Anno Regni Gulielmi III. Regis. Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae,
Septimo and Octavo. At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Two and
twentieth Day of November, Anno Dom. 1695. In the Seventh Year of the Reign of
our Sovereign Lord WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb,
deceased; Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. Reprinted at BOSTON in
New England by Bartholomew Green and John Allen, Printers to the Governor and
Council. 1696.

An Act for Preventing Frauds, and Regulating Abuses in the Plantation Trade.
W HEREAS notwithstanding diverse Acts made for the Encouragement of the
Navigation of this Kingdom, and for the better Securing and Regulating the
Plantation Trade, more especially one Act of Parliament made in the Twelfth
Year of the Reign of the late King Charles the Second, Entitled, An Act for
Increasing of Shipping, and Navigation, another Act made in the Fifteenth Year
of the Reign of His said late Majesty, Entitled, An Act for the Encouragement
of Trade, another Act made in the Two and twentieth and Three and twentieth
years of His said late Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act to prevent the
Planting of Tobacco in England, and for Regulating the Plantation Trade,
another Act made in the Twenty fifth year of the Reign of His said late
Majesty, Entitled, An Act for the Encouragement of the Greenland and Eastland
Trades, and for the better Securing the Plantation Trades, great Abuses are
daily committed to the prejudice of the English Navigation, and the loss of a
great part of the Plantation Trade to this Kingdom, by the Artifice and Conning
of ill disposed Persons.

For Remedy thereof for the future, Be it Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted and
Ordained by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, all Commons in Parliament
Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That after the five and twentieth
Day of March, One thousand six hundred ninety Eight, no Goods or Merchandises
whatsoever shall be Imported into, or Exported out of any Colony or Plantation
to His Majesty in Asia, Africa, or America, belonging, or in his Possession, or
which may hereafter belong unto, or be in the Possession of His Majesty, His
Heirs or Successors, or shall be Laden in, or Carried from any one Port or
Place in the said Colonies or Plantations, to any other Port or Place in the
(...), the Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon
Tweed, in any Ship or Bottom, but what is or shall be of the Built of England,
or of the Built of Ireland, or the said Colonies or Plantations, and wholly
owned by the People (...), or any of them, and Navigated with the Masters, and
Three Fourths of the Marinas of the said Places only (except such Ships only as
are or shall be taken Prize, and Condemnation thereof, made in one of the
Courts of Admiralty in England, Ireland, or the said Colonies or Plantations,
to be Navigated by the Master and Three Fourths of the Mariners English, or of
the said Plantations, as aforesaid, and whereof the Property does belong to
English Men: And also except for the space of Three years such Foreign Built
Ships as shall be Employed by the Commissioners of His Majesty's Navy, for the
time being, or upon Contract with them, in bringing only Masts, Timber, and
other Naval Stores for the Kings Service, from His Majesty's Colonies or
Plantations to this Kingdom, to be Navigated, as aforesaid, and whereof the
Property does belong to English Men) under pain of Forfeiture of Ship and
Goods, one third part whereof to be to the use of His Majesty, His Heirs and
Successors, one third part to the Governor of the said Colonies or
Plantations, and the other third part to the Person who shall Inform and Sue
for the same, by Bill, Plaint or Information, in any of His Majesty's Courts of
Record at Westminster, or in any Court in His Majesty's Plantations, where such
Offense shall be committed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That (from and after the
said Five and twentieth Day of March) Goods or Merchandises may be Exported or
Imported to and from this Kingdom, the Colonies, Plantations and Places
aforesaid, in any such Ships as are, or shall be taken as Prize, and whereof
Condemnation shall be made in one of the Courts of Admiralty aforesaid, and
shall be Navigated, as aforesaid, by the Master, Three fourths of the Mariners
English, and whereof the Property shall belong to English Men, and also Masts,
Timber and other Naval Store for His Majesty's Service, for the space of Three
years, may be Imported from His Majesty's Colonies or Plantations to this
Kingdom, in such Foreign Built Ships as shall be Employed by the Commissioners
of the Navy for the time being, or by Contract with them, any Law or Statute to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And whereas by One Clause in the said Act, passed in the Twelfth Year of the
Reign of the late King Charles the Second, Entitled, An Act for the
Encouraging and Increasing of Shipping and Navigation, all Governors of His
Majesty's Colonies or Plantations in Asia, Africa, or America, are Required to
take a Solemn Oath to do their utmost that every the Clauses therein before
mentioned, and all the Matters and Things therein contained shall be punctually
and bona Fide observed, according to the true intent and meaning thereof, so
that the said Governors are not strictly obliged by that Oath to put in
Execution the subsequent Clauses of the said Act, although some of the Clauses
following are of great Importance, and tend greatly to the Security of the
Plantation Trade: And whereas diverse other good Laws have been made for the
better Regulating and Securing the Plantation Trade since the said last
mentioned Act, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all the
present Governors or Commanders in Chief, of any English Colonies or
Plantations, shall before the Five and twentieth Day of March, One thousand six
hundred ninety seven, Governors of Plantations to be Sworn.
and all who hereafter shall be made Governors or Commanders in Chief of the
said Colonies or Plantations, or any of them before their Entrance into their
Government, shall take a Solemn Oath to do their utmost, that all the Clauses,
Matters and Things contained in the before recited Acts of Parliament
heretofore passed, and now in force, relating to the said Colonies and
Plantations, and that all and every the Clauses contained in this present Act,
be punctually and bona Fide observed according to the true intent and meaning
thereof (which Oath shall be taken before such Person or Persons as shall be
Appointed by His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, who are hereby Authorized
to Administer the same) so far as Appertains unto the said Governors or
Commanders in Chief, Penalty for neglect of taking their Oath, or of duty
accordingly.
respectively; and upon Complaint and Proof made before His Majesty, His Heirs
and Successors, or such as shall be by him or them thereunto Authorized and
Appointed by the Oath of Two or more Credible Witnesses, That any the said
Governors or Commanders in Chief, have neglected to take the said Oath at the
times aforesaid, or have been wittingly or willingly Negligent in doing their
Duty accordingly, the said Governor so neglecting or offending, shall be
removed from his Government, and forfeit the Sum of One thousand Pounds
Sterling.

And whereas by the said Act of the Fifteenth of King Charles the Second,
Entitled, An Act for the Encouragement of Trade, the Governors of the
Plantations are Empowered to Appoint an Officer for the performance of certain
things in the said Act mentioned, which said Officer is there commonly known by
the Name of the Naval Officer; And whereas through the Connivance or Negligence
of the Persons so Appointed by the Governors of the said Plantations, diverse
Frauds and Abuses are or have been Committed, Be it therefore Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, Naval Officer to give Security.
That all and every the Officers already Appointed, shall within Two Months
after notice of this Act in the respective Plantations, or as soon as
conveniently it may be, give Security to the Commissioners of the Customs in
England, for the time being, or such as shall be Appointed by them, for His
Majesty's Use, for the True and Faithful Performance of their Duty; And all and
every Person or Persons who shall hereafter be appointed to the said Office or
Employment, shall within Two Months, or as soon as conveniently it may be,
after his or their Entrance upon the said Office or Employment, give sufficient
Security to the Commissioners of the Customs, as aforesaid, for His Majesty's
Use, for the true and faithful Performance of his or their Duty; And in Default
thereof, the Person or Persons Neglecting or Refusing to give such Security,
shall be disabled to execute the said Office* or Employment; And until such
Security given, and the Person appointed to the said Office or Employment,
Penalty for neglect.
be approved by the Commissioners of the Customs as aforesaid, the respective
Governor or Governors, shall be answerable for any the Offenses, Neglects or
Misdemeanors of the Person or Persons so by him or them appointed.

And for the more effectual preventing of Frauds and regulating Abuses in the
Plantation Trade in America, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid.
That all Ships coming into, or going out of any of the said Plantations, and
Lading or Unlading any Goods or Commodities, whether the same be His Majesty's
Ships of War or Merchants Ships, and the Masters and Commanders thereof, and
their Ladings, shall be subject and liable to the same Rules, Visitations,
Searches, Penalties and Forfeitures, as to the Entering, Lading, or Discharging
their respective Ships and Ladings, as Ships and their Ladings, and the
Commanders, and Masters of Ships are subject and liable unto in this Kingdom,
by Virtue of an Act of Parliament made in the Fourteenth Year of the Reign of
King Charles the Second, Entitled, An Act for Preventing Frauds, and
Regulating Abuses in His Majesty's Customs; And that the Officers for
Collecting and Managing His Majesty's Revenue, and Inspecting the Plantation
Trade in any of the said Plantations, Officers power to visit and Search Ships
and to enter Houses etc.
shall have the same Powers and Authorities, for Visiting and Searching of
Ships, and taking their Entries, and for Seizing and Securing, or Bringing on
Shore any of the Goods Prohibited to be Imported or Exported into, or out of
any the said Plantations, or for which any Duties are payable, or ought to have
been paid by any of the before mentioned Acts, as are Provided for the Officers
of the Customs in England by the said last mentioned Act, made in the
Fourteenth Year of the Reign of King Charles the Second, and also to Enter
Houses or Ware houses, to Search for, and Seize any such Goods; And that all
the Wharfingers and Owners of Keys and Wharfs, or any Lightermen, Bargemen,
Watermen, Porters, or other Persons assisting in the Conveyance, Concealment,
or Rescue of any of the said Goods, or in the Hindering or Resistance of any of
the said Officers in the performance of their Duty, Penalty for any that shall
resist etc
and the Boats, Barges, Lighters or other Vessels Employed in the Conveyance of
such Goods, shall be subject to the like Pains and Penalties as are provided by
the same Act made in the Fourteenth Year of the Reign of King Charles the
Second, in Relation to Prohibited or Uncustomed Goods in this Kingdom; And that
the like Assistance shall be given to the said Officers in the Execution of
their Office, as by the said last mentioned Act is provided for the Officers in
England; And also, That the said Officers shall be subject to the same
Penalties and Forfeitures, Penalty for corruption in Officers
for any Corruptions, Frauds, Connivances or Concealments, in violation of any
the before mentioned Laws, as any Officers of the Customs in England are liable
to, by Virtue of the said last mentioned Act, And also that in Case any Officer
or Officers in the Plantations shall be Sued or Molested for any thing done in
the Execution of their Office, the said Officer shall and may plead the General
Issue, and shall give this or other Custom Acts in Evidence, and the Judge to
allow thereof, have and enjoy the like Privileges and Advantages, as are
allowed by Law to the Officers of His Majesty's Customs in England.

And it is hereby further Enacted, That all the Penalties and Forfeitures
before mentioned, not in this Act particularly disposed of, shall be One third
Part to the Use of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, and One third Part to
the Governor of the Colony or Plantation where the Offense shall be Committed,
Forfeiturs how to be disposed.
and the other Third Part to such Person or Persons as shall Sue for the same,
to be Recovered in any of His Majesty's Courts at Westminster, or in the
Kingdom of Ireland, or in the Court of Admiralty, held in His Majesty's
Plantations respectively, where such Offense shall be Committed, at the
Pleasure of the Officer or Informer, or in any other Plantation belonging to
any Subject of England, wherein no Essoign, Protection or Wager of Law shall be
Allowed; And that where any Question shall arise concerning the Importation or
Exportation of any Goods into or out of the said Plantations, in such Case the
Proof shall lie upon the Owner or Claimer, and the Claimer shall be Reputed the
Importer or Owner thereof.

And whereas in some of His Majesty's American Plantations, a Doubt or
Misconstruction has arisen upon the before mentioned Act, made in the Five and
twentieth Year of the Reign of King Charles the Second, whereby certain Duties
are Laid upon the Commodities therein Enumerated which by Law may be
Transported from one Plantation to another for the Supply of each others Wants)
as if the same were by the Payment of those Duties in one Plantation,
Discharged from giving the Securities intended by the aforesaid Acts, made in
the Twelfth, two and twentieth, and Three and twentieth Years of the Reign of
King Charles the Second, and consequently be at liberty to go to any Foreign
(...) England, Wales or Berwick. Security to be given for Goods Re^^^pt
notwithstanding the Duties be paid in any of the Plantations.
It is hereby (...) the aforesaid Duties (...) Ships or Laden on (...) Required
by the said Act made in the Twelfth, Two and twentieth and Three and twentieth
year of the Reign of King Charles the Second, to carry the same to England,
Wales or Berwick, or to some other of His Majesty's Plantations, and so toties
quoties as any of the said Goods shall be brought to be Reshipt or Laden in any
of the said Plantations, under the Penalty and Forfeiture of Ship and Goods, to
be divided and disposed of, as aforesaid.

And it is further Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Laws, By Laws, Usages or Customs, at this time, By Laws, etc. in the
Plantations repugnant to Acts of Parliament void.
or which hereafter shall be in practice, or endeavored, or pretended to be in
force or practice in any of the said Plantations, which are in any wise
repugnant to the before mentioned Laws, or any of them, so far as they do
relate to the said Plantations, or any of them, or which are any ways repugnant
to this present Act, or to any other Law hereafter to be made in this Kingdom,
so far as such Law shall relate to, and mention the said Plantations, are
illegal, null and void, to all intents and purposes whatsoever.

And whereas great Frauds and Abuses have been committed by Scotch Men, and
others, in the Plantation Trade, by obtruding False and Counterfeit
Certificates upon the Governor and Officers in the Plantations, appointed by
His Majesty's Commissioners of the Customs in England, of having given Security
in this Kingdom, to bring the Ladings of Plantation Goods to England, Wales, or
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, as also Certificates of having discharged their
Lading of Plantation Goods in this Kingdom, pursuant to (...) taken in the
Plantation, and also Cockets or Certificates of having taken in their Ladings
of European Goods in England, Wales or Berwick, by means whereof they may carry
the Goods of Scotland, and other Places of Europe, without Shipping or Lading
the same in England, Wales or Berwick, to His Majesty's Plantations, and also
carry the Goods of the Plantations directly to Scotland, or to any Market in
Europe, Security to be given in case of Suspicion that Certificates are false
or Counterfeit.
without bringing the same into England, Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed:
It is hereby further Enacted, That in such Cases where the Governor or
Officers appointed by the Commissioners of the Customs in the Plantations shall
have reasonable ground of Suspicion, that such Certificates are False or
Counterfeit (that is to say) that the Certificate of having given Security in
England is false, in such case the Governor or Officers Appointed by the
Commissioners of the Customs shall require, and take sufficient Security there
for the Discharge of the Plantation Lading in England, Wales, or Town of
Berwick upon Tweed; And in such Case where there shall be Cause to suspect that
the Certificates of having dicharged her Lading of Plantation Goods in this
Kingdom is false or Counterfeit, the Governor or Officers aforesaid, Penalty
for Counterfeiting, etc of Cockets, etc or making use of such
shall not Cancel or Vacate the Security given in the Plantation, until he or
they shall be informed from the Commissioners of the Customs in England, that
the Matter of the said Certificate is true; And if any Person or Persons shall
Counterfeit, Raze, or Falsify any Cocke^, Certificate, Return, or Permit, for
any Vessel of Goods, or shall knowingly or willingly make use thereof, such
Person or Persons shall forfeit the Sum of Five hundred Pounds, to be recovered
and disposed of, as aforesaid, and the Cocket, Certificate, Return or Permit,
so Counterfeited, Rased, or Falsified, shall be Invalid, and of no Effect.

And for the better Executing the several Acts of Parliament relating to the
Plantation Trade, Lord Treasurer etc. to appoint Officers of the Customs.
Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lord Treasurer,
Commissioners of the Treasury, and the Commissioners of the Customs in England
for the time being, shall and may Constitute and Appoint such and so many
Officers of the Customs in any City, Town, River, Port, Harbor or Creek of or
belonging to any of the Islands, Tracts of Land and Proprieties, when, and as
often as to them shall seem needful: Jurors to be Natives of England or Ireland
or born in the Plantations. Offenses may be laid to be in any Colony, etc.
Be it further also Enacted, That upon any Actions, Suits and Information that
shall be Brought, Commenced or Enacted in the said Plantations, upon any Law or
Statute concerning His Majesty's Duties, or Ships, or Goods to be Forfeited by
reason of any unlawful Importations or (...), there shall not be any Jury, but
of such only as are Natives of (...), or are born in His Majesty's said
Plantations; And also that upon all such Actions, Suits and Informations, the
Offenses may be laid or alleged to be in any Colony, Province, County,
Precinct or Division, of any of the said Plantations where such Offenses are
alleged to be committed, at the pleasure of the Officer or Informer.

Provided always, That all Places of Trust in the Courts of Law, or what
relates to the Treasury of the said Islands, Places of Trust in the Law, or
relating to the Treasury to be in the hands of Native-born Subjects of England,
etc.
shall from the making of this Act, be in the Hands of the Native born Subjects
of England or Ireland, or of the said Islands.

And whereas by the said Act made in the Two and twentieth and Three and
twentieth years of the Reign of His said Late Majesty King Charles the Second,
the bonds required to be given in the Plantations by Virtue of the said Act,
for Encouraging and Increasing of Shipping and Navigation, are altered, and the
word Ireland to be left out of the Condition of all such Bonds; and by the said
Act, It is Enacted and Provided That all such Ships or Vessels coming from
other Ports or Places, to any of the said plantations, which by the said Act
for Encouraging and Increase of Shipping were permitted to Trade there, the
Governors of such English Plantations should, before the said Ship or Vessel
should be permitted to Load on Board any of the Commodities in the said Act
particularly mentioned, take Bond in Manner, and to the Value mentioned and
directed in the above mentioned Act, for Encouraging and Increase of Shipping
and Navigation, for each respective Ship or Vessel, That such Ship or Vessel
shall carry all the aforesaid Goods that should be Laden on Board in the said
Ship, to some other of His Majesty's English Plantations, or to England, Wales,
or Town of Berwick upon Tweed; But because no Provision has hitherto been made
for the Returning and Producing Certificates within some reasonable limited
time, of the Landing and Discharging such Goods, according to the Condition of
the said Bonds; and also because many times it has happened, that the Sureties
taken in the said Bonds, have been Persons not Resident in the said
Plantations, but of uncertain and unknown Abodes, Sureties to be persons of
known Residence and Ability.
the said Bonds have proved ineffectual to the good purposes intended by the
said Acts: Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That in all such
Bonds to be hereafter given or taken in the said Plantations, the Sureties
therein Named shall be Persons of known Residence and Ability in the said
Plantations, for the Value mentioned in the said Bonds, and that the Condition
of the said Bonds, shall be within Eighteen Months after the Date thereof (the
Danger of the Seas Excepted) to produce Certificate of having Landed and
Discharged the Goods therein mentioned, in one of His Majesty's said
Plantations, or in England, Wales, or Berwick upon Tweed, Copies of Bonds
attested to be in Force.
otherwise such Bond or Coppies thereof, being attested under the Hand and Seal
of the Governor or Commander in Chief to whom such Bonds were given, shall be
in Force, and Allowed of in any Court in England, Ireland, or the Plantations,
as if the Original were produced in Court by the Prosecutor.

And whereas several Ships and Vessels Laden with Tobacco, Sugars and other
Goods of the Growth and Product of His Majesty's Plantations in America, have
been Discharged in several Ports of the Kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland,
contrary to the Laws and Statutes now in being, under pretense that the said
Ships and Vessels were driven in thither by Stress of Weather, or for want of
Provisions, and other Disabilities, could not proceed on their Voyage: For
Remedy whereof, Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after
the First Day of December, One thousand six hundred ninety six, it shall not be
lawful, on any Pretense whatsoever, to put on Shore in the said Kingdoms of
Scotland or Ireland, any Goods or Merchandise, of the Growth or Product of any
of His Majesty's Plantations aforesaid, Plantation Goods not to be put on Shore
in Scotland or Ireland unless etc.
unless the same have been first Landed in the Kingdom of England, Dominion of
Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, and Paid the Rates and Duties wherewith
they are Chargeable by Law, (...) the Penalty of the Forfeiture of the (...)
and Goods, Three (...) His Heirs (...), and the other Fourth (...) Sue for the
same.

Provided nevertheless, Goods put on Shore in Ireland through disability of the
Ship to be put into the custody of the Officer.
That if any Ship or Vessel, Laden as aforesaid, shall by Stress of Weather be
Stranded, or by reason of Leakiness, or other Disabilily, shall be driven into
any Port or Place, within the Kingdom of Ireland, and shall not be able to
proceed on her Voyage, then, and in such case only the said Goods and
Merchandises may be permitted to be put on Shore, but shall be delivered into
the Custody and Possession of the Collector or Chief Officer of the Customs of
such Port or Place where the said Ship shall be so Stranded or Driven into,
there to remain, until the said Goods and Merchandise shall, at the Charge of
the Owner thereof, be put on Board some other Ship or Vessel, in order to be
Transported, and Carried to some other Port or Place within the said Kingdom of
England, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed, the said Officer
first taking good and sufficient Security for the Delivery of the same,
according to the true Intent and Meaning of this Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, No Islands or Tracks of
Land in America to be disposed to others than natural born Subjects of England,
etc.
That all Persons and their Assignees, Claiming any Right or Propriety in any
Islands or Tracks of Land upon the Continent of America, by Charter or Letters
Patents, shall not at any time hereafter Alien, Sell, or Dispose of any of the
said Islands, Tracts of Land or Proprieties, other than to the Natural Born
Subjects of England, Ireland, Dominion of Wales, or Town of Berwick upon Tweed,
without the License and Consent of His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors,
Signified by His or Their Order in Council first had and obtained; And all
Governors Nominated and Appointed by any such Persons or Proprietors, who
shall be Entitled to make such Nomination, shall be Allowed and Approved of by
His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors as aforesaid, Governors appointed by
Proprietors to be allowed by His Majesty, etc.
and shall take the Oaths Enjoined by this or any other Act, to be taken by the
Governors or Commanders in Chief, in other His Majesty's Colonies and
Plantations, before their Entering upon their respective Governments, under the
like Penalty His Majesty's Governors and Commanders in Chief are by the said
Acts liable to.

And for a more Effectual prevention of Frauds which may be used to Elude the
Intention of this Act, by Coloring Foreign Ships under English Names, Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That from and after the Five and
twentieth day of March, which shall be in the Year of our Lord, One thousand
six hundred ninety eight, no Ship or Vessel whatsoever shall be deemed, or pass
as a Ship of the Built of England, Ireland, Wales, Berwick, Guernsey, Jersey,
or of any of His Majesty's Plantations in America, so as to be qualified to
Trade to* from, or in any of the said Plantations, Ships to be Registered.
until the Person or Persons, claiming Property in such Ship or Vessel, shall
Register the same as follows, That is to say, If the Ship, at the time of
such Register, does belong to any Port in England, Ireland, Wales, or to the
Town of Berwick upon Tweed, then Proof shall be made upon Oath of One or more
of the Owners of such Ship or Vessel, before the Collector and Comptroller of
His Majesty's Customs in such Port, or if at the time of such Register the Ship
belong to any of His Majesty's Plantations in America, or to the Islands of
Guernsey, or Jersey, then the like Proof to be made before the Governor,
together with the Principal Officer of His Majesty's Revenue residing on such
Plantation or Island; which Oath the said Governors and Officers of the
Customs respectively, are hereby Authorized to Administer in the Tenor
following, viz.

Urat A. B. That the Ship Name
(...) of Port
(...) whereof Masters Name
(...) is at present Master, being a Kind of Boat
(...) of Burden
(...) Tuns, was Bult at Place where
(...) in the Year Time when
(...) and that Owners Name
(...) of (...) and (...) of, etc. are at present Owners thereof, and that no
Foreigner, directly or indirectly, has any Share, or Part, or Interest therein.

Which Oath being Attested by the Governor, or Custom Officer respectively,
who Administered the same under their Hands and Seals, shall after having been
Registered by them, be delivered to the Master of the Ship for the Security of
her Navigation, a Duplicate of which Register shall be immediately Transmitted
to the Commissioners of His Majesty's Customs in the Port of London, in order
to be Entered in a general Register to be there kept for this purpose, with
Penalty upon any Ship or Vessel Trading to, from, or in any of His Majesty's
Plantations in America, after the said Five and twentieth Day of March, and not
having made Proof of her Built and Property, as is here directed, that she
shall be liable, and she is hereby made liable to such Prosecution and
Forfeiture as any Foreign Ship (except Prizes Condemned in the High Court of
Admiralty) would for Trading with these Plantations by this Law be liable to.

Provided always, That all such Ships as have been, or shall be taken at Sea by
Letters of Mark or Reprizal, and Condemnation thereof made in the High Court of
Admiralty of England, as Lawful Prize, shall be specially Registered, mentioning
the Capture and Condemnation instead of the Time and Place of Building, with
Proof also upon Oath, That the entire Property is English, before any such
Prize shall be allowed the Privilege of an English Built Ship, according to
the Meaning of this Act

Provided also, That nothing in this Act shall be Construed to require the
Registring any Fisher Boats, Hoys, Lighters, Barges, or any open Boats or other
Vessels (though of English or Plantation Built) whose Navigation is confined to
the Rivers or Coasts of the same Plantation or Place where they Trade
respectively, but only of such of them as Cross the Seas to or from any of the
Lands, Islands, Places or Territories in this Act before Recited, or from one
Plantation to another.

And be it further Enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That no Ships Name
Registered shall be afterward Changed without Registring such Ship de novo,
which is hereby Required to be done upon any Transfer of Property to another
Port, and delivering up the former Certificate to be Cancelled under the same
Penalties, and in the like Method as is herein before Directed; And that in
case any Alteration of Property in the same Port, by the Sale of one or more
Shares in any Ship after Registring thereof, such Sale shall always be
acknowledged by Endorsement on the Certificate of the Register before Two
Witnesses, in Order to prove that the Entire Property in such Ship remains to
some of the Subjects of England, if any Dispute arises concerning the same.

FINIS.

