By His Excellency Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and Governor in Chief of
The Province of New York, and the Territories and Tracts of Land depending
thereon in America, and Vice Admiral of the same, His Majesty's Lieutenant and
Commander in Chief of the Militia, and of all the Forces by Sea and Land within
His Majesty's Collony of Connecticut, and of all the Forts and places of
Strength within the same. A PROCLAMATION
WHEREAS the manifold Sins and Transgressions that are committed against
Almighty God, are a just Cause of Provocation, and a mean to frustrate Our
Happiness and Welfare, I have therefore, from the great Sense thereof, by
Advice and Consent of the Council, thought fit to appoint, That Friday, the
Twenty Seventh Day of March next ensuing, be observed and kept a Solemn Day of
Fasting and Humiliation throughout this Province, to prostrate our selves
before Almighty God, with true Penitence, earnestly beseeching the Forgiveness
of our Sins, Success and Victory to His Majesty's Arms by Sea and Land, and the
Preservation and Safety of His Royal Person, so frequently exposed to Danger
for the Happiness and Welfare of Europe. And all Persons within this Province
are hereby required strictly to observe and keep the same, and to desist from
all Servile Labor and Employment thereon, as they will answer the contrary at
their Peril.

Given at His Majesty's Fort in New York, the 27 th Day of February, in the
Eighth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord, William the Third, by the Grace
of God King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defendor of the Faith,
etc. Annoque Domini 1695, 6. Ben. Fletcher.

God Save the KING
Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to His Majesty, King William at
the Bible in the City of New York 1695.


