Remarkable Judgments of GOD, Related and Improved.
[The First SERMON.]
PSALM. CXIX.120. My Flesh Trembles for Fear of Thee, and I am Afraid of Thy
Judgments.


IT cannot be said of any man, as it is (...) of the Levi^than, He (...) made
without (...) But Fea^, is one of th^^e Natural Passi^^* which the Maker of man
has infused (...) to him, to move him in the matters (...) his Happiness. And
^ndeed, if the Spirit (...) man, were destitute (...) all Fear, it would wa^
(...) Sinew, needful to manage him in many of (...) motions. But this Affection
of our Fear, (...) which we have such Apprehensions of Evils (...) Fly from
them, as it is useful unto us in all (...) concerns, thus it is of most Eminent
Use (...) in the Concerns of Religion. Without the (...) of some Fear, no Real
Religion can be (...): If we would Serve the Lord, it must be with Fear: If we
would keep the Commandments of God, it is our Fear of Him that will be, Custos
utriusque Tabulae:

In the Sacred Oracle now before us, behold, such a Fear Exemplified! Solomon
the Wise, once wrote that Maxim of Wisdom, Happy is the man that Fears
always. And he had the Exemple of his Blessed Father, to Inform him of, and
confirm him in, such a Maxim. David was as great an Instance of undaunted
Valor and Cou^age, as perhaps any that ever Lived; His Fortiude was Heroical.
Yet we find him Fearing Al^ayes: And well might he Fear, when he had ^^ch a
Formidable Object for his Fear, as that which is proposed, in the Text now
before us.

The Psalmist, in our Context, is making his ^bservations upon the
Dispensations of the God (...) Heaven toward ungodly men on earth. Un^^dly men
had been very High in their Worldly ^^vancements, and Advantages, but, says
he, (...), I see Thee Treading of them down! Ungod^^ men had cleaved unto the
People of God, as (...) they had been of one Metal with them, and (...) Fate,
and Lot had been one; but says he, (...), I see Thee putting them away like
Dross! Now (...) is a Twofold Use, which the Psalmist makes ^hese Observations.
One is, Love. Therefore I (...) thy Testimonies* Another is Fear. My Flesh
(...) for fear of Thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments. The Degree of the
Fear thus Expressed, is Remarkable. One of the Ancients who understood Hebrew,
as few of them did, renders it, Horripilavit caro mea: q. d. My Hair even
stands on End with Fear. And the Septuagint renders it, My Flesh is pierced
with Fear, as with Nails. But there is no need of Evaporating our Discourse,
in Criticisms, on the Language of our Text; The plain Language, and the
Doctrine of it, is, That a Very Trembling Fear of God in His Judgments, is what
All men should, and what Goo^ men will, have their Souls, Exceedingly Aw^
withal.

If you will Hear the Sum of the Matt^^ there is this

CASE,

To be distinctly, with all due Brevity, spo^^^ unto.

What is the Tremblin^ Fear of God in His (...), which is to be Entertained in
our (...) And so, What are those Judgments of (...) whereof it becomes us, with
a Trembling (...) to be Afraid?

Behold, the Steps, by which we shall arriv^^ a full Answer of the Important
Case, thus (...) us.

I. The Fear of God, Comprehends the (...) of that Religion, whereto the Will
of God obliges us. Indeed, in a Natural Fear, we are carried From what we
Fear* But a Gracious Fear will carry us To the God, who is therein Our Fear: To
Fear God, is to Choose Him, to Love Him, to Trust Him, to Seek Him, and to Draw
Near unto Him. In this Fear of God, there is presupposed, a Sense of God. We
must be none of those Fools, who say, There is no God. Our Fear of God, must
not be, as of an Imaginary Being, or of the frightful Non-Entities which the
Feeble Spirits of Chil^ren are Scared withal. We are to be well satis^^ed, and
we have all possible Demonstrations, to ^^tisfy us, That there is a God, whose
Kingdom Rul^th over all. But then,

First, There is in the Fear of God, a Reverent ^espect and Regard, unto all
that has the Name (...) God upon it. We must have such a Fear of (...) in us,
that our God may speak of us, in that (...), in Mal. 4.2. You Fear my Name. We
(...) have none but Fit, that is to say, Holy, and (...) Resentments of all
those Things, where^ (...) Great God makes Himself known unto us. (...) Titles
we must mention with Honor; His (...) we must Adore, with all Affection; (...)
Appointments we must Approach, with all (...). We should be Sollicitous, that
God may ^^orifyed, not only by our selves, but also by (...) World about us.
Hallowed be Thy Name, (...) the First Petition of our Souls.

Secondly; There is in the Fear of God, a Studious Concern and Caution, to
Avoid all that Sinful Evil by which the Law of God is Transgressed. We must
have that Fear of God, whereto we are ^^vised, in Prove. 16.6. By the Fear of
the Lord* men Depart from Evil. We should Fly from every known Sin, as from a
deadly Serpent, or Poison, because of the Offense thereby given to that God,
who has no pleasure in Wickedness. When we see others do any thing that is
forbidden and condemned in the Edicts of God, we should be able to say, as
Nehemiah of old, But so do not I, because I have the Fear of God! When others
urge us to do any thing amiss, we should Reply like Joseph I dare not Commit
such Things, for I Fear God And therefore, the Anger of God should be the
Terror of our Souls: We should rather incur an^ Miseries than procure that
Anger, which (...) strongest Mountains cannot stand before; a^^count it a
fearful Thing to fall into the Hand* the Living God.

Thirdly. In the Fear of God, there is a Fil^ Care, to yield Him that Service,
and Worship, whi^^ may be Pleasing unto Him. In the Fear of Go^ we must Obey
Him with our Service. The A^^gels of Heaven, who move the Wheels in the (...)
Changes on Earth, when they stood in their (...) vice before the Throne of God,
which had (...) Appearance of Fire round about Him, they Let (...) their Wings,
at His Voice, in the Vision of (...) In Allusion hereunto, the Apostle,
speaking unto Believers, that are to be as the Angels, in the Kingdom of the
Lord Jesus Christ, which cannot be moved, says, in Heb. 12.28, 29. Serve God
Acceptably, with Reverence and with Godly Fear: For our God is a Consuming Fire
In the Fear of God, we must Renounce the Service of all our Idols; We must no
more Humor the Flesh, no more Follow the World, no more Gratify the Devil. And
we must now so Devote our selves unto the Service of God, that we may be able
to say, Lord, I am thy Servant, Devoted unto thy Fear! He is to be our Master;
and we should leave no Room for that Expostulation, Where is my Fear? And, ^n
the Fear of God, we must Address Him with our Worship. The Proselytes, which
came in to Embrace the True Worship of God, have this Distinction, in Psalm.
115.11. Ye that Fear the lord. In the Fear of God, we must Worship Him, ^ho is
Worthy to be Feared; and both the Natural, and the Instituted Worship of God,
is to be con^inually performed with us, we are to be, as he ^nce was, Devout
Persons, who Fear God, and Pray ^lwayes unto Him.

All this is Comprised, in the Fear of God. And ^et, you have no Right Notion
of it, if a CHRIST (...) left out of the Notion. There is a Faith im^^yed in
this Fear. The Fear of God, is after all, (...) be thus described, and never
fully, till thus de^^^ibed, unto us: It Is, Even such a Dread of the Divine
Displeasure at Sin, as Drives us to our Lord Jesus Christ, for Salvation from
Sin, and from the Displeasure of God against us for it. There never was any
true Fear of God, in the Days of the Old Testament, but such as thought of and
ran to a Messiah, as the Deliverer from the Wrath of God; and all the Fear of
God, in the Days of the New Testament* acknowledges our Blessed Jesus as that
Messiah. This is that Fear of God, which is the Beginning of Wisdom: This is
tha^ Fear of God, wherein all men should be all the Day Long. This is the Fear
of God, wherein we should continue all the Days that we Live upon the Earth.
If thou do not Walk in this Fear of God, O Man, Let thy Flesh Tremble for
Fear, and be afraid of the Judgments, whereto thou do make thy self
obnoxious. But this leads us to a further Consideration.

II. Unto the Fear of God, we are by the consideration of His Judgments to be
Awakened: and we should therefore be struck with a very Trembling Fear of those
Judgments. Now, the Judgments of God, are capable of a Distribution* into
Judicia Judicantia, and, Judicia Judicata, Judgments Denounced, and Judgments
Inflicted: Judgments in the Commination, and Judgments in the Accomplishment:
The Declaration of Divine Judgments, and the Execution of Divine Judg^ments.
With an Eye to this Distribution, there are these Counsils, which from the
Great God of Judgment, are to be given you.

The First Counsil.
Let us with a very Trembling Fear, be Afraid of the Judgments that are
pronounced against the Ungodly, in the Book of God. There are used in our
Longest and Sweetest Psalm, no less than Twelve several words, to signify the
Revelation which God had made of His Purpose, to Save men, by that Son of a
Virgin, who was to break the Old Serpents Head: And one of those words, is,
JUDGMENTS. This then is the Influence, which the Judgments of God, or the
Discoveries which He has made of Himself in this Book of His, must have upon
us: we should be able to say, as in Psalm. 119.161. Lord, My Heart stands in Awe
of thy Word. Are there any Praecepts in this Book? we should Fear the
Commandment: Fear, and Cry, Lord, I am afraid of breaking thy Holy Laws, that
are so Holy and Just and Good! Are there any Promises in this Book? We should
Fear, Lest we fall short of them. Are there any Threatenings in this Book? We
should Fear, Lest they take hold of us. Before every thing in ^he Book of God,
we should have the same Disposition, that Josiah had, when the Book of
Deuteronomy was Read unto him; [The Jews have a Tradition, that by the special
Disposal of Divine Providence, the first place, which the Reader ^itt upon, was
Deuteronomy. 28.36.] That it may be said unto us, Thy Heart was Tender, and thou did
Humble thy self before God, when thou did Hear His Words. We should be
Apprehensive of the Almighty God, speaking in every Line of this Book; and
then, be Afraid, Lest all the Plagues written in this Book, overtake us, if we
sin against such a God. It was the Character of our Lord Jesus Christ, in Isa.
66 2. He that is o^ a poor and a contrite Spirit, and who Tremb^eth at my Word.
When we see what Judgments, the Word of God has Threatened against the Children
of Disobedience, we should even fall a Trembling at them. And especially they
that are conscious to a course ^f Disobedience against God, should be Afraid of
these Judgments. When Belshazzar saw upon the Wall, an Handwriting, which he
could not Read, (because, perhaps, the Letters were so in^olded one among
another, that except a man had the Key of the Cyphar, the Sentence was not easy
to be Uncyphared,) he was wonderfully Terrified at what he saw. Unbelievers may
Read that Handwriting in this Book, If any man Believe ^ot the Son, the Wrath
of God abides on him: and ^ill you not be Afraid of that Wrath? Impenitents
^ay Read that Hand writing in this Book, The Lord will wound such an one, as
goes on still in his Trespasses: and will you not be Afraid of that ^ound? The
Prayerless may in this Book Read ^^at Handwriting, The Wicked shall be Turned
into ^ell, and all they that Forget God: and will they ^ot be Afraid of that
Hell; or, Fear Him, who is ^ble to cast Body and Soul into Hell? I say unto
you, Fear Him; and, Oh! be Afraid of these Judgments.

The Second Counsil.
Let us with a very Trembling Fear be Afraid of Judgments that shall be
pronounced upon the Ungodly in the Day of God. It is a Truth whereof we are
very sure, The God of Truth has given us Assurance of it; That He has
Appointed a Day, in which He will Judge the World in Righteousness, by our Lord
Jesus Christ. Now, in the Remembrance of this Day, when the Kingdom that was
promised unto the Seed of David, shall be Erected, it is said, in Eccl. 12.13,
14. Fear God, for God will bring every work into Judgment. We must expect the
Approach of, a Day, wherein the Quickening and Wondrous Voice of our Lord Jesus
Christ, will Raise us out of our Graves; a Day wherein a Doom of Everlasting
Punishment, or of Life Eternal, will be passed upon us; a Day wherein, as the
Apostle speaks, We must all Appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that
every one may receive such things in the Body, according to what he has done:
[for thus I choose to render i^.] Now, Let us Fear the Judgments, which on this
Terrible Day of Judgment, our Lord Jesus Christ, will dispense unto the World.
Of these Judgments it is, that a Great Minister of our Lord, could say, in 2
Cor. 5.11. Knowing the Terror of the Lord, we persuade men. There is a Terror
in those Judgments; Oh! Let this Terror now persuade us, to pursue after an
Interest in Him that is to be our Judge: and Let it persuade us, to Repent of
the Sins which our Judge will else Damn us to Endless Confusion for. When a
Pagan Faelix, was told of the Judgments which the Notable Day of God, will
produce upon mankind, it is said, He trembled. What; shall we be worse than
that unhappy Pagan? When God was only publishing His Judgments, on the Burning
Mountain, we are told, So terrible was the Sight, that Moses said, I
exceedingly Fear and Quake. And shall not we Exceedingly Fear and Quake, when
we Think on the Day, when our Lord Jesus Christ will descend from Heaven, in
Flaming Fire, to pour out His Judgments, and, Behold, the Lord comes, with
Myriads of His Saints, to Execute Judgment upon all! Certain I am, All this
Lower World, will be surprised with an Horrible Fright, at that Great
Revolution: An Horrible Tempest will then be Rained from Heaven upon this
World: The Earth will Shake and Tremble, the foundations of the Hills also will
move and be shaken, when our Lord shall Bow the Heavens, and come down, with a
Devouring Fire about Him. So then, Let us now Shake and Tremble at the
Contemplation thereof. Be Afraid, Lest we be found among the Ungodly, that
shall not stand in the Judgment. Be Afraid, Lest our Judgment then be, that of
the Devil and his Angels. It Is a thing which I have given me in Charge* Some
Save with Fear, pulling them out of the Fire. Wherefore I say unto you, Souls,
Be Afraid, Lest we be Adjudged unto the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, even, to the
Fire of the Vengeance of God throughout Eternal Ages.

The Third Counsil.
There are Astonishing Judgments, dispensed by the Hand of God, upon others in
this World; and with a very Trembling Fear, we should be Afraid of those
Judgments. The Dispensations of God, unto a Sinful World, are such as give us
that Invitation, in Psalm. 66.5. Come and see the Works of God, for He is
Terrible in His Doing toward the Children of men. It Is our Duty now, to be
Afraid of those Judgments, under which we see the Children of men suffering, by
the Terrible Dispensations of God; I do not mean, that we should Live in a
Slavish Fear, of all Fearful Accidents, but that we should be Awakened unto the
Fear of God, by what we see. Our Duty is described unto us, in Isa 26.9. When
thy Judgments are in the Earth, the Inhabitants of the World will Learn
Righteousness. And now, Let us proceed by these Rules, in this our Duty.

The First Rule.
There is one thing in the Judgments of God, whereof we should always be
Afraid; that is, Lest we do make an Injudicious Interpretation of them. It is a
caution given to us, in Psalm. 36.6. Thy Judgments are a great Deep, O Lord; And
we should be very cautious, Lest we drown our selves in such a Deep, when we go
to Fathom it. The Judgments of God are those things, whereof it is said, Whose
is Wise will Observe those things; but then we must be careful to proceed
wisely in our observing of them. It Is a Dangerous Thing for us, to indulge our
own Fancy, and much more, for us to indulge our own Passion, in making of
Glosses upon the Judgments of G^d: God will not hold the man guiltless, who
shall so take His Name in vain. Very sad Things may befall the People of God,
which if we should call them the Judgments of God, upon them, for some crime or
other, this would be as great a crime in us* as to Adulterate the Coin of the
Nation. The Sovereign God, has made a Cross, to be necessary for all the
Disciples of Him, who Died upon the Cross; and He will in His Infinite
Sovereignty, make choice of their Cross for them, to Exercise their Virtue, and
prepare them and ^ipen them, for His Heavenly Kingdom. If we should be so
wicked, as to suppose a Curse of God upon all that we see under the Cross,
Behold, we should wickedly offend against the Generation of the Children of
God. When the Sons of that Excellent Minister of God, Aaron the Priest of the
Lord, came to an untimely End, it had been a vile Impiety in the Congregation
of Israel, to have persecuted their Worthy and Aged Father, with any Censorious
Imputations The Judgments of God are like to arrest none sooner, than the Rash
Expositors of His Judgments on other men. The Jealous God, will soon Draw near
in Judgment, unto those who Persecute them whom He has Smitten, and who Talk
to the Grief of those whom He has Wounded* Our Lord has given us, a most
wholesome Admonition, to be generally made use of, when sore Disasters happen
unto any of our Neighbors, in Luke 13.4, 5. Think ye, that these were Sinners,
above all others; I tell you* Nay. But what shall we then do, to Determine a
Judgment of God, upon a Sinner, for his being so? I answer First, The Sin of
the Sinner must be evident, from the Scripture of God, before we may dare to
Apply a Judgment of God; unto him. It Is very preposterous, for us, first of all
to take it for granted, This or that Calamity is a Judgment of God for some
Iniquity; and then, upon this presumption, to Search out that Iniquity. And
Secondly, A Judgment of God, for Sin, must be clothed with some convincing
circumstance and Character upon it self, Reasonably to speak its being so,
before we may venture to call it so. There must be something in the Time of it,
or in the Place of it, or, in its Resemblance to the Fault for which it comes,
or in the Confession of the person Chastised, that shall make the Conscience to
say, (...) are the plain Signatures of a Judgment for some Sin, in the Stroke
now given by God! Having first Laid in this Antidote against Rash Judgments of
our own, about the Great Judgm^nts of God, we may safely go on, to say;

The Second Rule.
The Judgments of God in Former Ages, They should make us Afraid of the Sins
which procured those Judgments. There came the Judgments of God upon the
Murmurous Israelites; It Is said in 1 Cor. 10.11. All these things happened unto
them, for Examples, and they are written for our Admonition. Behold those
Judgments then, and be Afraid of all Murmuring, be Afraid of all Impatience, be
Afraid of all Discontent under the Difficulties of a Wilderness, Lest we be
Destroyed of the Destroyer. There came the Judgments of God upon the Debauched
Sodomites; It Is said in 2 Pet. 2.6. God made them an Example unto those that
after should Live Ungodly. Behold those Judgments then, and be Afraid of all
Debauchery, be Afraid of all Uncleanness, be Afraid of all Intemperance, Lest
God condemn us with a Fiery and an Early Overthrow. Syrs, The History which the
Bible has given us, of the Judgmen^s which have come from God, upon them that
Sinned against Him, it is not only a Chronicle of what is past, but also a
Calender of what is to come. We have the History; There we may Consider the
Days of Old, the Years of Ancient Times. But when we do so, Let us be Afraid.
Lest by Repeating of Old Sins, we bring a Repetition of Old Plagues upon our
selves. When Thunder and Lightning from Heaven, suddenly calcined a poor Woman
into a Lump of Salt, for her Coveteousness, near three Thousand and Eight
Hundred Years ago, that Salt was to Season us with a Fear, Lest near the Time
of the End, we perish like her; by setting our Hearts upon the World. Our Lord
therefore said, on that occasion, in Luke 17.32. Remember Lots Wife. Thus, I
may say, Remember Judas, and be Afraid, Lest we perish as he did in betraying
the Interests of the Lord Jesus Christ, for some Worldly Benefit Remember
Herod, and be Afraid, Lest we perish as he did, in proud affectations of what
belongs not unto us. Remember all the rest.

The Third Rule.
The Judgments of God on other places, They should make us Afr^id, Lest we fall
within the Circuit of those Judgments. When the Judgments of God, have begun
their Walk, we have cause to be Afraid, Lest we fall into their Walk; because,
with us, even with us also, there are Sins against the Lord our God. It was
prophesied, in Jer. 25.32. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Behold, Evil shall go
forth from Nation to Nation. Do we Behold other Nations, grievously sharing in
Distress of Nations, and great perplexity, we should be Afraid Lest we also
have our share in the Distressing Judgments of God. Have the Judgments of God,
sent War, and Poverty and Scarcity, upon other Nations? We have cause to be
Afraid Lest the Evil of those Judgments reach unto our selves; and lest we
Drink of that Cup of Trembling, which God seems to be putting into the Hands of
all the Nations. A Fire on one House alarums all the Town. The Judgments of God
have set all Europe on Fire; yea, the Sparks are flown over into America:
Lamentable Desolations have been made both Northward and Southward of us; Be
Afraid then, O poor people of God, Lest thou also become Desolate. When the
Judgments of God, were in their course, He said unto His people, in Zeph. 3.6,
7. I have cut off the Nations, their Towers are Desolate, their Cities are
Destroyed: I said, Surely Thou will Fear me. Thus, Do We see Destructions come
upon other Countries? Our God says thereupon, Surely, This Country too should
be Afraid, Lest I bring the like upon them.

The Fourth Rule.
The Judgments of God, seizing upon a Few persons only, before our Eyes, They
should make us Afraid, Lest we be the Next, that those Judgments do seiz upon.
When One Malefactor dyed it was said, All the People shall Hear and Fear. Thus,
if the Judgments of God single out one Malefactor, to punish him, His voice is,
Let all be Afraid! It is noted of a miserable Minister, who falling into a
Scandal, was presently overwhelmed by the Judgments of God, in Act. 5.5. Great
Fear came upon all them that Heard these things. When the Judgments of God, had
signalized themselves upon any Scandalous Wretches, we should all be struck,
with a Great Fear, Lest our Sins Expose us also to the Signal Rebukes of
Heaven. As, if one Drunkard in a Town be Drowned, it is a Loud Sermon to all
the Bruits about the Town, to be Afraid, of being so cut off in their Brutish
Follies: Thus, in all the Special Judgments of God upon any Offenders
whatsoever, there is that voice from Heaven to all such Offenders, Tremble, and
Repent, Lest all of you likewise perish! Yea, The Judgments of God upon a Few,
often should be seriously pondered by the Whole Body of the People, whom they
belong unto, as a Decimation made by that God, who gives none Account of His
matters. God has a Controversy with the Whole Body of the People; He might
have pitched upon me or thee, to have been the Subjects, on which he does
manage this Controversy, as well as any other of our Neighbors. Oh! what cause
have we now to be Afraid, of what we also have to meet withal! When the
Judgments of God followed one man aboard the Vessel, bound for Tar tessus, it is
said, in Jon. 1.16. All the other men, feared the Lord exceedingly. Truly, If
any one man aboard the Vessel of the Public, be followed with a Storm of
Judgments from God, it becomes us all, to Fear Exceedingly!

The Fifth Rule.
When Things that look like Judgments of God, befall the dear people of God, it
highly concerns other people to be Afraid, of the Greater Judgments, which they
may reasonably Look for. It Is an Inference, whereto we are Directed, in 1 Pet.
4.17. Judgment must begin at the House of God, -- And if the Righteous scarcely
be Saved, where shall the Ungodly and the Sinner appear? Which is but the
Translation of what we have in Prove. 11.31. Behold* the Righteous shall be
Recompensed in the Earth; much more the Wicked and the Sinner. Sometimes the
most Eminent Christians in a Land, yea, and whole Churches of such Christians,
meet with Troublesome Difficulties, in their way to Salvation: yea, they meet
with Troubles upon Earth* that seem to be Recompenses from Heaven upon them,
for their miscarriages. Come Let all Ungodly Sinners now be Afraid: I that
never was Reconciled unto God, by the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ; what,
what will become of me, throughout the Days of Eternity! Our Savior has
taught us to Argue thus, upon the Afflictions of Good men; If these things be
done to the Green Tree, what shall be done to the Dry? Those men that bring
forth much of that Fruit, whereby God is Glorified, are cast into a Fire of
many Afflictions. Yea, but you then that bring forth No Fruit, or ^ll Fruit,
and never were United unto the Lord Jesus Christ, what a Formidable,
Intolerable, Interminable Fire, is Reserved for you! Oh! be Afraid of that
Fire! That Blessed Prophet of God, even Ezekikiel, must have the best Thing in
his Family, snatched out of it, by the stroke of Death: Behold, I take away
from thee, the Desire of thine Eyes, with a stroke; yet shall not thy Tears run
down says the Lord. And what? was this a Judgment on the Prophet? It seemed
so; But it was indeed a Warning to the people; of whom the Lord then said, in
Ezekiel. 24.24. Ezekiel is a Sign unto you: According to all that he has done,
shall ye do. Syrs, Those things that appear like Judgments of God, upon His own
Faithful Servants, they are awful Warnings unto those that Serve Him not: God
therein says unto Profane, Christless, and Graceless Creatures; If I do these
things to those whom yet I pity as a Father does the Children that serve him,
what shall I do unto you, that are my Enemies, and that Serve none but my
Greatest Enemy? What shall I do unto you? Wretches, what shall I do unto you?
If God have such Rods for His Dutiful Children, what Scourges, what Scorpions,
has He for His Adversaries!

The Sixth Rule.
Among all the Judgments of God, I know none more Tremendous, than His leaving
here and there some Famous Professors and Pretenders of Religion, to some
Horribly Irreligious Actions. When we see ^^ose Judgments, Then, Then above
all, should our Flesh Tremble for Fear of God, and we should be afraid of His
Judgments. It Is a Thing, that sometimes does happen among us. Persons that have
been Exemplary for Piety and Charity all their Days, yet have at last grown
Melancholy, and God has so left them to the Possession of some Devil, that
they have laid Violent Hands upon themselves; they have Starved themselves,
Hanged themselves, Drowned themselves, yea, and had a Preternatural Assistence
in their doing of it. Who can Behold these unaccountable Tragaedies without
that out cry, Lord, I am afraid of thy Judgments! What Use can we make of these
Tragical Things, but that in 1 Pet. 1.17. To pass the Time of our Sojourning
here in Fear? What, but that in Phil. 2.12. To work out our own Salvation with
Fear and Trembling? And, alas, what shall we say, of those Prodigious Falls
into Sin, which the Lives of some that were counted First-rate Christians, have
been Reproached withal? What shall we say, Oh! our God, what shall we say, of
the monstrous Crimes, which we have seen some that have seemed Pillars of
Christianity among us, to fall into? This I will say; That the Burning Wrath of
a Righteous and a Terrible God, has never been so much discovered, in all our
Losses by Sea and Land, and in all the bloody Depredations of our Adversaries,
as in this One Thing: That ever now and then some one or other, that has been
much Noted for Zeal in the ways of God, has been found in some Damnable Act
of Wickedness. There is the very Venom and Spirit of Hell, in these Judgments
of God upon a Land; God would never have permitted these Judgments, if there
were not a Generation of His Wrath, to be praecipitated down into the fiery
Bottom of Hell, by His Wrath, so Darkning of the Land. Infinitely better had it
been for those Woeful men, to have Died with Milstones about their Necks, many
years ago, than thus to have Offended and Poisoned the Souls of Multitudes;
And, Oh! Woe, Woe, unto multitudes of Souls, that have hence taken an Incureable
and an Everlasting Offense, against the Blessed ways of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Sirs, When a provoked God, shall permit the Dragon to Sweep Stars down from
Heaven with his Tail, and permit the Devil to Enter and Possess and befool, and
be^o^, and confound, such as have made a show of a more Heavenly Frame than
other men, how can we forbear crying out, Lord, I am afraid of thy Judgments!
What says the Apostle, in Romans 11.20. Thou stand by Faith: Be not High
minded, but Fear? Oh! Be afraid, Be afraid, lest by some Secret Sin, we grieve
the Holy Spirit of God. If He withdraw, Ah! Lord, who, shall stand?

The Seventh Rule.
There is a peculiar concernment lying upon the Young People, among us* to be
Afraid of those Judgments, in which they see the Great God consuming of our
Young People, with His Fiery Indignation. It may be said, about the Young men
of N Eng. as it was of old said about the Young men of Israel, in Psalm. 78.63.
The Fire Consumed their Young m^n. And as when the earth Swallowed up some
Young People in the Wilderness of old, it is said, The Rest Fled at the cry of
them, saying, Lest the earth Swallow us up also. Behold, O our Young Folks, the
Earth, and the Sea, and the Pit, have been terribly Swallowing up your
Brethren. Fly then, with affrighted Souls, Fly, to the Lord Jesus Christ, and
say, Lord, I am afraid lest thy Judgments do Swallow me up also. Young People,
O that you would suitably lay to Heart, the Dreadful Judgments of God, which
are Consuming of your Generation among us. Behold, Vain Youths, Behold, how the
Wasting Judgments of God have been upon you, till we cry out, The Curse has
devoured our Land, and few Young men are Left!

Know you not, That when our Young men have been Pressed into the Wars, they
have been but Numbered for the Slaughter? and brought forth for the Murderer?
Know you not, That our Young men hoping to mend their Condition at Sea, have
but Sailed the sooner to their Long Home, in Running Abroad? Know you not, That
the Angels of Death have struck our Young Folks, with the Arrows of Death in
Epidemical Sicknesses? Know you not, That one strange Casualty after another,
brings many of our most Hopeful Young Folks to an untimely End? And Oh! how
doleful, doleful Things have our Young People seen, when they have been
Captives, in the Hands of Barbarous Infidels? The Canibals of the East, have
hideously Tormented them; and as far off as the Scorching Tents of Africa, they
have been fainting under the bitter Servitude of Mahometans.

Come then, Be afraid, O our Young People; Job could say, Destruction from God
was a Terror to me. Be Terrified, Young People, with a Fear, lest a Destruction
from God come upon you, in and for your Sins. Be afraid of continuing Estranged
from the Sheltering Wings of your Lord-Redeemer, lest you^ly open to the Storms
of the Judgments of God. Be afraid of Neglecting the Great Salvation, which the
Lord Jesus Christ has so often offered you, lest the Judgments of God bring a
Great Destruction upon you. Be afraid of all Filthiness, and all Profaneness,
and all Disobedience, and all Bad-Company, and all the Courses of Dishonesty,
lest by the Judgments of God, you Die before your Time, for your being Wicked
overmuch. Oh! Fear, and Flee Youthful Lusts; And now Remember your Creator in
the Days of your Youth, lest the Judgments of God, bring Evil Days upon you.

[The Second SERMON.]
BUT I intend all this Discourse, as only an Introduction unto a more
Entertaining Recapitulation of the Divine Judgments, which we have seen
Executed upon Several Sorts of Sinners, among our Selves. It cannot but be much
for the Glory of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, who from His Glorious High Throne
dispensed these Judgments: It cannot but be a Satisfaction unto the Good Angels
of the Lord, who are oftentimes the Executioners of these Judgments: It is an
Holy Undertaking, and it cannot but Serve the Interests of Holiness; to make
our modest Observations, upon the Judgments of God, which have been Executed
among us. As far as it may be Convenient in this Discourse, I will now Address
my self unto this undertaking. Sirs, Give me your Attention.

When that Great Man, the Emperor Mauritius, beheld his Family overwhelmed in
terrible Calamities and Five Hopeful Branches of his Family Slain before his
Eyes, he humbly Recited those words of the Psalmist, in Psalm. 119 137*
Righteous art Thou, O Lord, and Right are thy Judgments. My Neighbors, We have
ever now and then, those Calamitous Things before our Eyes in our
Neighborhood, which, if we are not blind, we must pronounce, The Right
Judgments of a Righteous God. And I must now ask you, to take some Notice of
those Judgments.

I do most readily grant, that, Lubricus hic L^cus ac difficilis, it is no easy
matter to Observe the Judgments of God; We shall easily fall into the Extremes,
of being either too Censorious, and Fanciful, or else too Negligent, in our
Observation of the Divine Judgments. But yet the Judgments of God, sometimes
and so circumstanced, that, He who runs may Read them; and our Duty thereupon
is described, in Psalm. 64.9. All men shall fear, and they shall declare the
work of God, for they shall wisely consider of His doing. Learned men have
complained of it, as a Defect in the Historical part of Learning, that there is
not Extant an Impartial and a well-attested Historia Nemeseos, or, Account of
Remarkable Judgments on Scandalous and Notorious Offenders. Yea, the God of
Heaven Himself complains of it, when men do not Regard His works, even, the
operation of His Hands.

I will now therefore, with all Faithfulness, lay before you, some of those
Remarks, which I have made upon the Judgments of God, that have been Executed
in this Land. Sirs, The Lord has been Known by His Executing of these
Judgments; Accompany them, with your Meditations! You shall Hear nothing but
what has had Sufficient Evidence: And certainly, I should be afraid of
Speaking Wickedly for God, or Talking Deceitfully for Him!

The First Remark.
Take a due and a deep Notice, I beseech you, of the Notable Judgments with
which we have seen the Contempt of the Glorious Gospel, Revenged by the God of
Glory. We have seen the Gospel, or, the Tidings of Salvation by the Lord Jesus
Christ, for Miserable Sinners, Graciously Offered; We have seen the Offer of
this Gospel, most ungratefully Refused; But of this Refusal, what Event have we
seen? Truly, A very Terrible Event. I Remember a passage of Scripture, which
runs thus in our Translation, Isa. 2.22. Cease ye from man, whose Breath is in
his Nostrils; for wherein is he to be accounted of? But, if you please, you may
thus understand it. The Prophet is denouncing the Judgments of God, upon the
Jews, for their Despising of the Messiah; and the Denunciati^n is thus
Concluded: Now forbear as to that man, [or, cease from Offending and Provoking
of Him,] who is now very Angry, [which the Hebrews Express, by Breathe in the
Nostrils,] for none is able to declare, how high an Account is to be made of
Him. Sirs, We have seen the God of Heaven very Angry; He has Breathed the Hot
Lightnings of Death, out of His Nostrils; when People have made no Account of
the Lord Jesus Christ, and of His Gospel. We have seen These Four or Five
Remarkables among the rest.

For a First Instance.
The Nation of the Narragansetts, was one of the most populous and power^ul
among all the Indians, that once filled this mighty Wilderness. Unto that woeful
Nation, the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, was freely Tendered* but they with
much Affront, and Contempt, Rejected it. An Holy man, then famous throughout
our Churches, hereupon uttered a Speech to this purpose, I speak altogether
without the Spirit of God, if this Nation be not quickly and strangely
destroyed. It was not long, before this Nation, much against the Advice, of the
more Aged men among them, engaged in Acts of Hostility against our people.
Whereupon, ours, with a Force much Inferior unto theirs, but with a mavelous
valor and success, in the Depth of Winter, made a Descent upon them. The
Glorious Lord Jesus Christ, whom they had Slighted, was with our Army, and the
Day was wonderfully carried against the Tawny Infidels. Their City was Laid in
Ashes; Above Twenty of their Chief Captains were Killed; a proportionable
Desolation cut off the Inferior Salvages: Mortal Sickness, and Horrid Famine,
pursued the Remainders of them: So that we can hardly tell, where any of them
are left alive upon the Face of the Earth. Such was thy speedy Vengeance, O
Blessed JESUS, on the Heathen that would not know thee, nor call upon thy Name.

For a Second Instance.
That Renowned Evangelist of our Indians, the Reverend ELIOT, Preached the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, unto Philip, the Prince of the Wompanoags; but
that Monster pulling of a Button on the Good man's Coat, said, He did not value
what he Preached any more than that? and he hindered his Abject Subjects from
Embracing the Christian Religion, that they might not become the Subjects of
our Lord Jesus Christ. But what is become of them all? They rashly
praecipitated themselves into a Rebellious War against the English: And at
Last, Philip fell into all the Distresses, that could be imagined. One of his
own Vassals then ran away from him, and informed the English where he was; They
came upon him in his Thicket, just as he was telling his Counselors of his
Dream, that he was fallen into our Hands; while he endeavored an Escape, an
Indian Shot him through the Heart, whereof he Died immediately; nor is any Number
of his people now left any where in the World. So do the Rejecters of thy
Grace, perish, O Lord!

For a Third Instance.
But the Indian Salvages, are not the only Instances of the Divine Revenges,
which have Ensued on men's Undervaluing the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ,
among us. Trave^ with me, Syrs, to the Eastern Parts of this Province; O come
and behold the Works of the Lord, the Desolations He has made in those parts of
the Earth. Twice has that brave Country, been occupied with Hopeful
Settlements. Hopeful! No, No; call them not Hopeful; inasmuch as the Ordinances
of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, were not settled among them. Hence,
Twice has that Country now be^n made an Aceldama; and the Settlements have all
been broken up, for many scores of Miles together. The Jealousy of the
Neglected Lord Jesus Christ, has broke forth, like an Unquenchable Fire against
those Plantations; the Fiery Wrath of Heaven has brought a Swift Destruction
upon them. A Barbarous Enemy has once and again, broke in upon those Towns,
like an Irresistible Torrent, carrying all before it, until they come to those
Towns, where the Ordinances of the Gospel are more upheld, and, behold, there
they find a Barriere, which they cannot yet get over; There the Spirit of the
Lord lifts up a Standard against them! In one of those Plantations, there had
newly been very prodigious Discoveries of Enmity against the Gospel of the Lord
Jesus Christ, which had been sometimes among them: And a bloody Adversary soon
surprised them, and Captived and Slaughtered the most of them, and Laid their
Habitations in Ashes, and horribly Roasted alive some of the Inhabitants.
Tremble, O ye people of the South, when you are told of this!

For a Fourth Instance.
And there is another Contempt of the Gospel, which we have often seen another
way chastised among us. Our Lord Jesus Christ has said concerning the Faithful
Ministers of His Gospel, in Luke 10.16. He that Despises you, Despises me.
When the Ministers of the Gospel, are Holy Prayerful, Painful, Watchful, and
Fruitful Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ, and men Filled and Acted with His
Holy Spirit: We have seen the Judgments of God many a Time, Arresting those
that have Abused these Ambassadors from the King of Heaven. Thus, there have
been Angry men among us, who have sat over their Cups, Railing at such or such
a Minister of God, and Hoping e're long to see the Death of him* In a little
while they themselves have Dyed miserably, and on their Deathbeds, they have
cried out for that very Minister to help them in their Anguishes. Yea, you may
sometimes mark it in our Churches; A Church has long Enjoyed an Excellent
Minister; but they grow at length full of unaccountable prejudices against him;
The Son of God seeing this their Froward Folly, sends for that Minister away to
Heaven presently; and let 'em supply themselves with such another when they can
find ^im! If unto these things, I should add, That the Impoverishing Judgments
of God upon our Land, have been very much for that Abominable Sacriledg^*
wherein the Ministers of Christ almost all the Land over, have been as much
defrauded of their Dues, as if you should withold the Wages of your Servants,
[which is a Sin that cries to God for Vengeance!] I could quote Scripture
enough, to give Authority unto that Assertion. Scripture! Yea, and Experience
too. A Town in this Country, Enriched with Two very Eminent Ministers, did one
year pass a Town Vote, That they could not allow their Ministers above Thirty
Pounds a piece that year, for their Salaries; and behold, the God who will not
be mocked, immediately caused the Town to lose Three Hundred Pounds, in that
Specie of their Cattle, by one Disaster. But I forbear it; for though the
Judgments of God go on to break people in a Mortar, for it, this Foolishness, I
know, will never depart from them. I pass to,

The Second Remark.
Men had ne^d beware of Rash Speeches, especially of Rash Wishes, for we have
seen Sore Judgments fall out, most agreeably thereunto. It was wholesome Advice
once given by the Town-Cle^^ of Ephesus, Ye ought to Do nothing Rashly* Truly,
Nor should we Speak any thing Rashly, much less Wish any thing Rashly. Syrs,
The Angels of Death over-hear what we say, and God often gives 'em Commission
to Sin^e a man, Ex Ore suo. How often have we seen it, That a Fools Mouth is
his Destruction, and his Lips are the Snare of his Soul! There was once a very
Godly man, of whom it is Reported, in Psal^ ^06.32. It went Ill with him,
because they provoked his Spirit, so that he spoke unadvisedly with his Lips.
I Will tell you what I have met withal. I have heard a vexed Father say, He cared
not whether he ever saw such a Child again. That Child has gone out of his
Presence, and through the Dispatches of Death, he has never seen that Child
again.

I have known a Weary Mother say, She hopes this is the Last Child she shall
ever have; and mul^iplied, and unhappy Miscarriages, ever after, have given 'em
cause to remind what they said, with bitterness of Soul.

Again, There was a Sailor in a Boat bound hither from the Northward, who being
dissuaded from taking a Pipe of Tobacco, because they had a Barrel of Powder
aboard, replied, I will take it, though the Devil carry me away alive! The Fire
some how came at the Powder, which tore the Boat in pieces, and Lost all the
Goods that were in it. All the men, were to admiration preserved; except that
one Sailor, whom they long after found in the Woods, with his Body torn to
pieces.

Once more; A Lewd Young man, being dissatisfied, with the Service wherein he
Lived, at the House of an Honest man, in a Neighboring Town, when they told
him, That his bad courses would bring him to Hell at the Last, he wickedly
said, He had rather be in Hell than in his Masters House. Immediately after
this, he was in a very strange manner Drowned* off a Little Bank in the River.
Take one Example more.

There was an Old Professor, in one of our Churches, who being under the
Admonition of the Church for some Offenses, was by his Friends called upon, to
Repent, and Reform, and Humble himself. But he flew into this outrageous
Answer, No, I will Burn, before I will Turn. And Behold the Issue! This man
some time after, fell into the Fire, and was Burnt to Death. Take yet one more
Example.

A man, in our Narragansett-Country having set his Dog to mischief his
Neighbors Cattle, denied the Fact, with Imprecations, That he might never stir
from the place, if he had so done. The Neighbor, to whom he denied it,
expressing himself troubled at his Impudent Lying, this Atheist hereupon used
the Name of the Great God in his Imprecations, That God would never let him
stir out of that place, if he did the Thing. The words were scarce out of his
mouth, but he sunk down Dead in the place, and never stirred any more.

And as they who Curse* themselves often smart for it, [consider of this, ye
Hardy Wretches, who call upon the Almighty to Damn you, which the Devils
themselves are not so Hardy as to Do!] So they who Curse others, do horribly
wound themselves in the Recoyl. You shall hear an Example.

A Debauched Fellow, had Cursed that Excellent man, Governor Prince. The
Governor Laid before the Transgressor, the Gre^^ Si^ he had committed; and
with a Grave, Holy, Awful Admonition, besought him to consider of that
Scripture, in Psalm. 109.17, 18. As he Loved Cursing* so let it come unto him,
as* he delighted not in Blessing, so let it be far from him. As he clothed
himself with Cursing, like as with his Garments, so let it come into his
Bowels, and like Oil into his Bones. Quickly after this, a direful Cancer smote
this man; the Cancer appeared first in his Lip, and so it Eat away his Flesh,
and his Jaw, down to his Throat; where, with Inexpressible Torments, it killed
him.

Behold, O man; If thou desire Life; keep thy Tongue from Evil!

The Third Remark.
There is a Lying Proverb, A Drunken man gets no Harm: We have seen the
Judgments of God upon Drunkards, most Woefully confuting of that Lie. I am sure,
It Is not a Proverb of Solomon's; for he says, in Prove. 23.29. Who has Woe? They
who tarry long at the Wine. Is it no Harm, for a man to bring Sickness, on his
Body? We have seen Drunkards often perishing in Diseases contracted by their
Debauches Is it no Harm, for a man to bring Disgrace, on his Esteem? We have
often seen Drunkards become very Abjects, though they once were Folks of some
Fashion and Figure in the World. Is it no Harm, for a man to bring Poverty on
his Estate? We have often seen the Judgments of God fulfilling that word, The
Drunkard shall come to Poverty. Surely, It Is no little Harm, for men to Debase,
and Confound their own Souls, and lay themselves open, unto the worst of all
the Temptations of the Devil, the worst of all Impieties. But Sirs, How often
have we seen woeful Drunkards doing so? We have seen them Turn Beasts, yea, Turn
Devils! But more particularly.

A Drunken man, is in old English as much as to say, A Drowned man. To see
then, a Drunken man, become a Drowned man, is to see but a most Retaliating
Hand of God. Why, we have seen This very Thing, more than Threescore Times in
our Land. And I remember the Drowning of one Drunkard, so odly circumstanced;
It was (...) the Hold of a Vessel, that lay full of water nea^ the Shore. We
have seen it, so often, that I am amazed at you, O ye Drunkards of New England;
I am amazed, that you can Harden your Hearts in your Sin, without Expecting to
be destroyed suddenly, and without Remedy. Yea, And we have seen the Devil,
that has possessed the Drunkard, throwing him into the Fire, as well as into
the Water. They have Tumbled into the Fire, and then kept Shrieking, Fire!
Fire! till they have gone down to the Fire, that never shall be quenched. Yea,
More than One or Two, Drunken Women, in this very Town, have, while in their
Drink, fallen into the Fire, and so they have Tragically gone Roaring out of
one Fire into another. O ye Daughters of Belial, Hear and Fear, and Do Wickedly
no more!

The Fourth Remark.
It was a Thing once charged upon Sabbath Breakers, in Neh. 13 18. Ye bring
Wrath upon Israel, by Profaning the Sabbath. And have not we seen the Wrath of
God, Correcting Profanations of the Christian Sabbath, with Rebukes of Thunder
and Lightning? And indeed, Some Intelligent Persons have noted it, That the
dreadful Storms of Thunder and Lightning, which have killed many among us from
year to year, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah; they have mostly happened on
or near the Lords Day: As an intimation, that breaches of the Lord's Day, have
procured the Firing of the Great Artillery of Heaven upon us. However, Our Land
sees little Rest, through the Judgments of God upon us, for the Violations of
the Sacred Rest, which he has appointed for us. And the many Disasters, which
happen on the Lord Day among us, may be so many Judgments, upon us, for our
not Sanctifying the Day unto the Lord* But all the more Special Exemples, of
Judgments coming for Sins against the Sabbath, I will wrap up, in this one
piece of History. I have been desired by many Malefactors, to be with them at
their Execution; and Then, in those last and sad Minutes of their Lives, they
have sometimes cried out, This, This is a Judgment of God, upon my
Sabbath-breaking; I may thank my Sabbath-breaking for all this; It Was for my
mispending of the Sabbath with vain Persons, and in vain Actions, that God has
left me to that Wickedness which has brought upon me, all of this horrible
Misery! Think of This, you that still say of the Lord's Day, What a Weariness is
it?

The Fifth Remark.
Disobedient Children! My Heart aches for you for I have seen the Judgments of
God, makin^ such as you* the most astonishing Monuments (...) His Indignation.
It was a Custom in Israel, tha^ once a year, this Proclamati^n was made, from
the Top of Mount Ebal, in D^ut. 27.16. Cursed he, that setts Light by his
Father^ or his Mother. A^ all the People shall say, Amen. As from the Top of
that Mount, I do this Day Proclaim it, That ^ have seen the Curse of God,
making a Quick work with such as have not Honored their Parents; while I have
also seen, those Children, who have Honored, and Supported, and Comforted
their Parents, wonderfully Prospering under the manifold Blessings of God. And,
I Pray all the People to mind it.

Very Few have Died on the Gallows, in this place, but what have Wrung their
Hands upon the Ladder, with this out cry, This is a Judgment of God upon me,
for my Undutifulness unto my Parents; My Dis^bedience to my Parents has
brought me hither!

But this Article of Discourse may not be dismissed, until we have Singled out
One particular Exemple, of the Strange Punishments, which Undutiful Children
bring upon themselves, from the Judgments of God.

A Reverend Minister of Christ, that often Served Him, in that very Pulpit,
where these words are uttered, once observed a Son, to behave himself
undutifully toward his Father, in the Ferry boat, which was carrying them over
the River. Whe^eupon that Man of God said unto the Young man, Young man, I am
sorry to see you so little Regard your Father; I would ser^ously persuade you
to Rep^^^ of your Undutifulness, or, I will solemnly Assure (...), that I
Expect, the Killing Judgments of God will overtake you, before a year come to
an end. And, behold, before that year was out, this Young man was miserably
Mu^dered.

Hearken, my Young Folks; And Let not your Eye mock your Fathers, or despise to
obey your Mothers, Lest the Ravens of the Valley do pick it out, and the Young
Eagles do eat it!

The Sixth Remark.
Unto the Contentious we have seen God Recompense Indignation and Wrath,
Tribulation and Anguish. Said the Apostle once, in Romans 16 17. I bes^^ch you,
Brethren, Mark them which cause Div^^^^^s. And I now say, I beseech you,
Brethren, Mark the Places and the Persons, which by Divisions have m^de
themselves Notorious: Mark, what Judgments of God have Signalized them.
Something of what I have Marked, I will freely tell you.

I have Marked it, That those Places, which have kept up Divisions, and
Strifes, and Schisms, have been direfully Smitten with Spiritual Plagues, the
Plagues which are of all the direfullest. The most Lively Saints in those
places, have been soon Snatched away by Death, one after another: The Power of
Godliness has been Lamentably lost among the Survivers, and a Leanness has
been sent into their Souls: The Work of Conversion has been at a deadly stand,
and the Rising Generation has pined away in their Iniquities. Yea, there was
one Church among us, wherein an uncomfortable Rupture happened: and a Young man
in the Town was left unto an horrid Self-Murder; he Drowned himself: But he
left behind him a Writing directed unto his Father, wherein there was this
among other passages; Father, My Ruin was, the Stubborness and Unfaithfullness
of my Tender years; and Evil Counsil, and Evil Company; and, The Differences in
the Church, by reason whe^^of I grew Pro^d, and did not carry it in my place,
as I ought, which is the wide way to Ruin. God make this Young man, our
Warner; His Name was, Warner!

Again, I have Marked it, That those Persons, who have been the Grand
Incendiaries, in Divisions, have been often branded, with some Symptoms of the
Displeasure of God. Those Persons, have, been very Industrious to Blott the
Names of other men; and at last, they themselves have Died with a Blott. This
indeed, is a point wherein we must be sparing; yet I may not forget, That a
Council Sitting at a Town, for the Composing of some Ecclesiastical
Differences, Our Venerable Old Mr. Wilson saw one man to be Extremely perverse
above the rest, and most unreasonably, to disturb the Peace of the Church.
Whereupon, that Zealous man, told the Council, he was Confident, That the
Jealously of God, would set a Mark upon that man, and that the Ordinary Death
of men should not befall him. It happened a little while after this, that the
man was barbarously Murdered by the Salvages!

Again, There was a Quarrelsome Woman in a Church not far off; who having
Accused a man in the Church, of a Fault that she could not prove, She yet
remained so Irreconcilable, that she would never come to the Lords Table, as
long as that man Lived. He Dying, she bragged unto her Friends, That now she
would go to the Sacrament, at the Lords Table. One of them solemnly told her,
That she might yet Fear a Testimony of the Displeasure of God against her, for
her Unchristian Absenting her self so long from that Ordinance. And, Lo, She
Dyed Suddenly, Just before the Next Sacrament was to be Administered: [though
she had the Repute of a Godly Woman.] Don't then, Don't Sow Discord any of you,
lest you be an Abomination to the Lord. Be not Unpeaceable, or Unplacable; God
is not pleased with the Froward.

The Seventh Remark.
We are assured in 2 Pet. 2.9, 10. At the Day of Judgment sh^^l b^ punished,
chiefly they that walk after the Flesh, in the Lust of Uncleanness. And it is
no rare thing among us, to see Judgment in this World also overtaking them.
Father Latymer once presented unto a Great man, a New Testament, with this
Inscription Embossed on the Cover of it, Whoremongers and Adulterers God shall
Judge. And indeed, how surprisingly, how Amazingly, may we see God Judging,
that sort of Sinners!

We have seen many, many, many, to Die in their Youth; because, Their Life has
been among the Unclean We have seen them, to mourn at the last, when their
Flesh and their Body, has been consumed. We have seen them getting a Wound and
a Dishonor, and a Reproach, that is never wiped away. It may be, the Just God
says upon the Unclean, Write this person Childless! or, it may be, the Lord
says, I will kill their Children with Death. Or, it is possible, some very
miserable Disasters have attended their Offsp^ing; Peccatum seminis punitur in
semine. Why? Because that some old Acts of Uncleanness have not been enough
Repented of.

It Is said of Uncleanness, By means thereof, a man is brought unto a piece of
Bread. Some forlorn people, have cried out unto me, of their desperate Poverty;
and anon, they have confessed, That they believed the Judgments of God, made
them, and kept them so poor, to Revenge the Secret, Cursed, Horrid Adulteries,
which they had wallowed in.

Yea, How many have R^pen^ed themselves, for the most Capital Strokes of the
Sword of Justice, by this Wickedness! I have known several who under a Sentence
of Death, for other Crimes wherein they thought themselves hardly dealt withal,
have cried out, Oh! It Is for my Secret Adulteries, that the Holy God, has
brought all this upon me! And how many Young Women, have been Executed among
us, for Murdering of their Bastard Infants! But, at their Execution, this has
been their Exclamation, Oh! 'that all young people, would beware of the Snares
of Uncleanness: By continuing in those woeful Snares, without any speedy
Repentance, we have been Ruined! One of the first in this Land, that came to
such an End, [Her Name was Martin,] had yielded unto a Wicked man soliciting
her Chastity: but with such Reluctances of Soul, that in her Prayers to God,
for Help, she said, If ever she were overtaken again, she would Leave her self
unto His Justice to be made an Example. She Remembered not her Vows, but was
again overtaken: She Conceived, she Travailed, she privately Destroyed her
Child, using Two several Attempts before she could wholly dispatch it.
Afterward, upon a Removal of the Family, the Murder strangely came to Light:
God made the Infant Bleed afresh before her, for her Confusion; She owned the
whole Truth, and she Died for i^: But she was Twice Turned off, before her
Expiration. Say then, Say, my Friends, to all the Temptations of Uncleanness,
How shall I do this Wickedness, and Sin against God!

The Eighth Remark.
Let us a Little Sum up the Gains, of those who have used Irregular Methods of
Oppression, or of Dishonesty, to Gain the World. I have done it; and I Will tell
you what I have seen the Sum Total to be. The Judgments of God have brought it
unto That, in Jer. 17.11. He gets Riches, and not by Right; At his End he shall
be a Fool. Father Latymer, would speak of a Grievous Cough which would come
upon them that swallowed Unrighteous Gains. Truly, Losses have usually followed
upon such Gains, like so many Coughs, and men have Cough'd, and Cough'd, until
they vomited up all that they had got. It is the Charge of our Lord Jesus
Christ upon us, That no man go beyond, or oppress his Brother* in a matter;
because that the Lord is the Avenger of all such. We are told, If thou see
the Oppression of the Poor, He that is Higher than the Highest, Regards it. We
are told, God considers all the Oppressions that are done under the Sun. There
was much Notice taken of This, in the Infancy of our Plymouth Colony, when the
poor Planters had their Dependence on certain Adventurers in England. The
Adventurers, taking their Advantages, of the Extreme Straits, which those poor
Planters were in, sent over Supplies unto them, at the most Extremest Rates
imaginable. The poor Planters made Return in Peltry; but the Vessel was taken
by a Turks Man of War, and carried into Salley, where they Sold the Peltry for
Groats a piece; as much too Low, as the Goods for which they had been Returned
were too High, and the men were made Prisoners into the Bargain, to the great
Loss of the Adventurers. But it would spend many Hours to Relate, the Notice
which might have been since taken, of many more, such Evident Judgments o^ God,
on the Ways of the Oppressor. Oh! do not Learn his Ways; God gives unto all
sorts of Devourers, Letters of Reprisal, to take away ^is Unjust Gains from
him; very commonly it so ^alls out.

There are some, that have used the grossest ^ort of Stealing, and Robbing. But
have they Enriched themselves? I Entreat you, Syrs, to ^ake our New-English
Pirates, the Subjects of your Meditations That man is Blind unto Sun^hine, and
Blind before Lightning, who sees not ^he Tremendous Judgments of God, pursuing
of those wicked men. Let no man after this, run greedily after the Error, of
those Children of Perdition. But, if any of you, have knowingly ^een Sharers
with them in their Gains; for Gods sake, Repent of what you have done; you have
carried Burning Coals into your feathered Nests; Don't put a farthing of that
money, among the rest of your Possessions; it will consume all the rest.

Others have had their Finer ways of Cheating; but, what has come of them?
The Estates gotten by Cheating, have been but so many Treasures of Snow; The
Rains of the Wrath of God, have wonderfully melted them; -- at least, Viz
gaudet Tertius Haeres.

There are Persons that have Broken, by their own Extravagancies: Not merely by
sad Providence, bu^ their own Extravagancies: These have used more Fraudulence
than Fair-dealing, in (...) Compositions with their Creditors: But have (...)
not seen afterward, That after This (as we say) No Butter would ever Stick
upon their Bread?

Widows, When the Estates of the Deceased Husbands have been Insolvent, have
not always given in True Accounts; They have held back ^ part, that they
should not have witheld: God has been Offended at them; they have gone under
the Scourges of God all their Days for that Offense.

Desperate Gamesters, What hand have they made of it? -- I can tell, what one
of them did. He had played away, about Forty Pounds, in Lewd Company; and
then, he fell into Horror of Conscience, wherein he often Cried out, I am all
on Fire, under the Wrath of God! I am all on Fire, under the Wrath of God! And
so, he went and hanged himself.

Make all the Restitution that you can, Ye Cheats; or Expect the Judgments of
God upon you. -- Diseite* Justitiam Moniti.

The Ninth Remark.
Methinks, The Public Judgments under which we have labored, have sometimes,
very convictively Intimated the Sins and Faults, for which those Judgments have
been Laid upon us. I will use a plain dealing in this matter. When have the
Judgments of God, ever Deprived us of any* Good Thing, but we first of all have
Despi^^d, that Good!

We have been Sensual, Excessive, Unthankful, in our Enjoyment of the Fruits of
our Harvest. The Judgments of God have blasted them.

We have made Idols of our Lands, and for the sake thereof, neglected almost
all that is Holy, and Just and Good. There was a Time, when through the
Judgments of God, our Titles to them all were contested.

Litigious Lawsuits, were Scandalously multiplied among us. The Judgments of
God, brought us into a Time, when the Extortions of the Law made a Cry among us.

Drinking-houses, have been a most undoing Stumbling Block of Iniquity, in the
midst of us. The Judgments of God, brought us into a Time, when Unsufferable
Villainies were perpetrated every where, under the pretense of the Excise.

Those Times, are now over-indeed. But our Indian Wars are not over yet! We
have too far degenerated into Indian Vices. The Vices of the Indians are these;
They are very Lying Wretch^^* and they are very Lazy Wretches; and they are out
of measure Indulgent unto their Children; there is no Family Government among
them. We have shamefully Indianized, in all those Abominable Things. Now, the
Judgments of God, have Employed Indian Hatchets, to wound us, no doubt for
these our Indian Vices.

A Thousand more such Things, may occur to a serious Observation. Syrs,
Consider the Wondrous Works of God!

The Tenth Remark.
Many people have Sinned Horribly, upon a presumption that they Sinned
Secretly: But the Judgments of God, have been wonderfully and prodigiously, and
stupendously Displayed, in the Discovering of Secret Sinners, among us. David
no doubt, promised himself, an Everlasting Secrecy, of his Transgression: Thou
did it Secretly, said the Prophet; And the Psalmist, calling to mind that
word, owned in Psalm. 51.4. Against Thee, Thee only have I Sinned; And the Evil
I have done in Thy Sight. None was privy to the Crime, except one man, who was
a Partner in it. Yea, but, Says the Lord, I Will make all Israel Hear of it! The
Sin-Confounding Judgments of God, made all the Sin to come out. Syrs, Those
Judgments of God, have been so Exemplified among our selves, That I cannot
imagine how some Guilty Wretches, whose Crimes are hitherto Secret, are able to
Walk about, having the Terrors of the Shadow of Death upon their Souls.

How many Secret Murders, have strangly been Discovered among us! And, I
believe, there are yet more to be Discovered.

There have been Devilish Filthinesses committed among us; But, Oh! how
strangely, have the Sins of men found them out!

At the Southward, there was a Beast, which brought forth a Creature, which
might pretend ^^to something of an Humane Shape. Now, the people minded, that
the Monster had a Blemish in one Eye, much like what a profligate Fellow in the
Town was known to have. This Fellow was hereupon Examined; and upon his
Examination, Confessed, his Infandous Beastialities, for which he was
deservedly Executed.

But I Will never Confess, thinks many an Hard-hearted Sinner. No! So thought
another man, whose Name I could mention. He was one, who had formerly, and
frequently, derided other persons, as Fools for Confessing against themselves.
This man Lived in Adultery, especially with one Vile Woman; until God Struck
him with a Dead Palsy, and a Quick Conscience. Then, he that had Laughed at
others, for not concealing their Sins, could not conceal his Own. He Revealed
his Villainies with that Woman, and others; and he acknowledged the Justice of
God, ^n compelling him to Reveal them. The Woman also made an Acknowledgment of
her Enormities; and they both, Died for their Iniquities.

What shall I say? There have been Church Members among us, who have made no
mean Profession of Religion. These have gone on from year to year, in a Trade
of Secret Filthiness. Even I know, and am a Witness of it, says the Lord. Some
of these, have Died in very sad circumstances, and the World has never heard
any thing of the Lords Controversy with them. Yea, but many of them, have been
strangely Detecte^ before they have Died: They have been left unto some
Foolish, and Sottish Action, at last, which has Occasioned the Publishing of
their Vileness unto all the World. The Holy Eyes of the Lord Jesus Christ,
which are like a Flame of Fire, have seen their Damnable Hypocrisy, and
Impiety; and, He has made all the Churches to know, that He ^earches the Reins
and Hearts of men: He has made their Wickedness to be Declared before the
whole Congregation: He has brought the Public Censures of His Faithful People
upon them. He has done much in these awful Judgments; and, I fear, I fear, He
has yet more to do, upon some, in the midst of thee, O Boston* Except they
Repent!

The Eleventh Remark.
The Judgments of God among us, have not been more Conspicuous upon any
Sinners, than upon those that have made others to Sin. There are some, whom the
Scriptures call, The Chief of Sinners: Those who are Chief, in Drawing others
on to be Sinners. Truly, The Judgments of God, have often made these, as
Exemplary in their Plagues, as they have been in their Sins.

I have known, some Wretched Young Men, in several Societies, who have been the
Chief Debauchers of the Societies which they belonged unto. But Oh! What sad
Things, could I tell you, of the Deadly Judgments that God has Showred ^^om
Heaven, upon the Heads of those Infamous Youths! God has made 'em, the Sons of
Eli, with His Deadly Judgments.

Under this Head of the Divine Judgments, why should I not mention the
Condition of one whom I knew in this Place? The man Denied the Immortality of
the Soul; and would go to debauch other men, with his vile Opinion, That we
have no Immortal Soul in us. This poor man came to ly on his Death bed, and
then the Terrors of God so Thunderstruck his Conscience, that his Dying
outcries were, Oh! what shall I do for my Immortal Soul; what will become of
my Immortal Soul for ever!

And, when, alas, when will our Indian Traders, apply to themselves, that
Commination, in Heb. 2.15. Woe to him that gives his Neighbor Drink that
put thy Bottle [thy Rhum Bottle!] to him and make him Drunken also? While
there has been a most Observable Blessing of God, upon the Preachers of Truth
to the Indians, all the World may Observe a Judgment of God, upon the Sellers
of Drink to the Indians. I pray, what have the Estates of such men, generally
come to? Do; Trade on, ye Merchants of Souls, or, more truly, ye Butchers of
Souls: Trade on, till the Judgments of God, have caused you, to Trade your
selves into Beggary at the last! But know, that the Blood of Souls, will be
found on you^ Skirts. It is not very long ago, that an unusu^^ Accident in a
part of this Province, did (...) ^he Neighbors into some serious Thoughts of
this matter. Several Indians were made horribly Drank, by the Drink, (...) the
English had Sold unto them. Returnin^ home, over a Little Ferry, Eight of them
were Drowned; and Three months after they were Drowned [from December to March]
one of their Dead Bodies came ashore, very near the place, where they had been
suppli^d with their Drink; and ^ying on the Shore, it (...) so plentifully as
to discolor the Water and and about it. Upon which the Considerate ^^ectators,
thought of that Scripture, The Stone all cry out of the Wall, against him that
gives his ^eighbour Drink. They thought, there was a ^oud Cry of Blood! Blood!
against some Wicked ^^glish in this matter.

The Twelfth Remark.
Finally; We have seen, we have seen, That (...) omitting their Prayers to God,
men bespeak (...) themselves, the Judgments of God.

How many, that have Lived Prayerless, have we ^en to Die Prayerless, or to Die
Hopeless?

We often miscarry in our Enterprises; Now (...) we would Search and Try our
Ways, it may be, we should find, That we did not sufficiently Pray, over our
Enterprises, before we Resolved upon them. How often, How often, have I seen
this ^erified in the Judgments of God!

Yea, by a Prayerless Life, we have seen men, (...) down, the most consummate
Judgments of (...) upon their own woeful Heads.

It was a pathetical Passage in the (...) Prayer of a poor Murderer, that was
Executed (...) this place not long ago.

Oh! (said he) If I had gone to Prayer that morning, when I committed the Sin
for which I am now to Die, Oh! Lord God, I believe, thou would have kept back
my Hands from that Sin!

(...) Day, wherein men have gone abroad without Prayer, before they went, how
often have the Judgments of God made it a Day of Thick Darkness to the
Prayerless people? Such a Day, w^ that of poor Origens Apostasy.

Yea, There was an Aged Professor, (...) to a Church in this Tow^, who, after
(...) of Good Repute, with Good People, (...) Drunken Sot, for which he was
(...) After his Excommunication, he fell (...) Anguish of Soul, and at length
(...) Circumstances. But some of (...) words were; I often Prayed unto God, for
a (...) which He still Denied me. At ^ength I g^ew Angr^ at God: Whereupon I
grew slack in my Acquaintance with the Lord; Ever since which, He has
dreadfull^ forsaken me, and I know, that now He has no Mercy for me. Think of
these things, and Oh! do not so Reject Fear, as to Restrain Prayer, before the
Lord.

These are the most peculiar Judgments of God unto which I have accounted i^,
not ami^s, (...) point you; That so you may Tremble for fear Him, and be afraid
of His Judgments.

FINIS.

