The Fifth Assembly, First Sessions, Beginning the 20th day of June, and ending
the 4th of July, Anno Regni Regis Gulielmi, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and
Hiberniae, Septimo.
An Act for raising Eight Hundred Pounds for the paying and maintaining the
Officers and Soldiers employed for the securing the Fronteers of this Province
at Albany, from the first of May, 1695. to the first of August next ensuing.
WHereas there has been lately raised and detached several Forces for the
security of the Fronteers of this Province at Albany, who have been there
employed for that service, from the first of May last, and are there to
continue until the first day of August next ensuing. To the end therefore that
the said Forces may attend the said Service, Be it Enacted by the Governor and
Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority
of the same, That a Levy of Eight Hundred Pounds Current Money of this Province
be laid, assessed, raised and levied upon all and every the Inhabitants,
Residenters and Freeholders of and in this Province, for the paying and
maintaining the said Forces, and their proper Officers, together with the
Incidental Charges arising thereon, during the time aforesaid, and for no other
use, intent or purpose whatsoever, to be laid, assessed, raised levied and paid
to his Majesty's Collector and Receiver General, for the time being, at his
Majesty's Custom house in the City of New York, on or before the twenty fifth
day of March next ensuing the Publication hereof, according to the Rates and
Proportions following, That is to say, for the City and County of New York two
hundred twenty four Pounds. For the County of Orange, eight Pounds. For the
County of West-Chester, forty Pounds. For the County of Suffolk, One hundred
and sixty Pounds. For Queens-County, One hundred and twelve pounds. for Kings
County, One hundred fifty two pounds. For the County of Richmond, sixteen
pounds. For Ulster and Duchess County, eighty eight Pounds.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
assessing raising and paying the aforesaid sum of eight hundred Pounds Current
Money aforesaid, The Mayor and Aldermen of the City of New York, the Justices
of the Peace, the Assessors and Collectors, for the time being, of all and
every respective Cities, Counties, Towns, Manors, Liberties or Jurisdictions
within this Province, are hereby required, empowered and authorized to summons,
assess collect and pay the several Sums of Money herein before mentioned,
according to the Proportions before Expressed, in such ways and means, and
according to such manner, rule and direction, and under such pains and
penalties, as are contained, enjoined, prescribed and directed in an Act of
General Assembly, passed in the sixth year of his Majesty's Reign, Entitled,
An Act for the Raising and (...) One hundred and seventy men for the securing
the Frontieers of this Province in the City and County of Albany, and all and
every Article, Rule, Clause, Pains and Penalties mentioned in the aforesaid
Act, for and concerning the (...), assessing, collecting and paying, or
refusing and neglecting the Execution of the respective Duties required
therein, shall be, abide and remain in full force and Effect, to (...) intents
and purposes, and in as full and ample manner for the due Execution of this
Act, until the abovesaid Sum of eight hundred Pounds, be duly, fully and
compleately assessed, collected and paid as abovesaid (...), as fully and in
like manner, as if the same were particularly and at large recited and set down
in the Body of this Act, any thing contained therein to the contrary hereof in
any wise notwithstanding. And the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of New York,
and all and every the Justices, Assessors and Collectors of the respective
Cities and Counties aforesaid, and all other concerned herein are to take
notice hereof accordingly.

An Act for Continuing the Act for encouraging the Post Office, three years
longer, after the expiration of the said Act.
WHereas the Act for encouraging the Post Office does expire in April next, by
its own Limitation, and it being found very advantageous to the Inhabitants of
this Province, by the preserving of Trade, and maintaining a mutual
Correspondence amongst our Neighboring Collonies and Plantations, Be it
therefore Enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in
General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That the Act, entitled, An
Act for encouraging the Post Office, be continued three years longer, after the
expiration of the time limited in the said Act, and all the Rates and Sums of
Money established by virtue of the said Act, upon Letters and Pacquets, that
shall be received and dispatched by the Office and Offices, contained in the
said Act, shall be paid by the space of three years, next and after the
expiration of the Term limited in the said Act, according to such Rules and
Directions, and under such Penalties and Forfeitures, as is contained and
enjoined by the said Act. And the aforesaid Act, entitled, An Act encouraging
the Post Office, and every Article, Rule and Clause therein mentioned, shall
be, abide, remain and continue in full force and effect, to all intents and
purposes, during the said term of three years next and after the expiration of
the term limited in the said Act, and no longer, as fully, and in like manner,
as if the same were particularly, and at large recited and set down in the Body
of this Act, any thing contained therein to the contrary hereof in any ways
notwithstanding.

An Act to enable the City of New York to relieve the Poor, and defray their
necessary and public Charge.
WHereas the public Buildings belonging to the City of New York, are much out
of repair, the Poor in great distress, the Highways, Streets and Lanes so
miery and foul, that they are noisome to the Inhabitants of the said City, as
well as to other of his Majesty's liege Subjects riding and traveling to and
from the same, and that chiefly for want of having a Fund annually raised for
the defraying the public and necessary Charge of the said City. To the end
therefore that the said City of New York may be the better enabled to erect or
repair their public Buildings, relieve their Poor, amend their Highways, pave
their Streets and Lanes, and defray the other contin^ent public Charge of the
said City, Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor and Council, and
Representatives convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same,
That the Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the said City, for the
time being, or the major part of them, whereof the Mayor or Recorder of the
said City to be one, shall yearly, in the week before the Feast day of St.
Michael, the Archangel, or within one Month after the said Feast day of St.
Michael, elect and appoint five good and sufficient Citizens, inhabiting within
the said City, who shall be called, Overseers of the Poor, and public Works
and Buildings of the said City, etc. And they, or the greater part of them, by
and with the consent of the Mayor or Recorder, Alderman and Assistants of the
said City, are hereby authorized, empowered and enabled annually, and once
every year, at the time aforesaid, to raise a reasonable Tax upon all and every
the Inhabitants, Freeholders and Sojourners within the said City, toward the
defraying the public and necessary Charge of the said City, and the necessary
Relief of the Lame, Impotent, Old, Blind, and such others being Poor, and not
able to work, etc.

And for the better raising and levying the Tax aforesaid, to defray the
public and necessary Charges, and the Relief of the Poor aforesaid, Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Mayor or Recorder,
Alderman and Assistants of the said City, with the Overseers so to be nominated
as aforesaid, or any three of them shall meet together at the least, once in
every three Months at the City Hall of the said City, and there to consider how
much the public and necessary Charge, and the relief of the Poor of the said
City, shall amount to for one year, and the estimate thereof they shall cause
to be particularly expressed in writing, that is to say, The particular Sum or
Sums that they shall think needful for the erecting or repairing of their
public Buildings, and the particular (...) that they shall esteem necessary
for the Relief the Poor, as aforesaid; and also the particular Sum that they
shall judge fit for the repairing the Highways, paying and cleansing the
Streets, Lanes and Allies of the said City, and the d^^^^ing the other
contingent Charges of the same. Which Sum, so particular^^ and estimated, as
aforesaid, shall be by the Assessors of the said (...) equally and
proportionably assessed upon the Real and Personal Estates of all and every of
the Inhabitants, Freeholders and Sojourners within the said City, within
twenty days, at least, after that they shall receive such estimate, made as
aforesaid, under the Hands and Seal of the Mayor or Recorder, or any one or
more of the Aldermen, and Overseers nominated as aforesaid. Which Tax, Rate or
Assesment shall be proportionably assessed or set upon the Real and Personal
Estates of all and every the Inhabitants, Freeholders and Sojourners within
the said City, or one year, for the purposes aforesaid, being allowed and
confirmed by the Mayor or Recorder, or any two or more of the Aldermen of the
said City, shall be collected by the respective Collectors of the said City,
and quarterly paid by every respective Inhabitant, Freeholder or Sojourner
within the same City upon demand made thereof by the respective Collectors
aforesaid, appointed to gather and collect the same; and in case of Refusal or
neglect, shall by warrant of the Mayor or Recorder, and any one or more of the
Aldermen of the said City, under their Hands and Seals, be levied by Distress
and sale of the Offenders Goods. All which Sum or Sums of Money levied,
collected and paid, as aforesaid, shall be by the respective Collectors
aforesaid, paid unto the Treasurer of the said City quarterly, and there shall
remain until the same be ordered for the purposes aforesaid, by order of the
Common Council of the said City, and by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of the
Mayor.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Mayor, Aldermen
and Assistants aforesaid, shall appoint a Scavanger, Raker, or other Officer,
to be employed in cleansing of the Streets, Lanes, Allies, and other places
aforesaid, within the said City, and at least once in every Week, shall carry,
or cause to be carried the Ashes, Dirt, Filth and Soil of the said Streets,
Lanes, Allies, and other places, unto such place or places where he shall think
convenient, provided that it shall not be noisome or hurtful to any of the
Inhabitants of the said City; which Scavanger, Raker, or other Officer, to be
employed, as aforesaid, shall have such yearly Salary or Wages as the Mayor or
Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants aforesaid shall in their discretion think
needful, to be paid out of the Money assessed and paid as aforesaid, by Warrant
upon the Treasure of the said City, as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted, That if the Mayor or Recorder, Aldermen and
Assistants aforesaid, shall refuse, delay or neglect to nominate and appoint
Overseers yearly, as is before appointed, that then each of them for such
default shall loose and forfeit for every such Default, five Pounds, to be
employed for the Relief of the Poor of the said City, and to be levied by
distress on their Goods by Warrant from the general Sessions of the Peace of
the said City. And if any Overseer, Assessor or Collector shall refuse, neglect
or delay to serve and execute the respective Duties before mentioned and
required, shall for each default, that shall happen, loose and forfeit the Sum
of five Pounds, to be levied by Distress, and employed as aforesaid, by Warrant
under the Hand and Seal of the Mayor or Recorder, and any two of the Aldermen
of the said City. Provided, That nothing herein contained shall continue or
remain longer in force than the space and term of two years, next after the
publication hereof.

An Act to enable the City and County of Albany to defray their Necessary
Charge.
FOrasmuch as the Inhabitants of the City and County of Albany have been,
during the time of the late Disorders, very much agrieved, wasted, destroyed
and impoverished by the Incursions of the French, his Majesty's declared
Enemies, and that it is absolutely necessary that some suitable and convenient
way should be found out for their Relief, and more easy defraying of the
necessary Charges of that City and County. Be it therefore Enacted by the
Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly, and it
is hereby enacted by the Authority of the same, That the Imposition or Rate of
Two per Cent shall be raised and levied upon all Indian Goods that are brought
up to that City and County of Albany, and there sold and consumed. And also,
that the Impost of Three Pence be raised and levied upon each Gallon of Rum,
that is sold and consumed within that City and County. And for the due and
orderly collecting of the respective Imposts and Rates, the Treasurer of the
said City, for the time being, or any appointed by him, and the Mayor of the
said City, under the public Seal of the said City, are hereby empowered and
authorized to appoint, constitute and establish a Collector or Receiver of the
Rates and Impost aforesaid, who shall have power to receive the same, and to
enter in a fair Book, kept for that purpose, all such Sum and Sums of Money as
shall be so entered and received for the respective Duties aforesaid, the said
Collector or Receiver appointing certain convenient times and places for the
keeping of the office, as shall be directed by the Court of Mayor and
Alder-men, and Assistants of the said City. And all Persons that Trade and
bring up to the said City and County the aforementioned Indian Goods and Rum,
are hereby required to make a Report of the Quantity and Value of such Goods
and Rum they so bring up and sell in the said City and County aforesaid, and
pay the Duties and Imposts hereby established, without being at any further
Charge than the said Duty. And in default hereof it shall be lawful for the
Mayor, Treasurer, or any other Officer hereby authorized to issue out his or
their Warrants, under his or their Hand and Seal for the seizing of all such
Goods and Rum as shall be imbezelled, and not pay the Duties aforesaid, one
third to the Informer, one third to the said City and County of Albany, and one
third to his Excellency, the Governor or Commander in chief for the time
being. Provided, That all the Sum and Sums of Money that are hereby received,
shall be only appropriated and applied to the defraying of the necessary
Charges of the City and County aforesaid; and that the Treasurer, Collector or
Receiver for the time being, shall not pay any of the Money received as
aforesaid, but by Warrant from the Mayor of the said City, and approved by the
Justices of the Peace of the said County. Provided, That this Act shall only
remain in force for the space of two Years, and no longer, any thing contained
herein to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act For the Encourageing of Seamen.
BE it Enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in
General Assembly, That whatsoever Tavern-keeper, Alehouse keeper or Victualer
within the City and County of New York, that shall trust or credit any Seaman,
belonging to any Ship or Vessel that is in, or shall hereafter come into the
Road or Harbor of the said City, for any sum of Money above the sum of six
Shillings current Money of this Province, shall loose the same, and no Writ or
Process shall go out against any Seaman, as aforesaid, at the suit of any
Tavern-keeper, Ale-house-keeper or Victualer within the said City and County,
for any greater sum than six Shillings, as aforesaid. And if any Tavern-keeper,
Ale-house-keeper or Victualer within the said City, shall trust or give credit
to any Seaman that is out of Service, for any greater sum than 12 d. per Day,
so long as he shall be out of service, shall likewise loose the same, and no
Writ or Process shall go out against any Seaman, at the Suit of any
Tavern-keeper, Ale-house-keeper or Victualer within the said City and County,
for any greater sum than the proportion of 12 d. per Diem, during the time that
he shall be out of Service, as aforesaid. And if any Clerk of the Courts of
Record within the said City and County, shall issue any Writs against any
Seamen, circumstanced as aforesaid, contrary to the true intent and meaning of
this Act, shall for his Offense forfeit the sum of five Pounds current Money of
this Province, to be recovered before the Mayor or Recorder, or any two of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said City and County, the one half to
the use of the Poor of the said City, and the other half to the Informer, or
him who shall sue for the same, without further Appeal. And all Masters of
Vessels trading to and from the said City, shall within forty eight hours after
his or their arrival, bring unto the Town Clerk of the said City a List of the
Names of all such Seamen as he did import or belong to his and their Vessels,
and the same cause to be registered in the Office of the said Town Clerk, who
shall take no greater Reward for the same than One Shilling, current Money
aforesaid. Provided, That this Act shall not continue in force longer than two
years after the Publication hereof.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to his Majesty, King William, at
the Sign of the Bible in New York, 1695.


