MASSACHUSETTS OR The first Planters of New England, The End and Manner of
their coming thither, and Abode there: In several EPISTLES

Psalm. 84.3 Yea, the sparrowe has found an house, and the Swallow a Nest for
her self, where she may lay her Young, even thy Altars, O LORD of hosts, my
King, and my God. John, 4. 21. Jesus says unto her, Woman, believe me, the
hour comes when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem,
worship the Father. Rev. 14. 4. -- These are they which follow the Lamb
whithersoever He goes -- Tantum interest, non Qua^^a, sed Qualis quisque (...)
In Tabernaculo Testimonij, quod erat in Itinere (...) Dei, velut Templum
deambulatorium, etc. Augustine de Civitate Dei. column. 46. (...) Lib. 15. Cap.
20. column. 845. (...) Viri ex^les, qu^^ ^aluit Patria^^ quam Evangelium
deserere; (...) sacris a Christo (...). Bullinger praefat (...). Ap^^ p. 16.
Boston in New England, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen. Sold by Richard
Wilkins, at his Shop near the Old-Meeting-House. 1696.

THE HUMBLE Request Of His MAJESTY'S Loyal Subjects, the Governor and the
Company late gone for NEW ENGLAND: To the rest of their Brethren, in and of the
Church of ENGLAND. ^or the obtaining of their Prayers, and the removal of
suspicions and misconstructions of their Intentions.
Reverend FATHERS and BRETHREN;
THE general rumor of this solemn Enterprise, wherein our selves with others,
through the providence of the Almighty, are engaged, as it may spare us the
labor of imparting our occasion unto you, so it gives us the more
encouragement to strengthen our selves by the procurement of the prayers and
blessings of the Lords faithful Servants: For which end we are bold to have
recourse unto you, as those whom God has placed nearest his throne of Mercy;
which as it affords you the more opportunity, so it imposes the greater bond
upon you to intercede for his people in all their straits, we beseech you
therefore by the Mercies of the LORD JESUS to consider us as your Brethren,
standing in very great need of your help, and earnestly imploring it. And
howsoever your Charity may have met with some occasion of discouragement
through the misreport of our intentions, or through the disaffection, or
indiscretion, of some of us, or rather amongst us: for we are not of those that
dream of perfection in this World; yet we desire you would be pleased to take
notice of the Principals, and Body of our Company, as those who esteem it our
honor to call the Church of England, from whence we ^ise, our dear Mother, and
cannot part from our Native Country, where she specially resideth, without much
sadness of heart, and many tears in our eyes, ever acknowledging that such hope
and part as we have obtained in the common salvation, we have received in her
bosom, and ^uck^ i^ from her breasts: we leave it not therefore, as loathing
that milk wherewith we were ^^^ished there, but blessing God for the Parentage
and Education, as members of the same body, shall always rejoice in her good,
and unfeignedly grieve for any sorrow that shall ever betide her, and while we
have breath, syncerely desire and endeavor the continuance and abundance of
her welfare, with the enlargement of her Bounds in the Kingdom of CHRIST JESUS.

Be pleased therefore Reverend FATHERS and BRETHREN, to help forward this work
now in hand; which if it prosper, you shall be the more glorious: howsoever
your judgment is with the LORD, and your reward with your God. It is an usual
and laudable exercise of your charity, to commend to the prayers of your
Congregations the necessities and straits of your private neighbors; Do the
like for a Church springing out of your own bowels. We conceive much hope that
this remembrance of us, if it be frequent and fervent, will be a most
prosperous gale in ou^ Sails, and provide such a passage and welcome for us,
from the GOD of the whole Earth, a^ both we which shall find it, and your
selves* with the rest of our friends, who shall hear of i^, shall be much
enlarged to bring in such daily returns of Thanksgivings, as the specialties of
his Providence and Goodness may justly challenge at all our hands. You are not
ignorant, that the Spirit of GOD stirred up the Apostle Paul to make continual
mention of the Church of Philip^^ (which was a Colony from Rome) let the same
Spirit, we beseech you, put you in mind, that are the Lords Remembrancers, to
pray for us without ceasing (who are a weak Colony from your selves) making
continual Request for us to GOD in all your prayers.

What we entreat of you that are the Ministers of GOD, that we also crave at
the hands of all the rest of our Brethren, that they would at no time forget us
in their private solicitations at the Throne of Grace. If any there be, who
through want of clear intelligence of our course, or tenderness of affection
toward us, cannot conceive so well of our way as we could desire, we would
entreat such not to despise us, nor (...) desert us in their prayers and
affections, but to consider rather, that they are so much the more bound to
express the bowels of their compassion toward us, remembering always that both
Nature and Grace, does ever bind us ^o relieve and rescue with our utmost and
speediest power, such as are dear unto us, when we conceive them to be running
uncomfortable hazards.

What goodness you shall extend to us in this or any other Christian kindness,
we your Brethren in CHRIST JESUS shall labor to repay in what duty we are or
shall be able to perform, promising so far as God shall enable us to give him
no rest on your behalfs, wishing our heads and hearts may be as fountains of
tears for your everlasting welfare, when we shall be in our poor Cottages in
the Wilderness, over-shadowed with the spirit of supplication, through the
manifold necessities and tribulations which may not altogether unexpectedly,
nor, we hope, unprofitably befall us. And so commending you to the grace of GOD
in CHRIST, we shall ever rest

From Yarmouth Aboard the Arbella. April 7. 1630. Your assured Friends and
Brethren, Jo. Winthrop. GOV. Charles Fines. George Phillips. etc. Rich.
Saltonstall. Isaac Johnson. Tho. Dudley. William Coddington. etc.


TO THE Right HONORABLE, My very good LADY, The Lady BRIDGET Countess of
Lincoln.
Madam,
YOUR Letters (which are not common nor cheap) following me hither into
New England, and bringing with them renewed Testimonies of the accustomed
Favors you Honored me with in the Old, have drawn from me this Narrative
Retribution, which (in respect of your proper interest in some persons of great
Note amongst us) was the thankfullest present I had to send over the Seas.
Therefore I humbly entreat Your Honor this be Accepted as payment from him,
who neither has, nor is any more, Than

Your Honors Old Thankful Servant, T. D.
Boston in New England, March 12 th. 1630.
FOR the satisfaction of Your Honor, and some Friends, and for the use of such
as shall hereafter intend to increase our Plantation in New England, I have in
the throng of Domestic, and not altogether free from Public Business, thought
fit to commit to memory our present condition, and what has be^allen us since
our Arrival here; which I will do shortly, after my usual manner, and must do
rudely, having yet no Table* nor other Room to Write in, then by the Fireside
upon my knee, in this sharp Winter; to which my Family must have leave to
resort, though they break good manners, and make me many times forget what I
would say, and say what I would not.

Concerning the English that are Planted here: I find that about the Year 1620.
Certain English set out from L^yden in Holland, intending their Course for
Ha^^on's River.

These being much Weather beaten, and wearied with seeking the River, after a
most tedious Voyage, Arrived at length in a small Bay, lying North-East from
C^^e C^d; where Landing about the Month of December, by the favor of a calm
Winter, such as was never seen here since, begun to Build their Dwellings in
that place, which now is called New Plymouth: Where after much Sickness,
Famine, Poverty and great Mortality, (through all which, God by an unwonted
Providence carried them) they are now grown up to a People, Healthful, Wealthy,
Politic and Religious; such things does the Lord for those that wait for his
Mercies. They of Plymouth came with Patents from King James, and have since
obtained others, from our Sovereign, King Charles, having a Governor and
Council of their own: There was about the same time, one Mr. Weston, an English
Merchant, who sent diverse men to Plant and Trade; who sat down by the River of
(...), but these coming not for so good ends as those of Plymouth, sped not so
well; for the most of them Dying and Languishing away, They who survived were
rescued by those of Plymouth, out of the hands of (...), and his Indians, who
oppressed those weak English, and intended to have destroyed them: And the
Ply^otheans also, as is set down in a Tract, Written by Mr. Winslow of
Plymouth: Also since, one Captain Wollaston with some Thirty with him, came
near to the same place, and Built on an Hill, which he named Mount Wollaston;
but being not supplied with renewed Provisions, they vanished away as the
former did. Also diverse Merchants of Bristol, and some other places, have
yearly for these eight years, or thereabouts, sent Ships hither at the Fishing
times, to Trade for Bever, where their Factors dishonestly for their gains,
have furnished the Indians with Guns, Swords, Powder and Shot.

Touching the Plantation which we here have begun: it fell out thus. About the
Year 1627. some Friends being together in Lincolnshire, fell into discourse
about New England, and the Planting of the Gospel there; and after some
deliberation, we imparted our reasons, by Letters and Messages, to some in
London and the West Country; where it was likewise deliberately thought upon,
and at length with often negotiation so ripened, that in the year 1628. we
procured a Patent from His Majesty for our Planting between the Massachusetts
Bay and Charles River on the South, and the River of Merrimack on the North,
and three miles on either side of those Rivers and Bay; as also for the
Government of those who did or should Inhabit within that Compass: And the same
year we sent Mr. John Endicott, and some with him, to begin a Plantation; and
to strengthen such (...) he should find there, which we sent thither from
Dorchester, and some places adjoining: from whom the same year receiving
hopeful News: The next year, 1629. we sent diverse Ships over, with about Three
Hundred People, and some Cowes, Goats and Horses, many of which Arrived safely.
These by their too large Commendations of the Country, and the Commodities
thereof, invited us so strongly to go on, that Mr. Winthrop of Suffolk, (who
was well known in his own Country, and well approved here, for his Piety,
Liberality, Wisdom and Gravity) coming in to us, we came to such resolution,
that in April, 1630 we set Sail from Old England with four good Ships. And in
May following eight more followed; two having gone before in February and
March, and two more following in June and August, besides another Set ou^ by a
private Merchant. These seventeen Ship Arrived all safe in New England, for the
increase of the Plantation here this year 1630* but made a long, a troublesome
and costly Voyage, being all Wind bound long in England and hindered with
contrary Winds, after they set Sail, and so scartered with Mists and Tempests,
that few of them Arrived together. Ou^ four Ships which set out in April,
Arrived here in June and July, where we found the Colony in a sad and
unexpected condition, above Eighty of them being Dead the Winter before; and
many of those alive, weak and sick; all the Corn and Bread amongst them all,
hardly sufficient to feed them a fortnight: insomuch that the remainder of an
Hundred and Eighty Servants we had the two years before sent over, coming to us
for Victuals to sustain them, we found our selves wholly unable to feed them,
by reason that the Provisions Shipped for them, were taken out of the Ship they
were put in; and they who were trusted to Ship them in another, failed us, and
le^t them behind; whereupon necessity enforced us to our extreme loss, to give
them all Liberty; who had cost us about Sixteen or Twenty Pound a Person,
furnishing and sending over. But bearing these things as we might, we began to
consult of the Place of our Sitting down: For Salem where we Landed, pleased ^s
not. And to that purpose, some were sent to the Bay, to search up the Rivers
for a convenient place; who upon their return, reported to have found a good
place upon Mistick; but some other of us, seconding these, to approve or
dislike of their judgment; we found a place liked us better, three Leagues up
Charles River: And thereupon Unshipped our Goods into other Vessels, and with
much Cost and Labor, brought them in July to Charlstown; but there receiving
advertisements (by some of the late arrived Ships) from London and Amsterdam of
some French Preparations against us (many of our people brought with us being
sick of Fevers, and the Scurvy, and we thereby unable to carry up our Ordinance
and Baggage so far) we were forced to change counsel, and for our present
shelter to Plant dispersedly, some at Charlstown, which stands on the
North-side of the mouth of Charles River; some on the South Side thereof, which
place we named Boston (as we intended to have done the place we first resolved
on) some of us upon Mistick, which we named Meadford; some of us Westward on
Charles River, four miles from Charlstown, which place we named Watertown;
others of us two miles from Boston, in a place we named Roxbury others upon the
River of Sawgus, between Salem and Charlstown: And the Western men four miles
South from Boston, at a place w^^ named Dorchester. This Dispersion troubled
some of us, but help it we could not, wanting ability to remove to any place
fit to Build a Town upon; and the time too short to deliberate any longer,
least the Winter should surprise us before we had Builded our Houses. The best
counsel we could find out was to Build a Fort to retire to, in some convenient
place, if any Enemy pressed us thereunto, after we should have fortifyed our
selves against the injuries of wet and cold. So ceasing to consult further for
that time, they who had Health to Labor, fell to Building, wherein many were
interrupted with Sickness, and ma^^ Dyed weekly, yea, almost daily. Amongst
whom were Mrs. Pinchon, Mrs. Coddington, Mrs. Phillips, and Mrs. Alcock, a
Sister of Mr. Hookers. Insomuch that the Ships being now upon their Return,
some for England, some for Ireland; there was as I take it not much less than
an Hundred (some think many more) partly out of dislike of our Government,
which restrained and punished their Excesses; and partly through fear of
Famine, not seeing other means than by their Labor to feed themselves) which
returned back again; and glad were we so to be rid of them. Others also
afterward hearing of men of their own Disposition, which were Planted at
Pascataway, went from us to them; whereby though our Numbers were lessened, yet
we accounted our selves nothing weakened by their Removal: Before the Departure
of the Ships, we contracted with Mr. Pierce, Master of the Lion of Bristol, to
Return to us with all speed, with fresh supplies of Victuals, and gave him
directions accordingly; with this Ship returned Mr. Revil, one of the five
Undertakers here, for the joint Stock of the Company; and Mr. Vassal, one of
the Assistants, and his Family; and also Mr. Bright, a Minister sent hither the
year before: The Ship being gone, Victuals wasting, and Mortality increasing,
we held diverse Fasts in our several Congregations, but the Lord would not yet
be Deprecated; for about the beginning of September, Dyed Mr. Gager, a right
Godly man, a skilful Chyrurgeon, and one of the Deacons of our Congregation.
And Mr. Higginson, one of the Ministers of Salem, a zealous and a profitable
Preacher; this of a Consumption, that of a Fever: And on the 30 th. of
September, Dyed Mr. Johnson, another of the five Undertakers, (the Lady ARBELLA
his Wi^e being Dead a Month before) This Gentleman was a prime man amongst us,
having the best Estate of any; zealous for Religion, and the greatest furtherer
of this Plantation; he made a most Godly End, Dying willingly, professing his
Life better spent in promoting this Plantation, than it could have been any
other way. He left to us a Loss greater then the most conceived. Within a month
after, Dyed Mr. Rossiter, another of our Assistants, a Godly man, and of a good
Estate, which still weakened us more: So that now there were left of the five
Undertakers, but the Governor, Sir Richard Saltonstall, ^^d my self, and seven
other of the Assistants. And of the People who came over with us, from the time
of their Setting Sail from England, in April 1630. until December following,
there Dyed by Estimation about Two Hundred at the least; so low has the Lord
brought us! Well, yet they who Survived were not discouraged, but bearing Gods
Corrections with Humility, and trusting in His Mercies, and considering how
after a lower ebb he had raised up our Neighbors at Plymouth, we began again
in December to consult about a fit place to Build a Town upon; leaving all
thoughts of a Fort, because upon any Invasion, we were necessarily to lose our
Houses, when we should retire thereinto: So after diverse Meetings at Boston,
Roxbury and Watertown, on the Twenty Eighth of December, we grew to this
resolution, to bind all the Assistants (Mr. Endicott, and Mr. Sharp excepted,
which last purposes to return by the next Ship into England) to Build Houses,
at a place a mile East from Watertown, near Charles River, the next Spring, and
to Winter there the next year; that so by our Examples, and by removing the
Ordnance and Munition thither, all who were able, might be drawn thither, and
such as shall come to us hereafter to their advantage, be compelled so to do;
and so if God would, a Fortifyed Town might there grow up, the place fitting
reasonably well thereto. I should before have mentioned how both the English
and Indian Corn being at ten shillings a strike, and Bever being valued at six
shillings a Pound; we made Laws to restrain the Selling of Corn to the Indians,
and to leave the price of Bever at liberty, which was presently Sold for ten,
and twenty Shillings a Pound. I should also have remembered, how the half of our
Cowes, and almost all our Mares and Goats, sent us out of England, Dyed at
Sea, in their Passage hither; and that those intended to be sent us out of
Ireland, were not sent at all; all which, together with the loss of our six
months Building occasioned by our intended Removal to a Town to be Fortifyed,
weakened our Estates, especially the Estates of the Undertakers, who were Three
or Four Thousand Pounds engaged in the joint stock, which was now not above so
many Hundreds; yet many o^ us labored to bear it as comfortably as we could,
remembering the end of our Coming hither, and knowing the power of God, who can
support and raise us again; and uses to bring his Servants low, that the meek
may be made glorious by Deliverance.

I have no leisure to Review and Insert things forgotten, but out of due time
and order must set them down as they come to memory. About the end of October,
this year 1630. I joined with the Governor, and Mr. Maverick in sending out
our Pinace to the Narragansetts, to Trade for Corn, to supply our wants; but
after the Pinace had doubled Cape Cod, she put into the next Harbor she found,
and there meeting with Indians, who showed their willingness to Truck; she made
her Voyage there, and brought us an Hundred Bushels of Corn, at about four
shillings a Bushel, which helped us something. From the Coast where they
Traded, they saw a very large Island, four Leagues to the East, which the
Indians commended as a fruitful place, full of good Vines, and free from sharp
Frosts, having one only Entrance into it* ^y a Navigable River, Inhabited by a
^ew Indians, which for a trifle would leave the Island, if the English would
set them upon the Main; but the ^ina^e having no direction for Discovery,
returned without Sailing to it, which in two Hours they might have done: Upon
(...) Coast they found store of Vines full of Grapes dead ripe, the Season
being past; whither we purpose to send the next year sooner, to make some small
quantity of Wine, i^ God enable us; the Vines growing thin with us, and we not
having yet any leisure to Plant Vineyards. But now having some leisure to
discourse of the motives for other men's coming to this place, or their
abstaining from i^; after my brief manner, I say this That if any come hither
to Plant for Worldly Ends, that can live well at Home, he commits an Error, of
which he will soon repent him: ^ut i^ for Spiritual, and that no particular
(...) hinder his Removal, he may find ^ere what may well content him: viz
Materials to (...) ^^wel to Burn, Ground to Plant, S^^s and Rivers to Fish in,
a pure Air to Breath in, good Water to drink, till Wine or Beer can be made;
which together with the Cowes, Hoggs and Goats brought hither already, may
suffice for Food; as for Fowl and Venison, they are Dainties here as well as in
England. For Clothes and Bedding, they must bring them with them, till time and
industry produce them here. In a word, we yet enjoy little to be envyed, but
endure much to be pitied in the Sickness* and Mortality of our People: And I
do the more willingly use this open and pl^^ dealing, least other men should
fall short of their expectations, when they come hither, as we to our great
prejudice did; by means of Letters sent us from hence into England; wherein
honest men out of a desire to draw over others to them, wrote somewhat
hyperbolically of many things here: If any Godly men out of Religious Ends will
come over, to help us in the good Work we are about: I think they cannot
dispose of themselves, nor of their Estates more to God's Glory, and the
furtherance of their own Reckoning: But they must not be of the poorer sort
yet, for diverse years. For we have found by experience, that they have hindered,
not furthered the Work: And for profane and debauched persons, their oversight
in coming hither is wondered at, where they shall find nothing to content them.
If there be any Endued with Grace, and furnished with means to feed themselves
and theirs for eighteen months, and to Build and Plant, let them come into our
Ma^edonia, and help us, and not spend themselves and their Estates in a less
profitable Employment: for others, I conceive they are not yet fitted for this
Business.

Touching the Discouragement which the Sickness and Mortality which every first
year has seized upon us, and those of Plymouth, as appears before, may give
to such who have cast any thoughts this way (of which Mortality it may be said
of us almost as of the Egyptians, that there is not an House where there is not
one dead, and in some Houses many) the natural causes seem to be, the want of
warm Lodging, and good Diet, to which English men are habituated at home; and
in the sudden increase of heat, which they endure that are Landed here in
Summer; the salt meats at Sea having prepared their Bodies thereto; for those
only these two last years dyed of Fevers, who Landed in June and July; as those
of Plymouth, who Landed in Winter, dyed of the Scurvy; as did our poorer sort,
whose Housing and Beding, kept them not sufficiently warm, nor their Diet
sufficiently in heart: other causes God may have, as our Faithful Minister, Mr.
Wilson (lately handling that point) showed unto us; which I forbear to mention,
leaving this matter to the further Dispute of Physicians and Divines.

Wherefore to return, upon the Third of January, Dyed the Daughter of Mr.
Sharp, a Godly Virgin, making a comfortable end, after a long sickness. The
Plantation here received not the like loss of any Woman, since we came hither;
and therefore she well deserves to be remembered in this Place.

Amongst those who Dyed about the end of this January, there was a Girl of
Eleven Years Old, the Daughter of one John R^ggles, who in the time of her
Sickness, expressed to the Minister, and those about her, so much Faith and
Assurance of Salvation, as is rarely found in any of that Age; which I thought
not unworthy here to commit to memory: and if any tax me for wasting paper with
Recording these small matters; such may consider, that small things in the
beginning of natural or politic Bodies, are as remarkable as greater, in
Bodies full grown

Upon the fifth of February, Arrived here Mr. Pierce, with the Ship Lion of
Bristol, with supplies of Victuals from England; who had set forth from Bristol
the first of December before. He had a Stormy Passage hither, and lost one of
his Saylors not far from our Shore, who in a Tempest having helped to take in
the Sprit Sail, lost his hold as he was coming down, and fell into the Sea;
where, after long Swimming, he was Drowned, to the great dolor of those in the
Ship, who beheld so lamentable a Spectacle, without being able to minister help
to him, the Sea was so so high, and the Ship drove so fast before the Wind,
though her Sails were taken down. By this Ship we understand of the Fight of
three of our Ships, and two English Men of War coming out of the Straits, with
Fourteen D^^kirks, upon the Coast of England, as they Returned from us, in the
end of the last Summer; who through Gods Goodness, with the loss of some
thirteen or fourteen men, out of our three Ships; and I know not how many out
of the two Men of War, got at length clear of them. The Charles, one of our
three, a stout Ship, of 300 Tonn, being so torn, that she had not much of her
le^t whole above water. By this Ship we also understand of the Death of many of
those who went from us the last year to England, as likewise of the Mortality
there; whereby we see there are Graves in other places as well as with us.

Amongst others who Dyed about this time, was Mr. Robert Welden, who in the
time of his Sickness we had Chosen to be Captain of 100. Foot, but before he
took possession of his place, he Dyed, the sixteenth of this February, and was
Buried as a Soldier, with three Vollyes of Sho^t. Upon the Twenty Second of
February we Held a General Day of Thanksgiving throughout the whole Colony, for
the safe Arrival of the Ship which came last with our Provisions.

Upon the Eighth of March, from after it was fair day light, until about Eight
of the Clock in the Forenoon, there flew over all the Towns in our Plantations,
so many Flocks of Doves, each Flock containing many Thousands, and some so
many, that they obscured the Light, that it passes credit, if but the Truth
should be written; and the thing was the more strange, because I scarce
remember to have seen ten Doves since I came into the Country: They were all
Turtles, as appeared by diverse of them we killed Flying, somewhat bigger than
those of Europe, and they flew from the North-east, to the South-west; but what
it portends, I know not.

The Ship now waits but for Wind, which when it B^owes, there are ready to go
Aboard therein for England, Sir Richard Saltonstall, Mr. Sharp, Mr. Coddington,
and many others; the most whereof purpose to return to us again, if God will.
In the mean time, we are lest a People poor and contemptible, yet such as Trust
in God; and are contented with our condition, being well assured, that he will
not fail us nor forsake us. I had almost forgotten to add this, That the Wheat
we received by this last Ship, stands us in thirteen or fourteen shillings a
strike, and the Pease about eleven shillings a strike, besides the Adventure,
which is worth three or four shillings a strike; which is an higher price than
I ever tasted Bread of before.

Thus Madam, I have as I can, told Your Honor, all our matters; knowing Your
Wisdom can make good use thereof. If I Live not to perform the like Office of
my Duty hereafter, likely it is, some other will do it better.

Before the departure of the Ship (which yet was Wind-bound) there came unto us
Sagamore John, and one of his Subjects, requiring satisfaction for the Burning
of two Wigwams, by some of the English; which Wiggwams were not Inhabited, but
stood in a place convenient for their shelter, when upon occasion, they should
Travel that way. By Examination we found that some English Fowlers, having
retired into that which belonged to the Subject; and leaving a Fire therein
carelessly which they had kindled to warm them, were the cause of Burning
thereof. For that which was the Sagamores, we could find no certain proof how
it was Fired: yet least he should think us not sedulous enough to find it out,
and so should depart discontentedly from us; we gave both him and his Subject,
satisfaction for them both.

The like accident of Fire also befell Mr. Sharp, and Mr. Colborn, upon the
seventeenth of this March; both whose Houses (which were as good, and as well
furnished as the most in the Plantation) were in two hours space Burned to the
ground; together with much of their Household Stuff, Apparel, and other things;
as also some Goods of others, who Sojourned with them in their Houses; God so
pleasing to exercise us with Corrections of this kind, as he has done with
others. For the prevention whereof, in our New Town intended this Summer to be
Builded; we have ordered that no man there shall Build his Chimney with Wood,
nor cover his House with Thatch, which was readily assented unto; for that
diverse other Houses have been Burned since our Arrival.

Upon the Eighteenth Day of March, came one from Salem, and told us, that upon
the Fifteenth thereof, there Dyed Mrs. Skeleton, the Wife of the other Minister
there. She was a Godly and an helpful Woman, she lived desired, and dyed
lamented, and well deserves to be honorably remembered.

Upon the Twenty fifth of this March, one of Watertown having lost a Calf, and
about ten of the Clock at night, hearing the Howling of some Wolves not far
off, raised many of his Neighbors out of their Beds; that by Discharging their
Muskets near about the place where he heard the Wolves, he might so put the
Wolves to flight, and save his Calf: The Wind serving fit to carry the Report
of the Muskets to Roxbury, three miles off, at such a time; the Inhabitants
there took an Alarm, Beat up their Drum, Armed themselves, and sent in Post to
us to Boston, to Raise us also: So in the morning, the Calf being found safe,
the Wolves affrighted, and our danger past, we went merrily to Breakfast.

I thought to have ended before, but the stay of the Ship, and my desire to
inform Your Honor of all I can, has caused this Addition: And every one
having warning to prepare for the Ships departure to morrow, I am now this
Twenty Eighth of March, 1631. Sealing my Letters.

The PREFACE of the Reverend Mr. John Allin, of Dedham, and of Mr. Thomas
Shepard of Cambridge in New England, before their De^ence of the Answer made
unto the Nine Questions.
IT was the Profession of the Lord Jesus before Pilate, when he questioned with
him about his Kingdom, John 18. 37. That for this cause he was born and came
into the world, to bear witness of the Truth. Many Truths about the Spiritual
Kingdom of Christ has he imparted to us; if therefore we be born into the
world, or sent into this Wilderness to bear witness to his Truth, it is unto us
reward sufficient, that we should be Witnesses thereunto, even to the Utmost
parts of the Earth. We confess we have been too slow in this Service of Christ,
not having to this day set forth an unanimous Confession of that Form of
wholesome words which is Preached, received and professed in these Churches of
the Lord Jesus; and which we are not unmindful of, though our distances, and
other difficulties may delay the opportunity. But this in the mean time we
profess in general, That (so far as we know) there is the same blefled Spirit
of Truth breathing in the Ministry of the Country; the same Faith embraced and
professed in the Churches, which is generally received as the Orthodox Doctrine
of the Gospel, in the best reformed Churches, and particularly by our Godly
Learned Brethren of England and Scotland. And though Errors have sprung up
among us, and some are gone out from us, that we ^ear were not of us, yet we
have born witness against them, and by the blessing of God, by the breath of
Christ in the mo^ths of his Servants they have been blasted. Neither do we
understand that these Churches are accused of any Errors about the saving
Truths of the Gospel, and therefore we thought our selves not so much called of
God to such a Confession at present, as to clear up to the World those Truths
we profess about the Kingdom and Government of Christ in his Churches; which is
the great work of this age, and of this nick of time. And yet here also we fe^r
that we have been too slack; for though it be said, We are the Volunteers, such
as cry up this way, etc. and so it seems we are apprehended to be one cause of
these present differences: yet if things be well weighed, we may seem rather to
be far behind in the duty that lies upon us. Indeed some brief Answers sent
over to some particular persons, to satisfy Brethren what our practice is,
(with some brief touch of our reasons) rather than to ^iscuss those points,
have been printed by some without our knowledge, or assent, upon what grounds
they best know. And some short Treatises by some Reverend Brethren have been
published to declare their affectionate desires of the unanimous endeavors of
all our dear Brethren, for a general and holy Reformation. But what has been
said or done* that either may justly offend the minds of the godly, provoke
their spirits, disunite their affections, or hinder a godly Reformation? Yea,
we have been too slow to clear our Doctrine and practice from the many
objections, harsh interpretations, and manifold Crimin^^ (...) cast upon the
same, wherein we fear our l^thness to intermeddle in these Controversies for
fear o^ making the breach wider amongst Brethren; and our desire rather to
attend what light we might receive from others in these points, wherein we
profess our selves seekers after the Truth, have made us guilty of neglect in
this our duty. But now we see our selves pressed hereto, by a necessity of
justifying our waves against the many aspersions cast upon them, as well as
against the reasons used against them. For we perceive by the first Letters of
our Brethren, how the withdrawing drawing of Christians from the Liturgy was
imputed to us, and by this Reply both in the Epistle and diverse passages, we
cannot but see what apprehensions are raised of us; yea, many are apt to think,
that if we had said nothing, yet our very act in forsaking the Churches of God
in our dear native Country, and the Cause of Christ there, together with the
practice of these Churches, thought to be so different from the reformed
Churches, have been, not only a great weakening to the hands of the Godly,
(that have stood by the Cause of Christ) but also have caused great disturbance
to the Reformation in hand: To which much might be said, but that we should
exceed the bounds of an Epistle. Yet let us entreat all the Godly wise, to
consider and look back upon the season of this great Enterprise, undertaken by
us, and the manner of our proceedings in it, with the admirable workings of
Gods Providence first and last about it; and we think (though we were silent)
they may easily satisfy themselves, whether this was of God or men; a sinful
neglect of the Cause of Christ, or a manifest attestation to the Truth, by open
profession against Corruptions of Worship in use, and for the necessity of
Reformation of the Church; and that confirmed by no small degree of Sufferings
for the same. For was it not a time when Humane Worship and Inventions were
grown to such an intolerable height, that the Consciences of Gods Saints and
Servants, enlightened in the truth, could no longer bear them? was not the
power of the tyranical Prelates so great, that like a strong Current, carried
all down stream before it; whatever was from the Law, or otherwise set in their
way? Did not the hearts of men generally fail them? Where was the people to be
found that would cleave to their godly Ministers in their sufferings; but
rather thought it their discretion, to provide for their own quiet and safety?
Yea, when some freely in zeal of the Truth preached or professed against the
corruptions of the times, old not some take offense at it, judge it rashness,
and to be against all rules of discretion, who since are ready to censure us
for deserting the Cause? Many then thought, it i^ an e^il time, the prudent
shall hold their peace, and might we not say, This is not our resting place?
And what would men have us do in such a case? Must we study some distinctions
to salve our Consciences in complying with so manifold corruptions in Gods
Worship? or should we live without God's Ordinances, because we could not
partake in the corrupt administration thereof? or content our selves to live
without those Ordinances of Gods Worship and Communion of Saints, which he
called us unto, and our Souls breathed after? or should we forsake the public
Assemblies, and join together in private separated Churches? how unsufferable
it would then have been, the great offense that now is taken at it, is a full
evidence. And if in Cities, or some such great Towns, that might have been
done, yet how was it possible for so many scattered Christians all over the
Country? It is true, we might have suffered, if we had sought it, we might
easily have found the way to have filled the Prisons, and some had their share
therein. But whether we were called thereunto, when a wide door was set open of
liberty otherwise; and our witness to the Truth (through the malignant policy
of those times) could not be open before the world, but rather smothered up in
close prisons or some such ways, together with our selves, we leave to be
considered. We cannot see but the rule of Christ to his Apostles and Saints,
and the practice of Gods Saints in all Ages, may allow us this liberty as well
as others, to fly into the Wilderness from the face of the Dragon. But if it
had been so, that the Godly Ministers and Christians that fled to New England,
were the most timoorus and faint hearted of all their Brethren, that stayed
behind, and that those Sufferings were nothing in comparison of their Brethrens
(for why should any boast of sufferings?) yet who does not know that the Spirit
who gives various gifts, and all to profit withal, in such times does single
out every one to such work, as he in wisdom intends to call them unto? And whom
the Lord will honor by suffering for his Cause, by imprisonment, etc. he gives
them spirits suitable thereto: whom the Lord will reserve for other service, or
employ in other places, he inclines their hearts rather to fly, giving them an
heart suitable to such a condition. It is a case of Conscience frequently put,
and often resolved by holy Bradford, Peter Martyr, Philpot, and others in Queen
Mary's bloody days, viz. Whether it was lawful to flee out of the Land? To
which their answer was, that if God gave a spirit of courage and willingness to
glorify him by Sufferings, they should stay; but if they found not such a
spirit, they might lawfully fly; yea, they advised them thereunto. Those
Servants of Christ, though full of the spirit of glory, and of Christ to
outface the greatest persecuters in profession of the Truth, unto the death;
yet did not complain of the cowardice of such as fled, because they deserted
them and the Cause; but rather advised diverse so to do, and rejoiced when God
gave liberty to their brethren to escape with their lives to the places of
liberty, to serve the Lord according to his Word. Neither were those faithful
Saints and Servants of God useless and unprofitable in the Church of God that
fled from the bloody Prelates. The infinite and only wise God has many works
to do in the World, and he does by his singular Providence give gifts to his
Servants, and disposes them to his Work as seems best to himself. If the
Lord will have some to bear witness by imprisonments, dismembring, etc. we
honor them therein; if he will have others instrumental to promote Reformation
in England, we honor them, and rejoice in their holy endeavors, praying for a
blessing upon themselves and labors. And what if God will have his Church and
the Kingdom of Christ go up also in these remote parts of the World, that his
Name may be known to the Heathen, or whatsoever other end he has, and to this
end will send forth a company of weak hearted Christians, which dare not stay
at home to suffer, why should we not let the Lord alone, and rejoice that
Christ is Preached howsoever, and wheresoever? And who can say that this work
was not undertaken and carried on with sincere and right ends, and in an holy
serious manner, by the chief, and the body of such as undertook the same? The
Lord knows whether the sincere desires of worshipping himself according to his
will, of promoting and propagating the Gospel, was not in the hearts of very
many in this Enterprise; and he that sees in secret, and rewards openly,
knows what prayers and tears have been poured out to God by many alone, and in
days of Fasting and Prayer of Gods servants together, for his counsel,
direction, assistance, blessing in this work: How many longings and pantings of
heart have been in many after the Lord Jesus, to see his goings in his
Sanctuary, as the one thing their Souls desired and requested of God, that they
might dwell in his house for ever; the fruit of which prayers and desires this
liberty of New England has been taken to be, and thankfully received from God.
Yea, how many serious consultations with one another, and with the faithful
Ministers, and other eminent servants of Christ, have been taken about this
work, is not unknown to some; which clears us from any rash heady rushing into
this place, out of discontent, as many are ready to conceive. We will here say
nothing of the persons whose hearts the Lord stirred up in this business;
surely all were not rash, weak spirited, inconsiderate of what they left
behind, or of what it was to go into a Wilderness. But if it were well known
and considered, or if we were able to express and recount the singular workings
of divine Providence, for the bringing on of this Work, to what it is come
unto, it would stop the mouths of all that have not an heart to accuse and
blaspheme the Goodness of God in his glorious Works. Whatever many may say or
think, we believe aftertimes will admire and adore the Lord herein, when all
his holy Ends, and the ways he has used to bring them about, shall appear.
Look from one end of the heaven to another, whether the Lord has assayed to do
such a Work as this in any Nation, so to carry out a people of his own from so
flourishing a State, to a wilderness so far distant, for such ends, and for
such a Work: Yea, and in few years has done for them, as he has here done for
his poor despised people. When we look back and consider what a strange poise
of spirit the Lord has laid upon many of our hearts, we cannot but wonder at
our selves, that so many, and some so weak and tender, with such cheerfulness
and constant resolutions against so many persuasions of friends,
discouragements from the ill report of this Country, the straits, wants and
^^vals of Gods people in it, etc. yet should leave our accommodations and
comforts, should forsake our dearest Relations, Parents, Brethren, Sisters,
Christian friends, and Acquaintances; overlook all the dangers and difficulties
of the vast Seas, the thought whereof was a terror to many; and all this to go
to a Wilderness, where we could forecast nothing but care and temptations;
only in hopes of enjoying Christ in his Ordinances, in the fellowship of his
people. Was this from a stupid senslesness or desperate carelessness what became
of us or ours? or want of natural affections to our dear Country, or nearest
Relations? No surely. With what bowels of compassion to our dear Country; with
what heartbreaking affections, to our dear Relations, and Christian friends
many of us, at least, came away, the Lord is witness. What shall we say of the
singular Providence of God bringing so many Shiploads of his people, through so
many dangers, as upon Eagles wings, with so much safety from year to year? The
fatherly care of our God in feeding and clothing so many in a Wilderness,
giving such healthfulness and great increase of posterity? What shall we say of
the Work it self of the kingdom of Christ? and the form of a Commonwealth
erected in a Wilderness, and in so few years brought to that state, that scarce
the like can be seen in any of our English Colonies in the richest places of
this America, after many more years standing? That the Lord has carried the
spirits of so many of his people through all their toylsome labor, wants,
difficulties, losses, etc. with such a measure of cheerfulness and
contentation? But above all we must acknowledge the singular pity and mercies
of our God, that has done all this and much more for a people so unworthy, so
sinful, that by murmurings of many, unfaithfulness in promises, oppressions,
and other evils which are found among us, have so dishonored his Majesty,
exposed his work here to much scandal and obloquie, for which we have cause for
ever to be ashamed, that the Lord should yet own us, and rather correct us in
mercy, then cast us off in displeasure, and scatter us in this Wilderness,
which gives us cause with Mich. 7. to say, Who is a God like our God, that
pardons iniquities, and passes by the transgressions of the remnant of his
heritage; even because (...) ^^^igh^eth in mercy? Though we ^e a people of many
(...) ^^^nesses and wants, yet we acknowledge (...) been to us a God of many
mercies, in respect of that sweet peace which he has taken away from so many
Nations, yet continuing the same to us; in respect also of that liberty we have
in Gods house, the blessed Ministry of the Word, the sweet unity and communion
of Gods Churches and Ministers, increase and multiplication of Churches,
Christian Government in the Common wealth, and many other mercies we enjoy; but
especially the gracious presence of Christ to many of our Souls in all these.
But we will not insist much upon this subject, being persuaded it is in the
Consciences and Hearts of many of our dear Countrymen to think that we should
be an object of love and tenderness to that State and People, by whose Laws and
unkind usages we were driven out into a Wilderness; rather then to be judged as
desertors of our Brethren, and the Cause of Christ in hand: with-whom (excuse
us if we now speak plainly) it had been far more easy unto many of us to have
suffered, then to have adventured hither upon the Wilderness sorrows we
expected to have met withal; though we must confess the Lord has sweetened it
beyond our thoughts, and utmost expectations of prudent men. etc. etc.

From New England, November 28. 16^5. JOHN ALLIN. THO. SHEPARD.


In Domini Nortoni Librum, ad Lectorem Praefatio Apologetica.
G RAVIS ea quidem Calumni^ est, et ^^ndore spiritus Christiani indigna
ad^^edum, Fratres ^ive e Belgio reduces, ^ive in nova Anglia exulantes, Rerum
Anglicarum ru^^am praesentiscentes; t^nquam sor^ces e domo labante, ^^fugisse,
^t s^luti quidem suae previde prospicerent; communis autem causae Reformationis
patrocinium, per^ide desererent. Non sic ^lim vitio vertehatur Eliae, qui prae
metu Jezebelis, in desertum aufugiss* ^ertur, I Reg 19. Nec piis illis
Confessoribus, qui in Mariana tempestate, in ^xteras (...) (...), cum per id
(...) (si restitissent) restaret copia, a^plum, satis et luculentum Testimonium
perhibendi Veritati; cum Disputatio^ibus publicis, tum Confessionibus: idque
non solum coram frequenti Judicum consessu, ut rederentur in excusabiles; sed
etiam coram universo p^puli circumstipantis (...) qui perspect a fratrum
invicta fide and patientia, redderentur ipsi quoque const^^nies in fide,
invicti, inexpugnabiles. E^ tamen discesserunt viri is it: boni, bona fratrum cum
venia: Venia? imo and gratia: neque omnino vel ut desertores fratrum, vel ut
proditores Causae, e^^ nomine male au diebant. At nobiscum nuperis hisce
diebus, long iniqui^^ actum fuisse, nemo est tam bardus, qui non intelligat,
nemo ingenu^s rerum aestimator, qui non agnoscut. Si quispiam nostrum coram
Trib^^ali compareret, protinus affantur, He^s tu, number juramentum, quod ex
officio tibi imponimus, capescere lubeat? Si capias, mill nocendi arts, et
certa necessitas, and temetipsum, et fratres cum accusandi, tum prodendi in
^nextr^^abiles legulejorum malignantium labyrint^^^ Sin juramentum recuses,
apage illico ad c^rceres; ^^lla ^mplius ^^stat Libertas, vel disputa^^di, vel
c^^fitendi, sed tantum dura necessitas in perpetus squellidi et umbrosi
carceris filentio con^^bescendi. Quam igitur it a se res haberet, ut ^^bis ^^t
in car^ere i^^^ter per^^ndum, (...) s^l^^ vertendum, Christi duce, soli
vertendi confilium inibamus, (...) fratribus. Fratres autem issi ques
cons^i^isse (...) viri leves (invisa et cassa capita) sed viri Dei, tum (...),
tum sancta prudentia spectatissimi. Illi autem pro (...) qua pollebant,
saprentia, perpensis omnibus (qu^^ ad tam (...) negotium spectabant) rerum
moment is, judic^^^nt, potuisse ^^s Testimonium a^^plius long et luculentius
causae Christi praebere, partim libera pr^edicatione verbi, partim viva praxi
Ecclesiasticae Discipli^ae, in caeteris Regionibus, quam Londini in arctis is
^etrisque carceribus, ubi nec librorum, nec calamorum, nec amicorum, nec
conscionum copia concederetur.

Juvet praeterea meminisse, consulnisse not etiam privatos quam plurimos vir^s,
ecsque syneor^e pietatis prefess^^ne conspicuos, qui in (...) i^^is degebant,
qu^rum nobis (...) impendebat, et qui ipsi maxim pendebant a ministeri^
nostro. Et borum quide^^ pars, qui libertati conscienti^^, e^ puritati cultus
i^pensius studebant, tantoper^ probar^^^ con^ilii nostri de dis^essu r^tionent,
ut ultro sese offerrent C^^^ites Iti^eris, etiam in Ultimas ^^his terr^^rum
eras, si Dominus via^ aperuerit. Pars (...) altera, qui propendebant magis,
licet n^n approbationi, tamen tol^^ationi adinventionum h^^^^rum, hi etiam
consilium nostrum de discess^ prob^^^nt, ut p^te cum nobis, tum paci Ecclesiae
appri^^^ pernecessorium: ta^^tsi consultius se facturos a^^^arent, si
libertatent pacemque (...), succumbendo oneri, sive subscriptionis (ut
l^qu^^ntur) sive conformit-tis, ipsi redi^^erent. Sic bona cum venia, i^^o et
gratia, discessum est invicem, non sine multis utri^que gemitibus, suspiriis,
^achrymis inter amplexandum, et valedicendum.

In istas aute^^ (bono cum Deo) cum appulimus oras, and sine ^^jusquam offensa
l^^ti f^uere^^ur (pro summae Dei op. max. benignitate) ea conscientiarum
liberate, et institutionum Christi puritate, quam a^imitus quaerebamus, haud
ita multo post, ex praxi Ecclesiasti^ae politeias, quam hic ex^^cere caepimus,
hoc inprimis expert^ sumus, posse Ecclesiasticam politeiam, cum politeia civil^
optime consistere, et tanquam Hippocratis gemellos, et ridere simul, et s^mul
flere. Atque hoc non (...) Testimonium viris prudentibus visum est, posse
(...), quam pro^^^^^ disciplinam, publica anthoritate stabiliri, tum sine n^ta
Schismatis in Ecclesia, tum fine periculo Seditionis in Republica. Atque hinc
etiam obstaculum aliud, quod subinde in publicis Regni Anglicani Comitiis,
adversus pur^oris disciplinae zelotas objici solebat, facile amovebatur.
Oggerebant siquid em viri, civili prudentia haud incelebres, fieri non posse,
ut zelotae isti in unam Ecclesiasticae Politeias formam (ne si optio quidem
daretur) communi inter se consensu, unquam conspirare velint. Objectaculum
(inquam) hoc, experientia test, ap^d nos, ^^^lo negotio amotum est. Concordes
etenim (pro eximiae Jesus Christi gratia) in unam ^andemque Ecclesiastici
Regiminis formam, sine vi, sine strepitu, sine tumultu, t^cito omnium consensu,
extempl^ coaluim^s.

Posteaquam autem Domini Jesus praestitutum tempus advenit, quo misereretur Z
ionts, in Angli^ vestra paritur ac nostra, et supremo ordinum Regni consessui
visum est, summos Theologos, eruditione simul ac pietate insignes, ex utroque
Regno convocare, ut communi consilio de Religione reformanda disquirerent, et
verae Doctrinae (UPOTUPOSIN,) purum cultus divini exemplar, et sacram
ecclesiastici regiminis formam, ex scripturarum fontibus adornarent: Nos etiam
haud cunctandum rati, scripta quaedam nostra (de foedere ecclesiastico, de
quaestionibus in Disciplina controversis, de clavibus Regni C^elorum, de
praescriptarum precum (ANOMALIA) tenuia haec quidem omnia, et levidensia, sed
tamen pro modulo nostro et pietatis erga patrtam, et studii erga veritatem, et
debitae observantiae erga ecclesia^ Anglicanas, certa pignora (ut olim vidua
minutula sua) in aerarium Domini Jesus contulimus.

Cum autem haec qualiacunque fuerint videremus in controversiam rapi, etiam a
fratribus eximia pietate, atque eruditione ornatissimis, non id quidem aegre
aut indigne tulimus. Nam quinam, obsecro, nos sumus, viri incircumcisi labiis,
incircumcisi cord, ut summos viros ad nostrum captum sapere sp^remus?
Veruntamen quia veritas et instituta Domini Jesus sacrosancta sunt, neque
patitur ipse vel unum (IOTA) aut apicem legis suae, nedum Evangelii Regnique
Christi leges perire, ecce excitavit Dominus Jesus (qui et ipse est et lux et
veritas) Presbyteros multos ^nostris (stellas eas quidem splendidas in
Ecclesiarum nostrarum candelabris) qui veritati laboranti suppetitas ferrent,
et nebulas luci obduct as studiose dispellerent. Inter hos Agmen ducit
Hookerus, qui non solum dominatur in conscionibus gratia spiritus sancti et
virtute plenos, sed etiam (prout est vir solertis ingenii, alque accerrimi
jud^oii) causam Ecclesiasticae disciplinae disputa vit acutissime, et
pertractavit (quantum ego quidem judico) accuratissime. Davenportus, pro eo,
quo pollet, Judicio, eruditione, et singulari orudentia, defensionem non sui
tantum, sed disciplinae Christi adversus dominum Pagettu (...) instituit,
justam, solidam, eruditam. Quinetiam, pro egregia ea, qua in grege Christi
curando pollet vigilantia, us errantem gregis sui ^viculam, quae in aridis
Anabaptistarum p^^e^s submersa fuerat, sublevaret, vivificam Christi sanguinis,
spiritusque virtutem, ex perenni gratuiti foederis sonte scaturientem et in
paedobaptismi fluentis largiter decurrentem, graphice delineavit.

Maderus, ut aetate, it^ judicio, et industriae proximus, vir morum gravitate,
et vi^ae integritate conspicu^s, potens in sermon Evangelii, et strenuus
verita^is assertor, pr^^ter ea quae superioribus anni^ edidit, firma et
inconcussa potestatis ecclesiasticae propugnacula, operam hoc anno tempestivam
impendit, ut maculas et sordes, quas in faciem ecclesiarum nostrarum frarer
bonus ille quidem, sed male feri^tus asper^it, abstergeret. Quin et illud
insuper (aucteri^ loco) ^^jecit viam ecclesiarum nostrarum, quam a viris magnis
(eximia eruditione, and pietate clarissimis) exagitari, interturbari cernebat,
disject is aggeribus, atque impedimentis amotis, divina spiritus sancti open,
solida, e^ solita dexteritate complanavit. Sepharedus ( qui vernaculo Idiomate
Shepardus) (...) cum Allinio fratre (fratrum dulce par) uti eximi^ pictate
florent ambo, et eruditione non med^^^^i, atque etiam mysteriorum pietatis
praedicatione (per Christi gratiam) efficaci admodum, it a egregiam navarunt
operam in abstrusissimis disciplinae ^odis faeliciter enodandis: et dum
responsum parant, at que nunc etiam edunt Domino Baleo, non ^lli quidem
satisfactum eunt (qui satis jam aperte videt in beatifica Agni visione,
introitus omnes atque exitus, for mas et lege^ ^^^stis Jerusalem) sed iis
omnibus, qui per universan^ Britanniam in ecclesiis Christi peregrinantur, et
rei disciplinari^^ studiosius animum appulerunt. Verba horum fratrum uti
suaviter spirant pietatem, veritatem, charitatem Christi: ita speramus fore
(per Christi gratiam) ut multi qui a disciplina Christi alieniores erant, odore
horum unguentorum Christi effusorum delibati atque delincti, ad amorem ejus and
pellecti, and pertracti, eam avidius arripiant, atque amplexentur.

Proximus ab his (sed cum primis annumerandus) Nortonus hic est, quem in
manibus habemus, vir et ingenii acumine, Judicii gravitate, morum su^vitate
insignis, et (quod caput est) gratiae Christi cum solertissimus indagator, tum
buccinator fidelissimus. Is fratrum rogatu (quemadmodum et reliqui) pe^sum hoc
suum et suscepit (non sine modest^ sui ab^egatione) et confecit non sine divina
grati^ affluentia. Placuit clarissimo viro, Domino Apollonio, quaestiones quam
plurimas de Ecclesiastica disciplin^ sicut ex nonnullorum heterogeneorum
libr^^, sic inter alios Orthodoxos, ex sanctissimi Baynesii examine, ex
placidissima pientissimaque Septemvirum Apologia, atque et^am ex nostrorum
Nova-Anglorum scriptiunculis, quasi in fasciculum colligere, et percontari
insuper a fratribus illis, number conclusiones istas, t^nquam suas agnos^erent.
Candide hoc quidem ac pie, atque adeo prudenter factum, ne dum ipsorum dogmata
convellere in animo haberet, qui^quam ipsis per imprudentiam affingeret, quod
ipsi non ut suum agnoscerent. Hac perquisitione chariss^^ni Fratris, nos quoque
monits at que expergefacti, facile personsimus, causam non solum Septemvirorum
Fratrum, sed et nostrum agi, nec nostrum solum, sed (quod multo maximum est)
Domini nostri (pariter ac vestri) Jesus Christi. Visum est at que nobis, id
muneris Domino Nortono serio commendare, ut non gravaretur sententiam nostram
(simul ac Christi) super quaetionibus istis explicare, ne quid non nostrum, ut
nostrum, nobis quoque (in praejudicium Causae Christi) affingeretur. Praestitit
SUN THEO quod petiimus, in hac quam in manibus habes Diatribe: ubi dextre,
dilucide, distinct, succincte, nervose denique pertractavit capit^ singula, et
ad mentem no^tram, si non omnia, saltem pleraque accommodatissime. Ingenue
fateor (neque enim diffiteri debeo) nec meipsum, nec Fratres etiam (quos dixi)
alies, idem pla^e omnes per omniae sentire, de praescriptarum precum omnimoda
ANOMALIA, de statis Ministrorum stipendiis, de api^ibus quarundam notionum
circa primum subjectum ecclesiasticae potestatis, et discrimen foederis gratiae
et ecclesiae, et siqua sunt hujusmodi. Sed cum de rebus ipsis, rerumque praxi
inter omnes satis constet, profecto a Deo ed^cti sumus, non solum placide far
aliud de istis rerum apicibus sentientes, sed etiam medullitus amplexari
Fratres in Christo dilectissimos, qui opus Domini operantur, sicut et nos.

Quod autem Latino Idiomate scripsit, consulto ^d quidem factum est, ut et
Domino Apollonio ^ine Interpret innotesceret; et controversa capita
transmarinis Ecclesiis, in examen venirent. Ve^ba authoris non tam diserta sunt
quam fortia; ut qui controversias scriberet, non declamationes. Paulus ipse non
affectavit sapientiam sermonis; sed sermonem sapientiae. Nemo despiciat
sermones, utcunque incu^^os, fratrum exulum, abjectorum, long terra marique
dissitorum, etiam ex eremo vociferantium; dummodo constiterit vere dici p^sse
de hisce ftatribus (quod Josaphatus olim de Elisha dixerat in eremo Id^maeo
peregrinanti) Verbum Domini cum ipsis esse. Narrat Johannes (dilectus ille a
Christo discipulus) semetipsum in eremum asportatum fuisse, ut clarius
perspiceret, non modo magnae meretricis judicium, s^d etiam castissimae Christi
sponsae, Novae Jerusalem de Coelo descensum, Apoc. 17. 1, 3. and cap 21. 2.

Quod si quispiam hic ^ggerat, Fratres h^sce omnes, omnium pessime de ecclesiis
Christi mereri; ut qui praecipue (una cum Fratribus apologe^icis) Refermationem
institutam retardare, et pro virili interturbare moliuntur: quippe si per ipsos
non ste^iss^t, presbyteri reliqui omnes omnino per universam Angliam, in unam
regiminis presbyterialis f^rmam conspirassent: Adeo ut fratres hii quos
excusare cupis a crimine desertionis causae Reformationis; rever a non modo
desertores, sed et proditores, et publicae p^cis hosts, jure merito male
audient, ma^e plectentur.

Hem spiritum, partium studio plus nimio abreptum et occaecatum! Piget et
pungit, dolet et angit, me^^inisse, binas istas regiminis ecclesi^stici for^^as
tanta animorum contentione, tanta calamorum amarulentia peragi, et promoveri;
acsi de summa Rei christianae, adversus infensissimos Christiani nominis
hosts, certamen cerneretur. Siccine in Dominum Jesum ingratos nos esse deceat;
ut confracto, per divitem Ipsius gratiam, jugo hierarchico, et amoto Philisteo
adinventionum humanarum plaustro; cum par erat, omnes canticum Agni et Mosis,
laetis et gratis animis vocibusque cantare; nos interea in mutuas discordias,
et vasta animorum, et calamorum divortia (quasi dis-diapason) discinderemur?
Tantaene animis coelestibus Irae? Nunquid aequum erat, duplam spiritus
episcopalis portionem super capita fratrum com presbyterorum residere?
Dispicite (per viscer^ Domini Jesus, dispicite, obsecro, et obte^tor) quid illud
est, de quo tantopere digladiamini? Regimen ecclesiasticum non Dominum est sed
Ministerium. Digladientur reges terrae de dominijs suis, and de jurisdictionum
suarum finibus, et latifundijs; at inter ministros Domi^^i Jesu, maximus is
est, qui minimus esse studet et servus omnium.

Deinde, dispicite rursus, quodnam illud sit TO MEGA CHASMA, quod mutu^m
utrinque divertium, tanquam murum intergerinum interposuit? Vos regimen omne
ecclesiasticum, penes presbyteros stabiltendum contenditi^: certe neque nos
regimen proprie dictum (saltem quoad ordinarium ejus exercitium) alibi quam
penes presbyteros, stabiliendum cupimus. In eo itaque convenimus ambo; in
subject^ regiminis ecclesiastici. Conveni^^us etiam in regula regiminis; ut
administrentur omnia, non juxta canones; sive papales, sive hierarchicos: sed
juxta canonem sacrarum Scripturarum. Convenimus etiam in fine regiminis, ut
omnia transigantur ad aedificationem ecclesiae; non ad pompam, aut luxum
secularem. Synodos nos una vobiscum, cum opus fuerit, et suscipimus, et
veneramur. Quantillum est quod restat, quod distat? Actus regiminis, quos vos a
synodis peragi velletis; eos a synodis porrigi ecclesiis, et ab ecclesiis ex
synodali DIORTHOSI peragi peteremus. Petimus et illud etiam (and quidem juxta
mentem Christi, prout credimus) ut regimen omne ecclesiasticum administretur a
presbyteris cujusque ecclesiae, in ecclesiae facie, nec inscia, nec invita
ecclesia. Vos aliud quiddam vendicatis: sed videte et perpendite etiam atque
etiam, an non satis tuto cautum fuerit, ne quid ecclesia detrimenti capia^, si
omnia a presbyteris ecclesiae, ecclesia conscia, et consentiente, peragantur;
modo nihil arduum aut quod superet ecclesiae vires, nisi ex consilio vicinorum
compresbyterorum transigatur? Mensam Domini Jesu, ausim di^ere, aeque vos ac
nos, a prophanis ac immundis manibus tractari polluique, aegre laturos. Pie
renuntiatum est in publico divini cultus directorio, Ignarum quem^am, aut
scandalo aliquo inquinatum, indignum prorsus esse, qui ad mensam Domini
appropinquet. Ac nisi potestas detur ecclesiae ^ujusque presbyteris, de ignaris
et immundis hijs^e judicium facere; caveri certe non potest, quin non modo
caeci and claudi (quos non recipit aula Davidis) sed canes etjam et porci (quos
odit anima Christi) ad menfa^^ Domini ingerant sese: qui nec corpus Domini
discernunt, nisi ut per illud dejerent; nec sanguinem Domini e^ib^nt. nisi ut
exinde animosius ad sanguin^^^ sanctorum effundendum (tanquam invisorum
rotundorum, ac rotantium capitum) prosilirent. Hujusmod^ ad ^ensam Domini
convivas, nullus dubito, vobis p^riter ac n^bis, aeque ingratos esse and
permolestos. Cum it aque in hisce rebus omnibus (quae quidem maximi momenti
sunt) pulchre convenimus, quid, obsecro, impedit, quo minus non causae communis
aut proditores, aut desertores: fed communis vob^s^^m causae, et defensores,
atque astipulatores (pro medul^ nostro) adversus communis fidei atque eccles^ae
hosts, habeamur? Certo ^ertius est, si ex mur^is nostris dissensionibus,
aditus per posticum pateat; sive pontificils, sive hierarchicis, ut rerum denuo
p^tiantur, actum iri funditus (humanitus loquor) de utrisque nostrum; sive
presbyteriis, sive ecclesiis propens^ves fuerimus. Tros, Tyriusve, illis nullo
discrimine agetur. Sive presbyteriales cluitis, sive ecclesiastici, istis rerum
dominis, ambo vos certe puritani estis; et prout PUR Graecis, et ITAN Wallis
ignem significa^; sie to^i toti, quanti quanti estis, ^anquam ignei
Reipublicae, atque Ecclesiae incendiarii, extinguemini. Non tam multi abhinc
anni retro fluxe^unt, quin recenti patrum memoria recordari liceat, Ridlejum
pariter ac Hooperum, quanquam in causa disciplinae, alter ab altero plus nimio
disjungeretur; tamen utrosque vivicomburio, a pontificiis rerum potiuntibus,
extinctos esse. Verbum sapienti.

Verum enimvero, si fratres animum inducere non possunt, quin nos ut communis
causae desertores, deserant: lic^at mihi quaeso (quod Judas olim a fratre
Josepho petiit) et petere a vobis, et impetrare, ut loquar verbum in auribus
vestris, neque ira vestra accendatur. Causa haec, quam a nobis deseri
quiritamini; quatenus a nobis deseritur, non ea quidem vobis communis est cum
pijssimis illis, ac sanctissimis Christi confessoribus, qui no^tra, et patrum
memoria causam Reformationis tuebantur? Vestra non ea causa est, quam Heroes
illi, amissione libertatis, confiscatione bonorum, incarceratione, exilio,
sanguine denique cofignarunt? Quantam potestatem venerabilis Cartoretus
ecclesiae cuique deferat, nemo nescit qui commentarium ejus in I Cor. 5.
perlegerit. Quodnam primum subjectum ecclesiasticae potestatis Paraeus statuat,
testatur tertium ejus volumen, acerrimo cum judicio, et summa eruditione
continuatum. Quaenam ea ecclesia sit, quam sanctissimus Bainesius agnoscat, cui
Christus ecclesiasticam omnem petestatem detulerit, patet ex examine. Quid
gravissimus Amesius, nervorum et medallae theologiae satur, super ecclesiae
institutae statu, forma, et potestate senserit; patet ex medulla. Atque hij
quidem currus, atque equites Israelis, illarum cohortum primipili erant, qui
causam Reformationis tuebantur; and nostra, et patrum aetate. Ab horum sive
vestigijs, sive principijs, si novitatis studio cessimas: jure merito deferemur
ut desertores. Quod si in via illorum ambulamus, nec ultra progredin^^r (quod
ad su^^ mam rei attinet) quam ab illorum lumine divinitus collustrati: certe
non nos illi sumus, qui causam Reformationis deseruimus; sed illi potius (quos
lubens nollem dicere) qui nos ut desertores deserunt, et de^e^tantur. Desinant
itaque viri fratres, viros hosce Dei, qui scriptis editis, causam cum patribus
communem, tueri satagunt, sugillare, a^ vellicare, tanquam male de Ecclesia
meritos, causae desertores, pacis publicae ^^^^^r^atores.

Caeterum praeter h^s omnes, supersunt duo fratres reliqui, Covetus, and
Eliotus; quorum hic justam contexuit historiam eorum qui apud nos, sub
praetex^^ conscientiae, a civili magistratu, graviora quam par erat, passi
perhibentur. Vir hic, uti gnavus est and impiger, fidelis in domo Dei servus,
priscis moribus, antiqua fide; ita fidelem operam navavit in investiganda rerum
istarum veritate; quas etiam fide historica in tabellas retu^it, et typis
mandavit: ut intelligant aequi rerum aestimatores, ea quae passim feruntur de
persecutionibus in Nova Anglia, conscientiae nomine perpessis (ut dicam verbo,
et verbo quidem Apostolorum) nihil esse. Alter autem ille e fratribus, quem
dixi, Covetus, cum persentisceret aliquot ex ovibus Christi sibi commissis,
antipaedobaptismi laqueis atque dumetis irretita^; zelo Dei accensus (et zelo
quidem secundum scientiam) imo et misericordia etiam Christi commotus erga
errantes oviculas; libros quos potuit, ex anababtistarum penu congessit;
rationum momenta (qualia fuerant) in lance Sanctuarii trutinavit; testimoniorum
plaustr^, quae ab illis congesta fuerant, sedulo perquisivit; et pro eo quo
floret disputandi acumine, dijudicandi solertia; solida multa paucis
complectendi dexteritate, atque indefess^ labor, nihil pene intentatum
reliquit, quod vel ad veritatem in hac causa illustrandam, vel ad errorum
nebulas discutiendas, atque dispellendas conduceret.

Sed vellicat hic mibi aurem quispiam (praeserti^ (...) ^is quibuscum
necessitudo (...) a^iqu^ intercedit) (...) serio percontatur: Cum tot tantosque
labores (...) (...) presbyteris tuis susceptos narras; qui prodierunt, (...)
Debora loquitur, ad auxiliandum Jehovae, ad ^^^^ndum Jehovae (ut Junius vertit)
inter for^^^; quid tibi interea faciendum restabat? Nunquid (...) sol^s
restitabas inter sarcinas, vel inter sibil^s and bal^tus gregum? Tune cum
Reubene, a fratrum consortio, prae magnis animi cogitationibus, divulsus es?
Equidem non diffiteor, me etiam aliquid molitum esse, et, pro gratiae acceptae
modulo, perfecisse etiam aliquatenus, a^que emisisse. Sed quicquid illud
fuerit, haud dignum reor, quod inter exquisitos Fratrum labores, vel vominari
quidem debeat. Scrip^erunt illi TOIS CHARIEISI; ego, prout necesse habui, TOIS
POLLOIS. Gratiosus est Dominus, qui acceptare dignatur ad aedificationem
Sanctuarii sui, non modo pur pur am et byssum; sed etiam pelles arietum, et
melium; imo et pilos caprarum: Exodus 35. 23.

Pergat Dominus (pro gratuita sua, and divite Gratia) laboribus servorum suorum
omnium, Sibi in obsequium, Ecclesiae in aedificationem, benedicere; Zionis sui
misereri; Lives inter suos dirimere; V^ritatem, and pacem promovere; Fines
Regni Christi, atque pomeria, dilatare; Antichristum spiritu Oris conficere;
Viam denique sternere, ut Shem in textoria Japheti, quasi postliminio,
revertatur; per Dominum nostrum Jesum Christum, in secula sempiterna
benedictum. Amen.

JOHANNES COTTON
in Ecclesia Bostonien^ Presbyter docens.

