The BOSTONIAN EBENEZER.

SOME Historical Remarks, On the State of Boston, The Chief Town of
New England, and of the English AMERICA.

With Some, Agreeable Methods, FOR Preserving and Promoting, the Good State of
THAT, as well as any other Town, in the like Circumstances.

Humbly Offered, By a Native of Boston.

Ezekiel 48 35. The Name of the City from that Day shall be, THE LORD IS THERE.

Boston, Printed by B Green and J. Allen, for Samuel Phillips, at the Brick
Shop School

Vrbs Metropolis, ut sit maximae Auctoritatis, constituatur praecipuum pietatis
Exemplum et Sacrarium.

Aphor. Polit. The HISTORY of BOSTON, Related and Improved.
At Boston Lecture 7. d. 2. m. School.
REmarkable and Memorable, was the Time, when an Army of Terrible Destroyers
was coming against one of the Chief Towns, in the Land of Israel. God Rescued
the Town from the Irresistible Fury and Approach of those Destroyers, by an
Immediate Hand of Heaven upon them. Upon that Miraculous Rescue of the Town,
and of the whole Country whose Fate was much enwrapped in it, there followed,
that Action of the Prophet SAMUEL, which is this Day, to be, with some
Imi^^tion Repeated, in the midst of thee, O BOSTON, Thou Helped of the Lord.

1 SAMUEL VII. 12. Then SAMUEL took a Stone, and set it up, -- and called the
Name of it, Ebenezer, saying, Hitherto the Lord has Helped us.


THE Thankful Servants of God, have used sometimes, to Erect Monuments of
Stone, as dureable Tokens of their Thankfulness to God, for Mercies Received in
the places thus distinguished. Jacob did so; Joshua did so; and Samuel did so;
but they so did it, as to keep clear of the Transgression forbidden, in Lev. 26
1. Ye shall not set up an Image of Stone in your Land, for to Bow down unto it.

The Stone Erected by Samuel, with the Name of Ebenezer, which is as much as
(...) say, A Stone of Help; I know not whet^^^ any Thing might be Writ upon
it: but (...) am sure, there is one thing to be now Read upon it, by our
selves, in the Text where we find it: Namely, thus much,

That a People whom the God of Heaven has Remarkably Helped, in their
Distresses, ought Greatly and Gratefully to acknowledge, what Help of Heaven
they have Received.

Now, it is not my Design to lay the Scene of my Discourse, as far off as
Bethear, the place where Samuel set up his Ebenezer* I am immediately to
Transfer it into the Heart of Boston, a place where the Remarkable Help
Received from Heaven, by the People, does loudly call for an Ebenezer. And I do
not ask you, to change the Name of the Town, into that of Help-Stone, as there
is a Town in England of that Name, which may seem the English, of Ebenezer; But
my Sermon shall be this Day, your Ebenezer, if you will with a Favorable, and
a Profitable Attention Entertain it. May the Lord Jesus Christ, Accept me, and
Assist me now, to Glorify Him, in the Town, where I drew my First Sinful
Breath; A Town, whereto I am under Great Obligations, for the Precious
Opportunities to Glorify Him, which I have quietly and publicly enjoyed
therein, for Near Eighteen years together. O my Lord God, Remember me, I pray
thee, and Strengthen me this once, to speak from thee, unto thy People!

And now, Sirs, That I may set up an EBENEZER among you, there are these Things
to be Inculcated.

I. Let us Thankfully, and Agreeably, and Particularly, Acknowledge What Help
we have Received from the God of Heaven, in the years that have Rolled over us.
While the Blessed Apostle Paul, was, as it should seem, yet short of being
Threescore years old, how affectionately did he set up an Ebenezer, with an
Acknowledgment, in Act. 26.22. Having obtained Help of God, I continue to This
Day! Our Town is now Threescore and Eight years old; and certainly it is Time
for us, with all possible affection, to set up our Ebenezer, saying, Having
obtained Help from God, the Town it continued, until almost the Age of man is
passed over it! The Town has indeed Three Elder Sisters in this Colony; but it
has Wonderfully Outgrown them all; and her Mother, old Boston, in England
also; Yea, within a Few years, after the first-Settlement, it grew to be, The
Metropolis of the whole English America. Little was This Expected, by them that
First-Settled the Town, when, for a while, Boston, was proverbially called,
Lost Town, for the mean and sad Circumstances of it. But, O Boston, it is
because thou have Obtained Help from God; even from the Lord Jesus Christ, who,
for the sake of His Gospel, Preached and once prized here, undertook thy
Patronage. When the World and the Church of God, had seen Twenty six
Generations, a Psalm was Composed, wherein that Note occurs with Twenty six
Repetitions; His Mercy endures for ever. Truly, there has not one year passed
over this Town, Ab Urbe Condita, upon the Story whereof, we might not make that
Note, our Ebenezer; His Mercy endures for ever. It has been a Town of Great
Experiences. There have been several years, wherein the Terrible Famine, has
Terribly Stared the Town in the Face: We have been brought sometimes unto the
Last Meal in the Barrel; We have cried out, with the Disciples, We have not
Loaves enough to feed a Tenth part of us! But the feared Famine has always
been kept off; always, we have had Seasonable and Sufficient Supplies, after a
Surprising manner sent in unto us: Let the Three last years in this thing most
Eminently Proclaim the Goodness of our Heavenly Shepherd and Feeder. This has
been the Help of our God; Because His Mercy endures for ever! The Angels of
Death, have often Shot the Arrows of Death, into the midst of the Town; The
Small Pox, has especially Four Times, been a Great Plague upon us: How often
have there been Bills desiring Prayers, for more than an Hundred Sick, on one
Day in one of our Assemblies? In One Twelvemonth, about one Thousand of our
Neighbors, have one way or other been carried unto their long Home: And, yet
we are after all, many more than Seven Thousand Souls of us, at this Hour,
Living on the Spot. Why is not, a, Lord, have Mercy upon us, written on the
Doors of our Abandoned Habitations? This has been the Help of our God; Because
His Mercy endures for ever. Never was any Town under the Cope of Heaven, more
liable to be laid in Ashes, either through the Carelessness, or through the
Wickedness, of them that Sleep in it. That such a Combustible Heap, of
Contiguous Houses, yet Stands, it may be called, A Standing Miracle; It is not,
because the Watchman keeps the City: Perhaps there may be too much cause of
Reflection in that thing, and of Inspection too; No, It is from thy Watchful
Protection, O Thou keeper of Boston, who neither Slumbers nor Sleeps. Ten Times
has the Fire made Notable Ruins among us, and our Good Servant been almost
our Master: But the Ruins have mostly and quickly been Rebuilt. I suppose,
That many more than a Thousand Houses are to be seen, on this little piece of
Ground, all filled with the undeserved Favors of God. Whence this
preservation? This has been the Help of our God; Because His Mercy endures
for ever! But if ever this Town saw a Year of Salvations, transcendently such
was the Last Year unto us. A Formidable French Squadron, has not Shot one
Bomb, into the midst of thee, O thou Munition of Rocks; Our Streets have not
Run with Blood, and Gore, and horribly Devou^ing Flames, have not Rag^d upon
our Substance: Those are (...), then have thou been (...) City of Destruction:
Or, I will rather say, A City of Salvation: And this, by the ^elp of God;
Because His Mercy Endures for ever. Shall I go on? I will. We have not had the
Bread of Adversity and the Water of Affliction, Like many other places. But
yet, all this while, Our Eyes have seen our Teachers. Here are several Golden
Candlesticks in the Town. Shining and Burning Lights, have Illuminated them.
There are gone to Shine in an Higher Orb, Seven Divines that were once the
Stars of this Town, in the Pastoral Charge of it; besides many others* that for
some years gave us transient Influences Churches flourishing with much Love,
and Peace and many Comforts of the Holy Spirit, have hitherto been our greatest
(...). I wish, That some ^ad Eclipse do not come e're long upon this Glory* The
Dispensations of the Gospel were never Enjoyed by any Town, with more Liberty
and (...), for so long a while together. Our Opportunities to Draw near unto
the L^^d Jesus Christ, in His Ordinances, cannot be paralleled. Boston, Thou
have been Lifted up to Heaven; There is not a Town upon Earth, which on some
Accounts has more to answer for. Such, O Such, has been our Help from our God,
Because His Mercy Endures for ever.

II. Let us Acknowledge, Whose Help it is, that we have Received, and not Give
the Glory of our God unto another. Poorly Helped had we been, I may tell you,
if we had none but Humane Help, all this while to depend upon. The Favors of
our Superiors we Deny not; we Forget not the Instruments of our Help.
Nevertheless, this Little Outcast Zion, shall with my consent, Engrave the Name
of no MAN, upon her Ebenezer! It was well confessed in Psalm. 108.12. Vain is
the Help of man! It was well counseled in Psalm. 146.3. Put not your trust in
Princes, nor in the Son of man, in whom there is no Help.

Wherefore,

First, Let God in our Lord Jesus Christ, have the Glory, of Bestowing on us,
all the Help, that we have had. When the Spirit of God came upon a Servant of
His, he cried out unto David, in 1 Chronicles. 12.18. Thy God Helps thee. This,
This is the voice of God, from Heaven to Boston this Day, Thy God has Helped
thee: Thou have by thy Sin destroyed thy self, but in thy God has been thy
Help. A Great man, once Building an Edifice, caused an Inscription of this
Importance, to be written on the Gates of it, Such a place planted me, Such a
place watered me, and Caesar gave the Increase One that passed by, with a witty
Sarcasm, wrote under it, His Deus nihil f^cit. i. e. God, it seems, did nothing
for this man. But the Inscription upon our Ebenezer, owning what Help, this
Town has had, shall say, Our God has done all that is done! Say then, O
Helped Boston, say as in Psalm. 121.2. My Help is from the Lord, which made
Heaven and Earth. Say, as in Psalm. 94.17. Unless the Lord had been my Help, my
Soul had quickly dwelt in silence. And, Boldly say, It Is only because the Lord
has been my Helper, that Earth and Hell, have never d^ne (...) that they would
unto me.

Let our Lord JESUS CHRIST, be praised as our Blessed Helper: That Stone which
the Foolish Builders have refused, Oh! Set up that Stone; even, that H^gh Rock,
Set Him on High in our praises, and say, That, That is our Ebenezer. It Is our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, who in His Infinite Compassions for the Town, has said; as
in Isa. 63.5. I Looked, (...) there was none to Help; Therefore my own Arms
has brought Salvation unto it. It is foretold concerning the Idolatrous Roman
Catholics, That together with the Lord Jesus Christ, they shall Worship other
Mauzzim: that is to say, other Protectors. Accordingly, All their Towns,
ordinarily have singled out their Protectors, among the Saints of Heaven; such
a Saint is Entitled unto the Patronage of such a Town among them, and such a
Saint for another: Old Boston, by Name, was but Saint Botolphs Town. Whereas,
Thou, O Boston, shall have but one Protector in Heaven, and that is, our Lord
JESUS CHRIST. Oh! Rejoice in Him alone, and say, That Lord is my Fortress and
my Deliverer! There was a Song once made for a Town, which in its Distresses
had been Helped wondrously; and the First Clause in that Song, [you have it in
Isa. 26.1.] may be so rendered, We have a strong Town; Salvation [or JESUS, the
Lord whose Name has Salvation in it] Will appoint Walls and Bulwarks. Truly,
What Helps we have had, we will Sing, It Is our JESUS, that has appointed them.
The old Pagan Towns, were sometimes mightily solicitous, to conceal the Name of
the particular God, that they counted their Protector, Ne ab hostibus
E^^^catus, alio commigraret. But, I shall be far from doing my Town any Damage,
by publishing the Name of its Protector; No, Let all Mankind know, That the
Name of our Protector, is JESUS CHRIST: For, Among the Gods, there (...) none
like unto thee, O LORD* Nor (...) any Help like unto thine: And there is no
Rock, (...) to our God.

Yea, When we ^^scribe the Name of Helper, unto our Lord JESUS CHRIST, Let us
also acknowledge, that the Name is not sufficiently Expressive, Emphatical, and
Significant. Lactantius of old, blamed the Heathen, for giving the Highest of
their Gods, no Higher a Ti^le, than that of, Jupiter, or, Juvans Pater, i. e.
An Helping Father, and he says, Non intelligit Divina Beneficia, qui se a Deo
tantummodo Juvari putat: The Kindnesses of God, are not understood, by that
man, who makes no more than an Helper of Him. Such indeed is the penury of our
Language, that we cannot coin a more Expressive Name. Nevertheless, when we
say, The Lord JESUS CHRIST has been our Helper, Let us Intend more than we
Express; Lord, Thou have been All unto us.

Secondly; Let the Sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ, most Explici^ly, have
the Glory of Purchasing for us all our Help. What was it, that procured, an
Ebenezer, for the People of God? We read, in 2 Samuel 7.9. Samuel took a
Sucking-Lamb, and offered it a Burnt Offering wholly unto the Lord; and Samuel
Cried unto the Lord for Israel, and the Lord Heard him. Shall I tell you? Our
Lord Jesus Christ, is that Lamb of God; and he has been a Lamb Slain as a
Sacrifice; and He is a Sacrifice pleadable, not only for persons, but also for
peoples* that belong unto Him. To Teach us this Evangelical and Comfortable
Mystery, there was, A Sacrifice for the whole Congregation, prescribed in the
Mosaic Paedagogy. It Is notorious, that the Sins of this Town, have been many
Sins, and mighty Sins; The Cry thereof has gone up to Heaven. If the Almighty
God should from Heaven Rain down upon the Town* an horrible Tempest of
Thunderbolts, as He did upon the Cities which He overthrew in His Anger, and
repented not, it would be no more than our Unrepen^ed Sins deserve. How comes
it then to pass, that we have had so much Help from Heaven after all? Truly,
The Sacrifice of our Lord Jesus Christ, has been plea^ed for Boston, and,
Therefore, say, Therefore it is, that the Town is not made a Sacrifice to the
Vengeance of God. God sent Help to the Town, that was the very Heart and Life
of the Land, that He had a pity for: But why so? He said, in Isa* 37.35. I
will desend this Town, to Save it, for my Servant David's sake. Has this Town
been Defended? It has been for the sake of the Beloved JESUS; Therefore has the
Daughter of Boston shaken her Head at you, O ye Calamities, that have been
Impending over her Head. O Helped, and Happy Town! Thou have had those
Believers in the midst of thee, that have pleaded this with the Great God; Ah!
Lord, Thou have been more Honored by the Sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ
than thou could be Honored by overwhelming this Town with all the plagues
of thy Just Indignation. If thou will Spare, and Feed, and Keep, and Help this
poor Town, the Sufferings of our Lord Jesus Christ, shall be owned, as the
price of all our Help. It Is This, that has procured us all our Help: It Is This
that must have all our praise.

Thirdly; Let the Lord be in a special manner Glorified, for the Ministry of
His Good Angels, in that Help that has been ministered unto us. A Jacob lying ^n
a Stone, saw the Angels of God Helping him. We are setting up an Ebenezer; but
when we Lay our Heads and our Thoughts upon the Stone, Let us then see, The
Angels of God have Helped us. When Macedonia, was to have some Help from God,
an Angel, whom the Apostle, in Acts 16.9. Saw Habited like a man of Macedonia,
was a mean of its being brought unto them. There is abundant cause to think,
That every Town in which the Lord Jesus Christ is worshipped, has an Angel to
watch over it. The Primitive Christians, were persuaded from the Scriptures of
Truth, to make no Doubt of This, Quod per Civitates distributae sunt Angelorum
praefecturoe. When the Capital Town of Judaea, was rescued from an Invasion, we
read in 2 King. 19.35. The Angel of the Lord WENT OUT, and smote the Camp of
the Assyrians. It should seem, There was an Angel, which did Reside in, and
Praeside over the Town, who went out for that amazing Exploit. And is it not
Likely, That the Angel of the Lord WENT OUT for to smite the Fleet of the
Assyrians, with a Sickness, which the Last Summer hindered their Invading of
this Town? The Angel of BOSTON, was concerned for it! Why have not the
Destroyers broke in upon us, to prey upon us, with sore Destruction? It Is
because we have had, A Wall of Fire about us; that is to say, A Guard of
Angels, those Flames of Fire, have been as a Wall unto us. It was an Angel,
that Helped a Daniel, when the Lions would else have swallowed him up. It was
an Angel, that Helped a Lot, out of the Fires that were coming to Consume his
Habitation. It was an Angel, that Helped an Elias to (...), when he wanted it.
They were Ang^^^, that Helped the whole (...) of God, in ^he Wilderness, to
their Daily Bread* Their Manna, was Angels Food And is it nothing, that such
Angels have done for this Town, Think you? Oh! Think not so. Indeed, If we
should go to Thank the Angels for doing these things, They would zealously say,
See (...) do it not! But if we Thank Their (...), and ours, for His Employing
Them ^o Do these things, it will exceedingly (...) them. Wherefore, Bless
(...), ye his Angels; And Bless (...) Town, for these His Angels!

III. Let the Help which we have Hitherto had from our God, Enc^u^^ge (...)
Hope in Him, for More Help (...), as the Matter may R^quire. The He^p (...) God
had given to His People, (...) Commemorated, as with (...) Pillars, conveying
down the Remembrance of it, unto their Children. And what for? We are told, in
Psalm. 78.7. That they might se^ their Hope in God, and (...) Forget the Works
of God. I am not willing to say, How much this Town may be Threatened, even
with an U^ter Extirpation. But this I will say, The Motto upon all out
Ebenezers is, Hope in God! Hope in God! The Use of the Former Help that we have
had from God, should be an Hope for Future Help, from Him that is, A Present
Help in the Time of Trouble. As in the Three First Verse o^ the Eighty Fifth
Psalm, Six times over there occurs, Thou have, Thou have: all to usher in this;
Therefore Thou WILL still do so O Let our Faith proceed in that way of Arguing,
i^ 2 Cor. 1.10. The Lord has Delivered, and H^ does Deliver, and in Him we
Trust, that He will still Deliver. We are to Day Wil^ing, Hitherto the Lord
has Helped us; Let us write under it, And we ho^e, the Lord (...) m^re H^lp
for us, in the Time of Need! It may be* some are purposi^g Su^denly and Hastily
to Leave the Town, th^oug^ their Fears of the (...) that may come upon it. But
I would not have you be too Sudden and Hasty in ^our purposes, as too many have
been* unto (...)- S^rrow. There was a Time when People were so Discouraged
about a Subsistence in the principal Town of the Jews, that the talked of
plucking up Stakes, and flying ^^way; but the Minister of God came to them,
[And so do I to you, this Day! Saying, in Isa. 30 7. I Cried concerning^ This,
Their Strength is to Sit Sill! Bosto^ was no sooner come to some Consistenc^
Threescore years ago, but the People foun^ themselves plunged into a sad Non
plu^ what way to take for a Subsistence. Go^ then immediately put them into a
way^ and, Hitherto the Lord has Helped us! The Town is at this Day full of
Widows an^ Orphans, and a multitude of them, are very Helpless Creatures. I am
Astonished, Ho^ they Live! In that Church, whereof (...) am the Servant, I have
counted* The Widows make about a Sixth Part of ou^ Communicants, and, no doubt,
in the whole Town, the proportion differs no^ very much. Now, stand still, my
Friends and Behold, the Help of God! Were any of these ever Starved yet? No,
These Widows are every one in some sort provided for. And let me tell you, Ye
Handmaids of the Lord, You shall be Still pro^vided for! The Lord, whose
Family you ^elong unto, will conveniently and won^erfully provide for you; if
you say, and (...)! Say! of Him, The Lord is my Helper, will not Fear!

What shall I say? When Moses was ^^ady to faint, in his Prayers for his
People, we read, in Exodus 17.12 They took a ^^one and put it under him
Christians, ^here are some of you, who abound in ^rayers, that the Help of God
may be ^^anted unto the Town; the Town is ^uch upheld by those Prayers of
yours. ^ow, that you may not faint in your ^rayers, I bring you a Stone: The
Stone, ^s our Ebenezer; or, the Relation of the ^elp that hitherto the Lord
has given us.

IV. Let all that bear Public Office (...) the Town, Contribute all the Help
they (...), that may continue the Help of God ^^to us. Austin, in his
Confessions, gives ^hanks to God, That when he was an ^elpless Infant, he had a
Nurse to Help him, (...) one that was both Able and Willing to Help (...).
Infant- Boston, Thou have those, whom (...) Bible calls, Nursing-Fathers. Oh,
Be not ^oward, as thou art, in thy Treating of (...) Nurses; but give Thanks to
God for them. I Forget my self; It Is with the Fathers themselves, that I am
concerned.

When it was demanded of Demosthenes, what it was, that so long Preserved
Athens in a flourishing State, he made this answer, The Orators are men of
Learning and Wisdom; the Magistrates do Justice, the Citizens love Quiet, and
the Laws are kept among them all. May Boston flourish in such happy Order!

And first, You may assure yourselves* That the Ministers of the Lord Jesus
Christ among you will be Joyful to approve themselves, as the Book of God has
called them, The Helpers of your Joy. O our dear Flocks; we owe you our All;
All our Love, all our Strength, all our Time; We, Watch for you, as th^se that
must give an Account: And I am very much mistaken* if we are not willing to Die
for you t^o, if called unto it. If our Lord Jesus Christ should say, to us, My
Servant, if you will Die to Night, you shall have this Reward; The People that you
Preach to, shall be all Converted unto me! I think, We should with Triumphing
Souls Reply, Ah! Lord, Then I Will Die with all my Heart. Syrs, we should go away
Rejoicing with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory. I am satisfied, That the most
Furious and Foul mouthed Reviler, that God may give any of us, to be Buffeted
withal, if he will but come to sober Thoughts, he will say, That there is not
any One man in the Town, but the Ministers wish that man as well as they do
their own Souls, and would gladly Serve that man by Day or by Night, in any
thing that it were possible to do for him. Wherefore, O our Beloved People, I
beseech you, Leave off, Leave off, to Throw Stones at your Ebenezers. Instead
of That, Pray for us, and Strive together with us, in your Prayers to God for
us. Then with the Help of Christ, we will promise you; We will set our selves to
observe what Special Truths may be most needful to be Inculcated upon you, and
we will Inculcate them. We will set our selves to observe the Temptations that
beset you, the Afflictions that assault you, and the Duties that are incumbent
on you, and we will accommodate our selves unto them. We will set our selves to
observe, what Souls among you, do call for our m^re particular Addresses, and
we will Address them faithfully, and even Travail i^ Birth for them. Nor will
we give over Praying, and Fasting, and Crying to our Great LORD for you, until
we Die. Whatever other Helpers the Town Enjoyes, they shall have that
convenience, in Ezra. 5.2. With them were the Prophets of God, Helping them.
Well then, Let the rest of our Worthy Helpers, Lend an Helping Hand, for the
promoting of those things, wherein the Weal of the Town is wrapped up! When the
Jews thought that a Defiling Thing was breaking in among them, in Acts 21.28.
They cried out, Men of Israel, Help. Truly, there is cause to make that Cry,
Men of Boston, Help! for Ignorance, and Profaneness, and Bad Living, and the
worst things in the World, are breaking in upon us.

And now, Will the JUSTICES of the Town, set themselves to consider, How they
may Help to Suppress all growing Vice^ among us?

Will the CONSTABLES of the Town, set themselves to consider, How they may Help
to prevent all Evil Orders among us?

There are some who have the Eye of the Town so much upon them, that the very
Name of, TOWNSMEN, is that by which they are distinguished. Syrs, Will You
also consider, How to Help the Affairs of the Town, so as that all Things may
go well among us?

Moreover, may not SCHOOLMASTERS, do much to instill Principles of Religion,
and Civility, as well as other points of good Education into the Children of
the Town? Only Let the Town well Encourage its Well Deserving Schoolmasters.

There are some other Officers; But concerning All, there are these Two Things
to be Desired. First, It is to be Desired, That such Officers as are Chosen
among us, may be Chosen in the Fear of God. May none but Pious, and Prudent
men, and such as Love the Town, be Chosen to Serve it. And, Secondly, It is to
be Desired, That Officers of several sorts, would often come together, for
Consultation. Each of the sorts by themselves, may they often come together, to
Consult, What shall we do to Serve the Town, in those Interests which are
committed unto our Charge. Oh! What a Deplorable Thing, will it be, for persons
to be Entrusted with Talents, [your Opportunities to Serve the Town, are so
many Talents!] and they never seriously consider, What Good shall I do, with my
Talents, in the place where God has Station'd me?

And, Will the REPRESENTATIVES of the Town, be considered among the rest, as
Entrusted with some singular Advantages for our Help! The Lord give you
understanding in all Things.

V. God Help the Town, to manifest all that Piety, which a Town so Helped of
Him, is obliged unto! When the People of God, had been carried, by His Help,
through their Difficulties, they set up Stones, to keep in mind how He had
Helped them: And something was written on the Stones: But what was written!
See; Josh. 8.32. Joshua wrote upon the Stones, a Copy of the Law. Truly, upon
those Ebenezers, which we set up, we should write the Law of our God, and
Recognize the Obligations which the Help of our God, has laid upon us to keep
it.

We are a very Unpardonable Town, if after all the Help which our God has
given us, we do not ingenuously Enqu^^^* What shall we Render to the Lord, for
all His Benefits? Render! Oh! Let us our selves thus answer the Enquiry; Lord,
we will Render all possible, and Filia Obedience unto thee, because Hitherto
thou have Helped us: Only do thou also Help us, to Render that Obedience! Mark
what I say; If there be so much as one Prayerless House in such a Town as this,
it is Inexcusable! How Inexcusable then, will be all Flagitious Outrages? There
was a Town, [T'was the Town of Sodom!] that had been wonderfully Saved out of
the Hands of their Enemies. But after the Help that God sent unto them, the
Town went on to Sin against God, in very prodigious Instances. At last, a
provoked God sent a Fire upon the Town, that made it an Eternal Desolation. Ah,
Boston, Beware, Beware, lest the Sins of Sodom get Footing in thee! And what
were the Sins of Sodom? We find in Ezekiel. 16.49. Behold, This was the Iniquity
of Sodom; Pride, Fullness of Bread, and Abundance of Idleness was in her;
Neither did she Strengthen the Hand of the Poor and the Needy; There was much
Oppression there. If you know of any Scandalous Disorders in the Town, do all
you can, to Suppress them, and Redress them: And let not those that send their
Sons hither from other parts of the world, for to be improved in Virtue, have
cause to Complain, That after they came to Boston, they lost, what little
Virtue was before Budding in them: That in Boston they grew more Debauched and
more Malignant than ever they were before! It was noted concerning the famous
Town of Port Royal in Jamaica, which you know, was the other Day Swallowed up, in
a Stupendous Earthquake, that just before the Earthquake the People were
Violently and Scandalously set upon going to Fortune Tellers upon all
Occasions: much Notice was taken of this Impiety, generally prevailing among
the People: but none of those Wretched Fortune Tellers could Foresee, or
Forestal the direful Catastrophe. I have heard, That there are Fortune Tellers
in this Town, sometimes consulted by some of the Sinful Inhabitants. I wish the
Town could be made too Hot for these Dangerous Transgressors. I am sure, the
preservation of the Town, from horrendous Earthquakes, is one thing that
bespeaks, our, Ebenezers; It Is from the Merciful Help of our God unto us. But,
Beware, I beseech you, of those Provoking Evils that may Expose us to a Plague,
Exceeding all that are in the Catalogue of the Twenty Eighth of Deuteronomy.
Let me go on, to say; What? Shall there be any Bawdy-Houses in such a Town as
This! It may be, the Neighbors, that could Smoke 'em, and Rout 'em, if they
would, are loath to Stir, for fear of being reputed Ill Neighbors. But, I say
unto you, That you are Ill Neighbors, because you do it not: All the
Neighbors are like to have their Children and Servants poisoned, and their
Dwellings laid in Ashes, because you do it not! And, Oh! that the
Drinking-Houses in the Town, might once come under a laudable Regulation. The
Town has an Enormous Number of them! Will the Haunters of those Houses, hear
the Counsils of Heaven? For You that are the Town Dwellers, to be often, or long
in your Visits of the Ordinary, 'twill certainly Expose you to Mischiefs more
than ordinary. I have seen certain Taverns, where the Pictures of horrible
Devourers were hanged out for the Signs; and thought I, 'twere well, if such
Signs were not sometimes too too Significant! Alas, men have their Estates
Devoured, their Names Devoured, their Hours Devoured, and their very Souls
Devoured, when they are so besotted, that they are not in their Element, except
they be Tippling at such Houses. When once a man is Bewitched, with the
Ordinary, what usually becomes of him? He is a gone man; And when he comes to
Die, he will cry out, as many have done, Ale ho^^ses are Hell-Houses! Alehouses
are Hell houses! But Let the Owners of those Houses, also now hear our
Counsils. Oh! Hearken to me, that God may Hearken to you another Day! It is an
Honest, and a Lawful, though it be not a very Desirable, Employment, that you
have undertaken: You may Glorify the Lord Jesus Christ in your Employment, if
you will, and Benefit the Town considerably. There was a very Godly man, that
was an Inn^keeper; and a Great Minister of God, could say to that man, in 3 John 2. Thy Soul prospers. O Let it not be said of you, since you are fallen
into this Employment, Thy Soul withers! It is thus, with too many:
Especially, when they that get a License perhaps to Sell Drink out of Doors, do
stretch their License to Sell within Doors. Those Private Houses, when once a
Professor of the Gospel, comes to Steal a Living out of them, it commonly
praecipitates them, into abundance of wretchedness and confusion. But, I pray
God, assist you that keep Ordinaries, to keep the Commandments of God, in them.
There was an Inn at Bethlehem; where the Lord JESUS CHRIST was to be met
withal. Can Boston boast of many such? Alas, Too ordinarily it may be said,
There is no Room for Him in the Inn! My Friends, Let me beg it of you; Banish
the unfruitful works of Darkness from your Houses, and then the Sun of
Righteousness will shine upon them. Don't countenance Drunkenness, Revelling,
and Mispending of precious Time in your Houses: Let none have the Snares of
Death Laid for them in your Houses. You Will say, I shall Starve then! I say,
Better Starve than Sin. But you, shall not. It is the Word of the Most High,
Trust in the Lord, and do Good, and verily thou shall be Fed. And is not Peace
of Conscience, with a Little, better than those Riches* that will shortly melt
away, and then run Like Scalding Metal down the very Bowels of thy Soul!

What shall I say more? There is one Article of Piety more to be Recommended
unto us all; and it is an Article, which all Piety does exceedingly Turn upon*
That is, The Sanctification of the Lords Day. Some very Judicious Persons, have
observed, That as they Sanctified the Lords Day, Remisly or Carefully, just so,
their Affayrs usually prospered all the Ensuing Week. Sirs, You cannot more
consult the Prosperity of the Town, in all its Affayrs, than by Endeavoring
that the Lords Day may be Exemplarily Sanctified. When People about Jerusalem,
took too much Liberty on the Sabbath, the Ruler of the Town Contended with
them, and said, Ye bring wrath upon Israel by profaning the Sabbath* I fear, I
fear, There are many among us, to whom it may be said, Ye bring wrath upon
Boston, by profaning the Sabbath. And what Wrath? Ah Lord, prevent it! But
there is an awful Sentence in Jer. 17.27. If ye will not Hearken unto me, to
Sanctify the Sabbath Day, then will I kindle a Fire on the Town, and it shall
Devour, and shall not be Quenched.

Finally, Let the Piety of the Town manifest it self, in a due Regard unto the
Institutions of Him, whose Help has Hitherto been a Shield unto us. Let the
Ark be in the Town, and God will Blessed the Town! I believe, it may be found,
That in the Mortal Scourges of Heaven, which this Town has felt, there has
been a Discernable Distinction, of those that have come up to Attend all the
Ordinances of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the Communion of His Churches. Though
these have had, as it is fit they should, a Share, in the Common Deaths, yet the
Destroying Angel, has not had so great a proportion of these in his
Commission, as he has had of others. Whether This be so, or no; To Uphold, and
Support, and Attend the Ordinances of the Lord Jesus Christ in Reforming
Churches, This will Entitle the Town to the Help of Heaven; for, Upon the
Glory, there shall be a Defense! There were the Victorious Forces of Alexander,
that in going backward and foreward, passed by Jerusalem, without Hurting it.
Why so? said the Lord, in Zech 9.8. I will Encamp about my House, because of
the Army. If our God have an House here, He Will Encamp about it. Nazianzen, a
famous Minister of the Gospel, taking his Farewell of Constantinople, an old
man, that had sat under his Ministry, cried out, Oh! my Father, Don't you dare
to go away, you will carry the whole Trinity with you! How much more, may it be
cried out, If we Loose or Slight, the Ordinances of the Lord Jesus Christ, we
Foregoe the Help of all the Trinity with them!

VI. Extraordinary Equity and Charity, as well as Piety well becomes a Town,
that has been by the Help of God so Extraordinarily signalized. A Town
marvellously Helped by God, has This Foretold concerning it, in Isa. 1 26.
Afterward thou shall be called, The City of Righteousness, The Faithful City.
(...) Ebenezer* of this Town, render it, A Town of Equity, and, A Town of
Charity! Oh! There should be (...) with Heaven has Dealt so Favorably. Let us
Deal Fairly in Bargains; Deal Fairly in Taxes; Deal Fairly in paying Respects
to such as have been Benefactors unto the Town. It Is but Equity, that they, who
have been Old Standers in the Town, and both with Person and Estate Served the
Town unto the utmost for many years together, should on all Proper Occasions be
considered. For Charity, I may indeed speak it without Flattery, this Town has
not many Equals on the Face of the Earth. Our Lord Jesus Christ from Heaven,
wrote, unto the good people of a Town, in the Lesser Asia, [Rev. 2.19.] I know
thy works, and Charity. From that Blessed Lord, I may venture to bring that
Message unto the Good people of this Town; The Glorious Lord of Heaven, knows
thy works, O Boston, and all thy Charity. This is a poor Town; and yet it may
be said of the Bostonians, as it was of the Macedonians, Their Deep poverty
has abounded unto the Riches of their Liberality. O ye Bountiful people of
God, All your Daily Bounties to the Needy, All your Subscriptions to Send the
Bread of Life abroad unto place^ that are perishing in Wickedness, All your
Collections in your Assemblies as often as they are called for; All these Alms
are come up for a Memorial before God! The Lord Jesus Christ in Heaven has
Beheld your Helpfulness, and Readiness to every good Work; and He has Requited
it, with His Helpful Ebenezers. It was said, in Isa. 32.8. The Liberal Devises
Liberal Things, and by Liberal Things he shall stand. There are some in this
Town, that are always Devising Liberal Things, and our Lord Jesus Christ, Lets
the Town Stand for the sake of those! Instead of Exhorting you, to Augment your
Charity, I will rather utter an Exhortation, or at Least, a Supplication, that
you may not Abuse your Charity, by misapplying of it. I remember, I have Read,
That an Inhabitant of the City Pisa, being asked, Why their Town so went, as it
then did, unto Decay, he fetched a deep sigh, and said, Our young men are too
prodigal, our old men are too Affectionate, and we have no punishment for those
that spend their years in Idleness. Ah, The last stroke of that complaint, I
must here ^igh it over again. Idleness, alas, Idleness, increases in the Town
exceedingly: Idleness, of which there never came any Goodness; Idleness, which
is a Reproach to any people. We work hard, all Summer, and the Drones count
themselves wronged, if they have it not in the Winter divided among them. The
Poor that cannot Work, are Objects for your Liberality. But the Poor, that can
Work and will not, the best Liberality to them, is to make them. I beseech you*
Syrs, Find out a method quickly, That the Idle persons in the Town, may Earn
their Broad; It were the best piece of Charity, that could be shown unto them,
and Equity, unto us all. Our Beggars, do shamefully grow upon us, and such
Beggars too, as our Lord Jesus Christ Himself has Expressly forbidden us to
countenance. I have Read a printed Sermon, which was Preached before Both
Houses of Parliament, the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, and the Assembly
of Divines; the Greatest Audience then in the World: And in that Sermon, the
Preacher had this passage; I have Lived in a Country, where, in seven years, I
never saw a Beggar, nor heard an Oath, nor look^d upon a Drunkard. Shall I tell
you where that Utopia was? 'Twas NEW ENGLAND! But they that go from hence, must
now tell another Story.

VII. May the Changes, and especially the Judgments, that have come upon the
Town, direct us, what Help to petition from the God of our Salvations. The
Israelites had formerly seen dismal Things, where they now set up their
Ebenezer: The Philistines had no less than Twice beaten them there, and there
taken from them the Ark of God. Now we are setting up our Ebenezer, Let us a
little call to mind some Dismal Things that we have seen; the Ebenezer will go
up the better for it.

We read, in 1 Samuel 6.18. concerning, The Great Stone of Abel. Some say, That
Adam Erected that Stone, as a Grave stone for his Abel, and wrote that Epi^aph
upon it, Here was poured out the Blood of the Righteous ABEL I know nothing of
This, The Names, I know, differ in the Original; But as we may Erect many a
Stone for an Ebenezer, so, we may Erect many a Great Stone of ABEL, that is to
say, We may write, MOURNING and SORROW, upon the Condition of the Town in
various Examples. Now, from the Stones of Abel, we will a little gather what we
should wish to write upon the Stones of our Ebenezer.

What Changes have we seen, in point of Religion? It was Noted by Luther, He
could never see Good order in the Church, last more than Fifteen years together
in the Purity of it. Blessed be God, Religion has here flourished in the
Purity of it, for more than Fifteen years together. But, certainly, the Power
of Godliness is now grievously decayed among us. As the Prophet of old
Exclamed, in Joel 1.2. Hear this, ye old men, and give Ear, ye Inhabitants;
Has this been in your Days: Thus may I say, Hear this, ye old men, that are
the Inhabitants of the Town: Cannot you Remember, that in your Days, a
Prayerful, a Watchful, a Fruitful Christian, and a well Governed Family, was a
more common Sight, than it is now in our Days? Cannot you Remember, that in
your Days, those Abominable Things did not Show their Heads, that are now
Barefaced among us? Here then is a Petition to be made unto our God; Lord,
Help us to Remember whence we are Fallen, and to Repent, and to Do the First
Works.

Again; What Changes have we seen, in point of Mortality? By Mortality, almost
all the Old Race of our First Planters here, are carried off; the Old Stock, is
in a manner Expired. We see the Fulfillment of that word, in Eccl. 1 4. One
Generation passes away, and another Generation comes. It would be no
unprofitable Thing for you, to pass over the several Streets, and call to mind,
Who Lived here so many years ago? Why? In that place lived such an one; and in
that place lived such an one. But, Where are they Now? Oh! They are Gone, They
are Gone into that Eternal World, whither We must quickly follow them. Here is
another Petition, to be (...) unto our God; Lord, Help us to (...) our Days,
and apply our Hearts unto Wis^^^ that when the places that now know (...) us no
more, we may be gone into the (...) of God.

Furthermore; What Changes have we seen, in point of Possessions? If some that
are now Rich, were once Low in the World, it is possible, more that were once
Rich, are now brought very Low. Ah! Boston, Thou have seen the Vanity of all
Worldly Possessions* One fatal Morning, which laid Fourscore of thy Dwelling
Houses, and Seventy of thy Ware houses, in a Ruinous Heap, not Nineteen years
ago, gave thee to Read it in Fiery Characters. And an huge Fleet of thy
Vessels, which they would make, if they were all together, that have miscarried
in the late War, has given thee to Read more of it. Here is one Petition more,
to be made unto our God; Lord, Help us to Ensure a Better and a lasting
Substance in Heaven, and the Good part that cannot be taken away.

In fine; How dreadfully have the Young People of Boston, perished under the
Judgments of God! A Renowned Writer, among the Pagans, could make this Remark;
There was a Town, so Irreligious and Atheistical, that they did not pay their
First Fruits unto God: (which the Light of Nature taught the Pagans to do!) and
says he, they were* by a Sudden Desolation so Strangly Destroyed, that there
were no Remainders either of the Persons, or of the Houses, to be seen any
more. Ah, My Young Folks; There are few First Fruits paid unto the Lord Jesus
Christ among you. From hence it comes to pass, that the Consuming Wrath of God,
is every day upon you. New England has been like a Tottering House; the very
Foundations of it have been Shaking: But the House thus over setting by the
Whirlwinds of the Wrath of God, has been like Jobs House; It falls upon the
Young men, and they are Dead! The Disasters on our Young Folks have been so
multiplied, that there are few Parents among us, but what will go with Wounded
Hearts, down unto their Graves: Their daily moans are, Ah, My Son cut off in
his Youth! My Son, my Son! Behold then, the Help that we are to ask of our God;
and why do we, with no more Days of Prayer with Fasting, ask it? Lord, Help
the Young People of Boston, to Remember thee in the Days of their Youth, and
Sanctify unto the Survivers, the Terrible Things that have come upon so many of
that Generation.

And now as Joshua, having Reasoned with his people, a little before he Died,
in Josh. 24.26, 27. Took a Great STONE* and set it up, and said unto all the
people, Behold, this Stone shall be a witness unto you, Lest ye Deny your God.
Thus, we have been this Day setting up a STONE, even an Ebenezer, among you;
and I conclude, Earnestly testifying unto you, Behold this Stone, shall be a
witness unto you, that the Lord JESUS CHRIST, has been a Good Lord unto you;
and if you Seek Him, He will be still found of you, but if you Forsake Him, He
will cast you off for ever.

Household Religion, Recommended, for the Preservation of our HOUSES.
At Boston Lecture. 26. d. 7. m. 1695.
It is Written in JOB XXII.23. If thou Return to the Almighty, thou shall be
Built up; Thou shall put away Iniquity, far from thy Tabernacles.


IT is Reported, as the Special and Signal Favor of God, unto His People, in
Exodus 1.20, 21. The People multiplied, and He made Them [that is, the People,
for the word is in the Masculine Gender,] Houses: Which Favor of God in the
nearest and strictest sense wherein that expression is commonly used, is not
only most Mercifully Vouchsafed, but almost Miraculously continued, unto us who
now Compose this Assembly. Our Gracious God has given us Houses, wherein we
Enjoy the Comforts of Life, Covered and Sheltered from foreign injuries; Yea,
and we have the Houses of our Gracious God also set open unto us, without the
Liberties whereof, I hope, we should not find our s^^ves able to Taste the
Comforts of our own. Let it not be thought Unseasonable, I am sure, it should
not be Unprofitable, for us to hear in the House of God at this Time, some
Singular Things, wherein the Welfare of our own is more than a little concerned.

Concerning the Houses, with which our God has favored us, there are Two
Considerations, which doubtless, every man in this Assembly, of his own Accord,
has Entertained.

First, I suppose, We are all sensible, That for us to Loose our Houses by any
Disaster whatsoever, would be a very terrible Calamity; Oh! It would be a
Judgment of God, wherein the Anger of God, would be seen written with Fiery
Characters. If by an Accident, or by an Enemy our Houses be Laid in
Desolations, every Roar of the Raging Flames, every Crack of the Tumbling
Timbers, every Downfall of the Undermined Walk, and every Jangle of the Bells
then tolling the Funeral of those Houses, would loudly utter that voice, in
Deuteronomy. 32.22. A Fire is Kindled in the Anger of God! It were a dismal Thing for
our Houses becoming too Hot for us, to say, Be gone; ye sinful Inhabitants, Be
gone; you shall never Eat, or Sleep, or Talk, or Pray, in us, any more; and for
our Consorts and Children with us, to be Stripped in a few Hours, of all that we
have been getting for many years, and be turned Shiftless and Helpless out of
Doors, to Lodge Next Door unto Beggary. A Town so Afflicted, may have this
Lamentable Account given of them, in Isa. 42.25. The Lord has poured on them
the Fury of His Anger, and it has let them on Fire round about.

Secondly, And there is as much cause for us to be sensible, That it is the
mere Power and Patience of our Good God, which keeps us from such a Terrible
Calamity, as the Loss of our Houses. How easy a thing were it, for the
Vengeance of Heaven, to Lay all our Houses in Ruinou^ Heaps before to morrow
morning! Truly, We may say, It Is because we have obtained Help from God, that
we continue to this Day. We may sit in our Combustible Houses, and make that
Confession, in Psalm. 127.1. The Lord keeps the Town; the Watchman waketh b^t in
vain. When we think, how much Destruction may arise from one Spark, or one
Snuff, and, as the Apostle speaks, How great a matter a Little Fire kindles!
And when we think, how many Careless, how many Foolish, how many Drunken, yea,
and how many horribly Malicious persons, persons wicked enough, To burn their
Neighbors Houses, only that they may Roast their own Eggs, may creep in among
us; Or when we think of him whom we may call OG, which is in English, The
Burner, for the Delight that he has taken in Scorching men with Fire; We may
with Admiration acknowledge, It Is our God that is our (...). Oh! we must make
that Acknowl^dgment before the Lord, in Psalm. 121.4. Behold, He that keeps
Israel, does neither Slumber nor S^eep; Else we should be waked out of our next
Sleep, with a Formidable Outcry.

Sensible of these Things, we shall not count it Improper, to bestow a brief
Discourse, upon the Methods, which we are, as Christians, to take for the
Comfortable Preservation of our Houses; especially, now the Season of the year
advances, wherein there are the most pungent Invitations, for such Methods to
be considered.

Behold then the Great Method, for the secure Enjoyment of our Tabernacles,
which the Oracles of God have directed us unto: It is, The putting away
Iniquity far from our Tabernacles.

That Perfect and Upright m^n, Job, had this among the Heavy Trials befalling
of him, That he Lost his House: Now under this Trial, one of his Friends gives
him this Advice: That he would by Acquaintance with God, and Repentance of Sin,
Endeavor, to answer the Expectations of Heaven concerning him. To Encourage
him hereunto, here is this Blessing promised, Thou shall be Built up: q. d.
Thou shall then have thy House Repaired, without the fear of Loosing it any
more.

The Clause which falls under our more particular Notice is that; Thou shall
put away Iniquity, far from thy Tabernacles: which is here mentioned, as the
Effect of Returning to the Almighty. Now, by Iniquity, we may understand,
either the Practice of Iniquity, or the Punishment of Iniquity. Take it for the
Practice of Iniquity, and then the sense runs thus; Manifest thy Returning to
the Almighty, by thy not* Suffering of any ^niquity in thy Tabernacles. Take it
for the punishment of Iniquity, and then the sense runs thus; By Returning to
the Almighty thou will Save thy Tabernacles, from such Ruins as will come upon
them, If thou continue in Iniquity. Take it which way you will, there is this
Doctrine in it. The Way for us to secure the Comfortable Enjoyment of our
Tabernacles, is, by Returning unto the Almighty, to put Iniquity far from our
Tabernacles.

There are Three plain Assertions before us, by which I may come fairly at my
Design, to promote Houshold-Religion, in the management of an Argument fetched
from the Benefit thence arising, unto the very Houses, wherein we mentain that
Religion.

I. In true Religion, men do Return unto the Almighty God. There was a Blessed
Communion with God, which man had at his first Creation by God. But how Long
did this continue? Alas, It was not Long, before Man turned his Back upon the
Service and the Glory of His Maker: It was not Long before Man Embraced the
Vain Things of this World, instead of the God that made him. Every Sinner is
now Guilty of that F^lly, that Frenzy, that Horrible Thing, in Jer. 2.13. He
has forsaken the Fountain of Living Waters, and he has hew^d him ^ut Broken
Cisterus. Well, but now in Religion, there is a Conversion and a Returning of
the Sinner; he says, I will Return to my first Object, because it is best
being with him. The Term From which a man does Return in Religion, is, All Sin
whatsoever; and every Pleasure, every Profit, every Honor, which the Heart is
by Sin carried forth unto. Thus it is said, in Jer. 18.11* Return ye now every
one from his Evil way. The Term To which a man does Return in Religion, is, God
in the Lord Jesus Christ; so that God becomes his Best (...) End, and the Lord
Jesus Christ becomes his Prophet, his Priest, and his King for ever. Thus it is
said, in Jer. 4.1. If thou will Return, Return unto me, says the Lord.

II. Those men that Return to the Almighty God, will put away Iniquity far from
their Tabernacles. The House as well as the Heart of a man is cleansed by
Religion; it will Reform not only his Living, and his Walking, but his Dwelling
also. The Godly man is one that puts away all Iniquity, yea, that puts it far
away: he do* in Repenting of Iniquity, as the God of Heaven does in pardoning
of it. In the pardoning of Iniquity, it is said, in Psalm. 103 12. As far as the
East is from the West, so far does God Remove our Transgressions from us; Thus,
in the Repenting of Iniquity, the man says, I would have all my Transgressions
to ^e as far from me, as the East is from the West: The East and West will
never meet, nor would I ever shake hands with any Iniquity. Even, the very
Shadow of Iniquity is banished from a Regenerate man; the very Appearance of
Evil, is the matter of his Abstinence, his Abhorrence: he puts it far away from
his Conversation, far away from his Approbation, far away from his Inclination:
But this ^s not all; He puts it far away from his Habitation too. Every Good
man is Comm^nitative of his Goo^^es^; he would have all about him to be as
Good, as Holy, as Happy as himself; and those of his own House most of all: He
will not permit any Iniquity, that he can prevent. A Religious Christian would
be a Religious Householder too; he would be such an Householder, as Jacob, who,
in Genesis 35.2. Said unto his Household, and unto all that were with him, put away
the Strange Gods that are among you; he would be such an Householder, a^ David,
who said, in Psalm. 101.2, 7. I will walk in my House, with a perfect Heart; He
that works Deceit, shall not dwell within my House; he that tells Lies, shall
not tarry in my sight. Or, as Joshua, who said, As for me and my House, we will
Serve the Lord.

III. By Putting away Iniquity far from our Tabernacles, we do secure to our
selves the Comfortable Enjoyment of them. Let us drive our Sins out of our
Houses, that we may not be driven out of them, our selves.

It is very time; A pious man, may have his Tabernacle taken from him; the loss
of Houses is one of those Things, wherein the Sovereignty of God, will have All
things come alike to all. A Treble Concession is (...) be made concerning this
matter.

First, A Godly man may Suffer the loss of his House, in a Common Calamity,
with wicked men. If a Righteous Let live in a Sodom, his House must be Bu^^ed
among the Rest in the Vicinity.

Again, A Godly man may Suffer the loss of his House, when man^ wicked men
Escape that Calamity. A Job, one who Fears God and Shuns Evil, may have his
House laid even with the Ground, while he could yet complain, The Tabernacles
of Robbers prosper. Yea,

Thirdly, At the House o^ a Godly man may begin that Calamity, that shall
Involve the loss of many other Houses in it. A Fire may be carried, even from
the Altar it self, over the whole City: and we know, Trouble may begin at the
House of God. Wherefore, upon the whole; Those persons are not always the
Greatest Sinners, who are the Greatest Sufferers, in such a Calamity. Those
Tabernacles may miscarry in which yet there are no abounding miscarriages of
Iniquity.

But all this Concession, will not Evacuate this Position; That we shall very
much Consult the Safety of our Houses, if we keep Iniquity out of them. If we
would not be put out of our Tabernacles our selves, it should be our Study, to
put Iniquity far away from our Tabernacles. There are many ways, by which men
seek to Secure unto themselves the Comfortable Enjoyment of their Houses. They
look to the Stuff, and the Place, of their Building; they have their Water
Engines, their Ensurances, and their Friendly Societies. It Is well: But, Sirs,
there is one way more to be laid in, which I now mention, in the approach of
the Time of the year, when the Dangers of our being Turned out of our Houses,
are the greatest; That is, Let us Put Iniquity far from our Tabernacles. Of
this way, I may say, as David about the Sword of Goliath, There is none like it!
For, There are Promises of our God, that the Tabernacles of men shall be
spared, when the Iniquities of men are not spared in their Tabernacles:
Promises, to be interpreted, with the Exceptions of the New Covenant. We have
the word of a faithful God for it, Let no Sins dwell with you, and I will not
cut off your Dwellings* It is His Word, in Zeph. 3.7. I said, Surely, Thou will
Fear me, thou will Receive Instruction, So their Dwelling should not be cut
off. There is that Promise given to the Reformers of Iniquity, in Isa. 65.21.
They shall Build Houses and Inhabit them: There is that Promise given to the
Forsakers of Iniquity, in Ezekiel. 28.26. They shall Build Houses, and they shall
dwell with Confidence therein. It was no mistake, in him that said, in Job 8 5,
6. If thou would seek unto God, if thou were it pure and upright, He would
make the Habitation of thy Righteousness Prosperous. A Righteous Habitation, is
like to be a Prosperous Habitation, and therefore a Preserved Habitation.

But on the other side, There are the Menaces of our God, That if the
Iniquities of men are not put away from their Tabernacles, their Tabernacles
then shall be taken away from them. It is that which the most High God has
threatened, Let your Sins go, or I will make your Houses go. See Zeph. 1 12, 13.
It is Threatened, that God will Deprive us of our Houses, if Iniquity be
countenanced in them; and this He can do when He will, by His Fiery Rebukes. We
have it Threatened, in Ezekiel. 16.41. They shall Burn thine Houses with Fire. It
is also Threatened, That God will Empty our Houses of us; and this can be done
quickly, by Oppression, by Poverty, by Mortality. We have it Threatened, in Isa.
5.9. Many Houses shall be Desolate, even Great and Fair ones, without
Inhabitant* Briefly, If we would not have the (...) God, issue out a Writ of
Ejection upon us, to Turn us out of our Houses, Let us put away Iniquity far
from our Tabernacles.

In this one Expression, all Household Religion, is to be understood, as
contained and Intended. Accordingly,

The CASE,

Wherewith you are now to be treated, What is that Household Religion* or, what
are those Cares, and those Acts of Religion, in our Houses, whereby the
Comfortable Enjoyment of our Houses, may be Secured unto us?

In answer hereunto, Let these Faithful Sayings be counted Worthy of all
Acceptance with us.

I. If we would Comfortably Enjoy our Tabernacles, Let us particularly Put away
those Iniquities, which have a particular Tendency to provoke, and procure our
being Put out of our Tabernacles. The Jews thought they consulted the safety of
their Houses, when they Sought, and Cast, all their Leven out of their Houses.
Let us in like manner Search our Houses, for every Iniquity, which may be like
Leven in them, and let us, Away with it, Away with it all! Indeed, Every
Iniquity is pernicious, not only to the Heart, but also to the House that gives
a Lodging thereunto; and therefore we should fall out with all Iniquity. If any
one should maliciously Burn us out of House and Home, we should never Endure
the sight of such a Wretch; but see the Law of Death Executed on him. Why Sin,
I say unto you, Si^ would be such an Incendiary: it is said, in Isa. 9.18.
Wickedness, burns as Fire. But there are some Iniquities, which are more
especially, and certainly, and frequently, as Fire balls upon the Houses
wherein they are committed; and the Counsil thereupon unto us is, Oh! Turn
those unfruitful works of Darkness out of D^ors, Lest we be our selves Turned
out of Doors for the sake thereof.

It was of old Required, concerning an House, which had the Leprosy Spreading
and Fretting on it, in Lev. 14.45. The Priest shall break down the House, the
Stones of it, and the Timber thereof, and all the Mortar of the House. What
that Plague of Leprosy was, we do not in this Part and Age of the World seem to
understand; if it were not a Plague peculiar unto Canaan, perhaps it means an
Infection in the Walls of an House, from whence the Inhabitants might be in
Hazard of catching the Leprosy. But this may be said in Allusion hereunto; I^
you keep any Bad Orders in your Houses, I must come unto you, with such
Language, as was then directed, It seems to me* there ^s, as it were a Plague
in the House Do not now stand asking of me, what I mean by Bad Orders. Ask your
sober, honest, industrious Neighbors; or ask your own Consciences; They will
tell you, What Bad Orders are. But Oh! Get thy House cleared of that Plague
which is to be seen in the Bad Orders of it; Lest our Lord Jesus Christ the
High Priest of the Creation, do break down that H^use, and, it may be burn thee
out of such an House.

There are Houses, where God is not Served, but where the people give
themselves up to all Excess of Ri^t; Gaming Houses, Drinking Houses, perhaps
Baw^y Houses; Houses, where Troops Assemble to Harlots; Houses, where young
people Debauch themselves and one another. Those House^, which make the Parents
and Masters in the Town, continually afraid of having their ^olks undone by
those Houses. Me^^^^ks, I see written on their Doors, Lord, have mercy upon us!
There is a Plague in them. The Keepers of such Houses, are not in this
Congregation to Day. But, those that may keep a strict eye upon them are here;
and unto them, I would say, If the Worshipful Justices, and the Constables, and
the Tything men, would Invigorate their Zeal, to Rout the villainous Haunts of
those Houses, the whole Town would be vastly the safer for it. There were Four
whole Towns together once, in which there were many Houses, full of Riotous
Iniquities; The Prophet says, There was nothing but Pride, and Luxury; and
Idleness in their Houses; And the Wrath of God so broke forth against those
Towns, that they were all consumed at once, and not one House Left Standing in
them. The Nineteenth Chapter of Genesis, will tell you, what I mean.

And besides these House consuming Bad Orders, there is especially one Iniquity
more which will horribly Endanger the Tabernacles, that are Guilty of it; and
that is, proper Iniquity, I mean, Dishonesty. It was a Remarkable passage, in
Zech. 5.2, 4. A Flying Roll, the Length thereof Twenty Cubits, the Breadth
thereof Ten Cubits; This is the Curse that goes forth; I will bring it forth,
says the Lord of Hosts, and it shall enter into the House of the Thief, and
the House of him that swears falsely; and it shall consume it, with the
Timber thereof, and the Stones thereof. The Porch of the Temple, was, The
Length thereof Twenty Cubits, and the Breadth thereof Ten Cubits: Now, it is
Judged, there were men Employed as Trustees of the Money gathered for the
Building of the Temple: but some of them were such Thieves as to convert part
of this unto their own use, and yet they Swore Falsely, in swearing to the
Truth of their Accounts. Now, says the Lord, If the Temple it self were a Roll,
or a Book, filled with Curses, it could not Express more Curses, than I will
swiftly bring upon the Houses of such Dishonest men. Truly, All Dishonesty in
Dealings, does Endanger the Houses of the Dealers. Men that go to feather their
Nests by any Dishonesty, do but carry Coals into them. The Flying Roll of the
Curses from God, comes as a Fiery Roll, to consume the Houses of them that by
Stealing, by Cheating, by Lying, propose to Enrich themselves.

II. If we would comfortably Enjoy our Tabernacles, Let us Dedicate them unto
God, and Employ them in Uses agreeable to such a Dedication. We read in Psalm.
30. Tit. concerning, The^^ Dedication of the House of David. With such a
Dedication Let us consecrate our Houses unto God, professing unto Him, Lord,
This House which thou have here given to me, I do give back to thee again, and
I will use it for thy Glory, as Long as thou will Let me Live (...) it! And
then according to this Consecration, as we read sometimes concerning, The
Church in the House, of such or such a person, Let our Houses be a sort of
Little Churches, for the Sacred Use that we put them unto. It was said of
Jerusalem, in Zech. 2 5. I, says the Lord, (...) unto (...) a Wall of Fire
round about, and I will be the Glory in the midst of her. Thus, Let God be
Glorified in the midst of our Houses, and there will be a Wall of Fire, that
is, a Guard of Angels, round about them, and so no other Fire shall prey upon
them. Let our Houses be used, as if built on purpose for Works of Piety, and
Works of Charity, to be therein performed; and Let our Character be that, in
Acts 10.2. A Devout man, one that feared God, with all his House, which gave
much Alms to the people, and prayed unto God always. There are two Names, that
we should make our Houses now to become worthy of* the Name of Bethel, and the
Name of Bethesda: both an House of God, and an House of Good. Let our Houses be
as though Devoted unto the Service of God; Let Praying, and Reading, and Singing,
be the Daily Exercises therein attended; so that you may look upon this and
that Apartment with such a joyful Reflection in your minds, If the Walls of
this place could speak, they would speak of many a good Hour which I have had
with the Lord in this place. And let our Houses be, as though Devoted also unto
the Succor of man; As far as you can, make Alms houses of them; Do what the
Lord has bid, Bring the poor, that are cast out, unto thy House. Let an Hungry
Jesus, a Naked Jesus, a Traveling Jesus, in His Members, be often Refreshed
there. I tell you, The very Angels of God, Love to Watch about the Houses, that
are so Devoted unto the Lord.

When the Jews built their Houses, they still had their Gualijoth, their
^APEOA, their Upper Chambers in them. There was always a Room, in the Upper
part of the House, which they set apart for Sacred Employments: It was their
Oratory, and they had in it a Window, which they called, Gods Window, opening
toward the Temple. Here Daniel waited upon God; Here Hezekiah lay Sick; Paul
took this Room to Preach in, when Eutichus fell, it is probable, from that very
Window. Even the Wickedest men among them, would not have an House without such
a Room and such a Window in the Room; Hence the Lord said of one, in Jer.
22.14. Woe to him, that says, I will build me a wide House, and large Upper
Chambers, and cutteth him out Windows there. But now, that which is to be urged
upon us, in these Days, when Holiness of Places is abolished, is this; Let
every Room of our Houses, in some sort or other, be the Lords.

III. Our Tabernacles must not be Prayerless Tabernacles, if we would
Comfortably Enjoy these Tabernacles. If we will Deny God, in our Houses, it is
but just that He should then Deny Houses unto us. It is a dreadful Imprecation,
in Jer. 10.25. O Lord, pour out thy Fury on the Families, that call not on thy
Name. And wherein will that Fury be discovered? It will be par^ly discovered,
in Turning those Families out of their Houses.

If there be so much as one owner of a Prayerless House, now appearing in this
House of Prayer; yea, if there be so much as one of you, that Pray any seldome^
with your Families, than ordinarily Twice in a Day, with a Morning and an
Evening Sacrifice, I would address that man, with an Earnest Expostrilation.

Friend; The very Turks, do at this Day uphold a Family Worship among them; and
art thou worthy to be called a Christian, that live without any
Family Worship at all? No, Thou art in this Thing, worse than a T^rk* It is
noted concerning Obed-Edom, The Lord blessed Obed-Edom, and his Household, while
the Ark of the Lord was there. Even so, The Lord would Bless thee, and thy
Household, if Prayer to the Lord were there. But thy Sinful, Woeful Family lies
open to the Curse of God, as long as thou do not carry those poor Children
and Servants unto the Lord Jesus Christ, for His Blessing to be bestowed upon
them: And how hideously, will They also Curse thee, throughout Eternal Ages,
when they shall with Intolerable Anguish cry out, Oh! that I had never seen
that Prayerless House! It Is that House, which has brought me to this Hell for
ever! But there is this particular Aggravation of thy Impiety; That if the Town
be laid in Ashes, it is thy Prayerless House that is among the just causes of it.

Come then; Don't any more plead, That you have no Time for Family Prayer. Did
God Give thee all thy Time; and shall He have none of it? Find a little Time
for thy Soul, as well as for the World; Or, go write that Sentence upon thy
Mantle tree, What is a man profited, if he gain the whole World, and loose his
own Soul?

And plead no more, That you want Confidence or Utterance, for Family Prayer.
But, Meditate on that Warning of the Lord Jesus Christ, Whosoever shall be
Ashamed of me, of him also shall the Son of Man be Ashamed. Sit down, and
ponder, What are your Sins, your Wants, your Woes; There is no need of making
Elegant Orations before the Lord: Call thy Folks together; Fall down before the
Lord among them all; Cry to the Lord for them as well as He shall enable thee:
Try, to Night, if thou never did before; Try; God will Help thee, man; and
thou will come to the Minister who thus advised thee, and say, Blessed be the
Lord, and Blessed be thy Advice, and Blessed be thou for giving it!

IV. If we would Comfortably Enjoy our Tabernacles, Let us Conscientiously
Instruct and Govern those that are under our charge, in our Tabernacles. Let us
do what we can, that there may be none but such as may Know and Serve God in
our Houses, and it may be Hoped that God will permit our Houses to stand before
Him. There is to be Recommended unto us, the Great Exemple of Abraham, in Genesis
18.19. I know him, that he will command his Children and Household after him,
and they shall keep the way of the Lord. Oh! Let not the Houses of Christians,
become like the Wigwams of Indians, for the Unnurtured, Uninstructed,
Ungoverned, Families in them! Wherefore, Let us Faithfully Teach the Little
Folks in our Houses; Teach them, as David and Bethsheba did their Solomon;
Teach them to Know those things from their Childhood, whereby they may be made
Wise unto Salvation: See that they be none of them unacquainted with the
Covenant of God, or, with any agreeable Doctrine of God their Savior. Let us
also Fervently Charge those Little Folks: Charge them to Serve the Lord with a
Perfect Heart and a Willing Mind; Charge them to Believe on Christ, and Repent
of Sin, and Return to God; Charge them to Enter into their Closets, and Pray to
their Heavenly Father in Secret; Admonish them, that they do Consider their
Ways; and that especially they Shun all Bad Company, and not Consent, if
Sinners do Entice them. If any of them do fall into any Sin against God, be
sure to Reprove that Sin; Reprove it Scripturally, Reprove it Effectually. And
Restrain them from every Sin, which they would be Ready to Run into. Let there
be no Children of Belial with you, none that shall be free from the Yoke of a
Serious Discipline.

There is especially one Sin, which the Lord has Required Householders to keep
all within their Houses from.

The Fourth Commandment is, That the Lords Day shall not be profaned, by thy
Son, or thy Daughter, thy Man servant, or thy Maid servant, nor thy Stranger
that is within thy Gates. And it was once the Menace of Heaven, If ye will not
hearken unto me, to hallow the Sabbath Day, then I will kindle a Fire* and it
shall devour, and it shall not be quenched! Oh! consider of it!

V. Let us carefully Attend, Esteem, Support the Tabernacles of the Lord, and
that will be the way for us comfortably to Enjoy our own. When David was
Banished from his own House, his value for the House of God, was Recompensed
with a Return unto his own. Would we never be Banished at all; out of our
Houses? Let us value the House of God above our own; and let us Build up His
House, Lest He Burn down ours. Would we have many Days in our Tabernacles? Let
us then heartily say, as in Psalm. 84.1.10. How Amiable are thy Tabernacles, O
Lord of Hosts? A Day there is better than a thousand elsewhere. Would we have
the Love and the Eye of God upon our Habitations? Let us then heartily say, as
in Psalm 26.8. Lord, I have Loved the Habitation of thy House, and the place
where thy Honor dwells. The Jews give this, as the Definition of a Bad
Neighbor: A Bad Neighbor is one who dwells in a Town, where there is a
Synagogue, and never comes unto the Synagogue. Truly, that person, who comes
not unto the Houses of God, in the Town, is a Bad Neighbor; and our own Houses
may fare the worse for having such a Bad Neighbor near unto them. They plead
perhaps, That they have not Clothes good enough. But you that are their
Friends, I pray, ask them, whether they had not better come to the House of
God, with mean Clothes, than Loose the Garments of Salvation, which are here to
be put upon their Souls. Ask them, whether they must not shortly be Shrouded in
a Winding Sheet, and then they will mourn at the Last, that ever mean Clothes
were their Excuse for not coming to the House of God. If they profanely tell
you, They stay at Home to Read a Chapter in Job, Turn 'em to a Chapter in Job,
and that mark of a Godly man, in Job 23 12. I have Esteemed the words of His
mouth more than my necessary Food. Briefly, It is the Church of God, that is
the House of God. Now, Let the Church of God, receive all possible Regard and
Kindness from you* Upon this Encouragement, you cannot Show so much Respect
unto the House of God, but God will show more to yours.

VI. Let us be Humbly Thankful, for the Mercies of God, which we Enjoy in our
Tabernacles, if we would still comfor^ably Enjoy our Tabernacles. If we would
not be Turned out of our Houses, Let us ^ay the Rent which we owe to our Great
Land lord for them: That Rent is this, Let us offer the praise that will
Glorify Him, and Let us order our Conversations aright. We are not Abroad
obnoxious to the Hardships of the Weather, Consumed, as the Patriarch was, In
the Day by the Drought, and in the Night by the Frost; nor are we confined unto
the wretched Cottages of the Salvages. Now unto what is this to be ascribed?

I Will mention unto you, a very Heart-melting Thought! Our Precious and Glorious
Lord Jesus Christ, could say, in Mat. 8.20. The Foxes have Holes, and the Birds
of the Air, have Nests; but the Son of Man has not where to Lay his Head. Now
it is to this Humiliation of our Lord Jesus Christ, that we are to ascribe, the
Mercies which we have, in our Commodious Houses. Oh! Let us Thankfully say
before the Lord, My Lord Jesus Christ, by being Harbourless in this Evil World,
has procured for me this Benefit, that I am in a Good Harbour^hore. Bless the
Lord, O my Soul, and Forget not such a Benefit! Hereupon, When we Look round
about our Houses, and see the manifold Smiles of God in every Corner of them,
we should then Study with our selves, What shall I now render to the Lord? It
is noted of David, in 2 Samuel 7.1, 2. He sat in his House, and the Lord had given
him Rest, and he then thought, What shall I do for the Ark of God? Would we Sit
long, and Sit safe, and Sit quiet in our Houses? Let us, when we Sit there,
contrive what Returns we shall make to the God of Heaven for them.

VII. Would we comfortably Enjoy our Tabernacles? Then Let us Remember that
they are no more than Tabernacles. When you go into your Comfortable Houses,
reckon them no more than Stages, whereat you can only stay to Bait a while in
your Journey, to your Eternal State. Oh! Live like Strangers in your own
Houses; and be the House never so convenient, yet count not ^ur selves at Home,
in that House.

I beseech you, to Lay up this Admonition with you. If you would Keep any
thing, in this World, you must not set your Hearts upon it: and indeed, it is
fit that men should keep nothing of this World, which they do set their Hearts
upon. The way for us, to have our Houses taken away from us, is, to have our
Hearts vainly fond of continuing in them. It was therefore an Annual, and a
most suitable Ceremony, which the Lord Enjoined upon His People of old; When a
Good Harvest had filled their Houses, God ordered them to go out of their
Houses; they must then go make Little Tabernacles abroad, and keep the Feast of
Tabernacles. Thus did the Lord mind them of their Condition in this World; when
they had never so much of this World about them, they must not forget that they
were no more than Sojourners in the World. This I say; Though we have Houses that
we can Feast in, yet Let us have the Temper of a Feast of Tabernacles in us.
Let our Hearts be gone out of our Houses, and the Lord will give us, Leave to
stay the Longer in them.

Oh! Let us not be those Fools, of whom it is said in Psalm. 49 11. Their Inward
Thought is, that their Houses shall continue for ever, and their
Dwelling-places to all Generations: Nor let us foolishly count, the Goods in
our Houses, Goods laid up for many years. As we walk about our Houses, let this
Consideration come into our Hearts; How easily can all these Riches take
themselves Wings and flee away! One or Two Hours, may lay this House Level with
the Ground. But there is a further Consideration, which is then also to come
into our Hearts; It Is but a little while that I shall remain in this House; It
will not be long, before I am Locked up in a Coffin under Ground, when the place
that now knows me, will know me no more.

And what should be the Issue of such Considerations? I would Pray you, let it
be This. Let us make sure of an House Eternal in the Heavens, to be Enjoyed by
us, when our Earthly Tabernacles can be no more useful to us. If you Enquire,
How this is to be done? I answer, in one Word; By giving to the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Lord of Heaven, a Dwelling in our Souls. Our Houses here, though
made of Brick and Stone it self, they are only Tabernacles. But the Apostle
tells us, in 2 Cor. 5.1. We have an House Eternal in the Heavens. The
Blasphemous Julian, would insolently call our Lord Jesus Christ, The Carpenters
Son. But, Christians; Be assured, That Blessed Son in Law of a Carpenter, is He
that has built a Stately Palace, in the Heavenly Regions, for all His Chosen
ones; and He has said, in Joh. 14.2. In my Fathers House are many Mansions;
Even, as there were many Chambers to Lodge the Priests, annexed unto the Temple
of old. The Formidable Fires, that shall dispatch the Conflagration of the
World, of which Conflagration, the Fires multiplied in our Days, are doubtless
a Shadow, and an Omen; Those Fires, I say, will not reach this Illustrious
House.

When the Worthy Minister of Nola, had his House burnt, he lift up his Eyes to
Heaven, saying, Domine, ubi Omnia Mea Tu Scis; Lord, Thou know, I have a
better House than This. Oh! Let us make sure of a Mansion in Heaven, by Faith
in the Lord Jesus Christ; and so, when our other Houses fail us, We shall be
Received into Everlasting Habitations.

CORONIS.
But there is a Tribe of Zebulon, which makes no little part of our
Neighborhood. There are so many of our Neighbors, whose Employment lies at
Sea, that in my own particular Congregation, I have counted near Ninety
Persons, in one Day recommended unto our Prayers, by Bills from those who were
Sollicitous for their Friends then abroad.

My Neighbors, Your Vessels are your Houses; what are your Ships, your
Ketches, your Brigantines, and your Sloops, but your Tabernacles? Oh! may
Iniquity be Put far from them! Since we have been pressing of that Religion,
which may have a Tendency to preserve our Standing Houses a Shore, let us also
press that Religion, by which the preservation of your Floating Houses at Sea
may be be-friended.

It is a passage, in Psalm. 107.23.24. They that go down to the Sea in Ships,
that do Business in great Waters, These see the works of the Lord, and His
Wonders in the Deep.

In the First place, before ever you Embark in those your Moving Tabernacles,
become United unto the Lord Jesus Christ, by Faith in Him, that so you may be
prepared for all the Wonders of those Dangers, which you may be Exposed unto.
There are wonderful Storms, which may Encounter and Endanger those your Feeble
Tabernacles: But Calms, may likewise Incommode you worse than Storms. By
Numberless Accidents, these Tabernacles may be Sunk and Lost in the Waters; but
the Fires especially may more terribly threaten you, than the Waters. Enemies
do much prey upon these Tabernacles on the Ocean, as the Greater Fishes in it,
upon the lesser ones; but the worst Enemies, are the Pirates of our own Nation,
who barbarously butcher all that may discover them. In short, So Sensibly near
to Death are you in these your Tabernacles, that, in Truth, I am prope mors
urget, quam prope cernis Aquam: it is but the Breadth of a Plank to two. My
Friends, That Pitched Box of Plank, what is it, but a larger sort of a Coffin?
Our Seafaring Folks, may say with the Psalmist, My Soul is continually in my
Hand. But, before it come to this, O man if thou Love thy Soul, effectually put
thy Soul, into the Hand of the Lord Jesus Christ, Repairing to Him, and Relying
on Him, for thy Righteousness, thy Blessedness, thy Everlasting Life. The Poet
counted him a Bold man, [ Audax Japeti Genus] who Ventured first of all to go
to Sea. Yea, but I earnestly Protest unto you, He that will venture to Sea,
before he has Savingly Closed with the Lord Jesus Christ, by Faith, is a Bold,
an Hardy, a Sottish, and a desperately Venturesome Creature. Sirs, Will you go
to Sea, before you have made up your Accounts? There are sad Accounts between
God and you; I beseech you, get 'em all made up, in your Believing on the Lord
Jesus Christ, for the Pardon of all your Sins, before you stir. The First Ship,
even the Ark, was in this, a Type of the Lord Jesus Christ, that the Salvation
of your Souls does depend on your being in Him. Neighbors, Don't Step into any
Ship, till you are first got into that Ark! And Now,

Be sure, That you Abandon those Vices, that Sailors too too generaly are used,
or at Least, are Tempted unto.

The first man, that ever set up a Ship, once fell into the Sin of Drunkenness.
Are none of you, that Sail in a Ship, too Liable to that woeful Sin? Beware of
that Beastly Vice. Beastly did I call it? Alas, I have wronged the Beasts in so
calling it: Beasts will not seek to be Drunk; To be Drunk, turns men into worse
than Beasts. A Drunken man, is q. d. a Drowned man; Let our Sailors Take heed
of being Drunkards, Lest God Almighty Drown them, yea, Damn them, for their
being so. And is not the Sin of profane Swearing and Cursing, become too
notorious among our Mariners? Reform that Impiety Syrs; Lest you that now Sail
in a vast Sea of Waters, e're Long have that profane Tongue tortured in the
Fiery Wrath of God, where you shall in vain cry, Oh! for a Drop of water to
cool my Tongue! The Tongue is fitly compared unto the Helm, which turns about
the Ships, though they be so great, and are driven of fierce winds: That Little
Helm, in thy mouth, Govern it, O man, and Restrain it by the Rules of the Word
of God, else thy Soul will be horribly Shipwrack'd.

Filthy Speaking, Baudy speaking, vile Ribaldry, is too frequent a Vice of
Mariners. Leave it off, I beseech you; and, Keep thy Tongue from Evil. It may
be, Mispence of Time, is to be reckoned a principal Vice among you; certainly,
it is a ^ernicious one. The Sails of Time, are ^urling apace, and yet how many
weary contrivances have you to pass this Time away? Yea, but thy Soul is ready
to put ashore in Eternity; and then, thou will wish, thy Time had been more of
it spent in Reading, and Thinking, and Praying over ^he State of thy Soul.

The Ships of Jehoshaphat were Broken: His men were an abominable Crew!
Hear^en, Brothers; you will hazard the Breaking of your Ships, if you don't break
off your Ungodliness. Let the Sea, no Longer-say, Wisdom is not in me! on the
occasion of ^he Follies almost universally indulged among the Sea faring.

Finally; Use Prayer, before you Go to Sea, that you may bespeak the presence
of the Lord Jesus Christ, in your Fleeting Tabernacles. You tell us, You desire
the ^rayers of the Congregation. It Is but a ^^ocking of God, if you make no
Prayers (...) your own. But Invigorate your Pray^rs, with Faith, in such
promises as that* (...) Isa. 42.3. When thou passest through the Wa^^rs, I will be
with thee.

And my Masters, continue your Prayers, with your Companies, even as with your
Families, during all the Voyage. You are worse than Jonahs Mariners, if you do
it not.

It may be, you have Received the Favors of God, on the Waters. Don't Write
the memory of them, as on the Waters, and forget the Vows of God that are upon
you.

Consider, Heaven as you Haven. And be desirous, that your Soul may like his,
in 3 John 2. make a Good Voyage of it* Have an Eye of Daily Observation on the
Lord Jesus Christ, as the Sun of Righteousness. Don't neglect the Pole Star
(...) the Scripture. Ply the Pump of Repentance, with continual Zeal to get Sin
out of the Hold of the Heart. When the Gales of the Spirit Striving with you,
are blowing, Spread the Sails of your Soul^ before them, and Sail right before
that blessed Wind. Often see What Way you make; and whatever you cast
overboard* make no Shipwreck of Faith and a Goo^ Conscience. And so, God Smile
upon your Voyages.


