David Serving His GENERATION.

Or, A SERMON Showing What is to be done in order to our so Serving our
Generation, as that when we Die, we shall Enter into a Blessed REST.

(Wherein Some account is given concerning many Eminent Ministers of Christ at
London, as well as in N.E. lately gone to their Rest.) Occasioned by the Death,
of the Reverend Mr. JOHN BAILY, Who Deceased at Boston in New England. December
12 th. 1697.

By Increase Mather, President of Harvard College.

Numb. 20.29. When all the Congregation saw that Aaron was dead, they mourned
for Aaron thirty days, even all the house of Israel.

Boston, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen. School

David Serving his Generation.
ACTS 13.36. For David, after he had served his own Generation by the will of
God, fell on sleep, and was laid unto his Fathers, and saw corruption.


THESE words are part of a Sermon which was Preached by Paul an Antioch,
wherein he demonstrates the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ, by what is
written in the 16 th. Psalm, where it is said, thou shall not suffer thine Holy
One to see Corruption. That must needs be meant either of David himself or of
the Messiah: But it cannot be so affirmed of David himself, for ha saw
Corruption. David's Body had been turned to Dust in the Grave for some Ages
before that Time; therefore that passage in the Psalm must be meant of Christ,
whose Holy Body did not lie long enough i^ the Grave to see Corruption. This is
the Apostles scope and design in the words before us, which are a Compe^dious
History of the Life and Death of David. 1. We have his Life. It was a Life of
Service to his own Generation, and that by the Will of God. The Greek word
HUPERETESAS, here Translated he had Served, is a Metaphor taken from Rowers,
who se^ve the Pilot in the safe passage of the Vessel. This World is a Sea, the
Church is like a Ship tossed on the Sea, God is the Pilot, by whose Skill and
Providence that Ship is Steered: He is pleased to make use of men as
Under-Rowers to Serve his Providence. Whereas David is here said to Serve his
own Generation; That Expression may imply two things. (1.) That he Served the
People who Lived in the same Age in which he Lived; for in that sense is the
word frequently used in the Scripture. No man can do Service for a Generation
of men who were gone out of the World before he came into it. No^ can any man
do Service for those that shall come into the World, after he is gone out of
it, excepting what he did whilst himself was here. (2.) A Generation is
sometimes taken for the Age of one man, as well as for the men of one Age. Thus
when it is said, David Served his own Generation, this is intended, sc. that as
long as he Lived in the World, he continued to Serve those that were his
Contemporaries. He Lived to be Seventy years old, and so long did he continue a
Servant of his Generation. Moreover, when it is affirmed, that He Served them
by the Will of God, that may import: (1.) That he fulfilled the Decree of God
in that his Service. He did all ths Service which God from Eternity had willed
that David should do. As no Servant of the Lord can Die before the appointed
time, so neither shall he Die until he has finished all that work which God has
asore determined that that man shall do. Every Servant of God is Immortal,
until his work is done. (2.) The Expression imports, that the Preceptive Will
of God was that according to which David acted in his Serving his own
Generation. As he used to Pray that he might know, and that he might do the
Will of God. We hear him praying, Give me Understanding, show me the way
wherein I should go, Lord, Teach me to do thy Will, so he did Practice
according to his own Prayers. Thus did David Live.

2. We have a description of the Death of this Faithful Servant of God, and of
his People. (1.) He fell Asleep. That Expression and Description of Death when
applied to Holy men, intimates an happy Death: In this World (as it is said of
Judah) they find no rest; but Death puts an end to all their hard Service and
Sufferings. (2.) He was Laid unto his Fathers. This is true both in respect of
his Body which was Laid in the Grave, as his Fore fathers who were Dead had
been. And in respect of his Soul, which which was carried to that Heaven, where
his good Father Jesse (whom the Jews are wont to call Jessai the Righteous) and
his Forefathers, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were gone before. Often in the
Scripture when men die, they are said to be Gathered unto their People; which
Expression implies the Immortality of the Soul. At the Hour of Death men pass
out of this World into the World of Souls. (3.) David saw Corruption; which is
to be understood not of his Spirit, but of his Body only. That Corruption is in
order to a Resurrection unto a Glorious Incorruption. As Grain, it may chance
or Wheat or some other Grain, is sown under the Earth, and then it corrupts,
but after that rises again with a great addition of beauty; so it is as to the
Dead Bodies of Saints, they are sown in Corruption, but raised in Incorruption.
This may serve for the opening of the words.

The Doctrine from them is,

That the Grave will be a Blessed Bed of Rest to that man who shall Serve his
own Generation according to the Will of God.

In order to the Explication and Confirmation on the Doctrine mentioned, I
shall only Answer this practical Case of Conscience. Viz.

What is to be done in order to our so Serving ou^ Generation, as that when we
Die, we may go into a Blessed Rest.

For Answer.

1. This is to be laid in the Foundation, we mus^ be Principled and Spirited
aright, or we shall no Serve the Generation wherein we Live so as to fin^
Acceptance with God. They that have not (...) principle of Grace in their
Souls, whose heart are not Established with Grace, either will not d^ that
Service which the Lord requi^es of them or if they do, they will not so perform
it as t^ please him. All acceptable Obedience spring from two principles.

1. From a principle of Faith in Christ. If the person is under the Curse and
Wrath of God the Service done by him is not pleasing. N^ man is accepted with
God, but the Believer o^ Christ. It was by Faith that Abel offered a^
Acceptable Sacrifice, and without Faith it is impossible to please God. Heb.
11.4, 6.

2. All acceptable obedience proceeds from a Principle of Sincere Love to God.
He show mercy to thousands of them that love him an^ keep his Commandments.
Exodus 20.5. Tha^ keeping of the Commandments which proceed from a slavish fear,
and not from love, is no pleasing. A small matter that proceeds from hearty
love, will be accepted. History tell us of a poor man, that when he had nothing
^etter to give, presented to his King a Cup of ^old Water, which because it was
from hearty love was accepted and rewarded. To be sure the King of Heaven will
reward small Services (...) the best of ours are such) which he sees flow from
a principle of love to his Name. Heb. 6.10. God is not unrighteous to forget
your work and labor of love which you have showed to his Name. We see this in
that instance of the poor widow, whose two Mites being cast into the Lords
Treasury were highly acceptable, because an evidence of great love to his Name.
Whenas the most splendid Services not proceeding from these principles are of
no account. King Amaziah did notable things in his Generation, which the Church
of God in that age was benefited by. He destroyed no less than twenty thousand
of their Enemies: but God did not approve of him, because his heart was not
rightly principled in what he did. It is noted of him that he did that which
was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart. 2 Chronicles.
25.2. He wanted faith in Christ, and a sincere love to God in what he did.
There have been amongst the Gentiles famous Heroes, who have done mighty things
for their Country in the age wherein they lived, but since they had not faith
in Christ, all those Services were (as Austin truly speaks) no better than
Splendida peccata, glistering sins.

Moreover, Men will be spirited and inclined according as they are principled.
The man that has faith which works by love in his heart, can not be of a mere
selfish Spirit. It is private Interest and Selfishness which makes men
unserviceable to the World in their Generation. Whenas it is impossible that
the same Person should be a true Believer oh Christ, and yet a mere
self-seeker. Faith and Love will make a Christian deny himself, that so he may
promote the Interest of Christ, and the good of his People. This we see in
Timothy of whom the Apostle writing to the Philippians, gives this Character,
For I have no man like minded, who will naturally care for your state: for all
seek their own, not the things which are Jesus Christ's. Phil. 2.20, 21. He that
would do Service for his Generation must be of a public Spirit. He must have a
large Soul that shall design and endeavor not so much his own particular
profit, as the good of many. A man cannot Serve his Generation without Serving
many: for there is no Generation wherein there are not many whose welfare is to
be endeavored. For this we have a great Example in M^rd^cai, who was accepted
of the Multitude of his Brethren, seeking the wealth of his People. Esth 13 3.
And no less an Instance of a public Spirit we see in Paul, who did not only
Exhort Christians, not to seek their own, that is to say, not that only, but
every man another wealth, but did himself practice accordingly. I (says he)
Please all men in all things, (he means so far as in duty he was bound to)
not seeking my own profit, but the profit of many that they may be Saved. 1
Cor. 10.24, 33. He that will Serve his Generation must be willing to spend and
be spent to promote the welfare of others It is reported of one of the German
Princes, that he took for his device a Can^^^ burning, with this Motto under
it, Alijs Servi^^s, meipsum Consumo, in Serving others, I consume my self. The
like unto which was that of Doctor Sibs, who had for his device, a light
burning with this Motto, Praelucendo pereo; in giving light to others, I wast
away. The man that is principled, and well stored with Faith and Love, will
certainly be of a public Spirit, and so Serve his Generation.

2. In order to Serving our Generation, it is necessary that we should make the
will of God as revealed in the Scriptures our Rule. The written word of God is
the Rule according to which we must believe. It was well replied by our famous
English Martyrologist, when some urged him to Subscribe certain Ecclesiastical
Canons, he produced a Greek Testament, saying, I Will Subscribe to all this, with
all my heart, but if your Canons are not according to this Book of God, I dare
not Subscribe them. And this was but according to Paul's profession, Act. 24.14.
Believing all things that are written in the Law and the Prophets. The will of
God as revealed in the Scripture, is a Rule of Obedience as well as of Faith.
It is a perfect directory, showing us how we must Serve God, and how we must
Serve the Generation wherein we live: Nor will any man Serve his Generation
aright, if he does not make that his Rule. This was the Rule that David acted
by, as the Apostle in the words before us does Testify, He Served his
Generation by the will of God. No man is to make his own will his Rule. Kings
themselves may not do it. David was a King: nevertheless, the Rule by which he
Served his Generation, was not his own will, but the will of God. The Kings o^
Israel, where with their own hands to Copy out the Divine Law, that so they
might from thence take direction how they should Govern It is reported to the
everlasting honor of tha^ Christian King Alphonsus, that he read over the
whole Bible with Comentaries fourteen times that so he might be the better able
to Serve hi^ Generation, and that too as a King. Nor (...) the will of other
men, or of the Generation wherein we Live, the Rule according to which we must
Serve them. Gal. 1.10. Do I seek (...) please men, if I pleased men, I should
not be a Se^vant of Christ; we may do great Service (...) the present
Generation in a way of Active Obedience. By activity in a good cause, but the
cannot be without taking direction from t^^ Word of God. So the Psalmist, Psalm
119.24. Thy Testimonies are my Counselors. A man may likewise do singular
Service for the Generation wherein he lives, by Suffering in a good cause.
Some will thereby be confirmed in the Faith* That Consideration was one thing
which made the Holy Apostle willing to Die a Martyr. Phil. 2.17. If I be offered
upon the Sacrifice and Service of your Faith, I joy and rejoice with you all:
since they should have benefit by his Sufferings, he was willing in that way to
Serve them: or, it may be others will be Converted thereby. The Martyrs were
instruments of Converting many in the Generation in which they lived and dyed,
by their Sufferings. The Papists said concerning one of the Martyrs in
Scotland, that was burnt to Death for his Religion, that the smoke of that fire
infected all that it was blown upon, and made them turn Protestants. But in
passive as well as active Obedience we must have respect to the will of God.
Christians must be careful that they do not suffer as evil doers* Nor ought
they to bring Sufferings on themselves further than as God shall call them
thereunto: A regard must be had to the will of God in all. Wherefore the
Apostle says, Let them that suffer according to the will of God ^ommit the
keeping of their Souls to him, in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator. 1
Pet. 4.19.

3. In order to Serving our own Generation, so as to be able to give a
Comfortable account at Death, it is necessary that we should improve the
Talents which God betrusteth us with, for the good of others. There is great
variety as to the Talents which the Lord of all sees meet to commit unto men.
There are some whom he blesses with Estates above others: They are in that
respect more able to promote the public good; and the Lord expects it from
them. Men are apt to think that their Estates are given to them for themselves,
or for their own Relations only but they ought to do good in their Generation
therewith, devoting some part of their Estate unto Public, Pious, and
Charitable uses. 1 Timothy* 6.17, 18. Charge them that are Rich in this world that
they do good, that they be rich in good work ready to distribute, willing to
Communicate. A ric^ man if he has an heart may do a world of goo^ with his
Estate, which will be Comfortable (...) Death, and augment his glory after
Death There are some that God has blessed them wi^^ Excellent parts, both
natural and acquired. The ought not to hide those Talents under groun^ but to
Serve the Church of God in their Gen^^ration therewith. The manifestation of
the Spi^^ is given to every man to profit withal. 1 Cor. 12 The Holy Spirit
does furnish some with Emine^^ gifts for the sake of his Church in their
Gene^^^tion. The whole Church of God is profited (...) one man that has
Excellent gifts and parts with a Sanctified heart to improve them to the utmost
for God and for his People. A man of Eminent parts and ability may possibly do
great Service for a whole Generation, by speaking a few words: That
accomplished Persom, Sir William Fitz James, by a speech in Parliament made way
for the Reformation in England, begun ^n the Reign of K. H. 8. There are some
whom the Providence of God has made Rulers ^n the Common Wealth: They ought to
^mprove that Power which God has put unto their hearts for the Public good.
^or the Encouragement of Virtue, and the Sup^ression of Vice, Rulers should not
be a Terror (...) Good Works, but to the Evil. Thus did ^avid when in
Government, Serve his Genera^^on. His Eyes were on the Faithful in the ^^nd, to
Countenance them, but as for Evil ^oers, he would cut them off from the City of
^^e Lord. As we see in the 101 Psalm; He ^^ecuted Judgment and Justice to all
his people. ^^d in so doing Served his Generation. 2 Samuel ^15. There are some
that bear a Sacred ^^fice, whose chief Employ^ment is in (...) wherein the
Souls of men are concerned. (...) Generation wherein they Live will certain^^
be either much the better, or much the worse (...) them. If they are corrupt,
they will be ^^^rupters of the Generation. From the Prophets in Jerusalem did
profaness go forth into al^ the Land. Jer. 23.15. But if they are Able and
Faithful men, they will be great Blessings to the Generation. All that Live in
the Age and Place with them, will have cause to bless God for them: A few such
are a great Blessing to a whole Land. The Prophet Elisha was so; therefore when
he was Sick of the Sickness whereof he Dyed, the King himself wept over him,
saying, O my Father my Father, the Chariots of Israel and the Horsemen ^hereof!
2 King. 13.14. intimating that his Death would make as sore Breach upon the
Land, as if the Chariots and Horsemen by whom they were defended, should be
removed from them. All the Nation of Israel did more than once fare the better
for a Prophet that was among them. Hos. 12.13. By a Prophet the Lord brought
Israel out of Egypt, and by a Prophet was he preserved. A Prophet! a Prophet!
that is Eminent and Faithful; all Israel fares the better for him; he is an
inexpressible Blessing to the Generation. One Justin Martyr, by writing an
Apology for Christians, was a Blessing to all the Churches throughout the Roman
Empire. The Ministers of the Gospel are by the Lord Jesus Christ himself
resembled unto Stars, Rev. 1.20. The Seven Stars are the Angels of the Seven
Churches. Stars have a great influence on the World. The Scripture speaks of
the sweet influence of the Pleiades, which are those that are usually called
the Seven Stars. So have Faithful Ministers whom Christ has fixed in the
Firmament of his Church an happy influence on the World, in their several
Generations. As the Stars are common Blessings to all the World, so are they
They are the Salt of the Earth* Mat. 5.14. should there be but one Age in which
were no Faithful Ministers of Christ, the whole World would purify for want of
this Spiritual Salt by which Generations are preserved from Corruption.
Ministerial Gifts are a great Talent; whoever shall improve them faithfully in
Serving his own Generation, will find the Grave to be a Blessed Bed of rest to
him, and his Works will follow him to Heaven. Daniel did not only do great
Service for the People of God in the Court of Persia, but as a Prophet. And an
Angel from Heaven said to him, Thou shall Rest, etc. at the End of this World,
he shall have a Glorious Lot in the First Resurrection. Dan. 12.13. Thus then
do we Serve our Generation by improving the Talents which God has given to us.
There are some that have many Talents committed to them As in the Parable, one
had two Talents, another one, another Five. David had so. He was a Prince and a
Prophet too, a man that was va^^ly Rich, and one of extraordinary Parts, Wise
like an Angel of God. All these Talents did he use for the benefit of his own
Generation. There are none but they have some Talent or other whereby they may
be Serviceable. Tho men in Public Place have greater Talents than others,
nevertheless, they that sustain only a Private Capacity, are for all that in a
Capacity to Serve the Generation which they are of. He that has a Family, by
giving a good Education to his Children, Serves the Common wealth which will
be advantaged by those Children. A private man that has a Calling, and is
diligent therein, Serves the Public. He that is a Sincere Godly man, by his
Prayers and by his Exemplary Conversation does good to others in his Generation.

4. In order to Serving our Generation, we should consider what are the special
Sins of the Age wherein we Live, and Endeavor the Reformation of them; and
what are the more peculiar Truths and Duties of the Times, so as to fall in
with them* There are some Evils which are Errores Secult, the more special
Errors of that Age, either Practical or Doctrinal: Sometimes one Evil break^
forth, sometimes another. As any Scandal appears, we shall do a good Service in
our Generation, to give a faithful Testimony against it if it be indeed a Sin.
Although there is no Age without its Errors, yet nevertheless, the Sins of the
Times are not always the same That Iniquity prevails in one Nation, which do
^ot in another; so in one Generation which ^oes not in another. In the Days of
Noah, ^he Crying Sin of the Old World was Sensuali^y. The World was Drowned in
Sensual Lusts, while the Flood came and Drowned them all. The Earth was corrupt
before God; all Flesh ^ad Corrupted his way. Only Noah was found Righteous in
that Generation. Genesis 7.1. He Preach^d against the Sins of the Times; the
Scripture ^alls him a Preacher of Righteousness. 2 Pet. 2 (...) He Preached
that men should Turn from Sin, and Live an Holy, Righteous Life. In that ^ay
did he Serve his Generation according to ^he will of God. When the Children of
Israel ^ere in the Wilderness, the sin which they were ^hiefly guilty of was
Unbelief and Murmurings, ^he fruit of their Unbelief: That whole Gene^ation was
guilty, excepting Joshua and Caleb, who were of another Spirit; and did a good
^ervice for that Generation, in endeavoring to Convince them of their Evils.
After they were settled in the Land of Canaan: Idolatry was the Reigning Sin in
diverse Ages. The Holy Prophets Served their Generation in bea^ing witness
against the Idolatries and Supersti^ions of the Times. After the Return from
Captivity, neglect of Divine Institutions and Worldliness were the special Sins
of that Generation. The Prophets Haggat* and Zechary, whose Ministry was
blessed to (...) Conversion of no^ a few in that Generation, did thereby do
singular Service for God and for them. None have done greater Service for the
Age wherein they Lived, then Eminent Reformers. David was such an one. Things
were much out of order when he first came to the Throne; his Predecessor Saul
was a man of little Religion. The Ark of God was not regarded in the Days of
Saul. 1 Chronicles. 13.3. He was a bloody hater of the most Holy men, and one that
put the Wickedest in the Nation into Places of Power and Trust; and as long as
it was so, there was no possibility of the Nations being Reformed; but David no
sooner had power to do it, but he Turned Ungodly men out, and put better in
their places. Such did he make to be Pillars in the Civil State, and did
himself Judge uprightly. Psalm. 75.2, 3. And he Settled Religion according to
the mind of God. Thus did he cause a great Reformation, Serving his own
Generation by the will of God. Several of the Kings of Judah were great
Reformers. So Jehosaphat, Asa, Hezekiah, Josiah; and in their being such, they
Served their Generations. The Reformers who lived in the last Century, were
great Servants of their Generation. What Service did Luther and Melancthon, do
for Germany? Zuinglius for Switzerland, Calvin and Beza, for Geneva and France?
Knox for Scotland. And the Reformers in the Days of K. Edw. the 6 th. for
England? As there are the special Sins* of the Times to be Testified against,
and that we should endeavor the Reformation of; so there are the more peculiar
Truths and Duties of the Times, which men that would Serve their own
Generation, must witness unto. That Truth which is received in one Age, is
Persecuted in another. There are Laboring Truths, which meet with the greatest
opposition from Satan and from the World. There is that which is called the
present Truth. 2 Pet. 1.12 In the Apostles Days, the present Truth was, That
Jesus of Nazareth is the promised Messiah, the Son of God, and the Savior of
the World. The Holy Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ by Preaching and
Propagating that Glorious Truth throughout the World, Served their own
Generation according to the Will of God. After that Christianity had prevailed
and triumphed over Judaism and Heathenism, the great Truth most opposed in the
World, was that which concerns the Eternal Deity of Jesus Christ the Son of
God. Athanasius did singular Service for his Generation, in standing up as a
Champion for the Truth, when (as that Ancient speaks) the whole World sighed to
see it self become an Arian. After this, Antichristianism (that is Popery)
sprung up, and got head, and then the Truths which concern the Offices of
Christ were invaded and violated by the Man of Sin. There have been many
Confessors and Martyrs, whom the Lord Jesus has raised up in the last Ages of
the World, who by their Preaching, Writing, and Sufferings, have born witness
to the Truth relating to the Prophetical Office of Christ, in asserting the
perfection and fullness of the Scripture, against all Traditions and Canons
devised by men; and to the Priestly Office of Christ, in maintaining
Justifica^ion by the alone merit of that one Sacrifice of the Humane Nature of
Christ, but once offered; and by maintaining those Bl^ssed Truths, they Served
their own Generations. The Truths of this Age wherein it has been the Will of
God that our Lot should be cast, are those which concern the Kingly Office and
Power of the Lord Jesus Christ. That He is the only Head of his Church: That no
Officers, no Ordinances, no Sacraments, or Religious Ceremonies ought to be
there, besides what Christ himself has appointed. And as such as these are the
Truths of the Age, so in a very special manner of the place wherein the Divine
Providence has cast our Lot to be. What was it that our Fathers came into this
Wilderness for? It was pure Conscience to the Second Commandment that brought
them hither. It was that so they might build Sanctuaries for the Name of the
Lord. It was, that so they might measure the Temple according to the Golden
Rule of the Scripture. It was with respect unto Purity as to all Church
Administrations, that they followed the Lord into a Land which was not Sown.
Wherefore notwithstanding too many of this Generation, who are lamentably
Degenerated from the Principles and Spirit or their Fathers and Grandfathers,
will rage at it, we cannot easily do a better Service, than to withstand
Innovations which would prove fatal to the Churches, and to the Interest of
Christ's Holy Kingdom among them. And let not those enter into the Sanctuary,
which thou, O Lord did Command that they should not enter into thy
Congregation. Lam. 1.10. We shall do well to remember, that there are Practices
which in some other places of the World, would be a step toward Reformation;
that in a people so Instructed and Enlightend as we have been, would deserve
the Name of great Degeneracy and Apostasy.

5. It will be good for us to follow the Examples of those who have Served God,
and his People with the greatest Fidelity. There are Examples recorded in the
Scripture, not only for Their Commendation, but for Our Imitation. The Apostle
therefore speaks, as in Heb. 12.1 Seeing we are compassed about with so great a
Cloud of Witnesses, let us run with Patience the race that is set before us.
Doubtless the words allude to the Cloud in the Wilderness by which the Children
of Israel were directed in the way to Canaan. That Cloud had a dark side, and a
light side. The Egyptians looked only on the dark side of the Cloud, and so
perished. The Israelites looked on the bright side of the Cloud, and were
Saved. But so (...) here: The Servants of God in this World have a dark side;
in that they must not be imitated We see it in David: he was guilty of some
very Scandalous Practices: Many Egyptians, Reprobate Sinners, I mean, will
imitate him, therein Some of the Ancients complain, that in their days, there
were men that would say, Si Davi^ cur non ego: If David was guilty of such and
such Sins, why may not I venture to do as he did; but they consider not David's
deep Repen^tance; nor did they, consider his bright side how faithful he was as
to the general course o^ his life in the World, Not turning aside from (...)
thing the Lord Commanded him all the days of (...) life, save only in the
matter of Uriah the Hittit. 1 King. 15.5. We should mind and imitate onl^ the
holy Example of them that have Served Go^ and their Generation, with diligence
and faith^fulness. Heb. 6 12. That you be not slothful, b^ followers of them
who through Faith and Patienc^ inherit the Promises. We should consider how the
holy Prophets Served their Generations, and en^deavour to do like them. Jam.
5.10. Take (...) Brethren the Prophets, who have spoken in the Nam^ of the
Lord, for an example of suffering affliction and of patience. So we should take
the Prophet for an Example of Serviceableness in their G^^nerations. We should
consider how the holy Apostles of the Lord Jesus Christ Served their
Generation, according to the will of God, and take Pattern by them. Phil. 3.17.
Brethren (says the Apostle) be ye followers together of me, and mark them that
walk so as you have us for an Example. And besides Scripture Examples, we
should consider those whom we our selves have known, that have faithfully
Served their Generation: And in a special manner such faithful Ministers of
Christ as we have had the knowledge of, and most of all, if we have lived under
their Ministry. Heb. 13.7. Remember your guides; so he words should be read,
and not as we have them, them that have the rule over you; for it is ^poken of
such as were then gone out of the World; wherefore it is added, who have spoken
^o you the word of God: you must not only Remember those that Do, but those
that Have ^poken the word of God to you; whose Faith ^ollow, considering the
end of their Conversation. They have finished their course: they are come ^o
the end of their Conversation in this World: ^^ey have done all the Service
that it was the Will of God they should do in and for their Genera^^on. Now
their Survivers must Remember them and their Graces, so as to imitate them The
best ^^membrance of a departed Minister, is to imi^^te his Virtues and Graces.
But above all, we should consider the Example of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Confessors Reformers, Ministers, Martyrs, must be followed; but more than to
any of them, we must be Looking to Jesus. Heb. 12.1, 2. No other man, no not
the best Apostle is to be imitated in every thing: We may not follow Peter
himself, nor Paul neither in every thing, only so far as they followed Christ:
We must not follow Peter in his dissimulation, nor Paul and Barnabas in the
(...) which was between them. 1 Cor. 11.1 Be ye followers of me, even as I also
am of Christ. Christ is an unerring Example for us to follow in every thing
that is imitable: So in particular, in this of being useful and Serviceable.
Never man did so much good in the world, as the Man Christ Jesus did. It is
said of him* He went about d^ing good Act. 10.3^. And he said of himself, The
Son of Man came to Minister, and to give his Life a ransom for many Math.
20.28* He is the light, the Sun of the World. The Hebrews call the Sun by that
name of Shimosh, which signifies to Minister, because the Sun is a most
beneficial, Serviceable Creature: It is the glorious Servant of the whole
World: but not to be compared with Christ, the Sun of Righteousness. The whole
World of mankind has received benefit by the Man Christ Jesus. As for the Elect
World, they are all Eternally Saved by him* As for the Reprobate World, He has
caused them to be put under a dispensation of Divine Patience. Let us then do
good to all, but especially to the house hold of Faith: The more good we do,
the more like are we to Christ. Examples are many times more prevalent than
Precepts. That so we may be both directed and quickened in Serving our
Generation according to the will of God, it will be profitable for us, to have
our Eyes upon the most Holy Examples.

6. Let us often think on those things the Consideration whereof has a tendency
to make us Serviceable. There are Meditations, which did we often entertain
them in our minds, they would be a means to awaken us unto constant and utmost
endeavors to do all the good we can whilst we remain in this World e. g. Let
us always remember what Eyes are upon us. There are glorious Eyes, which
though we see not them, they are observing us in all our motions. The Eyes of
holy Angels are upon us. 1 Cor. 4.9. We are made a Spectacle to Angels: They
observe how we acquit our selves, and if we Serve God and our Generation as we
ought to do, they will come in as Witnesses of our Fidelity at the last day.
And the Eyes of Jesus Christ the Son of God behold us: He said to every one of
the Churches, I know thy works: and to the Minister in the Church of Thyatira.
He said, I kn^w thy Service. Rev. 2 19 And the Eyes of God are upon us. All
this does the Apostle intimate to Timothy, as that which should make him the
more careful to attend the Service he was called unt^ with utmost diligence and
Fidelity 1 Timothy 5 21 I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ and
the Elect Angels. It is reported of a faithfu^ Minister of Christ, that there
was written or the walls of his Study, Deus video, Angeli adstant Conscientia
testabitur. God sees thee, Angel are by thee, Thy own Conscience will be a
witness how thou do behave thy self. Let us consider, that in Serving our own
Generation, i^ is possible that we may do that which will be Service for after
Generations. Isa. 58.12. Thou shall raise up the foundation of many
Generations. A man may do that whilst he lives, that others shall fare the
better for in all Generations to the end of the World. This we see in David.
Psalm 71.18. I have showed thy strength unto this Generation, and thy power to
every one that is to come. He wrote the Book of Psalms; and the Church o^ God
in all Succeeding Generations has been E^dified by that Divine Composure. We
should consider that by being Serviceable, we shall glo^rify God. Joh. 15.8.
Herein is my Father glorifye^ that you bear much fruit. The Christian that i^
very Serviceable in his Generation, bears much fruit whereby God has much
glory. And le^ us remember that God honors us, if he do condescend to make
use of us, to do any Servic^ for his Name. All the Angels in Heaven thin^ so
Heb. 1.14. Are they not all Ministering Spirit^ sent forth to Minister for them
who shall be heirs of Salvation. The holy Angels do by the will of God, ^ervice
for the World, but especially for the E^^ect; and count it an honor that the
Great God will so employ them. So if we are any of ^s Serviceable to the World,
but much more to ^he Church of Christ, it is a great honor that God puts upon
us. Luthers highest ambition was that he might be a Servant of the Church, and
was most willing to Die, might his Death prove beneficial to the Church of God.
Modo nec mo^iente floreat Ecclesia. The man who is more Ser^iceable than his
Neighbor, is on that account more honorable. Our famous Devenants Motto was,
Praefuit qui profuit. He that does most good in his Generation is the best man;
such shall appear most honorable another day: For Christ has said; If any man
shall honor me, he that Serves his Generation according to the will of God
does so, him will my Father honor. Joh. 12.26. Let us consider, this is the
way to Live desired and to Die lamented by the best men. Let a man be never so
Serviceable, there are ^ome ill Spirits that will wish him out of the World:
but they whose esteem is to be valued, will say, Long may that man live, who is
of such ^se, and does so much Service in his Generation. And when he is taken
away by Death, good men will lament for him exceedingly. Praying Jacob was a
Serviceable man, and when he was dead, they mourned with a great and very sore
Lamentation Genesis 50.20. Josiah was a Serviceable man, and when he was by an
immature death snatched a way, the Prophet Jeremy lamented for him, an^ in
their Lamentations, that is to say, in their fune^ral Elegies, they speak of
Josiah to this day. 2 Chronicles* 35.25. Steven, the Proto Martyr for Christ was a
Serviceable man, and when he was dea^ devout men carried him to his Grave, and
man great Lamentation over him. Act. 8.2. A Service^^ble life uses to be
attended with honor (...) Death. Hezekiah Served his Generation wit^ singular
Piety and Fidelity: when his work wa^ done, he slept with his Fathers, and they
buri^ him in the chiefest of the Sepulchers of the sons of D^^vid, and all
Judah and the Inhabitants of Jer^^salem did him honor at his death. 2 Chronicles.
32.3^ Jehojada the Priest had been an Eminent S^^^vant of his Generation; and
when he was De^^ they Buried him in an Honorable Tomb. (...) Buried him in the
City of David amongst the Kin^ because he had done good in Israel, both toward
(...) and toward his House. 2 Chronicles. 24.16. And us consider, that our Service
will be reward^^* Tho it may be not by men. We may do (...) most Generous and
General Service for our p^^^ple, and be ill rewarded by an Ungrateful Wo^^* But
we Serve a better Master then is the Ge^^^ration whom we Serve, we Serve the
Lord (...) Christ; and he will be sure to reward w^^^^ever Service we have done
according to the Will of God. Rev. 22.12 Behold I come quickly, and (...)
reward is with me, to give every man according (...) his works shall be: If he
that has given a cup ^f cold water to a Disciple shall be rewarded, what a
glorious reward shall that man have, who ^as been instrumental to the
Conversion and ^^lvation of many Souls. It was once the Ex^^ession of a Dying
Minister, We Serve a good ^aster, who will pardon our imperfections, and give
great Wages for a little Service. Let us more^^er cohsider, That we have but a
little time to ^^rve our Generation in; it is but whilst Life ^^ntinues; that
we can do any Service: There (...) work in the Grave whither we are all a ^^ing
apace; we have but a short Age to be ^^rking in, our days are but an hands
breadth, (...) our age is as nothing. Tho thought of it ^^uld make us do all
the good we can, the lit^^^ time that we have to live: It concerns us to ^^rk
whilst the day or life last, for the night of ^ath is hastening, when no man
can work. It ^or this reason chiefly that life is to be desired (...) a good
man that is fit to die. It would be ^^ch better for him to Die, and go to Heaven,
(...) to abide longer in this woeful World; only (...) as long as we are alive,
we may do that ^^^vice for God and his people, which after (...) cannot be done
by us: Therefore are we (...) ^hank God for continuing our lives. Excellent was
the Speech and Spirit of our English Josiah (as he is commonly and deservedly
called) King Edward 6. who after he had promoted the Building of Christ Church
Hospital, and other Works for the benefit of the City and Nation, and with his
own hand, both Signed a Charter, and contributed liberally, in the presence of
his Council, Lifting his Eyes to Heaven, said, O Lord God, I thank thee, in
that thou have spared my life to do this Service for thy Name before I Die. Two
days after which he dyed, having in a few years done wonderful Service for God
and for his People.

7. We should in a singular manner take care of those things wherein the
Welfare of the Generation is concerned. The Spiritual and Eternal Welfare of
those we live amongst, we ought most of all to desire and endeavor. And
therefore to do what in us lies, that the Gospel of Salvation may be Preached
to them. Alas, there are dark Corners in this Country, which are perishing for
lack of Vision. It is said, (Cant. 8.8.) We have a little Sister that has no
Breast, what shall we do for her! So there are little places (and some
considerable ones too) in New England, that have no Breasts, no Ministers from
whom they may receive the sincere milk of the Word. What shall be done for
them? There are some especially in this Town of Boston, who have Contributed
liberally unto so good a Work, by which they have done a real Service for
Christ, and for the Souls of men, and so it will be acknowledged another day.
In taking yet further care, as for the Gospellizing of Heathen Indians, so of
Heathenish English, we shall do an acceptable Service in our Generation. Let me
also say, That the Welfare both of this present, and of succeeding Generations,
is very much concerned in the Establishment of the College, which is the
Fountain from whence must flow those Streams which will make glad the City of
God. By taking care that the Government thereof be confirmed in faithful hands,
that will transmit it unto such Successors; we may be instrumental to make
Generations happy. Whoever shall be instrumental in obtaining so great a Good,
will do a singular Service both for the present, and After Generations. What a
doleful Case had New England been in before this day, had it not been for that
Blessed Nursery, almost all the Churches being supplied from thence. Nor do I
know wherein I or any man can do a greater Service for this Generation, than by
taking effectual care that the Tutors there be such as shall make Conscience to
Establish the Young Scholars in those Holy Principles of Truth, for a Testimony
whereunto their Blessed Fathers came into this Wilderness, and for the Defense
and Propagation whereof they Erected a College here.

But thus for Answer to the Case proposed.

All that I shall say by way of Application is only this.

We see that no Eminency of Usefulness can keep men out of the Grave. A David
that Serves his Generation with the greatest industry and fidelity, must fall
asleep, and see Corruption. When his work is done, he must go to Rest in the
Bed of the Grave; and a sweet Rest and Repose will it be. It is said of
Merciful men, and Righteous men; yea, of Serviceable Josias's, that they Enter
into Peace. So they do at the Hour of Death in respect of their Souls, and they
shall rest in their Beds, namely in respect o^ their Bodies, which are Laid in
the Grave. Isa 57.1, 2. The Psalmist takes notice that Wise men Die as well as
the Fool, and the brutish person. Psalm. 49.10. So the most Useful me^^dy, as
also those who are telluris inutile pondus Burdens on the Face of the Earth,
and it may be Scandals to the Generation whereof they are. Yea, it is one of
the Mysteries of Divine Providence, that eminently Useful men are ta^ken away
by Death, when others that only number the Ground, are suffered to live. A^
Holy Minister, (who has lived Sermons as wel^ as Preached them) Dies, when
others wh^ have been a reproach to the Gospel, and to all Religion, are living
still.

And truly, every year does sadly confirm the Truth of what you hear. Have we
not seen very Afflicting Instances of it in the year that is past. Look over
into London, and we shall see that eminently Faithful and Useful Ministers of
God, are lately removed from thence. I forbear to speak of a Brother of mine,
who had his Education in this College, and after that Served his Generation in
the Work of the Gospel for the space of Forty Seven Years in England, Holland
and Ireland; and now he is Fallen asleep. But there is Blessed Anstey, Cole,
James, Vincent, all within this twelvemonth Gone to the Spirits of Just men
made perfect; and a little before them, Buris, Fincher, Laurence, Mayo, these
were all Eminent Ministers of Christ. And I have the rather mentioned them
because I had not long since a dear Acquaintance with them all. One such stroke
seldom goes alone. An ingenious Writer on occasion of many Ministers Dying in
the same year, observes, That when a Generation of Contemporary persons begins
to Crack, it quickly falls. The Leases of their Earthly Cottage Commencing at
the same date, often at the same Term Expire. And I remember that Twenty years
ago, an Eminent Person in London, sent me a Catalogue of no less then Forty Two
Ministers belonging to that City, who Dyed in the space of about ten years. But
we need not look so far off as London for a tremendous Verification of the
Truth before us, since amongst our selves in less then half a year, besides
several young Ministers, three others of principal Note, and Use, are Laid in
the Grave. In the Neighboring Colony, no longer since than the last month,
that Serviceable Hooker, (who was the worthy Son of a most worthy Father) is
gone to his Rest. He was eminently Useful on more accounts than one. The Lord
Jesus Christ had made him a Pillar in the Temple of his God: (And without Envy
be it spoken) there is not a greater Pillar remaining in all the House of God
throughout that Jurisdiction. The Churches there are all weakened by his Fall,
The manner of his Death was very much like unto that of our Precious and
forever famous Juel, whom Death found in the Pulpit Preaching to a Congregation
at Lacock in Wiltshire. I observe that many Super eminent Ministers of the
Gospel have dyed suddenly: So Mr. Norton the never to be forgotten Teacher of
this Boston: And in England of late years; Mr Hol^ingsworth in Manchester, Mr.
Wills and Mr. P^edger in London: And when a few years since I Sojourned in that
City, Mr. Hurst (my dear friend) and Mr. John Oaks, (faithful and eminent
Ministers of Christ both of them) were taken ill in the Pulpit, from thence
carried home and dyed suddenly. It was an honor and a favor from God to them,
that they were found so doing. Mr Capel, Mr. Vines, and Mr. Gouge, (that
Eminent Servant of his Generation, who was the Son of famous Doctor Gouge, and
in Exemplary Piety not inferior to his Father (all these (honorable men of
God) dyed in their sleep, on a Lords day night: Thus did they fall asleep after
they had Served their Generation according to the will of God: What happened to
them was more like a Translation, than a Death. Such a Death as theirs was, and
as our Hookers was, is sometimes a sign of Gods special Love to his Servants,
but of his Anger kindled against that People, out of whose hands he has
snatched his Jewels. But we see then that the dearest Servants of Christ are
Subject to the arrests of Death. Yea, if we look into this very Congregation,
we see it, one that often spoke in the Name of the Lord from this Pulpit, and
(as I take it) the words which I am now upon, were the last which he Preached
on in this Place; six months ago he Rested from all his Labors. God made him
very Serviceable, especially in that part of the Country where for the greatest
part of his Time, he had Served his Generation. Portsmouth owes more than a
little to his Memory. No longer since then the last Week, another Faithful
Ambassador of Christ is called Home, who if he had been Living, and in Health,
should have spoken in the Name of the Lord here this day. It is said in Prove.
10.7. the memory of the Just is blessed, which words the Jews constantly apply
to their Dead Deceased Friends that have been of eminent Use among them. The
Seventy Greek Interpreters express it by saying. The Memory of the Just is [met
enkomione] with Praises. It is not my work this day so much to Praise the Dead,
as to Instruct the Living: Nor shall I enlarge on his Character of whom you
heard many things the last Lecture. Only I must say of him, as is here said of
David, He Served his Generation according to the will of God. He was truly a
very faithful Servant of God. Considered as a Christian. He kept a strick Watch
over the frame of his own heart every day. If he had happened to speak but so
much as one unprofitable word, so tender was his Conscience as that he would
severely reflect upon it, and mourn before the Lord in Secret, before he slept
that night. He was of a Peaceable temper; and would do any thing which he
thought was not repugnant to the will of God, rather than make a Schism in a
Church of Christ. Considered as a Minister, he was Eminently Faithful and
Serviceable. God honored him, in making him one of the Confessors of these
last days. The Spirit of a Martyr was in him. He endured a sore Imprisonment
in Limrick in Ireland, for his bearing witness unto the present Truth, which
the Lord would have his Servants in this Generation to stand up for. And on
that account (as our Fathers, and we our selves, some of us did) he became
Subject unto a Voluntary Exile into these goings down of the Sun. I have been
informed, that the unhappy man, who was the chief Instrument and Instigator of
his Imprisonment in Limrick, was afterward himself by the Papists made a
Prisoner there, and that then he Cried out in horror; This misery is come upon
me, for my causing Mr. Baily to be cast into Prison. When his Ministry found
great acceptance in the World, his Soul would tremble lest happily his Reward
should be (like that of the Pharisees) only a Reputation amongst men in this
World. His very heart was engaged in desires and endeavors to promote the
Conversion of Souls: And God made him Eminently Successful therein. There are
many who will bless God to Eternity, that ever they knew him: And at the day of
Judgment (which the Lord hasten) we shall no doubt see verified in him that
Scripture in Daniel, where it is laid, They that turn many to Righteousness
shall shine as the Stars for ever and ever.

The Use which we should all make of such a Death, is, to Prepare to follow:
And therefore to make all the have we can in finishing our work. If we serve
our Generation according to the will of God; If we Glorify him on the Earth,
when we have finished the work which he has given us to do, he will glorify us
with Himself, and that not for one Generation, but throughout the never ending
days of ETERNITY.

Tibi Domine et a Te.

