The Christian Thank Offering.

A Brief Discourse. ON The Returns of Gratitude and Obedience Whereto MEN are
Obliged, by the Mercies OF GOD. Made On a Solemn THANKSGIVING, kept in a
Private Meeting of Christians, on the Occasion of some Deliverances.

By Cotton Mather.

How Happy were my part If some kind man would thrust his Heart Into these
Lines: (...) in Heavens Court of Rolls They were by winged Souls Entered for
both, far above their Desert, Herbert. Page 98. BOSTON, in N. E. Printed by B.
Green, and J. Allen, for Michael Perry, at his Shop at the Townhouse. 1696.

A Preparatory Thanksgiving Song, fetched from the Beginning and Conclusion of
the Hundred and Third Psalm.
A Wake, my Soul, Awake, and Bless
JEHOVAH the most Blessed One:
Bless Him, and His Blessed Holiness
Let all my Inward Powers own.
The Glories of that Lord, my Soul,
Confess with Praises, just and high;
And His vast Benefits Extol
With a most Thankful Memory.
Though thy Sins have His Wrath incurred
He does those Horrid Sins Forgive;
And though thy Sins have thee procured
Diseases, These He does Relieve.
He does from Deaths and Hells dark place
Thy Life, though Forfeited, Redeem:
And with Rich Merc^^s of His Grace,
Thou art, How Richly! Crowned by Him.
Thy Mouth did never Wisely Crave
That Good, which He would not afford.
Such Bowels as our Fathers have,
And more than such are in the Lord.
O ye Bright Angels, who transcend
In Might, show with your Might abroad,
While ye His Will and Voice attend,
the Praise of our Almighty God.
Armies of Angels, that Obey
The Great Gods only Son and Heir,
His Greatness, Oh! Gladly Display:
You and We, His Glad Servants are.
All He has made, throughout His whole
Dominion too, Let all Adore
Their Maker: But, O Thou, my Soul,
Bear part with them for-ever-more.
THE Christian Thank-Offering.
I Beseech You, Brethren, by the Mercies of God, that you now give your
Serious Attention, unto the Returns which you are to make for those Mercies,
declared in

ROMANS XII. 1. I beseech you therefore, Brethren, by the Mercies of God, that
ye present your Bodies, a Living Sacrifice, Holy, Acceptable unto God: Your
Reasonable Service. As Reasonable a Thing certainly, as ever was proposed, in
the World!

Christians, I have set before you, a passage of Sacred Scripture, worthy to be
Written, as once the whole New Testament whereof this is a part, was upon the
Walls of a German Monastery, In Letters of Gold; Yea, to be Written on the
Fleshly Tables of our Hearts for ever.

We find this passage, in an Epistle Directed unto the Apostolical Church of
Rome, and an Epistle, which insisting on that Great Article of Justification
only by Faith in the Obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ, which is the main
Thing denied by the present Church of Rome; and on the Conversion of the
Israelitish Nation, which is to be Consequent on, and perhaps a little Effected
by, the Destruction to come shortly on the present Church of Rome; in those, as
well as in other Notable Things, it mentions matters, wherein the Apostatical
Church of Rome, is in a peculiar manner concerned.

But we also are concerned in these Things; and this Day, Eminently concerned
in the Text now to be considered.

The Doctrinal part of this Epistle, being dispatched in the first Eleven
Chapters, the Practical, is comprised in the Five last; And this part, begins
with a most Universal, and most Comprehensive Exhortation. Wherein we may note,

First, The Matter of the Advice. This is, That we do make our Bodies, which by
a Syn^^doche, implies our whole Selves, our Souls, our Names, our Friends, our
Estates, and all our Interests, a Sacrifice unto God: which is done, in short,
by Devoting them unto the Service of that God.

Next, The Manner of pressing it. This is, with, A Compellation, Brethren: An
Obtestation, I beseech you; And a very weighty Argument, By the Mercies of God;
that is to say, The Mercies of God lay upon us, a very powerful Obligation
hereun^o.

But we have not yet given the Text so particular an Illustra^^^^, as it seems
to call for Know then, That according to the Stricter Notion of a Sacrifice,
its more general Distinction, is into Propitiatory, or Eucharistical Now
Christianity in that Notion admits but One, and this of the former sort; by
which One, even that of Himself, our Lord has forever perfected them that are
Sanctified: He is a Poor Priest, who dreams of any other. We our selves, or any
Things that we do, in Religion, are capable of being Sacrifices, only by way of
Analogy, and that chiefly to the latter sort; So, we offer up Spiritual
Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. A Sacrifice here signifies no
more, than a Thing Devoted unto God. But what are we thus to Devote? Our
Bodies. Hereby we are to understand our whole Selves: but it is Expressed by,
Your Bodies, for Distinction sake: the Bodies of Beasts were heretofore
Offered, and now we are to Offer up Our own. This is called, a Li^ing
Sacrifice, because the Sacrifice of old was to be brought Alive unto the Lord;
the Isra^lit^s might not themselves Eat a thing Dead of it self, much less
might they bring such a Thing to the Living God. And yet the Victim was to be
Slain, in Sacrificing; which is here opposed, by an Intimation, that when we
Sacrifice our Bodies to the Lord, they yet continue to Live Our Lives will not
be at all Impaired, by the commanded Sacrifice of our Bodies, no, they will be
Improved by a wonderful Sac^^dness added thereunto. Our Bodies are to be an
(...) Sacrifice: And yet the Bodily Life also is herein but alluded unto: it is
a further, an Higher, a Nobler Living, a Living unto the Lord Jesus Christ,
that is here called for. Holy, is annexed without any Tautology; for though it
be in our word, Sacrifice, it is not in the Greek word, (...). And besides, the
Real Holiness or the Rectitude of Mind, and Walk, which attends our Sacrificing
of our selves unto God, is here pointed at. What is Holiness but a Devotion of
our selves unto the Lord Jesus Christ? This will be Acceptable. Indeed our
Sacrifice becomes not Acceptable By this; and yet, it is not Acceptable without
it (...) We have been told, that all our Sacrifices, are Acceptable to God, by
Jesus Christ. However, Holiness, in the Nature of the Thing it self, is Well
pleasing unto God. And, In all this there is a Reasonable Service; This
intimates the Transcendency of the Sacrifice required; they are not B^uits but
Men, that are to be a Sacrifice; and the Highest Acts of Reason too, are to be
the Ingredients of the Sacrifice; and the Right of God hereunto is also
signified; there is nothing so Reasonable, as that we should Offer our selves
unto Him. It Is to be done with a Presentation; we are to set our selves before
God, as they did Sistere ad Altar, the destined Sacrifices, making them Stand
ready there for Immolation. The Result of all is,

That the (...) of God unto us, Very Strongly obliges us to Devote our selves
unto the (...) of God.

There are Two Prop^sitions which we are here to Listen unto.

1. The First and Great Obedience, and the Sum and Substance of that
Obedience, which we owe unto God, is the Devotion of our selves unto the
Service of the Lord Jesus Christ. That we should Serve the God that made us,
This is the Grand End for which we are made by God: Of mankind, it is by the
Eternal Maker said, This people have I formed for my self, they shall show
forth my praise. But it is the Son of God, who is that Word of God, of whom we
are told, in Col. 1. 16. All things were Created by Him, and for Him. And the
Son of God, who is also the Son of Man, He is that, He^^ of God, and that Lord
of All concerning whom it is the Will of God, expressed, in Joh: 5 23. That all
men should Honor the Son, even (...) they Honor the Father. The Dues which
belong to God from us, the Lord JESUS CHRIST, our Immanuel, and our God
manifest (...) the Flesh, is the more immediate Receiver of them. He has a
Right unto us not only as He has Made us, but as He has Bought us too; and as
we are directed, in Ephesians. 5. 20. To give thanks unto God, and the Father, in the
Name of our Lord Jesus Christ; thus, our Service is then most agre^^ably and
effectually yielded unto God, (...) we distinctly put the Name of the Lord
JESUS CHRIST upon all, as being a Servicein^e^ded for Him immediately. All the
Mercy of God unto us, comes through the Hand of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, the God
man, and the Mediator between God and Man. Hence, though it were an Impiety, to
Exclude the Consideration of God the Father, or of God the Spirit, in that
Service which we are to render unto God for His Mercy, yet we then render it
after the most Christian manner, when we carry the Lord JESUS CHRIST in our
Thoughts, as the next Object of it. Wherefore, in the Meditations which I am to
give you, I shall study still to insert the Name of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, as
calling for that Service, which is to be done in the whole of our Obedience
unto God. And this I do the rather, because of a boiling Antipathy in my Soul,
against the Paganism of those Traitors unto the King of Heaven, who though they
call themselves Divines, yet would have their Sermons and Writings valued, for
the same cause that Blessed Austin undervalued the Books of their Brother
Cicero, Quia Nom^^ Christi non est i^i; the Name of the Lord JESUS CHRIST is
not there. Nor indeed, would we be so profane, as to reckon it a Battology, or
a Superfluity, in the Fourteen Epistles of Paul, that this dearest Name occurrs
four hundred and fifty Times therein, and no less than (...) Times in the Ten
First Verses to the Corinthians.

The Thing which I assert is, That the Obedience to God, which His Innumerable
and Unparallellable Mercies unto us, do call for, is, That we Devote our selves
unto the Service of the Lord JESUS CHRIST; who to this End both Died and Rose,
that He might be the LORD of all. To Serve the Lord JESUS CHRIST, what is that?
Briefly, It Is to make ^t Acknowledgments of His Infinite Excellencies, and
bring others to join with us in making of such Acknowledgments. It is to bear
our Testimonies unto the Truths and unto the Ways of he Lord JESUS CHRIST, and
Conform our selves unto His Will. Now to Devote our selves hereunto, is our
Acceptable Sacrifice; For ^e are assured, He that Serves Christ, is Acceptable
to God. And we are thus to proceed ^n our doing of it.

First, We are to be convinced and satisfied of this; That the Service of the
Lord JESUS CHRIST, is the most Reasonable Service. The lord JESUS CHRIST, is
the True God, the Great God, the Mighty God, and GOD over all, Blessed ^r ever.
The Lord JESUS CHRIST, is He, whom all the Angels adore, as the Lord of ^osts,
the Creator and Preserver of the World; and the most High, Possessor of Heaven
and Earth. The Lord JESUS CHRIST is He, to whom we are beholden for all the
Good Things that ever we do enjoy. HE particularly, though He were Equal with
God, nevertheless Took on Him the Form of a Servant, for our Good. Upon the
view of all this, we are to pronounce it infinitely Reasonable, that we should
for ever be the Devoted Servants of such a Lord. But the Benefits of Redemption
which we have by our Lord JESUS CHRIST, are to have a very particular
consideration, among the Reasons of our Serving Him. If we Serve Him not, we
Deny the Lord that Bought un.

We are hereupon to Dislike, and Renounce every Service inconsistent with that
of the Lord JESUS CHRIST. The proposals which those Hellish Taskmasters, the
FLESH, the WORLD and the DEVIL, make unto us, we should Reject with all
possible Abhorrence; and be al^ogether impatient of the Drudgeries, which we
undergo, while we are under their Direction.

We are herewithal to Resolve that the Service of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, shall
with His Assistences, be our Everlasting Employment. It is not a Cold Assent,
but a Full purpos^ of Heart, with which we are to Cleave unto the Lord. And
with a Resolution to undergo (...) the Self denial therein called for, we must
be able to say, Lord, I have inclined my Heart, (...) perform thy Statutes
always, even unto the End.

We are herein to give the full consent of our Souls unto the New Covenant,
wherein ou^ Bonds to the Service of the Lord JESUS CHRIST are to be Signed by
us. In the Covenant of Grace, it is demanded of us, whether we are willing that
the Lord JESUS CHRIST should Enstate us in the Favor of God, by the virtue of
His Obedience and Intercession, and by His Gracious Influences Enable us, as
persons United unto Himself, to Glorify God for ever, and by His own Divine
Methods, both Instruct ^^ and Incline us, to come at that Final Blessedness?
And whether we are willing to Express our Thankfulness unto Him, for Delivering
us from Spiritual and Eternal Miseries, by sincere Endeavors to Serve Him in
Holiness and Righteousness all our Days? We are now to give up our selves unto
the Lord JESUS CHRIST, by declaring our most Hearty Consent unto this COVENANT,
in all the Terms of it. Our Baptismal Vow is thus to be Renewed, by our
Professing in the most early years of our Youth and Choice, That we do for ever
approve of the Dedication to the Service of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, which was
visibly passed upon us in our Infancy.

And finally, We are now to Study, how to Improve our All, for the Service of
the Lord JESUS CHRIST; that He may have Revenues of Glory out of All. Having
said with Joshua, I will Serve the Lord, we are to say unto our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, as one once more improperly did unto another King, I am thine, my Lord,
O King, and all that I have. It was required, in 1 Cor. 6. 20. Glorify God in
your Bodies, and in your Spirits, which are His. Yea, It was required, in 1
Cor. 10. 30 Whether ye Eat or Drink, or whatever ye do, Do all to Glory of God.
Thus, whatever does in a Regard belong unto us, we should by our C^^secration
thereof unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST be able to say, This belongs unto the Lord!
When any Tempters (...) Solicit us, to abuse any thing that we have unto the
Dishonor of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, we should Reply with ^^dignation, How shall
I do this Wickedness, an^ Sin against the Lord; the Lord whose I am, an^ whom I
am to Serve? Instead thereof, All the Powers of our Spirits, our
Understandings, our Fantasies, our Memories, our Wills, our Affections, are to
be at work for the Lord JESUS CHRIST continually; All the Members (...) our
Bodies, our Eyes, our Ears, our Tongues our Hands and our Feet, are to be at
work for the Lord JESUS CHRIST perpetually. All our Possessions, are to have,
HOLINESS TO THE LORD, written on them; and we are to put them unto no use, but
what may be (...) the Service of the Lord JESUS CHRIST Our Actions, every Day,
should be Ennobled with Deliberate Thoughts, of Glorifying the Lord Jesus
Christ, in what we do. Yea we should be able to say, with the Apostle, in Phil.
1. ^1. To me to Live is Christ; by Spending out Lives in the Service of our
Lord. It is thus that we are to Present our selves a Sacrifice unto Him, that
once made Himself a Sacrifice for us!

II. The Mercy of God unto us, is that which very Strongly Obliges us to this
Obedience.

Very Various are the Courses taken by the God of Heaven, to Produce and
Procure from ^s, that Service which we are to Honor our Lord JESUS CHRIST
withal. It Is the Voice both of His Ordinances and of His Providence, (...) men
Serve the Lord Jesus Christ, and in ^ll Things Obey the Will of that Glorious
Lord. But ^he Mercies of God have this in a most particular manner, for the
Language and the Errand of them.

Gratitude, as one says, Like the Blood in the Body, runs through the whole
Practice of Christianity. The whole of that Obedience which we render into God,
is to be a continued Expression of Gratitude unto Him. Thus the Schoolmen make
^ngratitude, a General Circumstance of sin; inasmuch as though it be not in the
Definition of sin, yet it is always in the Perpretration of it.

It has been sometimes a Question very unsafely handled in the Books of some
English Writers, What place in the Christian Religion is to ^e assigned unto
Evangelical Obedience? Now we are not so grossly Ignorant of the Gospel, as ^o
assert, That our Hearty and Honest Endeavor ^f Obeying the whole Will of God,
is the condition upon which the Benefits purchased by Christ, belong into us.
God forbid, that we should Swallow down all the Poison Comprehended in that
Assertion! We say, The only Condition on our Art, Entitling us to the Benefits
Purchased by our Lord-Redeemer, is our Faith in Him, or the Reliance of our
Souls upon the Free Grace of God, in Him alone, for the Communication of those
Benefits. And, Aliter qui vadit, Cadit! But then, the Place which we assign
unto Evangelical Obedience, is, that of Gratitude unto God, for the Benefits of
Redemption; and we think, that the Principle which disposes us to Believe on
the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and on His Righteousness, will also dispose us to an
Hearty and Honest Endeavor of Obeying the whole will of God, in Gratitude unto
Him, for what Provision He has made for our Happiness in our Lord JESUS
CHRIST. The Connection between Justifying Faith and Obedience, Holy, Sincere
Thankful Obedience, is Infallible, and Inseparable; though we say likewise,
that no man can do any Good Works of Obedience, until he be Justified. Nor does
this place of Gratitude for our Happiness, which we assign to Obedience, hinder
us, from Considering it, as the Way to our Happiness, Yea, as a Part of our
Happiness. There is no true Believer, who ^^ not of this Persuasion, I am an
Happy man, i^ I may but Serve my Lord Jesus Christ.

Indeed, Every Mercy of God unto us, call^ for this Return. Almighty God
therein does as he speaks, in Hos. 11. 3. I drew them with the Cords of a man,
with Bands of Love; I Lai^ meat unto them. When He dispenses Kindnesses unto
men. He propounds this as a Reasonable Expectation thereupon, These Kindness
are to be attractive of their Obedience; Inferior Creatures are Serviceable
unto their Keepers, (...) Feeders, those that Lay meat unto them: and (...)
doing thus for the Children of men, I do with (...) and Bands oblige them to
Serve me for ever. ^et us maintain this Truth, with a treble demonstration.

First; We have the Lessons of Scripture, to ^ow, That the Mercy of God,
obliges our Obedience to Him. The Scripture seems to put his Motto on every
Mercy that we Receive, A ^rong Obligation to Serve the Lord Jesus Christ. Thus,
When the Church of Israel received the Mercy of a mighty Deliverance, from
woeful Circumstances, what Use did their most Merciful Deliverer make of all? It
was, A Demand of Obedience to all His Commandments. This is ^he Preface to both
Tables of the Law, I am the Lord your God, that have brought you out of your
Distresses, and now surely you can deny me no Obedience. And when Ten Thousand
further Mercies had been shown to the People of God, this was the Inference
deduced from them; Let these be acknowledged, with an Obedience answerable
thereunto: Thus you have it, in Deuteronomy. 10. 12. Now, (after all) What does the
Lord thy God require if thee, but to Fear Him, to Love Him, to Serve Him, and
to Obey Him? This was what Samuel once Preached unto a Great Congregation; in 1 Samuel 12. 20. Only Fear the Lord, and Serve Him, for consider how great Things
He has done for you. This was what Paul has written to us all, in Romans 2. 4.
The Goodness of God, O man, Leads thee to Report (...) And Symphonizing with
all this, what says the Psalmist, in Psalm. 130. 4. There is Forgiveness with
thee, O Lord, that thou ma^^t be feared? Even so, we shall conclude but
Scripturally, if (...) say, We have all Mercies from thee, O Lord, tha^ thou
may be Obeyed. Unto this purpose, it ha^ been Remarked, that when God had
carried Israel over Jordan, there were Stones Erected for His Praise: But what
was inscribed on the Stones? It was not the History of what have been done by
God; but it was a Copy of (...) Law. An Intimation, that our Keeping of the
Law, is to be no small Ingredient in our Pra^sing of Him, that gave the Law;
our Keeping of the Law is the Return that we are to make unto Him that has
carried us well through our Jordans.

Secondly; We have the Complaints of Heaven, to show, That the Mercy of God
oblige our Obedience to Him. Heaven takes it unkindly, if we don't see an
Obligation to Serve the Lord Jesus Christ, in every Mercy. I^ was the
Expostulation of a provoked God, in Isa. 1. 2. Hear, O Heavens, and give Ear,
(...) Earth: Summoned they all are, to make Man Ashamed: Why, What Is the
matter? Alas The Lord has spoken, I have nourished and brought (...) Children,
and they have Rebelled against me. How bitterly it is Complained of, That Mercy
should be bestowed upon us, and we not Return Obedience to the God of our
Mercy! It is mentioned as a Provoking Evil, in Hezekiah, who was otherwise a
Godly man: in 2 ^hron. 32. 25. He rendered not again, according to the Benefit
done ^to him, therefore was wrath upon him. And it (...) mentioned as a
Provoking Evil, in Israel, on (...) Day of Humiliation, in Neh. 9. 35. They
have (...) Served thee, O Lord, in thy Great Goodness, which thou gave them.
So we see, That when Benefit shall be done un^o (...) us, by the (...) Goodness
of God, and we don't render this gain, that we shall Serve Him who gives all,
^he Wrath of God, is Enkindled upon such a Provocation.

Thirdly; The utmost Obedience were due to God, though He should never confer
any Mercy at all upon us. Truly, such is the Sovereignty, such is the
Authority, of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, that if HE say, Let such a Service be ^one
for me! No man may dispute it: And, such are His Essential Perfections, that He
will remain Worthy of all Service from us, though we were every one of us,
Damned, among the Outcasts, in the lowest Hell forever: It Is from the
Unreasonableness of Mankind, that there is any cause given for that Complaint,
Vix diligitur Jesus Propter Jesum: Scarce is JESUS Loved and Served, for the
pure sake of JESUS. Let the most miserable man, under the whole Cop^ of Heaven,
keep Serving of the Lord JESUS CHRIST unto Eternal Ages; Yet he must own, as in
Luke 17. 10. I have done but that which was my Duty to do. If God should strip
us immediately of all our Desirable Things, and cast us into the dismal
shadows of the Second Death forever, we ought still to say, The Holy God still
deserves all the Obedience that I can possibly yield unto Him. The Greatness of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST renders Him worthy of all our Service, though we should
have no^ particular motive of His Goodness unto us, to invite us thereunto.
It Is said in Psalm. 145. (...) Great is the Lord, and Greatly to be Praised. So
(...) say, Great is the Lord, and Greatly to be Served. It was a sweet speech
that fell from the Pen of the Renowned Chancellor of Paris, I don't know what
the Lord intends to do with me forever but this I know, (Am^ri Dignus est et
Coli) He is worthy that I should Love Him and Serve Him and I will do so.
Though we were horribly bruised between the formidable Milstones of the Anger
of God in the place of Dragons forever, yet it would become us ever to put this
Accent on our Endless Lamentations, Yet This God is to be Obeyed! But what an
Additional Obligation to Obedience, is by His Mercy then laid upon us? Let us
now make some

APPLICATION.
I. There are Two Things, which, methinks, now have a very Scandalous Face upon
them. Two Faults will fall under a Sharp Reproof. (...) am now to tell you,

First, It is an Ill Thing, to be nothing the better for all the Mercies of
God. Alas, How many of us will be found Guilty of this monstrous Disingenuity!
Man, of whose Tender Mercy is it, that thou art not Consumed! whose Mercy has
been Feeding, and Clothing, and Supplying, and Preserving, and Advancing of
thee, these many years? But art thou not as Disobedient unto the God of all
this Mercy, as thou vast many years ago? Oh, Examine thy ^elf; Have I done any
more Service to the Lord Jesus Christ, for all that Goodness and Mercy, with
which He is daily following of me? Now (...) we astonished at our own
Unfruitfulness! It was a most Unrighteous Thing in Jeshurun, to ^ive the Lord
any Occasion to say, as in Deuteronomy. 12.15. Thou have waxed Fat, and Kicked, and
for^ook the God that made thee. It was a most Un^ovely Thing in David, that the
Lord should have have any Occasion to say, as in 2 Samuel 12. 9. I have done much
for Thee; Wherefore have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord? Let us with
Trembling Souls, think, whether we shall not bring a Curse on our selves, by
such (...) Barrenness?

But, Secondly, It Is a Worse Thing then, to be the Worse for the Mercies of
God. Some there are, who make the Mercies of God, the Occasions, yea, the
Instruments, of their Sin against Him. There are Spiders, whom the Grace of
God, Emboldens in Impiety and Impenitency: they Cavil after this rate, God
Almighty is ready to Pardon, and why may not I allow my self in some
Transgressions of His Law? The Apostle Jude has flashed the hottest Brimstone
of Hell, in the faces of those Reprobates; and indeed, Whatever Sins a
Regenerate man may fall into, it will not be Improper at least for the sinner
himself to count it questionable, Whether any Regenerate man can Deliberately
thus, Turn the Grace of God into Wantonness. And what shall be said of them,
who take Encouragement from their Prosperity, to Wallow Securely in those
filthy puddles of Death, which they would otherwise be afraid of plunging
themselves into? Say, Would you not be more Prayerful, and more Careful, in all
your ways, and more Studious to Serve the Lord JESUS CHRIST, if you were under
those Deadly Bands, which ly upon such, or such of your Neighbors? Conscience,
Do thy Office! Is there no Person among us, who has had, not only a Life, but
a New Life, and a Life Sweetened with many Conveniences, given to him? And yet,
how does he now carry himself? Does not he Live more Carnally, more Worldlily,
more Vainly, than he did before? Is he not like the Jews, who having made
their Offerings in the Temple said, ^e are now acquitted to do all
Abominations, and ^un upon a New Score of Sinning? Yea, How common a Thing is
it, for Persons to make ^he Mercies of God, the mere Fuel of their Lusts? It
was the Crime of them, in Hos. 2. 8. The Corn and Wine which I gave them, did
they prepare for Baal. Thus it may be said of many, They would be less Wicked,
if it were not for the Mercies which God gives unto them. Now, what an horrid
thing is this? It David should have taken the Sword and the Bow that Jona^han
gave him, and presently have Stabbed or ^not the Donour with it, would it not
have been a most Villainous Act? But be it known to you, That you are Fighting
against God, with Weapons of His own; yea, you are fighting or the Devil with
them. Oh! Think of this, and Blush at the Horrible Thing.

II. But there is an Exhortation to be now pressed upon us; That the Mercy of
God may now Cause us to do, what it Calls us to do. I Beseech you, Brethren, by
the Mercies of God, that you be thence prevailed withal, to become the Devoted
Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ, in all New Obedience, which is to Present
your selves a Sacrifice unto Him. The Affricans o^ old, would foolishly Worship
the Creatures which did them any Benefit, as our Americans at this Day do the
Fire, because of the Singular Benefit which they have therefrom. Yea, the
People of Troas worshipped the very Mice, because they had received a notable
Benefit by an Army of Mice, gnawing asunder the Bow Strings of their Enemies.
But how unnatural then, will it be for us, to forget the Benefits done to us by
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, or to decline the Service of Him that has done the
Benefits: Indeed we cannot requite the Mercy of God unto us, by doing of any
thing that shall be for His Advantage. Though the parts of Thankfulness are
well-distributed by Aquinas, into Recognition, and Valuation, and Retribution,
of the Divine Benefits; Yet, for this last point o^ Thankfulness, if the Son of
Sirach might justly say, How can thou Recompense thy Parents, the things they
have done for thee? Much more may we say, It Is impossible for us to Recompense
our Savior, the things He has done for us: And the Light of Nature it self
dictates, as Bellarmine himself allows, That no man can, Paria reddere Deo; or,
make Equal Returns unto the Lord We must say to our God, as in Psalm. 16. 2. My
Goodness extends not unto thee. Nevertheless there are some Things, which the
Lord graciously calls Retributions; and those are the Fruits of Obedience,
which the Showers of Mercy falling upon us, from Heaven do bespeak our yielding
of. The Mercy of God is the Tillage which He Employes upon us; O Earth, Earth,
Earth, Hear the Word of the Lord! Now the Retri^^^ions which we are to make
unto Him, are those which the Apostle mentions, in Phil. 1. 11. The Fruits of
Righteousness, which are unto the Glory and Praise of God. Wherefore, I beseech
you, Brethren, to Consider such Things as these.

Consider, First, There are many, there are mighty, there are most Undeserved
Mercies, which we have Received from the Open Hand of our God. There is no
Comfortable Thing at any Time Enjoyed by us, but what comes unto us, from the
Hand of God in the Lord JESUS CHRIST. Verily, we must call Him, as in Psalm. 59.
17. The God of our Mercy. But ^oh^ how much of His Mercy, are we on every side
surrounded withal! There are General Mercies, wherein we all have our share. As
we are Englishmen, we are Born to those Rights, which are preferrible to the
Best Estates that can be acquired among any other Nations upon Earth. But as we
are New-Englanders, we have our further Privileges, which no People under the
Sun, out of New England have. Here are things, whereof we may say, as the
Jewish Rabbi said of Liberty, If the Heavens were Parchment, and the Seas were
Ink, they would not suffice to Write the Praises due to God, on the account
thereof. But besides, and above, and beyond, these Liberties, we have the
Liberties of the Gospel too, (the Mercies in the Text now before us most
peculiarly referred unto!) in some Circumstances, which may cause us to sing,
as in Psalm. 147. 20. God has not dealt so with any Nation. But then, there are
Personal Mercies also, wherein all of us may Rejoice. We have our Common
Mercies: the Mercies which attended our Infancy, and Education: the Mercies of
the Provision hitherto made for all our Necessities: the Mercies of our
Preservations from Dangers whereto we have often been Exposed: the Mercies of
the Relations, which God (...) graciously given to us; Mercies whereof we may
say, as in Lam. 3. 32. The Lords Mercies are New to us every morning. We have
our Special Mercies too. It may be, Temporal Mercies are heaped upon us, with
such Loads, as to distinguish us from, to dignifie us above, others round about
us: Oh! compare our case, with the case of others, known to us, of whom we do
not know, but that we have Sinned much more than they; and say, as in Psalm. 16.
6. I have a Goodly Heritage. Yea, but we have our Spiritual Mercies, to be
Celebrated with the peculiar Hallelujahs of our Spirits. Our Everlasting
Salvation is cont^ived in our Lord JESUS CHRIST: and in pursuance of that
Salvation, our Lord has complied with all the Humbling Things, which the
Justice of God required of our Surety: and that Great Salvation is Revealed and
Offered unto us, and the Spirit of the Lord JESUS CHRIST has been savingly
Operating upon us, to make us Accept of that Salvation, and to Apply that
Salvation unto us for-ever. Oh! say with a Spirit Rejoicing in God our Savior,
as in Luc. 1. 78. Through the Tender mercy of our God, the Day Spring from (...)
High has visited us. Now, have we Deserv^^ (...) these Mercies? No, Not one of
them. What (...) we, but the Dogs, that never merited a ^rumb of all the Bounty
that is fallen to us? We are Undeserving, and Ill-deserving, and Hell^eserving
Wretches; and we must own, as in ^en. 32. 10. Lord, I am not worthy of the
Least, (...) all thy Mercies, which thou have showed unto thy ^ervant!

(...) Consider, Secondly: All the Return that we (...) make unto God for His
Mercies, is our (...), in the Service of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. If we would
ask, and Oh! Let us (...), that convenient Question, What are the ^anks that
our God would have of us, for all His Mercies? The Reply must be, Become the
Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ, and Obey Him ^ith Universal Holiness. Or, we
may take an answer from Tit. 2. 10. The Grace of God, that ^ingeth Salvation,
teaches us, to Deny all Ungod^ness, and Worldly Lusts, and Live Soberly, and
righteously, and Godl^ly. It is worth nothing, ^ow those Two Bad Qualities, are
joined, in Tim. 3. 2. Unthankful, Unholy. If men be not ^oly, they are not
Thankful. Do we Dream, that our All sufficient God will expect from us,
Thousands of Rams, and Ten Thousands of Rivers ^f Oil, by way of Thankfulness
for His Mercies? (...), He only says, Be you my Servants; Live unto me, while
you Live upon me, Obey me by Doing of Justice, and Loving of Mercy, and Walking
Humbly before me, and I have enough. It was most ingenuously spoken, by the
Dying Martyr, Alas, I have only two Brass Farthings for my Lord Jesus Christ, a
sorry Body, and a sinful Soul: if He, to whom I am infinitely Endebted, will
accept of these, He shall have them with all my Heart. Even so ought we to say;
We are (...) Insolvent, a Desperate, sort of Debtors unto God; (...) never can
pay Him any thing proportionable to what we have Received from Him; but if the
unwearie^ Service of my Obedience may be acceptable to Him. (...) shall be
glad; He shall have That, while I have (...) Being.

Consider, Thirdly: If we do not Return the Service of Obedience unto the Lord
JESUS CHRIST for His Mercies, we are chargeable with an odious Ingratitude; and
Ingratitude (...) indeed the most odious thing Imaginable. (...) say, Ingratum
dixeris; et omnia dixeris: As Good call a man, a Viper, or the Detestablest
Thin^ you can imagine, as to say, He is Unthankful I remember, the Prophecy
concerning the R^turn of the Israelitish Nation to a good (...) in the Latter
Days, Expresses it so, in Hos. 3. (...) They shall Fear the Lord, and His
Goodness; (...) is, as a Converted Jew teaches me to Expo^^ it, the Messiah,
the Good Thing promised in Eighty Fifth Psalm. Syrs, Our Lord JESUS CHRIST, is
a Lord so Good, that He is G^^ness it self; and how Ungrateful are we, if (...)
do not Serve such a Lord! A Slave, that shall have his Meat, his Drink, his
Clothing and Lodging from a Good Master, is to be Beaten with many Stripes, if
he be not like the Servant, of whom the Centurion his Master, said, I say ^o
him, Do this, and he does it. It was a Custom even among the Heathen, as our
Lord Himself observes, that such as were their Benefactors, (their Baal Hanans,
and their Hannibals, their Gracious Lords) they would make them their
Governors, and Swear Allegiance unto them. And shall we then refuse to Serve
our Lord in Heaven, the Lord of Heaven, who supplies all our wants, and is our
Benefactor every moment? The Prophet Elisha, in 2 King. 4. 1^. thought ^t would
have been a breach of Good Manners, if he had not asked a Courteous Hostess,
Behold, thou have been careful of us; What shall be done for thee? Surely then,
we should say with ourselves, What shall be done, what Service is there to be
done for the Lord JESUS CHRIST, who has been always careful of me? What a
sordid man, was that Egyptian Butler, who forgot the Joseph, that had been so
useful unto him? And is it not as (...) a thing for us to Forget the God of our
(...)? It was a base Temper that Nabal showed, when David must say of him, in 1 Samuel 25. 11. in vain have I kept all that this Fellow has. And shall our Lord
say of us. In vain have I thrown away all my Mercies upon such (...) Sinner: He
is a mere Grave to my Mercies: He Will do no Service for me, Let me do never so
much for Him. Syrs, the Lord will by dreadful Dispensations, give us to
understand, that He does nothing in vain. Oh! Let not that check belong unto
us, in Deuteronomy. 32. 6. Do ye thus Requite the Lord, O foolish people and unwise!

Consider, Fourthly; All the Service wherein we Obey the Lord JESUS CHRIST, for
the Requital of His Mercies, will be as profitable to our selves, as acceptable
to the Lord. Certainly, we shall not Lose by it! No, It will issue in the
Continuation, and the Augmentation of our Mercies. As among men, it is a Delight
unto us, to Do good unto the Thankful; So will the Blessed God say, My Mercies
are well bestowed upon such a man; he shall have them still, he shall have more
of them, he shall have as much as Heart can wish. Behold, how we may prevent
the Loss of our Precious and Pleasant Things. Let us do Service for the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, with what we have: So our Talents will not be taken from us. Let
us be Tenants, that shall honestly pay the little Rents required of us, and we
shall not be Turned out of all. And what a Sign shall we therein have of our
Sincerity before the Lord? An Hypocrite will sometimes abstain from Evil, for
fear of Rods and Blowe^ Oh! but when a man is marvellously quickened unto the
Service of the Lord JESUS CHRIST by the Smiles of the Lord upon him, there is a
most hopeful mark of Uprightness upon the Sou^ of such a man.

Well, These Things being thus Considered, ^ere are some Things, which I desire
we may ^ow find our selves disposed unto.

First, Let us very particularly Ponder the Mercies of God unto us, in the Lord
JESUS CHRIST. Retire, and Look back, and Look round, ^on the Multifarious
Loving kindness of our ^od unto us. As Abashuerus in Est. 6. 1. called for
(...) Records, wherein he found Great Things ^at had been done for him; So let
Us ca^t (...) Eye into the Records, which we Do, or Should ^^ep, of the Great
Things that God has done (...) us. Oh! Let us make a Catalogue, as far (...)
we can, of our Mercies: Nor indeed can ^e easily leave, a better Legacy to our
Families, ^an such a Catalogue of our Ebenezers, of our ^xperiences.

Secondly, Let us very particularly Purpose the ^ervice of the Lord JESUS
CHRIST, for, (...) with, His Mercies Retire, and put that ^^terrogatory unto
our selves, in Psalm. 116. 12. What shall I Render to the Lord for all His
Benefits? and pursuant hereunto, Let us choose to be (...) Servants of the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, (...) all Holy Conversation. Imitate that Prince ^^ntacuzanus,
who giving up himself unto (...) Lord JESUS CHRIST, would afterward (...) his
Name Changed into Christodulus, or, Servant of Christ. I tell you, Great
Emperors ^ere not the Smaller for Subscribing themselves, ^he Vassals, of this
Lord. Yea, Let us often have our Ex^lici^ Contrivances, how to Glorify and
Magni^y God our Savior. It Is a Noble Question, that we should sometimes put
(...) our selves, What special Service may I do for my Lord Jesus Christ, as I
Stand in such (...) Relation, or such a Capacity? And in Answer to this
Question, some singular ways to (...) Good, will doubtless occur unto us.

Finally, Let us Resign up our selves unto the Spirit of the Lord JESUS CHRIST,
that by His Influences, we may Present our selves a Living Sacrifice, Holy, and
Acceptable unto Go^. We can do nothing of our selves, in this Reasonable
Service: but if once the Spirit of our Lord JESUS CHRIST shall take Possession
(...) us, we shall then Serve Him faithfully, Serve Him ^ervently, Serve Him
constantly; and (...) for Him, and not for another. In allusion to the old
usage of Masters Br^nding their Servants, (...) was usual for the ancient
Idolaters, to Bran^ themselves for the perpetual Service of the (...) whereto
they were devoted, with such Mark^ as are forbidden in Leviticus. They some
times Branded themselves, with the Mark (...) their Idol, as an Hel^et was the
Mark of (...) and the Ivy was the Mark of Bacchus. The sometimes Branded
themselves with the (...) of their Idol; as, ^upiter, or the like, at larg^ And
they sometimes Branded themselves with the Number of his Name; that is, with
other Letters which together would amount unto the same Number with the known
Letters of his ^ome, agreed Privately among the fra^ernity, ^o signify So. I
will not Report what some Zealous Persons among the People of God, in the
Primitive Times, did in Opposition hereunto. But this I say; Lying at the Foot
of ^overaign Grace, Let us, give up our selves ^o the Free Spirit of the Lord
JESUS CHRIST; and that Spirit will Effectually Mark us, and Hold us, to Service
of that Lord Eternally. Come then, Let us Lay our selves in the Dust, (...) the
Feet of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and say before Him; Lord, I would gladly be
^hine, and there is infinite Reason that I should be (...) forever. Oh! how
wonderful will be my Happiness, and If thou will accept me to Serve thy
Glorious Interests! Behold, I here Devote my self, and all that I am, and all
that I have, unto thy Glory? But I am able to do nothing: Wherefore, Oh! give
me that Good Spirit of thine, which thou have Promised unto them that ask it.
Let that Spirit Seize me, fill me, act me, and make me an instrument of thy
Glory for ever.

Whatever has been done by the Mercies of God, for the man who does thus, I
say, Believe Thou? Thou shall see yet greater Things than Ever.

But it is Time to break off. We will now make an Echo to the Calls of Heaven
which we have thus had,

I Beseech you, by the Mercies of God, that ye ^esent (...) your Bodies, a
Living Sacrifice, Holy, Acceptable (...) to God, your Reasonable Service

By Digesting it into an Hymn, which may help carry on the Thanksgiving wherein
we are Engage^
THe Mercies of Almighty God
To miserable Me,
Purchased by His most precious Blood,
Are, Oh! how Rich and Free!
Mercies, which Answer and Remove
All my just Miseries:
Mercies, Well-worth my Praise and Love,
And Thankful Sacrifice.
Behold, O Gracious Lord, I do
Present my self to Thee:
No Beasts, but my Own Body to
My God, shall off'red be.
A Body, by the Death of Thine
For Thee full dearly Bought,
To Thee, with Every Thing of mine,
Is now Sincerely brought.
My Living Body Off'red here
So does continue Still;
Oh! may it Live, Thy Name to Fear,
And still to Do Thy Will.
May, HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD
On all I do in It,
According to Thy Holy Word,
Be now most Plainly Writ.
May I, the Pleasing of Thee, make
My daily care therein,
And never any Pleasure take
Defi^'d with Loathsome Sin
Lord, Let me thus my Reason use
In Offering Thee Thy Own:
It Is all Right Reason I should choose
To be Thine, Thine alone.
FINIS.

