ACCOUNT Of the Proceedings of His Excellency, THE Earl of BELLOMONT Captain
General and Governor of New York, etc. and the Honorable, the Council, at an
Extraordinary Council held in Fort William Henry, New York the 8th day of May,
School.

Published by his Excellency's Command.



Printed and Sold by William Bradford. Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, in the City of New York, School.

At an Extraordinary Council held at Fort William Henry, New York this 18th of
May, School.
PRESENT, His Excellency the Earl of Bellomont, The Lieut. Governor, Capt.
Nansan, Esqr. Frederick Phillips, Esqr. Stephanus Cortland, Esqr. Chidley
Brook, Esqr. Gabrill Minveill, Esqr. John Lawrence. Esqr.


HIS Excellency administered an Oath of Secrecy to the Lieutenant Governor,
Edward Randolph, Esquire and Thomas Weaver, Esquire they not being Members of the
Council.

His Lordship appointed Thomas Weaver, Esquire to act as Council at Law in behalf
of his Majesty, and to assist to take the Minits of the Council.

By his Lordships Command a Letter was read from his Grace the Duke of
Shrewsbury, principal Secretary of State, to his Lordship, Governor of
New York, in relation to Pirates.

By his Lordships Command, the Letter to his Lordship from James Vernon, Esquire
Secretary to their Excellencies, the Lords Justices of England, in relation to
Pirates was read; as likewise a second Letter from Mr. Vernon, with Memorials
from the East India Company, of Damages done in the East Indies by Pirates
belonging to New York, the said Pirates being reported to have Commissions and
Protections from the late Governor, Coll. Fletcher and a Command to his
Lordship to make enquiry into the same

His Lordship then told the Gentlemen of the Council, That the occasion of his
calling them was to have their Advice in relation to some Discoveries he had
made about Pirates, and desired Mr. Weaver to open the matter to them.

Who enlarged upon the strict Orders given by his Majesty against Pirates, to
the Governor of New York, and now read to them, of the Nature of the Crime of
Pyracy, how involved with other Crimes, especially Murder, and the ill
Consequences that attend it: How far his Majesty's Honor is prejudiced, with
regard to his Allies: The great loss and destruction of the Trade of the East
India Company of England, and therein the vast loss of his Majesty's Revenue,
and to the Ruin of his Majesty's Subjects by Reprizals made on their Effects in
the East Indies: The dishonor done to his Majesty. That any of his Governors
should grant Commissions to Pirates, or that they should grant Protections to
prevent Prosecutions for a Crime abhorred by all civil Governments, all which
is a betraying the Trust reposed in them by his Majesty.

That his Lordship had received full Information that Coll. Fletcher, late
Governor of this Province, had admitted notorious known Pirates to bring in
their Spoils to the City of New York, and had granted them Protections under
his Hand and Seal, for which he had received considerable Rewards from them,
they at the same time confessing to him that they had Robbed the Subjects of
the great Mogul, his Majesty's Alley.

That likewise his Lordship was well informed that William Nicolls, Esquire one of
his Majesty's Council, by Profession a Lawyer, and therefore not ignorant of
the Nature of Pyracy, had so far betrayed the Trust his Majesty had reposed in
him, as to make the bargain between the Pirates and Coll Fletcher, (well
knowing them to be Pirates) and agreed with them on the Price they should give
Coll. Fletcher for his Protections; for which his Service the said Mr. Nicolls
had a Present made him of eight hundred Pieces of Eight. To prove which a
Deposition was produced to his Lordship and Council, of Edward Tailor, one of
the Pirates who made the agreement with Coll. Fletcher and Mr. Nicolls. Which
Deposition was very full to prove the same. And likewise several Original
Protections as for Pirates were produced, signed and sealed by Coll. Fletcher.

That his Lordship esteemed it a very great betraying of Trust both in Coll.
Fletcher, the late Governor, who is now on ship board bound for England, as
likewise of Mr. Nicolls, one of his Majesty's Council, now confined in the
Fort, involved in the same Crime with him. That this is matter of State, and
his Lordship desired their Assistance and Opinion, what should be done therein
for his Majesty's Service.

On this Mr. Nicolls was sent for to appear before his Lordship and Council,
and being charged by Mr. Weaver with the foregoing particulars, and having
heard read the aforesaid Deposition of Edward Tailor, Mr. Nicolls for his
Defense said, He knew no Persons that were Pirates, nor did he know of any
Contract made by Pirates with Coll. Fletcher; but acknowledged that he had
received the eight hundred Dollars from Edward Tailor for obtaining Protections
and did believe he deserved them for his pains and labor in serving them. He
likewise offered, That there is an Act of this Province that gave allowance to
Privateers to come in and have Protections, if they gave Security to the
Government.

To this Mr. Weaver answered, That there was no such Act that gave any benefit
to these Pirates, and produced the Act in relation to Pirates, and read part of it

Then Mr. Weaver, by his Lordships order, acquainted the Council, That Capt
Evans, Commander of his Majesty's Ship, The Richmond, bound for England, had
given in a Memorial to his Lordship, That be wanted forty Sailors, but
acquainted his Lordship, that he could Man his Ship by Pirates. His Lordship
being startled thereat, told Capt. Evans, That he thought it dangerous to admit
so many Pirates on board the Kings Ship, for that they might knock the Kings
Sailors on the head, or join with them to run away with the Kings Ship. To
which Capt. Evans replied, He did not fear that. This discourse was about the
18th of April: and four or five days after Capt. Evans came again to his
Lordship, and desired an Order for ten of Capt. Syms Saylors, affirming to his
Lordship, that he had got thirty Volunteers on board, who would pay for their
Passage home for England. That his Lordships Jealousy being much increased by
these Discourses of Capt. Evans, his Lordship ordered him to get ready to sail,
and when the Ship was ready, his Lordships Pacquets and Capt. Evans sailing
Orders should be ready. And some few days after Capt. Evans came to his
Lordship, and told him, that he was ready, and would, with his Lordships leave,
sail to the Watering - place at Statten-Island, and when watered would fall
down to Sandy Hook, where he expected six or eight Sailors would come on board
of him; and then Capt. Evans said he would wait on his Lordship at New York,
and receive his Pacquets and sailing Orders

To these Discourses his Lordship offered his Oath voluntarily to the Council,
that they were true. And to the two last Discourses of thirty Volunteers on
board that would pay for their Passage home: and that six or eight Sailors
would come on board at Sandy-Hook, Mr. Weaver (who was present with his
Lordship at the time of their being spoke) offered to attest.

That his Lordship (believing it not safe to hazard the Kings Ship, and with
design to catch the said Pirates (if on board) had this morning secured Cap.
Evans in this Fort, and had given a Commission to Cap. C^^^iford, with
necessary Instructions, and several Gentlemen, with forty armed Sailers were
now sent with him on board the Richmond, which his Lordship offered to the
Consideration of the Council.

On which Captain Evans being called in before the Council, and charged with
the aforegoing particulars, Capt. Evans absolutely denied that he had said to
his Lordship that he would man his Ship with Pirates, and said his Lordship had
mistaken him, for that he had only said he believed he could get so many of the
Privateers come in with Capt. Allison from Madagascar, and likewise denied all
the other Speeches to be said by him, which were attested by his Lordship; and
Captain Evans protested, that he had no Pyrate or Volunteer (to pay his
passage) on board the Kings Ship, nor would he suffer any Pyrate to come on
board the Ship, nor did he know of any that was to come on board. On which both
Captain Evans and Mr. Nicolls were ordered to withdraw.

His Lordship then proposed to the Council that since the Infamy of Encouraging
and Supporting Pirates was laid on the City of New York, that it would be for
the honor of the Government (what in them lay) to wipe off that stain, and to
publish a Proclamation forthwith concerning the horrid crime of Pyracy, and for
the prosecuting and discovery of Pirates, to which the Council unanimously
assented.

Then his Lordship desired the advice of the Council what Methods should be
used against Coll. Fletcher, Mr. Nicolls and Captain Evans, on this Emergency.
Mr. Chidly Brooks said, that giving Protections to Pirates has not been looked
upon formerly as so great a matter, for that all the neighboring Governments
had done it commonly. To which his Lordship replied, That Mr. Brooks might, if
he pleased, think it a Piccadillo but his Majesty and his Ministers at home
esteemed it as a high Offense, as might be perceived by the strict Instructions
about it, that had been read to them. To which Mr. Brook answered, That he
would not excuse it, but only spoke of what had been done.

The Council were of Opinion not one dissenting, That the Depositions and
Proofs against Coll. Fletcher should be taken, and sealed with the Seal of the
Province, and sent home to the King with Coll. Fletcher a Prisoner. But as for
Mr. Nicolls they believed it proper he should be tried here where the fact was
committed, and not be sent home, which would Ruin him, he having, (as they
believed) no Money at home.

To which his Lordship replied, That there was so general a Corruption in this
Province, and the People so accustomed to the Profits of Pirates, that they were
apt to be almost in an Uproar on the Execution of the Laws; and that he did not
know how far it was proper to bring this matter to a Trial here; and that since
Coll. Fletcher and Mr. Nicolls were both involved in the same Crime of
Maladministration of the Trust reposed in them by his Majesty, it was his
Lordships Opinion, that they should both be sent home together, and be
answerable to his Majesty

Then Capt. Evans and Mr. Nicolls were again called in before the Council.

The Council were of Opinion that Mr Nicolls and Capt. Evans should give in
Security for their Appearance, or continue confined.

And in presence of the Council his Lordship admitted Mr. Nicolls to give in
Security of Two Thousand Pounds to appear when demanded; and admitted Capt.
Evans his own Recognizance of one Thousand Pounds to appear when demanded.

His Lordship thought fit to suspend Mr. Nicolls from being one of his
Majesty's Council, until his Majesty's further pleasure be known therein.

And on the foregoing Recognizances Capt. Evans and Mr. Nicolls were
discharged of their Confinement.

Copia Vera, Thomas Weaver.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, in the City of New York, School.


