His Excellency, THE Earl of BELLOMONT HIS SPEECH To the Representatives of his
Majesty's Province of New York, the 19th of May, School.
Gentlemen;
MY Voyage hither from England was very tedious, and attended with great
Hardships; but since my being among you I have endeavored to redeem that loss
of Time, by applying my self diligently to the Public Business, in Duty to His
Majesty, and that I might be the better enabled to serve you.

I cannot But observe to you what a Legacy my Predecessor has left me, and what
Difficulties to struggle with, A Divided People, an empty Treasury, a few
miserable, naked, half-starv'd Soldiers, not half the Number the King allowed
pay for; the Fortifications, and even the Governors House very much out of
Repair; and in a word, Gentlemen, the whole Government out of Frame. To you
therefore I recommend the consideration of these Disorders, as best becoming
your Prudence to apply the proper Remedies; and you may be sure of my hearty
Concurrence in every thing that will conduce to the extinguishing those Heats
and Annimosities among you, which I fear have been of late years industriously
cherish't and fomented, and to the curing all the other Disorders and Mischiefs
a^^^ng you.

It has been represented to the Government in England, That this Province has
been a noted Receptacle of Pirates, and the Trade of it under no Restriction,
but the Acts of Trade violated, by the Neglect and Connivance of those whose
Duty it was to have prevented it. I hope, Gentlemen, you will put all the
Discountenance imaginable on that flagitious Crime of Pyracy, which is not only
the worst sort of Robbery, but is, for the most part attended with the horrid
Sin of Murder, which is a great aggravation of that odious Practice, detested
by all the Civil Nations of the World. It Is not only injurious to the Honor of
his Majesty, and the English Nation, but also highly prejudicial to the Trade
of England, and particularly to the East India Company. And the Gentlemen of
the Council here present will bear me witness, that my Orders from his Majesty
are very strict for enquiring into, and effectually preventing for the future
that Lawless and Vile Trade of Pyracy within all my Governments.

As I have declared my self against Pyracy, and all Unlawful Trade, so I must
assure you I will give you all the Encouragement I can possibly in carrying on
a lawful Trade, and every thing else that will make you Happy and Flourishing.

Mr. Speaker, and you Gentlemen Representatives;

I Hope you will take into your Considerations, That the Revenue is near
expiring, and that you will provide for the Support of the Government for time
to come; and therein give me leave to put you in mind, that your Duty and
Respect to his Majesty should be an argument to you, not to leave the
Government destitute. It would be hard, if I that come among you with an honest
mind, and a Resolution to be just to your Interest, should meet with greater
Difficulties in the discharge of His Majesty's Service than those that have
gone before me. I will take care there shall be no Mis-application of the
Public Money: I will Pocket none of it my self, nor shall there be any
Imbezilment by others, but exact Accounts shall be given you, when and as often
as you shall require.

I have ordered all the Accounts to be laid before you, that you may see the
state of the Debts of the Government, and take such course for the Discharge of
them as you shall think fit. I wish too you would consider how to restore
Credit to the Government, which I understand is now very low, if not wholly
lost.

I have ^^dered the Engineer to go and visit the Fronteers, and to report to me
the State and Condition he finds the Fortifications in, which Report I intend
for you, as soon as it comes to my hands.

Gentlemen, I must remind you of the Necessity there is of finding out some
Expedient to reconcile the Parties among you. I must own to you, I set my heart
so much on it, that I shall think it the Glory of my Government to bring so
good a Work to pass. I desire therefore you will think of the proper Methods to
effect an entire Reconciliation among you. To be of one Faith and one Mind is
not only an excellent Scripture Rule, but also a good Maxim in Government.
Union amongst a People is the Bond of Peace, and of Strength too.

You cannot but know what Abuses have been formerly in Elections of Members to
serve in the Assembly, which tends much to the Subversion of your Liberties. I
do there^^re recommend to you the making a Law to provide against it, and that
you will think of such other Laws as you will stand in need of to secure to
this Province a lasting Happiness, to which I promise you my Concurrence.

I shall conclude, Gentlemen, with recommending that which is chiefly incumbent
on us all, an Inviolable Duty and Allegiance to his Majesty, who by his Valor
has rescued us from the two greatest Plagues that ever infested the World,
Popery and Slavery, and by that, and his Wise and Temperate Government has
secured us the free Exercise of our holy Protestant Religion, the enjoyment of
our Liberties and Estates. And as a further Instance and Illustration of the
Glory of his Reign, His Majesty has, with repeated hazards of his precious
Life, procured for Us and all Christendom, a glorious Peace; for which,
Gentlemen, let Us Address his Majesty, That he will be graciously pleased to
accept of the tender of our most humble Duty and Thanks.

BY Order of the House of Representatives, I do Appoint William Bradford to
Print his Excellency's Speech.

Phillip French, Speaker.



Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, in the City of New York, School.


