The Case Put and Decided BY George Fox, George Whitehead, Stephen Crisp, and
other the most Ancient and Eminent QVAKERS, BETWEEN Edward Billing on the one
part, And some West-Jersians, headed by Samuel Jenings On the other Part, In
an Award relating to the Government of their Province, wherein, because not
molded to the Palate of the said Samuel, the Light, the Truth, the Justice
and Infallibility of these great Friends are arreigned by him and his
Accomplices.

ALSO Several Remarks and Annimadversions on the same Award, setting forth the
Promises. With some Reflections on the Senseless Opposition of these Men against
the present Governor, and their daring Audatiousness in their presumptuous
asserting an Authority here over the Parliament of ENGLAND.

Published for the Information of the Impartial and Considerate, particularly
such as Worship God, and profess Christianity, not in Faction and Hypocrisy,
but in Truth and Sincerity.

VVo to the Rebellious Children, says the Lord, that take Counsel, out not of
me, and cover with a Covering, but not of my Spirit, that they may lay sin upon
sin,

Isa. 30 1. Therefore now hear, Thou have trusted in thy Wickedness, Thou have
said, none sees me; Thy Wisdom and t^y Knowledge it has perverted (...), and
thou have said in thy ^eart, I am and none else beside me,

Isa. 47.^0. Therefore shall Evils come upon thee, thou shall not know from
whence it rises; and Miseris shall fall upon thee, thou shall not be able to
put it off,

v. 11. The Award of George Fox and other Rulers of Chiefest Authority among
the Quakers, relating to a Diff^rence concerning the Government of West-Jarsey,
depending between Edw. Billing and Sam. Jenings; etc.
WHereas there was a late difference depending between E. Billinge on the one
part, and S. Jenings, Tho. Budd and G H^tchinson, and some of the Proprietors
of the Province of West New-Jarsey on the other part, concerning the Government
of that Province, which they did refer and submit to the Judgment and
Determination of G. Fox, G. Whitehead, W. Gibson, Alex. Parker, W Shewin, Chapter
Bathurst, Chapter Marshall, T. Ellwood, R. Whitpane, J. Park, G Crisp, T. Heart, J
Osgood and W. Crouch, promising and engaging to stand, abide and submit unto
the Judgment, Sentence and Determination of them, or any eight of them, as by
Writing under their hands, bearing date the 31 of 5. Mo. 1684. and by
adjournments continued to the 11. of 8 Mo. following, and no longer does
appear. Now we whose Names are here-under written having duly weighed and
considered the matter in difference, upon a full hearing of both Parties
concerned* face to face, do, according to our Consciences and best
understandings of matters of Fact and of the several Complaints, Al^egations
and Evidences produced, understand, advise, judge and determine as follows,
viz.

1. That E. Bi^^inge has, by Concessions, signed by himself, with other words
and circumstances, as also by Letters written by G^^en Laury, Nicholas Lucas
etc. to the Proprietors, given them ground to expect that they should have and
had the Government, with the Soil, which he not performing, gave offense, and
we judge they were to blame, and not well advised; for it appears something
dubi^us whether E. B^lling had it then to dispose of, Counsels opinions seeming
various about it, and the words Powers and Governments not being mentioned in
the Dukes Grant to the Lord Berckly and Sir George Cartwright.

2. We find no mention made in the Concessions of such mode of Government as
that a Governor is to be chosen by the People, but mention of an Assembly and
ten Commissioners. Neither can we find any warrantable foundation and legal
Right either from the Kings Grant, or in the Conveyances to the particular
Proprietors from E Billing, etc to justify them in electing their Governor,
nor yet for a popular Government without a single Governor, or Commissioners
particularly assigned by legal Authority, NB.

3. That E. Billinge by the last Grant from the Duke has the Title and Power
of Government legally in him, as also by the Kings own approbation in his
Declaration and Letter to and in behalf of the said E. Billinge, and he cannot
be divested thereof but by default or by his own consent, as we really
apprehend.

4. That E. Billing (as we really conceive and understand) cannot legally fell
and divide the Government in pieces, parcells or piece-meals to particular
Proprietors, if he part with it, it must go whole to a single Person, or to a
certain number by Name who must, as a Corporation, have the whole of him, in
whom it legally resideth, and that by an entire Grant or Assignment for the
same purpose.

5. That whereas S. Jenings and the Assembly in West-Jarsey had positively
acknowledged E. Billing as Governor, and acted about two years by virtue of his
Commission and Power, and S. Jenings as his Deputy engaging to serve him, and
preserve his Interest in that Capacity; now after all this they accepting E.
Billing as Governor only in Trust, as they allege, in order to have him assign
his Power and Government to the People, which not being obtained with his
consent, then they rejecting him the said Billing, and choosing S. Jenings
Governor in his stead, and his accepting thereof, WAS A BETRAYING HIS TRUST, as
also rejecting W. Welsh, since deputed by E. Billing, without giving E. Billing
any previous Notice of these their designs and proceedings against him and his
Interest, These we judge irregular Proceedings, Vnfair and Unwarrantable, (...)
and worthy of Blame in S. Jenings and all Persons concerned therein.

6. That seeing E. Billing and those of his Trustees did give such ground of
expectation as aforesaid, by Concessions and Letters, and also by some words in
some of their Deeds, that the Proprietors should or might have the Government
or Power to elect a Governor among themselves, which if be cannot legally or
safely perform according to their expectations, yet we all agree, that he is
thereby bound to perform to the Proprietors, so far as he legally and safely
may do. And also we judge, that the said Billing ought to go so far as he is
able, and lawfully can in all things to their just Satisfaction, by making and
confirming unto them such Fundamental Laws, Concessions and Provisions,
consonant, and not repugnant to the Laws and Government of this Realm of
England, as may fully secure them from all Abuses, Oppressions and
Encroachments upon their Freedoms and Liberties, both as Men and Christians, by
and from himself, his Heirs or Assigns, according to the Contents of his own
Letter, dated the 15 of 8. mo. 1680. sent with his last Grant from the Duke.

7. That seeing E. Billing has declared that he has settled the Reversion of
the Government upon his Son-in Law B. Barclet, our advice is, That he do
procure his said Son-in-Law to sign, with himself, such fundamental Laws,
Concessions and Provisions, so made and confirmed as above* and also that the
said Billinge do produce and show his Concessions, so made, to any 30. more of
those 14 Friends before named* to whom the aforesaid Difference was refered,
and take their advice and consent thereunto* before they be transmitted to the
Proprietors, there to be passed into an Act or Law in the General Assembly of
West-Jarsey

8. That the said S. Jenings, T. Bu^^, G. Hutchison and the rest of the
Proprietors concerned, and residing in West-Jarsey, do at present renew and
continue their due acknowledgment of Billing, and peaceably aquiese, and
quietly and duly submit to his Authority and Power, as their legal Governor,
and receive and accept of those things before mentioned from him, and to be
content and satisfied therewith. All which being effectually performed by the
said E. Billinge then the Proprietors to pay their proportions of the Charge of
the last Grant.

9. We finding that many Errors, Mistakes, Misapprehensions, Misacting, Faults,
Trespasses and Offenses have been suffered and done and committed since the
first proposal of inhabiting and planting the said Province, not only by E.
Billing, but also by S. Jenings and others, therefore we do advise and judge it
needful that an Act of Indemnity and Oblivion be provided and passed by the
first opportunity by E. Billing and the Assembly of West-Jarsey, and that the
same be drawn so full and effectual that all Persons concerned in the said
Province may be secured from being called to account for any thing done or
acted in relation to himself a^ Governor or to the Government before the date
hereof; and that likewise therein provision be made to enjoin the Inhabitants
and Proprietors of the said Province not to upbraid, traduce or defame the said
Billing, nor he them for any fault, mistake or miscarriage done, in relation to
the said Difference before the date of the said Act of Oblivion; and that the
said Billing procure his Son-in-Law B. Bartlet to sign the same with himself.

10. It is our Christian advice, That no party concerned in the aforesaid
Difference make or cause to be made any S^^ife or Contention therein, whereby
the Peace or Prosperity of the said Province, or any Member thereof may be
disquieted or hurt thereby, and that all Persons concerned forbear to disquiet
or molest each other by going to Law, or any vexatious Suit or Prosecution in
any Courts of Judicature for or because of the said Difference. This we ^o
solemnly leave in Charge on all Persons concerned, for the holy Truth and the
Name of the Lords sake.

Lastly, We do in all sincerity and godly Care ^a^nestly entreat and beseech,
as well as advise all Parties and Persons he^ein concerned, That they sincerely
and heartily in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, and for his sake, ^orgive
one another as Christians, and endeavor with one accord to ^oo^ out and
extinguish all (...), An^mosities, Prejudices, Heart-b^rnings, Heats, Pa^^^ons,
(...) and Divisions, and so b^o^ ^ut the very remembrance thereof, that
Christian and mutual Love and good Will may increase among you, and Truth may
prevail and spread in the Province and those remote parts, through your
faithful and Christian Examples and Conversations, that God Almighty may b^ess
you with Peace, Plenty and Prosperity, and with his divine Refreshments and
Consolations in Christ Jesus, according to our Souls sincere Desires and tender
Supplications on your behalf.

Thus we have given our Advice and Judgment in the foregoing Passages under
our ^ands in London, the 11 of 8 mo. Oct 1684.

London, this 15 of 8. mo. when the Original Judgment and Advice of Friend^
(...). A true Copy, witn^ssMarke Sw^^ner. Will^am Crouch James Park, C^ar.
Marshall, Rich Whitpane William S^^win, Thomas Heart, Geo. Whitehead, Charles
Bat^urst.

Memorandum, Paragraf^ 2d. after these words, assigned by legal Authority,
(...), viz.

NB. Neither do we understand that such a Grant as was expected was attainable
when the 2d Grant was so^icited for, w^^nce this Sentence above cited was
hastily razed out of the Original, the 11 of 8. ^o 1684. It Is our Judgment that
it were better and more clear to be incerted.



Observations on the fore going Award.
REader, (...) observe, That by the foregoing Award of those eminent Quakers,
the Government was in Billing, and not in the People of West-Jarsey, and S.
Jenings condemned by them for Betraying his Trust, in laying aside Billing's
Commission, and taking the Government on him from the People; yet
notwithstanding all this, the same Sam. Jenings being the leading man of that
Party, and chief in the Assembly, now sings his old Song over again, and
affirms the Government to be in the People, thereby encouraging and exciting
the People to Rebellion against the present Governor, and other their lawful
Rulers, to the great obstruction of the Peace and Prosperity of the Province.

Hence is is that P. Fretwell and T. Gardner (two of the said Jenings's Minions
and Quondam Justices) have run from County to County to stir up People to
Sedition, and to oppose the holding of any Courts by the Governors Authority,
and threa^on such as yield Obedience thereunto.

And hence they themselves are so perverse and stubborn as not to come to Count
to (...) for their setting the Province in a flame, at the Court of Appeals,
(...) and for other Misdemeanors, without raising Soldiers to force them
along, to the end that they may send these their Suff^rings to London also, to
be recorded among the rest of their Lies) as a suffering for Truth and
Religion. And hence the said Fretwell, the former Treasurer, refuses to give
Account to Authority what he has done with all the Money he has received of the
Province, and County Taxes: No, for doubtless he finds it more profitable to
continue his former method, viz. to give account to his Fellows, who applaud
him to the People, but pass his Accounts unexamined.

And hence it is that our Sheriff and his Assistant, for doing their Office at
Barlington, are by the said Gardener arrested and shed at a Court in
Pennsilvania, directly contrary to the Laws and Liberties of our English
Nation, and a notorious Violation of our ancient Privileges.

And from hence some others have been encouraged to resist the Government
lately at Salem, where some Quakers also assumed the Militia by beat of Dru^
and Colors flying, and with Whips, Clubs and ^taves they forced off the
Magistrates from the Court house, not suffering them to keep Court (thereby
stopping the current of Justice) till the Governor went with a Force of fifty
Men in Arms, who by the Providence of God, and the said Governors discreet
management, broke through, and que^'d the Rabble, without Bloodshed, even
beyond the expectation of all concerned, the Captain of these Rioters having
prepared his Gun with a Charge of thirty^eight small Bullets.

But all this seemed little in the Eyes of S. Jenings, therefore that he might
more effectually accomplish his seditious Designs to subvert the Government, he
and his Quaker-Followers held a great Meeting, as private as they could, about
December last, at the said Jenings's Plantation House, which Meeting was
appointed for his said Followers to draw up a Writing against ^he Governor and
Government, to send to England; but when the said People met, they found (...)
said Writing ready contrived and drawn to their ^ands, which, when 'twas read,
a person was appointed ^o set every man's Name thereunto the said Jenings having
before threatened the Governor ^o his face to throw him out of the Government,
and therefore he [ Quaker-(...)] uses such landesti^e ways to get others to
authorize his Plots, that ^t may be seen in England, (...) it is not he, but the
People that does it; and ^ll this must be for the Propagation of their Truth,
yea, endeavors of Ruin to their peaceable Neighbors, nay, Province and all
shall lie at ^ake, ^ather than this man to want his Will.

No wonder therefore that he and his Faction in the General Assembly refuses to
sign the Association of Fidelity to King William he being so great a Jacobite
that he covenants with those to whom he sells h^s Land, in their Deeds, to pay
their Quit-Rents to the late King James, a known Enemy to the Kingdom; this all
who please may see recorded in the Registers Office at Burlington.

It Is he that has got away the Book of the L^ws of the Province (as his Friend
H. Grubb informs us) and conceals it from the present Government, (for he had
rather the Province should be without Laws than not to have them of his own
making) but God be thanked he cannot conceal the Laws of England from us; but
perhaps he conceals it for f^^r of loosing their great Fundamental Law therein
recorded, made when the said Jenings was Governor, viz. That the Governor for
the time being shall sign all Acts whatsoever the Representatives, from time to
time, please to enact. This is the Magna Charta of W^st-Jarsey, made to out do
t^^t other Magna Charta of England: What think ye Si^s! were not these men
wiser than our English Legislators? Was not Cato of old inferior to this Man?
for they were but People of the World, but the Quakers say, They are the Only
People of GOD.

But, lastly, it is not to be doubted but when a Committee of both Houses did
debate S. Jenings and his party's Pretentions to the Government, at the
Assembly held in November, 1697. It did inspire great boldness to Jenings and
his Faction to proceed as they have done, that the then Governor Hamilton did
plead so stiffly for them and their pretended Right, and had not one word to
offer on the behalf of the Society, for which his zeal on their account, and
against the Society, they honestly answered his expectation with a Present of
200 l. I say, they (...) took great boldness, who being greedy of engrosing the
whole Rule of the Province to themselves, they had not only outed every Justice
in the County of Burlington, except their own faction of Quakers, but also they
had turned out the Council from being Justices, ex officio, so that none but
Illiterate and otherways Unqualified Persons bore Rule, the ill Effects whereof
the Province in diverse respects has and yet does groan under, as may in time be
further manifested.

But to conclude, I leave these things to be considered, and whether there be
not now need of a ^i^^tia in the Province to secure our Lives and Estates, left
by the leading Quakers crying out against the Government, as no Government, the
Mob here and Scum of England, transported to these Plantations, should jo^n to
Ravage and Ruin both us and them? And it is seen already what Robberies have
been lately committed by Pirates at the lower parts of Delaware, for want of
being opposed by Force, notwithstanding the Quakers boasting of their Trust in
divine Providence to restrain evil Men.

Annimadversions upon the Quakers Award, etc. Penned under the direction and
guidance of this godly Instruction and Caution, viz. He that justifies the
Wicked, and he that condemns the Just, even they both are Abomination to the
Lord, Prove. 17 15.
Impartial Reader;
MAny remarkable Observations the foregoing Award will offer to thy discreet
and ^^genious Consideration.

1. That though the most ancient and eminent Professors of the Quakers Communion,
and their great Patriarch GEORGE FOX himself (who first gave birth and
existence to that New Sect) were chosen Arbitrators by the mutual Consent and
Agreement of the controverting Parties, all Disciples or Proselites of the said
FOX, yet because they drew up an Award which did not in all points suit the
haughty Genius and ambitious Pretensions of Samuel Jenings, he did not
scrupled spensing with his Quakerism, utterly to reject it as Unjust, and by
his Example others also, whom he headed and governed, and who could not, or
d^^st not see but with his Eyes, though they had bound themselves by a Writing
under their hands (as is decl^^'d in the Award) to submit to the Judgment and
Arbitrament of these venerable Friends, headed by their first Apostle, and the
great Architect and President of their Society*

2. Which Proceedings do evince, how far such Persons are worthy to be
credited, and what Confidence may reasonably be reposed in them in other
matters, whom neither so solemn a ^ye* a Writing under their hands, nor the
Authority of such Persons, could bind to their Promises, or engage a Conto^mity
to their own free and spontaneous Act, and the Obligation they had voluntarily
assumed. Though this ^ame FOX, and others concerned with him in this Arbitration,
are the Men, whom, on other occasions (where Interest is not concerned) for the
reputation and support of their Party, they represent as Holy and Righteous,
and would persuade the Wo^ld to reverence them as such, and accordingly ^^each
them up as the M^ss^ngers of Truth, and not in^^^iour to any of the holy
Apostles.

3. That Sam. Jenings by his Non-acquiescence to their Decision does draw great
S^andal and Disgrace upon himself and them. For, if Samuel should be ask't,
Why ^e does refuse to submit to their Determination? his answer could be no
other, but that ^h^se just Men had done Unjustly, and that the Spirit of
Iniquity had got the Ascendant over these Saints, so that their Understandings
thereby were darkened and eclipsed, and their Wills also rendered partial, and
averse to the Cause he had undertaken to maintain, and in vain was brought
before them. And if, on the other hand, the Arbitrators should be interrogated,
Why Samuel would not obey their Order and Determination, and his own
Engagement to conform accordingly? What could they Reply, but That the Spirit
of Pride (which had been a Liar and a Rebel from the beginning) had subdued his
Conscience to Oppose Gods Ordinance, and to confederate with him against them
and the Truth, by whose Inspiration and Guidance they had penned that Award?

4. So that by Sam. Jening^'s own Testimony, and Theirs also whose Senses have
been perverted to link themselves with him, G. FOX, G. Whitehead, S Cr^sp, and
the rest of the Arbitrators, did not act according to Justice and Truth in this
matter, nor Samuel and his Party by theirs; and consequently by the Reciprocal
Evidence of these Men against each other, none of them are Righteous, Perfect
or Infallible, as they hold forth to others, and preach themselves to be. But
Samuel must be content to knock under, and not pretend to stand in
Competition, in point of Veracity, with these Arbitrators; for in the true
Spirit of Quakerism, neither their Light nor Integrity is to be disputed or
called in question; since they were Men, that by the common Testimony of the
whole Body, and the essentials of their own Creed, were illuminated and
governed by the Spirit of Truth, and were taught all things (as formerly the
Apostles of Christ) by the powerful Irradiation of its Light within them. By
their very Fundamentals therefore, their Decision of the Controversy is
Evidence sufficient to convince, that they understood it, and consequently
understood what they did therein, and ought to be done, in point of Justice, on
the behalf of each party. If then Justice was equally distributed by them in
this Award which cannot be denied b^ a Quaker, if he will be true to, and not
revolt from his Principles) why did Samuel refuse to comply with it? And if
Samuel, and those under his Government, who pined their judgment on his
Sleeve, had been men of common Probity, how could they have shamed their
Promise, and strained such a Case? a case so remarkable, so circumstantiated,
to defeat so solemn an Obligation, to the disgrace of themselves, and the
Pillars of their Par^^?

5 That even those moral Precepts enjoined both Parties by these Arbitrators,
as their Christian Dut^, Not to malign, not to Revile or Back bite each other,
have been rejected by Samuel and his Accomplices, as Antichristian, even to
this day; so that the Grave does not yet defend Byllinge against their
Slanders, nor the Authority of those ancient select Friends (to whose Decision
Jenings and his Adherents subjected their Cause and Controve^sie^ against their
Rebellion. But they still as hotly inveigh against Billing, and as fiercely
appear and concern themselves against that Power and Government, in whom it is
now legally and rightfully invested, as formerly when it was lodged in
Billing's Person, before they consented and submitted to this Arbitration. And
at this very present, this great Champion against Billing and this Award does
act this part so strenuously, and with such success, as to draw great Numbers
after him in his Rebellion, and with such a stubborn Refractoriness as to tell
the present Governeur to his face, He neither liked him nor his Commission; did
therefore from thenceforth denounce perpetual Hostility against him, and should
not cease to make War upon him until he had driven him out of the Government.

6. That not only Sam. Jenings, but whosoever beside combine with him to oppose
the Governors Commission and Authority, oppose the Judgment of G. FOX, and the
rest of the Arbitrators named in this Award, and consequently the Judgment of
the most ancient Friends and principal Rulers of the whole Body, and censure
them and it as Unjust and Unworthy of their Regard. So that whilst they strive
against the Government, they also strive to sully the good Name of these
eminent Friends, and cast such a Reproach upon their Memories and Reputation,
as must inevitably form a bad Impression of them in others, and will at once
cancel their Pretensions to those high Dispensations which they claim and
proclaim as peculiar to themselves, and were never before communicated to any
other Name, Order or Society of Christian Professors.

7. It cannot therefore but highly concern the People of West-New-Jarsey to
consider whether it is not more just and safe to obey the Determination and
Judgment of these ancient Friends, than the bold seditious Notions of that
Person, whom those Friends, in the Spirit of Truth (as all Quakers are obliged
to believe, unless they will renounce Unity with their Friends and consistency
with themselves) have stigmatized with the infamous Character of Betraying his
Trust, declaring, that hi^ Proceedings, and theirs also that did appear with
him against Billing's Authority (whom they did publish, testify and recognize
to be his and their lawful Governor) were Vnfair, Unwarrantable, Unsafe and
worthy of Blame. And it is an indelible stain on the Quakers of West-Jarsey,
that those who are not of the Quakers Profession in that Province conform
themselves to the Award of these ancient Friends, and religiously observe the
good Advice therein incerted and urged, and those that profess themselves
Quakers generally abhor, and spu^n against it, as if it were the Dictates of
some Profligate Wretches, or the Resolution and Sentiments of the Sons of
B^lial, and not the conscientious Judgment and impartial Decree of honest Men?

8. Nor can it be any Excuse for Sam. Jenings, and others (who are, and long
have been active by his Motion, as the great Wheel to seduce and betray the
People into Sedition) that they have gained a Multitude to appear on their side
against the present Governor and Government. The Success of this Agency will
not ^xtenuate, but on the contrary aggravate both their Shame and Offense. For
who are they, whose Judgments are debauched thereby? are they not generally
professed Quakers? And what are the Fruits thereof? What does such a
N^go^^ation operat^, bu^ the Peoples Disturbance, the Violation of the public
Peace, the Obstruction of Justice, and endles-Distractions, Ann^^o^^ties and
(...) among all Pa^^^es, and in a word, the Destruction of (...) Province? And
as it shows their Power with the People, so their (...) that Power, and how
pe^niciou^ and dangerous such Seditious, (...) Spirits are in any Government,
in whose Breasts appears to be lodged a large Seminary of Contentions,
Sedition, Factions and Hostilities, to use Samuell^s own Term?

9. Nor can this Plea or pretention be any Justification or Warrantee for their
Proceedings, That the present Governor is not approved of by his Majesty,
according to the Prescription and Tenor of the late Act of Parliament. This
Argument will recoil upon themselves, and against the late Governor, and make
him no Governor after the 25th day of March* 1697. and consequently all
Public and Provincial Acts illegal, void, unwarrantable and dangerous after
that time, especially since he did not so much for his Warrantee to hold the
Government after the Limitation exol^ed, as to obtain a Dedimus Potestatem to
take the Oath, though so precisely and pe^emprorily commanded by that Act. Which
therefore neither was nor could be legally taken by or administered to him,
according to the manner and direction, as thereby enjoined. But waving this
point, and admitting their Allegation to be true, though the contrary is manifest
b^ the Dedimus Po^estatem, which the now Governor brought along with him, under
the broad Seal of England, his Instructions from the Lords Justice, signed by
the Lo^ds Commissioners of the Treasury, the very same verbatim as are given to
all other his Majesty's Governors in America, for which he gave distinct
R^ceipts, as Golished by Authority, wherein ^is Maj^sties approbation of him,
for the vernour of the Jarseys; ^ Lett^^ from his Majesty, ad^ressed to him in
the style of Governor of New-Jarsey, he printed Gazets, pu^-Government of the
Jarsey, was adve^tiz^d) and several other Writings, Instruments and
Testimonials, which are as so many unquestionable Vouchers and irrefiagi^le
Proof that he come to this Government approved of by his Majesty, according to
the said Act of Parliament. But admitti^g the contrary, and their Allegation to
be true (as is said before) yet it is not a Point that they ought to m^ddle
with. The Examination and Discussion thereof is not left to them. Infinitely
otherwise. ^or by the Direction of the same Act, No Persons, Powers,
Jurisdiction or Authority are to take Cognizance of this matter but the King
himself, his Heirs or Successors, or such as he or they shall think fit to
appoint. The Parliament of England could not so much mistake or forget a
Decorum, as to subject the King's Lieutenant, who represents his M^j^st^ here,
and is entrusted with Regal Powers, to the Disquisition of such little Souls as
Sam. ^enings, or any those Mechanic Mermi^^ons that have confederated with him
to prosecute his audacious and se^^tious M^naces against the Governor. On the
contrary, are so tender an^ c^urious to act any thing in derogation of that
honorable Post, lest ^t might see^ to (...) some ^ight and contempt upon his
Majesty, that they have left the Judgment thereof as aforesaid) wholly to his
Majesty, as the most competent Judge of his own Actions, and the most suitable
Tr^bunal in these Cases for his Represen^atives. And though the ^ct is express
and positive in this particular* yet Sam. Jenings, and his Partisans, as if
they were above all Laws and Powers, and his Majesty not so capable and well
qualified as they to be entrusted with the Examination of this great Cause,
have therefore thought fit to overruled the Parliament of England, as to that
part of their Act, and by a superlative Presumption to assume the Decision of
this Case to themselves, and have passed Judgment upon it accordingly, which
they strive to execute with a^l the Force and Opposition against the Governor,
they are able to make, improving, upon their first Notice of his Commission,
their utmost Efforts to keep him out of the Government, which they have put
since upon the highest there^^ to throw him out of it*

10. Before we conc^u^e this Discourse, we cannot but further insist upon a
^opick which was cu^^o^ly touched before) and more plainly expose to view, the
indeed, senseless partiality of the Quakers of West-Jarsey, who have to
generally and una^imo^sly revolt^d from the Society, and conspi^ed against
them, and their Commissioner, the present Governor, that (...) of that
Denominacio^ within that Province may be justly exempted from that Charge.

12 The la^e G^vern^r (as was said before) neither had the Kings app^o^^^tio^
(...) for the Administration of the Oa^^ to him, according to the Law, though
^oth were so strictly and pr^cisel enjo^n'd the (...) unto him, and all other
Proprietary Governou^s of any of hi^ Majesty's Colloni^s or Plantations before
the 25th day of Marc^* 1697 yet the Quakers, ^^twithstanding th^se ^ailures and
Omission, did ^ot (...) to own him for Governor, till he gave place to a new
Commission, wh^^^ he could not but own to be legal and plena^y, and therefore
yielded Obedience to it, and went off, as superceded by it, which was about 15
(...) after the time limited by the Act, and were also so hot and z^alo^s then
to maintain his Authority (notwithstanding the above Defect, contrary to the
Law) that they would not have failed to oppose any, that on pretense thereof
should have called it in question.

12. The present Governor brings over a Dedimus Forestatem under the broad Seal
of England, takes the Oath, as prescribed by the Law. The Time, the Place, the
Concourse of Spectators and Auditors made this Act so public that it could
not, that it cannot be denied by them. Nevertheless because he did not bring
such Vouchers of his Majesty's approbation as they could not except against
(which was impossible, unless for this also he could have brought the broad
Seal of England to answer their Quibbles and Cavils, th^' he brought such
assurances thereof (as was instanced before) as might have satisfied any
reasonable unprepossessed Persons) they resist him as an illegal Usurper, and
deny that his Commission ought to be received. So the late Governor, though he
failed in both those Preliminaries required by the Act, was still
notwithstanding owned by them as the legal Governor of the Province, and the
present Governor that in reality fa^ls in neither, and by them is supposed and
charged but to fail in one, is denied to be so for that precise Reason. And the
Opposition they make against him has such a leven and tincture of a Perverse
Spirit in it, that they will tolerate any Mischief to be committed in the
Province, rather than do any thing to redress, punish or prevent it, whereby it
may be implied that they own the Governor, or in the least submit to his
Administration. Cannot therefore by Subpaena's or any Inducements be compelled
or prevailed with to give Evidence at the Courts in any Causes either Civil or
Criminal, or to perform any Services there.

13. And though (as before recited) it is expressly enacted by the said Act, That
all who shall be made Governors or Commanders in Chief of any of his Majesty's
Collonies or Plantations, shall take the Oath therein prescribed; and such as
are not immediately Commissionated by his Majesty, shall not only take the same
Oath, but also be approved of by his Majesty, before their entrance into their
Government. And if any of the said Governors or Commanders in Chief be
convicted of failure, or to have made default in either of the Premises, by the
Oath of two or more credible Witnesses, before his Majesty, his Heirs or
Successors, or such as he or they shall authorize and appoint, he shall be
removed from his Government, and forfeit the sum of One Thousand Pounds
Sterling.

14. Though the Act thus prescribes, yet the Quakers of West-Jarsey doubt not to
confederate against this Authority, and as Patriots of the Province and
Champions for the Public (which Opinion they deceitfully insinuate into the
credulous and simple^ boldly oppugn it. So they will not have the Governor
removed from his Government, but kept out of it. Not to incur the Penalties for
entering before the said Oath taken, and Approbation obtained, but not to enter
at all, nor consequently be liable to any F^^feitures. Nor to be convicted by
the Oath of two, or more credible Witnesses, nor before his Majesty, but
Themselves will be Judges, Witnesses and Accusers also in this Controversy.
And though the Act gives the Appelation and Character of Governor to all such as
have received a Commission for Government, though supposed to have failed in
those Performances appointed by the Act, and to have made themselves obnoxious
to the Penalties thereby enjoined, Yet these Confederate Friends disallow it,
as a Title of Su^ererogation, and both by their Words and Comportment censure
it as an Unreasonable, Erroneous, and an Unwarrantable Complement.

15. And thus they take that Judgment upon them, which by the express words and
Direction of the Act, is appointed for another Tribunal, where (as before was
obeserved) his Majesty is to be sole Judge, his Heirs or Successors, or such
only as he or they shall authorize and appoint, arrogating to themselves a
Dictatorship over the Parliament of England, and making their own Stubborn,
Untractable Wi^s pa^^amount to the Laws and Authority of that august Assembly.
The Consequences whereof Time will discover, and to that Test we shall leave
(...) now.

16. This we have thought fit to publish, in tenderness to the People and
Inhabitants of the Province of West-New-Jarsey, and as a Caution to them, from
a cordial Desire of their common Welfare, Peace and Prosperity, and to the end
that these who yet stand may be strengthened and confirmed, and those that have
fallen, may, as by a hand stretched forth for their Assistance, recover
themselves, and as good Subjects and Christians return to their Duty;
conformable to that of the great St. Augustine, whereby he endeavors to expel
Obdurateness from Humane Nature, and to drive it into its proper Region and
Channel. Humanum est (...), sed D^abol^cum est perseverare. It Is an incident of
human Frailty to fall sometimes, but to continue, but to be hardened therein,
is the Property of the Devil. From which Unhappy Graceless State, Lord, in the
Tenderness of thy Mercies deliver this People, both the Seducers and the
seduced! Create (...) a New Heart and an Upright Spirit in their inward parts.
Make them legitimate Children of thy Light, faithful Friends of thy Truth, and
do^ile in Holiness, that being delivered from Arrogance and Obstinacy, from the
Guile of Hypocrisy, and the deceitful Delusi^rs of vain Pretentions, false
Appearances and crafty Insinuations, they may approve themselves to Thee in the
Sincerity and Integrity of a constant and cheerful Obedience to thy revealed
Will, particularly to these thy inspired Oracles published, and recorded by
those great Secretaries and divine ^en-men of thy holy Spirit, Romans 13. v. 1,
2, etc. Let every Soul be subject unto the higher Powers; for there is no Power
but of God. Whosoever therefore resists the Powers, resists the Ordinance
of God; and they that resist shall receive to themselves Damnation And much
more in this place, to the same effect, is ardently inculcated by the holy
Apostle. And again, Tit. 3.1. Put them in mind to be subject to Principalities
and Powers, to obey Magistrates, to be ready to every good Work, to speak evil
of no Man, to be no Brawlers, but gentle, showing all Me^k^ess unto a^l Men.
Which Christian Virtues he illustrates by their contrary Vices. For Contra^ia
juaeta se posita magis^ll^cescunt. For we our selves (says he) were also
sometimes Foolish, Disobedient, Deceived, serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures,
living in Ma^i^e and Envy, Hateful, and hating one another. Now let the most
confident Pretenders and Boasters of Godliness and high Dispensations, try
themselves by this Test, not deceitfully, and flattering their Consciences, but
seriously and impartially, whether this is not still the Frame and Posture of
their Interior, and an exact and lively Description of their present
Condition? See what the holy Ghost does yet elsewhere further exhort, and give
us in charge on the same subject, particularly 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. and in many
other places of the divine Records, too tedious to be quoted or enumerated here.

17. Thus Paul indeed may plant, and Apollo water, but it is God alone that
gives the Increase. To whose blessing therefore we recommend these Seeds, that
they may fall upon good Ground, and multiply therein, to the Increase of our
Peace, the establishment of Christian Love, and a holy Conversation among us.
For by the Testimony of our Lord himself, Mat. 13.23. such as the ground is, so
will the Increase be. And there we must leave it, even to the same All-powerful
God, who is also able to correct, to amend, to reclaim the Soil, to cleanse it
from We^ds and all Nastiness, to cure its Sterility, and to cause it to yield a
plentiful Crop in its due season.

FINIS.

