By His Excellency Colonel Benjamin Fletcher Captain General and Governor in
Chief of his Majesty's Province of New York, etc. A PROCLAMATION
WHEREAS many of the Soldiers of his Majesty's four Companys, appointed for
the Security and Defense of this Province, have deserted His Majesty's Service,
and either by the Negligence and Re^isness of the Officers, Civil and Military,
in examining and calling to account all V^gabond Strangers and Idle Persons
that are traveling to and fro or by the Encouragement and Entertainment (...)
them by others, get safe into oth^^ Provinces and Colonies, to the great
Prejudice of his Majesty's Service, the weakening of the (...) Damage and Hurt
of all the Inhabitants of this Province, (...) of Detachments for the necessary
Preservation of the Fr^^^^ers.

For Prevention whereof, for the future, I have therefore thought fit, by and
with the Advice and Consent of his Majesty's Council, to prohibit all persons
whatsoever from harboring or entertaining any of the said Soldiers, who shall
desert, and from giving them any manner of Encouragement or Aid, as Victuals,
Clothing, or Passage in Boat, Sloop or Canow, or otherwise, as they will avoid
the Penalty of being detached to serve in their room; or of bringing that
insupportable Burden of Detachments upon the I^habitants of this Province,
which will be inevitable.

And all Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and all other
Officers, Civil and Military, are strictly required to Examine and take up all
Persons whatsoever, that are str^ngers, who can give no good Account of
themselves, and of their business, and to secure them until it be made appear
that they are about their lawful business, and are not fugitive Vagabonds and
Deserters And to the end that no Person have Disturbance in their lawful
Affairs* the said Justices, Sheriffs, Bailiffs, Constables, and other Officers,
Civil and Military, are also required to grant Tickets unto such Persons whom
they know, as are to Travel where they are not known, in writing gratis.

Given at His Majesty's Fort in New York, the 4 th Day of November, in the
Nineth Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord, WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace
of God, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith,
etc. Annoque Domini 1697. Ben. Fletcher.

God Save the KING
Printed by William Bradford, Printer to the Kings most (...) Majesty in the
City of New York, 1697.


