A CASE of Conscience Concerning Eating of Blood, Considered and Answered.
COncerning that Case of Conscience, Whether the Eating of Blood be Lawful? I
find that many not only of the more Ignorant, and Common Professors of
Christianity, but some very Learned men among them, have Inclined to the
Negative in the Question proposed. So did some of the Ancients, particularly
Tertullian, Origin, Clemens Alexandrinus, and the Author of the Questions and
Answers to the Orthodox, which passes under the Name of Justin Martyr.
Like-wise Eusebius relates, that when St. Biblis was put upon the Rack to make
her Confess, that Christians were wont to Eat Infants (for so had the Accuser
of the Brethren made the Heathen Believe) she Replied, How should they Eat
Children, when they Abstain from all Eating of Blood? Also, in the Book of
Canons falsely pretended to be the Apostles, the Sixty Third Canon declares,
that If any one in Holy Orders, Eats Blood, he shall be Degraded, but if he
be a Lay man, he shall be Excommunicated. Moreover, some Old Councils have
condemned it, as Unlawful: And some Emperors have by very severe Laws,
Inhibited all Blood-Eating. The most Remarkable is that Ordinance of the
Emperor Leo, Surnamed the Philosopher A D. 886. He says, that He had received
Information* that there were some, who stuffed Blood into Guts, or in Bags, and
did Eat the same, as usual Meat: He does therefore Command that no Person
should dare so to Practice himself* or to Sell such things to others; declaring
that both Buyer and Seller, shall have all his Goods forfeited, his Head
Shaven, and himself sent into Perpetual Banishment. It is further True, that
the Christian Greeks, the Russians, Abyssines, Maronites, have abstained from
the Eating of Blood, as unlawful. Nor are those Christians free from far
greater Superstition than this Some late Authors have Written against it: So
Grotius and Curcedaeus in his Treatise De Vsu Sanguinis; Dr. Du Veil, in his
Commentary on Acts 15 29 And Dr. Barlow the late Bishop of Lyncoln, whose
Arguments in the Opinion of the Athenian Mercury (March 3, 1694.) are of such
weight* as that they will make his Antagonist sweat to Answer them. This
notwithstanding, the Generality of Protestant Divines maintain the Affirmative,
in the Question under Consideration. So Pareus, Rivet, Calvin, Willet, and many
others in their Commentaries on Gen 9 4. So Voetius de Politia Ecclesiastica,
Part 1. Page 471. who refers his Reader for Satisfaction in that point to
Libavius and Horn-beck his Diatriba de Sanguine and suff^^^^^. So among
Episcopal Divines, Bishop Richardson, and Dr. Hammond. Thus also some of the
Ancients. Quadra^^s (an old Christian Philosopher who affirms, that in his
Time, some of the Persons on whom our Savior wrought Miraculous Cures were
still Living) maintains (as is testified by Bid) that there is no Meat from
which a Christian ought to abstain Vid. Monologium Graecorum, in September 21 See
Dupin Vol. 1. p. 48. But it is not the Practice or Authority of men, without
Scripture or Convincing Reason, that can Determine, or satisfy Conscience. For
my own part, I concur with the Generallity of Protestant Christians, as to the
Case under Debate. And that especially for these Reasons.

1. No Meat does in its own Nature defile, Math. 15.11. Not that which goes
into the Mouth Defiles the man. I suppose that the Apostle has Respect unto
those Words of our Savior, when he says, I know and am persuaded by the Lord
Jesus, that there is nothing Unclean of it self, Romans 14 14.

2. The Scriptures of the New Testament give such a General Allowance for the
Eating of all sorts of Meats as does Comprehend that of Blood, There is that
Scripture, Romans 14.2 One Believes that he may Eat all things* he that Believed
so, was Orthodox in his Judgment as to that particular, And it was from
Weakness in Faith, that is from Ignorance of the Latitude of Christian Liberty,
under the Gospel, that any did Haesitate about it. Now if the Christian may Eat
All Things, then Blood. Another Scripture is that in 1 Timothy 4.3, 4. where the
Apostle condemns the Superstition of those, That Abstain from Meats, which God
had created to be received with Thanksgiving of them, which Believe and Know
the Truth, for every Creature of God is good, and nothing to be refused, if it
be Received with Thanksgiving Now if Nothing is to be Refused, then Blood is
not to be Refused. Another Scripture is that 1 Cor. 10 25. Whatsoever is Sold
in the Shambles, that Eat, asking no Question for Conscience sake It was usual
to Sell Blood in the Shambles, If therefore we may Eat not some Things only,
but whatever is Sold in the Shambles, we may lawfully Eat Blood, for that is
there Sold,

3. There are Medicinal Uses of Blood. Our Modern Physicians have found, that
the Spirit of Blood is a wonderful Restorative, may not a Christian who is in a
Consumption make use of that Spirit for the Recovering of his Impaired Health,
and Preservation of his Life, according to the Sixth Commandment, only because
Jews were prohibited things made of Blood?

4 If it be Lawful to Eat things Strangled, then it is Lawful to Eat Blood. The
Consequence is undeniable. And the Jews were as much bound in Conscience to
abstain from things Strangled, as from Blood, and they Practice accordingly to
this Day; Some of the Popes have denied Christians this Liberty. So did Pope
Zachary, A D. circiter. 756 Also several Councils that were Convened in the
Days of Popery, but Austin declares, that in his Time, if any man scrupled the
Eating things Strangled, (which had the Blood in 'em) he was Laughed at by all
the World v. August Lib. 32. contra Faustum. cap 13. If a man among us should
affirm that it is unlawful to Eat an Hare, or a Rabbet, killed by a stroke in
the Neck, or a Pigeon caught in a Net, he would be Ridi'cled by most people. If
the Eating of a thing that dies of it self, is lawful, then to Eat things
Strangled, or with the Blood in them, is so too; but this is, and ever was
Lawful for the Gentiles, Deuteronomy. 14 21. Thou shall not eat any thing that dies
of it self,, thou shall give it to the Stranger, that he may eat it, or Sell it
to an Alien. Divines argue strongly concerning Usury, that the Prohibition of
it to the Jews, was only a Judicial, and not a Moral Precept, because they
might take Use for Money Let to Strangers. There is a Parity of Reason, as to
this Case. He that Eats that which dies of it self, eats Blood. This the
Gentiles might do. Therefore Eating of Blood was not against the Moral Law.

5. All Precepts which were only Ceremonial and not Moral, are Abrogated by the
Death of Christ. Col. 2.16, 17. Gal. 4.9. Heb 9.10 such was this concerning the
not Eating of Blood, as appears from the Reason of the Prohibition mentioned,
Lev. 17.11. For the Life of the Flesh is in the Blood, and I have given it you
upon the Altar to make an Atonement for your Souls, for it is the Blood that
makes an Atonement. Blood the Organ of Life, was Holy to God the Author of
Life, and therefore they should not Profane it by Eating thereof. Now this is a
Ceremonial Reason, Blood was a Sacred Thing, because to be offered to God for
making Atonement, as Typical of the Blood of Christ. Wherefore since Christ has
shed his Blood, there is no Sacredness in any other Blood.

The Hebrew Doctors object, that there were six Precepts given to Adam, and so
to the Antediluvians, which were all of them Moral and Perpetual unto the
Observation whereof all Mankind is obliged. And that a Seventh was added and
given to Noah, viz. That Gen 9.4. The Flesh with the Life thereof, which is the
Blood thereof, thou shall not Eat.

For Answer. Not to Insist upon the Falseness of that Rabbinical Notion of
Seven Precepts in the Moral Law, the Error whereof H^^sius has shown in his
Nucleus Prophetiae.

1. Some of the Jewish Masters themselves confess, that the Precept which
forbids Eating Blood, does concern only Israelites, and not other Nations.
Rabbi Solomon, and some others of the Rabbis suppose that Text does only
forbid the Eating of the Flesh of Creatures, whilst they are yet Living, and
the Drinking of their Blood. This Interpretation is followed by Cajetan,
Mercer, Aynsworth, the Belgic Annotators and some others. It is an usual
Custom among the Barbarous Scythians to drink the Blood of their Horses. Also
the Arabians will draw Blood from their Camels and Drink it. Men's being used to
Blood makes them ferocious, and hardhearted, as we see in Butchers, whence our
English Laws permit not Butchers to be Jurymen in cases of Life and Death.
According to this Interpretation, the Design of that Precept to Noah, is to
forbid all Inhumanity, which suits with the next verse, containing a
Prohibition of Murder. But

2 It Is a mistake to think, that all the Precepts given to Noah, were Moral,
binding all his Posterity in all the Ages of the World. For in his Days there
was a Distinction made betwixt Clean and Unclean Beasts. Genesis 7.2. which was a
Ceremonial, and not a Moral Commandment: And so was Sacrificing required of
Noah, and of the Patriarchs before the Flood. And for that Reason it was not
meet that they should Eat Blood.

It is further Objected, That there was a Synodical Decree against the Eating
Blood, in the Apostles Days, viz. that Acts 15 20. To which may be Answered,
that the Apostolical Advice was grounded on the Scandal, which at that time,
would have happened, in case the Converted Gentiles should have practiced the
Eating of Blood, and that therefore it was only a Temporary Advice, and not a
Precept binding all Christians to the End of the World. Cessatio Causae efficit
ut cessaret Observatio. The Learned and Judicious Turretin does by diverse
Reasons prove, that that Precept was not of perpetual Observation. He argues,
that Paul was present in the Synod at Jerusalem, and knew the true Intendment
of the Advice given* Nevertheless he afterward wrote those Epistles, in which
he allows the Eating of all sorts of meat, without any Limitation, which he
would not have done, if the Decree, at Jerusalem had been of perpetual
Observation. But in those Days the Eating of Blood would have scandalized the
Jews. That Practice was so abhorrent to them, as that it would have Endangered
their being prejudiced against all Christianity, had they observed, that all
Christians indulged themselves therein; on which account, to abstain from it
was then necessary, verse 2^. It would also have been Scandalous to the
Gentiles among whom the Eating of Blood was an Idolatrous Rite. Psalm. 16.4. The
Syrians used to drink some of the Blood of their Sacrifices. The Book of Wisdom
informs us, that the old Canaanites had Blood in their Feasts. And Lanctantius
testifies, that the Heathen at the Feast of Bacchus were wont to Drink Goats
Blood; they would also Boil Blood, and mix it with Meat and Spices, and so Eat
it at their Sacrifices, which Tertullian calls Botulos Cru^^e distentos; they
Sacrificed Sawsages and black-puddings to Idols. Maimonides says, that the
Reason, why the Heathen did Eat Blood, was, because they thought that Blood was
the Food of Demons, whom they Worshipped, and that thereby they should obtain
their Love and Favor. To the same purpose does Origin speak. Hence the Demons
are by Athenagoras called HAIMA PERILICHMO^ENOI, Lickers of Blood; so then in
Primitive Times eating of Blood would have Looked like a Symbolizing with the
Heathen, and was for that Cause then Inhibited. And although it is mentioned
with Fornication, it does not follow that if one of these is against the Moral
Law, that the other so too; For the Eating of things offered to Idols is also
mentioned, Acts. 21.25. But that is an Indifferent thing, the Apostle does
plainly allow of it, when it can be done without Scandal, 1 Cor. 10 27. He only
therefore condemns the (...) of Idolothytes, in the Idols Temples, 1 Cor. 8.10.
But does not forbid them to do it, in their own Houses, because in the one
place it might be without Scandal, but not in the other. There is then no
Validity in the Objection. Eating of Blood and Fornication are conjunctly
mentioned, therefore they are of the same Nature. We find in other Scriptures
that Precepts, which are only Judicial, are conjunctly mentioned with those
that are Moral. Thus in Ezekiel. 18. The taking of a Pledge, and Usury, Judicial
Precepts, are condemned with Idolatry and Adultery, heinous Transgressions of
the Moral Law, unlawful to be done by any persons, in any place, or at any
time. Moreover, the Gentiles esteemed Fornication to be no sin at all, yea, the
Unclean Spirit unto whom they Sacrificed, taught them to make it a part of
their Idolatrous Worship; Witness that shameful thing Baal peo^, Numb. 2^.3.
Ier. 11.13. Hos. 9.10. Rev. 2 14. Dr. Lightfoot observes that the Hebrews were
wont to Condemn all Incestuous Marriages by the Name of Fornication, which the
Gentiles made no matter about, and therefore supposes that the Design of the
Apostles in Condemning Fornication with things offered to Idols and Blood, was
to bring the Converted Gentiles under the Obedience of the Law, in Lev. 18.
Another late Annotator conceives, that the Thing more especially Designed, is
to forbid that Concubinate, which was commonly practiced both by Jews and
Gentile, the Evil whereof was not generally known, until discovered by the
Light of the Gospel. These four things* Idolothytes, Fornication, Strangled and
Blood were the Rites of Idolatry commonly practiced amongst the Nations, so
that the Gentiles by abstaining from them, declared a perfect Renunciation of
their Heathenism, which Dr Spencer in his late Learned Exercitations, takes to
be the special Reason why those four particulars are by the Apostles instanced
in.

These things seem a Satisfactory Solution of the weightiest Arguments which
have been produced for the Negative, in the Question before us.

FINIS.
Boston in New England, Printed by B. Green, and I. Allen, 1697.


