Faith at Work.

A Brief and Plain ESSAY, Upon certain Articles of the Gospel most Necessary to
be understood by every Christian: to wit, The NATURE, the ORDER, and the
NECESSITY OF THE GOOD WORKS, by which The FAITH of a Christian is to be
Evidenced.

Qui scit inter Legem, et Evangelium distinguer^ gratias agat Deo, et Sciat se
esse Theologu^.

Luther. Boston in New England, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen. 1697.

Some Right Thoughts, in an ESSAY, upon Good Works.
James 2.20. Will thou know, O vain man, That Faith without Works is Dead?


THAT Great Preacher of the Gosp^^ and Insatiable Admirer of the Lord (...)
Christ, our Apostle Paul, in all (...) Writings, but especially in the (...)
which he wrote unto the Romans, [which was (...) Melancthon well called, The
Protestants Confession (...) Faith,] as well as his Epistle to the Galatians,
does abundantly maintain this Article of our Faith, That a man is not Justified
by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ. Justifying Faith is
a Receiving of, and a Relying on, the Gift of Righteousness from God, by our
Lord Jesus Christ; or, the Consent of a Distressed Soul* to be Justified, by
Gods Graciously Imputing unto him, the Obedience which the Lord Jesus Christ,
as our Surety, yielded unto God, on the behalf (...) His Elect. This Faith does
Justify a Sinner, (...) as it is a Work; but Organically and Relatively;
Inasmuch as it is the Instrument, by which a man apprehends the Righteousness
of the Lord Jesus Christ, as freely Tendered unto the Sinner in the Gospel; It Is
only in this Regard, that Faith, and no Grace, but this Faith, has the Honor
to Justify us. This is the Good old way, of arriving unto Rest; and, Aliter qui
Vadit, cadit.

But every Jewel has a Counterfeit. And, How shall a man know, that his Faith
in the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, for his Justification, is not a
Counterfeit?

To answer that Case, the Blessed Apostle James, under the Inspirations of the
Almighty, declares unto us, the Marks of a Justifying Faith; and those Marks
are, the Works which it perpetually disposes the Believer unto.

Now among the Admonitions of the Apostle (...) purpose, there ^s a special
Remark due to that, Wi^t thou know, O vain man, that (...) without works is
Dead?

The Reader will presently observe in this Remarkable passage; both the
Character of the Faith, which does not produce and promote Good Works, in the
man that has it: It is a Dead Faith; it will be of no use unto the man in whom
it is; it can do nothing for him: and then, the Character of the Man who has
this Faith; He is a vain man; ^e seems, and he boasts, to have, what he has
not; and he flatters himself with Hopes that never shall be made Good unto him.
So that, we (...) now Assured, A Workless Faith is a Worthless Faith.

Pa^^, who Pro^essedly handles the Doctrine of Justification, does plainly
assert, That no man living is Justified by Works, but a man is Justified only
by Faith. James does nevertheless assert, That a man is Justified by Works, and
a man is not Justified by Faith only. And yet, however some of the Ancients, as
well as Luther, stumbled at this Appearance of Contradiction, the Assertions do
not Contradict one another at all. Paul treats of our Justification before God,
and the Right unto Everlasting Life, therein granted unto us, which is only by
Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ (...) treats of that which may manifest our
Iustifica^^^^ unto men, that See and Hear, our Profession of ou^ Faith; and
here Works are significant. The Con^science of a man, may be distressed with a
two^fold Accusation.

First, A man may be Accused of Iniquity; It may be said, Thou have broken the
Law, and thereby wronged the Name, of God, and the terrible penalty of that
Law, now belongs unto thee. The Answer to this Accusation is to be, My Lord
Jesus Christ has fully obeyed the will of God, and suffered the penalty due to
me for my Disobedience; and I do by Faith depend on this Righteousness of my
Lord Jesus Christ, for my Acceptance with God for ever.

Secondly, A man may be Accused of Hypocris^* It may be said, Thou Talkest of
thy Faith; but is (...) not mere Talk? How can thou prove, that thy Faith is
any more, than what is in the very Devils themselves? The Answer to this
Accusation is, The works of a Sanctified man, which I am doing every Day, are
the Proof of my Faith According (...) by Paul, That a man is Justified alone by
Faith: but it is asserted by James, That a man is not Justified by a Faith
which is alone. The Question discoursed by Paul is, How a Guilty Person may
come to be Acquitted by the Lord, from all the Guilt that lies upon him? The
Answer to this Question, is, Not by any Works of our own, but only by the
Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is, on our part, only by Faith
applied unto us. The Question discoursed by James, is, Whether a man pretending
to Faith in the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, shall be saved, though
he continue without the works of an Holy Life, agreeable thereunto? The Answer
to this Question is, No, Such a man has no Saving Faith at all. And that James
is to be taken in that sense, is evident from. This: He does insist upon the
Instance of Abraham; and yet Abraham was a Justified man, Thirty years, before
those Works, which are said here to Justify him. Upon the whole then, we see
Paul and James, Reconciled, or, indeed, never contrdicting. And we are Advised
after all; It Is a Vanity in any man to Profess, that he has a True Faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ, if his Faith be not Fruitful in those Good Works, which may
Justify the man's Profession.

There are Two very Important Cases, about which the Thoughts of every
Christian, cannot but be Exercised; and we will here bestow some of our
Thoughts thereupon.

The first Case which a Christian, must Consider, if he would be a Christian,
is, What are those Good Works, which a True Faith, will Quicken and Incline the
Believer unto?

Now we may thus conceive of them; Good Works, are Sincere Essays to observe
the Law of God. Our God has given us a Rule of Life, in that which we call,
The Moral Law. None of our Works are Perfectly Good, if in any point they fall
short of that Rule. But none of our Works do Perfectly come up to the Rule, as
long as we are lodged in this Body which is to Die. The Best me^ alive, when
they look upon the Best Works of the^^ Lives, may cry out, with one of the
Ancients* Terret me tota vita mea, nam apparet mihi, aut Peccatum, aut tota
Sterilitas; The Sinfulness, and Ba^rann^ss, of all my Life, strikes me with a
Deadly Terror of Soul! Nevertheless, there are Sincere Essays toward
Perfection, which all Believers are Conscientiously making every Day. Now these
Essays are Good, in the Merciful Reckoning of God, our Father in our Lord
Jesus Christ. Though none of our Sincere Essays at Well-doing are such Good
works as to Justify us, before that Thrice Holy God, who is of Purer eyes than
to behold Evil, and whose Pure (...) yet behold in our Good Works, a world of
Evil: Ye^ our Sincere Essays are pleasing unto our God, (...) by His Good
Spirit has Excited them, and Assist^^ them; and, Whose workmanship we are,
Created (...) Christ Jesus unto Good works, which God has before ordained,
that we should walk in them. Such Good Works, as our Prayers, are, as it is said,
in Prove. 15.^* The Delight of the Lord; and such Good Works, ^s our Alms, are,
as it is said, in Heb. 13.16. The Sacrifices where with God is well pleased.

But now, to speak strictly, Good Works must have these Four Ingredients to
render them such.

First; The Matter of our Works must be, according to the Law of God, or, His
Will Revealed in His Word. The Prophet could say, in Mic. 6.8. He has showed
thee, O man, the thing that is Good; and what does the Lord require of thee,
but to Do Justice, and to Love Mercy, and to walk Humbly with thy God. Good
Works must be such, as the Lord has shown to us, that He has Required of us.
They are no Good Works, whereof our God may say, Who has required 'em? Works
of Piety, are Good Wor^^; for we have the Word of our God for them; as in Psalm.
92.1. It is a Good Thing to give Thanks unto the Lord. Works of Charity are
Good Works; for we have the word of our God for them; as in Heb. 13.16. To Do
Good, and to Communicate, forget not. No works are Good, but such as are
contained in the Two Tables of the Ten Commandments; the Commandments of Love
to God, and of Love to Man.

But unto the Constitution of Good Works, it is ^ot enough, that the matter of
what we do, be according to the Law of God. Men may do Works that shall be Good
for the matter of them, and yet, Every work of their Hands be unclean, ^aith
the Lord. Plowing is Lawful, and Praying is Lawful; and yet these works may be
sinful in the Doer of them. Wherefore,

Secondly, The Manner of our Works, must be Right, as well as the Matter of
them. A man may incur the Wrath of God, by his Good Works, if he do them not in
any manner according to the Law, as they should be done. We find, in 1 Chronicles.
15.13. The Lord our God is offended at those who Seek Him not after the due
Order. No mere External Actions are to be Esteemed Good Works; there must
Internal Cautions go along with them; else they are but the matter of Good
Works, without the Form. Good Works must be done with Regular Circumstances, if
they would be called, Good.

Thirdly, The Design of our Works must be Right, as well as the manner of them.
The Design which the Law of God has assigned for our Good Works, is, That the
Great God, may be acknowledged, and magnified, and glorified: And the Gospel of
God, coming in, has assigned a further Design for them; namely, To express our
Gratitude unto our Lord-Redeemer, for His Redeeming of us. Thus it is Enjoined,
in 1 Cor. 10.30. Whatever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. An Evil Intention
will utterly spoil any Go^^ Works, though they were otherwise never so Go^^ And a
merely Selfish Intention is an Evil one Good Works must all be done, with an
Eye, to the Honor of God, and the Service of Christ before any Temporal
Advantage to Self: else the Best Sacrifices are but an Abomination.

Fourthly, Good Works must proceed from a Good Principle; or otherwise they
will have no Real Goodness in them. Waters that Flow from a bitter and a
poisoned Fountain, cannot be Good. A Good Heart, Like a Good Fountain, must be
the Principle, from whence Good Works are to flow. We are told, in Mat. 12.35.
A Good man, out of the Good Treasure of the Heart, brings forth Good Things.
A Good Principle within, is a Good Treasure of the Heart. Works done merely
from a Principle of Slavish Fear, or Fleshly Love, are not Good, though they be
never so Good. There must be a Principle of Respect unto God in Christ, wooing
us unto all our Good Works, or else they are Stark Naught. Yea, the Spirit of
our Lord Jesus Christ, must be in us, as a Vital Principle, for our Good Works,
or else they are Dead Works, every one of them. Hence, no Good Works were ever
done by any one Unregenerate man, since the World began; for every Unregenerate
man is destitute of the Principle, which is to be acted in them: the most
Splendid Works of the Unregenerate, are but (as Austin called them) Splendid
Sins before the Lord.

And now there is a Second Case which a Christian has to consider, that so he
may be stirred up, and helped on, to do those Good Works by which he may
approve himself indeed a Christian.

Where Lies the Necessity of Good Works, in a Justified Believer, to Justify
the Faith, which he is a Professor of?

Now we do know this; That our Good Works are not Antecedently necessary unto
our Justification before the God of Heaven. For Good Works cannot be done by
any man, until he be Justified. Until a man be United unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, who is our Life, he is a Dead man: and what Good Works can a Dead man
do? This is a thing Livelily Preached unto us, by our Lord Himself, in the
fifteenth Chapter of John; The mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Hence that
common saying of Austin, Bona Opera sequuntur Justificatum, non praecedunt
Justificandum. No, nor is Faith it self, As doing of Good Works, that which
Entitles us unto the Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ, for our
Justification; It Is Faith, only As it Lays Hold on the Righteousness of the
Lord Jesus Christ, for the chief of Sinners, that Justifies us; And until this
be done, we cannot be carried forth unto any Good Works at all.

But then, Good Works, are consequently necessary upon our Justification. It Is
indeed said, That God Justifies the Ungodly; but then, He does not Leave them
Ungodly when He has Justified them. Well, And where Lies the Necessity? Truly,
if we would not be vain men, we must Know such Things as these.

First, Will thou know, O man? That it is in the very Nature of a Justifying
Faith, to put a man upon the Doing of Good Works. Faith is a Purifier of the
Heart: [Acts 15.9.] and so, it cannot but be a Purifier of the Life. The same
Faith, which Embraces the Lord Jesus Christ, as a Priest, for Atonement, (and
As doing this it Justifies!) Embraces Him also, as a Prophet, and as a King:
Now this Prophet will Instruct, and this King will Injoin, our doing of Good
Works for ever. A Justifying Faith, Receives Christ the Sacrificer, and the
Intercessor; and in that Notion, it Justifies: But is this all? No, it also,
according to Col. 2.6. Receives Christ the Lord. Now Good Works are by that
Lord Required. It Is no True Faith, which any man has, if it be not for a whole
Christ. The Devil said unto our Lord Jesus Christ, What have we to do with
thee, Thou Holy One? If a man would be concerned with our Lord Jesus Christ,
only as a Merciful One, and a Gracious One, and not likewise as an Holy One,
that man has no more Faith than a Devil! Justifying Faith is a Tree, which
cannot but have the Good Fruits of Good Works growing upon it. It is the Holy
Spirit of God, that Creates, and that Bestows, a Justifying Faith, wherever it
is; and that Holy Spirit cannot suffer any Soul, in which He dwells, to be
wholly Remiss about the Good Works which are agreeable unto His Holiness.

Briefly; It Is in the very Nature of a Saving Faith to be a Working Faith. The
Scriptures of Truth, assure us, in Gal. 5.6. Faith works, by Love. It was well
said, therefore by John Hus, Ubi Bona Opera non apparent ad extra, ibi Fides
non est ad intra: Faith is not within, if Good Works are not without. Faith
must become visible, and (as has been sometimes said) Incarnate, by Good
Works upon it.

Again; Will thou know, O man? That Good works are no Small part of the Great
Salvation, which is the Hope and claim of all the Justified. Our Lord Jesus
Christ has Redeemed us by His Blood; What for? We are informed, in Tit. 2.14.
To purify unto Himself, a peculiar People, zealous of Good works. The following
words, Let no man despise thee, Calvin thinks them spoken to the People,
because People often don't care to Hear of this; but it is a Thing to be spoken
with all Authority. A main Thing, Bought for us by the Righteousness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, is, that we may be made Happy, by our Enjoying a Resemblance
of that Righteousness, in our own doing of Good works, wherein we shall be
conformed unto His Exemple. The Doing of Good works* is one main Thing, in that
Blessedness, which our Lord Jesus Christ has (...) for us, in His being made a
Curse on our behalf: And a man has (...) True Faith in him, until he be thus
persuaded* Very grand is the mistake of men, about Salvation: Salvation is not
merely our Fruition of the Good Things reserved for us, in the unseen and
future state; but Salvation lies also in our Performance of Good works leading
thereunto. Our Capti^^ to the Devil, is that from which we are in our Salvation
rescued (...) that Captivity keep^ a man from doing of Good works. For a man to
be set at Liberty from the Devil, and so to do those Good works, which are
contrary to the Works of the Devil, This, This is our Salvation. A man's being
made Able and Willing to Do Good works, like the Good Angels of Heaven, This is
the Salvation, which Faith does make out after; It Is the End of our Faith, and
the Salvation of our Soul.

Furthermore; Will thou know, O man? That the Commandment of Heaven has made
Good works incumbent on every man on Earth. It Is true, when we are in our Lord
Jesus Christ, we are not under a Covenant of works. Our own doing of Good
works, is not now, the Condition of our Entering into Life. But still, the
Covenant of Grace does not Release us, from all Obligation, to do those Good
works, which once were the Terms of our Entering into Life; the Language of it
is that in Rom 3.31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid:
Yea, we Establish the Law. Because we are under the Covenant of Grace, are we
not still obliged unto all that Holi^^ss, all that Watchfulness, all that
Exactness, which was demanded in the Old Covenant? God forbid! Yea, we do still
so Establish the Law, that if we fail in any one thing, it is our Sin, it should
be our Grief, it will be our Shame; and we must, with Contrition of Heart, make
our Confession, That we come short of our Duty. Indeed, because we cannot but
continually Transgress, and, In many things we offend all, therefore the
New Covenant has provided a Remedy for us: It Is only the Good works of our Lord
Jesus Christ Reputed Ours, that cause us to stand as without Fault before the
Throne of God. But we must own it still, as a Fault in us, a Fault worthy of
Death, whenever we miss of doing any Thing, that is demanded as a Duty, in the
Old Covenant: There is a Sin, in Every Transgression of the Law; a Sin to be
Confessed, Bewailed, Abhorred. Yea, and our Lord Jesus Christ in the Gospel,
does, How often? Repeat those Precepts; in Math. 5.16. Let your Light so shine
before men, that they may see your Good works: and in Tit. 3.8. This is a
Faithful saying, That they which have Believed in God, should be careful of
Good works: and in 1 John 2.1. These Things write I unto you, that ye do not
Sin.

Moreover; Will thou know, O man? That without Good works we are Abominably and
Inexcusably Ungrateful unto our Lord Jesus Christ, who has done so many kind
works for us? The Evangelical Reason for our Good works, is, That we may show
our Thankfulness unto Him, Who (...) Loved us, and given Himself for us; unto
Him* (...) has Loved us, and washed away our Sins, in His (...) Blood. If a
man have the least Grain of Tr^^ Faith in him, he will make that Enquiry before
our Lord Jesus Christ, in Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render to the Lord, for
all His Benefits? Now the Reply that Faith makes to this Enquiry, is the same
that our Lord Himself makes; Let those Good works be done, which may adorn the
Doctrine of God the Savior! It was argued, in Romans 12.1. I beseech you
Brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your Bodies, a Living
Sacrifice, Holy, Acceptable to God, which is your Reasonable Service. Even so,
All the Return, which our Lord Jesus Christ expects from us, for all His
Mercies, is, That we Devote our selves unto the Service of our Lord: And Faith
says, That this is a Thing infinitely Reasonable. Where Faith has been infused
into the Heart of any man, there is no Motive unto Good Works more powerful
than this upon him. If he could think, I shall escape Hell, yea, I shall merit
Heaven, by my good works! This were not such a powerful motive to good works,
for an Heart that has Faith in it, as to think, I shall by my good works
Glorify, my Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, who has done so much for me! That man
has no Faith in him, on whom this motive has not a very constraining operation.
For us to be without good works, would be an horrible Reproach unto the Lord
Jesus Christ, as if He were, A Patron of (...), and as if He were a God that
had pleasure in ^ickedness, and evil might dwell with Him. Now ^ True Faith
will never let a man be so wicked, as thus to Reproach the Lord. Foolish and
Unwise are all they, that thus Requite the Lord!

Finally, VVilt thou know, O man? That an Heart set for the Doing of Good
Works, is a Qualification, and a Preparation of them that shall Inherit the
Recompenses of Everlasting Life. There is no passing into the most Holy
Heavens, without being, as it is expressed in Col. 1.12. Made meet to be
Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. All the Partakers of the
Heavenly Inheritance, are doing of Good Works therein for ever; they do nothing
but Good works there throughout Eternal Ages. Now, except a man have an Heart
for Good works [in Conversion, Mat. 18.3.] given unto him, he is not meet for
that Inheritance, whereinto there Enters nothing that shall Defile. The Good
works which our weekly Sabbath is to be filled withal, make it very wearisome
unto an Unrenewed Soul: they say, What a weariness is it? When the
Sanctification of the Lords Day, was lately Urged upon a grave Ceremonious
Clergyman, he replied, What? Would you have a man be upon the Rack, a whole Day
together? Truly, The Eternal Sabbath, which our Glorious Jesus carries all His
People into, Men will be weary of it, it will be a Rack unto them, they will not
be suited in it, if they should not have an (...) for Good works inspired into
them; none (...) those that are thus pure in Heart, will be fit (...) the
Beatifick Sight of the most Holy God. (...) God must work us for that self-same
thing, [2 (...) 5.5.] or, else the Thing would be Distastful unto us: now, it is
by a Spirit for Good works, that He does work us up hereunto. And He (...)
warned us, in Heb. 12.14. Without Holiness, no man shall see the Lord. Though we
shall not go to Heaven For our Good works, we cannot go to Heaven without them.

Now what should be the Result of our Thoughts upon these Two Cases thus
offered, but This?

We are to be advised, first of all; That we do not Expect, to be Justified by
our Good works, or to Do any Good works until we are Justified, in our
Believing on the Lord Jesus Christ. It is of no little Importance unto us, That
our Good works have their due place in our Divinity: and many Treatises of such
Divinity as the English Nation^ has been of later years Defiled and Abused
withal, have not only been Ineffectual to procure those Good Works, which they
have pretended for, but also been really prejudicial thereunto, for their want
of This. We must Beware how we go to patch up a Righteousness of our own, out
of those Good works whereto God may Enable us, or do like them, who in Romans 10
3. Being ignorant of Gods Righteousness, and going about to establish their own
Righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the Righteousness of God.
There is not a more (...) Rock for the Shipwreck of a Soul, than this! (...)
Sinners are Awakened, with the Appre^^^^ions of the Divine Vengeance pursuing
of ^^em, for their Sins, this is the First Thing that they usually betake
themselves unto: They fly first unto the Good Works of a Reformation in (...)
faulty Lives. No, O vain man; Will thou Know? Thy First Flight should be unto
the Lord Jesus Christ, for His Righteousness to be conferred upon the most
Loathsome Sinner out of Hell; and that thou may, Be found in Him, not having
thy own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is thro^ the Faith
of Christ, the Righteousnes^ which is of God by Faith It Is a vain Imagination
that thou may not Believe on the Righteousnes^ of the Lord Jesus Christ, or
thy Justification, until by doing of Good works thou art made Fit for the
Imputation of that Righteousness. Many say, indeed they would Lay Hold on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and on His Righteousness, but they dare not, because they
are not Fit for Him. Alas, this also is but another and a finer strain, to set
up our own Righteousness. How, Not Fit? The wretched circumstances of thy Soul,
that make thee say, Not Fit, are thy very Fitness. We must come to our Lord
Jesus Christ For those things, which the preposterous Hearts of men would come
unto Him, With. It is an Error for men to venture their Everlasting Interest
upon the Lord Jesus Christ, under this Encouragement, That they have attained
unto such and such Godly Dispositio^s, as will Recommend us unto Him; We mu^^
(...) to Him, and His Righteousness, and ventu^^ (...) cast our selves upon it,
as Recommended (...) thing, but our own Horrible misery, the^ (...) Certainly,
It will never make Sincere Conver^^^^ (...) talk of Rapping off men's Fingers
from catching (...) of Christ, before they are fit for Him. It Is ou^ Catching
Hold of Him, that must make us Fit for Him, and for every Good work! We shall
do Good Works when we have come utterly without them, unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, first, for a share in the Righteousness of the Good Works which He did
for us, and then, for the Assistance to Do Good Works our selves, in a measure
Like unto them. Well, and when we have Done our Good Works, we must after all,
Remember this, That we are to Renounce them all; Renounce all Dependence on
them for the purchase of the Divine Favor unto us. When some told our Dying
Herbert, the many Good works which he had been doing in his Life, he only said,
Good Works, if sprinkled with the Blood of Christ! It is the Blood of Christ,
and not our Good works, that must be of any value with us. They that Build
their Faith on their Good works, Build on a Sandy Foundation: The Primitive
Christians were found in this Article; ( Justin Martyr will clear it:) That we
are Justified only by a wonderful Commutation between our Lord and us, He
taking our Guiltiness, and we having His Righteousness: It Is well declared by
Cyprian, Non asperuatur (...) Filius carnem Hominis induere, ut cum peccare
(...) non posset, aliena peccata portaret. Immortalita^^^ (...) posita, fieri
se mortalem patitur, ut (...) pro Nocentium Salute Perimatur: It Is well de^^^ed
by Theodoret, who Expounding that passage in the Psalms, I restored that which
I took not away, applies it unto our Lord Jesus Christ. q. d. Others robbed God
of His Glory, but I (says our Lord) have resto^^d it again; the Sins by which
'twas done, they were mine by Imputation, though never mine by Inhaerency. The
Protestant Reformers were so full in this Article, That they did not scruple to
say, Amisso Articulo Justificationis, simul amissa est tota Doctrina
Christiana; and as they Lived and Died in the Judgment of that Martyr, whose
Expiring words, were, Behold, a mavelous Exchange, my Lord has my Guiltiness,
and I have His Righteousness! thus, they have generally ever since been clear
in it, until some of Late, have darkened the Truth, under pretense of
preserving the Interests of Holiness; Albeit, as our Incomparable Owen, says, I
am not satisfied, that any of those, who at present oppose this Doctrine, do in
Holiness and Righteousness, and the Exercise of all Christian Graces, surpass
those who in the Last Ages, both in this and other Nations, firmly adhaered
unto it. Yea, some of the Papists themselves, have been under such Convictions,
as have compelled them to Subscribe unto this Article; especially, when the
Approaches of Death, have given them with a Lively Sense to feel themselves
going to appear before the Judgment Seat of God. ^^nestus, the Archbishop of
Magdeburgh, when (...) was near his Death, was comforted by a (...), who told
him, That the merit of his (...) works, would make sure a place in Heaven for
him, whereupon the Dying man cried out, Nullo modo, I will by no means trust
unto the merit of any Good works, done by any man whatever, but the Good works
of Christ are sufficient for me! Bellarmine himself, who had Lived so
Blamelesly, that he was not conscious of his ever having once told a Lie, and
when he came to Auricular Confession he could find nothing to mention, without
Looking back so far as his Childhood, yet when his Death was arresting him, he
durst no more trust unto the merit of his Good works, but would have that
clause inserted in his Will, That he desired the Lord to Receive him, Non ut
aestimator meriti, sed ut Largitor veniae; Not on Merit, but in Mercy!

But we are in the next place to be Advised* That having first Believed on the
Lord Jesus Christ, that we may be Justified, we do then Abound in those Good
works, which are the proper and Genuine Symptoms of Believers; those Good
works, which the Oracles of Heaven call, The Fruits of Righteousness. We
should, as the Apostle speaks, in 1 Cor. 15.58. Always abound in the work of
the Lord. The Bible has no Good words any where, for those Antinomian
Wretches, with whom Good works are despised and neglected: It spits nothing but
Sulphurous Fire, in the Faces of those Libertines! If we are destitute of Good
works, we have none but a Dead Faith, and a Dead Faith will very little
befriend a Dead Soul. To have no Good works then, is a woeful Thing: and, the
Praemonition is, in Math. 3.10. Every Tree which brings not forth Good Fruit,
is hewn down, and cast into the Fire: What then will be the Woe, how woeful will
be the Doom of those that are full of Evil works, and bring forth much of that
Evil Fruit, which grows on the Vine of Sodom, and in the Field of Gomorrah? Sad
will it be for us to perish among Unbelievers, after we have seemed mightily to
Believe; and after a fair show of our Faith, to be Damned among, The workers of
Iniquity. Surely, I^ we would with the Joy of Faith, be Satisfied, that the
Seal of the Holy Spirit, which we seem to have, when we Entertain our
Assurance, That the Righteousness of God, which is by the Faith of Jesus Christ
is upon us, is not a Cheat, a Sham, a Selfdeluding Enthusiasm, it becomes us,
with a Constant Zeal for Good works, to Exercise our selves, at keeping a
Conscience void of Offense toward God and man. It becomes us, to Ponder, How
much we Owe unto our Lord Jesus Christ, and Study, How to Serve the Lord that
has Bought us; and with Good works always to be at work for Him. It becomes
us, to forethink, How little Time we have to be Working in, how near we are to
the Time where there can be no Working, and to Do as many Good works, as we can
in our Time; yea, to call our selves unto a Daily Account, with unspeakable
Trouble, if we have let one Day pass without many of them. It becomes us even
to raise our Civil and Natural, as well as Religious works, unto the Dignity of
Good works, by the most Frequent, most Explicit, and most Ennobling Dedications
of all our Works, unto the Lord. So, it will not be long before we rest from
our Labors, but our Works will follow us.


