ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England.

Begun and Held at Boston the Twenty-ninth Day of May, 1695. and continued by
several Adjournments until Wednesday the Twenty-sixth of February following.

Anno Regni Guilielmi Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, Regis,
Octavo.

BOSTON. Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to the
Governor and Council. 1696.

Anno Regni Guilielmi Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, REGIS,
Octavo.
An Act, For the granting unto His Majesty, An Additional Tax of Two thousand
Three hundred Thirty three Pounds, Nine Shillings, and Three Pence, unto the
Tax upon Polls and Estates, granted by an Act of this Court at their Sessions
begun the Twenty-ninth day of May last past.
FOR the Support of the Government within this His Majesty's Province of the
Massachusetts Bay, and answering of the Incident and Contingent Charges in and
about the same: For a vigorous Prosecution of the War against the French and
Indian Enemy and Rebels; For the Payment of just Debts already Contracted, or
to be Contracted on the Public Account within this Province, and such Grants
and Allowances as have been or shall be Made and Ordered by the General Court
or Assembly to particular Persons; For the Repairs and Support of His Majesty's
Castle, upon Castle-Island, and the Garrison there; For the making good One
Hundred Pounds Miscast in the Grant of Nine Thousand Five Hundred Fifty Nine
Pounds, including a former Grant by Act of the General Assembly, Passed at
their Sitting by Adjournment the Fifth Day of September, One Thousand Six
Hundred Ninety Four, Entitled, An Act, For Regulating of the late Tax, and for
Granting an Appitional Supply of Money. To the Ends and Intents
aforementioned, and none other. We the Representatives of this His Majesty's
said Province of the Massachusetts Bay, Do Grant unto His Most Excellent
Majesty, a Tax of Two Thousand and Eight Pounds, Nineteen Shillings and Three
Pence in Money, to be Raised and Levied upon Polls and Estates, both real and
personal within the same, as in and by this present Act for the manner and
proportion thereof, is directed and set forth.

And be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the Treasurer do forthwith make out and send Warrants to the Select-men
or Trustees, and Commissioner of each Respective Town and Precinct within this
Province, Requiring them to Assess all their Rateable Male Polls and Estate,
both real and personal, lying within such Town or Precinct, and the Dependances
thereof, one full and just third part of the Sum Total of the two several Lists
returned unto the Treasurer, upon the Grant made at the Session of this Court,
begun and held the Twenty Ninth of May last past; the Lists of the same that
are returned amounting to the Sum of Six Thousand and Twenty six Pounds
Seventeen Shillings and Eight Pence. Which said Third part is to be Assessed
proportionably upon Polls and Estates, according to the Rules and Directions in
the Act for the said Grant prescribed and particularly set down, and the said
Lists so made, to Return unto the Treasurer, with a Notification of the Names
of the Constables or Collectors of such Town or Precinct respectively, at or
before the last Day of March Instant. And the Treasurer is hereby further
Empowered and Ordered to send out Warrants directed to the Constables or
Collectors of the said several Towns and Precincts, together with the said
Lists Requiring them to Collect and Pay in the Sum therein mentioned, into the
Treasury, and to Issue their Accounts thereof with himself or Successor, at or
before the Twenty Ninth Day of May, which will be in the Year of our Lord God,
One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Six.

Provided nevertheless, Forasmuch as the Select-men or Trustees of the several
Towns and Precincts here-after named, have omitted their Duty, in not Returning
unto the Treasurer the Lists of their said Towns or Precincts respective Sums
and Proportions unto the aforesaid Tax Granted by this Court at their Session,
begun the Twenty Ninth Day of May last past, and have hitherto paid nothing
toward the same. To the intent therefore that they may bear their just and
equal proportion of Public Charges.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the said several Towns and Precincts, shall pay toward the said former,
and this Additional Grant the respective Sums following:

That is to say, l. s. d. York, Ten Pounds 10 00 00 Wells, Ten Pounds. 10 00 00
K^^tery, Twenty Pounds 20 00 00 (...) o^ Shoals, Five Pounds. 05 00 00 ^^lgar
Town, Forty One Pound. 41 00 00 C^^^mark, Twenty One Pounds, six shillings,
eight pence. 21 06 08 T^^bury, Twenty One Pounds six shillings eight pence 21
06 08 Nantucket, Eighty Pounds. 80 00 00 Southfield, Twenty Pounds. 20 00 00
Enfield, Five Pounds. 05 00 00 Eastham, Ninety Pounds, sixteen shillings eight
pence. 90 16 08

The whole proportion of the said before-named Towns and Precincts, amounting
to Three Hundred Twenty Four Pounds Ten Shillings being added to the Two
Thousand and Eight Pounds Nineteen Shillings and Three pence beforementioned,
makes this Additional Grant to be Two Thousand Three Hundred Thirty Three
Pounds Nine Shillings and Three Pence, and the whole Tax (including the Sum
formerly Returned) to be Eight Thousand Three Hundred and Sixty Pounds Six
Shillings and Eleven pence.

And the Treasurer is hereby Ordered forthwith to send out Warrants directed
unto the Select-men, or Trustees and Commissioner for Assessment (if any such
there be) of the several Towns and Precincts before named, Requiring them
forthwith to Assess the Sum herein set and proportioned, unto the said several
Towns and Precincts, upon all the Rateable Male Polls and Estate, both real and
personal lying within the same, according to the Rules and Directions in the
Act for the aforesaid Grant, and in this present Act prescribed and set down,
and to Return a List thereof unto himself, at or before the last day of March
Instant: And the Treasurer upon Receipt of the same is hereby further Empowered
and Ordered to send forth his Warrants, together with the said Lists, unto the
Constables or Collectors of the said several Towns and Precincts, Requiring
them to Collect and Pay in the Sum therein mentioned into the Treasury, and to
issue their Accounts thereof with himself or Successor, as aforesaid, at or
before the said Twenty Ninth Day of May, which will be in the Year of our Lord
God, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Six.

And for the better Enabling the Treasurer to Enforce the bringing in of the
Moneys herein mentioned to be Granted, and the Arrears of all Public Ra^^ and
Taxes whatsoever, at any time or times heretofore Granted (...) due from any
Town or Towns, or in the hands of any Sheriff, Constable or Collector, the
Accounts whereof lie open and unfinished, or where any Select-men or Assessors
have or shall fail of performing the Duty and Service lawfully required of them.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Treasurer shall be, and hereby is fully Empowered and Authorized, to
take, use, and execute all such Methods, Directions, Powers, and Authorities as
have heretofore been given him in and by any Act or Acts of the General
Assembly, or in any (...), branch, or Article thereof, for the obtaining and
drawing into the Treasury as well all the Moneys mentioned to be Granted in and
by this present Act, as all Arrears of any former and other Rates and Taxes
whatsoever, as fully and effectually as if the same Directions, Methods,
Powers, and Authorities had herein been again particularly Recited and
Re^enacted, and notwithstanding any limitation or restraint thereof in the
particular Act or Acts wherein the same are enumerated, set down and expressed.
And all Select-men, Trustees or Assessors, Sheriffs, Constables or Collectors
failing of performing the Duty and Service of them respectively required, shall
be liable and subject unto the like Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures to be
prosecuted, had and recovered of them in the same way and manner, and before
the same Judicatories, as in and by the said Acts, or any of them are set,
declared and prescribed.

And be it further Enacted,

That the Treasurer be, and is hereby Empowered to Issue forth and pay a certain
number of Bills of Credit, to the value of Four Thousand Pounds more than what
is before Ordered according to the aforesaid Act for which this present Tax,
and the Impost and Excise shall be a Fund.

And be it Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Accounts of the Issuing and Disposal of Moneys and Sums of Money
Granted and Raised, and that hereafter shall be Granted and Raised by the
General Assembly, for the Support and Defense of this His Majesty's Province,
and that has or shall come into the Public Treasury, by any other ways or
means whatsoever, shall be by the Treasurer laid before the Great and General
Assembly, when by them required, for their Examination, Approbation and
Allowance from time to time as has been accustomed. And all such Approbations
and Allowances of the General Assembly heretofore, and that hereafter shall be
passed, shall be to the Treasurer a full and final Discharge.

An Act, For the Encouragement of making Salt, within this Province.
FORASMUCH as the Inhabitants of this Province are brought into great Straits
by reason of the dearness and scarcity of Salt; May of our Vessels employed in
fetching of it from Tartooda, and other Places, being taken by Privateers, and
others Discouraged from Undertaking such Voyages during this (...): And whereas
Elisha Cook, Elisha Hutchinson, and (...), Esqrs. Have Informed this Court,
that (...) offered then of the possibility of making Salt here after the manner
as it is made in France. For a Trial whereof, a considerable Sum of Money must
be advanced* and great pains taken, and that with uncertainty of Success.

Wherefore for the promoting of a Design that will be so universally
beneficial, if it take effect.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and the Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the whole privilege and benefit of making Salt within this Province,
shall be to the said Elisha Cook, Elisha Hutchinson, and John Foster, Esqrs.
and their Associates during the space of Fourteen Years: And if any person or
persons shall make any Salt as abovesaid, within this Province during the said
Term of Fourteen Years next coming; or shall Import any Salt into this
Province, made as abovesaid, in any other Province or Place in New England:
They shall yield and pay as a Custom, the value of Ten Shillings per Hogshead
for all such as shall be Imported as abovesaid; one half to the Undertakers,
Elisha Cook, Elisha Hutchinson, and John Foster, Esqrs. and their Associates,
the other half to the use of the Poor of the Town where the same shall be
Seized. To be Recovered, as other Customs are: Whether the same be Seized on
Board any Ship or Vessel Importing it; or in any Storehouse, or Place, on
Shore, within six months after its being so Imported. Provided, That the said
Elisha Cook, Elisha Hutchinson and John Foster, shall cause to be made as
abovesaid, One Hundred Hogsheads of good Merchantable Salt within this
Province before the Expiration of the Year One Thousand Seven Hundred. Any Law,
Usage, or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

FINIS.

