A Good Man making a Good End.

THE LIFE and DEATH, of the Reverend Mr. JOHN BAILY, Comprised and Expressed IN
A Sermon, On the Day of his FUNERAL. Thursday. 16. d. 10. m. 1697

By Cotton Mather.

Pu^chra sunt verba ex ore Ea Facientium.

Adag. Judaic. BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Michael
Perry, at his Shop, under the West End of the Town House. School.

Reader,
WE are not so Wise, as the Miserable Papists! Among Them, a Person of Merit,
shall, at his Death, be Celebrated and Canonized, by all men agreeing in i^ as
in their Common Interest, for to applaud (...) Life. Among Us, Let there be
Dues paid unto the Memory of the most Merit^rious Person, after his Decease;
many of the Survivers are Offended, I had almost said, Enraged at it: They seem
to take it as a Reproach unto themselves, (and it may be, so it is!) That so
much Good should be told of any man, and that all the Little Frai^ti^s and
Errors of that man, (and whereof no mere man was ever free!) be not also told
with all the Unjust Aggravations that Envy might put upon them This Folly, is
as Inexpressible an^ Injur^ to us all; as it cannot but be an Advantage unto
Mankind in General, for Interred Virtue, to be Rewarded with a Statue.

I^ ever I Deserved well of my Country, it has been, when I have given to the
World, the Histories and Characters, of Eminent Persons, which have adorned it.
Malice will call some of those things Romances; but that Malice it self may
never his with the least color of Reason any more, I do here declare, Let any
man Living, Evince, any one Material Mistake in any one of those Compo^ures, it
shall have the most Public Recantation, that c^n be desired* In the mean Time,
while some with Impo^^nt Cavils, Nibbling at the S^atues, which we have Erected
for our Worthies, take pains to prove themselves, The Enemies of New England,
and of Religion, the Statues will out live all their Idle Nibbles; The
Righteous will be had in Everlasting Remembrance, when the Wicked who s^e (...)
and are grieved, shall gnas^ with their Teeth and melt away.

A Good Man making a Good End.
Uttered, Thursday 16 d 10 m. 1697.
I Bring you this Day, a Text of Sacred Scripture, which a Faithful Servant of
the Lord Jesus Christ, lately gone unto Him, did before his going, order for
you, as his Legacy. Give your Attention.

It Is That, in Psalm. XXXI.5. Into Thine Hand I Commit my Spirit. THat Holy, and
Worthy Minister of the Gospel, whose Funeral is this Day to be attended, having
Long Labored for the Conversion of men unto God, at length grew very
Praesagious that his Labors in the Evangelical Ministry, drew near unto an
End. While he was yet in Health, and not got beyond the Fifty Fourth Year of
his Age, he did, with such a Praesage upon his mind, (having first written on
this wise in his Diary, Oh! that Christ's Death might fit me for my own!) begin
to Study a Sermon, on this very Text, Into Thine Hand I Commit my Spirit. But
his Great Master, who favored him with such a Praesage, never gave him an
opportunity to Finish and Utter, what he had begun to Study. His Life had all
this while, been a Practical Commentary upon his Doctrine; and now, behold! His
Death must Expound and Apply the Doctrine, which he would have Preached unto
us. He must show us, how to do that Important work of Committing a Departing
Spirit into the Hands of God, no otherwise than by the Actual doing of that
work himself. While therefore he Lay a Dying, he a^k'd one of his dearest
Relations, Do thou know what I am doing! She said, No; He then added, I am
Rendering, I am Rendering! meaning, I suppose, his own Spirit unto the Lord. But
while he was doing of that work, and with Humble Resignation Committing his own
Spirit into the Hands of God, he desired of me, that I would Preach upon the
Text, about which he had been under such Intentions. Wherefore [If at least I
may be thought worthy of such a Character!] You are now to consider me, shall I
say, as Executing the Will of the Dead? or, as Representing a Man of God, whom
God has taken. The Truths, which we shall now Inculcate, will be such, as you
are all along to think, These are the Things which a Saint now in Glory would
have to be Inculcated. And when we have briefly set those Truths before you, we
will describe a little that Excellent Saint, as from whom you have them
Recommended: We will describe him chiefly, with Strokes fetched from his own
Diaries, out of which, in the little Time I have had since his Death, I have
collected a few Remarkables.

Our Psalmist, the Illustrious David, now, as we may judge, drew near unto his
End: and we may say of the Psalm here composed by him, These are among the last
words of David, the man who was Raised up on High. The Sighs of the Psalmist
here collected, seem to have been occasioned, by the Sufferings, which he
underwent, when his own Subjects, took up Arms against him. Nevertheless, as
our Psalter is all over, The Book of the Messiah, so this particular Hymn in
it, is contrived Elegantly to point out, the Sufferings of our Lord Jesus
Christ unto us. In the Text now before us, the Psalmist apprehending himself in
danger of Death, does the Great work of a Dying man: Which i^, To Commit a
Surviving Spirit, into the Hand of God. But in doing this, he Entertains a
special Consideration of God, for his Encouragement in doing it: This is, Thou
have Redeemed me, O Lord God of Truth. It is the Messiah, that has Redeemed
us; It is the Messiah, whose Name is The Truth; David upon a view o^ the
Messiah, said, This is the man, who is the Lord God. Wherefore, In Committing
our Spirits unto God, our Lord Christ is to be distinctly considered; and He
was, no doubt, by David considered. The Power of God, is called, His Hand; The
Wisdom of God, is called, His Hand: But above all, The Christ of God, who is,
The Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, He is the Hand of God; By Him it is,
that the God of Heaven does, what He does in the World: And He is, for that
cause also Styled, The Arm of the Lord. It is therefore to the Power and
Wisdom, and Goodness of God, in Christ, that our Expiring Spirits are to be
committed.

There was indeed a wonderful Time, when our Lord Jesus Christ Himself made a
wonderful Use of this very Text. We read in Luke 23.46. When Jesus had cried
with a loud voice, He said, Father, into thy Hands I commend my Spirit; and
having said thus, He gave up the Ghost. Syrs, God uttered His voice, at this
rate, and the Earth Trembled at it! And well it might, for never did there such
an amazing thing occurr upon the Earth before. Now, our Lord having said, Into
thy Hands I commend my Spirit, stopped at those words; for He was Himself the
Redeemer, the Lord God of Truth. But as for us, we are to consider God, as in
our Lord Jesus Christ, when we Commit our Spirits into His Hands. As Luther
could say, Nolo Deum Absolutum, I Tremble to have to do, with an Absolute God;
that is to say, a God without a Christ: So, we may all Tremble to T^ink of
Committing our Spirits, into the Hands of God, any otherwise than as He is, in
Christ Reconciling the World unto Himself. We are truly told, in Heb. 10 31. It
is a Fearful Thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God. Our Spirits are by
Sin become obnoxious to the Fearful Wrath of God; and, woe to us, if our Spirits
fall into His Hands, not having His Wrath Appeased! Syrs, We Commit Bri^rs and
Thorns, and wretched Stubble to Infinite Flames, if we Commit our Spirits into
the Hands of God, not in a Christ, become our Friend. We deliver up our
Spirits, unto a Devouring Fire, and unto Everlasting Burnings, if we approach
the Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God Almighty any otherwise than through the Immanuel,
our Mediator. We are to Commit our Souls unto our Faithful Creator: But if He
be not our Merciful Redeemer too, then, He that made us will ^ot have mercy on
us. When Hezekiah was, as he thought, a ^ying, he Turned his Face to the Wall:
I suppose it was, to that side of the Upper Chamber, the Pra^ing Chamber, where
he Lay, that had Gods Window in i^, the Window that opened it sel^ toward the
Ark in the Temple. When we Commit our Spirits into the Hand of God, we are to
Turn our Face toward that Ark of God, our Lord Jesus Christ* We have this
matter well directed by the words of the Dying Martyr St^phen; in Acts 7.59. He
said, Lord Jesus, Recive my Spirit.

And now, there is a weighty CASE, that lies before us;

After what manner should we commit our Spirits unto our Lord Jesus Christ,
that so the Eternal Safety and Welfare of our Spirits, may be effectually
provided for?

If our Faithful BAILY were now Alive, I do not know any one CASE, that he
would more Livelily have discoursed among you: but I know, that he would have
Discou^sed on This, with a Soul full of Inexpressible Agonies. He was a Man,
who had, from a Child, been full of Sollicitous Cares about his own Soul; and
from hence in part it was, that when he became a Preacher of the Gospel, he
Preached nothing so much, as the Cares that all men should have, about the
Conversion of their Souls, unto God, and the Sincerity of their Souls before
Him. There were many Great Points of our Christian Faith, which he still
treated with Shorter Touches, because his Thoughts were continually Swallowed
up, with the Vast Concern of not being Deceived, about the Marks of a
Regenerate and a Sanctified Soul, and Hopes of being found in Christ at a Dying
Hour. Those two words, A SOUL, and ETERNITY, were Great Words unto him; and his
very Soul was greatly, and always under the Awe of them. Hence, The very
Spirit of his Preaching, lay in the points, of Turning from Sin to God in
Christ, and the Trial of our doing so, and the Peril of our not doing it.
Wherefore, as far as alas, one of my sinful coldness in those dreadful points,
can do it, I ^ill set before you in a few minutes, what I app^ehend my Dead
Friend would have to be spoken, upon these points, in relation to the CASE,
that is now to be considered.

I. Let every mortal man be very sensible, that he has an Immortal Spirit in
him, and prize that Spirit exceedin^ly. How shall we Commit a Spirit into the
Hands of the Lord Jesus Christ, if this thing be not Rea^ized unto us, That we
have a Spirit, which will be ho^ribly miserab^e to all Eternity, if the Lord
Jesus Christ look not after it!

Could that mouth, which is this Day to be Laid in the Dust, once more be
op^ned among us. I know what voice would issue from it: with a very zealous
vivaci^ie, I know this voice would be uttered, Man, Thou have a Soul, a Soul
within thee; a Soul that is to Exist thr^ughout Eternal Ages; Oh! prize that
Soul of thine, at the greatest rate imaginable. I say then; We must be
sensible, That we have Spirits which are Distinct from our Bodies, and which
will outlive them: Spirits, which are Incorporeal Substances, Endued with
Rational Faculties; and though Inclined unto our Humane Bodies, yet surviving
after them* An Infide Pope of Rome, once Lying on his Deathbed, had such a
Speech as this; I shall now quickly be certified and satisfied, whether I have
an Immortal Soul or no! Woeful man, if he were not until Then certified and
satisfied! God forbid, That there should be so much as one Epicurean Swine
among us, dreaming, That man is nothing but a mere Lump of matter put into
Motion. Shall a man dare to Think, that he has not a Rational Soul in him,
which is of a very different Nature from his Body? Truly, his very Thinking is
enough to confute his monstrous Unreasonableness: Mere Body cannot Think; and I
pray, of what Figure is a Rational Atom? The Oracles of God, have therefore
assured us, That the Fathers of our Bodies, are not the Fathers of Spirits; No;
these have another Father! And, That the Spirits of men, may go from their
Bodies; and be caught up to the Third Heaven too! Well; But when our Bodies
Crumble and Tumble before the Strokes of Death, are not our Spirits overwhelmed
in the Ruins of our Bodies, like Sampson, when the Philistean Temple fell upon
him? No; They are Sparks of Immortality, that shall never be Extinguished; they
must Live, and Move, and Think, until the very Heavens be no more. Among other
Evidences, That our Spirits are Immortal, there is no Contemptible one, in the
Presages, which the Spirits of such good men, as he which is (...) to be
In^err'd, have had, of their Spe^dy passage in a World of Spirits. Our Lord
Jesus Christ, who gave His own Blood for the Purchase of our Souls, and can
Tell, Sure! what it is that He has purchased; He has Expressly told us, in
Math. 10 28. They which Kill the Body, are not able to Kill the Soul. Our
Blessed Apostle Paul, a mighty Student and Worker for Souls, was not fed with
Fancies, when he took it for granted, in Phil. 1.21. That when he should be
dissolved, He should be with Christ immediately. Do, Try, Thou Fool hardy
Creature, to persuade thy self, That thou have not an Immortal Soul: Thou can
not, for thy Soul, render thy self altogether, and evermore perswa^ed of it:
with very dreadful Suspicions, of its Immortality, will thy own Conscience, a
certain Faculty of thy Soul, terrify thee, when God awakens it. I have known, a
Sturdy Disputer against the Immortality of the Soul, go out of the World, with
this Lamentable Out cry, Oh! my Soul, my Soul; what shall I do for my poor
Soul! Syrs, Let this Principle Stand like the very Pillars of Heaven with every
one of us, That we have Immortal Souls to be provided for. But if a man have an
Immortal Soul within him, what will be the Natural Consequence of it? The
consequence is plainly this; That since the Soul is Immortal, it should be very
precious. It was infinitely Reasonable, for the Soul to be called, as it was,
in Psalm. 22.20. My Soul, my Darling! Oh! There should be nothing so Dear to a
man, as that Soul of his, that shall Endure, when all other Things are Changed:
For, O my Soul, of thy years there shall be no End. The Interests of our
^pirits are to be much greater Things unto us, than the Interests of our
Bodies. What will become of our Souls, That, That is a thing, that should Ly
much nearer to our Hearts, than what will become of our Lives, our Names, our
Estates. We should set an high value on our Spirits, and often meditate on the
Text, which was once given to a Great man, for his daily meditation, in Mat.
16.26 What is a man profited, if he gain the whole World, and Lose his own Soul.

II. Let every man in this World that has an Immortal Spirit, he above all
Things Thoughtful for the welfare of that Spirit in another World. When we
Commit a Spirit into the Hands of the Lord Jesus Christ, it is, that so it may
Escape that Wretchedness, and Attain that Blessedness, in another World,
whereof our Lord has in His Word advised us. When that Ambassador of Christ,
who is lately gone back unto Him, was Resident among us, there was no one
Thing, that he more Vigorously Insisted on, than This; Oh! there is nothing so
dreadful, as that Hell, which every wicked Soul shall be turned into: There is
nothing so joyful as that Heaven which is prepared for every Godly Soul: And
there is nothing of so much concernment for you, as to flee from that Wrath to
Come, and lay hold on that Life Eternal. I say accordingly; There are
astonishing Dangers, whereto our Souls are Exposed by our Sins Our Spirits are
in Danger of being forever B^nished from the Communion of the Lord Jesus
Christ, into a State of Easeless, and Endless Horror; Our Spirits are in Danger
to be Plunged into doleful Torments, among the Devils that have been our
Tempters: Our Spirits a^e in Danger to be Siez'd by the Justice o^ that God
against whom we have Sinned, and laid under Everlasting Impressions of His
Indignation There are Spirits in Prison; there is Danger lost the Vengeance of
God, Chain up our Spirits in that fiery Prison. (It was but a little before he
went unto Heaven, that our Batly in Twenty Six Discourses on Rev. 6.8. Opened
the Treasures of that Wrath among us*) And we should now be so Thoughtful of
nothing upon Earth, as how to get our Spirits Delivered from thi^ Formidable
Hell. The Fittest Language for us, would be like that, in Psalm. 116.3, 4* The
pains of Hell are getting Hold on me; O Lord, I beseech thee, to Deliver my
Soul. But then, There is a Great Salvation, which our Lord Jesus Christ has
wrought for us; and that Salvation is, The Salvation of the Soul. Our Spirits
may be Released, from the Bonds, which the Sentence of Death, by the Law of God
passed upon them, has laid them under. Our Lord Jesus Christ, Satisfying o^ the
Law, by His Death in our Stead, has procured this Release for the Spirits of
His Chosen. There a^e the Spirits of Just men made Perfect; and there is
perfect Light, and perfect Love, and perfect Joy, among those Glori^yed
Spirits. Our Spirits may be advanced into the Society of Angels; and be with
our Lord Jesus Ch^i^t, in Heaven, the Spectators, and partakers of His Heavenly
Glory. Now, we should be more Thoughtful to make sure of such a Heaven for our
Spirits, than to Ensure any thing on Earth. We should wish for nothing so much
as That, in 1 Samuel 25 29. A Soul bound up in the Bundle of Life. There are
Souls, which our Lord Jesus Christ, has Bundled, like so many Slips, to be
Transplanted into the Sweet Garden of Heaven; Say now, O man, with all possible
Ardour of Scul, Oh! may my Soul be one of them!

When our Father Jacob, was a Dying, he seems, upon the O^c^sion of mentioning
a Serpent, immediately to call to mind the mischiefs which had been done by the
old Serpent, unto our Spirits: whereupon he cried out, Genesis 49.18. I have
waited for thy Salvation, [for thy JESUS!] O Lord. That our Spirits may not be
destroyed in our Dying, This, This, is the Thing that we should be concerned
for; That they may be Saved by a Jesus, from the mischiefs, which the old
Serpent has brought upon them.

III. When we Commit our Spirits into the Hand of our Lord Jesus Christ, we
must Believe in Him, as fully able, to Save our Spirits unto the uttermost. It
is by Faith acted unto the uttermost, that we are to Commit our Spirits, into
the Hands of our Lord Jesus Christ: Now the Acts of this Faith are admirably
expressed, in 2 Timothy 1.12 I know whom I have Believed, and I am persuaded, That
He is Able to keep that which I have committed unto Him. We would have our
Spirits preserved from the Direful Anger of God, which threatens to Swallow
them up: Say now, Lord Jesus, I am persuaded, Thou art able to preserve me. We
would have our Spirits Enriched with the Knowledge, and Image, and Favor of
God, in His Kingdom: Say now, Lord Jesus, I am persuaded, Thou art Able to
Enrich me. We are therefore to place our Faith, on the Sacrifice which our Lord
Jesus Christ has offered unto God, on the behalf of His people. We read, in
Job 33.22. When a Soul draws near unto the Grave, If there be a Messenger with
him, an Interpreter, then He says, Deliver him from going down to the pit, I
have found a Ransom. Some of the Ancients take that, Angelus Interpres, to be,
Christ the Mediator. Syrs, When your Souls are drawing near unto the Grave,
it is high Time to Believe on that Ransom, which, One among a Thousand, has
paid unto God for us, We must Believe, That the Sacrifice of the Soul of the
Messiah, when He was Cut off, but not for Himself, is a valuable Sacrifice, a
sufficient Sacrifice, and a Sacrifice which the wondrous Grace of God invites
us to Depend upon; and with a firm Dependence on that Sacrifice, we must plead,
O Let my Soul be delivered from going down to the Pit, since God has found such
a Ransom for me! But while we Rely on our Lord Jesus Christ, as He has been
Sacrificed for us here below, we must also Re^^ upon Him, as He is now above,
in the Holy of Holies, Interceeding for us. And that our Faith in commi^^ing
our Spirits unto our Lord Jesus Christ, may be a Truly Christian Faith; We must
Believe Him to be no less than, The Lord God of Truth; to be God as well as
Man; to be God and Man in one person. That man, is a very Foolish man, who will
Trust his own Soul, with any one Less than the God, who made our Soul, and who
alone can Save it. Our Belief must pronounce our Lord Jesus Christ, the same
that His Bible has pronounced Him; The True God, the Great God, and God over
all; One who is, Every where, and who Knows every Thing. This Article of our
Faith, which the modern Jews deny, i^ indeed so Incontestable, that I could
presently overwhelm, with an Army of Testimonies, from the Rabbis among the
Ancient Jews, confessing, That the Messiah must be very Jehovah Himself. I
beseech you, Let no man dare to Die, in any Doubt, whether the Lord Jesus
Christ, unto whom he commits his own Soul, be not more than a mere man.
Believing Him to be God, Let us believe, that His Blood is price enough to
obtain for us, the E^erlasting Happiness of our Spirits; what can our Spirits
want that the Blood of God cannot obtain? Let us Believe, that His Holy Spirit,
can sit our Spirits for, and fill our Spirits wi^h, Eternal Glories; the Spirit
of Christ, is the Spirit of God: What cannot He do for us? Let us Believe, that
He has Legiors, and My^iads, and Millions of Blessed Spirits, ^o be our Convoy,
and Safeguard from those Evil Spirits, which are waiting to arrest our Spirits
at our Dissolution: He is God, among the Thousands of His Angels, in His Holy
Place: They Will ^ly like swift Flashes of Lightning to succor us, when ever He
shall command them so to do. What shall we say? When Jacob ^ell Asleep, with
his Head Lying upon a Stone, he had a Vision of Angels concerned for him.
Truly, our Lord Jesus Christ is, The Stone of Israel. If you don't fall Asleep,
till you have Laid your Heads, and Hopes on that Stone, you shall then see
Armies of Angels about you, to secure you.

IV. When we Commit our Spirits into the Hand of our Lord Jesus Christ, we must
Submit unto all His Gracious Operations upon our Spirits. We Commit our Spirits
into the Hand of our Lord Jesus Christ, we say: Well, He then demands of us, as
in Mark 10.51 What will thou, that I should do unto thee? And, I pray, mark it;
If there be any Article of Grace, always wrought by the Lord Jesus Christ, for
the Spirits of Hi^ Elect, which you do not Consent unto, He will not Receive
your Spirits; No, He will Destroy them dreadfully. Some Commit their Spirits
into the Hand of the Lord Jesus Christ, they say; but they are not willing that
the Hand of the Lord Jesus Christ should, ever Do for them, all that must be
done, in all that are brought Home unto God. Perhaps they would have their
Spirits rescued from the Hands of the Devils hereafter; but they don't heartily
Commit their Spirits into the Hands of the Lord Jesus Christ, for to have all
the Lusts that make their Spirits like Devils, here Embittered, and Eradicated.
They would have Easy Spirits, it may be, but Oh! they are Loath to have Holy
Spirits. This Halving of it, Thou Hypocrite, This Halving of a Christ, will
Hang the Milst^^es of Damnation, about the Neck of thy Soul for ever. The Lord
Jesus Christ, puts this Question unto us, Poor Sinner, what shall I do for thy
Spirit? No man can a^ight Commit a Spirit into the Hand of the Lord Jesus
^^rist, until he have se^iously pondered on (...) Question. Ponder i^, Syrs, in
the Fear of God! But then Let our Answer to it, be according to that, in 2 These
1.11 That He would fulfill all the good pleasure of His Goodness in you, and the
work of Faith with power. In Committing your Spirits into the Hand of the Lord
Jesus Christ, Oh! Let your Hearts, being made willing in the Day of His power,
Declare themselves willing, to have Him Do for you, all that He is willing to
Do. It Is the proposal of the Lord Jesus Christ, Shall my Obedience to my
Father, furnish thee with that Atonement, and that Righteousness, whereby thy
Spirit shall stand without Fault before the Throne of God? Reply, Lord, I
Commit my Spirit into thy Hand, for Thee to Justify it. The proposal of the
Lord Jesus Christ unto us is, All the Maladies of thy Spirit, shall I heal them
all? Reply, Lord, I Commit my Spirit into thy Hand, as into the Hand of the
Lord my Healer; O Let that Hand of thine, Open this Blind Mind, and Subdue this
Base Will, and Rectify all these Depraved Affections; and on all Acc^unts Renew
a Right Spirit within me. Man, Commit thy Spirit into the Hand of the Lord
Jesus Christ, with such a Disposition; and then rest Assured, That Spirit shall
never be Lost.

V. If you would successfully Commit your Spirits into the Hand of the Lord
Jesus Christ, when you Die, you are to Do it for your Spirits before you Die.
Indeed, what should all our Life be, but a preparation for Death? And all of
our Life truly is little enough. So thought our Devout Baily. It was the
Counsel which he often gave to his Friends, Let not one day pass you, without
an earnest prayer, that you may have a CHRIST, for to stand by you in a Dying
Hour. And his own practice, was according to that Counsel, as is well known to
them that Lived with him in his Family. Syrs, you are not sure, that when the
Decretory Hour of Death overtakes you, you shall have one minute of an Hour
allowed you, to Commit your Spirits into the Hand of the Lord Jesus Christ. Is
not a Sudden Death a Frequent Sight? There are very many so suddenly Snatched
away, by the Whirlwind of the Vengeance of the Almighty, that they have not
opportunity, so much as to say, Lord have mercy upon me! And, Let me tell you,
That a Sudden Death is most likely to be the portion of those who most
presumptuously put off to a Death bed, the work of Committing their Spirits,
into the Hand, that can alone befriend them. I have Read, That of old,
according to the Laws of Persia, a Malefactor had Liberty, for an Hour before
his Execution, to ask what he would, and what he asked was granted him. One
that was under Sentence of Death, being Admitted unto the use of this Liberty,
desired neither one Thing, nor another, but only, That he might see the Kings
Face; which being allowed him, he so plied the King, in that Hour, that he
obtained his pardon: Whereupon the Persians altered their Custom, and covered
the Face of the Malefactor, that he might never see the King any more. I will
not now Enquire, how far this passage, will Illustrate the Story of Haman; but
I will observe, That the Face of God, is the Name of the M^ssiah; and in this
observation, I have given you a Golden Key, to come at New Treasures in ^s^ores
of Scriptures. And I will apply i^, with saying; You have it may be an Hour,
and no more, allowed you, to address the Face of God in the Lord Jesus Christ.
In this Hour, you may obtain His Favor and Mercy, and Pardon. Don't slip this
Hour, Lest it be Too Late Or, peradventure, (and alas, it is but a
peradventure!) you should upon a Death bed, have space enough, to Commit your
Spirits into the Hands of the Lord, are you sure, that you shall then have the
Grace to do it? It is a solemn caution, that is given us, in Phil. 2.12, 13.
Work out your own Salvation wi^h Fear and Trembling; For it is God that works
in you, both to Will, and to Do, of His own Good pleasure. Even so, Fear, and
Tremble, to Delay Committing your Spirits into the Hand of the Lord, so much as
one Day Longer; You don't know, that God will please to Work in you, for the
doing of it, when your last Moments are upon you. I have read it, as the
observation of some very Experienced Ministers, that they never handled in
their Ministry, any Subjects more successfully, than those which led them to
discourse against procrastination in the concerns of their Souls. Our Baily was
much in making of this Experiment. Many a man inserts that clause in his Last
Will, I bequeath my Soul unto God that gave it. But, in the Name of God; Art
thou certain that He will Accept of it? The Law says, Legato renunciari potest,
and, Legatum accipere nemo nolens cogitur; One may Refuse a Legacy, there is no
compelling one to Accept it. It is true, our Compassionate Lord, will ever
Accept a poor Soul, whenever it is with a true Faith* brought unto Him. Yea, but
it may be, He will not Accept of thy Soul, inasmuch as thou have no True Faith
to bring it withal; Faith, which is not of our selves, it is the Gift of God!
Wherefore, O man, if thou have any Regard unto thy Never Dying Soul, Go thy
ways presently, and earnestly Commit it unto the Lord before a Dying Hour. As
the Apostle said, This I say, Brethren, the Time is short: Even so, This I say,
My Friend; Thy Time it may be shorter than thou art well aware of What shall I
say? I say. Boast not thy self of To morrow. I say, This Night thy Soul may be
Required.

And, if thy Faithless Heart, have the Assistences of the Divine Grace witheld
from if, when the Damp Sweats of Death are upon thee, there is yet another
Objection, with which the God of Heaven will Thunder-strike thy Attempts to
Commit thy Spirit into His Hand. That is This: That Spirit of thine, is it thy
own to Dispose of? Have thou not already otherwise disposed of it? It is a Rule
in Law, Nemo potest Legare, quod suum jam non est: No man can by will, Demise,
Devise, Dispose of that, of which he had made Sale before. It is said of a very
ungodly man, in 1 King 21.25. He sold himself, to work Wickedness, in the sight
of the Lord. Ungodly Sinner; The Devil has often bargained with thee, about
thy Soul; he has said, By Deliberate Sinning against Heaven, do thou make over
thy Soul to me, and thou shall have the short pleasures of Sin for it. God
knows how often, thou have thus Bargained away thy Soul to the Devil; and since
thou have not in all thy Life Revoked that Bargain, then though thou do at thy
Death cry unto Him, Lord, Receive this poor Soul of mine! how justly may He
say, No, Not I! Thou have Sold that Soul to another; And Let him keep it
forever! There will also be this further to be said; What power have thou to
Dispose of thy Spirit? Have thou any thing at all, at thy own Disposal? It is a
Rule in Law, Servus non potest Condere Testamentum; A Slave cannot make a Will:
He has nothing of his own to Dispose of. It is said, in Joh. 8.34. Whosoever
practices Sin, is the Slave of Sin. It may be, thou have all this while, been
a very Slave; Thy Lust is thy Lord; A Lust of Uncleanness, of Drunkenness, of
Worldiness, it has utterly Enslaved thee. And, What? Not got out of that
Slavery, before thy Dim Eyes, and Cold Lips, and Faltering Tongue, and Failing
Breath, has put over thy Soul into the Hand of the Lord! How justly may He
say, Slave, Thou art not Able to do for thy wretched Soul, what thou do now
pretend unto. The Lord Jesus Christ, will not (...) off thy Soul, with such
Objections, if thou Seek the Lord while He may be found, and call upon Him
while He is near. I earnestly Testify unto you, The Vilest and the Oldest
Sinner among you all, may Come, and be Welcome, unto the Lord Jesus Christ, if
you will come Now, while it is the Acceptable Time, Now, while it is the Day of
Salvation. Though thou art never so Bad, yet come and Heartily complain to Him
of all thy Badness, and He will do Good unto thy Soul! I am sure my BAILY,
would have said nothing more Heartily than this among you; you heard him often
say it, Come in to the Mercy of my Lord, for yet there is Room! But it is to be
feared, That if thou stay, till the Last Assaults of Death are made upon thee,
the Door of Mercy will be shut, and so, when thy Shrieks are, Lord, Lord, Open
to me! all the Answers will be Rebukes and Fiery Thunders.

VI. Often Committing our Spirits into the Hand of the Lord Jesus Christ while
we Live, Let us Endeavor after such Characters upon our Spirits, as may Assure
us, that He will Receive us, when we Die.

Indeed when we first Commit our Spirits into the Hand of the Lord Jesus
Christ, we are to bring them, with no other Characters but those of Sin, and
Hell, upon them. If we then Commit our Spirits into the Hand of the Lord Jesus
Christ, under the Encouragement of any Laudable Qualifications and
Recommendations, in them, Ah! Lord, Thou will Abhor us, and cast us off! In our
first Believing on the Lord Jesus Christ, He Enquires of us* What Spirit is
that, which thou do now Commit into my Hand? Our Answer must be, Lord, It is
a Guilty Spirit, a Filthy Spirit, a Spirit as full of Sin and Hell, as ever it
can hold, and a Spirit horribly under the Curse of God. Sirs, If you Answer any
otherwise than So, the Redeemer of Spirits, will not Receive your Spirits. But
when we Commit our Spirits into the Hand of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the last
Actions of our Life, it is to be supposed, That we only Repeat, what we have
done before, and that our Lord Jesus Christ, has already Received our Spirits,
on our doing of it. Oh! It Is a dreadful Thing, for a Dying man, to think, The
Lord never yet Received this poor Soul of mine; for I never till now Committed
it unto the Lord! When such Persons Commit their Spirits into the Hand of the
Lord Jesus Christ, under the Dimness of the Anguish of Death, it is, as one
says, As if one should bequeath unto an Honorable Person, some greasy Dish
clout, or some dirty Shoe clout. It is of unutterable Concernment, for every
man, to get the Symptoms of a Received Soul upon him, Now before his last
Surrender of a Distressed Soul: and for a man to be able to say, at the last,
Lord, I Commit a po^r Sinful Spirit now into thy Hand; but it is a Spirit upon
which thy Blood has been Sprinkled, and it is a Spirit which thy Spirit has
long since taken possession of. Now, to render this Unquestionable, we are to
Examine our selves, Whether our Spirits have been Renewed by the Holy Spirit of
God? and be Restless in our own Spirits till we are sure of such a Renovation.
The Apostle once concluded, That when our Spirits depart from hence, the Lord
Jesus Christ, will Receive them, into an House not made with Hands, Eternal in
the Heavens: And upon what was it, that he Raised this Conclusion? He says, in
2 Cor. 5.5. ^or He that wrought us, for this self-same Thing is God* The Greek
word, used there, is the same that the LXX use for the Curious works about the
Tabernacle. When Bezaleel had neatly wrought a Board, for to be set up in the
Silver Sockets of the Tabernacle, he would not throw it away among the Rubbish.
Man! If thou have a Well wrought Soul within thee, God will Receive it, and
Advance, and Improve it, in His House for ever. A Work of Grace produced by the
Spirit of God, upon the Spirits of men, is a sure Token, of His purpose to
bestow a State of Glory upon them, at their Departure from their Bodies. The
primitive Martyrs were bidden, in 1 Pet. 4.19. To Commit the keeping of their
Souls unto God, as unto a Faithful Creator. But it is probable, the New
Creation Experienced by Renewed Soul, is especially therein referred unto. Has
the Spirit of God, made a New Creature of thy Spirit? This will be a
Demonstration, that the Lord Jesus Christ, has already Received thy Spirit,
and that, when thou do again Commit thy Spirit unto Him, He will Receive it.
When we do, in our last Actions, Commit a Spirit, into the Hand of the Lord
Jesus Christ, what is it for? It is that He may put an upper Garment of Glory
upon that Spirit. But He will demand, Where is the under Garment of Grace upon
it? If thou art without that Garment, He will doom thy Spirit unto outer
Darkness, that is to say, (for Outer Darkness was the Name of the Prison a ^ong
the Jews,) He will make a Perpetual Imprisonment, the porti^n of thy Soul.
Wherefore, let us Enquire diligently, into the Signs of a Newborn Soul upon
us, before we come to Die. Woe to us, i^ we are not Born Twice, before we Dye
Once! Why should we incur this Desolation upon our Souls, That when at last, we
go to Commit them into the Hand of the Lord, He shall Reject them, and say, No,
I know them not; They are none of mine; They are the Workers of Iniquity! The
more certainly to prevent this Desolation, Let this one Comprehensive Duty of
the New Creature, be often Renewed with you. Receive the Lord Jesus Christ into
thy Soul, when He does Command it of thee, and the Lord Jesus Christ will
Receive thy Soul into Heaven, when thou do at last Commit it unto Him. As
Jotham said, in Judge. 9.7. Hearken to me, that God may Hearken to you: Even
This do I now say to you; and I carry it on to This Issue: Do you Hearken to
the Lord Jesus Christ, when He bids you to Receive Him, and when you Pray Him
to Receive you. He will then Hearken to you. The Lord Jesus Christ, is often
knocking at the Door of thy Soul: There would He Enter, with all His Gracious
Influences: Open to the Lord, by Resigning up thy Soul to the Sweet Influences
of His Grace: Reply, O come in, thou blessed of the Lord, why stand thou
without? So, when thy Last Sands are a running, thou may joyfully think, My
Lord Jesus Christ will now Receive me, more heartily, than ever I Received Him:
If I have had an Heart, alas, a vile Heart! for Him. I am sure He has an Heaven
for me! Lord, I now Commit into thy Hand, a Spirit into which thou have been
Received, when thy wondrous Grace demanded it for an Habitation: And thou will
now Receive this unworthy Spirit of mine into a better Habitation. Think thus,
and, Rejoice, with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory!

VII. When we come to Commit our Spi^^^^ unto the Hand of our Lord Jesus
Christ, at and for, our Last Resignation, Let us do it very Humbly, but very
Wittingly, but very Cheerfully.

How Humbly ought we to Commit our Spirits into the Hand of the Lord Jesus
Christ! With how much Loathing and Judging of our selves, and with what
Shameful Reflections, on all our past Behaviors. We are bitterly to
Acknowledge the Disorders, and Corruptions, of our (...) Spirits, when we
Commit them unto the Lord, and Acknowledge the numberless Errors, whereinto our
Spirits have betrayed us. When we Lift up our Soul unto the Lord, Let it be in
Terms like those, in Ezra 9.6. O my God, I am Ashamed, and blush to Lift up my
Face to thee, my God! And therefore, whatever Blessings we expect for our
Souls, Let us with all possible Self-Abhorrence found our Expectations on the
pure Mercy of God, in our Lord Jesus Christ. Most sweetly did our Dying Hooker,
express the frame of Spirit, wherewith a Spirit, is to be Committed into the
Hand of the Lord: When one that stood weeping by his Bed side, said unto him,
Sir. You are going to Receive the Reward of all your Labors, he replied,
Brother, I am going to Receive Mercy! What shall I say? The Frame of Spirit,
necessary in this Glorious Transaction, I cannot better paint out unto you,
than by reciting the words, which I remember I once had, from an Eminent old
Servant of the Lord Jesus Christ, at my taking Leave of him: said he, Sir, I am
every Day expecting my Death; but I desire to Die, like the Thief, crying to the
Crucified Jesus for mercy. I am Nothing, I have Nothing, I can Do Nothing,
except what is Unworthy* My Eye, and Hope, and Faith, is to Christ on His
Cross. I bring an Unworthiness, like that of the poo^ Dying Thief unto Him, and
have no more to plead than he. Like the poor Thief, Crucified with Him, I am
wai^ing to be Received, (...) the Infinite Grace of my Lord, into His Kingdom.
And, pray tell me, Did not Aged Paul mean something of This, when he said, I am
Crucified with Christ?

Syrs, This is the Frame, wherewith we are to do, what we do. But then, How
Willingly, How Cheerfully! God forbid, That we should Commit our Spirits into
His Hand, as only Dragged, and Forced unto it by Unavoidable Death. Our Dying
Lord said, Father, Into thy Hands I commend my Spirit. When God calls for our
Spirit, we are to think, It Is my Father that calls for me; and shall not I go
to my Father? It was a good Speech even of an Heathen, Been Mori est Libenter
Mori, one Thing in Well Dying, is to Die willingly. It Is a dismal Thing, for the
Spirit of a man to be Torn from him, and be pulled away with Roaring
Reluctances, with Horrid Convulsions. Where would be the sense of it, if a
Dying man should say, Lord, Into thy Hand I commit my Spirit, but if I could
have my choice, my Spirit should never come there! When we perceive that Call
from our Lord Jesus Christ, Go up and Die! Let us Freely Surrender our Spirits,
unto our Great Lord, and, Go up and Die: He is the Lord of our Lives. Freely,
did I say? Yea, and Gladly too. When we have aright Committed our Spirits into
the Hand of the Lord, then take up that conclusion, in Psalm. 49.15. God will
Receive my Soul. And then, Let us wonderfully comfort our selves, in the
Thoughts of that Spiritual World which we are going into Think, I shall quickly
Rest from Sin, and all Temptations, and all Afflictions, and all the cursed
Effects of Sin, and all Annoyances of Ill Spirits for ever. I shall quickly be
Lodged among the pure Spirits, that see God, and serve Him Day and Night in His
Temple, and God shall wipe away all Tears from my Eyes. Yea, I shall quickly be
with my Lord Jesus Christ, which is by far the best of all. Oh! Rejoice in the
Hope of this Glory of God! And let not your Joy be Interrupted, by any Fear, of
what may become of your Friends, when you shall be Dead and Gone. The Lord that
calls you to Commit your Spirits into His Hand, calls you at the same time, to
Commit your Widows, your Orphans, and all your Friends, into that Omnipotent
Hand: He says, Leave them all with me, and He take the care of them all! It wa^
noted of the English Martyrs, which Died at the Stake, in the Bloody Marian
Persecution; That none of them went more joyfully to the Stake, than those that
had the largest and the dearest Families then to commit unto the Lord: And
afterward those large Families, were wondrously provided for. The Excellent
Mr. Heron, a Minister, that had a Family of many small Children in it, when he
lay a Dying, his poor Wife said with Tears, Alas, what will become of all these
Children? He presently, and pleasantly Replied; Never Fear, He that feeds the
young Ravens, will not starve the young Herons! And it came to pass accordingly.

Syrs, Thus are you to Commit your Spirits into the Hands of the Lord Jesus
Christ.

My Reverend BAILY did so; and it is as from Him, that I do this Day, be speak
your doing like him; yea, Not from Him only, but from the Lord Jesus Christ,
the God* whose he was, and whom he Served. If you would more particularly be
told, after what manner, he did Commit his own Spirit into the Hands of the
Lord, I can faithfully Recite you his own Account of the Transaction. He gives
it, thus;

I spent half the Day alone in seeking of God; Desiring to give up my self unto
God in Christ wholly, and to be His in Soul and Body. The particulars I omit. I
hope, God in Christ, will Accept of me, and enable me by His Spirit to keep
Touch with Him: for I owned my self wholly Unworthy to Enter into Covenant, and
also Unable to keep it; but Jesus Christ is both Worthy and Able.

It Is from one who thus did it, that you are now called upon to Do Likewise.

When you see the Coffin of this Man of God, anon carried along the Streets,
imagine it a mournful Pulpit, from whence, Being Dead he yet speaks thus unto
you; Whatever you do, Commit your perishing Souls into the Hands of the Lord
Jesus Christ, as you have been Advised.

That these Admonitions may have the more of Emphasis, a short Account of this
Worthy man must now be given you.

He was Born, on Febr. 24. 1643. near Blackbourn in Lancashire; of a very pious
Mother, who even before he was Born, often, as Hannah her Samuel, Dedicated him
unto the Service of the Lord.

Of this his Birth day, in the Return of every Year, he still took much Notice
in his Diaries: and made his humble and useful Reflections thereupon.

Once particularly, I find him thus Entertaining it.

This is my Birth day, I am ready to say of it, as Job does of his: but I
forbear any unadvised words about it: only, I have done Little for God, and
much against Him; for which I am sorry.

When this Day, last arrived unto him, he thus wrote upon it.

I may say with a Great Sigh, This was my Birth day! O how little Good have I
done all this while! O what Reason have I to stand amazed at the Riches of Gods
Forbearance! Much may happen this year: Lord, Carry me through it!

From a Child he did know the Holy Scriptures, yea, From a Child he was wise
unto Salvation. In his very Childhood, he discovered the Fear of God, upon his
young Heart; and Prayer to God was one of his Early Exercises.

There was one very Remarkable Effect of it. His Father, was a man of a very
Licentious Conversation; a Gamester, a Dancer, a very Lewd Company-keeper. The
Mother of this Elect Vessel, one day took him, while he was yet a Child, and
calling the Family together, made him to Pray with them. His Father coming to
unde^stand, at what a rate, the Child had prayed with his Family, it smote the
Soul of him, with a great Conviction, and proved the Beginning of his
Conversion unto God. God lest not off working on his Heart, until he proved one
of the most Eminent Christians in all that Neighborhood. So he Lived; so he
Dyed; A man of more than ordinary Piety. And it was his manner sometimes to
Retire unto those very places, of his former Lewdnesses, where, having this his
Little Son in his Company, he would pour out Floods of Tears, in Repenting
Prayers before the Lord.

This Hopeful Youth, having been Educated in Grammar-Learning, under a worthy
Schoolmaster, one Mr. Sage^* and in further Learning, under the Famous D^.
Harrison, at Length, about the Age of Twenty Two, he Entered on the Public
Employment of Preaching the Gospel. In so doing, he was not one of those, of
whom even the Great Papist Bellarmine complains, Qui non valde Solliciti esse
solent, an ea qua par est preparatione accedant, cum Finis eorum magis sit
cibus Corporis, quam Animae. He began, at Chester; but afterward went over to
Ireland, where his Labors were so frequent, and fervent, that they gave those
wounds unto his Health, which could never be Recovered. About Fourteen years of
his Time, in Ireland, he spent at Limrick, and saw so many Seals of his
Ministry, in that Country, that he seemed rather to Fish with a Net, than with
an Hook, for the Kingdom of God. I am not willing to Relate, How Grievously,
and yet, how Patiently he Suffered Long and Hard Imprisonments, from those men,
concerning whom a Conformable Divine of the Church of England, very truly says,
That they were Atheists, with the Inventions of Ceremonies hab^^ed like
Christians, for the Service of the Devil, to Corrupt and Destroy True
Christianity: I should Relate but little of this, because that Spirit of
Persecution, has been Repented by an Happy Act of Parliament.

And yet, for the Admonition of Our Inexcusable Young Men, [The Sin of the
Young men is very Great before the Lord! above that of those, who have been
brought up, as many very Godly Christians have, in those ways of the Church of
England, for a Secession from which, this Country was first planted:] Who
notwithstanding their Descent from Fathers and Grandfathers, that were great
Sufferers, for their Non Conformity to an Uninstituted Worship of Christ, and
notwithstanding their Education in the Knowledge of what is Required, and what
is Forbidden, in the Second Commandment, and notwithstanding their being urged
by no Temptation, of Persecution, or being Tempted by any thing, but the Vanity
of their own minds, do yet so Rebel against the Light, as to Turn Apostates
from the First Principles of New England; it may be seasonable to Repeat so
much of the History of this Worthy man, as a little further to Illustrate this
Article.

He no sooner began to Preach the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ, but his
Fidelity to that Gospel, was Tried, by an Hard Imprisonment, which he underwent
because his Conscience could not Conform to Humane Inventions, In the Sacred
Service of Heaven. Yea, while he was yet a Young man, he often Traveled far by
Night in the Winter, as well as in the Summer, that so he might enjoy the
Ordinances purely Administered, in the Meetings of the Faithful; and was laid up
sometimes in Lancashire Gaol for being sound at those Meetings. When he was at
Limrick, the Attendance which a Person of Great Quality, and his Lady, (who
were nearly related unto the Duke of Ormond, the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,)
upon his Ministry, provoked the Bishop, to Complain unto the Lord Lieutenant.
This Gentleman then proffered unto Mr. Baily, that if he would conform, he would
procure his being made Chaplain to the Duke, and having a Deanery immediately,
and a Bishopric upon the first Vacancy: But he Refused the profer. Albeit,
another Eminent Non conformist Minister, not far from Limrick, a Godly, and an
Able man, and one who had appeared much against Conformity at the first
pressing thereof, did afterward Accept of the aforesaid Chaplain ship, and by
Degrees Conformed, and Arrived unto several ^^aces of preferment: pretending,
That he did it for the sake of Opportunities to Preach the Gospel. But it was
Remarkable! God so Disabled him, with Distempers after this, that he was very
Seldom, if ever Able to Preach at all. Mr. Baily went on, in the Exercise of
his Ministry, not pursuing any Factious Designs, but merely the Conversion, of
men to Christ, and Faith, and Holiness, which the Devil counts the worst of all
Designs. And now, although he were so Harmless and Blamless, in his whole
Conversation, that he was always much Beloved wherever he came, yet another
long Imprisonment was inflicted on him, while the Papists in the Neighborhood,
had all manner of Liberty and Countenance. When he was before the Judges, he
told them, If I had been drinking and gaming and carousing at a Tavern with my
Company, my Lords, I presume that would not have procured my being thus treated
as an offender. Must Praying to God, and Preaching of Christ, with a Company of
Christians, that are as Peaceable, and Inoffensive, and Serviceable to His
Majesty and the Government as any of His Subjects, must this be greater Crime?
The Recorder answered; We will have you to know, it is a greater Crime. While
he was Imprisoned, his Church being divided into Seven Parts, visited him, one
part a Day, so that Preaching to them, and Praying with them, every Day, he
once in a Week Served them all. But this, in a Little while gave such Offense,
that a Violent-Obstruction was given thereunto; and though his Flock,
particularly, His dear Young men, (as he called them) did Pray without Ceasing,
and not without Fasting, for his Release; and Humble Applications were also
made unto the Judges, at the Assizes for i^; yet no Rele^se could be granted
him, without his giving Security, to Depart the Land, within a little Time then
limited unto him. It was not long, before, a Wrath unto the uttermost came upon
the City, which had thus persecuted this Faithful Minister of God; and that
Person particularly, who had been the chief Instrument of his Persecution, was
(as we have been told) within a while, upon other Accounts, himself run into
Prison, where he Cried ou^ with horror, of the Wrongs done by him to Mr. Baily,
and then run^ing Distracted, he dyed Miserably. But, New England, a Country
Originally a Retreat for Persecuted Non conformists, hereupon afforded unto our
Baily an Opportunity, of Laboring near Fourteen Years more, in the Work, which
he Loved above all Things in the World; the Work, of Turning the Souls of men,
from Darkness to Light, and from Satan to God: wherein, for some ^ime his
Younger and Godly, and Sweet-Natured Brother, who came over with him, was his
Comfortable Companion, and Assistent; until he g^t the Start of him in his
departure to the Glories of the Better World. They were indeed, Fratrum du^ce
par; a David and a Jonathan. Death, which for a while parted them, has now
again brought them together. This Mr. Thomas Baily dyed, January 21. 1689. As
this his Brother and Colleague notes in his Diary; He dyed well, which is a
great Word; so sweetly, as I never saw the like before! But as for this Elder
Brother, he was a man of Great Holiness, and of so Tender a Conscience, that if
he had been at any Time Innocently Cheerful, in the Company of his Friends, it
cost him afterward abundance of sad Reflection, through Fear, lest e're he had
been aware, he might have Grieved the Holy Spirit of Christ. A Savoury Book of
his, about, The Chief End of Man, published among us, has fully described unto
us, that Savor of Spirit, which was in his daily walk mentained.

Sic Oculos, Sic ille manus, Sic or a ferebat. The Desire of this Holy man,
was, (as himself Expressed it,) to Get up unto Three Things: To Patience under
the Calamities of Life; To Impatience under the Infirmities of Life; and, To
earnest Longings for the Next Life.

And his Desire at another Time, he thus Expressed. Oh! that I might not be of
the Number of them, that Live without Love, Speak without Feeling, and Act
without Life! Oh! that God would make me His Humble and Upright and Faithful
Servant!

From this Holy Temper it was, that when some kind presents were made unto him,
he wrote in his Diary thereupon; I have my wages quickly; But Oh! that God may
not put we off, with a Reward here! Oh! that God may be my Reward!

We will more particularly Note, a few Notables, wherein the Holiness, which
Irradiated him, will be described unto us.

We might begin, with Observing, That the Holy Word of God was very dear to
him, as indeed it is to every Holy man. Hence, I find this passage in his
Diary. Jan. 11. I finished the Reading of the Bible, in my Family (as
formerly,) Oh! it is a Dear Book; it is always New. In the Beginning of every
Chapter, it is good to say, Lord, open my Eyes, that I may see Wonders out of
thy Law; And when we shut it up, to say, I have seen an end of all perfection,
but thy Law is exceeding Broad. Oh! now terrible are the Threatenings; how
precious are the Promises; how serious are the Precepts; how deep are the
Prophecies of this Book! But we will pass on, to some further Observations.

What is Holiness, but a Dedication to the Lord Jesus Christ? This Holy man was
often breathing in himself, and pressing on others, that Great point, of
Dedicating every thing to the Service of the Lord. Thus, in his Diary there
frequently occur, such Strains as these. Oh! that I may Glorify God, with all I
am, or have; even with all the faculties of my Soul, all the members of my
Body, and in all the Places and Relations that I Stand in, as Man, Master,
Minister, Husband, Kinsman, and Neighbor. Oh! I stand in need both of a
Justifying Christ, and a Sanctifying Christ. When shall I sensibly find a
Christ, Swaying his Scepter in my Soul! Thus, whatever House he came to Live
in, it came under a Dedication; and once upon a Remove, he wrote this passage
in his Diary. I could not but Leave my Old House, with a Prayer in every Room
of it, for pardoning mercy.

But it was particularly Expressed, when one of his Children was to be
Baptized. He thus wrote upon it. I spent some Time, in Offering up my self, and
my Child unto the Lord, and in taking hold of the Covenant for my self and him.
It is Actually to be done to morrow, [in Baptism.] I prayed hard this day, all
this day, that I might be able in much Faith, and Love, and
New-Covenant-Obedience, to do it to morrow. It is not Easy, though Common, to
offer a Child unto God in Baptism. Oh! that is a sweet word, I will be a God to
Thee, and thy Seed after thee. No marvel Abraham fell on his Face at the
hearing of it!

Hence, when he parted with the greatest Enjoyment he had in this World, he
thus wrote upon it, in his Diary;

If I can but Exchange Outward Comforts for Inward Graces, it is well enough:
Oh! for an Heart to Glorify God in the Fire!

From this Holiness, proceeded that Watchfulness, which Discovered a singular
Fear of God, in his whole Conversation. I find him Entering in his Diary, such
passages as these.

At one Time.

I did not watch my Tongue so as I ought; which cost me much Trouble
afterward, and made me walk Heavily. It Is a mad Thing to Sin!

At another Time.

I spoke Two unadvised words to day. Though there was no great Harm in them, yet
I was Rebuked by my Conscience for them. Let the Lord Forgive them; and for the
future, set a watch before the Door of my Lips. Let my Thoughts and words be
acceptable in thy sight, O Lord.

At another Time.

That Is a serious word, methinks, in Ephesians. 5.30. I have Grieved the Holy Spirit,
by my Unedifying Communication. Oh! that in speaking, I might Administer Grace
to the Hearer! Oh! that Honey and Milk were under my Tongue continually.

At another Time.

I was too forgetful of God, and exceeding in Tobacco. The Lord pardon that,
and all other Sins, and heal this Nature, and humble this Heart. At another
Time.

This Day I have been more cheerful, than I have been, of a Long Time. It has
afflicted me since, fearing it was not suitable. Oh! I ought to walk in the
midst of my House, in a perfect way. I ought every day to be writing Copies;
and to Leave a Stock behind me, that others may trade for God withal, when I am
Dead. And, Behold, you see this Day, that he did so.

And as Holy men, use to be full of Hearty Prayers, and Wishes, for the Good of
other men, thus this Holy man, has filled many places in his Diaries, with his
Prayers for the Welfare of those, with whom he was concerned; from whence we
may gather how full his Heart was of Blessings for his Neighbors.

Once particularly I find him thus Writing.

I desired to know of Dr. O. what I was indebted to him, for those many Rich
Things I have had from him: he told me, Nothing; [which was a great Favor!]
only desired my Prayers for him. Oh! that I could Pray! Whenever I can Pray, I
would heartily say to God in the Name of Christ, for him, The Lord bless him
indeed! Let thy Hand be with him, and keep him from all Evil, that it may not
Grieve him.

Moreover, It was not only among the Great Signs, but also among the Great
Means, of his Holiness, that he was very sollicitous, as well in his
Preparation for the Table of the Lord, as in his Observation, of what Communion
he Enjoyed with the Lord Jesus Christ, at His Table.

His Diary abounds with passages of this Importance; the Expressions of a
Careful Soul.

The Last Time of his being at the Lords-Table, he wrote the Ensuing Passages.

I was Encouraged to carry my Late Ba^ Frame to the Cross of Christ, and to
Bewayl there, my late Prayerlesness, and Unthankfulness. Of Late, it has
Troubled me, to think, how little I have Admired Christ, for bringing me out of
some late plunges of Temptation. I now come to Him, for Two Things; namely, for
Pardon; and also for Double Power; both to Receive Him, and to show forth His
Praises.

Let me add; Sometimes, as he was Able, he would set a part Half a day, for
Extraordinary Prayers: He still did so, when there were any Extraordinary Cares
upon him. Thus he Records in his Diaries.

At one Time.

Being of late in so ill a Frame, I spent some Time, to seek the Fair Face of
Jesus Christ; and I did, on purpose, Address my self to Him, who is the most
Admirable Savior. I left my self with Him; my Mind, Heart, Mouth; especially
my Conscience. Oh! how many Wonders are to be wrought in me! I know, the
Loving, and wonder-working Jesus can do them all.

At another Time.

I spent some Time alone in Prayer, from 8 to 3. I was much tired. Oh! that I
might wait for Returns, and never more turn to Folly. I cannot tell how God
should Admit me near Him, considering how I have grieved His Spirit. Having
Prayed in the Morning in the Family, I Retired; and first Sought at large unto
God for Help to go through the day: especially begging Repentance, and not only
so, but Faith; That I might not rest in the bare work; That Satan might get no
Advantage after it; That I might have Reason to desire more such days. Then
after a little Meditati^n, and Breathing, I went to Prayer again, only to
Confess my Sin before God, and to set my Soul as before the Lord; Laboring to
Judge and Loath my self, for all my Sin, from first to last. God helped a
little; but Oh! that my Heart was broken in pieces, and Humbled to the Dust.
After a little more Meditation, I went to Prayer, in way of Petition, and that
at large. Oh! Lord, hear me, and give me the Wisdom that I want. I hope God
will hear, pity, pardon, and help me. After a little more Meditation, I fell
to Praise and Bless God for my Mercies, by Sea and Land; but was somewhat short
in this part, for which I am sorry. At last, I Concluded all, in Praying for
the Church of God in general, for London, Lancashire, and Limrick; and for
New England also. Here I brought all my Relations to the Lord. Oh, Lord, Accept
of me, and my poor Services in Christ. Oh! that I may Watch afterward, and
never more be sensual, unbelieving, Proud, nor Hypocriti^^l Lord, say, Amen.

And that Praises, as well as Pr^^ers might not be forgotten with him, I find
him once particularly in his Diary, thus Expressing himself.

December 15. 1691.

I Resolved, through the Grace and Strength of Jesus Christ, even in the midst
of all my Sorrows and Sinkings, despairings and distractions, to keep as much
of this Day, as I could, in THANKSGIVING; which I did; but could not go through
with It* through bodily Faintness. I spent Five Hours somewhat Comfortably; but
after that I flagged. I Resolved to do Three Things. First, To spend some Time
in Praising God for His Excellencies. God was with me, I hope, in that part of
it, and I spent my self so much therein, that I was Disabled for the Rest. To
help it forward God brought to hand Mr. Buroughs, of the Nature of God; I bl^s
God for it. After that, I went to Praye^ Laboring to Exalt God; (It was a Good
Time!) After that I Sang the 148 th. Psalm* Secondly, After that, I set my self
to bless God, for His Benefits and Kindnesses to me. But being Spent, I did not
much; only going to Pra^er, I made mention of some Mercies; such as these; viz.
for Christ; His Covenant of Grace; and the Promises of it, (some of which, were
particularly mentioned and pressed:) also my Education; my manifold
preservations by Land and Sea; (especially that in Ips^ich Bay:) and manifold
tedious Sicknesses ^^ce; For the long Day of Gods Patience, notwithstanding
many Sins: For my Comfortable Provisions all along; For preserving His Great
Name, that I have in nothing openly Dishonored it; For my Success and
Acceptance in my work; For my dear Wife, that I had her so long; and that my
Brother, and my dear Wife, dyed both of them Glorifying of God: They are in
Heaven, and I am out of Hell! That I have hitherto been kept from Distracti^n,
and Despair, and kept to my Work: Tha^ I have any Friends (in this strange
Land,) and any in my Family to mind me, and tend me: That I have Work here, and
Opportunities of Service: For my sore Crosses and Losses of Late, Afflictions
and Temptations, hoping they may work for Good* T^^^dly, To Conclude all, with
a cheerful Accepting of Christ, and Devoting my self to His Service: To Do for
Him, that had done all this for me: Saying, If God would help me to Study, He
should have all the Glory of it.

Thus did he Walk with God.

His Ministry was very Acceptable to the people, whose Good he most aimed at,
wherever he came: Great Auditories usually Flocking thereunto, proclaimed it.
But that he might not be Lifted up, it seemed meet unto the Wisdom of Heaven,
to Humble him, with sore and long Temptations, often Recurring to Buffet him.
In his Days, he saw many Disconsolate Hours; he was filled with Desponding
Jealousies, Least after he had Preached unto others, he should be himself a
Castaway: and he often Entreated those, who saw the Distresses of his mind,
That they would by no means take up any prejudice against the sweet and good
ways of Religion, from what they saw of his Disconsolate Uneasinesses.

It may be, 'twill be profitable unto some Discouraged minds, to understand how
he expressed himself on such occasions. In Sermons on those words, I am
Oppressed, undertake for me, he much described it unto us. But in his Diaries
'twas thus: At one Time.

I was almost in the Suburbs of (...) all day; a mere Magor-missabib. I saw
Death and Sin full of Terror: I thought I never sought the Glory of God: Ah!
What a matchless Wretch am I! Oh! that I could Love above all things, and seek
the Glory of God, and Live contentedly on Him alone! Oh! that I could see the
Blood of Christ on my Soul, and at the bottom of my profession. Oh! for a Sight
of the Mystery and Majesty of the Grace and Love of Jesus Christ; so that all
Excellencies might fall down before it!

At another Time.

I am in a woeful Frame; far from saying, with Dr. Avery, Here I Ly, not knowing
what God will do with me, but though I thus Ly, God does not Terrify me, either
with my Sin, or with my Death, or with Himself.

At another Time.

If God should yet Save my Soul, and His Work in my Hand, it would be amazing
There is a, May be! If these Inward Troubles hold, I shall be forced to lay
down my work. O Lord, step in for my Relief! O the worth of the sense of Gods
Love in Christ!

At another Time.

I am oppressed unto Death, and filled with the Angry Arrows of God: It arises
not at present, from any particular Cause, but the sense of my woeful Estate in
general. Oh! that the Issue may yet be, peace, and that I may not fetch comfort
unto my self, but by Faith in Jesus Christ.

At another Time.

Oh! that Jesus Christ would undertake for me! If God marvellously prevent not,
I shall lay down my work. O Lord, Appear. Oh! for one saving sight, of the
Love, and Loveliness of Jesus Christ. I wish I could say, as my dear Tutor, Dr.
Harrison said, That he could not Live a day, without a fresh manifestation of
God, unto his Soul!

At another Time.

The Eclipse of the Moon last Night, made me think, Oh! that I could mourn
bitterly, who have Sinned my self into Darkness. How is the Earth Interposing!
Lord, Remove it. Let the Sun of Righteousness in His Glory and Strength yet be
seen by me!

At another Time.

I have much Reason to bless God, for Rebuking of Satan. I have been many a
Time ready to give up all, and lay down my Ministry, thinking that God had
utterly forsaken me, and hid Jesus Christ from me; which I would Justify Him
in. But by the consideration of the Brazen Serpent, I was somewhat Recovered.

At another Time.

I was now supported, by the Thoughts of a precious JESUS. I should for ever
sink, but for Him! When I look Backward or Forward, Upward or Downward, I Die, I
Sink; but when I Look at the Sweet JESUS, I Live. I may Resolve with Dr.
Preston; (O that I could!) saying, I have often Tried God, and now I Will Trust
Him. It Is a Good Resolution; Lord, Help me to it! At another Time.

I would gladly think, That God is my Father. And if so, Oh! what Glory is due
to the Riches of Free Grace! Oh! how glorious i^ that Grace, and how will it
shine through all Eternity! If ever I see my self Safe at Last, I must for ever
cry out, I am wonderfully Saved!

In fine. One Thing that much Relieved him in his Internal Troubles, was, what
he had Occasion (thus) to write in his Diary, a little before his End.

I do more see, into the Great Mystery of our Justification by Faith, merely of
Grace. There is no Respect in it, unto This, or That; but Jesus Christ having
wrought out a Redemption for us, and by His Active and Passive Obedience
procured a Sufficient Righteousness, and making a Tender of it in the Gospel,
it becomes Mine, by my Accepting of it, and Relying on it alone, for Salvation.
And shall I not Accept of it? God forbid!

I see (says he) there are Two Things, wherein I cannot easily Exceed: viz. In
Ascribing to the Grace of God, the Freeness and Richness of it, in man's
Salvation; And in Ascribing to the Righteousness of Christ in man's
Justification.

At Length, Dismal Pains of the Gout, with a Complication of other Maladies,
confined him, for a Quarter of a Year together, Under the Pains of his
Confinement, he took an Extraordinary Contentment in the Fifty Third Chapter of
Isaiah, which represents the Sorrows of our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby all ou^
(...) are Sanctified: And he would (...) ever those words of our Savior,
elsewhere occurring, They pierced my Hands and my Feet. When the Remainders of
his Flock, which waited on him to New England, Visited him, his usual and
Solemn Charge unto them was, I Charge you, That I find you all safe at last! My
Brethren, God make the charge of your Dead Pastor abide upon you. For some Time
in his last Sickness, his Heavenly Soul was harrassed, with terrible
Discouragements: Under all of which, it was yet a common Expression with him,
The Master has done all things Well! But at last, he arrived unto a Blessed
Satisfaction, That the Lord Jesus Christ, had made his Peace in Heaven, and
that he was going into Eternal Peace. Yea, at the worst, he would say, That his
Fear was not so much about the End of all, as about what he might meet withal
in the way to that End. He had begun to prepare a Sermon for our South Church,
upon those words, Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness, Leaning on her
Beloved? And he now spoke of it, as Expressing his own Condition; Thus am I
going (said he) out of the Wilderness of all my Temptations, Leaning on my
Blessed Jesus! When his Affectionate Friends, were weeping about him, he
bestowed this Rebuke upon them, Away with your Idols! Away with your Idols! It
was not very long before he fell Sick, that he wrote this passage in his Diary.
I was affected, with what I Read, of Mr. Shewel of Coventry, who dyed in the
Pulpit. Lord, Let no^ me Die meanly, but in Dying bring much Glory to Thee. And
now, it shall be so! At last, just as he was going to Expire, he seemed as if
he had some Extraordinary Apprehensions, of the Glory, in which our Lord Jesus
Christ is above Enthroned: He Strove to Speak unto his Virtuous Consort, and
anon Spoke thus much, Oh! What shall I say? He is altogether Lovely! His Worthy
Sister-in-Law, then coming to him, he said, Oh! All our Praises of Him here,
are Poor and Low Things! and then added, His Glorious Angels are come for me!
Upon the saying whereof he Closed his own Eyes, about the Time when he still
opened his Bible for his Public Labors: On the Lords Day, about Three in the
Afternoon; and he never opened them any more.

This was he, whom you are now going to Bury; but I pray you, Bury not with
him, all the Holy Counsils, and Warnings, that we have heard from him; Remember
how you have Received and Heard.

He was one, who took much Notice of what was from the Oracles of God, Spoken
to him, in the Sermons of other men. He has much replenished his Diaries, with
Remarks of this Importance; I heard a good Word to Day! And he would often
decline going to Feasts, whereto his Friends invited him, that he might go to
Private Meetings in some other parts of the Town, where he might at the same
Time Feast on the word of God. Thus, more particularly.

At one Time.

I heard a very Good Word. Are ye not Carnal? Ah, Lord, I am Carnal. The Lord
give me His Spirit, to make me Spiritual! I was in many Things justly Reproved:
Let me take it, and be wrought into the Likeness of this Good Word. At another
Time.

To day I heard a most precious Word, with which I was much Edified and
Refreshed, viz. Christ is All. Oh! that I might never forget it! Oh! that it
might be written upon the Table of my Heart! Let my Soul feed upon it forever.
It was very Seasonable. Though it was a Day most Intolerably Cold; so Cold,
that there was little writing it; yet it heartily Warmed me, I needed a Christ:
Oh! that I could get Him, and keep Him forever! I would make Him my All, and
count Him my All. I need a whole Christ: Oh! that I may prize a whole Christ,
and Improve a whole Christ. I have of late thought, that this may be one
Evidence of my Right unto Glory, that Christ is more precious to me than ever.

What I say upon it, is; Imitate him, in a point so Imitable. This Preacher is
well worthy to be Imitated, as he was an Hearer.

You can all testify, that he was none of those Cold Preachers, whereof one
Complains, Verba vitae in quorundam Doctorum Labijs, quantum ad Virtutem, et
Efficaciam Moriuntur: Adeo enim tepide, adeo remiss, verba Dei annunciant, ut
Extinct^ in Labijs Eorum penitus videantur; unde Sicut ipsi Frigidi sunt, et
Extincti, sic Frigidos et Extinctos relinquunt, et utinam non facerent,
Auditores.

For his Preaching, he particularly prescribed unto himself, according to a
Memorandum, which I found thus Entered in his Diary.

Old Mr. Thomas Shepard, when on his Deathbed, said unto the young Ministers
about him, That their work was great, and called for great seriousness. For his
own part, he told them Three Things. First, That the Studying of every Sermon,
cost him Tears; he wept in the Studying of every Sermon. Secondly, Before he
Preached any Sermon, he Got Good by it himself. Thirdly, He always went up
inro the Pulpit, as if he were to give up his Accounts unto his Master. Oh!
that my Soul (adds our Baily) may Remember and Practice accordingly!

To this his Preaching, when he saw God gave any Success, he would still, in
his private papers, take as Thankful a Notice, as if great Riches had been
heaped in upon him. And yet he would add, [such passages I sometimes find.]

Let my Soul Rejoice. But, Lord, keep me from Pride. I desire to be Humbled for
it. Do I not know, that God makes use, of whom He pleases, and usually of the
Weakest! No Flesh shall Glory!

But if the Word Preached, by this Lively Disp^nser of it, Live not in our
Lives, after he is Dead, he will himself be, which, he often told you, he
feared he should be, in the Day of God; a Witness against many of you.

That we may then meet him with Joy, Let us Remember them, who have spoken to
us the Word of God, and follow their Faith, considering the End of their
Conversation.

But be thou sensible, O all my Country of New England, how much thou art
weakened, by the Departure of such Blessings to the World of the Blessed.

Thy Baily could sometimes write such passages as this, (I find) in his
Reserved Papers.

There was a Day of Prayer. God was with me in Prayer, helping me to plead with
Him an Hour and half, for this poor Land, and in some measure to Believe for
it. I hope, God will hear and help.

Such an one taking Flight from thee, Let thy Lamentations thereupon be Heard;
My Father, my Father!

APPENDIX. The Character of a Christian.
Act. XI.46. The Disciples were called CHRISTIANS.


ECclesiastical History mentions this particular Disposition, in one of the
Primitive Christians, and Confessors; That when the Sworn Enemies of
Christianity, Examined him, What he was? he would still give them no other
Answer, but this, I am a Christian: If they asked him, what Countryman he
was, or, what Employment he had, or, who were his Friends, or, any other
matter, his Answer to them still was no other than this, I am a Christian: Thus
he still Answered, although he ran the hazard of his Life, by making such an
Answer!

It is to be supposed, that Most, if not All, of the Persons, who Compose the
Assembly, now together in this place, if they should be asked, What they are?
would make that Answer, I am a Christian: And indeed there is no Danger; it is a
matter of some Credit, among us, in such an Answer. But then there is another
Question, hence proper to be Considered: What is a CHRISTIAN? And it is to be
feared, That very many, who wear that Worthy Name, can make, either but a sorry
Answer to that Question, or such an Answer as must carry their own Confutation,
and Condemnation in it.

You are at this Time, to be Entertained with a Discourse on that Important
Question. And we may fitly Introduce our Discourse, with some Enquiry into the
first Original of that Name, CHRISTIANS; which Enquiry may Receive
satisfaction, from the words now Read unto us.

The Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, was begun to be Preached unto the
Gentiles: Antioch particularly was a City of the Gentiles, where the Preaching
of the Gospel was Crowned with a great Success. And at this Antioch it was,
that the Name of CHRISTIANS, was first put upon the people, who Received the
Love of the Truth of that Gospel. It had been predicted, as a thing to come to
pass at the coming of the Messiah, in Mic. 4.5. We will walk in the Name of the
Lord our God for ever and ever. And there now seems a partial compl^tion of
this prediction, in our having the Name of CHRISTIANS; for CHRIST, is the Name
of the Lord our God.

We have Two Things here before us, that seem Remarkable.

First, We have the Name, which was betimes fastened upon the Disciples of our
Lord Jesus Christ. This Blessed people, had hitherto called one another, by the
Name of Disciples, because of their subjection to the Instruction, and
Protection, and Government, of the Lord Jesus Christ. Beca^se of their Faith
also, they called one another Believers; Because of their Love, they called one
another Brethren; and they called one another Saints, because of their Holiness
unto the Lord. Their Enemies all this while, called them Nazarenes, and
Galilaeans, because our Lord was Conceived, and had Resided at Nazareth in
Galilee; and His Apostles were mostly of that Country. But now, the Honorable
Name of CHRISTIANS, became That, by which they were afterward most of all
distinguished.

Secondly, We have the Place, where this Venerable Name first of all began.
This was at Antioch. There were, it may be, no fewer than Seven and Twenty
Cities of Asia, wearing the Denomination of Antioch: Which was occasioned by
two several Anti^chus's, potent Princes, who founding, repa^^ing, and enlarging
the several Cities, procured them to be thus from themselves denominated: or
else their Favorites to^k this way of naming Cities from them to be
Recommended unto their Favor. But the Antioch here mentioned, was undoubtedly
That in Caelosyria, the Metropolis for the Trade of these Regions. It was
called, Antioch the Great; Behold here, as Great a Thing, as any that ever made
it so: A Church of CHRISTIANS, here first wearing so Great a Style. The
Evangelist Luke, who writes the Story of this thing, was a Citizen of Antioch:
and behold, what a memorable Note he Leaves, for the Everlasting Reputation of
the Town, whereof he was a Citizen: the Style of CHRISTIANS, was never heard
of, says he, till first at my Town of Antioch. It had been foretold unto the
people of Christ; The Sons of them that Afflicted thee, shall come stooping
unto Thee. See now that p^ophecy in a small part fulfilled! In that very City,
which had been the Seat, and still bore the Name, of Antiochus, the most Bloody
Tyrant, that ever Israel, the people of Christ had groaned under, that people
are now multiplied; and obtain^ an Appellation, which must be extended as far
as any part of the Earth, which the Sun shines upon, and continued as long as
the Sun and Moon Endure in Heaven.

Two Things one would now Enquire.

First, Who it was that first gave the Name of CHRISTIANS, to the Disciples of
our Lord? Of that I say, It is not probable, That this Name was imposed upon
the Disciples, in a way of Derision, by their Persecutors: Their Persecutors
would rather have contrived a more Derisory or De^amatory Name for them, and
have called ^em, as one says, Crucifixians, or some like Term of Contempt. It
is much more probable, That the Disciples Assumed this Name to themselves, by
their own Election The Greek word, CHREMATISAI, here used, for Called,
signifies, a Calling, with some very solemn and signal, and singular
Circumstances. Yea, it is related by Johannes Antioche^^s, that Evodus, the
Minister of the Church at Antioch, at a Church Meeting agreed with them, to
take this Name upon them. It should seem, that there was a special Direction,
from the Holy Spirit of Christ, unto them, for their doing of it.

Secondly. Why the Name of CHRISTIANS; A Title derived from no person in the
Trinity, but the Second; and from no other Character of that Second Person, but
This?

Of That I say; It Is only the Second Person in the Trinity, which took our
Nature upon Him. Our Name therefore is very fitly fetched from that Second
Person. It Is only in CHRIST, and through CHRIST, that God becomes our God; and it
is by CHRIST, that He does whatever is done for us. How Agreeably, are we
called, Christians, to acknowledge this? As for the Name of JESUS, it
signifies, A Savior; Now none of us vain men, have any claim to any share with
our Lord, in His being so. Since, There is no other Name under Heaven, given
among men, whereby we must be Saved, it is not fit that this Name should be put
upon any among men under Heaven. They who have called themselves JESUITS, in
the Last Age, are a presumptuous as well as a pernicious Generation. But the
Name of CHRIST, signifies, Anointed. Now to something of This privilege we
also are Advanced: The Apostle says, We have Received an Anointing: And the
Psalmist says, We are Fellows with our Lord in this, though He be Anointed above
us all.

Having thus briefly dispatched these Two Enquiries, there is a Third, which
remains, to be the Subject of our further, and most serious Meditations. Namely;

What is a CHRISTIAN?

Two Preliminaries are to be Considered.

First; Many a man is not Really a Christian, that yet is Visibly so. As the
Scripture says, in Romans 2.28. He is not a Jew, that is one outwardly: Thus we
may say, He is not a Christian, that is no more than outwardly so. It Is t^^e, A
man's being Visibly a Christian, is that which Entitles him to the External
Privileges of Christianity, in the Churches of God; Non Judicat Ecclesia de
Occultis. But a man must be Really a Christian, if he would not perish among
Infidels at the last.

Secondly; A man that is Really a Christian, may have many Unchristian
Disorders in his Heart and Walk. Alas, my Friend* (...) is not Christianity,
that is done by every Real Christian! He was a Real and a First-rate Christian,
who said, in Romans 7.22, 23. I Delight in the Law of God after the Inward man,
but I see another Law in my Members. Thus it may be said of a Good man; He
Delights in every Good Thing, so far as he is a Christian man: but you may see
such a man do many Things, that are far from Christian.

Prepared with these Two Consideration, Let us now pass on to Consider, What a
Christian is? What are the points of Real Christianity, which every Christian,
as far as he is a Christian, does come up unto.

Give your Attention, Sirs; Your Condition for Eternity, is going to be
determined.

I* A CHRISTIAN, is one, who Adores the Lord JESUS CHRIST, as very GOD, and who
Accepts that Lord, as His own GOD. The man, who does not Look upon our Lord
Jesus Christ, as more than a man, is no Christian. The Old Arians were but
Pseudo Christians. A Christian sees that our Lord Jesus Christ is a man, but he
sees this man to be personally Uni^ed unto the Second Person in God. This is
mentioned as the First, and Grand, Article of Christianity, which is the
Mystery of Godliness, in 1 Timothy 3.16. That our Lord Jesus Christ is no other
than God manifest in the Flesh. A man may be a notable Preacher of Christ, and
write whole Books, about, The Knowledge of Christ, and yet not be a Christian.
Mighty Numbers of those Heretics, which are called Socinians, do at this day
cover the face of Christendom, as the Frogs did Egypt of old: They hold, that
our Lord Jesus Christ, is God, not by Nature, but only by Office; and not from
Eternity, but only since His Resurrection. The Mahometans are as Good
Christians, as these miserable Heretics; for the Mahometans grant our Blessed
Jesus, to be a Glorious Prophet of God. Yea, there are better Christians than
these, among the Mahometans; for there is a Potent Sect lately risen among the
Mahometans, called, The Good Followers of the Messiah, who hold that our Christ
is God, and the Redeemer of the World. No, A Christian, is one, who counts
himself Robbed, of all his Hope, and all his Joy, and all his Life, if the
Godhead of his Lord Jesus Christ, should be questioned. A Christian expects
from his Lord, such a Righteousness as will Entitle him to Life, and such a
Sacrifice as to Expiate all his Guilt, and such a Spirit, as will Sanctify him
throughout, and at last Raise him out of the Dust, unto Heavenly and Eternal
Glory. Now the Foundation of all this Expectation in the Christian, is, My
Christ is God as well as Man! When the Apost^^ical Writings have called our
Lord Jesus Christ, The True God, and, The Great God, and God over all; the
Christian is one that Heartily Subscribes unto it. The Christian thinks of the
Lord Jesus Christ, That this His Lord, Is every where, and, Knows every thing,
and, That His Lord is, The Lord God Omnipotent, and, That all Things were made
by Him, and, That He Upholds all Things.

There were Christians in the Days of the Old Testament; All the Faithful
People of the God of Abraham, were Christians, though that Name were not yet
Formally put upon them. Now those old Christians, did Worship the Messiah as
God: Joshua did so. Jacob was one of those old Christians; and he said of the
Messiah, This is the God that fed me all my Life Long. Job was another of them;
and he said, In my Flesh, I shall see God: From whence, even a Jewish Rabbi,
who was no Christian, infers, The Word of God will take Flesh in a Woman on
Earth. David was a Christian; and he said of the Anointed One, our Christ, in
Psalm. 45.7. Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever. Isaiah was a Christian;
and he said, of the Christ, who is the Child born; the Son given unto us, in
Isa. 9.6. His Name shall be, God, The Mighty.

Unless our Lord Jesus Christ, be unto a man, God as well as Man, and the very
God, whose Name alone is JEHOVAH, That man cannot be a Christian. The Christian
accounts our Lord Jesus Christ, The God, which is, and which was, and which is
to come; that is to say, The Eternal JEHOVAH. The Christians of the Old
Testament, were of this Apprehension; and therefore, in multitudes of passages,
concerning the Works of the Messiah, all over the Old Testament, the Name of
JEHOVAH is Ascribed unto Him. [Thus in Zech. 12.10. Thus in Zeph. 3.9. Thus, in
Jer. 33.16.] The Jews themselves are so se^sible of This, that though they Deny
our Jesus to be the Messiah, yet several of their own Rabbi's, do confess, That
when the Messiah comes, he shall be called, The Eternal JEHOVAH; and, that the
Messiah, is intended when it is said, Jehovah shall build up Jerusalem. There
was a man, whom the Jews did Stab with a Sword. But the Old Christians among
the Jews, looked upon that man, to be Assumed by the Wisdom of God, into one
person with Himself; Hence, they reckoned, the Messiah, to be the Wisdom of
God; and as in Zech. 13.7. that Stabbed man, they saw, was a Fellow, an Aequal,
unto Jehovah, the Lord of Hosts.

But when the Christian sees the Demonstration of this Mystery, That his Lord
Jesus Christ, is very God, and by an ineffable Generation from all Eternity,
The Son of God, he does there on, and there fore, make choice of this Lord, for
his own God. The Language of the Christian, is that which Thomas used when he
saw our Christ, after His Resurrection from the Dead, in Joh. 20.28. My Lord,
and my God! That famous Roman Pagan Governor, Pliny, gave this Description of
the Christians, in his Time, That they Sang Hymns unto one CHRIST, as unto a
GOD. Sirs, If we are Christians, We offer up our Praises and our Prayers, unto
our CHRIST, as our God; and as unto God, we devote our selves unto Him. It was
usual with the ancient Idolaters, to Brand themselves, in token of their
Devotion to the Idols, whose Brands they wore, with such Characters, as are
forbidden in Leviticus. With a Golden, or an Iron Stamp, they sometimes Branded
themselves, with the Mark of their Idol; as a Thunderbolt was the Mark of
Jupiter, an Helmet of Mars, an Ivy of Ba^chus. They sometimes Branded
themselves, with the Name of their Idol at large; as Jupiter, or, Mercurius,
and the like. And they some times Branded themselves, with the Number of his
Name; that is, with other Letters privately agreed by the Fraternity, which
together would amount unto the same Number, with the Known Letters of his Name.
I will not Report what some zealous Christians in the Primitive Times, did in
opposition to this Idolatry. But this I will say; Every Christian does brand
himself, with a certain Stamp, in token, That CHRIST is the God, whom he
devotes himself unto; Now, the Name of, A CHRISTIAN, is that Stamp: As long as
he wears the Name of, A CHRISTIAN, he thinks, CHRIST is my God; I am to Trust
Him, Fear Him, Love Him, as my God forever.

There is no Christian, who does not Receive the Doctrine of the Trinity, as an
Article of his Creed. Now, a Jew lately Turned Christian, recieved it with this
peculiar Emphasis. It is said, [for so he Read it, and we may Read it so,] in
Deuteronomy. 6.4. Hear O Israel, The Lord, our God, the Lord, are One. Behold, says
he, Here are Three; and yet it is added, These Three are but one. But it is the
Second Person, that here more Eminently chooses to be called, Our God, because
He would more especially be Ours by Taking Our Flesh and Blood upon Himself;
and it is in Him, that God becomes Ours. Truly, A Christian beholds the Lord
Jesus God, as that Person of God, wherein God becomes eminently Ours, and he
cry out, Oh! my God, my God, forevermore!

II. A CHRISTIAN, is one well satisfied in JESUS of Nazareth, as the Messiah
promised of God, unto the World.

The world was through all Ages Entertained with Promises, of a Messiah, to
Redeem us from the C^rses, which the Wrath of God for Sin has brought upon us,
and from the Mischiefs done to us, by that Old Serpent, the Devil, in our
Hearkening unto him. These Promises are every where Scattered up and down, in
the Scriptures of the Old Testament even from the Third of Genesis, to the
Fourth of Malachi. Now, it is Essential unto a CHRISTIAN, to entertain the
Blessed JESUS of Nazareth, as the Messiah Exhibited in all of these Very Great
and Precious Promises. And there are espicially Two Things, that Convince a
Christian of it.

First, A Christian is Convinced, That in our JESUS, all the ancient Oracles
about the Messiah, have their full Accomplishment. You Will easily bring a
Christian, to join in a Consort with the Song of Mary, in Luke 1.55. In Him,
God has Helped us, as He Spoke to our Fathers. A Christian will soon be
Convinced, That there did no Considerable Thing befall our JESUS, but what the
Ancient Oracles did foretell concerning the Messiah. And, a Christian will soon
be Convinced, That whatever the Ancient Oracles did foretell concerning the
Messiah, can be evidently found in our JESUS. Yea, any Rational man might be
presently Convinced of This! There are especially Two Things in our Illustrious
JESUS, a^ which the miserable Jews, are Scandalized: His Birth, and His Death.
But in both of these, the Christian sees an Astonishing Accomplishment, of the
Prophecies, in the Ancient Oracles of God. The Messiah was to be Born, before
the Tribe of Judah, should be utterly Stripped of Lawgivers; and while the Second
Temple was yet standing; and within Four hundred and Ninety Years, after the
Proclamation of Cyrus for the Rebuilding of Jerusalem. Now says the Christian,
So was my Blessed Jesus! The Messiah was to be Born, at Bethlehem; and, Born of
a Virgin; and, Born of Obscure Parentage. Now says the Christian, So was my
Blessed Jesus! The Messiah was to Ride upon an Ass Colt, when He came to Work
out our Salvation. Says the Christian, My Jesus did so! The Messiah was to be
Despised and Rejected of His own Countrymen. If the Messiah be not yet come,
then whenever He does come, the Jews are to deal with Him, just as they did
with our Jesus. Upon this the Christian says, No, my Jesus was He! The
Messiah, a^t^r His being a Public Preacher Three yea^s and an half, was to be
made a Sacrifice for the Sins of men, and thereupon the City and the Temple
were to fall under horrible Desolations. Was it not so with my Jesus? Will the
Christian say. The Messiah was to be Betra^'d by one of His own Disciples; He
was to be Tried and Judged, as a Malefactor; He was to have His Hands, and Hi^
Feet Pierced, that is, to be Crucified: Vinegar was to be offered unto Him in
His Agonies; He was to be Robbed of His Garments; He was to Suffer with the
worst of Criminals; He was to be Bu^yed in the Tomb of a Rich man; like Jonah*
He was to Rise again, and the Gentiles were thereupon to come unto Repentance.
All this was predicted of the Messiah; Well then, says the Christian; My Jesus
is the Messiah, for in Him is all of this, gloriously come to pass!

Again; A Christian is convinced, That the Miracles wrought by our JESUS, could
be wrought by none but the True Messiah. It is said of our JESUS, The Son of
David, in Romans 1.4. He was Declared to be the Son of God with power. The
Miracles of our Lord Jesus Christ, are called, Powers; and they may w^ll be
called so, inasmuch as they are Expressive of Supernatural Powers over the
Creation of God. Now, when a Christian sees the Miracles done by our Blessed
JESUS, he is convinced of our Lords Divinity, and convinced of our Lords
Messiah-ship, immediately; and he cries out, Oh! This my JESUS, is the Son of
God! The Christian is very sure, That our JESUS, wrought such Miracles, as are
in the Gospel Related of Him: Stupendous Miracles wherein, The Blind Received
their Sight, the Lame Walked, the Lepers were Cleansed, the Deaf heard, the
Devils that were the Instruments of Inflicting such Calamities were cast out,
and the Dead Raised up The Witnesses of those Miracles are Incontestable. The
Obstinate and Enchanted Jews themselves do in their Talmuds own those Miracles.
But then the Christian is very sure, That God would never have permitted such
Miracles to be wrought by our JESUS, if He had not been the Messiah. Indeed, a
False Prophet may have a Sign, accompanying of Him. Yet, such is the Compassion
of the Good God unto the World, that something or other always adhaeres to the
Miracles of a Ly, whereby the Delusion may be detected. Whereas the Miracles of
our JESUS were such, that the more men Examine them, the more proofs will
appear, of their being the Seals of the Great God, unto the Truth of all that
He Declared. Our JESUS came, the Christian sees him coming, a man of Universal
Holiness, and full of Endeavors to promote all that is Holy and Just and Good.
He Asserted Himself to be the Messiah; and for the Evidence of this Assertion,
He not only did lesser Wonders, but also Raised the Dead, who had been diverse
Days putrefying in their Graves; and this in His own Name too: Yea, He Raised
Himself also from the Dead, after He had been Stabbed through the Heart, and Hung
Six Hours on a Cross, and Lay in a Sepulcher for Three Days together. If any
man should maliciously say, That all this was nothing but an Imposture of the
Devil; God Almighty would never Pardon that man, throughout Eternal Ages! The
Christian, upon the sight hereof, says like that Officer, who saw something of
it, Certainly this was the Son of God. What says the Christian? O my JESUS,
There are no works, like thy works; Thou art the Messiah that was to come.

III. A CHRISTIAN, is one who Acknowledges the matchless JESUS, to be the
Priest, the Prophet, and the King, Appointed by God, for the Everlasting
Acknowledgments of all His People. The Name of MESSIAH, which is given to our
Lord Redeemer, it may be Seven Times in the Old Testament, is the same with
CHRIST, which is in the New Testament given perhaps, above Two Hundred and
Four-score Times unto Him. The Name signifies, The Anointed. Now there were
Three Offices of much Influence, in the Old Church of God; that of a Priest,
that of a Prophet, and that of a King; and it was usual for them, who sustained
these Offices, to be Anointed thereunto. These Offices, and the Anointings
wherewith persons were set apart for these Offices, were ordered by the God of
Heaven to be Typical of our Sacred JESUS. His being, The Anointed, is His being
both Commissioned and Qualified, for all the Offices of our Lord-Redeemer. And
now, what is a CHRISTIAN, but a Believer on a CHRIST? One who Believes in the
Blessed JESUS, as Gloriously Executing all the Offices of a Mediator.

Particularly; First, unto a Christian, our Blessed Jesus, is a Priest for
ever. It Is said, in Heb. 3.1. Consider the High Priest of our Profession,
Christ Jesus: Christ Jesus is the High Priest of the Christian Profession; A
Christian makes Profession of being Reconciled unto God, by no High Priest, but
Jesus Christ. A Christian is one who sees himself utterly unable to make that
Reparation unto God for the wrongs done by our Sin^ unto Him, which His Just
Law requires. He therefore flies unto the Lord Jesus Christ, as the only
High Priest, that can Repair those wrongs, and make Atonement for him. What is
a Priest? We have the Definition of one, in Heb. 5.1. He is one ordained for
men, in Things pertaining to God, that he may offer both Gifts and Sacrifices
for Sins. Now says the Christian, I know no such Priest, but my Blessed Jesus.
The Christian apprehends the Lord Jesus Christ, as a Priest Sacrificing for
him. He Assents to that in Heb. 9.26. He has appeared to put away Sin, by the
Sacrifice of Himself. He sees the Lord Jesus Christ, yielding both Active and
Passive Obedience unto God, on the behalf of His Elect: He sees this Obedience
of the Lord Jesus Christ, as his Ransom from Eternal Miseries. All the Relief,
that a Christian has against the Fears of the Wrath of God is This; Christ has
Loved us, and given Himself for us, an Offering and a Sacrifice to God, of a
sweet smelling Savor. Ask a Christian, How do you think to find Acceptance
with God? He Will tell you, If he be a Christian, he will tell you, It Is through the
Merits of the Obedience of my Lord Jesus Christ alone. The Christian also
apprehends the Lord Jesus Christ as a Priest Interceeding for him. He assents
to, That, in Heb. 7.25. He is able to Save to the uttermost, seeing He ever
Lives to make Intercession. He sees the Lord Jesus Christ, as a Legal Surety,
and as a Public Person, gone into the Holy of Holies for us; He sees the Lord
Jesus Christ, with our Names on His Breast, there powerfully pleading for our
purchased Salvation. A Christian has nothing to support him under all his Daily
Corruptions, and his Daily Temptations, but this, My Jesus is my Advocate! The
Soul of the Christian even Lives upon this Cordial, My Christ Lives in Heaven,
to make Intercession for Transgressors.

Again, The Blessed Jesus is the Prophet of the Christian; the Shepherd and
Bishop of his Soul; the Faithful Witness of God unto him; and his perpetual
Counsel^or. A Christian sees his Blessed Jesus, and says with that Multitude,
in Mat. 21.11. This is Jesus the Prophet. The Christian is one who apprehends
the Lord Jesus Christ, as, A Teacher come from God; and, a Teacher, whose
Acquaintance with the Counsels of God, infinitely exceeds all that any mortal
man can pretend unto: Jesus, a Prophet, (says he) Mighty in Deed, and in Word
before God! Hence, the Christian Embraces what the Lord Jesus Christ has
Revealed, as being the True and the Whole Will of God; He will Credit nothing,
with a Sacred Belief, and Perform nothing, as a Sacred Worship, except what
comes from the Lord Jesus Christ: In every Difficulty, he will go to the Lord
Jesus Christ for Direction: and he carries a Dark Soul to the Lord Jesus
Christ, with this petition, Lord, that I may Receive, my Sight! The Scholars of
an Aristole are called, Aristoteleans. Thus a Christian, what is he but a
Scholar of Christ?

Once more; The Blessed Jesus is the King of the Christian: the Lord of Life,
the Lord of Peace, the Lord of Glory, yea, the Lord of All. A Christian sees
his Blessed Jesus, and says with that Sincere Soul, in Joh. 1.49. Thou art the
Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. The Christian apprehends the Lord
Jesus Christ, as the Master of the World, the Lord of Hosts, and of Angels, the
Man on the Throne managing all the Wheels of Providence: And as the Ruler of
the Church; the Spouse and Head, and Lord of it, and the Lawgiver of the
Conscience. Hence the Christian seeks unto the Lord Jesus Christ, for to have
his own Heart Subdued unto the Will of God, and for Defense from all Interior
Adversaries, and Conquest over all. Thus, he Recieves Christ the Lord! The
Subjects of an Herod were called Herodians. Thus, a Christian is but a Subject
of Christ.

IV. A CHRISTIAN is one, who Considers the Profound Humiliation of the Lord
Jesus Christ, as no matter of Prejudice; no, but as a matte^ of unspeakable
Praise and Joy. The foulmou^h^d Julian, having Renounced Christianity, would
Scoff ^t our Blessed JESUS, calling Him, The Staked God. But Christianity
teaches us, to be infinitely Satisfied with the Thoughts of what that Man, who
is God as well as Man, Suffered on a Stake. The Pagans, would laugh at the
Christians of old, saying, Tu adoras Crucifixum; What? You are one of the
Fools, that Adore Him that was Crucified. The Christian Thinks, I have still
the more cause to Adore Him for That! The Jews do still taunt at the
Christians, with such a Flout as that; What? you Adore Talui, i. e. an Hanged
man. The Christian Thinks, I had been a Damned man, if He had not been So! A
Christian is, One that is not Ashamed of a Christ on a Cross. And indeed, Why
should he? The posture of old Jacobs Hands in (...) his Children, might
intimate unto them, That through a Cross all the Blessing of Heaven is derived
unto us. What we translate, in Isa. 52.13. My Servant shall deal prudently,
(which the Chalde^ Paraphrase Expressly applies to the Messiah,) may have the
Messiahs laying Himself on a Cross, intimated in the Hebrew Original. A
Christian is not Scandalized at it, That his Lord who is the Everlasting
Father, was once an Infant laid in a Manger, where Beasts had their Fodder; but
he thinks, This was, that I, with my Infants, who have made our selves worse
than Beasts, may come to be Lodged and Fed among the Angels of God. A Christian
is not Scandalized at it, That his Lord, who is the High Possessor of Heaven
and Earth, had not an House where to lay His Head; but he thinks, This was,
that I, to whom Hell, the Place of Dragons belonged, may have an House Eternal
in the Heavens. He is not Scandalized at it, That his Lord, who is the Creator
of all things, did Submit unto the poor Mechanic Employment of a Carpenters;
but he thinks, This was, that I, ^ho have made Wickedness my Employment, may be
made a King and a Priest unto my God. He is not Scandalized at it, That his
Lord, who Sitts on the Throne of Eternity, should Wear a Crown of Thorns; but
he thinks, This is, that I may obtain a Crown of Life. He is not Scandalized at
it, That his Lord, who is the Judge of the World, should be Condemned at the
Bar of sinful men; but he thinks, This is, that I, a vile Sinner, may be
Acquitted at the Bar of the Holy God. He is not Scandalized at it, That his
Lord, whose Hands Wield the Scepter of the Omnipotent, should have his Hands
nailed unto a Tree of Death; but he thinks. This is to make Atonement for my
meddling with the Forbidden Tree, and that I may come to Eat of the Tree of
Life. The Pains of Hell, he sees getting hold on his Lord, who is the Joy of
the whole Heaven: He is not Scandalized at it, but thinks, This is, that I may
arrive to pleasures at Gods Right Hand for evermore! The Christian is
wonderfully pleased, with Reflections, Like those which occurr, in the Writings
of the Ancients; The Maker of man, was made a man: He that Rules the Stars of
Heaven, did Suck the Breasts of a Woman: The Bread of Life was Hungry; The
Spring of Life was Thirsty; The Light of the Wo^ld saw Nights of Sleep; He that
is the Way, was weary wi^h Traveling; He that is the Truth was overwh^lmed
with false Accusations; The Judge of the Quick and the Dead, was a^raigned
before a mortal Judge: Justice it self was Condemned by the Unjust. He that is
Discipline it self, Endured Scourging; The Richest Cluster of Grapes, was
Crowned with Thorns: The Foundation of the Church was hanged on a Tree:
Strength it self was weakened: Health it self was Wounded; Life it self Dyed.

V. A CHRISTIAN is one who values a Baptism, into the Name of the Lord Jesus
Christ; Obtains it, if have not Enjoyed it; Improves i^, if he has obtained it.
Christians are the Disciples of the Lord Jesus Christ. Now, all the Disciples
of that Lord, in all Nations, are to be owned such, by being Baptized into the
Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. There is no Christian, but
what would Gladly be Baptized into the Name of CHRIST, and he would thereby
openly take upon himself the Name of a Christian: It Is said, in Mark 16.16. He
that Believes, and is Baptized, shall be Saved. He that is a Believer, will as
soon as he can, Express it, by his being a Baptized one. But a Christian having
been once Baptized, he does not altogether Forget the Baptismal Obligations
laid upon him, to be the Lords. It is said in Gal. 3.26. As many of you, as
have been Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. A Baptized Christian has
put on the Livery of Christ; and wearing the Name of CHRISTIAN, he is to
Remember himself, the Servant of that most Holy Lord. Thousands of Churches, at
this Day in the Eastern parts of Europe, when a Person is Baptized in them,
there is this Expression used, Such an one, A Servant of the Lord Jesus Christ,
is Baptized. Sirs, when y^u were Baptized, you were Declared the Servants of
the Lord Christ; and though you were Baptized, yet you are no Right Christians,
if you decline the Service of that Heavenly Lord. When some of the Roman
Emperors, became Christian, they Subscribed themselves, The Vassals of the
Lord Jesus Christ. Ay, That, That it is to be a CHRISTIAN. A Christian, and a
Baptized Vassal of Jesus Christ, are of the same Importance He is one that
falls down at the Feet of the Lord Jesus Christ, and affectionately says, Ah!
Lord, other Lords besides thee have had Dominion over me, but now I will make
mention of thy Name alone. The Christian is one that will not Humor the Flesh*
one that will not Follow the World, one that will not Gratify the Devil. JESUS,
JESUS, That is the Name of His only Lord. He heartily says, Lord, I am thy
Servant; Thy Vows are upon me, to be so! Yea, come to a Christian, and satisfy
him, about any Thing, This Thing will be a Service to the Lord Jesus Christ;
you need not any other Argument for to persuade him unto the Thing. Oh! may I
Serve my Christ! of this the Christian says, It Is all my Salvation, and all my
Desire!

VI. A CHRISTIAN is one, who Endeavors to Imitate the Example of the Lord
Jesus Christ, in those Things, wherein He has required our Imitation of Him.
Indeed, there are Mediatorial performances and preheminencies of our Lord Jesus
Christ, wherein He is Inimitable. But such was the Ordinary Conversation of our
Lord Jesus Christ upon Earth, as that He could say, in Job. 13.15 I have given
you an Exemple, that ye should do as I have done. The Exemple of our Lord Jesus
Christ, is in this Book of His, mightily Inculcated on every Christian; yea,
our Lord says unto us, in Luke 14 27. Whosoever does not come after me, cannot
be my Disciple; which is to say, He cannot be a Christian! The Images of the
Lord JESUS CHRIST on the Wall, are not Agreeable unto a well instructed
Christian. But instead of that, the Christian would fain have an Image of the
Lord Jesus Christ, in the Dispositions of his own Heart and Life. The Christian
lays up his chief Happiness, in being made like unto the Lord Jesus Christ;
and he daily aspires to be changed into that Image, from Glory to Glory. What
is a Christian? Briefly; He is a Christ like man; and one, who, as He that has
called him is Holy, so, would be Holy in all manner of Conversation. There have
been Persons in the world called, Ciceronians; and their Fancy has been, that
whatever Phrase or Word, they could not find in the Works of Cicero, they would
hardly make use of it. Thus, if men dislike every Thing, that is contrary to
what might in the Walk of Christ be met withal, Why, These are your Christians.
What says the Apostle, in 1 John 2.6. He that says, he abides in Christ,
(or, is a Christian,) ought himself also to Walk, so as He Walked. Alas, It Is
not a Recitation of a Creed, but an Imitation of a Christ, that will make a
Christian. Among the Jews, the Reckabites, would plant no Vineyards, and build
no Houses, because they would be like old R^ckab, their Grand father, from whom
they were called so. Thus, if we would be Christians, we must live like our
Savior Christ, from whom we are called so. Among the Papists, the
Bened^ctines, the Franciscans, the Dominicans, and the other Irreligious
O^ders, ^y themselves to Imitate the Lives of these men, from whom they have
their Names. In vain have we the Name of Christians from our Lord Jesus Christ,
i^ our Lives be not conformed unto His. When Da^ies are before us, a Christian
is to think, How was th^s Duty done by Christ? When Trials are upon us, a
Christian is to think, How was this Trial born by Christ? And then conform
ac^o^dingly* Christians* we must Walk in Love, as Christ also has Loved us; we
must Learn of Christ in being Me^k and Lowly; we must have that mind in us,
which was in Christ Jesus, who Humbled Himself; we must run with Patience the
Race set before us, Looking ^n^o Jesus; else there is a Crime in our Name. When
Alexander the Great, saw a Soldier, whose Name was Alexander, prove a very
Coward, he said, Aut fortiter pugna, aut Nomen de pone: either Fight like
Alexander, o^ been't called Alexander! Truly, if Christians don't conform
themselves, to the Holy, Prayerful, Watchful, and Fruitful Exemple of our Lord
Jesus Christ, the Lord bestows this Rebuke from Heaven upon them. Either Live
as I showed you how to Live, or else don't presume to take the Name of
Christians any longer!

VII. A CHRISTIAN is one that is willing to s^ffer any Cross, that the Lord,
who Died upon the Cross, may please to lay upon him It has been truly said
Omnis Christianus est Crucianus; Every Christian is a Cross-bearer. Syrs, To
deal plainly; You cannot be Christians upon easier Terms than those in Mat.
16.24. Then said Jesus to His Disciples, [Mark it, you cannot be Disciples,
except this Hard Saying be complied withal.] If any man will come after me, Let
him deny himself, and take up his Cross. Except we can Deny ^ur selves, we
shall Deny our Christ; and then, what Christians are we! A Ch^istian is one,
who does not propound unto himself a Freedom from afflictions in this Life; but
with a profound subm^ssion he Leaves unto the Lord Jesus Christ, the ordering
of all those Afflictions, with which there may be Need for him to be kept in
Heaviness. Our Lord Jesus Christ has Reserved a most Exceeding and Eternal
Weight of Glory for us, in another World. Now, it is inseparable from a
Christian, to submit unto those Afflictions, by which our Lord Jesus Christ
will in this World, prepare us for that Glory. It Is a solemn and an awful word,
but it is the word of our Lord Jesus Christ; That if there be any one thing,
that we are not willing to forego, at the Call of Christ, and for the Sake of
Christ, we are not through Christians to this Hour. He that has the Heart of a
Christian, has in some Degree the Heart of a Martyr too! Whatever Comfort of
Life our Lord Jesus Christ shall call us to part withal, yea, though it be Life
it self, the Christian will say, Well, if my Lord Jesus Christ will have me to
part with This, I have done with it, Let it go! We are told, in Heb. 2.10. The
Captain of our Salvation, was made perfect through Sufferings. The Christian is
one Lifted under that Captain; and he says, I Will follow my Captain! Our Lord
Jesus Christ might complain, That He had not where to Lay his Head. Then says
the Christian, Shall not I be willing to be poor, if my Lord Jesus Christ will
have me to be so? Our Lord Jesus Christ, might complain, That Reproach had
broken His Heart. Then says the Chri^^^an, Shall not I be willing to be under
Disgrace, if my Lord Jesus Christ, will have me so to be? Our Lord Jesus
Christ, was forsaken by all His Friends; They all Forsook Him. Then says the
Christian, If my Lord Jesus Christ will take away my Friends and Relations, I
will not withold them from the Lord!

VIII. A CHRISTIAN, is one studious to preserve the Honor of the Name of
CHRIST, with which he is himself Honored in the Name of CHRISTIAN. It is the
unalterable Statute of Heaven, in 2 Timothy 2.19. Let every one that Names the
Name of Christ, [i. e. that is a Christian] Depart from Iniquity. All Iniquity
is a Dishonor to the Name of Christ; If they that are called after the Name of
Christ, indulge themselves in any Iniquity, in any base and ill Thing, the
World is ready to say, as they did upon the Scandalous Lives of some Christians
long ago, Christiani sancte vixissent si Christus sancta docuisset; If Christ
were an Holy Lord, His Christians would be an Holy People. But our Holy Lord
Jesus Christ, who came to Redeem us from all Iniquity, exceedingly Resents it,
if any Christians give Him cause to say, as in Ezekiel. 36.20. They profaned my
Holy Name, and it was said, These are the people of the Lord. Now, every
genuine Christian, is wonderfully Afraid of doing any Thing, that may Reflect
any Reproach upon the Name of his dear Lord Jesus Christ: Oh! thinks he, My
dear Lord has Died for me, and I had rather Die than Dishonor Him. The Apostle
has well put a difference between these Two, in 1 Pet. 4.15, 16. Let none of
you suffer as an Evil Deer, yet if any man suffer as a Christian, Let him
glorify God. An Evil Doer, and a Christian, are directly contrary, one unto
another. A Christian and a Swearer, a Christian and a Drunkard, a Christian and
a Railer, a Christian and a Debauch, a Christian and a Cheater, a Christian and
a (...) a Christian and a Covetous Mu^k worm; What shall I say? A Christian,
and yet a Servant of Antichrist, an Idolater, and a Persecutor! Oh! they are
most notorious Inconsistencies. A Christian is in vain called so, if he be not
a better Husband, a better Father, a better Master, and a better Neighbor, and
the better Correlate of those, than other people, for being so. Truly, Sirs If
we Christians, are Wicked, or Worldly Wretches, we shall open the mouths of
men, against our Lord Jesus Christ; and as in Jam. 2.7. They Will Blaspheme that
worthy Name, by which ye are called. As Averroes, the Arabian Philosopher; he
was much taken with the Christians, till he saw a vile Thing very common among
them; Ah, Now, says he, Let my Soul go among the Philosophers! Alas,
Christians, we shall horribly wrong the Souls of our Neighbors, if we allow
our selves to do any thing, but what becomes Christians, or if we do not Adorn
the Doctrine of God our Savior. I tell you, we forfeit the Name of Christians,
if we Live Unholily; a Profane Christian, a Dishonest Christian, or a
Discourteous Christian; It Is a Contradiction. The Pagans of old, called the
Christians by the Name of, Chrestians; they mistook the Name, and it was now
taken to signify, Good, Kind, Useful, and Sweet Natured People. Why, if we
would be Christians, we must be Chrestians; we must not be harsh, and fierce
and unserviceable, and ill-conditioned; we must be all made of Benignity
toward all the World, and count our selves Enriched with any opportunity to
Express Goodness, and Kindnesses toward all the Children of men. When the
Heathen Emperor Severus, did see Two Christians most shamefully Quarrelling
with one another, he gave order, Let those two Wretches never be called
Christians any more; Their Master Christ never taught them to do as they do.
Even so, if any of you, Christians, do not lead Godly, Sober and Righteous
Lives, the Lord Jesus Christ Himself utters and Thunders that Order from Heaven
about you, Let not those People be called Christians, any longer; It Is a
Dishonor to me, that they should be called so. In the Primitive Times, if a
Christian were asked, Have you kept the Lords day strictly? he would Reply, I
am a Christian, and I dare do no other. Thus, if it be asked concerning any of
us; Does that man Pray without ceasing, and bring up his Family in the Fear of
God, and deal justly, and fairly, and kindly with all the World? Oh! Let it be
Replied; Yes, He is a Christian; and he dare do no other; he fears, he shall
dishonor his Christ, if he do?

Christians, This it is to be a Christian; Thus the Name of our CHRIST is to
Endure for ever; Thus m^n are to Bless themselves in Him: and I hope, you are
every one of you, more than Almost Persuaded, for to be such a Christian. God
make every one of us, Altogether so.

FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 16.^. la^t. r. overwhelm them p. 37. l. 11. f. which. r. of. p.
38. l. 20. r. a greater.


