Things for a Distressed People to think upon. Offered in the SERMON To the
General Assembly of the Province, of the Massachusetts Bay, at the Anniversary
ELECTION. May, 27. 1696.

Wherein, I. The Condition of the Future, as well as the Former TIMES, in which
we are concerned, is Considered. II. A Narrative of the late Wonderful
Deliverance, of the KING, and the three KINGDOMS, and all the English
DOMINIONS, is Endeavored. III. A Relation, of no less than SEVEN MIRACLES,
within this little while wrought by the Almighty Lord Jesus Christ, for the
Confirmation of our Hopes, that some Glorious Works, for the welfare of ^is
Church, are quickly to be done, is annexed.


By COTTON MATHER

Boston in N E Printed by B Green, and J. Allen, for Duncan Campbel at his Shop
over against the Old-Meeting House. 1696.

Uttered unto the Great and General Assembly, of the Massachusetts Bay,
New England: Convened, May 27. 1696.
IN a General Assembly there is this Day Convened, a whole Province, that has
Eminently professed the Religion of the Lord JESUS CHRIST; and some Advice from
the Lively Oracles of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, unto such a Province, now
Laboring under the Deadly Tokens of His Displeasure, is this Day called for.
The Text now to be Recommended unto you, from these Oracles of Heaven, shall be
one, wherein you shall see described* the behavior of the only People that the
God of Heaven then had in the World, meeting together in a General Assembly,
upon the Advice of his being Displeased with them. The most Reasonable, and the
most Seasonable Things, that I can Recommend unto you, in this critical Time,
are those Three Things which were done by the General Assembly of Israel, in
the Text whereto I now desire your serious Attention.

1 Samuel VII.6, 10. And they gathered together to Mizpeh, and they drew water
and poured it out before the Lord; and they Fasted on that Day; and they said
there, We have Sinned against the Lord. [Unto which, if we duly Attend, we
shall be ready for the following passages;] And Samuel Judged the Children of
Israel; But the Lord Thundered with a great Thunder upon the Philistines, and
discomfited them.


I Confess, that I now Entertain you with a Text very proper, for a Day of
Humiliation: but it is for this very cause that I pitch upon this Text, as a
very Agreeable Entertainment for us: inasmuch as we are generally agreed, That
we are in most Humbling Circumstances.

It Is possible, that it was an Anniversary Solemnity of a Sacred Importance
with the People of Israel, when the memorable Actions here mentioned were
performed. Jewish and Ancient Records have told us, that at the Feast of
Tabernacles, they did every Day fetch a silver Flagon of Water, and pour it out
at the Altar, with the Wine, for the Drink Offering; to signify the pouring out
of the Holy Spirit, after the Coming of the Messiah, who indeed, was afterwa^ds
Born at the very Time of that September Festival For this Custom, we find no
Institution; but the countenance which our Lord Jesus Christ gave unto it, when
He thence formed a Reflection upon the Living Waters of the Holy Spirit which
He has to give, would make one think, whether it were not first Instituted by
the Inspired Samuel, in that History which is now before us. But we have a
further Assurance, that five days before the Feast of Tabernacles, namely, on
the Tenth Day of the Seventh Month, a Fast was kept for a Day of Expiation:
Even on the same Day that Moses having Thrice Fasted forty days together, came
down to his people, with the News of the Lords being Reconciled unto them. I
know not whether the Prophet Samuel, might not, a little divert some Actions of
that Great Solemnity, unto the Designs of Repentance, which the extraordinary
Calamities upon his people did now require. But still, our Anniversary
Solemnity of a Civil Importance, this Day recurring, will be the better
accommodated* by our proposing those Actions to ou^ present Imitation.

The People of Israel, were, by their Sins, like us, the poor People of New
England, brought into very dismal circumstances. Those Ta^ny Pagans the
Philistines, had made cruel and bloody Depredations, upon several of their
Villages: and besides their Loss of men, by the Hand of the Philistines, they
lost a great number of their Principal men, by the more Immediate Hand of
Heaven upon them. The least comp^tation of that mischief, is that of them, who
thus read the Story: When they were together met from all Quarters at
Bethshemesh, about Fifty Thousand People, the Lord smote Threescore and ten
men: and it may be those Threescore and ten men were equivalent unto Fifty
Thousand People, of the more common sort. Under these awful Judgments of God,
they continued Impenitent, for as many years, as have ran out, since the
Children of those Philistines were first let Loose upon our selves; even for
Twenty years together. But it was well for them, that they had a Samuel among
them; a faithful Minister of God, who had no little part of their Civil, as
well as of their Sacred Affairs, falling under his Direction. Upon the
Exhortations of that Blessed Samuel, they began to Lament after the Lord, that
is, to cry unto the Lord for (...) g^ievous Lamen^ation; and they (...) private
Reformations of their Families, all the Land over, to their Lamentations. But
(...) must have something more publicly done in this matter: the whole Body of
that People must Assemble at Mizpeh, a Town of some Note in the Confines of
Judah and Benjamin, near the center of the Country, where we suppose there
might be an Altar Erected for the Worship of God; and at Mizpeh they do Three
Things, whereto, may the Body of this People, to Day, endeavor some Conformity.

We have Three Things here done, by a General Assembly of Israel.

First, The Drew Water, and poured it out (...) the Lord. This passage puts
Interpreters, as ^he Dead Body of Asahel did the Travelers, and Spectators,
unto a Stand; they almost content themselves with saying, Mirabilis hic locus,
ac Difficilis; It Is too hard for us to Interpret it. But, if the Exposition,
which we have already guessed, will not hitt, there are several other
Conjectures to be made upon the Literal Sense of this passage, which we will at
present wave; that we may in the room thereof substitute that Figurative Sense,
which has no less Authority, than that of the Chaldee Paraphrase to support it;
Hauserunt Aquas e puteo cordis sui, et abunde Lacrymati sunt coram Domino. And
indeed, Expositors do mostly go this way; Expounding it of the plentiful Years
which they shed in such abundance, as if, to use the the words of the Weeping
Prophet elsewhere, Their Heads had been Waters, and their Eyes a Fountain of
Tears. However, Let us take what Sense we will, of all that the Commentators
have ordinarily offered us, the words will still have some Sense of Humiliation
in them. The other two passages, are more Intelligible.

Secondly, They Fasted on that Day:

Thirdly, They said there, we have Sinned against the Lord. Behold, the
Supplication, and, Behold, the Reformation, which this Humiliation was attended
withal. The circumstances of it, here specified, that it was, On that Day, and
that it was, There, intimate that they were no^ willing to Delay, the Work of
Repentance any longer: they counted it High Time for them to make thorough work
of it, and they would not rise from the place until they had accomplished the
work.

There are Three Things, which the Text thus said before us, would Awaken us
all unto: Three Things which if duly attended, Thrice and Four Times Happy
from this Day, will be our Land, which is at this Day. Trembling and Shaking,
by the Breaches that God makes upon it. I will not leave my Text, though I do
mow call in another Text, for the Application of it, and make, The present
State of NEW ENGLAND, the Text which we shall now insist upon.

I. May the Tears of a profound HUMILIATION, be this Day shed among us, upon
the Sorrowful Occasions of those Tears.

The Tears of an Humbled, a Melted, a Broken Heart, O let us Draw that Water,
and pour it out before the Lord.

When the General Assembly of Israel, poured out Water before the Lord, it is
the Opinion of some, that they designed with an Hieroglyphick of much
Humiliation, to express their own Calamitous Condition. A State Irretrievably
calamitous, is thus described, in 2 Samuel 14.14. We are as water spilt upon the
ground, which cannot be gathered up again. Thus the Intention of the General
Assembly here, might be, most significantly to say, Lord, see whether we are
not a People so utterly Lost* and Spoilt, and Gone, that it is as impossible to
Retrieve our doleful Circumstances, as to gather up the Water which is poured
out upon the Ground. Now, thy Condition, O poor New England, is indeed so very
like that of Water poured out, that it pathetically obliges us all, to pour
out the Water of our Tears before the Lord. Weeping, is one of those Exercises,
whereto the God of Heaven calls His people, to Humble themselves before Him.
And in the Bible we have many Instances of a Practice, according to that
Precept, in Joel 2.12. Turn ye to God, with all your Heart, with weeping, and
with mourning. Indeed the Tears of the Eye, are to be expected of men, more or
less, according to their Natural Constitutions. It is desirable, that the Eye,
which has been the Grand Broker for Sin, should by its Tears bear its part in
discovering the passions of our minds thereupon. But where the Eye, does not
Naturally afford so free a Channel to that Brine, which the compression and
constriction of the Brain upon Grief produces, we have still our Sighs, which
Austin, well calls, our Interior Tears. And now, O our Tears, where are you!

We read concerning a General Assembly, in Judge. 2.1. An Angel of the Lord came
unto them, and said, I brought you unto the Land, which I swear unto your
Fathers; but ye have not obeyed my voice; wherefore there shall yet be Thorns
in your sides: And it came to pass, when the Angel of the Lord spoke these
words, the people lift up their voice and wept; And they called the Name of the
place Bochim; i. e. Weepers. Oh! why should not Boston this Day, be thus called
Bochim. So Autocratorically spoke that Angel, that it seems to have been the
Messiah himself, appearing in an Humane Shape; even, the same Angel of the
Covenant, that had formerly appeared unto Joshua at Gilgal; and therefore it is
here said, He came up from Gilgal. Permit a poor Servant of that Blessed
Messiah, thus to Expostulate with you; The Lord of Heaven from whom I come unto
you, brought our Fathers into this Good Land, which He provided for us; But we
have not obeyed His voice; and this our Disobedience He has chastised with
continual Thorns in our sides. Why should we not Lift up our voice and weep, at
such doleful Tidings!

I am sure there are such Things as these to bespeak our Tears.

First, The Horrid Sins committed in the Land, yea, commonly committed, loudly
call for our Tears. Alas, it may be said of us, That we have been Drinking in
Iniquity like water. How much ought we then to, Drop it away in Tears, as I may
say, when we p^ur out Water before the Lord! Bloody Crimes, like those, the
Imputation whereof, made our Lord Jesus Christ, Sweat out His very Blood, have
abounded among us; and will they not cause us to weep? Truly, Tears of Blood,
were little enough to bewayl our Bloody, Scarlet, Crimson Abominations. There
is not one of all the Ten Commandments, in the Law, which our God has given us,
but people are notoriously violating of it, from one end of the Land unto the
other. While our Land is full of Unconverted, Unrenewed, Unsanctifyed Sinners,
how should it be any other than full of all Ungodliness! And yet such is the
vast multitude of Dead Souls among us, or of Souls which do not Live unto God,
by virtue of Union with the Lord Jesus Christ, that we may with Horror say,
There is hardly an House, in which there is not one Dead: Nor may we wonder at
it, if the Holy God in His Dispensations, treat our Land, as Unclean, when the
Dead in all Societies are so very many. Truly, If we had a real kindness for
the Holy and Just and Good Law of our God, or for our N^ighbours, that Ruin
themselves by sinning against that Law, we shall in some sort say with him, in
Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of waters (...) down my Eyes, because they keep not thy
Law. Oh! shall we not mourn, when we see, That the World is become the Idol,
of almost all our little World, but the Lord Jesus Christ, and His Great
Salvation very little considered? That the Institutions of the Lord Jesus
Christ are shamefully neglected, and the Superstitions of a vain Conversation
practiced? That the Names, Words, Works and Ordinances, and Providence, of the
Lord Jesus Christ, are most Irreverently and Unprofitably looked upon? And,
That we have a Profane Indisposition to the Sabbaths of the Lord? Shall we not
Mourn when we see the Disorder which confounds all Societies, and the
Selfishness which depraves the most in all Societies? Our Hating and Vexing of
one another? Our Unchastity in all sorts of Pollution? Our Injustice in our
Dealings? Our manifold Falsehood in our Affayrs? Our Discontent in every
Station? We could, in a Synod of our Churches, near Seventeen years ago, charge
our selves with Epidemical Breaches of all the Rules of Love, to God, and man.
And verily, it would be a brave Sponge to Dry up our Tears, if we could say,
that we are mended since the Admonitions of that faithful Synod, But besides
the more common Violations of the Divine Law among us, there are more Special
out-breakings of Sin, in the midst of us, for which, no Tears are enough. We
may say, but Oh! not without our Tears, as in Jer. 5.30. A wonderful and
Horrible Thing is committed in the Land. The Land was fearfully Defiled, by the
Impieties of the Indians, which were the first Inhabitants. Now, is it not A
Wonderful and an Horrible Thing, for so many English that have Succeeded them,
to Indianize, and by the Indian Vices of Lying, and Idleness, and Sorcery, and
a notorious want of all Family-Discipline, to become obnoxious unto the old
Score, and Store of wrath due unto the Land? Is it not a Wonderful and an
Horrible thing, that the Sins of Sodom, should so much prevail in a Land, which
was once a Land of Uprightness? For, this was the Iniquity of our Sister Sodom,
Pride, Fullness of Bread, and Abundance of Idleness; neither did she strengthen
the Hand of the Poor and Needy: The whole Spirit of all their Dealings, was, it
seems, a General contrivance to Oppress, one another. Is it not a Wonderful and
an Horrible Thing, that in such a Land as this, there should be the Sins that
made the Old Land of Canaan, Vomit out her Inhabitants? For so did those
Infandous, and Confounded, Mixtures, that have openly shown their Heads among
our selves. There was a Time, when one Returning from hence to England, could
in a Sermon to a very Honorable Auditory, give this Report concerning us, I
have been Seven years in a Country, where I never beheld one common Beggar, I
never saw one man Drunk; I never heard one Profane Oath, for all the Time of my
being there. But is it not a Wonderful and an Horrible Thing, that the Vices of
Drinking and Swearing, are now every Day, the objects of our Observation; I
pray, let it be a Sorrowful Observation? And is it not a Wonderful and an
Horrible Thing* that it should be a Complaint made about New England,
Righteousness once Lodged in it, but now Murderers? I do speak it, with a Great
concern of Soul; The Tears of a bitter Detestation, are necessary to cleanse
this Land, from the Guilt and Shame, of the Murderous Things, that have been
with too much credibility Reported, as done by some New-Englanders! God forbid,
That I should Reproach my Country. As the Apostle could say, I do not make my
Appeal, as having any thing to Accuse my Nation of: So I would say, I do not
Accuse my County, of any Thing, but what any other Nation may as much be
charged withal. But, when Caesar saw one that was nearly Related unto himself,
among the Wretches that were Stabbing of him, he cried out, with a Singular
Agony, What? You my Son! Have I a Son among you! Thus, there is this
Aggravation upon all of our Miscarriages: Our Lord Jesus Christ from Heaven may
thus Argue with us; If other People do Wound me by their Sins, it is not such a
Wonderful and horrible Thing: But for you, O my People, of New England, a
People that for the Liberties of my Gospel, I have known above the other
Families of the Earth; a People that are obliged unto me, above the rest of
mankind: For these Vile Things to be done among you, my Children! Oh! This is a
Lamentation, and it should be for a Lamentation?

Secondly, No Tears are enough to Bewayl the visible Degeneracy, which is to be
Instanced, let me plainly, and humbly say so! in all Orders of men throughout
the Land. When there was a Second Edition of the Temple, among the People of
God, it is noted, in Neh. 3.12. The Ancient men, who had seen the first House,
when the Foundation of this House was laid before their Eyes, they wept with a
loud voice. Truly, the few Ancient men that are left among us, do weep with a
loud voice, when they see how miserably Temple-work is now circumstanced, in
the Second and Third Generation of the Country. Though we may Shout aloud for
joy, when we see so much of Christ, and of Truth, and of Grace, among us; for
indeed, so much there is, that if they who talk of (...) this Country, would
please to stay, as methinks they should, until they hear of a Country that has
proportionably more of CHRIST in it, there would for the present, be little
said of a Removal! Yet let not this Hinder our joining with such as weep with a
loud voice for our Degeneracy. It is affirmed, That many sorts of Inferior
Creatures, when Transplanted from Europe into America, do Degenerate by the
Transplantation; But if this Remark must be made upon the People too, what can
we do, but spend our Tears upon such a sad Remark? Our Lord Jesus Christ from
Heaven seems to bestow that Rebuke upon us, in Jer. 2.21. I planted thee a
Noble Vine* How then art thou Turned into the Degenerate Plant of a strange
vine unto me! New England once had a famous Governor, namely, Hopkins of
Connecticut, whose words were, I fear, I fear, the Sins of New England will
e're long be read in its punishments. Blessed have thou been, O Land, in thy
Rulers; but alas, for the generality, they have not c^nsidered, how they were
to Honor the Rules of God, in Honoring of those whom God made Rulers over
them; and I fear they will come to smart by having them set over them, that it
will be an hard work to Honor, and that will hardly be capable to manage their
Affairs. Now can we without many Tears, look upon the Tendencies, with the
words of that Excellent man have toward an Accomplishment! It must be
acknowledged unto the praise of God, that New England is yet Blessed with very
Worthy men in all Orders; but alas, we have not such a Choice of them, as once
we had. I suppose, 'twere easy to single out, it may be, less than Twenty men,
upon whose Removal from us, all our Affairs would be Palsey-struck, with an
Irrecoverable Feebleness, and the Country would almost fall, for want of
Pillars to support it. Indeed, the best symptom that New England has to boast
of, is an Hopeful Issue, of Learned and Pious Young men, from a well-governed
College; a College, which the Sons of Barbarity among us, perhaps care not,
if it might be Rased unto the ground. But those thy Sons, O New England, will
be no sooner Hatched and Fledged, but it may be, they will fly away from thee,
as fast as they can. Among the First Planters of New England, there was a vast
variety of Generous* Notable, Brave Spirited men; yea, some of those very men,
that were afterward found able to conquer and manage mighty Kingdoms, would
have been but New England Farmers, if their silly Persecutors had not hindered
them: Choice Grain from three sifted Nations filled this Wilderness. But, the
Posterity do for the most part strangely Loose that Brave Spirit, which
Inspired their Ancestors. I Remember, That the Writer of the Israelitish
Chronicles, in 1 Chronicles. 4.22. reports, That among the Children of Judah, there
were Degenerate Creatures, who were Potters, and Wretche^ Dwelling among
Plants, and Hedges; there they dwelt with the King, for his work; a slavish
Generation they were: But what were their Ancestors? Why, they were Brave
Hero's, who had the Dominion in Moab: and it is added, These are Ancient
Things* New England once abounded with Hero's worthy to have their Lives
written, as Copies for future Ages to write after; But, These are Ancient
Things! A Public Spirit in all that sustained any Public Office, and a
fervent Inclination to Do Good, joined with an Incomparable Ability to do it,
once ran through New England; But, These are Ancient Things! A new-England^man,
once was as much as to say, A man that scorns to do an ^ll Thing, and One whose
word is as good as his Bond; But, These are Ancient Things! There seems to be a
shameful Shrink, in all sorts of men among us, from that Greatness, and
Goodness, which adorned our Ancestors: We grow Little every way; Little in our
Civil Matters, Little in our Military Matters, Little (...) our Ecclesiastical
Matters; we dwindle away, to Nothing: I do not mean, for our Numbers, but for
our Actions. Those things, which have been our Glory, they are gradually
Removing from us. Oh! with Tears, do our Ancient men cry out, Where is the
Glory of the Ancient Things! And shall I say it? As the Grandchild of Moses,
it is judged, became an Idolater: So, There are very many Families, of
Everlasting Renown throughout New England, wherein some or other of the
Grandchildren, are become either foolish, or wicked, and it may be notorious
Children of the Devil: the first and great Apostate. Those Things, which their
Grand fathers would sooner have died, than have Done, these Degenerous
Creatures, do them every Day. -- At non ille Satum, quo te menti^is. Wretch, If
thy Grandfather had imagined, that ever thou would have become, such a
pitiful Thing, he would have swum in his own Tears, unto his Grave upon it.
Yea, our people, have for many years been going on in a course of long
Apostasy. I will not Enquire, Whether the Principles of Church-Reformation,
upon which we were at first Established, begin to be Deserted among us? I will not
so much as Enquire, Whether we are Loosing that Principle, That no party of men
whatsoever, have any just Authority to appoint any parts or means of Divine
Worship, which the Lord Jesus Christ has not in the Scriptures Instituted? I
will not so much as Enquire, Whether we are Loosing that Principle, That a
probable, and a credible, and a tried Profession of a Saving Faith is to be
expected from all that we Admit unto the Table of the Lord? For us to Loose
those Principles, already, would be too quick a Degeneracy, to be imagined. I
know very well, that Apostasy has been sometimes unreasonably charged among us:
Those things that were Incontestably, The First Principles of New England, when
asserted and practiced, have been called, an Apostasy. The Principles of
Morellianism, and Separation, were none of our First Principles: Nevertheless,
the Principles of a Scriptural Purity in our Whole Worship, were so much our
First Principles, that the Lord Jesus Christ, I am verily persuaded, will abhor
us, and forsake us, upon our Abandoning thereof. But, I will Enquire, Whether
our First Love to the Lord Jesus Christ, and his Evangelical Appointments be
not almost I often? And, whether we have not almost Lost the old Power of
Godliness, in our Conversations? And, whether, A Christian full of Piety, and
Charity, and Self-Denial, and universal Holiness and Fruitfulness, do not grow
a rare sight among us? Christians, our Lord Jesus Christ is this Day Holding
His Bottel, to take the Tears, which we are to drop for our Apostasies!

Thirdly; The prodigious and astonishing Scandals, given by the extraordinary
Miscarriages of some that have made a more than ordinary Profession of
Religion; These call for our Tears, and our Bleeding Lamentations. When some
Church Members, yea, some Teachers and Rulers in Israel, were fallen into
Scandal, says that good man, in Ezra 9.3. When I heard this Thing, then I rent
my Garment, and my Mantle, and I sat down Astonished; and I said, O my God, I am
Asha^ed. Alas, It would Astonish any good man, into Tears, to be informed of
the Detestable Things done by some that have highly Professed Better Things.
Indeed, Let a man do never so well, yet a great many Ill Things may be spoken
of him; yea, a man shall Hear Ill, for Doing Well. One of the most faithful men
among the whole People of God, could say, I heard the Defaming of many. But if
those Defamed Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ, will be a little patient, He
will at last give an Honorable Resurrection unto the Names, that had so much
Dirt cast upon them, when the Names of their Envious Accusers, will either lie
Buried in Oblivion, or be mentioned no otherwise, than as Judas in the Gospel,
and Pilate in the Creed. It is another matter, and oh! a very Tearful, and
Fearful matter it is! When such as have made an high profession of Godliness,
are left of God, unto the Doing of those Ungodly Things, upon which it may be
said unto them, The Name of God is through your means Blasphemed. Syrs, It were
infinitely better, for one to Dye immediately! There are some, who do with
pleasure, Entertain the Stories of Base Things done by the strict Professors of
Religion; and with Triumph exclame thereupon, Ay, These are the Members of such
an one! who would be a Professor? They are all so! Unto every such person I
must without haesitation say, Man, Thou have an infallible mark of an
Unregenerate Soul upon thee. If thou had the Heart of a Christian in thee,
thou would never speak at such a rate: such Language would rather proceed
from the Heart of a Devil! But the Lord Jesus Christ has an Holy People, who do
themselves Hate every false way, and are in exquisite Agonies of Soul, when
they see any others to step aside into such a Way. The Wise man says, in Prove.
25.26. A Righteous man falling before the Wicked, is as a Troubled Fountain,
and a corrupt Spring. Some have made such a profession of Righteousness, that
much Notice has been taken of them; others have been ready to think, Well,
Christianity, is just such a Thing, as the Lives of these men do Represent it.
Now the Falls of these men, before the Wicked, are just as if one should throw
p^ison into the Well that all the Town is to fetch Wa^er at. So were the
Heathen of old Poisoned, when they said, Christiani sancte vixissent, si
Christus sancta docuisset! Oh! Lamentable Thing! Satan, who is often the
Executioner of the Wrath of God upon a sinful World, has Desired, leave to
single out some hig^ Professors of Religion, and push them on to some
scandalous Iniquities: he would fain do the part of a Devil, it may be, on some
one man, that he might poison all the Town, by the Falls of that man. The
Dreadful Justice of God, who gives none account of His matters, has said, Go,
Satan, go make an Experiment upon them? And lo, upon the Experiment, some
strict, and it may be, some old Professor, that had been formerly Troublesome
to all the Sinners that were about him, He not only proves a Coveteous
Worldling, but he acts as driven by an Unclean Devil, or by a Cheating Devil,
or by a Lying Devil: and he plays the Devil horribly. Such Doleful Instances
there have been among us, as would poison a whole Neighborhood, yea, a whole
Colony, with Atheism, (...) the Lord Jesus Christ, had not an Almighty Arm, to
secure His own Religion. Woe, way woe, to Hundreds of Souls, in the midst of
thee, O New England, for the Offenses that are given by some of thy
Church Members; Lo Them think of the rest. But, Oh! how should we all come to
such Lamentations, My Eyes do fail with Tears, my Bowels are Troubled. The
scandalous Fall of David, is by as transcendent a Mystery of Divine Sovereignty
Recorded, as i^ was Ordered. Some of the Pagans in the Primitive Times, would
not be Christians, because ^avid, forsooth, was one of our greatest Saints though
he did such Damnable Things; and, many of the Christians would then Sin
Damnably, pleading, Si David, cur non et ego? Why, may not I, as well as David?
I believe, There are a million of men in Hell, whose Damnation was occasioned
by the Fall of David, though David himself be gone to Heaven after all. Ay, but
this David therefore comes to cry out, I water my couch with my Tears, mine Eye
is consumed! Have any of our Eminent Persons, ever miscarried like David? We
should with an Impartial Fidelity, do what we can, that they may Repent like
David: No doubt, the most Holy Lord Jesus Christ, who has Eyes like a Flame of
Fire, makes his Jealousy burn like fire, against the Churches, which do not
bear due Testimonies against such Offenders: It may be, He Will set them on fire,
for their Unfaithfulness. But still, we must even Consume our Eyes with Tears,
when we bear our Testimonies. Oh! the Irreparable Wrongs that we have seen done
to the dear and sweet Name of our p^ecious Jesus! Methinks, we should broach
our Tears, on this Lamentable Provocation; and be like the Church of Corinth,
when an Unclean Fellow was found among them; [2 Cor. 7.11.] for Godly Sorrow,
for Carefulness, for Clearing of our selves, for Indignation, Fear, Desire,
Zeal, and Revenge.

Fourthly; The Evident Blows from (...) Hand of an Angry God, in a long Train
of Disasters upon all our Affairs, How much do they Solicit our Tears before
the Lord? A Recapitulation of the sad things, which have befallen us, while our
Days have passed away under the wrath of God, in this Wilderness, and we have
seen one Destruction after another, almost without any Intermission, might
justly bring us to that Lamentation, in Lam. 3.48, 49. Mine eye runs down
with Rivers of Water, for the Destruction of the Daughter of my People; Mine
eye trickleth down, and cease not, without any Intermission. The Vials of the
wrath of God, have been long Pouring out upon us, in Continued, and Horrendous
Desolations; it becomes us therefore to Draw Water, and pour our Tears into the
Vials of the Lord. God began to smite us, with an Annual Blast upon several
sorts of our Grain, just Forty years ago: and although, if our Husbandman were
taught Discretion by his God, no doubt, many Natural Remedies for much of that
Blast, might be lit upon, a kind of Dead sleep upon men still detains them
under Blasting Disadvantages: and behold, by an Alteration come upon the very
Course of Nature among us, our Indian Grain it self, the very Native Grain in
the Country, is the last year so Blasted, that we hear such an hideous Cry,
for, Bread! Bread! this year, as was never heard in this Land before. And how
very much have our Estates been Diminished, by Losses that have been
Multiplied, upon us? On Shore, once and again such Fires have laid wast the
Treasures of our Metropolis, that we have had cause to Cry, Oh! What means the
heat of this Anger! And at Sea, besides our Frequent Ship-wracks, I suppose, no
part of the English Dominions, have proportionably had near so many Ships,
taken by the common Adversary, as New England; poor Boston and Salem, I am
sure, has Felt what I Speak: Yea, it is the Discourse among the Virtuous
Merchants upon the Exchange at London, That surely, Almighty God is much
offended at New England, for they miscarry from no Quarter so much as they do
from thence: But what Havoc, has been all this while, ever now and then
making upon the Lives of our People, by the Angels of Death, in Epidemical
Sicknesses? We have ever now and then, been visited with Mortal Contagions; the
Arrows of Death have been flying thick among us; A Thousand Persons, if I have
not misreckon'd, have been from one Town, in one year, ca^^ied unto their
Eternal Home; And, Oh! The slain of the Lord have been many!

Shall I proceed? We have seen our selves Deprived, not only of
Charter^Liberties, but also of English-Liberties, with such Things done to us,
as the High Court of Parliament, by their Vote numbered among the Grievances of
the Nation. Any considerate man, that compares the Prodigious Invasions then
made upon all our Interests, with Two Things that have since come to light; the
Irish proposals, For the Irish to be settled near New England, to check the
growing Independants of that Country; and the Letter to the Pope, engaging to
set up the Roman Catholic Religion in the Plantations of America: cannot but
say, That all Things were then under a Dreadful Prospect with us. An Happy
REVOLUTION has Saved us, out of those Distresses; But we have immediately been
Distressed with New Disasters, wherein a Righteous God, has been Punishing us
yet Seven Times more for our Iniquities. The Salvages filled this Land from one
end unto the other, with direfu^ outrages, with which they cut off many
Hundreds of our Inhabitants, in a Former War; (...) now a Later War, wherein
the Revolution foun^ us Entangled, has been consuming us for more than Seven
years together. Herein, God ha'^ been Pouring out the Blood of our Friends; Yea
Horrid Stories might be told, of the Barbarou^ Cruelties, wherewith some of
them have bee^ butchered, by the Hands of the Barbarians And shall not we, Pour
out our Tears upon their Graves?

-- Quis talia fando,
Temperet a Lacrymis? --
The most Compendious and Effectual way to come at a lasting Peace, was well
contrived, in an Expedition formed, for the cutting down of a Tree, that was
the Roost of the Rooks, which Troubled us; but a mavelous Frown from Heaven,
so defeated this contrivance, that although it was at first next unto a Miracle
that so Important a Thing, as the Conquest of Canada, was not accomplished, yet
Now our Armies not being All cut off, by the whole Force of Canada now arrived
into Quebeck, was a Deliverance next unto a Miracle. Our compassionate Lord,
Marvellously answered the Faith, which we then Expressed in our Prayer before
Him, That the English Army should not fall by the Hands of the French Enemy:
And therefore, about fourteen Hundred Raw men, tired with a long Voyage, were
not made a Prey to more than twice as many Expert Soldiers, then Crowing in
their own Dunghill. Nevertheless, the heavy Debts, and the many Deaths, which
ensued upon the failure of that Great Action, the Greatest that ever we
attempted, have so confounded us, that it becomes us to Ly- Low, before that
Just God, who Showed us Great and Sore Troubles, and brought us down to the
Depths of the Earth. And, as if all this had not been enough to lay us Low, the
Spirit of God against whom we had Rebelled, permitted the Devils, from the
Depths of Hell, to assault us, with as Prodigious Vexations, as ever befell any
People under the whole Cope of Heaven. The Devils, those Powers of Darkness,
had been horribly played withal, by Magical Tricks, used among many People in
this Land of Light, and these Devils now broke in upon the Country, with such
Praeternatural Possessions as may be (...) perpetual Astonishment of the World.
In the Storm now Raised, upon a Land, which by the Wrath of the Lord of Hosts
was Darkened: a Storm Raised by Wicked Spirits in High Places, that had the
Upper-hand of us: a Storm that would have made the best of Pilots, to want the
best Advice that could be given: It was, and it will be, past all Humane Skill,
Exactly to Understand what Inextricable Things we have met withal. But yet it
may need some Disquisition with us, What matter of Humiliation in them? O
New^England such as these, have been thy Disasters: And indeed, there is hardly
a Family among us, wherein there has not some Terrible Thing or other, fallen
out, which will cause particular Persons, to go Drooping, with Sorrow to their
Graves. It Will be Endless to Enumerate the Temptations, that we have all had in
this Wilderness: But as it was said of Miriam, that seems to have been a Figure
of the Church then with her in the Wilderness; Numb. 12.14. If her Father had
Spit in her Face, should she not be ashamed? Thus, O New England; Thy Father
has been Spitting in thy Face; but, Oh! Let thy Tears now run down that shamed
Face, let thy Tears wash that shame of thy Face away for ever. If we did thus
Pour out Water before the Lord, we might at last, as the Scripture speaks, come
to Forget our Misery, and Remember it as Waters that pass away.

II. May the Prayers of a fervent SUPPLICATION, be from this Day, raised among
us, upon the manifold Occa^ions for such Prayers. I do not ask you to Fast on
this Day, as the General Assembly of Israel did, on the day, when they were all
together. But those things may be Uttered on this Day, and Resolved on this
Day, that many a Day of Prayer, with Fasting, may be the effect of this Day:
And it may be, a General Assembly, will before they break up, some time or
other set apart a Day, for Prayer with Fasting, together, before the Lord; that
so a whole Province together at once, may Hear what God the Lord will speak
unto them, Some think, that when the General Assembly of Israel, did pour out
water before the Lord, they did it, as a symbol, expressive of the Devotion
with which they made their Prayers before Him; as the devout person could say,
in 1 Samuel 1.15. I have poured out my Soul before the Lord. And indeed, they seem
to me so intent on pouring out their Prayers, that they would pour nothing, not
so much as a little water, in. For such Prayers unto the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, I do this Day make my most zealous Addresses unto you, O
Inhabitants of New England: I Address you, That you would Pray always with all
Prayer and Supplication; and that with a public Recommendation of public
Supplication, to be maintained by our Churches, in a successive and a repeated
practice thereof, Household Prayer, and Secret Prayer, may be conscientiously
practiced by all sorts of men.

It is with a Threefold Advertisment that I would urge this Desire of my Soul.

First; All the Blessings, that we can want, or wish; yea, the very Best of
Blessings, are to be obtained by Supplication to the Blessed God for them. Why
should I lanch forth into the vast Ocean of Assurances and Experiences, which
our God has given unto His People, That they shall not seek his Face in vain?
All New^England, has been filled with Demonstrations from its first Settlement
unto this Day, That Prayer is as it has been sometimes called, A Golden Key to
Unlock all the Treasures of Heaven. Many, and many, and many a time, it might
be said, This poor Land cried unto the Lord, and the Lord has heard and saved.
And what is the use that we should make of all the Salvations, wherein we have
so wonderfully seen, The prevalency of Prayer demonstrated? What but this, That
we will with our Prayer, again and always come unto Thee, O Thou Hearer of
Prayer! We would have a Supply of Provision from the Bounties of Heaven sent
unto us in our Scarcity. Why, Supplications, like those of Elijah, will manage
the very Corks on the Bottles of Heaven We would have the Lions that are
threatening to Devour us, Restrained from doing so. Why, Supplications, like
those of Daniel, will muzzle the most Ravenous Lions. All our Undertakings,
would they not prosper the more, if by more Prayer over them, like the Servant
of Abraham, we acknowledged the Lord in all our ways? Would any of our
Churches, have Pastors after the Lords own Heart bestowed upon them? I pray,
mark what I say; I wonder exceedingly, How any Church dare proceed so far as to
vote, and call a Minister, for their fixed Service, until they have by a Day of
Prayer, first made their Supplications unto the Lord Jesus Christ, for His
Direction: The jealous Lord Jesus Christ, may justly show them, that they make
more Haste than good speed, when the chief Shepherd, is thus forgotten with
them. Whereas, if you will go to the Lord Jesus Christ, O ye Flocks of the
Lord; He will give you those Pastors, that shall be Good men, and Full of the
Holy Ghost, and men, by whom there shall be much people added unto the Lord:
Men, in whom you shall be, on a thousand accounts unspeakably Happy, as long as
they live among you.

Briefly, The Best Thing that New England can possibly be Blessed withal, would
be, the Regeneration of the Rising Generation; the general Conversion of our
Young People, to know* and prize, and serve our Lord Jesus Christ. We are
Trembling, at the Controversy, which we see the Great God managing against you,
O our Young Folks, in Fiery, Deadly Rebukes. You do not Keep the Covenant of
God; and now, the Almighty God seems to say over New England, I will take no
pleasure in your young men. Some of our Young men are given up to the furthest
sallies of Extravagant and Exorbitant Impiety: And others of our Young men
perish either by the Wars at Home, or by the Seas abroad, until we almost
become, as Bede reports once England was, Omni milite, et floridae Juventutis
Alacritate Spoliata. Miserable Young men; your Conversion to the Lord Jesus
Christ, would certainly prevent all of this misery. Now, to procure such a
Conversion, it would be a course of admirable Efficacy, for our Churches to
keep now and then, whole Days of Prayer unto the Lord, on the behalf of their
poor Posterity. Awake then, what mean you, O ye sleeping Churches? Arise, and
call upon your Lord! The Holy Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, Oh! could we
Pray that Holy Spirit into the Hearts of our Children, they would fall to
Glorifying of the Lord Jesus Christ immediately! How much might our Counsils
work upon them, if they saw our most ardent Prayers accompany those Counsils?
If Grace were more owned, and sought, who can say, What the Spirit of Grace,
would then do for our Offspring?

Secondly, The Times which we are fallen into, do Loudly call for our
Supplication to that God, in whose Hand are all our Times. All the whole Tribe
of Thinking men, that have any Understanding in the Times, do know this, that
of all the Things, which we ought now to do, there is nothing more Seasonable,
than Unfeigned Prayer unto the Lord. There are those Things now come unto the
Birth, which require us to Lift up our Lively Prayer, unto the Living God;
There are those Calamities impending, that strongly require us to Cry unto the
God that performs all things for us. When Daniel, did understand by Books,
that the Number of the years, for the Captivity of the Church of God, was very
near accomplished, Then, says he, in Dan. 9.3. I set my Face unto the Lord
God, to seek by Prayer and Supplications, with Fasting and Sackclothe and
Ashes. Truly, We may Understand by Books, That the Number of years, for the
Church of our Lord Jesus Christ to Ly under its Desolations, is very near to
its Accomplishment: and therefore, Haec sunt Orandi Tempora: I may say, Pray,
Pray, Pray, never more Need than Now. When the Seventy years, so the Churches
confinement in Babylon, were almost out, Good men might have Known that they
were so: Holy Daniel did Know it. When the Four Hundred and Thirty years for
the Churches Expecting the Promised Rescue from Egypt, were almost out, Good
men might have Known that they were so: The Lord made the Doubting Moses to
Know it. When the Four Hundred and Ninety years for the coming of the Messiah,
after the Rebuilding of Jerusalem, were almost Expired, Good men might have
Known it; and many Good men did then Know it, Waiting for the Consolation of
Israel: Yea, the Pharisees themselves, the High Churchmen of those Days, They
also did Know it; and our Lord called them Hypocrites, for their not conforming
themselves accordingly. Well, When the Twelve Hundred and Sixty years assigned
unto the Reign of the Antichristian Apostasy, draw toward their Period, this
Period also may be Known, as well as any of the former. The Mistakes that have
been in the Guesses of some Learned men, about this Happy Period, are far from
Inferring a Necessity of Wrong Reckonings to the Worlds end; No, they rather
make it more easy now to Reckon Right. Now I do this Day appear among you, O
People of God, with such a Message from Heaven unto you, as This; Behold, I
bring unto you Good ^idings of Great Joy, that shall be to all the faith^^l
People of God: The Tidings which I bring unto you, are, That there is a
REVOLUTION and a REFORMATION at the very Door, which will be vastly more
Wonderful, than any of the Deliverances, yet seen by the Church of God, from
the Beginning of the World. I do not say, That the Next year will bring on this
Happy Period; bu^ this I do say, That the bigger part of this Assembly, may in
the course of Nature, Live to see it: There stand those within these Walls this
Day, That shall see, Glorious Things done for Thee, O thou city of God! The Day
is at Hand, when Thunder and Lightning and Earth quake, shall Prodigiously
Swallow up that Abominable City, which now indeed her self begins with
Processions, to deprecate such an Exterpation. The Day is at Hand, when the
Tu^kish Empire, instead of being any longer a Woe to Christendom, shall it self
become a Part of Christendom. The Day is at Hand, when the Vail that has been
upon the Hearts of the Jewish Nation, shall be taken on, and that Nation shall
Fear the Lord, and His Good Thing, the Messiah. Concerning the Day of the Lord,
wherein these Things will be done, I do with all Freedom say unto you, That
Great Day of the Lord, it is Near, it is Near, and it hastes greatly! Yea, If
I could speak with a Voice as loud, as that of the Seventh Trumpet, which we
are certain will Sound Quickly, I would Sound this Alarm to all mankind, The
Kingdom of God is at Hand! The Kingdom of God is at Hand! This is not mere
Conjecture, or Opinion; but there is Demonstration, I assert nothing short of
Demonstration for it. For, I pray, when the Kingdom of Satan, managed by his
Vicar at Rome, is Expired, whose Kingdom shall next Succeed upon it? Now, It Is
very certain, That there will be no more than Twelve Hundred and Sixty years
allowed unto that Papal Kingdom: It Is very certain, That when Ten Sovereign
Kings arise, in the broken Roman Empire, the Twelve Hundred and Sixty years of
the Papal Kingdom, are Commenced: And It is very certain, That by the middle of
the Fifth century, Ten several Distinct Kingdoms, took advantage from the
Distractions then upon the Roman Empire, to set up for themselves. By this
Calculation, we have nothing less than a Demonstration, that the Papal Kingdom,
has the last Sands, of its last Hourglass, now running for it. Nor is it
Unlikely, no, but all Things conspire, even to Demonstration it self, That the
last Half Time, or, Hundred and Fourscore years, of the Papal Kingdom, Entered
at the Reformation in the Former Century. All the Schaemes, that put off this
most Happy Period, unto further and future Ages, are easily convicted of
manifest Inconsistences: And therefore, I question, whether there be so much as
one Judicious and Considerate Student, in those Prophecies, which, Blessed are
they that Study, but what concurs to this Expectation, That the Kingdom of God
is at Hand. Lift up your Heads then, O you that Love the Appearing of the Lord
Jesus Christ: For there seems as if there were an Age of Miracles now Dawning
upon us. Proper Miracles were continued in the Church of God, for Two or Three
Hundred years together, even until the Antichristian Apostasy was come on to
some Extremity. And when that Apostasy is over, it is possible, there may be a
Return of proper Miracles; those, Powers of the World to come. Such Miracles
have been lately Wrought, more than two or three of them, in the City of
London, that, what if they should be a Few Drops of the Spirit of the Messiah,
falling before a Mighty Shower of that Spirit? Persons who have had their Limbs
miserably disjointed, Persons that have had Inveterate Palseyes, Incurable
Fistula's, Desperate Leprosies; These Persons, as they have been Reading the
Ancient Miracles of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Spirit of Christ has
wonderfully given them, the Faith of His doing the like for them; and Behold,
they have, to the Astonishment of mankind, been by the like Miracles, perfectly
and presently recovered out of all their Maladies. What shall we make of these
things? Do not Sinfully Expect Miracles; and yet say I, That the Lords Name is
Near, His Wondrous Works declare! However, They may be Symbolical
Representations, and Exhibitions, of the Miraculous Things, which the Lord is
going to Do for His People: For, I do again assure you, The Trumpet is going to
Sound, that shall make the Kingdoms of this World, become the Kingdoms of the
Lord, and of His Christ.

But I am sure, we had need be much upon our knees, in Supplications before the
Lord, if it be a Day of such Expectations. For you must expect, That these
Things will come on with such Horrible Commotions, and Concussions, and
Confusions, that Men's Hearts every where shall fail them for Fear, and for
looking after those Things which are coming on the Earth. The mighty Angels of
the Lord Jesus Christ, will make their Descent, and set the World a Trembling
at the Approaches of their Almighty Lord: They will Shake Nations, and Sha^^
Churches, and Shake mighty Kingdoms, and Shake once more, not Earth only, but
Heaven also* The very next Thing, I freely tell you, tha^ I look for, is, That
there will those Horribl^ Shakes be given unto certain Kingdoms in E^rope, that
shall bring the pure Worshippers o^ the Lord Jesus Christ into such Employments
(...) Advancements, as they never had before. Bu^ such Things will be done,
that it may be que^stioned, Who shall Live, when God does these things? and it
must be Answered, Your Hearts shall Live, that seek the Lord?

Thirdly; No men are under so much obligation to be Men of Prayer, as the
Ministers of the Gospel, who should be as much by their Study, as they are by
their Office, the Men of God.

My Fathers, and Brethren; You that are the Samuels of this New-English Israel,
you are concerned more than any men Living, to be among them that Call upon the
Name of God; Call you upon the Lord, and He will Answer you. The First
Ministers of the New Testament, expressed a Resolution, well worthy to be
followed, by all that shall come after them, in Acts 6.4. We will give our
selves continually to Prayer, and the Ministry of the Word.

Our Lord Jesus Christ, gave unto His Disciples a Directory, for their
Supplications: And in this Directory, methinks, I see the condition of His
Ministers most particularly Accommoda^ed. Our Prayer should be, as it were our
Breath; and oh! how should we Live, if we were Breathing of Prayer, on all
Occasions every day continually! The Success of our Mini^try, in those three
Things, The Sanctifying of Gods Name, and, The Coming of His Kingdom, and, The
Doing of His Will, these are the first and main Things, for which we are to be
concerned in our daily Supplications. But if we will be Faithful in our
Ministry, we must run the hazard of loosing all the Comforts of this Life;
'twill be well, if even they that are bound by Compact, as well as otherwise by
Justice, to support us, do not Sacrilegiously cheat us of our Daily Bread. We
must therefore Go to God as unto our Heavenly Father, for our Bread with our
daily Supplications. But in our Ministry we shall commit many Errors, being
Flesh and Blood, and having a Fountain of Sin in us, as well as other men. We
must therefore cry for the Forgiveness of our Sins, with our Daily
Supplications. And the many Injuries, which an Ungodly World will treat us
withal, will furnish us with opportunities enough, to Insert in our Daily
Supplications, that clause, Lord, we forgive them who Trespass against our
selves! But our Ministry, will be attended with various Temptations from the
Wicked One: Oh! how glad will the Devils be, if We, whose Business it is to
thwart and cross his Designs, may be Trepan'd by him into any thing that shall
promote them! For this cause, our Daily Supplications must cry to Heaven, That
we may not be Led into Temptation, but Saved from the Evil.

Thus are we to Pray without ceasing, and we are to interweave Prayer, into all
the Affairs of our Ministry. Our Sermons especially, oh! if we did but Pray
much over them, how much would the Spirit of Christ adjoyn Himself unto them!
It Is very sure, Been Orasse, est been Studuisse. But shall we not Fast, as well
as Pray? Our Excellent Hooker would say, That Prayer was a principal part of a
Ministers work; 'twas by this, that he was to carry on all the rest: He would
also say, That such an Extraordinary Favor as the Life of Religion, and the
Power of Godliness, must be preserved by the frequent use of such extraordinary
means, as Fasting with Prayer: and accordingly, he did himself still Devote one
Day in a Month unto a secret Fast before the Lord. Thus, our Excellent Mitchel,
would once in two months, keep such a Fast, wherein he would make a Catalogue
of all the Afflictive Things that he saw, not only in himself, but in all our
Three Colonies, and in the Nations of Europe also, and he would spread them all
before the Lord, with the matters of his own Everlasting Welfare. Yea, I
suppose, there has been hardly one very famous man, in the Churches of
New England, but what has familiarized himself to such Exercises; and these
were the Exercises that Ripened, and En^arged their Souls, and rescued them
from Enchantments, and fitted them to become so famous: And they that have
hereto Exercised themselves, have left this Observation to us, I soon Loose
that serious, that gracious, that generous, and that watchful and useful
Disposition of mind, that I gain by these Devotions, if I do for many days
together intermit them. I remember, There are three persons Renowned in the
Scripture, for their Fasting; and every one of those persons, was Honored,
with the Doing of Miraculous Things, in Feeding the People of God. And I
Remember a Golden Passage of Chrysostom, That the very Angels themselves cannot
but Honor the man, whom they see familiarly and frequently, admitted unto the
Audience, and as (...) were Discourse, with the Divine Majesty.

III. May the Cares of a Thorough RE^FORMATION, be from this Day used amon^ us,
upon the multiplied Occasions for suc^ Cares. When the General Assembly of
Isra^^ were all together, They said, we have Sinned a^gainst the Lord; but when
they so said, it (...) implied, that they did something, in pursuanc^ of this
Confession; that is to say, They for themselves to Redress the Provoking Evil^
wherein they had Sinned. Certainly, there ^ not one man, in our General
Assembly, but wha^ will readily confess, We have Sinned against (...) Lord:
Yea, the Lord, has by Scourging ma^^ this whole People, many a Time, over, to
con^fess thus much before Heaven and Earth. Bu^ now, Just, and Quick, and Warm
Cares to Re^form what we Confess, are needful to show the Sincerity of our
Confession, or, to prove, that (...) had a Spirit without Guile, in our
Confession. (...) thought by some, That when the General As^sembly of Israel
did Pour out Water before the Lord, they did thereby, as it were, Sacramentally
Profess, that they thoroughly Cleansed themselves from all their filthy
Idolatries, and utterly cast forth all their Filthiness and Wickedness, ^ith a
full purpose, to Take up nothing of it, (...) more. Truly, The Command of our
God, ^ow unto us, is that, in Isa. 1.16. Wash ye, make (...) clean, put away
the Evil of our Doings, from ^^fore mine Eyes. I must say unto you, That
^hatever man, shall in any Thing Obstruct, the ^eformation of New England, he
is therein, and ^far, a Public Enemy of the Land. There is ^uch Talk,
oftentimes Impertinently Enough ^^ried on, whether such a man, or such a man, ^
True to the Interest of the Country. But you ^^all give Me, that am never
present at any of ^^ur Elections, leave to Suggest unto you, who ^^ose men are,
that are True to the Interest of the ^^untry. Syrs, Those men, that will do all
they (...), for the Reformation of the Country, from ^^norance, from Idleness,
from Dishonesty, from ^^cleanness, from all Profaneness, and Paganism, and from
Drunkenness, and all the Execrable In^^ntives thereunto; THAT, That is the man!
those men are True to the Interest of the Country; (...) indeed, our Peace with
God, is our True In^^rest. Nor do I, by saying this, go to set by, (...)
English Tenderness of our Liberties, from the ^eputation, of a Commendable,
yea, and a Ne^essary Quality, in all that we call to Serve the Public. If
there should be any Sons of Esau, that will not be Tender, and Tenacious of
such precious Liberties, as the Country is, by a Royal Grant, at this Day,
priviledg'd withal, those persons also cannot be True to the Interest of the
Country. But, still it must be asserted, That ou^ Best Friends, are those, that
most Vigorousl^ Endeavor to Restrain, and Redress, and R^^form, that Liberty
of Sinning, which men are to ready to give unto themselves. Now, to Inv^^gorate
our Endeavors after this Reformation* Let us give Earnest Heed unto a
Five-fold Ad^monition.

First, What though we shall not Agree about E^very Thing? Is there Nothing
therefore to b^ done, for the Reformation of a Land Pining ^^way in its
Iniquities? Possibly, We are ye^ somewhat in the Dark, about that Quaestion*
What is the Controversy that the Lord Jes^^ Christ has with New England? And
it might occasion some Controversy our selves with one another, to pull that
Quaestion, under too clo^^ and hard, and arbitrary Disquisitions. How^^ver,
There are several Provocations to God, (...) Evident, and so Notorious, among
us, that me^thinks, we cannot be to seek, for many Cause of the Judgments that
are daily breaking o^ us; and where we see those uncontestable Causes o^ Wrath,
Oh! Why may we not Unite, as one man, for the Removal of them? It Is true, We
don't Know all Things; But shall we therefore Do Nothing? Let us Examine, How
far we can go, hand in hand, for the Reformation of what we do plainly see to
be amiss; and what we see not, the Lord will Teach us, that wherein we have
done Iniquity, we may do so no more. A Lady of a very suspected Chastity,
^postatising to Popery, complained unto a ^rotestant Minister, that the Reason
of her ^postasy was, Because the Scriptures were not ^^ain enough, to have
their Sense determined by ^^ivate Christians, and therefore she must Embrace
Religion, where an Infallible Judge could be had (...) all: but the Protestant
Minister, gave her (...) sharp Reply, Good Madam, say not so; For that can be
more plain, than one Instance, that I (...) give you instead of many; It Is
that, Thou ^alt not commit Adultery. Thus, when, Re^^rmation; Reformation! is
urgently called for, ^erhaps, 'twill be objected; It is not plain to us; that
are the Things most Needful to be Reformed, (...) what are the ways most
likely to Reform (...)? Now, suppose a man should make this ^eply; Syrs, Can
any thing be more plain than (...)? That except the Drinking Houses throughout
(...) Country come under more of Regulation, and ^^cept the Town-Dwellers in
many places be allowed (...) to Ly Tippling at such Houses, all the Evil
Con^equences of slothful Drunkenness, are like to Drown (...) in Confusion. Or,
suppose, a man should make this Reply; Syrs, can any thing be more plain than
this? That except we leave off Oppressing one another, in our Dealings, and
leave off our Abusing and Injuring of them that serve the Public, above the
rest of our Neighbors, the Gra^e God will still Interpose His Revenges upon
us. (...) suppose a man should make this Reply; (...) Can any thing be more
plain than this? That (...) men would every where set themselves to the (...)
ordering of their own Families, and Revive gen^^rally, such Family Prayer, and
such Family Instr^^ction, and such Family Government, as our (...) Planters
Exemplified unto us, the whole Countr^^ would presently be mended thereupon.
All th^^ (...) shall say is; There are plain matters, where^^ we all Know the
will of our Heavenly Lord* and oh! to what Stripes do we Expose (...) selves,
if we cannot Agree plainly and ful^^ to promote those matters! The Last Queen,
that adorned the British Throne, even the Late Queen Mary, of Glorious Memory,
was in this thing a Pattern most worthy of our Imitation* She would say, She
feared there might be some secret Sins, that might Lie at the Root, and Blas^
all the English Affairs; but then she would come off and say, There is so much
Sin visible, that there is little Need of Divination concerning what may be
secret. And yet I will venture to go on and say,

Secondly, Are we sure that we have no Secret Sins to be Repented of? Let us,
with all Humility of Soul, Enquire after them, that so, nothing may be wanting
to the Reformation of the Land. There was once a People in a Wilderness, who
being harassed by sore Desolati^^s, could thereupon say, in Psalm 90.8. Thou
have (...) our Secret Sins, in the Light of thy Countenance. ^here is at all
Times, a Room for that Exclamation, How Unsearchable are the Judgments of
(...)! And at some Times, it is peculiarly difficult (...) us, vain Mortals, to
Search out the causes of those Judgments. There were such Diabolical ^^actices
among the Israelites of old, that it is said, therefore the Lord was very Angry
with them, and ^emoved them out of His Sight: and yet it is also (...), of
those things, in 2 King. 17.9. They did ^^cretly those things, which were not
Right, against (...) Lord their God. Yea, There was a Time, when the Judgments
of God, made all the Armies of Israel to fly and fall before them, so that ^he
Hearts of the People melted, and became as (...): No doubt, the Sins usual in
other Armies, and an abundance of Debaucheries and of other Disorders, and
Distempers were among them: Nevertheless, These were not the Accursed Thing,
that procured 'em all their Trouble; nor did any one man among all their
Leaders understand what was that Accursed Thing, until God Wonderfully helped
them to discover it. Yea, There was a Time, when the Judgments of God pursued a
whole Company of Sea faring people; a Storm came upon them, that had like to
have Sunk them all: No doubt, they were as faulty and as vicious, as any other
Seafaring Folks use to be: Nevertheless, the Storm came for the Sins, of that
person, that one would have least suspected among them all; than man was the
Jonas, whose Error had Exposed them all. So Uunsearchable are the Judgments of
God! And that which renders them yet more Unsearchable is, The wondrous
Distance of Time, which the Lord may take, to punish a people, for Former
Iniquities, and even (as that passage of Scripture which I am now quoting, may
be Translated) for the Iniquities of those that have gone before them. The
Children of Jacob were once brought into astonishing Distresses; and in those
Distresses, Then Joseph's Bloody Coat is laid before their Eyes; The Hard Things
done by them to a Brother of theirs, Things done Twenty years ago, so came unto
Remembrance, as to make them cry out with Horror, We are verily Guilty! If none
of all these Instances are enough to perplex our Thoughts, about the
Unsearchable Judgments of God, I Will give you one more. I take Notice, That when
David Numbered the People, there was a Great Sin cleaving to that matter; and it
was not Holy David alone, but it was the People, whom the Lord was in that
matter chiefly offended at. God had Required, That when the People were
Numbered, Every man should give a Ransom for his Soul unto the Lord, That there
be no Plague among them (says he) when thou Numbrest them. Now, because the
Lord had a Controversy with that People, for their Former Iniquities, he leaves
David, the Best man in the Nation, to act in this weighty matter, without the
Advice of the Priests of the Lord; Hence, though it was not a Sin simply to
Number the People, yet the People not being put upon their part, that they
might be Ransomed from a Plague among them, it became a Sin and a Snare unto
them: Now, as an effect hereof, I take Notice of a strange Threatening, in 2 Samuel 24.13. Shall seven years of Famine come unto thee, in thy Land? Whereas,
the Threatening runs no more than so, in 1 Chronicles. 21.12. Three years of Famine.
I pray, How shall these two passages be Reconciled? Attend, and you shall see a
very Remarkable Thing, in the Reconciliation. There had been Three Years of a
Famine upon the People, for an old Sin, of slaying the Gibeonites; God thus
chastised the people, for a Sin that had been Committed more than Forty years
before: and while the Fourth Year was Running, there was that New Provocation,
about the Numbering of the People, added unto the former: and that Fourth year
being well nigh Expired, Three years more of a Famine denounced, make up the
Seven: The first of which seven years Famine, was the year that next followed
after the Rebellion of Absalom: as That was Forty Years, after the Anointing of
David at Bethlehem. Oh! What a world of Intricacies, were there, in these
Dispensations of Providence! The only Thing, that I design here to Recommend,
from the mention of these Intricate and Mysterious Matters is, A most
Self-jealous and Self-loathing, Humility of Soul, in our Enquiries, after those
Things, that are to be acknowledged as Provoking Evils, e're peace will be
Restored unto our Land* This is very sure, that this Land has often had its
Days of Temptation; and when the People of God come with Second Thoughts to
Reflect upon those days, they often see cause to cry out, Peccavimus omnes: we
have one and all been out of the way. On the whole, The Temper which I would
propound is This; Let us not be without some Suspicion, that our God may be
Angry with us, for some Evil or other, which is not yet universally
Acknowledged: But yet let us manage that Suspicion so Humbly, so Modestly, so
Seriously, that we may not thereby add a New Evil unto the old score. It Is very
certain, That when a Secret Cause of a Divine Controversy, is Enquired after,
there is nothing more usual, than for men to Enquire not wisely concerning that
matter. An Assembly of Lutherans coming together to Enquire, after the Cause of
the Judgments which God had brought upon their Churches, most unhappily
determined, That their not paying Respect enough unto Images, in their
Churches, was one cause of the Lords Controversy with them. Unhappy Enquirers;
Instead of your Dream that you had not Sinned enough against the Second
Commandment, you should have thought whether you had not Sinned too much
against the Fourth. But we hear not a word, concerning their universal
prophanations of the Lord's Day to this Day. That which I therefore say, is
This; In a just Apprehension of our own Darkness, and Weakness, Let us make
that Prayer to our Lord, Lord, show us wherefore thou contendest with us. Let
us then have our Debates, with one another hereupon; but let us come to those
Debates, always with a Disposition to judge our selves rather than any one
else, and a Resolation to take any shame to our selves, that Scripture and
Reason, shall cast upon us. Wherefore,

Thirdly* In pursuing the Designs of Reformation, why should not Every man,
even Every one concern himself, according to the Capacities of the Station,
wherein God has placed them? That a General Reformation may be effected, Every
man should begin with Himself; and if Every man would mend one, the Emendation
of Manners among us, would indeed be very general. Men should be as desirous in
point of Repentance, as they use to be in point of Charity, to Begin at Home!
Self-Reformation every where conscientiously endeavored, would prevent a
double Evil, very common under the Sun. Sometimes, men make a Noise about
Reformation, when they do but follow the Dictates of their own Malice and
Revenge, in all the Noise. There was once, a Shimei, who, seeing the Judgments
of God come upon the Land, he presently fell to Railing at the chief Rulers in
the Land: he falls upon David, with such outcries, as those, in 2. Sam. 16.8.
Thou Bloody m^n, the Lord has now Returned all the Blood of the House of Saul,
in whose stead thou have Reigned. This poor man, was himself of the House of
Saul, and because he thought his own House had met with some hard measure from
the Government, he falls to Reviling as if the Land had no Sins, but those of
the Government then to answer for. But I can tell you, That he was egregiously
mistaken! And men had need beware, lest by giving way to their own exasperated
Spirits and Passions, they become Shimei's, in exclaming for a Reformation.
Sometimes again, there is a cry made about Reformation, by men that only cover
their own vile Hypocrisy, by the Diversion of such a cry. It Is very clear,
that there are Vanities of Apparel to be Rebuked and Retrenched among us; those
little Female, foolish Vanities, are utterly a Fault among us: the Holy Angels
of the Lord Jesus Christ, are doubtless grieved, when they see the Flags, and
Signs of a vain mind, hung out by the children of men; else the Lord would
never have said, as in Isa. 3.16. Because the Daughters of Zion are Haughty,
and walk with stretched forth Necks, therefore the Lord will take away the
Bravery of their Tinkling Ornaments, and thy men shall fall by the Sword. But
now there are persons, who are themselves Drones, or Thieves, or Cheats, or
Liars, of Drunkards, or Fornicators, or some other way horribly Depraved
Creatures: And these, to quiet their own guilty Consciences, will Declame very
bitterly against certain Vanities in other people, and perhaps will with more
pride than Scripture, crowd in many lawful and needful Things among those
Vanities: These are the Things that want Reformation, they say; But thou
would say it, with a better Grace, O man, if some of the zeal were spent
upon thy own Enormities. However, Thus they will fall into a fiery rage about
those Things, As if nothing else brought the Judgments of God upon the Land.
But that which we are first of all to do, is This: It becomes every one of us,
first of all to Judge themselves, and throw the First Stone, at our own
^niquity. It was greatly Resented, i. ^ Jer. 8.6. I hearkened, and heard, but
they spoke not aright; No man repented him of his Wickedness saying, What have
I done? Then, Oh! Then, shall we speak aright about the Reformation incumbent
on us, when Every man shall say, What have I to do, toward the Reforming of my
self, and of my own Family? Let Every one set before himself, a Catalogue of
Things Forbidden, and of Things Required, in the Ten Commandments; our ordinary
Catechisms will advantageously set before us, the Glass of the Law, wherein we
are to take a view of our selves; Thereat, Let us with a secret Self
Examination find out our own Delinquencies, and so Request for, and Rely on,
the Aids of Grace, for a Self Reformation. Having done thus much, we are then
bravely qualified for the Doing of more: Let us now, as far as ever we are
capable, Extend our Influences. Householders, They are first of all to Rectify
all that is amiss, where they reckon themselves a sort of Kings, that is to
say, in their own H^uses. Oh! Ask your selves, whether you have no Bad Orders
to be Rectified there? Whether your Devotions there might not be more
Edifyingly carried on? Whether your Children and Servants may not have a better
Education bestowed upon them? Upon which, let all the World besides take what
course they will, do you Resolve, As for me, and my House, we will serve the
Lord. But is this all? No; 'Twould be a very Laudable Thing, for the Worshipful
Justices in the several Counties, now and then to hold a Consultation, upon
that Question, What may we do, to Reform any Spreading Evils? Gentlemen, I take
Leave humbly to Represent it unto You, That you have singular Opportunities, to
Reform almost all the Growing Evils in the midst of us; and such is your
Wisdom, that without any further Advice from us, You need but a little
Discourse now and then with one another, to be informed of Your own
Opportunities: But, Let me say unto You, That these Opportunities are precious
Talents, for which You are Accountable to the Eternal Son of God. The same that
was done by Iehoshaphat for his Land, has in You, been done by the Lord Jesus
Christ, for this Land* He has set Judges throughout the Land; and now His
words from His Excellent Glory, unto every one of you, are like those, in 2 Chronicles. 19.6. Take heed what you do; For ye Judge not for man, but for the Lord:
Let the Fear of the Lord be upon you; Act in the Fear of the Lord, faithfully,
and with a perfect Heart; ye shall warn^men, that they Trespass not against the
Lord, and so Wrath come upon you, and upon your Brethren: The Levites also
shall be Officers before you, Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with the
Good. But those Consultations for a Reformation of pernicious Things among us,
which have been Recommended unto these Worshipful Persons, may likewise be most
profitably practiced, by the Grand-Jury-men, the Constables, the Tithing-men,
in their several Precincts. Syrs, If you also would have your Stated, or
Frequent Meetings, to consider, What may be done by us, to Reform any Common
Evils? You might be wonderfully Serviceable.

But above all, O ye Watchmen in our Churches; It Is from You, that the Lord
Jesus Christ expects the most critical watchfulness, in Advising your several
Churches and Charges, of the several Evils, that are to be Reformed among them.
That which you have lately been doing toward Gospellizing those Out-lying
parts of the Country, has been very worthily done: And, I do humbly pray the
Recompencing Benediction of Heaven, upon those Worthy Merchants and others in
this place, who by their pious Expenses have assisted the Undertaking. I wish
those parts of the Country might now be effectually put in mind, of the
concernment that lies upon them to make a due Improvement of the Price put into
their Hand. If any that belong, or travel to those parts, are now in this
Assembly, I pray, carry them this Advice, That if they slight the Gospel now
sent unto them, there is Danger, the Lord Jesus Christ will never grant them
another Offer of it; no, there is Danger that they will never be Healed, but be
given to Salt for ever: there is Danger, that a Wrath unto the uttermost will
overtake them. And now, there are further Instances of our Watchfulness, over
our own Flocks, to be maintained. It may be, 'twould be one very significant
piece of our Watchfulness, over the Churches, if some safe methods might be
taken, that all those who go forth unto the Work of the Ministry, might carry
with them some Testimonial of their Qualifications, from fit Judges of those
Qualifications; and that Raw, Rude, Lewd Young Men, and profane Sons of Eli,
may not go forth, to make a Living of their Preaching, and Ruin Christianity
among us, by not Living according to their Preaching. Yea, I do earnestly
Beseech the Congregations of New England, That, if they have any Regard unto
the Things of their Peace, they would none of them, Invite, or Accept, any man,
to constant Preaching among them, unless that some Holy, and Faithful, and Able
Pastors of other Churches, do, upon a thorough Trial, Testify, That such a man
is Worthy to Labor, and be very Highly Esteemed for his Labor, among them.
Nor is this All that we have to do. Can we not, in Visiting our Flocks, inform
our selves about the Morals of our People, in every Quarter, and thereupon both
Publicly and Privately set our selves to cure all that shall be found amiss!
May we Lift up our voice like a Trumpet, against every thing that we see
offensive unto our Lord Jesus Christ; and let us therefore, by the
Anticipations of our Faith, have in our Ears continually, the Sound of the Last
Trumpet, which will fetch us before the Tribunal of our Lord. Much, very, very
much will be done toward a Glorious Reformation, by our Discharging the work
of our Ministry, as under the Awe of that most awful Consideration, in Heb.
13.17. They watch for Souls, as they that must give an Account. I Remember, It Is
Related concerning the Holy Mr. Herbert Palmer, That observing of Sundry Evils
to have been become common in his Town of Canterbury, he took such Pains to
convince the People of those Evils, that at last, they generally Signed an
Instrument, wherein they Declared their Dislike of those Evils, and their
Purpose to take heed of them forever; and a wondrous Reformation ensued upon
it. Syrs, who can tell, how far the concern of Reformation may possess the
Hearts of our People, in almost every Town, if we took due pains to convince
them, and persuade them; yea, if our Personal, Prudent, Loving Admonitions,
might but operate, upon that one part of Neighbors, the Innkeepers, who can
tell how far the Desired Reformation might be Befriended and Attained! But this
leads me into another Article of our Discourse.

Fourthly. To Assist the Designs of Reformation among us, Why should we not
Review, and Renew, and Apply, the Obligation, which is by Covenant Lying upon
us thereunto? If one would say at once, what it is, that has procured the
Indignation of Heaven against us, to be written in such Dismal and Bloody
Characters, methinks, I could find a passage in our Psalter, that should
Expressively enough describe it. While the Time was not yet come, that the
Israelites in Egypt should be delivered out of their Difficulties, the Active
Colony of Ephraimites formed a Lively Expedition, against the Philistines to
the Northward, from whom they had Received many Injuries; they reckoned
themselves Numerous and Powerful enough, to attack the Canaanites in their own
Country; but they came off unhappy loosers in it; and the Psalmist has told
us, what was the reason of the loss that befell them: It Was, as in Psalm. 78.10
Because, They kept not the Covenant of God. This I venture to say, whatever
else may be said; Covenant Breaking, I say, Covenant Breaking, or, the Neglect,
and Contempt of that Covenant, even, the New Covenant, wherein the Lord Jesus
Christ, has been tendering Himself unto us; This, is the most comprehensive
Cause of all our Disasters. I will say so, as long as I can Read that horrid
Picture of our own condition, in Isa. 24.4. -- the Lord makes the Land Empty,
and makes it wast, and turns it upside down, and Scatters abroad the
Inhabitants thereof; The Land mourns and fades. And why is all this? Because
they have broken the everlasting Covenant; therefore the Inhabitants of the
Land are Burned, and few men are left. Wherefore* if we would be Recovered out
of our Condition, it is the Covenant of our God, that must Recover us, and
Reform us. It Is imagined by some, That when the General Assembly of Israel
here, Poured out Water before, the Lord, they used a Rite of making of a
Covenant; q. d. If we Return to our Sins, let our Blood be thus Poured out.
This we all know; A Renovation of Covenant, has been always pressed, as a
very special and Important Expedient of Reformation. The Covenant of Grace,
which is Brought unto us all, is very particularly Sealed and Owned, with such
as have been Admitted unto any Ecclesiastical Privileges among us. Let all
Persons, by the Help of Grace, give the consent of their Souls unto this
Covenant; Consent, O Immortal Souls, That God should be your God, and be unto
you, better than all your Idols; that the Lord Jesus Christ should be your
Prophet, Priest, and King; that the Holy Spirit should Possess you, and incline
you to Glorify Him according to the Gracious Terms of this Covenant for ever.
But then, Let them that have Enjoyed the Seals of this Covenant, again, and
again, with all possible Solemnity Repeat the Consent of their Souls thereunto.
Syrs, A most wondrous Reformation would follow hereupon Immediately! Now, In
the doing of this Thing, Why should not our Churches, most Explicitly Apply,
the Covenant of Grace, unto all the Designs of Reformation, as well as they
Apply it unto the particular Designs, of a Particular Church State before the
Lord? Our Covenant will to the most Edification, and the most Satisfaction, be
Renewed, when we most of all Express the Spirit of the New^Cov^^ant in all that
we do. Now, It Is the Spirit of the New Covenant, for us to Acknowledge, That
our Justification only by Faith in the Righteousness of our Savior and our
Surety, does powerfully oblige us to Depart from all Iniquity: And, Then, to
Acknowledge, That this and that Evil Thing, whereof we are advised, is an
Iniquity, from which we do, with our very Hearts within us, Desire to Depart
for ever: But with such Acknowledgments, we are to Protest in all Sincerity of
Soul, That we ask the Grace of Heaven, to Watch against every such Abominable
Thing, both in our selves, and in one another. What one Christian upon Earth
would scruple to consent unto such Acknowledgments and Protestations? Now, if
our Churches, yea, and other Societies too, would thus use the Covenant of
Grace, with pertinent Applications thereof, to every New Iniquity, that they
Discern arising among them, how gloriously might the Spir^^ of Grace, then Lift
up a Standard against every Flood of Iniquity! As fast as we see any (...)
gaining of ground upon us, Let us make our Evangelical Acknowledgments and our
Evangelical Protestations, against that Sin; These are the Sanctified Ways in
which the Almighty Spirit of Christ, will make us Conquerors, and more than
Conquerors, over that Sin for ever. And shall I add this one thing more? There
are many sorts of Officers among us, that are under very special Oaths, unto
God, for Well-Doing; and these would surely Do well, to have Copies of their
Oaths, well Explained unto them, often before their Eyes. Our Honorable
Counselors are under the Oath of God* That they will to the best of their
Judgment at all Times freely give their Advice. Our Worshipful Justices are
under the Oath of God, That they will Dispense Justice equally and impartially
in all cases, and for no cause forbear truly to do their Office. Our Grand
Jurymen are Sworn by the Ever living God, That they will diligently Enquire,
and true Presentment make, of all things given them in Charge; and present no
man for Envy, Hatred, or Malice, nor leave any man unpresented, for Love, Fear,
Favor and Affection, or Hope of Reward. Our Constables are Sworn by the
Ever-living God, That in all that the Law has made part of their Office, they
will deal (...) and faithfully, whilst they are in Office, ^^^hout any sinister
Respects of Favor or Displea^^^e. And are not our Tithing-men, under an Oath
of the like Importance: Yea, I suppose, there is hardly a Clerk of a Company,
but he is under the Bonds of a Dreadful Oath, to Discharge his Duty faithfully.
Now, This one thing would exceedingly contribute unto the Reformation of the
Land* That men often Read and Think, what they are Sworn to Do: For this would
put the Good men, upon more usual Thoughts in themselves, What Good they may do
in their several Places for other men? It is mentioned, as a Commendable
property, in a Citizen of Zion, Psalm. 15.4. He swears to his own Hurt, and
Changes not. It may be rendered, He Swears to an Ill man, and Changes not.
If he have made a Lawful Promise, though it be to a Wicked man, a Pagan, an
Enemy, he will not reckon that the Wicked unworthiness of the man, will Release
him from his Promise. But, Syrs, You that are Sworn to a Good God, and Sworn to
a Good King, and Sworn to a Good Work, and Sworn, for the Service of a Good
People; how much ought you to Study, that you may be the Genuine Citizens of
Zion, for your Fidelity! The Land will mourn, because of Swearing, if men
ordinarily, Lift up their Hands to the Eternal God, in Oaths to Deal faithfully
and honestly, but Swear indeed Hand over Head, without any After-care to
observe their Oaths: As on the other Hand, For men to Fear an Oath, is one way
to keep clear of many Fearful Sins and Evils. Beho^^ the Reformation, that is
to be labored for.

But then, Lastly, to put an Edge upon these Things; That we may be in Earnest
about the Necessary Reformation, Let us consider the loud calls of Heaven, that
most earnestly bespeak it of us. The Necessity of Reformation, is a Thing that
has been long and often Preached unto us, ever since that the Judgments of God,
began to make us more generally miserable; but the Judgments of God, are going
on still to further and further Degrees of misery upon us, while the Cares of a
Necessary Reformation, continue fast asleep in our Souls. We do one year after
another feel the formidable Executions, of those Threatenings, in Lev. 26 23. If
ye will not be Reformed by me, through these things, but will walk contrary
unto me, Then will I also walk contrary unto you, and I will Punish you yet
Seven Times for your Sins. Our most Intolerable Indisposition, to do any
Significant Thing, toward our Necessary Reformation, has been already
Revenged, with Sore Plagues, and of long Continuance; Yea, The Lord has made
our Plagues Wonderful, for this our Obdurate and Obstinate Impaenitency.
Wherefore, As they cried unto Pharaoh, Let the men go; know thou not yet
that Egypt is destroyed? Even such a cry must I this Day awaken you withal;
Know you not, that New England, is very near destroyed, by the Sins that have
been Harbored among us? Oh! Let them Go! Let them Go! Lest we perish in them.
Christians, Let us take Warning. There have been many Thousands, I say, many
Thousands, of Churches in Europe, not much less famous for the Protestant
Religion, than that little Handful and Hundred of Churches, whereof this
Country is composed; Every one of which, have been made an utter Desolation,
within these few years; even since the Time that so Young a Man as I am, came
into the World. And, is not the Fate of those Churches, a Solemn Warning to us,
in these Ends of the World? I say again, Let us take the Warning, and, Repent,
Lest we likewise Perish. Don't you see, the Tokens of the Divine Wrath against
us, arise apace toward an horrible Extremity? O Lord, They who dwell in these
uttermost parts, are afraid at thy Tokens! I Will say only these Two Things. One
thing is this; If there be not an Extraordinary Appearance of God, from Heaven,
to give a check unto a Great Leviathan, who is at this Day Troubling all the
European Waters, New England will be soon overwhelmed in Desolation. Another
thing is this; If we should have such a Summer this year, as we had the last,
for the Unseasonable Weather, which, alas, hitherto does hold, upon the Fruits
of the Earth, the Desolation of New England will be more horrid, than any
Tongue, has hitherto Expressed, or Heart Conceived. On every side of us then,
we have that cry Roaring in our Ears, Reformation, or Desolation! Reformation,
or Desolation! Oh! It Is High Time to Awake out of our Sleep, and to do some
Signal Thing for the Reformation of our Land. Consider, O our Zerubbabels, O
our Joshua's, and O all ye People of the Land: Necessity is laid upon us, and
W^ unto us if we Do it not.

And now, if these calls of Heaven, are, by your Tears, and by your Prayers,
and by your Cares, duly complied withal, there is a twofold Benediction, from
our Lord Jesus Christ, our High Priest, who went away from hence to Heaven,
Blessing of us, that I do from the Word of His, now before us, Conclude withal.

I. You shall have Samuels to be Judges over you. How vast was the Felicity of
Israel, when a Samuel, who formerly had been a most faithful Preacher, by whom
they were always advised of their True Interest, now became a Ruler, who so
acquitted himself in his Government over them, that when he came to put off his
Government, he could make that Appeal to all the World, Behold, Here I am;
Witness against me before the Lord; whom have I defrauded! whom have I
oppressed? or of whose Hand have I Received any Bribe, to blind mine Eyes
withal? Many such a Samuel will thy God give unto thee, O New England, if thou
thus Turn unto Him. It was a Sentiment, for which we have the Authority, of the
greatest persons, both among the Ancients and among the Moderns, who count that
they have also for it, the greatest Authority of the Sacred Scriptures
themselves That every Province is under the special care of some Angel, by a
singular Deputation of Heaven assigned thereunto. But besides that Invisible
Gua^dian, our God, upon our Turn to Him, will give us a GOVERNOR, that shall
be like a Guardian Angel unto us, Employing his whole Strength to Guard us from
all Disasters. Although we are Invested with a Royal Charter, which leaves not
any Governor capable to Enact one Law, or Levy one Tax, or Constitute one
Counselor, or one Judge, or one Justice, or one Sheriff, without such a
Negative of the People upon him, as the People are not in the other American
Plantations, no, nor in Ireland, no, nor in England it self, privileged
withal; Nevertheless, we shall have cause to Receive a Governor that like a
Nehemiah, shall Seek our Welfare, with all Thankfulness to God, and the King,
as a very Rich Blessing from Heaven unto us. We have Already, and Hitherto,
Enjoyed that Blessing, above any people at this Day under the whole Expanse of
Heaven; and, if our God be not Angry with us, we shall with such a Blessing
still be, A People Saved of the Lord. Our God will* send us a Governor, who
will cast a Favorable, and a Fatherly Aspect, upon all that is valuable to us;
a Governor, who shall have the brave Motto of the Emperor Hadrian Engraved
upon his Heart, Not for my self, but for my People. And with such a Governor,
He will give us, Our Judges as at the First, and our Counselors as at the
Beginning.

II. God will Thunder with a great Thunder upon your Philistian Adversaries,
and gloriously Discomfit them. The Lord had promised unto His People, that if
they would Go up duly to Worship Him, at His Tabernacle, He would keep off the
Invasion of their Adversaries; (...) now when they were together at Mizpeh, He
fulfilled that Promise, by a strange Discomfiture of the Invading Philistines.
New England never was without its Adversaries; but at this Day, we are more
Eminently under the Alarm, The Philistines are upon thee, O Land much
Maligned! Now, by o^r Conforming our selves unto the Will of God, we shall get
Him on our side; The Almighty would then soon scatter our Enemies with His Hot
Thunderbolts, and Thunder them into Ruin for ever And that Sentence which the
Emperor Maximilian wrote upon his Table, we shall see written on all our
Houses, and all our Vessels, and all our Fields, If God be for us, who can be
against us? By comparing of certain passages in the Bible, not commonly
observed or understood, it appears, that there was a General Circumcision of
the Israelites in Goshen; and at that very Time, God sent the Three Days
Darkness upon the Egyptians; God sent Three Days of Darkness and Horror upon
the Egyptian Adversaries, that they might then be Able to Do Nothing against
His People, who Rebelled not against His Word. Oh! might there be a General
Obedience of New England unto the Lord Jesus Christ, that Lord of Heaven would
soon Darken our Adversaries, with His Plagues upon them. Hear, O New England,
Hear thy Lord, saying over thee, O that my people would Hearken to me; I would
then soon Turn my Hand upon their Adversaries; but their own Time should Remain
for ever and ever.

THE CLOSE. Containing a Relation, of the Wonderful Deliverance, newly
received, by the KING, the Three Kingdoms, and all the English Dominions.
BUT, Behold, O my dear People of New England, while I am telling you, of the
Thunder to fall upon our Philistean Adversaries, there do this very Week arrive
unto us the Joyful and the Wondrous Tidings, which give us a Stupendous
Instance of this very matter; The Philistines drew near to Battle against
Israel, but the Lord Thundered with a Great Thunder on that Day, upon the
Philistines, and discomfited them, and they were Smitten before Israel. It is
but just now that we have Advice, from the other side of the Atlantic Ocean,
That Great Britain is Miraculously delivered, from the utmost Perils, of
becoming an Enslaved, and perhaps a Dragoened, Province of the French Empire,
or, at least from a Bloody War, that must have cost many Thousands of the Best
Lives in the Nations, to have shaken off the Chains, which a French Force would
have laid upon them: And then, I am sure, that thou, O little New England,
have, above all the American Plantations, a share in this Deliverance; for if
the Great-House, whereof thou art but a poor Leanto, had fallen, how horribly
had thou been crushed in the Ruins (...) it! O come, and Behold the Works of
the Lord, (...) Desolations which He is bringing upon the Fren^^ Philistines,
by the Hand of His Omnipotency There has been all along, a large party of
B^^gtted and Besotted People, the Sons of Nimr^^^ in the English Nation, who
have long bee^ seeking to overthrow those things, wherein (...) Real Welfare of
the Nation lies; and, Many Time have they afflicted me, from my Youth, may
England now say; Many a Time have they afflicted me, from my Youth; Yet have
they not Prevailed against me. It may be those Adversaries, were never more
confident of their prevailing, than in their late Execrable Plot, for the
Murdering of our Illustrious King WILLIAM, in that horrid Juncture, when a
French Army, with an Abdicated Prince in the Head of it, was coming over to
join his Friends in England, and have made that Land such a stage of Blood,
Fire, and Horror, as it never was before. But we have now appointed, by the
Authority of this Province a Day of Public and Solemn THANKSGIVING unto the
God of Heaven, [It was Observed, June 16.]
for the Miraculous Defeat of that Plot; and upon the Invitation thereof, give
me leave now to Entertain you, with a brief Relation of that Wonderful
Providence, which has now been after an astonishing manner displayed, for the
Preservation of us all.

The miserable Malcontents had for a long while been fomenting and
augmenting, Discontents throughout the Kingdom, in hopes, by the means of those
Confusions, to Recover all that they had lost, in the late Happy Revolution.
The Kingdom had been long Disastered with many Losses; besides the Heavy Taxes
that lay upon it: and the Prodigious Depravation, brought, as it were at Once,
upon the Coin current throughout the Kingdom, coming upon all the rest, had
thrown the Nation into such a Ferment, that the Exquisite Wisdom and Success of
the Parliament, in since getting through it, is to be annumerated perhaps among
the Greatest Appearances of God, for His Poor People there: Moreover, There had
been particular methods (...), through the Artifice of these Incendiaries, to
Distress, yea, to Destroy, the Sea faring part of the Kingdom, that so a French
Invasion might be facilitated: Nor were they unwilling to Encourage themselves
from a Bone of contention cast between the Two Kingdoms of England, and
Scotland, about their Trade: And the Servants of the late King, had in Great
Numbers pretendedly Deserted him; Returning Home, that they might Live Quietly
under a Mild Government, though not intending, it seems, To, Study to be Quiet.
It was at this Critical Time, That Great Britain, with all the Dominions
pertaining thereunto, was upon the point of being overwhelmed in, A Conspiracy
for the Assassinating of His Majesty's Person, to encourage an Invasion from
France, at the same Time intended, for the utter Subversion of the Protestant
Religion, and the Liberties of the Kingdom.

It being understood in France, that man^ Hundred Ships of Merchantmen, were
settin^ out from England, for diverse parts of the Wor^ and that a great Convoy
was also going to the Streights, whereby the Kingdom would have been left
extremely Naked, immediately in February last, near Thirty Thousand French were
drawn down to Dunkirk, and Calice, and other Ports, Headed by the Late King
James, with an huge Fleet, wherein were between Three and Four Hundred
Transport Spips, to bring them over, unto the Thames^Mouth, Sussex, or Kent;
and some unto the North, to strengthen those that should make an Insurrection
there. They Embarked, before it was known in England; but the Lord Jesus
Christ, who Commands the Winds, did by Cross winds, constrain them to stand in
again: In the mean time, the Duke of Wittenberg, having obtained some knowledge
of the French Invasion, presently sent over to King WILLIAM, the Notice of it,
by a Messenger, in a Fisher^boat, where, by lying (...) among the Nets, he so
escaped the French Inspection* that he was able to inform the King, of the
Nets, which the common Enemy had laid for Him, and for more than Three
Kingdoms. At this Instant, Admiral Russel being dispatched, on this vast
occasion to reinforce the English Fleet, found, that by a surprising Hand of
Heaven, our Merchantmen, with the (...) had been out at Sea, but were by
con^tan^ Weather dr^^^en back into their Harbors; (...) most seasonable
Accident, the Fleet, which else might have been a prey to the French, was
within a few hours, all Manned, and Fitted out; and immediately they Blocked up
the French Fleet in their Harbors, with no little damage to them at the
present, besides the future Devastations, which may attend, the total
Disappointment of the Descent by them Designed.

But this was not all. The Almighty Lord JESUS CHRIST, has Employed the mighty
WILLIAM, as an Hook in the Nostrils of that French Leviathan, who has been so
long Troubling the Waters of Europe; and the Conspirators thought it impossible
for them to do a more significant Thing, than to get Him out of the way. It was
therefore concerted and resolved, among a Desperate Crew of Ruffians in
England, that in February last, they would make an Attempt upon that Royal
Life, upon which the Fate of all Europe does at this Day depend, (...) may be
more than upon that of any one (...) Living in the World. After several (...)
held among those Wretches, about this wretch^ed Enterprise, it was at length
Agreed. Tha^ upon the Kings Return from Richmond, (...) would, at the end of a
Lane, by Turnam (...) a place which they not only marked, but (...) for that
Hellish purpose, with Forty five (...) sons on Horseback, fall upon the Kings
(...) and in spite of His Guards, whereof some, (...) said, were in the
Conspiracy, Assassinate Him; upon the Accomplishment whereof, the Printed
Accounts report, that a Signal, was to have been given to the French Coast, by
a Fire on Dover Cliff; And indeed, there had been seen Fire enough, if this
Barbarous and Villainous Thing had been Accomplished! The Tenth of February, was
the Day first Appointed, for the perpetration of this Comprehensive Murder: But
upon the failing of some circumstances, it was put off unto the Fifteenth. In
the mean while our Lord JESUS CHRIST, who Gives Salvation unto Kings, thus
wonderfully Delivered His Servant our King, from the Hurtful Sword! There were
Two or Three of the Conspirators, who, as it seems, unknown to each other,
discovered the Treason; what it was that put them, upon the making of the
Discovery, I can at present, say no further, than that the (...) Printed
thereupon inform us, That their Threatening one of their Company, To kill him
(...) his being Absent from some of their Cabals, did contribute not a little
thereunto: though a Generous Abhorrence of so barbarous an Acti^n; as the
Murder of the King, inspiring the (...) of one, to whom the Design had been
^ommunicated, seems to have been the true (...) of the Discovery. The King
being (...) in the Truth of the matter, took (...), have the rest (...) in the
most convictive circumstances; for upon finding Things, the Fif^eenth of
February look suspiciously upon them, they began to fly from the Storm, which
they feared thus breaking upon them: and upon their Trial since, the Fact has
been so convictively proved upon them, that sundry of them, have been with the
(...) satisfaction of the Nation, Executed.

In this Plot, things were so laid, that the Adversaries, were very secure, of
carrying all before them. It cannot but create an Horror mixed with Pleasure,
to reflect on the Assurance, which the Adversaries, both at home and abroad,
had, that their machinations could not miscarry. It is affirmed, That on the
Day when the Plot was judged ripe for Execution, One of the Nonjurant Parsons,
Preached on those words, in Jer. 46.10. This is the Day of the Lord God of
Hosts, a Day of Vengeance, that He may Avenge Himself of His Adversaries; and
the Sword shall Devour, and it shall be Satiae^e, and made Drunk with their
Blood. But, behold, by the astonishing Providence of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, it
is come to pass, that it may be there never did so great a Rout befall th^se
Adversaries of God, and of the Nation, as the miscarriage of this Plot ha^
given them. A Remarkable ^eal inspires, on^ of the best Parliaments that ever
the Nation saw, to Associate for the Safety of the King, and Meditate such
Things as cause the whole Kingdom to Rejoice. A prodigious Conste^nation falls
upon the Adversaries; and they daily feel the fulfillment of the Label, which
the Dutch Sculptures on this occasion, put into the mouth of the Abdicated
Prince, Frustra Tentare, nocebit. Many years are now past, since that from the
Press, as well as from the Pulpit, we have said unto you; If any man, be he
High or Low, Rich or Poor, shall go to introduce Popery, in a Kingdom, wherein
it has been Abolished, the Curse of Joshua, never fell so hard on the Rebuilder
of Demolished. Jericho, as the Curse of Jesus will fall upon the Authors of
this Accursed Enterprise; neither shall they prosper in it, any better than the
Jews, who at the Invitation of the Apostate Julian, going to Re-Edifie their
Temple, God sent the Terrible Earthquake, that Overthrew all (...) had already
done, and by Fire from Heaven, burnt up the Tools, and some of those that used
them. And this year, has now strangely added, unto the many Confusi^^^, that we
have seen every year of late be ^^lling the Enemies of the Reformation. Prepare
now, your Praises to the Glorious Lord Jesus Christ, O (...) People of God, for
the Great Things which He has done. But Believe Thou? Thou shall see yet
GREATER THINGS than these! For I do once more assure you (...) Kingdom of God
(...) at Hand.

A POSTCRIPT. Giving an Account of some late MIRACLES, wrought by the Power of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST.
HAving in the preceding Sermon mentioned the late MIRACLES, with Hopes that
they may be Symbolical Representations and Exhibitions of the Miraculous
Things, which the Lord is going to Do for His People, I am willing to Entertain
the Faith of the Christians in this Remote Wilderness of America, with a ^^ief
Rela^ion of those Miracles; for all which, we have Incontestable Evidences,
that they are not like the Lying Wonders, by Popery sometimes imposed upon the
World, but the Wond^ous Works of the God, which declare that His Name is Near.

The First Example.
In the Preface of a French Treatise, Entitled, Harmony des Propheties
Anc^nnes were les M^dernes, which was Printed at Cologne, in the year 1687. I
find this very Wonderful Passage, which I choose to mention in this place, as
contributing to the Explication of them that are to follow.

Madam Mingot, the Widow of a C^^irurgeon, of the City of Caen in (...), had
seve^al unaccountable Revelations made unto her, that she kept wholly Secret;
but there was one, which by a Miracle that accompanied it, was ^ut beyond the
possibility of Secrecy. She was ^^^licted with a Palsy, Eight or Ten years
together in her Limbs, which rendered her altogether Impotent; and her Impotency
was not the less, for her being Fourscore years of Age. But one Day, when she
was at Prayer before the God of Heaven, for the Deliverance of His Church, from
the Confusions then upon it, in the heat and height of the French Persecution,
it was audibly said unto her, Thy Prayers are heard; The afflicted Church shall
be speedily and gloriously delivered; But it has yet somewhat more to suffer.
She was Commanded herewithal, to make this Revelation known unto her Brethren;
and that they might give credit unto her words, it was added, The Lord has
Restored thy Health and Strength unto thee. She was Immediately, and
Miraculously, Healed of her Malady, and she Walked her self, and carried unto
her Pastors, the Account of this Revelation. They wondered at the Miracle, and
would fain have concealed the Prophecy; but the Prophecy could not possibly be
hid, because of the famous Miracle that attended it. All the Pastors of Caen,
and a good Number of other Protestant Refugees, belonging to the Town, being in
the Low Countries, Anno 1687. offered their Unanimous and Uniform Testimony, to
the Truth of this mavelous matter.

The Second Example.
Mary Maillard, a French Damsel, (the Daughter of Protestant Refugees,) about
Thirteen Years of Age, Living in Westminster, was through a Dislocation of her
Left Thigh, very Lame from her Birth, and her Lameness increased with her Age,
into much Deformity and Infirmity, insomuch that she became Ridiculous to the
Children in the Streets, who would Throw Dirt upon her, with other Abuses and
Injuries, as they saw her pass along. Her Leg was become shorter by four Inches
than the other, her Knee was turned Inwards, and her Foot was distorted so,
that the Inward Ancle bone almost supplied the place of the Sole of that Foot;
and much pain attended this Malady, which the Surgeons and Physicians
pronounced Incurable. The Ill treatment of the Children in the Streets, one
Lords Day, Nov. 26. 1693. bespattering her with Dirt, as she returned from the
Public Worship of God, much afflicted her: She wept extremely, with Complaints
to her Mistress, of the Affronts that had been offered her; but her Mistress
Exhorted her to be patient, and put her Trust in God. In the Evening she took
the Bible; and Reading the Second Chapter of Mark, wherein is related our Lords
Miraculous Cure of one Sick of a Palsy, she seemed much affected therewithal.
She told her Mistress, that she could not but wonder at the Unbelief of the
Jews; adding, That if such a Thing should now happen, she would run to the Lord
Jesus Christ for a Cure also. She had no sooner spoke this, but her pain began
to Return with violence upon her; and suddenly stretching out her Leg, the Bone
audibly snapt into its place, and her Knee and Foot were instantly restored
unto their Natural Posture. Her pain immediately went off; and she supposed
that she heard a voice declaring to her, Thou art Healed: whereupon she
presently found her self to be fully Cured of all her Lameness, and she Walked
up and down her Chamber; still continuing well, and affirming to the great
multitudes that came to visit her, That without any Humane Help she was healed,
in Reading the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ.

The Third Example.
Mrs Elizabeth Savage, the Wife of Mr. John Savage, a Minister and School
master, Living in Middle Moor Fields, was afflicted with a Palsy on her
Right-side; and her Mother knows nothing to the con^^^^, but that she brought
it into the World with her. Her Distemper was judged Remediless, and her Right
Thumb was distorted, and three other angers, were bowed round, almost close to
the palm of her Hand; no^ could she, by that Hand (which also was always cold)
bring any Sustenance unto her mouth She was now upwards of Twenty-eight years
old; and her Husband agreed with her, to set apart the Twenty second or
December, 169^. ^or Prayer with Fasting, in secret before the Lord; not upon
any Temporal Account, but purely to obtain Spiritual and Eternal Blessings.
About eleven of the Clock, when he was upon his knees, the late Miracle wrought
for the French Damsel came into his mind, with such Impression, that he gave
solemn Thanks unto the Lord Jesus Christ, for Displaying of His Power, in such
a work, at a Time of prevailing Infidelity. He then asked his Wife, whether she
believed that our Lord Jesus Christ, was able to Cure her Weakness also;
whereto she answered with Tears, That she qu^stion'd not His Power, but she
knew not whether it might be good for her to have such a Comfort, inasmuch as
her Weakness was useful many ways to Humble her. He began to Read the Eighth
Chapter of Matthew; and when he read those words, Lord, if thou will, thou
can, he said, That he had as much Faith in the Power of the Lord Jesus
Christ, for the Cure of her Infirmity. Proceeding then to the third verse, I
will, be thou clean, she presently felt a great pain in the middle Joints of
her crooked Fingers; which before the Chapter was ended, were stretched out,
and she was able to move them nimbly, like those on her other Hand. A new
warmth also came into that Hand, and though it were poor and lean, as well as
weak before, it began to Recover. Fresh, with Strength, and its natural color
came into it. When her Husband had smithed the Chapter, she showed unto him, in
her warm Hand, now opened and expanded, what the Lord Jesus Christ had newly
done for her; whereupon they sat some while drowned in Tears of Admiration,
from which when they Recovered themselves, they solemnly praised the Lord Jesus
Christ, on their Knees, for His Mercy to them: And the day following, her whole
Paralytic Side also, had a New Life returned into it, so that she was able to
Walk four or five miles, without any weariness.

The Fourth Example.
David Wright, who was Twenty Seven or Eight Years of Age, had been grievously
mortified with the Kings Evil for diverse years; but there was a Worse Evil then
this upon him, for he was also a very vicious and protane sort of a Fellow.
Following the Employments of a Shepherd, because his Distemper had Enf^^bled
him, for any harder Labor, he desired a Religious G^ntlewoman, in the year
1693. to take him into her Service. But she was afraid of Employing him, until
he promised a Reformation of his Lewd courses, and particularly, a due care to
Hear the Word of God; which promises nevertheless he sadly, violated. However,
on the Twenty Ninth of November, understanding that there was to be a Sermon
Preached at Hitchin, by one Mr. Edward Coals, his ^^ind b^came unaccountably so
Resolved for the Hearing of Him, that though his Brother came for him, wi^h an
Horse, to go another way, he could by no mea^s be prevailed withal, to bear him
company. While he was Hearing the Sermon, he found his (...) Mind strangely
Enlightened, and his Hard Heart strangely mol^^^^ed. He had new Visions of his
own Sinfulness and Wretchedness, and of the Remedy provided for him in the Lord
Jesus Christ; and before the Sermon was ended, he did with a conquered Soul and
with inexpressible Agony and Reflection, give himself up unto the Lord Redemer.
And whereas, he had been fifteen or sixteen years, horribly Tormented with
Scr^^h^i^ns Tumors and Ulcers, and now came unto the Meeting under great pain
with them, while he was hearing the Sermon, his ugly Sores all insensibly sunk
upon him, and he was well on a sudden. So that, as they Returned home from the
Meeting, he went in the Head of the Assembly, Admiring and Adoring the
Wonderful Glories of the Lord Jesus Christ, in thus dealing with him; and it
made an Heaven upon Earth among them, to join with him, in the Heavenly Praises
rendered unto the Lord Jesus Christ, on the occasion of this Double Miracle.

The Fifth Example.
There is likewise, an undoubted Relation, of a poor, but a good Woman,
belonging to the Congregation of the Reverend Mr. Daniel Burgess in London. She
had for many years, labored under a Fistula in her Hip, which had proceeded so
far, that the very Bone was tainted, and she was turned out of the Hospital as
Incurable. This person, Reading, with Prayer over it, that passage, in Mat.
15.28. Jesus said unto her, O Woman, Great is thy Faith; be it unto thee as
thou wi^t; and feeling her Soul, by the Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ,
carried forth unto a Great Faith in Him, she found her self immediately and
miraculously, Cured of all her Malady. I have not now the Relation of this
matter at hand; but this is as far as I can Remember, the substance of what I
receive^ ^^^^erning it. It was about the beginning of Decembe^, 1694.

The Sixth Example.
In a Letter from the Reverend, Mr. John How, I find the Ensuing passages,
which I take the leave to Expose unto the Public.

It gives among us (Writes that Worthy Man) some Reviving to the Languishing
Interest of Christianity, and some check to the Infidel Spirit, that (under the
falsely assumed Name of Deism) would turn all Revealed Religion, and indeed all
Religion into Ridicule; that God is pleased to own it, by some late Miraculous
Cures, wrought upon the Acting of Faith in CHRIST.

That Excellent Person, proceeding then, to recite some of the Instances, which
we have already mentioned, he adds;

A Fourth, I have late certain knowledge of (but the Thing was done Six years
ago) of a Blackamoor Youth. Servant unto a Religious Baronet. He lately dining
at my House, assured me, That his Servant, having a Great Aversion to
Christianity, and refusing Instruction, was struck with Universal Pains in all
his L^mbe, which continued upon him a year and half^ like Rheumatical, but
Releived by none of the apt usual means, that are wont to give Relief in such
Cases. At length, in his Torments, which were Great, he grew Serious,
Instructible, Penitent; and by the frequent Endeavors of the Parochial
Minister (a Good man, known to me) brought to an understanding Acknowledgment
of Christ; upon which, Baptism being promised to him, he consented; but pressed
to be carried unto the Assembly, that he might own Christ Publicly; Upon the
doing whereof, he was Immediately Cured, and has continued well, ever since.
These are Great Things! Hallelujah! Preparatives, I hope, to the Revival of
Christianity; and, I fear, to terrible Acts of Vengeance, upon Obstinate
Persevering Infidels.

The Seventh Example.
Susanna Arch, was a Miserable Widow, for diverse years, overwhelmed with an
horrid Lepros^, which the Physicians that saw it, pronounced, Incurable, but
from that very Time that they told her so, a strange persuasion came into her
mind, That the Lord JESUS CHRIST would Cure her. That Scripture came frequently
into her mind, Math. 8.2 Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean; and she
found her self Enabled to plead this before Him, with some Degree of
Confidence, That at last she should prevail. She Resolved, That she would Rely
on the Lord JESUS CHRIST, who, in the Days of His Flesh, when on Earth, cured
all Diseases and Sicknesses (...) the People, and who had still as much Power,
now that He is Glorified in Heaven. She felt many Temptations, to weaken her
Confidence; but still, there came in Seasonable, and Agreeable Scriptures, with
a mighty Force upon her to Strengthen it; As, at one Time, that in Mark 11 22.
Have Faith in God; At another Time, that in Joh. 11.40. Said I not unto thee,
that if thou would Believe, thou should see the Glory of God? At another
Time, that in Heb. 10.35. Cast not away your Confidence, which has Great
Recompense of Reward. Her Leprosy had been Complicated with a Phtisick, which
for many years afflicted her; but in the Month of November, 1694. she found her
Phtisick Removed without any Humane Means, and she took that as a Token for
Good, that she should also be cured of her Leprosy; and the late Miracles upon
others, Enlivened this her Hope Exceedingly. In December, that Distemper of
this Godly Woman grew worse and worse upon her; and when her Mind was uneasy,
those passages came to Mind, I know, O Lord, that thou can do every Thing,
and, Our God, whom we serve, is able to deliver us. On December 26. at Night,
she was buffe^ed with sore Temptations, That her Faith for her Cure, having
proved but a Fancy, he Faith for her Soul must be so too: but she cried out
unto the Lord, Lord, I have cast my So^^ upon thee, and my Body upon thee, and
I am Resolved now to cast all my Diseases upon thee. Her Mind was hereupon
Composed; and the Next Night, putting up her Hand unto her Head, first on the
one side, and then on the other, she felt a New Skin, on both sides, which very
much amazaed her; whereupon she cried out, Lord Jesus, Have thou begun? Thou will carry it on. he then taking off her Head-Clothes, found the Stu^ff gone
off her Head, and a firm Skin appearing there; and her Distemper, which had
Extended it self all over her Body, from Head to Foot, in ^^^rifying Sores, was
in like manner, suddenly taken away, to the Admiration of all Beholders.

Reader, Do not now Encourage thy self in a Vain Expectation of Miracles, to
Relieve thy particular Afflictions, but Improve these Miracles, as Intimations
of what the Lo^d Jesus Christ can and will quickly do, for His Afflicted Church
in the World.

FINIS.

