A Remembrance OF FORMER TIMES FOR THIS Generation; AND Our Degeneracy Lamented.

The First Part.

Jere. 8. 5. Why then is this People of Jerusalem hidden back, by a perpetual
backsliding? they hold fast deceit, they refuse to return. Jere. 3. 12. Go and
proclaim these words toward the north, and say, Return, thou backsliding
Israel, says the LORD, and I will not cause mine anger to fall upon you: for I
am merciful, says the LORD, and I will not keep anger for ever. By W. J. Esquire.

Boston, N. E. Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Duncan Campbel, at his
Shop over against the Old Meeting House. 1697.

A REMEMBRANCE Of Former TIMES for this Generation.
The First Part.
Isaiah V. I, 2. Now will I sing to my well beloved a song to my beloved,
touching his vineyard; my well-beloved has a Vineyard in a very fruitful hill.
2. And he fenced it, and gathered out the stones thereof, and planted it with
the choicest vine, and built a tower in the midst of it, and also made a wine
press therein: and he looked that it should bring forth grapes; and it brought
forth wild grapes. I principally scope at the last words.
THis Great Prophet Isaiah was one whom God Raised up, and Endowed with a
Spirit of Prophecy above most in those days: And as to foretell Christ the
Messiah coming, and other Accomcomplish. (...) ways, and from the Purity of
his Worship, wherein their Godly Forefathers walked in former days; when God
planted them a Noble Vine, and was the Glory in the midst of them; and as a
Wall of fire round about them for their defense.

Of whose woeful degeneracy as the Lord complains by this Prophet; Chapter the
first, ver. 2, 3. and chap. 3. and other places; so he makes the like sad
complaint by that mournful Prophet Jeremy, chap. 2. v. 1. as you may see there;
also by Ezekiel and others of his Prophets. But now to stop a little before I
proceed; may not the Lord justly make the like sad complaint of the lamentable
Degeneracy of his People in these Days; and that with far greater and more
grievous Aggravations thereof than that People were chargeable with; for we
especially in New England have been brought up under greater and more glorious
Light than they. They were trained up under mysterious Types and Shadows, only
pointing at Christ to come; but we under clear Gospel Light in the
Accomplishment; Christ manifested in the Flesh, seen of Angels, believed on in
the world, received up to Glory, whose Second Coming we expect and hope for
e're long.

And yet notwithstanding we have in our first times been thus planted a Noble
Vine; alas! have we not brought forth wild or sower Grapes, bad fruit, made
evil Returns to the Lord after all the great things God has done for us,
especially in our Primitive Times.

And whereas in these latter days God for our Correction and Amendment has
(as we know) visited and smitten us with awful and wasting Judgments from year
to year. Yet is it not manifest, that we in this, and the Rising Generation
grow worse and worse; so that God may justly plead with us as he did with this
People, Isa. 1. 5 Why should ye be smitten any more, you will Revolt more and
more; wherein the Lord (in effect) does charge them with Incorrigibleness,
under long continued Corrective Judgments as Ripe or Ripening for Desolation,
which indeed accordingly hastened upon them; first, by the Babylonish Seventy
Years Captivity, wherein a Remnant was preserved. And finally by the Romish
Desolation to this Day.

And truly these things considered, we have cause to fear and tremble to think
what God may do with this Sinful and Degenerate Age and Generation wherein-we
live.

The Lord prepare us.

But to proceed:

First from the whole of the Parable, the Observation is,

That when God has planted a Nation or People in their First Times or Infancy,
upon good foundations of Gospel Light and means of Grace, and that under his
Divine Protection and Culture, he expects they should bring forth the fruit of
all in Piety, Godliness, and growth of Religion and Holiness.

Observe. 2. That when such a People so Planted, do universally Degenerate and
Backslide from the Primilive Purity and Godliness of their Fore fathers and
Ancestors, and Sin and Iniquity does abound, notwithstanding Gospel Light, and
Means of Grace still continued to them for their Instruction in Religion; and
Fatherly Chastisements from God inflicted upon them for their Correction and
Amendment, God is highly provoked thereby, and may justly complain of them as
Unteachable and Incorrigible.

Observe. 3. That such a People are Ripe or Ripening for Desolating Judgments,
if they do not speedily Repent, Reform and turn to God.

Of the first Observation the Sum is, That when God has planted a People in
their first times on foundations of Religion and Piety, he expects they should
bring forth the fruit thereof answerably; themselves, and their Posterity.

For proof and illustration whereof.

1. Some Scriptures. 2. Some Reasons. 3. Some Application for our Improvement.

1. For proof; not only the Parable it self does clearly infer it, the whole of
Gods Planting and Cultivation of that People as his Vineyard does fully prove
it, as I shall further demonstrate when I come to particulars.

But this expectation of Fruitfulness may be also gathered from Isa. 1. 2. Hear
O Heavens, and give ear O Earth, for the Lord has spoken it: I have nourished
and brought up Children, and they have Rebelled against me. God calls the
Inhabitants of Heaven, the Angels above, and the Inhabitants of the Earth, men
below to consider (as 'twere) of the matter; what he might justly expect having
so nourished and brought up Children: What to Rebel against him? to prove
Rebellious at last; sure that is an evil return, and both Heaven and Earth will
testify against such a sinful and ungrateful People.

Now you that are Parents; if your Children whom you have nourished and well
brought up, should prove rebellious against you, you would surely cry out
against them, and justly too, and greatly lament the disappointment of your
hopes.

Why thus God himself does (as you have heard) when his Children or People whom
he had nourished and brought up, proved rebellious and Degenerate, as that
people did in future Generations. So further, what a sad complaint the Lord
makes against this People, Jer. 2. 10. I had planted thee a noble Vine; How
then art thou turned into the Degenerate Plant of a strange vine unto me?
Again, Hos. 11. 7. My people are bent to Backsliding from me: though they
called them to the most High, none at all would exalt him. Again, Hos. 10. 1.
Israel is an empty vine, he brings forth fruit unto himself.

In the next place I shall lay down some Reasons why God may expect suitable
and answerable fruitfulness from the Vineyard of his Professing People.

And therein first, I shall refer to Gods Ancient Israel, to show what great
things God did for them, then consider what God has done for us in Allusion
thereunto.

1. God did much for that People in the great cost and pains (as I may say) he
was at in his Planting and Cultivation of them to make them his Vineyard and
fruitful Inheritance.

To which end First, From his Sovereign Grace and free mercy, he singled them
out, and separated them from the rest of Mankind lost in the First Adam. Thus
he did with Abraham, Genesis 15. 1. I am the Lord that brought thee out of Ur of
the Chaldees to give thee this Land. Whereby we see the Lord separated Abraham
from a Heathen People, to lay the foundation of his Church first in his Family,
and afterward in his Posterity; which continued (as we know) to the Coming of
the Promised Messiah Jesus Christ, whom they then Rejected, and were therefore
Rejected themselves to this day.

2. God might justly expect such fruitfulness from that People, from the high
Obligation he laid upon them, in giving them his Divine Laws, Statutes and
Judgments for their Instruction and Education in Grace, and holy Obedience, as
it is said, Psalm. 147. 19,20. He showed his word unto Jacob, his Statutes and
Judgments unto Israel; he has not dealt so with any Nation.

3. God might justly expect fruitfulness of that his People and Vineyard, in
consideration of the light and means of grace afforded them in his Public
Worship and Ordinances for their spiritual growth, to ripen them for Eternal
Glory.

4. God might justly expect such fruitfulness of that his People, from his
further Cultivation of them by his fatherly Chastisements of them for their
recovery and amendment when they sinned against him; and this according to his
Covenant Faithfulness, as promised, Psalm. 89. 30,31,32. If this Children for
sake my Law, I will chastise them, etc. I shall now proceed to make some
Improvement of what has been said.

1. With Reflection upon our selves in these times. 2. For Humiliation. 3.
Exhortation.

1. For Information and Reflection.

Has the Lord in former days Planted his People in this Wilderness to be his
Vineyard: Pray let us seriously consider what steps he took to bring about that
great work, in a very near similitude to what he did for his Israel of old.

1. He brought them (as we know) out of Egyptian Bondage; the sore Oppression
and Persecution they underwent there, as the Holy Scripture fully declares; so
it is said, Exodus 20. 2. I am the Lord thy God that brought thee out of the Land
of Egypt out of the House of Bondage. And of this also the Lord minds them
again, Deuteronomy. 6. 11,12. When thou art full then beware lest thou forget the Lord
which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt, from the House of Bondage.

Now may not this be said in a parallel sense of the first Generation of our
Godly Fathers and Ancestors. For although God did not bring them out or an
Egyptian Heathen Land, rather a pleasant and desirable Country, yet considering
the sore Persecution of the Saints and Servants of God in these times, they
might be truly said to be brought out of the house of bondage; Israel's Bondage
was outward chiefly; but there is a Conscience Bondage, and that is the sorest,
and that with great and heavy outward Sufferings too

2. The second step of Divine Power and Providence toward that People of
Israel was, that he led them through the Red Sea, by his mighty power made a
way for them, which else had stopped and discouraged them, as it is said, Exodus 15.
19. the Children of Israel went on dry Land through the midst of the Sea. Thus
the Lord brought his People over the great Atlantic Ocean, (said to be the
greatest in the World) and that with most remarkable safety in those days; so
to plant them his Vineyard in this Wilderness.

3. The third step of Divine Dispensation toward and for that People was, that
God did cast out the Heathen to make room for them, as Psalm, 80. 8. thou have
cast out the Heathen, and planted it, etc. So the Lord to make room for his
People, and for their greater safety cast out the Heathen in great numbers, by
sore sickness and mortality in those times; and since diminisht them much by
the Sword or War. This was as in the Parable to gather out the Stones for the
Planting of his Vineyard.

4. The fourth step of Divine Dispensation toward that People, the Lord set up
a Rich and costly and glorious Tabernacle for his Worships according to the
Pattern given to Moses in the Mount, with the Ark of the Testimony or Covenant;
all mystically and typically pointing at Christ their promised Messiah, to
build them up, and establish them in Religion and Godliness; and to prepare
them for Entrance and Settlement in that Typical Canaan: And thereunto they
might not add any Invention of their own, nor alter a pin of that Sanctuary.

So the Lord at first planting of his Vineyard in this Land in the days of our
Fore fathers, he Settled Evangelical Churches according to the Pattern in the
Mount, viz. Christ's Institutions given forth by his holy Apostles in those
Primitive Times of the Gospel without respect to Humane Traditions as the
Inventions of men.

5. The fifth step of Divine Dispensation toward that People: He gave them
Laws and Ordinances, the Moral and Ceremonial Law for their enlightening and
instruction in the Will of God, and for direction in his Worship, to make them
fruitful in Holiness, and to Ripen them for the Spiritual and Eternal Canaan,
as it is Neh 9. 14 thou made known to them thy Holy-Sabbath, and Command
them Statutes and Laws, etc.

So the Lord was pleased to settle his Churches in New England in those first
times with pure Worship and Ordinances of his own Institution and Appointment
in his Word, to prepare and ripen them for Eternal Life and Glory.

6. The sixth step: The Lord built a Tower in the midst of that his Vineyard
for their Protection and Defense. And by that we may understand the Civil
Government settled among them by Judges, for preservation of good Order,
Righteousness and Peace, and they qualified according to Jethro's counsel to
Moses; men fearing God, men of truth, hating Coveteousness. And was it not thus
in our first times; the then Rulers were wise and godly Worthies of our Israel,
however too slightly thought of by too many of this Generation.

7. The seventh step of Divine Providence toward Gods Ancient Israel was with
respect to their protection and defense against their foreign Enemies; for
whilst they continued to be his Glory, God was a Defense to them, as promised,
Isa. 4. 5. And the Lord will create upon every dwelling place in Mount Sion,
and upon her Assemblies, a Cloud and Smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming
fire by night, for upon all the Glory shall be a Defense.

To this purpose also that promise, Psalm. 141. 2. As the Mountains are round
about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his People from henceforth even for
even Also Zeeh. 2. 5. And was it not thus with Gods people in New England in
our first times; was not the Lord as a Wall of Fire round about them, and their
Defense against all Enemies at home and abroad, so that no weapon, council or
device prospered against them in those days, as it is well known. But alas,
alas! has not the Lord comparatively forsaken us in these days, and justly too,
because we have forsaken him.

8. The eighth step observable may be with respect to Gods Dispensations
toward that People in aftertimes, For when they began to Degenerate from God
and his ways, which was in a gradual manner, God was pleased for their
Correction and Amendment, gradually to visit them with Corrections and
Chastisments for their Reformation and Recovery. Of this the Lord gave them
warning, Deuteronomy 31. 16,17. Read the sum: If they forsake, I will forsake them,
etc. and as it is Psalm. 89. visit their transgressions with the rod, and their
iniquity with stripes. And thus the Lord did when they degenerated from him, as
we may see, Amos 4. 6. I gave you cleanness of teeth in all your Cities, and
want of bread in all your places; yet have you not returned unto me. v. 9. I
have smitten you with blastings and mildews, and palmer worms, etc. yet have
you not returned unto me. Yea, v. 10. it is further said, that God sent the
Pestilence among them, and the Sword, and Burnings; yet the Lord goes on with
the same Complaint: Yet have you not Returned unto me,

And now pray let us solemnly consider: Is not this our case? Has not the Lord
thus awfully dispensed toward us for many years past, and to this day in a
great measure? Have we not seen and felt many of these Judgments of God in this
Land; blastings, mildews, worms, shortnings of our Bread Corn, Sickness,
Mortality, Sword, Burnings add the like, though not so universally as upon that
People.

But for all these sore Chastisements, where is our Reformation and Returning
to God: May not the Lord make the same Complaint against us as against them:
Yet have you not returned unto me; yea and say of us as of them, Isa 1. Hear O
Heavens, and give ear, O Earth, I have nourished and brought up a people in New
England, and they have Rebelled against me. I had planted thee, O New England,
a noble vine, how art thou then degenerated into the plant of a strange vine
unto me? But to go on with a further account about that People.

9. The Lord seeing that instead of being Reformed by his Word and Judgments,
they grow worse and worse, and so proved incorrigible; it put him (as 'twere)
to a stand what to do, as we may find in the Parable, Isa 5. 3,4. And now O
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and men of Judah, judge I pray you betwixt me and my
Vineyard; what could have been done more, that I have not done? when I looked
it should bring forth Grapes, it brought forth sower Grapes.

Now the Lord having thus Expostulated with them for their unfruitfulness under
all his Cultivations of them by the means of Grace, having afforded them his
divine approbation against Enemies. And at last visited them for their
degeneracy by his fatherly Chastisements; and they still proving unfruitful and
incorrigible notwithstanding; the Lord being by all put to a stand what to do
with such a People, resolves the question himself, v. 5,6,7. that is in short,
he would even give them up and lay them wast (only as we know God had his Elect
Ones whom he preserved even in Babylon) And then in the sequel of that Chapter,
beginning v 8. so v. 11,18,20,21,22. the Lord denounces woes to them; Woe, Woe,
Woe, six times successively: A series of Woes accomplished in awful wasting,
desolating Judgments.

And to the same purpose the Lord threatened them for their Impenitency and
Incorrigibleness, with sore and desolating Judgments by others of his Prophets,
as we may see in Amos 3. And then proceeds to the Execution of them, chap 4.
verse 12. tell, them plainly: Thus will I do unto thee, O Israel, and because I
will do this, prepare to meet thy God O Israel. And then follows a mournful
lamentation for them by that Prophet, chap 5. 1,2,3.

In the next place I shall further and more particularly Apply and Improve all
to our selves.

And therefore first, Let it be for Examination.

You have heard what Gods Dispensations were toward his Ancient Israel of old;
and the evil returns they made, and the sad and doleful issue of all. Let us
then (I say) come home to our selves Gods Professing People in this Wilderness.
O let us seriously reflect, comparing former days with our times.

May not the Lord take up, and justly improves this Parable against us, as well
as against them in every step of his Dispensations toward us from our very
first beginning. As in affording us such Gospel Light, Liberties and
Privileges above any other people in those times; giving us his pure Worship
and Ordinances, buildings up his Mount Sion and Jerusalem in the midst of us in
Evangelical Churches; and therein the platform of his Spiritual Kingdom in our
primitive times, beyond what was to be found in all the Earth; all things
considered.

But I pray let us consider what fruit have we brought forth to his Glory, good
grapes or rather sower grapes from one end of the Land to the other in these
times.

If so, let it be for a Lamentation.

Ah! how well may the Lord complain of us, as he did of that his Ancient
Israel, Jer. 2. 21. I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed; How
then art thou turned into the Degenerate plant of a strange vine unto me? see
also ver. 31,32.

3. Let the next Improvement be for Humiliation: If ever any people had cause
to humble themselves in Sackcloth and Ashes before the Lord under the sense of
their woeful Degeneracy, and Gods awful wasting Judgments we have been long
under, and still are; surely we have.

And to quicken us thereunto, as also, to humble, earnest and fervent prayers
and supplication for mercy; see 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. If my people which are called
by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray and seek my face, and turn from
their wicked ways: then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin,
and will heal their Land. O that it were so indeed with us.

But alas! alas! instead of humbling our selves, which God calls to, and that
in Sackcloth and Ashes, as Isa. 22. 12. Behold other things, the superabounding
of Pride and Vanity, Fantastic Attire and Ornaments, monstrous Head-Towers,
and other antic Dresses: And many other Godprovoking, and Land destroying,
yea, and Souldestroying sins which the Lord condemns and threatens, Isa. 3. 13,
to 24. and many other places.

4. And lastly to conclude all with a word or two for Exhortation and Counsel
to this Generation. Seeing our sins and degeneracy have provoked God to follow
us so long, and that to this day with woeful judgments, and threaten us further,
for our incorrigibleness (if we do not repent and turn) even with Desolation.

Let us therefore say in our hearts, and one to another, (and O that it might
be so throughout the Land) as the Prophet Hosea did in his Exhortation to that
people, Hos. 6. 1. Come and let us Return unto the Lord, for he has torn, and
he will heal as, he has smitten and he will bind us up, etc. And then he
promises further, he will Revive us, and we shall live in his sight. Thus (I
say) Let us call one upon another, Come, Come, O Come, Let us return unto the
Lord, etc.

But you may say, How shall we Return?

I answer by sincere and serious Humiliation, through Reformation, and restless
wrestling prayer, in the name, and through the Mediation of Jesus Christ our
Advocate and Intercessor in Heaven: And then we may hope that for his sake the
Lord will make good that gracious promise beforementioned, 2 Chronicles. 14. to
hear us from Heaven, forgive our sins, and heal our Land; And so be gracious to
the Remnant of his Joseph, as it is promised, Amos 5. 15.

But if we Return not, then we have cause to fear those Repeated Woes denounced
against Gods Ancient Israel aforesaid, Isa. 5. etc. will be our sad portion at
last.

O therefore let us follow God with prayer, together and apart, That he would
have mercy upon his Israel, the Remnant of his Joseph in this Land, and in
other parts of the World in this dark and gloomy Day.

The Second Part.
For a further Awakening I shall add the Mourners Lamentations for the Sins and
Degeneracy of the TIMES. And Gods Awful Judgments long continued and further
threatened.

As also to stir up Christians to deep Humiliation, fervent Prayer, and through
Reformation.

From the Forty fourth Psalm.

Exodus 33.5. Put off thine Ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do with
thee. Isa. 55. 6. Seek the Lord while he may be found, call ye upon him whilst
he is near. Psalm 44. 23,24,25,26. Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord? arise,
cast us not off for ever.

Wherefore hidest thou thy face? and forgettest our affliction and our
oppression?

For our soul is bowed down to the dust: our belly cleaves unto the earth.

Arise for our help, and redeem us for thy mercies sake.

1. IN this Psalm we have David's, or rather the Churches sore Affliction and
Distress.

2. The Churches Integrity and good frame of Spirit under all. And

3. Their Prayer in the words Read.

1. We have an account of the Churches distressed and afflicted State, v 9. to
17. Thou have cast off, and put us to shame: and go not forth with our
Armies. Thou make us to turn back from the enemy: and they which hate us
spoil for themselves, verse. 11. Thou have given us like sheep appointed for
meat: and have scattered us among the heathen. v. 12. Thou sellest thy people
for naught, and do not increase thy wealth by their price. Thou make us a
reproach to our neighbors, a scorn and derision to them that are round about
us. Thou make us a by word among the heathen: a shaking of the head among the
people, etc. And so goes on with a sorrowful complaint of their doleful
condition and sufferings.

Now when it was that this People of God were in, and under such sad
Dispensations as if forsaken of God, and cast off as they complain, is hard to
say. But probably it was in the time of the Babylonish Captivity. But I shall
leave it.

Only before I proceed, I pray let us solemnly and seriously consider whether
it is not thus with us in a great measure in New England at least threatened.
Have we not cause to complain that God in a great measure has (as 'twere) cast
us off and forsaken us. What is the meaning else of that great Wrath of God
against us? in giving up so many of our fellow Christians from time to time
unto the cruel hands of the Barbarous Heathen, professed Worshippers of the
Devil; to letting (as 'twere) Hell loose against us. If we are not sensible of
it, God will make us sensible of it before he has done with us, as he did this
people; that we, as they shall in like manner mournfully complain before him.

Now the sad complaint this people here make of their afflicted state, is
greatly aggavated in their calling to mind what great things God did for their
Fathers in former days, as you may see from v. 1. to 9. We have heard with our
ears, O God, our fathers have told us, what work thou did in their days, in
the times of old v. 2 How thou did drive out the heathen with thy hand, and
plantedst them; how thou did afflict the people, and cast them out. v. 3. For
they got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own
arm save them: but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy
countenance, because thou had a favor unto them And then he goes on with
prayer, to make way for the following complaints of their sorrows and
sufferings, notwithstanding those great things God had done for their fathers.

And now I pray you, may we not rightly and truly in every particular say as
these do: That we have heard with our ears, and our fathers have told us, what
great things God did do for them in those first times, when God planted them as
his Vineyard, in His first (...) pure Evangelical Churches in New England; and
to that end cast out the Heathen, at least diminisht their great numbers; and
all this God did by his right hand, and Arm of his power, and the light of his
countenance, because he had a favor unto them, was with them, and their
defense and glory in those times But now as to us their Posterity and
Successors in these days: Alas! we may sadly say; But thou have cast off, and
put us to shame, and go not forth with our Armies; and so throughout to the
end of that Lamentation.

And thus I have mentioned the distresses of that ancient Israel of God in
those days; as also our own sorrowful State in these times parallel therewith,
as if it had been penned for us in New England as well as for them; and so we
ought to apply and improve it.

2. In the next place, which is most remarkable, we have the Churches gracious
frame of Spirit, and Integrity under all these distresses and afflictions they
had complained of; say they, All this is come upon us, yet have we not
forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant. v. 18. Our heart
is not turned back: neither have our steps declined from thy way. v. 19. Though
thou have sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered us with the
shadow of death. And see on v. 20,21,22.

3. And then that afflicted Church goes on with most affectionate argumentative
prayer for Gods favor, that he would deliver them for his Mercies sake, as in
the 4 last verses of the Psalm at first mentioned. Although this prayer was the
principal thing I had my eye upon, and unto which the many distressing
Dispensations of God toward us calls us to, even throughout the Land, yet I
shall wave at present, and proceed:

Let us then for our solemn consideration, compare the present state and
condition of the People of God in these times, especially our own in this part
of the World, with what we find here expressed concerning that ancient Church and
People of Israel in those days. viz.

1. Their afflictions and sufferings. 2. Their frame of spirit and behavior
under all, for our reflection and awakening in these sleepy times.

1. For the suffering part, having glanced upon that already, I shall not
further insist upon it, it being so obvious to every seeing eye, yea, every ear
in all places throughout the Land may hear the doleful complaints that are made
of our public Calamities, fears and distresses from the Righteous Judgment of
God wherewith we have been followed for many years past, and still are.

And doubtless the memorial of the great things God did for our Fathers and
Ancestors, lest upon Record for us, cannot but be a sore aggravation of our
sins, and just sufferings in these declining and degenerate times.

But secondly and principally: Let us solemnly see this peoples gracious frame
of spirit under all their afflictions and calamities here complained of; and
see whether it be so with us, whether we can truly say, and acquit our selves
before the Lord, and to him as they did: And for our close reflection, we will
come to particulars by way of Enquiry.

1. Can we say as they do, v. 17. All this is come upon us, yet have we not
forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy covenant. v. 18. Our heart
is not turned back: neither have our steps declined from thy way, etc. If we
say it is so with us, I may Reply, or rather God may say to us as Samuel did to
Saul, 1 Samuel 15. 14. What means then this bleating of the sheep in mine ears,
and the lowing of the Oxen which I hear?

Let us therefore (I say) more distinctly consider the particulars of the
solemn profession this people here make; and they do it to God himself, which
is an awful thing.

1. Say they, after all this that is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten
thee. Now pray consider, Can we, or dare we say as they do? That we have not
forgotten God in sundry respects; or rather may not the Lord justly say to us
as to Backsliding Israel of old, Jer. 2. 31,32. O generation, see ye the word
of the Lord: have I been a wilderness unto Israel? a land of darkness?
wherefore say my people, we are Lords, we will come no more unto thee? v. 32.
Can a maid forget her ornaments, or a bride her attire? Yet my people have
forgotten me days without number. Pray consider whether this forgetfulness of
God may not be found among us in this Wilderness in sundry respects? I shall
mention some. As

1. Have we not too much forgotten the Design and Ends of our Forefathers
coming into this Wilderness, viz. Religion and Godliness, with the purity of
Gods Worship and Ordinances: If we say we do not forget; then let me say, that
is an aggravation of our sin if we be found to pursue another Interest, viz.
the World (for I know, that Religion was the Foundation Interest of New England
in their first settlement here both in Church and Commonwealth. But is the
World in a great measure has crowded out that, God sees it, whether we see it
or not, which was of awful consideration to this People the Psalmist speaks of;
say they, v. 20. If we have forgotten the Name of (...) God, or stretched out
our hands to a strange god: v. 21. Shall not God search this out? for he
knows the secrets of the heart. And therefore may not the Lord lay this Sin
of Worldliness to New-Englands Charge, as he did to his degenerate people of
old, Jer. 6. 13. in the precedent verses of that Chapter, God had threatened
them with sore Judgments; and that therein he would stretch out his hand upon
the whole land; and then in v. 13. he gives the reason of it, viz. for from the
least of them even to the greatest of them, every one is given to Coveteousness.

And 'twas for this sin of Worldliness that the Lord was wroth with and smote
Ephraim, Isa. 57. 17. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth and
smote him: I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his
heart. And it is from this root of all evil, as the Apostle calls it, 1 Timothy
^6.10. the love of money; that that gain of Oppression arises, which fills the
whole land; and for which sin the Lord threatened to lay his Vineyard waste, as
Isa. 5. 6,7 Read the place. And if we are not as yet a Vineyard laid waste,
assuredly we are by present and impending judgments laid open to it, and have
cause to fear.

2. Again, this afflicted people could say, Neither have we dealt falsely in
thy Covenant. Now can we say so too? for we are Gods Covenant people as they
were. Our Fathers in their first settling of Churches in New England, did
Covenant with God for themselves and their seed and Posterity, to walk with
God, and to uphold his Worship and Ordinances according to his revealed will in
Gospel Institutions, without mixture of their own, or addition of Humane
Inventions: And to maintain Communion of Saints in Church State, in purity and
holiness, looking well to the entering in, and going forth of the Sanctuary;
according to that charge, Ezekiel. 44. 5. The neglect whereof in bringing in the
uncircumcised in heart and flesh, the Lord does charge as breach of his
Covenant on that people. Now this was the holy care of our Fore fathers in
their time as it is well known. But have, and do we follow their Examples? if
so, What is the meaning of the manifest degeneracy of this Generation? very
evident, if we compare Churches and Church Members (many of them) and some of
our now Administrations in practice and Discipline, with the way, practice and
Discipline of Churches in those first times. Let the Rules of the Gospel left
by Christ and his holy Apostles, (being the unalterable Laws of his Spiritual
Kingdom) determine and resolve the case; for all must be tried and judged by
those Divine Laws and Rules in the Great Day. But I desire rather to mourn in
secret for these things, than to mention particulars, because I would not
offend; yet let me say, that then at first the Churches were the Glory of
Christ, and upon all the glory there was a defense, as promised, Isa. 4 5,6.
And further, (I pray seriously mind it, and know, that according to the purity
of Churches, has been, and will be their Protection. But when once by their
degeneracy they become as the outward Court-Worshippers (which some in these
times incline to) they shall then be given to be trodden under foot of the
Gentiles, (witness the once famous seven Churches of Asia) And if that in part
be the condition of some Churches in this Land at this day, to be in danger of
being destroyed by Antichristian and Heathen Enemies, we may apprehend the
cause, and may well fear God has a Controversy even with his Churches, as well
as the whole Body of this People.

3. In the next place, can we say with this people: Our heart is not turned
back, neither have our steps declined from thy way. O that was a great (...)!
whilst their heart kept right with God, they kept close to him in other things;
but when that (...) back from God, then they declined apace, and that in every
thing. Now can we in these (...) say thus; Alas, alas! our wound lies here;
this O this is the ground of the Apostasy of this age, of the degneracy of New
England in this Generation; our hearts are gone, and turned back from God, and
from one another, as Christ has foretold of the last times. And hence it is
that our steps are declined from his ways; the first and best ways of the
Churches of Christ, and of our godly forefathers in our primitive times. Let me
explain and evince this is some particulars.

1. Do not our hearts go several ways herein; so this people had but one heart
(as 'twere among them all; for they do not say our hearts, but our (...) is not
turned back. So in the Primitive Times of the Gospel it is said Act. 2.4. there
was singleness of heart, or one heart among them. And so it might be said of
our First New England. Churches. But now alas! it may be said of us, as the
Lord complains of Israel, Hos. 10. 1,2. Their heart is divided, now shall they
be found faulty.

O I could say much of the sorrowful consequents of this heart division among
Gods professing people, when they began to decline in the other England, and
that in my own time, and observation there, which proved a sad inlet to their
after changes and suffering in many respects.

2. Again, Have we not left or lost our first love upon a Spiritual account.
This the Lord Jesus charges upon that shining Church of Ephesus, which out
mined most of the Churches in our times, as you may see, Rev. 2. 1,2,3. And yet
charged with this loss of first love; and therefore threatened to be Unchurched,
if they Repented not; see verse 4,5.

Now if it be found that we have left our first love to God, and one to
another, and to the good ways of God our forefathers walked in. How far this
threatening and sentence may concern us, I shall leave-to solemn consideration:
And say no more.

3. Are we not in this Generation (at least too many) grown more lax, and large
in our principles, yea and in practice also, then in the first times, and that
in sundry respects. Indifferent about the things of God, if not lukewarm; the
Evils charged upon the Churches of Laodicea and Sardis, as Rev. 3. 2,3. and
15,16.

Ah! how indifferent are most Christians in these times; can too easily give
way to, and comply with new principles and practices in the things of God,
without clear Scripture warrant. And what a lukewarm frame of Spirit as to
Religion, may be found almost every where, so that we may fear the life and
power of Religion will wither and dye away by degrees, if Christ revive it not.

For Lastly, Have we not in these times in a great measure lost the power of
Godliness both in heart and life; is so, it is no wonder that our steps are
declined from his ways, for if heart godliness be gone, life godliness will
quickly follow. Hence the Lord laid that Charge of old upon Abraham, Genesis 17. 1
I am God Almighty or Alsuffiicient, walk before me, and be thou upright. When
once we grow in heart slight and formal in our Communion and walking with God,
we shall quickly grow slight in other respects: If we loose the life and power
of godliness in our hearts, we shall lose it also in our lives; and of and
against this we are solemnly warned in these latter days we are fallen into, 2 Timothy 3. 1,5. pray read the Text. We have cause greatly to mourn to see the
Accomplishment of what the Holy Apostle there foretells in so great a measure:
The Lord help us to fear our selves, and to watch and pray that we enter not
into temptation; and so be carried away with the iniquity of the times.

Having thus spoken to the principal matters contained in this Psalm, in
reference to the times we live in, for our reflection and awakening: That we
may be stirred up to prepare to meet the Lord in the way of his Judgment, for
he is surely come forth out of his place, to punish the Inhabitants of the
Earth for their iniquity. I shall therefore draw toward a conclusion; and only
a few words further for Improvement of the whole.

1. Then (...) we have been long, and still are an afflicted people in this
Land, and cannot but say, unless we are asleep, or worse, penal^y hardened, as
it is Isa. 9. 12. For all this his Anger is not turned away, but his hand is
stretched out still. Then I say, let us humbly justify God in all, and judge
our selves for this, see Neh. 9. 33. Thou art just in all that is come upon us,
for thou have done right but we have done wickedly; and Ezra 9 13. And after
all this that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespasses,
seeing that thou our God have punished us less than our Iniquities deserve.

And surely great cause we have thus also to Justify God in the many woeful,
wasting, long continued and annually still increasing Judgments he has
followed us with to this day, considering that our Degeneracy from the first
and best ways of his Covenant people in our primitive times, goes on and
increases; and that Pride, Oppression and Profaness (too much connived at)
seems to abound more and more, in all or most parts of the Land, as if we were
already ripe, or ripening apace for an overflowing Scourge, or utter
desolation, which the Lord in mercy prevent.

And yet though the by past, present and further threatened Judgments of God are
very terrible, I am more afraid of that word from God which he denounced
against Ephraim of old, Hos. 4. 17. Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone.
That degree of resolvedness in Degeneracy does so manifestly appear among us,
that fear and tremble, left the Lord should say of us, Let them alone. O for a
people, or particular Soul to be let alone in their Sin, is a most dreadful
thing, the sorest of Judgments, as we find it expressed, Psalm. 81. 11, 12 My
People would not hearken to my voice, etc. They would not hearten to his voice,
speaking to them by his Prophets, by his Word, and by his Judgments. God had
been long speaking to them in all these ways, but still they would not hearken,
and then follows: So I gave them up to their own hearts lusts, and they walked
in their own counsels.

And then verse 13. follows a sad Lamentation for them; God himself laments
their case. O that my People had hearkened unto me, and Israel had waked in my
ways. verse 14. I should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand
against their Adversaries.

Now may not the Lord thus Lament over his Professing People in New England;
yea, and well he may. For surely had we hearkened to the Lords so long speaking
to us by the Ministry of his Word, and by his Judgments, and walked in his ways
accordingly, after the good Example of our Godly Forefathers; and (...) to the
good Scriptural Foundations then laid in Church and Common wealth; the Lord
would soon have subdued our Enemies, that are such a sore Scourge to us from
year to year, and preserved us as he would have preserved that his Ancient
Israel in those days, and not so follow (besides the present War) with such
yearly wasting, Impoverishing and Famine threatening Judgments to this day.

I shall conclude all with a word of Exhortation.

Instead then of Complaining and Discontent, whatever public or personal
Calamities and Afflictions we are under, Let us say with Jeremy, Lam. 3. 22. It
is of the Lords Mercy we are not consumed, because his Compassions fail not:
and with Job, chap. 9. 15. make our Supplication to our Judge. And in so doing,
as he, chap. 23. 4. fill our mouths with Arguments: That is, Let us night and
day, together and apart, follow God with humble, penitent, affectionate,
fervent and earnest Prayers, and Cries in the Name, and through the Mediation
of JESUS CHRIST our Advocate and Meritorious Intercessor in Heaven, as this
afflicted Church, and People of God did in those distressing times, wherein we
have their holy Example in the words first penned. And wherewith for our
Direction, as suiting our own sorrowful times, I shall conclude.

Psalm. 44. 23,24,25,26 Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord, cast us not off for
ever?

Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest our Affliction and our
Oppression.

For our Soul is bowed down to the Dust, our belly cleaves unto the Earth.

Arise for our help and Redeem us for thy Mercies Sake. Amen.

FINIS.

