A Letter of Advice To A Young Gentleman Leaving the UNIVERSITY Concerning his
Behavior and Conversation in the WORLD.

By R. L.

Printed and Sold by W. Bradford, Printer to his Majesty, King WILLIAM, at the
Bible in New York, 1696.

AN Advertisement From The PRINTER.
THe Gentleman concerned in this Paper being assured, That he is not the only
One that needs these Instructions, and that the Benefit he reaps by them, would
not be the less by their being Public, has so far befriended the World as to
Expose them to the View of all: But it being the peculiar Fate of Letters, to
be at the Dispose of those to whom they are sent, This has not, perhaps, those
Advantages and Accessions which would have been given it, had the Inditer been
the Publisher: Yet as it is, all kind of Readers will be entertainted, from the
Usefulness of the Subject, The Variety of the Matter, The Freedom that is
taken, and the Conciseness of the Suggestions, which will further oblige them
to measure the Words, not by their Number, but Weight. If this be perused by
Men that live up to the Advices proposed,. They cannot but be Confirmed and
Gratified, to find themselves so luckily Transcribed And if This falls into the
Hands of Novices, (and such are all once, if Experience must make men Wise)
this little Vade Mecum shall suddenly Enrich them with a Treasure of
Observations, which they may hourly employ, and continue to do so, even while
they live: Nay, all must be Gainers here, when they find the good Christian
reconciled to the good Companion, and the Scholar Taught to be a Gentleman.

It has been observed, That Elaborate studied Discourses have not been so
Contributive to Wisdom, as the Memories and private Remarks of Eminent and
Conversing Persons. And it is to be wished, That they would communicate their
Experiences a little more, and that some would insist on this Subject so
minutely, as to descend to the Particulars of Behavior, that befits men in
their several Qualities and Professions, This would be a greater Kindness to
all Societies than that which is intended them from the Experiments and modern
Improvements that are now the Boasts and Triumphs of some Vertuosi's.

SIR,
YOU have been infinitely advantaged by your Education in the University, which
will have a perpetual good Effect upon you, and give you Luster in the Eyes of
the World: But that you may be further Useful and Acceptable to Mankind, you
must pare off something you have contracted there, and add also to your own
Stores from Observation and Experience, a way of Learning as far beyond that by
Precept, as the Knowledge of a Traveller exceeds that which is gotten by the
Map.

An Ackademick Life is an Horizon between two Worlds, for men enter upon it
Children, and as such they must judge and act, though with Difference according
to their own Pregnancy, the Ingenuity of their Teachers, and the manner of
their being taught; and when they pass from thence, they launch into a New
World, their Passions at high Water, and full of themselves, as Young Men are
wont to be, and such as are dipped in unusual Learning, and if they go on so,
they are lost: Besides that, there is a Husk and Shell that grows up with the
Learning they acquired, which they must throw away, caused, perchance, by the
Childishness of their State, or Formalities of the Place, or the Ruggedness of
Retirement, the not considering of which has made many a great Scholar
unserviceable to the World.

To propound many Rules for the manage of your self, were to refer you back to
the Book again, and there is even a Native Discretion that some are endowed
with, which defends them from gross Absurdities in Conversation, though there
be none but may be helped by some Admonitions.

I suppose you understand the nature of Habits and Passions: I suppose you
likewise what I know you to be, viz. To be Advisable, Observant and of a sedate
Temper; Therefore you will be sufficiently instructed with a few Intimations:
For he that reflects upon himself, and considers his Passions, and accommodates
himself to the World, cannot need many Directions. I suppose you also to be
principl'd with Religion and Morality, which is to be valued before any
Learning, and is an ease and pleasure to the Mind, and always secures a firm
Reputation, let the World be never so Wicked. No man ever gains a Reverence for
his Vice, but Virtue commands it. Vicious Men indeed have been Popular, but
never for being so, but for their Virtues annexed: They administer their
Employments well and wisely, They are civil and obliging, They are free and
magnanimous, They are faithful and courageous. It is always some brave Thing
that recommends them to the good Opinion of the World.

The Advices I here lay down are rather Negative than Positive; For though I
cannot direct you where you are to fail throughout your whole Course, yet I may
safely show you where you must not split your self.

And the first Rock I discover, on which Young Scholars shipwreck themselves,
is vaunting of the Persons and Places concerned in their Education. I therefore
advise you to be sparing in your Commendations of your University, College,
Tutor, or the Doctor you most there admire; for either all is taken for
granted, or you only betray your Affection and Partialty, or you impose your
Judgment for a Standard to others: You discover what you think, not what they
are. An early kindness may make you as blind as an unjust Prejudice, and others
will smile to see you confident of that which it may be, they know they can
confute. This holds in all kinds of Commendations, which should be modest and
moderate, Not Unseasonable, not Unsuitable, not Hyperbolical; for an Excess
here creates Envy to the Person extolled, and is a virtual Detraction from
others you converse with, and your own Understanding is measured by it. Nay, it
is a presumption in some to commend at all; for he that praises another, would
have him valued upon his own Judgment.

Therefore it is a Disparagement to be commended by a Fool, except he concurs
with the Vogue, or speaks from the Mouth of another; you must indeed, when you
speak of men's Persons (which without provocation should never be) represent
them heartily and fairly, and you are bound to give your Friend his due Elogy,
when his Fame is concerned, or you are required to do it, or may do him a
kindness in it. But remember, that when you give a Person a particular
Character, it receives its estimate from your Wisdom, be Temperate therefore as
well as Just.

When you come into Company, be not forward to show your Proficiency, nor
impose your Academical Discourses, nor glitter affectedly in Terms of Art,
which is a vanity indesent to Young Men that have Confidence, and hear of
Temper. Nor on the other hand must you be morose or difficult to give an
Account of your self to Inquisitive or Learned Men; let your Answers be direct
and concise. It is both your Wisdom and your Kindness to come to the point at
first, only in Conferences or Debates, speak not all you have to say at once,
in an entire Harangue, but suffer your self to be broached by degrees, and keep
an Argument for reserve. What you say at first may perhaps give Satisfaction,
however you gain Respite for Recollection; and when all is out at last you will
be thought to have more in store.

And because the Mouth is the Fountain of our Weal or Woe, and it is the
greatest Instance of Prudence to rule that little Member, the Tongue, and he
indeed is a Perfect Man that offends not in a word; for all our Follies and
Passions are let out that way. There are many things to be observed in the
managing of Discourse, I only say in general, That you must not speak with Heat
and Violence, nor with Reflection upon men's Persons, nor with Vanity and
Self-praise. No Man therefore should be his own Historian, that is, Talk of his
own Feats, his Travels, his Conferences with great Men; etc nor boast of his
Descent and Alliance, nor recount his Treasure, or the manage of his Estate,
all which wearies out the greatest Patience, and without a Provocation
expresses an intolerable Vanity and implies a believing that others are
affected and concerned in these things as much as himself. The like weakness is
in talking of ones Trade or Profession to those that neither mind nor
understand it. Indeed, if the Company be all of one piece, their debating any
thing that relates to all, may be Useful; but it is impertinent in mixed Company
to betray your Skill or Inclination. In like manner, he is not to be brook't,
that over a Glass of Wine will turn Statesman or Divine, perplex good Fellows
with Intreagues of Government, Cases of Conscience, or School Controversies.
which are too serious and too sacred to be the Subjects of Common Talk. Let no
Man's Vice be your Theme, nor your Friends, because you love him; not your
Enemy's, because he is so, and in you it will be expounded Partiality and
Revenge; not of any other, because you are certainly unconcerned in him, and
may possibly be mistaken of him.

Let not the Lapses or ridiculous Accidents or Behaviors of Men in Drink, or
in Love be taken Notice of after, or upbraided to them in jest or earnest; for
no man loves to have his Folly remembered, nor to have the consequence of Wine
or Passion imputed to him; and he cannot but like you worse, if he finds they
have left an Impression upon you. Every Man's Fault should be every Man's Secret,
as he sins doubly that publishes his own shame, for he adds scandal to the sin,
so does every Man increase the Scandal that is the propogator of it.

When you carve out Discourse for others, let your Choice be rather of Things
than of Persons of Historical matters, rather than the present Age, of things
distant and remote, rather than at Home, and of your Neighbors; and do not,
after all these Restrictions, fear want of Discourse; for there is nothing in
the World but you may speak of it Usefully or Pleasantly. Everything (says
Herbert) is big with jest, and has Wit in it, if you can find it out.

As for Behavior, that is certainly best, which best expresses the Sincerity
of your heart. I think this Rule fails not, that that kind of Conversation that
lets men into your Soul, to see the goodness of your Nature, and Integrity of
your Mind is most acceptable; for be assured, every man loves another for his
Honesty; To this every Knave pretends, and with the show of this he deceives;
nay, the sensual love of bad men is founded upon this. Nothing loves a Body but
for a Soul, nor a Soul, but for such a Disposition as answers to that Idea of
goodness which is in the Mind.

This is that, that reconciles you to some men at the first congress; for
usually you read men's Souls in their faces, if they be young and uncorrupted,
and you forever decline some Countenances which seem to declare, that some Vice
or Passion has the predominacy; and though sometimes you are deceived yet you
persist in your pre-possession till the behavior does signally confute what
the Countenance did threaten.

This makes a starcht formal Behavior Odious, because it is forced, and
unnatural, and assumed as a disguise and suffers not the Soul to shine clearly
and freely through the outward Actions.

First then, your Actions must discover you to be your own Master; for he is a
miserable Slave that is under the Tyranny of his Passions: And that Fountain
teeming pair, Lust and Rage must especially be subdued.

That of Love (to give it the milder Name) so far as it is vicious, I take to
be seated principally in the Fancy, and there you must apply your Cure; for I
ascribe its vehemence not so much to the Constitution as to the pampering the
Body, and men's letting loose their Eyes, Tongues and Imaginations upon amorous
Incentives, and not keeping a sense and awe of Religion upon them. For if you
live in an Age and Place where Shame and civil Penalties have no force, you
must have recourse to Religous means, and the Grace of God for Restraint. L^st
is more distinctly forbidden by our Christianity, than any other thing;
therefore it ought more sacredly to be avoided.

If you grow Troublesome to your self, in Gods name make use of that honorable
Remedy he has provided; and in the intrim, if you can allay your Fancy, and
keep your Inclinations undetermined, I think a promisen us Conversation is the
safest; for many that have lived in the Shade and Retirement, when they came
abroad were ruined by doting on the first Thing they met with. And this is often
the effect of Distance and Caution.

The other spring of Mischief is Anger, which usually flames out from an
unnamed Pride and want of Manners, and many other untollerable Infirmities, so
that there is no living in the world without quenching it, for it will render
you both Troublesome and Ridiculous, and you shall be avoided by all, like a
Beast of Prey. The Stoics pretend to be successful Eradicators of this
Passion, and their Books may be usefully read for Taming it. But themselves
have retained many ill humors behind, which are worse than a transient Rage,
and are most abhorrent from all Society, as Moroseness, Fastidious Contempt of
others, Peevishness Caption, Scurrility, Willfulness, etc. Which issue from
some Tempers and some Principles which men are apt to suck in, to feed their
natural Dispositions with; whereas the World is not to be entertained with
Frowns and dark Looks. Be as severe ad intra as you will, but be wholly
complaisant ad extra, and let not your strictness to your self make you
censorious and Uneasy to others; thus many mortified men have been very
Unruly, to the great scandal of what they professed.

Avoid therefore going to Law at your first setting out, for that will teach
you to be litigious before your temper is well fixed, and will contract an
habit of wrangling with your Neighbors, and at last delight in it, like a
Sophister, with arguing in the Schools: You may observe many who have entered
upon entangled Estates to become Vexatious, and have quite lost the
Debonariness of their Dispositions.

Be always mild and easy to those that are about you, your Relations and
Servants, not only for their fakes, but your own. If you be displeased at every
Piccodillo, you will become habitually Froward, which you cannot put off when
you appear abroad. And remember that if you be easy top your self, you will so
to every Body else, and you will be Welcome every where.

This produces Comity and Affability, which is a great Ornament of Behavior;
This argues you are well within, and that you are a Lover of Mankind. It is a
Mixture made up of Civilities and Freedom, suited to the Condition of the
Person you converse with, a quality as to Modes and Circumstances, we fetch
from beyond the Seas; for the mere Englishman is supposed to be defective in
it; as being Rough in Address, not easily acquainted, and blunt even when he
obliges; though I think it not worth the Charge the Gentleman is at, that
travels for it; Nay, I am sorry for the poor Returns many make, that import
hither the Air and Carriage, and Assurance of the French, therewith quitting
their own staple native Commodities of much greater Value, viz. the Sincerity
and Generosity of the English Disposition. None is more melted with a Civility
than an Englishman, but he loves not you should be verbose and ceremonious in
it; take heed therefore of over-acting your Civilities to men unconcerned in
you, that must conclude you impertinent or designing. Freedom is likewise
acceptable, and a great advantage to a Converser. We commonly make make it the
effect of Familarity, but it should be the cause of it; but Prudence must bound
it and apply it. Be free when you speak, when you give, when you spend, and
when you allow your Time and Company to your Friends, let nothing of
Confinement, Formality or Difficulty be discerned. If you can do a kindness, do
it at first, That is a double Obligation, and evidences that it was in your
heart before it was suggested to you. The Return of Thanks will be but cold, if
the obliged finds, that Importunity, Necessity Or after Reasonings did extort
it from you.

If you would have an Interest where you live, there must be legible (in all
your Actions) Justice in your dealings between man and man, this is the
cheapest and the greatest Policy, and this alone will secure your Reputation
with the Populo. And to this purpose I only advise Two Things.

1 st. You must be an exact keeper of your Word. A Promise is a Debt, which you
should pay more carefully than a Bond, because your Honesty and Honor are the
Security. Be punctual even in small matters, as meeting a Friend, restoring a
Book, returning a Paper, etc. for failing in little things will bring you to
fail in great, and always render you Suspected, and you shall never be confided
in, even when you mean most heartily.

2 dly, Have a special care of your Debts. I scarce know any that can always
avoid contracting them, but he that neglects them is profligate, and undone, as
to the World. If you would eat in quiet, never run in debt for what you daily
consume: He that is necessitated to this, is the proper Object of an Alms. When
you borrow, choose rather a rich Creditor, and a great Debt, than many trifling
Debts dispersed among poor People; a poor man's little Debt makes the greatest
noise. Defer not therefore to pay Mechanics, etc. their utmost Dues, for they
are craving and clamorous, and consider only your Condition in the world, not
your present Exigence.

Prudence must be discernable in your Actions, as well as Justice, and that
will appear in nothing more than in the Choice of Confidents and Dependents;
Your most diffusive love to Mankind cannot be extended very far, for the verge
of your Knowledge is not, and need not be great: Out of Acquaintance you choose
Familiars, and out of these you pick Friends, but you must not expect them to
be such as are described in Books, and talked of by Philosophers, that is a
Romantic thing only to be found in Utopia or the New Atlantis: If any such
are, they must be in a Monastry or Recess, where business and understanding are
in a little compass: It is sufficient for you to find the effect of one such
Friend in many. You may cull one out of each of those eminent Professions that
you may be concerned in, and make them your Confidents in their several
Spears. You go not to a Lawyer for Physic, nor to a Merchant to be resolved
in a case of Conscience, though both do love you and serve you in what they may.

Make no Man your Friend twice, except the Interruption was through your own
Mistake, and you have done penance for it. Every Well-wisher is not capable of
being made your Friend, nor every one that you think is honest and faithful;
there must be a suiting your humor, and a mutual serviceableness and ability to
give Advice and take it; and such a proportion of Temper as that he shall not,
through vanity, or levity, or uncertainty betray himself o^ you. He that is not
stanch in preserving of Secrets cannot be a Friend, such is a Talkative Man,
that uses his Mouth for a Sluice to let out all that is in him. This argues a
great weakness in the Head; for a shallow Understanding presently judges, and
passes Sentence, and is Positive in it.

Never tell any man you have a Secret, but dare not tell it; you should either
go further, or not have gone so far; and press no man Vehemently to keep
concealed what you have committed to him; for that implies you suspect what you
have done, and that you diffide in his Prudence: It discovers your value of
Things, and provokes him to Incontinence and breach of Trust; for there is an
Itch in Mankind to be greedy of those Fruits that are most zealously forbidden;
and some Prohibitions do even excite desire.

Reservedness, by some, is accounted an Art and a Virtue, but I think it is a
fault, and the symptom of a sullen or stupid Nature, and I know it to be
Unwellcome to all Societies: I like a plain Communicative man, he is useful and
acceptable to the World; and be assured, that a dark close reserved Man shall
never have Friends, No man will take you into his heart, that cannot get into
yours, let your Intentions be never so sincere. And I know not what a good man
need be afraid of. if no hurt be in him, no hurt will come out of him.

It is true Open heartedness has a Latitude, and discretion must bound it, and
assign its degrees, according to your kindness to them, or their nearness to
you; and none should see all within you, for it may be Infirmity, Vice or
Discontent lies at the bottom. Nor is it fit to rush into Discourse before
Superiors, This is a greater Rudeness than to deny them their Place and
Respect. The like Reverence must be had to the Aged, and the most Experienced,
and such as speak out of their own Profession. Neither would I have a man lie
open to the Scrutinies and Pumpings of every Pragmatical Inquisitor: Such
Assaults must be managed by Art. You must put by the Thrusts by slight, rather
than Strength; for no force must be discerned in such cases: He that drolls
best, evades best. But when a man demurs at an easy Question, and is shie of
speaking his Mind, and passes into another Shape, when the matter enquired for
is common to all, or Prejudicial to none, and when he delivers any thing it
must be received as a great secret, though not fit or worthy to be kept; It
argues him weak and formal; and by his Rarities he lays up, you may guess at
all his Closet.

From all this you may infer how far the reporting of News may be convenient.
If you would be Popular, you must indulge this humor of Mankind, though the
Young man is not so much the Athenian in this as the Aged. If you live remote
from the City, have all public Occurrances as early as you can, you oblige
your Neighbors by it, better than with the greatest Entertainment: Some are
terrified from speaking what they hear, because it is the Trade of Seditious
men to spread Rumors and false Reports, but I think there needs not such
Caution, if what is related be somewhat at distance, or a common concern, or
not evil in it self, and hurts not the fame of others.

Tell no News to one that Pretends to be a Statesman, and ask none from him;
not the first, for he will seem to know it before, or be angry his Intelligence
was no quicker; not the last, for he thinks secrecy becomes gim, and he loves
not to be an Author.

You may guess men's Tempers by the strain of their Intelligence, Converse not
therefore with mutinous Dispositions; and be sure you represent the Actions of
your Superiors Heartily, as Peace, Charity and Obedience does oblige you. Let
your Errors be always on the Right Hand; for every good Child is so far from
exposing, that without beholding, he endeavors to cover the Nakedness of his
Father.

It is the Method of Nature and all Common Wealths, that there be a Dependence
of the lesser upon the greater, the weak upon the strong; therefore if you aim
at Employments, you must lean upon some besides your own Virtue, and have
Patrons and Assistants to advance you: I know no greater advantage for a
Qualified Man than to stand in the way; for every man must let out his
Affections upon some, and have his Creature, and that is chosen by Chance or
Fancy. You see when Friends meet, their Presence does excite a Cheerfulness and
Vivacity, with which they entertain one another, and this speaks their
Sincerity, better any words they can utter. This holds proportionably in all
degrees of Conversation. Take notice therefore of your first accosting any
Person, he will be presently inclined to like or dislike, and he cannot but
give some Indications of it.

Observe then the Eye, rather than the Tongue, and apply not your self where
you was at first discouraged, if the Circumstances of your Affair did not cause
it: If you prove the Favorite of a great Man, desire not the Monopoly of his
Ear, for his Misadventures will be imputed to you, and what is well done, will
be ascribed to himself.

Allow your self some time for Business every day; No man should be in the
World, that has nothing to do in it; yet never proclaim your self very busy,
for a little hint will serve any that is not much Impertinent; and the less
busy you seem, the more you are admired, when your work is dispatched.

Recreation is as necessary as Business, which should be rather of the Body
than the Mind, because that suffers most in sedentary Employments. In this you
must have respect to the Place where you live, and Your Associates there. In
some parts of this Kingdom many of the Gentry understand nothing beyond a Horse
or a Dog, and can talk of nothing besides it; therefore if you be not a
Hunts-man or a Faulkoner you cannot converse with them. Yet this is really
better than the Effeminate Divertisements of the City,

Take heed of playing often Or deep at Dice and Games of Chance, for that is
more chargeable than the seven deadly sins; Yet you may allow your self a
certain easy Sum to spend at Play, to gratify Friends, and pass over the
Winter Nights, and that will make you indifferent for the Event. If you would
read a man's Disposition, see him Game, you will then learn more of him in one
hour, than in seven Years Conversation, and little Wagers will try him as soon
as great Stakes, for then he is off his Guard. Equanimity at Play, which is not
the effect of Use, argues a man Mannageable for any thing; He that Crows and
Insults with Success, is Passionate, and is usually the same that frets and
quarrels at Misfortunes.

All Society is linked together with some common thing that entertains them;
Thus eating, and especially drinking is become the Ligament of Conversation. In
this you are daily concerned in some degree, let this be with a visible
Chearfullness and Pleasantness; for that is wholesome both for Body and Mind, as
Physicians and Divines will inform you. It will make you Welcome to all; and
by this many accomplish their ends upon the World.

Be not over Critical about eating, for an Epicure is very Troublesome; though
this Luxurious Age has made it a piece of Learning, yet methinks it is much
below a brave Man to be anxious for his Palate, and to have his Thoughts and
Pleasures confined to a Dish of Meat. Judge rather for Health than Pleasure;
and disquiet none with disparaging the Food, or Niceness about it; and be not
much afraid of the unwholsomness of what is set before you, except it be your
constant Diet; for usually you see nothing but some will commend it; and our
common Tables furnish us with nothing that a temperate eater may not eat with
safety.

Confine none when you drink to your Measures, and expect not that others
should do as you do; it is both uncivil and unreasonable to impose on Company;
nor yet must you seem to be under any Restraint by them, but be flexible to the
Inclinations of the whole, and that with readiness. Every man should keep a
stint, he that palliates it, is most pleasant; yet if you publicly declare
your Resolution not to Trespass beyond your Measures, when you are found to
command your self, you will not be solicited any further. When you have come
up to your Standard, recede silently, and do not magisterially oblige the
Company to break up with you, much less stay to be an unconcerned Spectator of
their Levities; but give others the same liberty your self desires to take.

I might extend such kind of Observations to many other Subjects, but I must
desist, begging your Pardon for playing the Dictator, and being so Dogmatical
in what I utter. I know they will not fit all Men, nor do they pretend to cure
all Faults, nor are they designed to express your Needs; but they may prevent
Inconveniences, and help you to read Men, and discover where they fail, and
let you see what Relishes with the World. They are obvious and easy in
themselves; for Nice and Subtle Things do not guide Mankind, but plain and
common Rules. And by Analogy, with these laid down, you may judge of other
Matters, as they Occur. And I cannot but acquaint you, that they are the Effect
your Worthy, Father's Influence on me, who extending his Paternal Care to all
Circumstances for your good, engaged me (upon your quitting you* Accademical
Station) to propound to you some Directions concerning Conversation. And I have
Pitched upon such as are grounded on Virtue, yet tend to render you acceptable,
even to the worst; and he has done me Honor in judging me capable of speaking
to this Subject. If they accomplish not the Utmost I intended, at least, they
will do no hurt, but discover my own private Sense, and be a Testimony of that
Kindness which is owing to your Relations, by

Your unfeigned Friend and Servant, R. L.


