LOYALTY Vindicated
From the (...) Virulent Pamphlet called [A Letter from a Gentleman (...) York,
concerning the troubles which happened in that Pro^ince, in the time of the
late happy Revolution] wherein the Libellous Author falslely scandalises those
Loyal Gentlemen, who courageously threw off the absolute Slavery that Province
then lay under: and Declared for His present Majesty, the Protestant Religion,
and the English Laws.
ALthough to name but the Authors of this Pamphlet, to give account of the
time, manner, and design of its Publication, would sufficiently confute it; and
were it all Truth, take away its Credit: Yet I shall first by plain proof of
Fact and Reason, disabuse whom it may have imposed on^; and then expose the
Seducers themselves whose corrupt minds gave birth to this Ignis fatuus.

I know the Authors have triumphed, that their Libel has not hitherto been
answered; but they will have but little cause, when they consider it required
some time to recover the damp and stunn given to honest minds, by the late
corrupt Government of New York that (...) it: and some time will always be
naturally taken up for the (...) of joy; that truth and honesty will now have
their turn of being pr^tected by Authority.

It was with great dread known, that the late King James was bound in
Conscience to endeavor to Damn the English Nation to Popery and Slavery, and
therefore no wonder (since he made such large steps toward it in his
Kingdom's) that he took a particular care of this Province, of which he was
Proprietor, and at one jump leapt over all the bounds, and Laws of English
Right and Government; and appointed a Governor of this Province of New York,
who (although he was a person of large indowments of mind ^et) gave active
Obedience to his Prince without reserve; and accepted of a Commission now on
record in the Secretarys Office, giving him power with consent of any Seven of
his Council to make Laws and to ^aise Taxes (as the French King does) without
consent of the People, (for the Council) are no body, but whom he pleases to
name, and therefore could represent nothing but the Kings pleasure^ Hereby the
will of the Prince became the Law; and the estates of the Subjects became the
Kings property. And this Governor and Council were the tools to inslave their
Country, who pursuant to their Commission did make Laws and Assessed Taxes
accordingly, without any Representatives of the People, as appears by the
Records of the Council book.

This French Government being thus (by Commission) introduced, it was natural
that Papist^ should be employed in the highest Trusts; such as the Council, the
Revenue, and the Military Forces; and since no Law was left alive to make them
unqualifyed, therefore this Obedient Governor admitted major Brockholse and
major Baxter. into the Council; M^tthew Plowman to be Collector of the Revenue,
and said Baxter and R^sse^ to Command Military Forces; all professed Papists to
assist in making Arbitrary Placats, and forcing Obedience to them from a
P^otestant free People.

This was the condition of New York, the Slavery and Popery that it lay under,
until the Hand of Heaven sent the glorious King WILLIAM to break those chains,
which would otherwise have fettered all Europe. And these were the reasons that
moved the Gentlemen concerned ^n the Revolution of New York, to be early in
shaking off their Tyrants, and declaring for their Deliverer.

These things premised do make way for the answer to the bold Assertions of the
Libeller, who had the Author Printed the Letter ten ye^rs before, viz the time
of the Revolution, he would have come under the penalty of spreading false
News, which he in particular knows, in Scotland is called Leesing, and deserves
the death called the Maiden.

[Pag. 3] In the third page which is the first of the Letter, he declares that
Jacob Leisler and his accomplices committed great disorders in the Revolution.
And was ever Revolution made wi^^out them? What, must (...) noxious humors of
the body natural, be loosned and put a float, and very often with pangs and
gripes, before the Medicament can officiate the discharge? and must not the
body politic suffer a Convulsion to pluck up Spiritual and Temporal Tyranny
that was taking (...) in it? (...) I pray explain your self, was not the
Revolution it self the greatest disorder that could be given to you and the
Jacobite party? and therefore you need not admire nor wonder that all those
that have a good opinion of the Revolution, have so likewise of Jacob Leisler,
and other early Instruments of it in this Province: Nor is it a wonder that it
should b^ credited, that the persons then in Commission in New York were
Jacobites, and persons ill affected to the Revolution (which now the Libeller
dare not say otherwise than call happy) for their very Commissions from King
James were expressly contrary to Law, and their persons unqualified to serve in
any Capacity in any English Government, and so that as Jacobites (i. e. obeyers
of King James's Arbitrary Government) and as Papists they must naturally be ill
affected to the happy Revolution in England, and implacable Enemies to the well
wishe^ thereof in New York. The proof of this appears by the Printed account of
the State of the Government of New York, attested by the Records of Sir. Edmund
Andross, Coll Nicholson, Matthew Plowman, major Baxter and Bartholomew Russel's
Commissions; which are Evidence undeniable and point blanck contrary to the
Testimony of the Libeller, who calls himself a personal witness. But the Author
was safe at the time of Publishing the Letter, for it was when the Province lay
under the calamity (more then in any other age) of Licensing this Letter, which
gives Authority for the palliating of Vice with false glosses, and of
criminating the Actions of the most Just and Virtuous and pious persons, and
when Truth and Innocence were stripped of all defense against the malice,
falsehood and calumny of Col. Fletcher, and his complying Council.

We are told the Lieutenant Governor and Council were Protestants, and perhaps
they were; and so were Friend, Perkins, Jefferys, Herbert, Bishop of Chester,
and Brian Haynes the player; therefore that is no infallible Test that they
were well affected to the Revolution, if they had no other. But they resolved
Thereupon to suspend all Roman Catholics from Command and pla^es of trust in
the Government. Well resolved, though they did not perform it, as the Libeller
afterward owns. But what means the word [ Thereupon] i. e. King James was fled
into France, the Prince of Orange was Arrived with considerable Forces in
England, and by consent and voice of the Nation declared their Deliverer and
King: and since King James could not stand by them, and the Arbitrary
Commissions he had given them, and Old England would be sure to Command
New York: Thereupon they etc. No thanks to them for their Thereupon. Besides if
I am not mistaken* the execution of their Illegal Commissions (which they held
as long (...)) and their fear of exasperations they had justly given to the
People, by being Voluntary slaves to King James his Will, and Authorized to
make all under them to be likewise so: (as the Devils would have all men Damned
with themselves.) For these reasons these faint resolve, were made and ill
executed. But we do not find that Thereupon they declared for the Prince of
Orange, or the Protestant Religion No, these Gentlemen had submitted so
entirely to such a blind Obedience to their Prince as (notwithstanding their
Profession) was never practiced by any Christians, but the Papists; and think
to hide their nakedness by the fig leaf of turning a single Papist out of the
Council, just as their Master King James did, when the Prince of Orange was
landing; the Nations hearts alienated from him, and his standing Army likely to
run over to the Prince: Thereupon, he restored the Charters of Corporations,
and Magdalen College of Oxford, and declared to call a free Parliament: Just
with the same good will as these New York Thereupon-men. [Pag 4.] But it is
notoriously false and known to be so by the Inhabitants of New York, that
Thereupon these disbanded Papists forthwith left the Province: For Baxter
stay^d here several Months, not knowing whether it was a real Revolution or
no; and Russel stayed and dyed in New York, but Plowman continued fixed in the
greatest Trust of Collector of the Revenue, being entrusted by the Protestant
Lieutenant Governor and Council with the sinews of War in his management, who
would be sure as a strict Papist to employ it in the service of a Protestant
Revolution, from the same good affection with themselves.

To proceed, this Libeller names three Dutch Gentlemen of their Co^ncil, and
tells you that but two of them were moct affectionate to the Royal house of
Orange, although Mr. Phillips (I believe) had the same affection with the rest:
but the Libeller never tells you, that any of them (...) pleased that the
Prince of Orange, had rescued from ruin our English Laws, Liberties and
Protestant Religion, and was become a Royal English King: which was but a small
reward to Him for the Blessing it gave us: he only tells us, that as Dutchmen
they loved the Royal house of Orange: So, I presume the late King James does,
being tied by blood thereto; although the wishes him far enough from England. I
suppose those Dutch Gentlemen will give the Libeller few thanks for his remark
on them. He adds, that the said Lieutenant Governor and Council Convened to
their Assistance, all the Justices of the Peace and Civil Magistrates, and
Military Officers. But they had quite forgot the English Constitution of
calling the Representatives of the People: and whereas several of this
Convention were the Persons that were pitched upon, and thought fit by the then
Arbitrary Government to have Commission, Office and Power to enslave the
Subject. No wonder the People did not think themselves safe in their hands, to
be managed by the major Vote of such a Convention.

Neither was the first thing they ordered, viz. Fortifying the City of
New York, any wise satisfa^to^y; since it was most proper that those persons
who gave occasion for a Revolution, were most probable to make themselves
strong to oppose it. And therefore Coll. Bayard made Coll. of the Militia by
King James, was most liable to obey and execute King James's order, and an
unsure Security for the Fort; Especially having so often declared in Words, and
Letters, under his own hand to Mr. West etc. That those who were in Arms for
the Prince of Orange were Rebels. But it is absolutely false, that Coll.
Bayards industry fortifyed the Fort; for Capt. Leisler opened the Well, which
was closed up; he it was ordered the Batteries, that were made about the Town,
he mended the Breast works of the Fort, as likewise the Platforms, and Powder
Room; all which were in a miserable Con^ition^ and these great works took up
near a Twelve Mo^eths time, with Vigorous application and industry of the
Inhabitants, (...) Bayard was out of the Power of betraying the Fort, which
(...) never have been defended in the posture he kept it, with no W^ll op^n,
nor any covering for it, defense or security for their (...) when the Mi^itia
Forces were on guard in the ^ort, the (...) Governor in Passion alte^ed their
Orders given by their (...) them, if they gave him any further (...). Improoved
by the Depositions of (...)] And for their own (...) Revenue, as being very
useful for men (...), for their cause.

It matters not what Letters were sent home by the Lieutenant Govern^^^, for it
is plain neither Governor nor Council would declare for the Prince of Orange,
pretending they wanted Orders; No, they wanted good will; for without Orders
this Libeller pretends they turned out Banter and Russel out of Commission. I
wonder how they dared to go so far, and no farther. But no body but themselves
know or care whither they Wrote or no, for it signified nothing, except to
excuse themselves from declaring till an answer came, and they knew who was
upperm^st I suppose they had a mind to stay to see who got the better in
Ireland, before they would declare.

[ Page 6.] A lying building must have a lying foundation, and therefore the
Libeller says, That Capt. Leisler unwilling to pay the Duty of his Wines,
stirred up the People to Rebellion. The case was thus, the Popish Collector
Plowman was then continued in Office, and Capt. Leisler did, even with him,
make Entry in the Custom house for his Wines, and engaged to pay the Customs to
such as should be legally qualified to receive them; which the Papist Plowman
was not.

And now the People being exasperated by the delay of the Governor and Council
to declare for the Prince, the greater body of the Militia with their Officers,
did Seize on the Fort, and did send and demand the Keys from the Lieutenant
Governor; and since they had taken the Government on them, they did Seize what
Public Moneys they could find; and took the Seven hundred Seventy three Pounds
from Coll. Nicholson, which with great prudence they did Expend for the safety
and defense of the Revolution: nor were the People Drunk or Mad: for no Man,
Woman, or Child, was hurt by them even in the very Convulsion of changing the
Government; nay the very Papists then in Office and others who were justly
suspected of designs of betraying the Country to King James's faithful Allie,
the French King had not a hair hurt, except by the fright their own guilt
occasioned; and these Revolutioners must either be very sober or loving in
their drink, or these Jacobites had never escaped being Dewitted by a
sufficiently provoked People, who had the Power, but more grace than to use it.

False Assertions without proof are sufficiently answered by denying them This
northern forehead answers himself: for the Libeller says, the people cry^d out
that they disowned all Government, and in the next line tells you, they
proclaimed Capt. Leisler their Commander. But I suppose he gives this
contradiction as a proof of the Peoples being drunk; to be against all manner
of Government, and choose a Governor in the same breath. It Is likewise
notoriously (...) that no other Commissioned Officer was amongst them: for most
of the Officers of the Militia of the City joined therein: But had it been
true, then (...). Leisler (...) only Commission Officer ought to Command them;
(...) they wor^ just and sober in their choice, as well as prudent in their
Trust of so good and faithful a Person But the fact of this was false, for
Capt. Leisler though instrumental in shaking off the Tyrannical Government, did
not believe he had a Title to govern longer than the Peoples Resolutions were
known; and therefore circular Letters were carried by Coll. Depeyster and Capt.
De Brayn to the several Counties; whose Freeholders chose their
Representatives, who being met appointed Capt. Leisler Commander in Chief under
their Hands and Seals, and appointed several to be of his Council, under the
name of a Committee of Safety to preserve the Public Peace of the Province:
Who did i^ so effectually, that those divested of the Governing power had no
other harm done to their persons; and the late Lieutenant Governor was
permitted to withdraw himself whither he pleased. And here I must remark that
he ^ai^d much better than Sir. Edmund Andross at B^ston, who was made close
Prisoner and sent home to England, and yet no man was Executed or attainted
there for that act of Loyal Violence.

Boston having proclaimed King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, and New York Fort and
Government possess^d by Loyal Leisler and his party, and the Lieutenant
Governor withdrawn out of the Province, then the Libeller says, That the late
Council and their Convention of Justices of the Peace and Officers, had a great
wind to proclaim the King and Queen, whom they never had declared for, and we
must take his word for it: but he owns the Loyalists did procl^me them, but
says, it was very disorderly. I observe what ever ma^e for the Revolution, or
against the late King James, is very displeasing to the Scribler: For when the
People took the Government out of their Arbitrary betrayers hands, he says,
they were drunk or mad; and now the proclaiming of the King and Queen, was very
disorderly, in neither of which he gives one instance: [ Page 7.] Bu^ thank
God, they were procla^med, and their goodness will pardon small disorders which
were the effects of Loyal Zeal. Although the Jacobites will never forgive them
for it. Some of which Council and Magistrates went to Coll. Bayards house and
drank and rejoiced that Leisler had done what they never could have the heart
to ^o, nor made one step toward. And we may know what kidney these drinkers
were of, by whose Wine they drank: For Coll. Bayard having been a complying
tool all King James's Arbitrary Reign, you shall judge o^ the rest by his
opinion of the happy Rev^l^tion, in his letter to Mr. West of the 14 th. of
January 1689, 90. Wherein he calls them Philistines; calls Leisler and his
Loyal party, the Ar^h Rebel and his hellish crew; wishes he had a suf^c^ent
number to suppress the R^bels, calls them usurpers of the Government, and call^
Sir. Edmund Andross, his Excellency, and calls his friends Loyal; and the whole
tenor of the Letter is to keep up King James's title to admit his Commissions
of Government to be of force, to brand all that declared for the Prince of
Orange, with the black name of Rebels; by which he owned King James was still
in his heart, and had he power equal to his will, would have kept him still on
the Throne, and therefore we may judge of his and his Companies joy, on this
occasion, and whose Health they drank: which, eight years after, they tell us
was King WILLIAM'S and Queen MARYS.

His Majesty's Proclamation to confirm Sheriffs, Collectors, etc. in their
Offices, being Published, the Convention removed Matthew Plowman a Papist from
being Collector, but this is now when Capt. Leisler had rescued the Government*
was possessed of the Fort and had proclaimed King WILLIAM (...) Queen MARY.
Then the Conventi^n (who had done none of these things and were angry at those
who did) they removed a Papist from his Office, about the middle of June, who
was permitted by them to act above two Months from the time that the
Lieutenant Governo^r and Council resolved to remove Papists from Offices; which
(as the Libeller in the first page of his Letter says) was the beginning of
April: they kept him in as long as they could, and now to mend the matter, they
put others in his place of the same principles as to King James, of which the
famous Bayard aforementioned was the Ringleader. And the Li^eller brags, that
they were the (...) in the Province that t^ok the Oaths to Their Majesty's,
appointed by Act of Parliament: It may be true; but it is a^ true, that they
were the last and backwardest to assist in the Revolution, or declare for the
Prince of Orange, which they never did; but afterward pursued to death those
that had done it. They were indeed most forward to take Oaths, when they were
to gain by them, and to have the fing^ing of the Revenue. For the carrying of
the purse they will deny their old Master King James; not out of hatred to him,
but love to Money; being ^ound by solemn Oa^h to be true to their own interest;
which Oath binds them closer than any Oath of Allegiance.

These worthy Commissioners of the Revenue ^a^e in the Custom^ house, but Capt.
Leisler with the Inhabitants who (...) possession of the Government and (...),
demanded of them by what Authority they pre^ended to act; who refusing to give
Capt. Leisler any Account they offered to turn him out of the Custom-house by
force; on which turn^^ (ma^e by three Jacobites) a guard of Inhabitants from
the Fort came to defend their Captain. And the People in the Streets were so
enraged at Coll. Bayard (who they knew was as inveterate as any Papist against
the Revolution) that they had certainly tore him to pieces, had not the good
temper of Capt. Leisler been his protector, who was the only person capable of
saving him in that extremity, and favored his escape, and let him live to have
afterward a hand in the Murdering his deliverer: So that the Violence of Armed
men and naked Swords, beating the Commissioners from the Custom-house, was very
modestly done, for no man was hurt, not so much as a skin broke of those who
deserved the halter; but they are still alive; some of them to watch another
occasion to betray their Country, when they can get a Popish King of England to
assist them.

[ Page 8.] Captain Leisler finding several Papists and false Protestan^s in the
Town, like a prudent Officer kept good g^ards, sent parties to preven^ any
Conspi^acy they might make to resume the Government; and to p^eserve the Peace;
which was daily attempted to be broke by declaring for King James, and his
Governor Sir* E^m^nd An^^^ss, and denying the Authori^y of the People, and
Capt. Le^sler entrusted by them, on which it was wisel^ d^ne of Capt Leisler to
secu^e in the Fo^t those whom he found so troubl^some to the p^bli^k Peace, and
as the heads of them he Imprison^d the (...) famous Coll. Bayard and Mr.
^i^^ols, but without (...) they were confined, and not in a nasty C^al, but in
handsome lodgings, such as now are thought p^o^er for the Cap^ain of the ^uard,
the Store keeper and the ^^cretary of the Pro^ince to lodge and keep Office in.
It is true that Coll. Bayard was put in Irons, as he well deserved for his
aversion to the Revolution, disturbing the Peace, and attacking Capt. Leisler
(then Commander in Chief) in the open Street, as appears by several credible
Oaths. Nor could it be safe to admit such firebrands to Bail; and therefore
they were kept close from doing mischief, which is the part of all good
Governments to do, and was most necessary in this Revolution.

Captain Leisler with the Committee of safety (appointed by the Representatives
of the Freeholders of the several Counties of the Province) having published
their Declaration for the Prince of Orange the Protestant Religion, and the
English Laws and Liberties, they thought it prudent to discriminate the Well
affected from the Enemy, and therefore Summoned all the Inhabitants of the City
to the Fort, to sign their names to such a Declaration as owned the Authority
of the Prince of Orange. And the refusers must justly by him and all mankind be
deemed Enemies to the Revolution, to His Majesty, and their Country. And is
this a crime to know the Sheep from the Goats, or to take all Reasonable
methods for the safety of the then Government: but the Libeller is angry at
every prudent step was taken, nor is he satisfied, although it is above Seven
years since he was gorged with their innocent blood which he had a hand in
shedding.

It is notoriously false that Capt. Leisler opposed the Collecting of the
Revenue; indeed he was not willing a Papist should run away with our Protestant
Kings Money, nor did he think it safe in Bayards etc hands. But the Committee
of safety (and not Capt. Leisler) appointed Mr. De Lanoy (in whom they durst
confide) to that trust, who received no Customs until December following, when
His Majesty's orders arrived; till then he took only notes from the Merchants
to pay the Customs when demanded. And it is well known that Mr. De Lanoy gave a
fair and true Account of his Receipts and payments of the Customs to Governor
Slaughter: whereby it appears ^e had exp^nded five hundred Pounds of his own
Money above the Money of the Revenue, for the Kings Service and the support of
the Rev^l^^ion; (...) Money is not repaid him to this day through the (...)
Jac^^ites before m^ntioned, who crept into power, (...) gratified their revenge
on men of greater sense (...) than themselves.

On the tenth of December one Riggs brought His Majesty's Le^^ters which were
delivered to Capt. Leisler, as they ought accordin^ to their direction; for
Coll. Nicholson (to whom they were first d^^rected) had withdrawn himself out
of the Province, and (...) absence the Letters were directed to such as for the
tim^ (...) took care for the preservation of the Peace (...) ^^^ministring the
Laws; which was none other but Capt. [ Page 9. Leisler, who was appointed
thereto by the Represen^^^^ves of the Freeholders of the several Coun^yes of
the Province, ar^ had the Command of the Fort; nor could those who called
them^selves of the Council be entitled thereto, for they were the Person that
were made use of in the late Arbitrary and Tyrannical G^^vernment, to the
over-turning of all Laws, and Civil Rights, an^ who gave Occasion for the
Revolution in New York, and did never declare for the Prince of Orange.

These Letters from His Majesty fully confirming Capt. Leisler (...) the
Government, whereto he was chosen by the People's Represen^tatives; he
endeavored to execute his trust faithfully, and on such an Emergency it was
the greatest wisdom and prudence to find Money to support the Government, which
he did as regularly* as the time would permit, by and with the consent of the
General Assembly of the Province fairly chosen by the Freeholders; which this
seducer falsely insinuates were only Selected and Appointed by Capt. Leisler.
And by and with their ad^ice and consent Taxes were raised and properly
applied. And it is observable the Libeller tells us, that Capt. Leisler applied
these Sums to his own private use, and yet in the very next words tells us, it
was to maintain said disorders, al^owing private men Eighteen Pence per day: by
disorders he means the Government reposed by the People and confirmed by King
WILLIAM in Capt. Leisler, which had disordered and routed the former Slavery
the People lay under: for it was di^o^der to none but Papists and Jacobites.
And the Eighteen pen^e a day was for the private use of the private men to whom
it wa^ p^id, for their subsist^nce in defending the Government: and th^i^
de^ence was indeed of private use to Capt Leisler, as comprehend^d in the
Public general good thereof: But the Revenue was not suffi^ient to defray so
great a change, had not Capt. Leisler expend^d great Sums out o^ his own
private Estate, as others concerned with him likewise did, for which he was
repayed with a barbarous Death* through the means of men who will never venture
their ^ives or Estates to serve their Prince, Country, or Protestant Re^igion.

[ Page 10*] Nor could Coll* Bayard and Mr. Nichols complain of their
aforementioned confinement in the Fort, since they would fly in the face o^
Government, and give such vent to their invenomed passions as appears by the
Record of their Committment, and Co^l. Bayards confession in his Petition to
Capt. Leisler.

But it is point blanck a lie, nor was it ever, or can be proved that Capt.
Leisler gave directions to any man to plunder Coll. Bayards house, nor was an^
thing of that sort done by his order to any house, but Commands given to the
contrary, and the Soldiers were compelled to restore what could be made appear
they had forcibly taken from any man. Even so small a matter as a Hat taken out
of the house of Mr. Lambert, was restored to him.

Coll. Cortland and others might leave their houses and families, but they
would have had no occasion for so doing had they peaceably and quietly minded
their own affairs and submitted to the Government; for all such had no manner
of disturbance given them, but were protected.

[ Page 11.] The Protestant Ministers the Libeller says, could not escape Capt.
Leislers Malice and Cruelty: I am afraid those Ministers he mentioned, were
Popish Trumpets, to Preach up the damn^d Doctrins of Passive Obedience, and Non
Resistance, and to noise in our Ears with their accursed breath that we ought
patiently to hold our Protestant Throats to be cut by the (...) of a Popish
King: and when Capt. Leisler with his friends had (...) hold of that wonderful
Deliverance offered immediately from (...) to Redeem His People from Slavery
upon Earth, and Popish Damnation in Hell; to have false Priests of Baal get up,
and use their wicked Eloquence, to make the People believe a lie, even in the
house of the God of Truth; and from the Pulpit, to tell these Captains of our
Temporal Salvation to their faces, that being faithf^l to their God, their
Country, and their Laws, in the defense of the Holy Protestant Religion, and
the Rights and Liberties of Eng^ish men, and their thankful declaring for the
most glo^ious Prince (...) ^a^th their Deliverer: was the blackest of Treason
and R^^e^lion. Such Apostasy and base Treachery has deserved, and often (...)
rebukes than the friendly Verba^ admonition given by Capt. Le^sler to the blind
Seer, and had nothing of the Malice and C^uelty in it of the Libeller, who
wrote ^o false a Pamphlet: and so the other time^serving Priests (who were
Protestant shooing horns to draw on Popery) might have been more quiet, and
left the result of the Revolution to Divine Providence, and not pass such hard
Censures as to attaint blood and accuse of Rebellion, (...) that would accept
of Gods deliverance from the two greatest plagues of mankind, Popery and
Slavery. But I hope they have repented and will be saved, otherwise whilst they
Preach to others they themselves will be cast away.

It Is true Capt. Leisler sent to the Merchants of the Town to supply the
Garrison with Provisions and other necessaries, and sent without distinction to
all People who had Stores; otherwise the Garrison might have perished: but he
honestly gave them Credit in the Kings Books, and they have since (for the
greatest part) been satisfied; and Capt. Leisler (as he ought) did order
forceibly to break their Warehouses open, where they were refractory, and
refused on so great Emergency to afford support for the Government; but exact
Accounts were kept of all such goods, and Entries made in Books kept for that
purpose; so that it was not plunder, (as the Libeller falsely calls it) but
they were to be satisfied, and paid for the same. And I believe it was never
known in the Memory of man, that ever a Revolution, or change of Government,
was more regular: or where Military power would not force Victuals where it was
denied them, when they wanted it: and therefore it was for the special Service
of King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, to keep alive those that were the only persons
in that Province, who declared early for Them, and owned Their Authority. Nor
can any proof upon Earth be brought (except such as the (...)) that one
Farthings Value of goods was ever converted t^ the private use of Capt.
Leisler, or Transported by him to the West Indies, but the imposture of the
whole book depends on such positive falsehoods.

[ Page 12.] The Account of Thirteen Thousand nine hundred fifty nine Pounds of
damages done the Province is made up by the Libeller himself: for no man living
of truth, has ever demonstrated that Capt Leisler or his friends, ever made
pillage of any man's Estate* but I believe the ^ibeller reckons that he and his
Jacobite party had so much damage by the Revolution, which they might
Arbitrarily have extorted from the Kings good Subject^, i^ it had no^ happened.
Good damages! which I am glad o^ with all my (...). At this rate pray what
damages had the Popish Cle^gy o^ England and Ireland, by King WILLIAMS
hindering their being restored to Abbys, Monasterys and Peter Pence; but it is
better that the Jac^bites should su^fer damage of their Estates and Lives too,
than an Eng^ish Protestant People should have the damage o^ loosing their Laws
and Religion, their Properties and their Souls. And as ^or Coll. Willets
losses, which the Libeller magnifies, he could not put a particular Value on
them, they were so small. Had they been considerable, he would since have made
a particular complaint, to have reparation, which he never did, nor had
occasion for; but had he been ruined he would not have been pittyed by good
men, because he so far forgot that he was an Eng^ish man and Protestant: that
he Executed an Illegal Commission, and raised Forces to destroy all those that
declared* for our Deliverer, that we might return to our Vomit, which was a Dog
trick in him.

And thus the Libeller expatiates on Capt. Leislers Arbitrary proceedings over
his Majesty's Subjects Persons and Estates, against the fundamental Laws of the
Land; but he should have considered that all the fundamental Laws of the Land
were wholly subverted and trampled upon by the Hellish, Popish, Arbitrary
Government, Established by King James's Commission; so that Capt. Leisler found
no fundamental Laws to transgres^; and was forced in discharge of his trust
from the People, and by and with the consent of those app^inted by their
Represen^atives, to use these violent methods which Heaven gave him the power
to make use of to restore those fundamental Laws, which were abolished by tools
of the same temper with the Libeller.

Major Ingoldesby a Captain of a foot Company, arrives near two yea^^ after,
says the Libeller, And with se^eral Gentlemen of the Council, send^ to ^apt.
Leisle^, that for the prese^^ation of the Peace, he might continue to Command
in the Fort, until Coll. Slaughters Arrival, and only de^^red that major
Ingoldesby and the Kings Soldiers might be permitted to quarter, and refresh
themselves in the City: but instead of complying, he in passion told Mr.
Brook, on his acquainting him, that Mr. Phillips, Coll. Bayard, Coll. Cortland
were of the Council, that they were Papist Dogs, and if the King should send
Three Thousand of them, he would cut them off; and without cause Proclaimed
open War; (...) which said major Ingoldesby persuaded several of the (...) with
him merely for self preservation. On which several (...) Shot from the Fort
killed and wounded several of (...) good Subjects, who made no opposition.

This whole Paragraph I shall show to be the greatest complication of Iniquity,
and fit to be the production of a Monster begat by an Incubus on a Scotch
Witch, who had kindled his malice against Truth from the flames he put to the
holy Bible, thereby to become the Adopted Son of the father of Lies.

For major Ingoldesby having no Commission, nor Authority to Command, on his
Arrival, took on him the Title of Commander in Chief, usurped a show of
Government, calling a Council, and Issuing peremptory orders, as appears by the
Records of the Council Book; nay quite contrary to the Romantic Account of the
Libeller, he sent a demand under his own hand, which I have seen, wherein he
acknowledges Capt. Leislers offer to him of his own Houses in the City for the
Accommodation of himself and Officers, and to appoint fit Quarters for the
Soldiers; which major Ingoldesby under his hand denies to accept of, saying,
he demanded the Fort from him, which unless Capt. Leisler would deliver up to
him, he would esteem him as an Enemy to King WILLIAM and Queen MARY. I have
likewise seen Capt. Leislers Letter to major Ingoldesby full of Civility, and
true Reason, wherein he acquaints him, that he held the Fort and Commanded by
Virtue of a trust reposed in him by the People, and confirmed by His Majesty,
and assuring him, that if he had any Commission from His Majesty, or any
Instruction, or Order from Coll. Slaughter appointed Governor of the Province,
on his producing it, The Fort should be immediately delivered to him, but
desired to be excused from resigning his trust, till he found one qualifyed and
authorized to rec^ive it from him. But this was not satisfaction to major
Ingoldesby who was prevailed with to take the Government on him in opposition
to Capt. Leisler, and as Governor in Chief (although never Empowered by King or
People) he issues orders to the several Counties to be ready to attend and
ass^st in opposing Leisler, and his party with A^ms; which was the proclaiming
open War; and pursuant there^o, he sends his (...) in the night, and ordered or
permitted his Rounds at all hours to pass the guards and contrys on the Walls
of the Fort, and not to make answer, but by reproachful Language, when
challenged by them, in order to provoke the drawing of blood, and engaging the
People in a Civil War: and farther, major Ingoldesby ordered all the m^n under
his Command to wear Marks on their Arms, to di^tinguish them from those who
joined with Capt. Leisler.

Du^ing this Revolution and Civil War, I am told not above two persons were
killed, which happiness a^tended the moderate temper of Capt. Leisler and the
Committee of safety, who could not be raised to punish the Insolence of the
Tory party, suitable to what they gave just occasion for.

Soon after, viz. in March, about a Month or five Weeks a^^er major Ingoldesbys
usurpation, Coll. Slaughter Arrived, who Summoned the Fort late at night, and,
contrary to the Libellers assertion, it was never denied to be delivered: but
the delivery suspended till next Morning, i^ not being proper (according to
Military R^les) to ^eliver a Fort in the night; and then it was Surrendered by
Capt. Leisler, who waiting on the Captain General Coll. Slaughter, instead o^
thanks for the faithful Service he had done His Majesty in defending the Fort
and Province from the French (our professed Enemies) and the Treachery of
Papists and Jacobites amongst our selves, wa^ immediately by his order Seized
with Mr. Milbourn, and others of ^he Loyal party, and bound over to answer at
the next Supreme Court of Judicature; where Capt. Leisler and Mr. M^^b^urn
pleaded to the Ju^isdicion of the Court, That whereas he was i^ possession of
the of the Gov^^nment by the choice of the People, (...) in it by the (...)
Letters, that he was (...) to answer (...) or Author^t^, (...), who had (...)
him; (...) was (...) the Count, with (...) ^eason o^ Law, and (...) guilty o^
High Treas^n and Murder; and (...) was granted them (...), until His (...)
should be known in the matter: yet the Violen^e of the Jacobite party (of which
sort were most of Capt. Leislers Judges and Officers of the Court) was such
that they gave no rest to Coll. Slaughter, (...) their Importunity they
prevailed with him to sign the Dead Warrant. And they were Executed
accordingly. So that the representation of the matter, with an account of their
Reprieve reached His Majesty at the same time with the account of their
Execution and Death. So fell Capt. Leisler, and Mr. Milbourn men of known
Integrity, Honesty and Loyalty, and by a pretended course of Law, contrary to
all Law condemned, where their Judges were most of them violent Enemies of the
happy Revolution, and therefore resolved to revenge themselves on these
Gen^lemen who were the most Early and Zealous Instruments of it; and who had
first expended great part of their Estat^s, and then suffered Martyrdom for
King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, their Religion and Laws. The proofs and papers
referred to in this account remain in the hands of Mr. Jacob Leisler only Son
of Capt. Jacob Leisler the Martyr to Jacobite Revenge. The proof that Capt.
Leisler was legally Governor of New York. That major Ingo^desby was but a bear
Captain of ^oot, and had no other command in that Province, nor authority to
demand the Fort from Capt. Leisler; The proof that Capt. Leisler did as a good
Subject deliver the Fort to Coll. Slaughter upon demand, and his Justification,
is immediately expressed in the Act of Pa^liament of England which reverses
their Attainders, and restores their Families, in Blood and Estate.

So that this is the full and true account of this Tragedy; New York lay under
the C^rse of an obs^lute Gov^^nm^nt by King James's Commission to Si^. Edmund
Andross; the (...) courage on the first News of the Rev^lution in Eng^and, and
s^o^k off the Oppressors, and declared for the Prince (...); the Lieuten^nt
Governor, the Council, and (...) o^ the (...) met and ^^l^'d (...) a
Co^^ention being (...) by King (...) no^ decla^e ^or the Prince o^ Orange;
wherefore the people did not think themselves ^a^e in their (...), but S^iz^d
upon the Fort, and (...) Capt. Leisler Commander o^ the Fort until Cir^ular
Letters had p^ocured a return of Representatives of the Free holders of the
several Counties of the Province, who on their meeting making a Declaration for
His present Majesty, did under their Hands and Seals constitute Capt. L^isler
Commander in Chief until the Kings pleasure should be known; and li^^wise
appointed him a Council, by the name o^ a Commit^ee of Sa^ety. And in these
Persons the Government was lodged, who proc^eded to support themselves by the
most moderate methods could be devised.

The Lieutenant Governou^ hereupon withdraws ou^ of the Province, major
Ingolde^by Arrives with Authority over none but his Foot Company; and yet
demands the Fort, which Capt. Leisler du^st not deliver to him without
betraying his Trust both to the King and People; major Ingoldesby usurps the
Title of Commander in Chief, he Issues Orders and Warrants to the People to
rise in Arms to assist him to wrest the Fort out of Capt. Leislers hands, and
provokes Capt. Leislers men in the Fort to Acts of hostility, by which means
one or two men were accidentally killed. Coll. Slaughter Arrives, demands the
Fort, which was surrendered to him immediately; the Persons of Capt. Leisler and
Mr. Milbourn are Seiz^d, and soon after brought to Trial; their plea to the
Jurisdiction of the Court (which could not by Law try them for Mal
Administration in Government) violently over ruled, and they Condemned as
Mutes, for High Treason and Murder; they were Reprieved until His Majesty's
pleasure should be known; and notwithstanding the Reprieve, the Warrant of
Execution Signed, and they Executed.

But the Enemies to King WILLIAM, and consequently to these Gentlemen, had not
sufficiently gratified their malice, by these men's innocent blood: but they
labor in England to get a Justification for themselves, and a confirmation
that the said unjust Judgment was according to Law; and when His Majesty was in
Flanders and several Ministers of State were in place an^ trust in the
Committee o^ Trade, which His Majesty has since tho^ght fit ^o remove from His
Council and their Offices: a report was obtained from the Committee of Trade
affirming that these Loyalists were Condemned and Ex^^^ted according to Law.
^ut however the said Committee represented their Sons* as fit objects of Her
Majesty's mercy, to be resto^ed to their Fathers Estates; which Her Majesty was
(...) pleased to grant. And these mag^ignant Confederates so far prevailed with
the Assembly of New York to compliment and (...) new Governor Coll. Slaughter,
as to pass several Votes against the whole proceedings of the happy Revolution,
and to exc^se the barbarous Seve^ity of the Illegal Condemnation and bloody
Execution which he had ordered. And this was the State of the Case until the
Par^iament of England took the matter into the^^ Con^^de^ation, and the
Honorable the H^use of Commo^^ in the Sixth and Seventh year o^ His present
Majesty's Reign appointed a Committee to examine all parties in ^elation to
Capt. Leislers Execution, where they were heard by their Council at Law, and
where Mr. Dudley (who formerly applied to get Money by Magistracy and
Government in New England, and set up for a Judge in matters of Blood in the
Trial of Capt. Leisler at New York) was heard to make his defense, where his
Cobb Webb Eloquence was too thin to put a vail over so black an Action, as
created horror in the minds of that Honorable and Numerous Committee; who
reported the matter fully to the House, and thereupon an Act of Parliament
passed the Royal Assent, wherein His Majesty, the Lord, and Commons of England
do recite the Legality of Capt. Leislers Authority, and justify his
proceedings in the Government, and more especially his refusing to deliver the
Fort to major Ingoldesby, being the Fact for which he was Condemned; and do
absolutely reverse the Attainders and restore the Blood and Estates of Capt.
Leisler, and those persons Condemned and Executed in New York; which Act of
Parliament i^ (...) at the end of this Treatise.

And now after all, it being about Eight years since these men d^ed, when the
Gra^e and Time should have so b^ry^d the Pers^ns and (...) of th^se good (...)
unfortunate Persons, that no Revenge sh^^ld have room to desire a ^a^ther
gratifica^i^n; and when the (...) between those (...) D^^ch extrac^i^n (who are
the (...), L^yal and Sober Subjects of that Pro^ince) and ^he (...) (who were
most ave^se and backward in the Re^^lu^i^n, but viol^nt and bloody in the
Execution of Capt. (...), as w^ll as the m^st disso^u^e in their Mo^als) in
th^s Provinc^, had (...) to cool, and might by a good Government have been
wholly (...). After all, I say, to have this (...) again blown up, to (...)
Wounds and to open the Graves of the Dead, to disturb the (...); was such an
artifice of the Devil as must give a more than usual abhorrence in good minds;
which leads me to give an account of the Occ^sion, the time, manner, and design
of the Publica^ion of this (...) called a Letter, and withal take some n^tice
of the supposed author.

It is evident in New York, and will soon b^ made appear to His Majesty, that
the (...) Governmen^ of New York under the Administrati^n of Coll. F^etcher,
was a perfe^t sink of Corruption. And although he was (...) to that Government
from a poor mean refugee of Ireland; yet ^e soon forgot the hand that raised
him, and to satisfy his Soul, his Idol Gain, he made a fast friendship with the
few Papists, Jacobites, and dissolute English of New York, who had opposed the
Revolution and revenged themselves on Cap^ Leisler; and who to be supported in
their hatred to the Loyal Wil^iami^es, and connived at in their open breach of
all the Acts of Trade, found great advantage to reward Coll. Fletcher's
friendship by Presents from themselves, and gifts from Pirates; and complied
with him, and consented to all things proposed to them by him; to the
squandring of the Kings Revenue and (to the great dishonor of the King)
destroying all conveniences of a Succeeding Governor; and disposing of all the
Lands in the Province, that not one ^uch is le^t to be given in reward to any
who may by their Services to His Majesty, deserve; or to encourage new
Settlers, and that in such quan^ities as will wholly make it impossible ever to
People the Province; giving to one man Seventy Miles in length; and to several
Fifty, Forty and Thirty Miles in length, and several Miles in breadth; with
many other unjust gross Mal Administrations.

On this bottom Coll Fletcher joined in the mortal hatred to the l^vers of the
Loyal Leisler; and when several condemned to dye for their (...) in that
Revoluti^n were order^d by Her gracious Majesty (...) Memory to be (...), Coll.
Fletcher did it (...) an act (...) of ^is own, and told them that al^h^ugh ^e
rele^^ed them (...) call for them (...) pleased, and hang them And some time
(...) told (...), that they dealt worse by ^im* (...) cleans^d by our (...),
some of which (...) him, but none of them ever did, meaning none of them had
given (...) Bribe or reward, which he was used to re^eive. These Truths Mr.
Beck^^^ and Mr. Gouvernour will attest. Coll* Fletcher likewise paid that
disregar^ (...) the Act of Parliam^nt of England (Reversing the Attainders
(...) Capt. Le^sler and others Condemned, in Blood and Estate) that he (...)
the Wido^ Leisler to be repossessed of her Estate; nor had she (...) her,
during Coll. Fletchers Government, nor until my Lord (...) granted her a Writ
of Possession; which was a ye^r and half after she was Entitled to it by Act
of Parliament in Eng^and, Reprinted at New York. He likewise wholly discouraged
the generality of those who were active in the Revolution, putting few or none
of them into Office, or Employment; and wholly adhering to those that gratifyed
his Vanity, Pride, and Covetousness. For which in return he gave them
countenance in all matters, as we^l as connivance at their unlawful* Trade.

His Majesty having appointed the Earl of Bellomont Governor of New York,
(whose great Honor and Justice Coll. Fletcher both knew and dreaded.) some
considerable time passed between his Patents being passed, and his beginning
his Voyage, which Coll. Fletcher took the advantage of, therein to contrive
methods so to divide the People of the Government, that in Public disorder he
himself might escape having strict Scrutiny made into the Corruptions of his
Government, he therefore not satisfied with crushing the Loyalists, during his
Government, was resolved to assist the Publishing this Libel, which might give
such an Account of the Revolution of New York as should Exasperate to the
highest degree, all that were concerned in it and at the same time assured his
Jacobite party, that it was necessary such a book should be Licensed, to
possess the Strangers who came with my Lord, with such falsehoods as were
useful to their party; my Lord being, as he feared, inclined to favor whoever
was we^l inclined to the Loyalty of Leisler. So that, as is su^posed, one Mr.
Jamis^n was employed to frame this Libel, who was Clerk of the ^loody Court
that Condemned Leisler; a person most in the graces of Coll. Fletcher, who was
in Scotland condemned to (...) and Bur^ing the Bible, and was banished to
New-Y^^k: (...) Contribution need from being a Servant, (...) and being
somewhat a Scholar, and having good (...) (...) of hi^ wi^ked parts to teach
Blasphemy, and Atheism, and to ^idi^ule Sober Religion, till he got a
Reputation amongst the disso^ute Church of England men, whose Li^urgie he then
would, and still does gabble over with great seeming devotion, and up lifted
eyes a few hours after he had been Blasph^ming Ch^istianity: but his form of
saying the Common Pra^er s^ffi^iently recommend^d him to Coll. (...), so that
the Secretary C^arkson was prevailed on to make him his Deputy for a Hundred
Pounds a year Rent; and Coll. Fletcher gave him ^i^ty Pounds per Annum Salary
out of the Kings Revenue as Clerk of the Council, and through all his
Government made use of his vile Service, and afterward recommended him to the
Earl of Bellomont, as one of the honestest men in the Government; although at
the same time he knew the said Jamison was actually married to two Wives then
living. This man so qualifyed was entrusted to do this piece of Service, but
it is believed the aforemen^ioned Coll. Bayard gave him some assistance in
furnishing him with some Materials, and without doubt according to orders, no
falsehood was b^lk'd that could serve the cause, and so this Libel was hammered
out, in which there is sca^ce a Paragraph, but what contains one or more
Scurrilous Untruths, which are delivered with an Highland modesty and
peremptorily affi^med to be truth without any proof, on purpose to Vilify the
Transactions of the Revolution, and Massacre over again the Reput^tion of
thos^, whose persons were Murdered Eight years before for their Loyalty, and
withal the Villainy proper to persons who ^ate the present Government* are added
to this Account some Servile Vo^es of the Assembly of New York made to flatter
their new Governor Coll. Slaug^^^r, who signed these Loya^ists Warrant for
Execu^ion, and likewise is P^inted an order or report (God knows how ob^^in^d)
of the Committee of Trade for J^st^^ying the said Condem^ati^n and Executi^n
But this Libeller, contrary to his duty, to (...) to His Majesty, and respect
to Laws (for he (...) to the present Government) takes no (...) of Pa^liament
of England Reversing the Attainders (...) G^ntlemen, which gives the Lie to his
whole (...) as Lawful Governor of New York, and in (...) was basely Murdered,
contrary to all (...) d^ing (...) duty as His Majesty's Lawful (...); which is
the sense of the words of the said Act. But the Libeller did as he was o^dered,
and the book raised the flame it was designed to raise, and was carried to the
(...) by Mr. Brook (who although a Refugee from (...) and (...) b^ King WILLIAM
to be Collector and Receive^ (...) Customs and Revenue of New York, and a
new-(...) upon him to be one of the bloody Judges of this (...)* but is since
for betraying his said Trust and neglect of his duty, suspended from all his
Employs, even that of being Judge, and one of the Council, by the Right
Honorable the Earl of Bellomont, who was his Security for his Collectors place
to the Commissioners of the Customs of England, but could not bear his
treachery to that Tr^st which he himself had been Instrumental to advance him
to. And Mr. Wilson late Sheriff of New York a hot headed despicable fellow, who
to serve the Tory party, contrary to his Oath, made a most false Return of
Assembly men to serve for the Counties of New York, and Orange in the l^st
Assembly. For which palpable breach of his Oath and Trust, His Excellency the
Earl of Bellomont with consent of the Council suspended him from being Sheriff
of New York. But when this Libel was so midwived to the Press by the Kings
Collector (who was likewise one of the Council) and this foresworn Sheriff.
Then Coll. Fletcher calls the Council where it is proposed (as appears by the
Minute of Council) that a book being found at the Printers, giving an Account
of the Revolution of New York and containing nothing but Truth. It Is resolved
Nomine contradicente, that it should be Printed. But who were the Council who
consented to this great piece of Service to His Majesty? Why Coll. Fletcher,
who is supposed to have given orders for its being Written. Coll. Bayard of
whom enough is said plainly and truly. Mr. Brook who carried it to the Press
and was one of Leislers Judges* Mr. Pinhorn, another of Leislers Judges (who is
since removed by His Excellency the Earl of Bellomont from being Judge and of
the Council, for speaking most Scandalous false and reproachful words of His
most Sacred Majesty King W^LLIAM, and for protecting and concealing in his
house a Popish Priest) and some other Enemies of the Revolution. So that (to
omit the false sordid flatteries given to Coll. Fletcher, which are
impertinently added by the Libeller) it is apparent that there was a wicked
conspiracy, by this book to give distraction (by Printing it just before the
Earl of Bellomont's Arrival at New York) and thereby to divide the People and
so to disturb (...) under his Government, that there should be (...) time or
opportunity of quickly inquiring into the Corruptio^^ (...) Coll. Fletchers
managements.

This was the time and design of its Publication, these the qualities of the
supposed Authors, and of the Persons who carried it to the Press, and after
this manner (by Coll. Fletcher and the before mentioned of the Council) it was
permitted to be Printed; so that it is no wonder, that this book was a Mine
Sprung from He^l to blow up the Peace of this Province, when so many Sons of
Belial in Office and Authority joined in its Contrivance and Publication, who
must keep to their nature and not stick at any plain falsehood (although i^ fly
in the face of the King, Lords and Commons of England, and Truth it self) that
may Exasperate and raise a flame, and if possible Murder over again those
Martyrs for their Loyalty, Capt. Leisler and Mr. Milbourn, who were barbarously
Executed for b^avely* Asserting the Rights and Liberties of English men against
Popish and Arbitrary Government; and for their Early and Sincere Affection to
His most Sacred Majesty KING WILLIAM, whom GOD send long to Reign.

Anno Regni GULIELMI III. REGIS Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Sexto
and Septimo.

At the Parliament begun at Westminster the Twentieth Day of March, Anno Dom.
1689. In the Second Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, WILLIAM
and MARY, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King
and Queen, Defenders of the Faith, etc.

And from thence Continued by several Prorogations and Adjournments to the
Twelfth Day of November, 1694. being the sixth Session of this present
Parliament.

LONDON, Printed by Charles Bill, and the Executrix of Thomas Newcomb deceased,
Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. MDCXCV.

Anno Sexto and Septimo GULIELMI III. REGIS. An Act for Reversing the Attainder
of Jacob Leisler and others
_^^e^tas in the (...) Happy Revolution, the In^^^itants of the Province of
New York in America, did, in their General Assembly, Constitute and Appoint
Captain Jacob Leisler, to (...) Commander in Chief of the said Province, unt^
Their Majesty's Pleasure should be know^ therein; And the said Jacob Leisler
was after^^rds Con^^rmed in the said Command by His Majesty's (...), Dated the
Thirtieth Day of July, One thousand six hundred eighty and nine; And the said
Jacob Leisler having the Administration of the said Government of New York, by
Virt^e of the said Power and Authority so Given and C^^^firmed in him, as
aforesaid, and being in the (...) thereof, Captain Richard Ingoldesby arriving
in the said Province in the Month of January, Anno Domini One thousand six
hundred and ninety, did, without Producing any Legal Authority, Demand of the
said Jacob Leisler the Possession of the Fort at New York: But the said Jacob
Leisler, pursuant to the Trust in him Reposed, Refused to Surrender the said
Fort into the Hands of the said Richard Ingoldesby, and kept the Possession
thereof until the Month of March then next following: At which time Colonel
Henry Slaughter being Constituted Captain General and Governor in Chief of the
said Province, arrived there in the Evening, the said Jacob Leisler having
Notice thereof that same Night (though very late) took care to Deliver the said
Fort to his Order, which was done very early the next Morning.

And whereas the said Jacob Leisler, also Jacob Milborne, Abraham Gouverneur
and several others, were Arraigned in the Supreme Court of Judicature at
New York aforesaid, and Convicted and Attainted of High Treason and Felony for
not (...) Possession of the said Fort to the said Richard (...)* and the said
Jac^^ Leisler and Jacob Milborne were (...) for the same: May it therefore
please Your most Excellent Majesty at the humble Petition and Request (...) the
Son and Heir of the said Jacob Leisler (...) Jacob (...) the Son and Heir of
the said Jacob Milborne deceased* and of the said Abraham Gouverneur, That it
be Declared and Enacted.

And be it Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty; by and with the Advice
and Consent of the Lords Spiritual (...) Temporal, and Commons in this present
Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That the said several
Convicti^ons, Judgments and Attainders of the said Jacob Leisler deceased,
Jacob Milborne deceased, and the said Abraham Gouverneur, and every of them,
(...), and are Repealed, Reversed, Made and Declared Null and Uo^d to all
Intents, Constructions and Purposes whatsoever, as if no such Convict^ons*
Judgments or Attainders had (...) had or Given: And that no (...) Blood or
other Penalties or (...) Goods, Chattels, Lands, (...), be by the said (...)
and Attainders or either of (...)* Any Law-Usage or Custom to the ^ontrary
notwithstanding.


