Propositions made by the Five Nations of Indians, viz. The Mohaques, Oneydes,
Onnondages, Cayouges and Sinnekes, to his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont,
Capt. General and Governor in chief his Majesty's Province of New York, etc.
in Albany, the 20th of July, Anno Dom. School.
PRESENT
His Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and Governor in
Chief of New York, etc. Aldermen
Capt. Johannes Schuyler, Hendrick van Ranslaer, Jan Lansing, Jan Vinnagen,
Hendrick Hanse, Wessells ten Brock,
Coll. Peter Schuyler, James Graham, Esquire. Attorney General Coll. Abraham D'
Pey^^er, Walter Hungerford, Esquire Major Derick Wessells, Mayor, Capt. John Janse
Bleeker, Recorder, Assistants
Capt. Johannes Bleeker, Johannes Themase,
And several other Gentlemen.
The Interpreter (...) C^^^elise Viele, and the Interpretess H^lletie van
Olanda were both sworn publicly.

After they had made five Acclamations of Joy for the five Nations,
Sadeganaktie, Sachem of Onnondage, stood up, and spoke in behalf of the five
Nations, as follows,

Brother CORLAER;

WE understand that your Voyage hither has been long, tedious and dangerous,
but now you are safely arrived, and have given us the great Satisfaction of
seeing you here, We a^e therefore much overjoyed, during the late long and
grievous War we have sustained great Losses, but now your bringing the joyful
Tidings of Peace, we wipe the Tears off, Sorrow and Grief from our Eyes, and
put on a joyful Countenance. Do give a Beaver Skin.

We also by the present joy of our minds quite remove our late Confusions, and
compose our thoughts into such order as to be fit to enjoy our former
Tranquillity; and in this quiet of mind we purify our selves from the stain^ of
Blood, that have been shed during the War, in all our habitations. And in this
calmness of Spirit we renew our rejoycings, and heartily congratulate our great
Brother, and his Ladies safe arrival over the great Sea, with the joyful
Account of the long wished for Peace, but cannot but be concerned that so great
a joy should be attended with an Indisposition in our great Brothers Body,
which we perceive he has, that does in some measure ^loud our gladness. We give
nine Beaver Skins.

My Lords Answer to the Congratulatory Propositions of the Indians.

I thank you for your cheerful Congratulations: My Voyage was, as yo^ have
observed, ^edious and troublesome, and I am now much indisposed by the Pains of
the Gout, but shall Little Regard that, if I can be serviceable to (...)
Brethren, and shall be always ready to hear any thing you have to offer (...)
the behalf of your selves and your Country; and if you have now any thin^
fu^ther to say, notwithstanding my present Indisposition I am willing to he^^
you.

Then the Sachems replied, they had nothing further to offer at present but
would wait to know what their great Brother had to say to them, an^ then they
would make their answer.

Robert Livingstone, Secretary for the Indian-Affair

His Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Capt. General and Governor in (...)
his Propositions to the Mohaques, Oneydes, O^nondages, Cayouges an Sinnekes, in
Albany the 21th Day of July, School.
BRETHREN;
I Am come to this place on purpose, to visit the Brethren, and am glad t^ see
you well, and heartily lament the loss of the Brethren that have bee^ ki^led
during the late War.

The King of England, my great master was Induced, among other things to
undertake a War against the French, to Revenge the Injuries done the B^e^thren
by that Nation, and has been so Succesful, by the Power of his Arms as to
Constrain the French to make an honorable Peace, of which happi^es^ the
Brethren will have a large share* A few days after my arrival to m^ Government,
I did send Coll. Peter Schuyler and Mr. Dellius to the French at Canada with
the Articles of Peace concluded between my great Master, the King of England,
etc. and the French King, and did thereupon require them of Canada to cease
from all Acts of Hostility upon the Brethren demanding what Captives they had,
and returning to them such of their Nation as were Captive in my Governments,
and some were accordingly reciprocally Exchanged.

If the Brethren have any Overtures to propose, that may tend to their Comfort
and well being, I am ready to hear them. Then His Excellency gave five Bunches
of white strung Wampum.

Albany the 21th of July, School.

^adeganakty, the Speaker, and one of the Sachems o^ Onnondage, stood up, and
in behalf of the five Nations, repeated what my Lord said unto them. And then
addressed himself unto my Lord, and said, We are very much obliged at our great
Brothers kind Salutation to the five Nations, and we will take a ^it time when
our great Brother is in better Health, to offer unto him, by my self the
Speaker, what we have to say in the behalf of our five Nations.

Robert Livingstone, Secretary for the Indian Affairs

Proposals made by Coll. Peter Schuyler, James Graham, Esquire his Majesty's
Attorney General, Coll. Romer, and Major Derick Wessells, Mayor of Albany,
Appoint^d by his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Capt. General and
Governor in chief, etc. To three praying Indian Sachems of Canada, in Albany
the 21th of July, School.
BRETHREN;
WE are glad to see you here again, and that you have not forgot the Love you
bear to your Native Country, in taking the first opp^rtunity you have had after
the Conclusion of the P^ace to Visit your Kindred and Relations; you are
sensible of the welcome you have had, and may perceive with what Strictness we
observe the Articles of Peace, and do therefore bury in oblivion all the
Injuries you have done your Friends during the War.

As you have the same freedom of Trade as our selves, so whenever you design
the like, you shall always have the same protection, and if either your Love to
your Country or to the Christian Religion can prevail upon you to come and live
amongst your kindred, the same Houses you left are now ready, open to receive
you with all the stores of plenty, to make you live forever happy.

The said three Indian Sachems of Canada, after some ^ause and Consideration,
re^^^'d by one of their number, That they were truly obliged by the civil
Treatment they had met with at this place, and for which they were very
thankful, but being young men they could neither give a suitable nor
satisfactory answer to what was now proposed unto the^* because there were none
of the Elders of their Nation in Canada with them; but upon their return Home
they would acquaint them of their kind entertainment here, and with the
Proposal now made them.

Robert Livingstone, Secretary for the Indian Affairs.

Propositions made by the five Nations of Indians, to wit, The Mohaques,
Oneydes, Onnondages, Cayouges and Sinnekes, To his Excellency Richard Earl of
Bellomont, Capt General and Governor in thief of his Majesty's Province of
New York, etc in Albany, the 22th day of July, School. Present his Excellency
Richard Earl of Belloment, etc. and the Gentlemen abovenamed, with several
others. Interpreted by Arnout Cornelise Viele and Hillet^e van Olanda.
Sinnonquirese, Sachem of the Mohaques Nation, rose up, and said,

Brother CORLAER;

WE your Brethren of the five Nations are all as one, and there are matters of
great Import, and which are now to be discoursed; nevertheless without
Interrup^ion I must acquaint our great Brother that there is la^ely amongst us
the Mohaques Nation a great m^sunderstanding arisen concerning a Writing that
has been given by some of our Brethren about our Mohaques Land, a matter of
such Consequence that whatever affects us will affect the whole five Nations,
and therefore we desire that the said Writing may be abolished and burnt, and
that we who are the right owners may be masters of our own Land, especially
since we are in one Covenant Chain, and ought not to wrong one another; We
therefore most Instantly renew our request that the said Paper or Writing which
has created such a mistake, may be burnt. Do give two Bevers.

Sadeganacktie, Sachim of Onnondage, rose up, and said, Brother Corlaer,

We have deliberately Consulted one with another what is to be offered to our
great Brother, in the behalf of the Brethren of the five Nations, which I am
appointed to speak.

Brother Corlaer, Coll. Peter Schuyler, Major Derik Wessels and Dom. Delli^^,
Who are Lovers of our welfare, by your Command did acquaint us with the Peace
concluded between our great King of England, and the French King, with which we
are pleased, and do accept of the same. And then directing his discourse to the
Clerk, said, Secretary Livingston, pray be careful, observe well, and write
what we say.

Brother Corlaer, we cannot but observe to you a thing very strange, that after
the conclusion of such a Peace, we are forced to tell you, that since the same
was notifyed to us, we have lost Ninety four men; We, since we had the tiding
of the Peace, have lain still and quiet, without giving the least Offense to
our late Enemy, keeping the same firmly as we have always done the Covenant
C^a^n* but on the contrary, the French Indians, our late Enemy, have Violated
the said Peac^, and have killed our People; and we acquaint you with this
action, and b^g you to take it into your hearty Consideration, for ou^
D^pendance is only upon you; yet we are daily in great Terror, and very
une^sie* whilst we stay here our Wives and Children being daily Exposed to
fresh assaults of the Do^aga^haes, and other French Indians.

Now great Brother, We will cease talking any more of that ungrateful Subject,
and confine our selves to the ancient beginning of the Covenant Chain.

In the times of old there came a Ship into this Country in which there was one
(...), who brought in the same great Plenty of Goods, with whom we entered into
a strict Alliance, and tied his Ship with the bark of a Tree, which was often
Renewed until at length we changed the bark of the Tree which kept our Alliance
firm, and made it of a more substantial matter, by which it became a Covenant
Chain, which is the Term we have ever since used, and in this Covenant Chain we
and the Brethren have been continually Linked, and have fixed it so sure, that
we have never since withdrawn our hands from it, and we the five Nations shall
never depart from it, but keep the same Inviolable.

Brother Corlaer, All our Confidence is and we are well assured that our great
Brother will take our whole House under his Protection, in which Confidence we
have great joy, the like having been our Comfort in former times, and Coll.
Peter Schuyler has been always the Instrument that has been employed for the
assuring to us this Comfort. We cannot ^^^get that our Neighbors of Virginia,
Maryland, New England, and all the rest of our great Kings Subjects upon this
main Continent of America, have often desired, and have been accordingly Linked
into this Covenant Chain, which remains no longer to be Iron, but is now become
Silver, and now shines with a greater Luster and brightness than ever; and now
all of us sit under the shadow of that great Tree, which is full of Leaves, and
whose Roots and Branches extend not only to the Places and Houses where we
Reside, but also unto the utmost limit of our great Kings Dominion of this
Continent of America, which Tree is now become a Tree of Welfare and Peace, and
our living under it for the time to come will make us Enjoy more ease, and live
with greater advantage then we have done for several years past, and we
therefore in the hopes of this enjoyment, Renew our old Covenant Chain under
this Tree of Welfare, whilst our great Brother has the care of this Government.
Then turning to the rest of the Indians, he said,

Brethren, Let all of us here present, be Witnesses, and keep this Covenant
Chain firm and bright.

Brother Corlaer, Let now your Protection extend unto all us, your Brethren,
and be watchful that when we rest secure in the Confidence of this Peace, that
no more hu^t or mischief may befall us, and let Coll. Peter Schuyl^r, M^jor
Derick Wessels Dominie Dellius, Evert Banker, John Janse Bleeker, and Secretary
Rob. Livingston, be mindful to inform our great Brother, when any such hurt or
mischief befall us, that he may do us his Brethren Right therein. Yet
nevertheless if the French of Canada should do any future hurt or mischief to
the Brethren, we are resolved to keep the Covenant Chain clean, but do Expect
that our great B^^^her will take care to see Justice ^one us for such hurts and
injuries, as we shall thereby sustain.

And in Testimony of the Integrity of all our Intentions, we do hereby Vomit up
all the G^ul and Bitterness (...) in our minds for or by reason of any Hurts,
Mischiefs or Bloo^^heds that have been done us, and do afterward wash, cleanse
and Pu^ifie our selves from all the filth that has a^tended us therein

We also observe unto you that the Goods and Merchandise we have occasion for
are now so very dear, that it ^ay be a m^an in time of Peace to tempt our young
men to go to Canada to proc^^e them cheaper there, where our youth may be
debauched; so that it would be much better that your Goods were sold cheaper
here then at Canada, which would Invite ou^ ^ou^g m^n that the French have
already seduced to Canada, to return hi^her, and ^ive amongst their Relations,
where they may have every thing at a better ^dvantage than they can have there,
provided the Brethren ^e^l their Goods cheap

We also tell you, that we come a great way from our Hous^s ^o this place, and
it is a great grievance that when we break our Hatchet or our G^n, we must pay
an unreasonable price for the mend^ng of them and they not contented with that
make us stay a long time before they can be mended, which does us a great deal
of Prejudice, and therefore we desire that those Abuses may be remedied.

Now Brother Corlaer, Before I leave off I must return a matter of great
weight, which will require your se^ious Consideration, and that is, that you
would require the Governor of Canada to surrender up unto us all the Prisoners
they have taken from us during the late War: We must also acquaint you, that a
greater evil could not have attended all of us in the five Nations, as well as
the Brethren, than the suffering the French to re-settle Cadaraquie, which will
always be as a Thorn in our sides, and keep us in such a continual Alarm and
Watchfulness, that we shall never be able to hunt freely, whilst such a Power
and Fo^tress is so near, not only to annoy, but in a capacity to destroy us.

Robert Livingstone, Secr. for the Indian-Affairs.

His Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont Capt. General and Governor in chief
of his Majesty's Province of New York, etc. Answer to the Propositions of the
Five Nations, the Mohaque, Oneydes, Onnondages, Cayouges and Sennekes, in
Albany the 23d day of July, School.
BRETHREN;
I have Considered what you offered unto me yesterday, and perceive you would
insinuate, that the m^sunderstanding which is conceived about a Writing made
concerning the Mohaques Land, ^s ^ matter of such weight as to affect the
Interest of the whole Bre^hren in the ^ive Nations, b^t this matter being so
da^kly related in the Proposi^ion made ^y S^anonguirese, the Mohaque Sach^m,
that I am not thereby enab^ed to do yo^ that Justice you so earnestly press,
therefore if the B^e^h^en will be so (...) as to ^xpress the truth of that
matter, I shall thereupon take care that right be do^e according to the
Justice, and Equity of their case.

Brethren I am heartily glad that that Peace which was so glo^iousl^ obtained
by the powerful Arms of my great Ma^ter, the King of England, was so agreeable
unto the Brethren, and do assure you, that I will take care that the Articles
thereon shall be duly observed by the French, and d^ expect that the Brethren
upon the least hurt done them by the French, will give me timely notice
thereof, in order to my requiring just Satisfaction for the same, and to the
end that a friendly Correspondence may be kept between the French and me, you
are not to suffer any o^ the French Priests to abide and continue with you* ^o
withdraw your affect^ons from this place* b^t upon their arrival unto any of
your Castles you are forthwith to bring them hither to receive my ^urther
di^ections. And your safety is so L^nked into the Inte^e^t of my great Ma^ter,
that you may have ^onfidence all his Subjects are Lovers of the five Nations,
and will st^dy you (...), and I (...) take care that the Clerk or Secretary
shall follow your directions

I am sorry for the great loss the Brethren have sustained since their
Intelligence of the Peace, and am afraid they have not been so watchful as the
Circumstances of the Brethren did require, ^or they can be no Strangers that
the War which the Brethren have with that (...) of Indians called Dowaganhaes,
is a War of a long standing, and long before the War between England and France
broke out; so that that matter cannot be so justly charged upon the French, as
upon the Brethrens own Neglect; and therefore if the Brethren have not strength
and conduct sufficient for the reducing of that Nation of Indians to your own
Terms, it may be then worth your Consideration to endeavor to make an
advantagous Peace with them.

I am very glad that you so well remember the Original of our Covenant Chain,
and that you are sensible of the advantages you have received by the firm
continuance of it, and of your candid Resolution never to break or violate the
same. I am also extremely pleased with your request in desi^ing the Protection
of my great Master, the King of England, etc. and that I will take you
particularly under my Charge. It has always been the care of the Crown of
England to protect the Brethren, ever since they first entered into the
Covenant Chain, and as an Instance thereof did engage into the late great and
chargeable War for the security of the Brethren, and whilst his Government is
under my Adm^n^st^ation I will make it my chiefest study to preserve the
Brethren from all Violence, and give them all comfortable help and assi^tance,
upon their application in the time of any D^^tress or Necessity, and shall
always encourage and reward such of his Majesty's Subject, under my Government,
as gives the Brethren any Succor, Help or Relief. And as the great King, my
Master, ha^h great Kingdoms and Dominions in Europe so the extent of his
Dominions are great in America, and therefore his S^bjects, as you well
obse^ve, are linked in the same Covenant Chain with (...), and retain the same
luster and brightness you mention, and we all live under that pleasant Tree of
Love, which extends it self unto all the Brethren, and over-shadows us all, and
preserves us from that scorching heat of S^rife and Enmity. I therefore in the
behalf of all his M^^est^es S^b^^cts of New England, Virginia, Maryland,
Pennsilvania, East and West-Jarsey and Carolina* accept of your Resolution of
living mo^e peaceably and quietly among them than ever, and of the Renewal of
the Covenant Chain with them, and in their behalf do by these presents renew
the Covenant Chain with the Brethren, and will maintain and preseve the same
Inviolable forever, and will vindicate and maintain the Brethren in their just
Rights against all their Christian Enemies.

As to your Complaint, with relation to dearness of Goods, it is not in my
power to help you, for the Peace is but just begun, and Trade not brought yet
under any regular settlement, which in some little time will be done, and then
the cause of your Complaint will cease of course.

I will give directions to the Magistrates o^ Albany that the Smi^hs, and other
Trades-m^^ in Town do yield to your R^quest I will also take care that th^se
Prisoners which belong to you, and (...) ^ow in Canada shall be sent for, and
therefore desire you to give me a L^^t of their Names, and what French
Prisoners you have amongst you, you must take care to send here, in order to
their Return home, according to the Articles of Peace.

I am strangely surprised that you seem concerned that Cadar^quie is now (...)
by the French, and is very prejudicical to the Brethren, when I am informed,
the said place was forced to be defe^red by the French in the beginning of the
War* and the same continued in that Condition for several years, during which
(...) there were many Opportunities for the demol^^hing of it, and rendering it
incapable either of a ^ettlemen^ or of hurting the Brethren; how the same came
to be neglected I desire to know, for I cannot believe that any could be
faithful to the King, my master, or just to your Interest that would omit so
fair an opp^rtunity of demolishing that Fort, which would have been so great an
Injury to the Enemy, and so great an advantage to the Brethren.

Brethren, My last advice to you, is, That you do not upon any account
whatsoever take upon you to treat with the French of Canada, or enter into any
sort of Negotiation with them, by either receiving from or sending Messages to
them, for if you do that, you will then break the Covenant Chain, and the
Promise you have made of continuing firm under the Obedience and Protection of
the King, my great Master.

Brethren, You may judge of the great Affection the King of England my great
Master, has for you, by the Richness of the Present he now makes you, so I
doubt not but you will always demean your selves worthy of the Esteem my great
Master has for you. There were given them, 5 pieces of (...), containing ^^7
yards, cost 7 s. 6 d. per yard, 5 pi^c^s stroad waters Cloth, at 12 l. 10 s.
per piece, 150 Shirts, 2^ Kitles, 25 Blankets, 10 Doz. pair of Stockings, 1
Barrel of (...), 5 Dozen Hatts, 60 Gallons of Rom^n 30 Kegs, 400 pound of R^ll
Tobacco, 1 Barrel of Tobacco Pipes, 700 pound of Powder in 150 ^ag* 1500 pound
of Lead, 50 Guns, 500 Flints, ^ Barrel of Syder, 120 Loaves of Bread, Besides
private Presents to 25 Sachems, a Coat, Shirt and ^at to each.

Robert Livingstone, Secretary for the Indian Affairs.

On the 23d day of July School. The Canada I^d^ans came and desired permission to
speak to ^^ Lord, who were thereupon ^^mitte^, and one of them said, They came
to acq^aint his Lordship That they intended this day to go to Canada but found
themselves obliged ^o (...) thankfully the notice his Lordship had taken of
them, by his (...) they now take their leave of him, will Speak ^n his praise
in Canada and acquaint his Lordship with their arrival there, and in the fall
of the year, would return and make his Lordship a visit.

Whereupon my Lord express^d himself well satisfied with their grateful
acknowledgments* and ^old them (...) so often as they come to this place they
should always meet with a hear^y ^elcome, and (...) want the like Entertainment
they have now had, and have on all such occasions the Protection of this
Government.

Robert Livingstone, Secretary for the Indian Affairs.

Propositions m^de by the (...) To his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont,
(...) Gov^rnour in chief of his ^^jesties Province of New York (...) the 25th
day of July, School. Present his Excellency, with the ^entlemen abovenamed.
Father CORLAER,
WE are heartily glad to see you, and Congratulate your safe arrival to this
place, it is a year ago since we heard of your coming, and we esteem it a great
happiness to us, your Children, that you are now arrived. Do give two Beaver
Skins.

Father, We have not seen the Sun these nine years past, having been involved
in a bloody War, but now the Sun of Peace is r^sen again in our Horizon, by our
seeing of our Father Corlaer come, who b^ings us the j^yful News of Peace, your
coming has made our hearts light, and ^o rejoice. Do give two Beavers.

Father, We have lost a great many men within these nine years past* not by
sickness, but by the War, when we pursued vigorously against the French of
Canada; we have been a strong People, but pray Father behold what a small
number we are reduced to by the War, however we that are left are glad to see
you come sa^e hither. Do give three Beavers.

Father, It is long since we and the Christians were united into such a Chain
of Friendship that we did live peaceably under the Tree of welfare, planted at
Skachkok, but that peaceable living was interrupted about nine years ago, by a
War that broke out by the French, but n^w that War being ended, we intend to
return again, and live under the Branches of that pleasant Tree of Peace, that
abounds so much with Leaves, as that the Scorching heat of the Sun cannot
pierce it; and we not only enjoy this Peace alone, but the s^^e fire that heats
and warms the Mohaques, and the other Nations of Indians* and makes them
constant and firm in their Affections, has the same effect upon us, so that we
are no more divided, but are one People, one Aff^ct^on, and one Interest. Do
give three Beavers.

Father, In the first settlement we always esteemed the Governor o^ this
Province to be our Father, but now we perceive we have a M^ther also* which
extremely rejoices our hearts, because the care of the Ch^ld^en must be strong
under that mutual Bond, and therefore the Covenant Chain, which has always
been successively preserved in all the changes of Governmen^, must now be
stronger than ever, our Parents, the Christians being great, our Brethren of
the five Nations being strong, and we the least and youngest, yet being of the
same Family, and in the same Chain, do cleanse and scower our part of it, and
make it shine with the same luster and brightness as the rest, renewing that
Covenant of dutiful Obedience to our Father* Do give three Beavers.

Father, When we formerly lived at Skachkook we enjoyed plenty of every thing*
but the heat of the late War driving us from thence, we were constrained to
settle here near Albany, where we found every thing scarce, so that since that
time we have endured very great hardships. Do give two Beavers.

Father, You may now perceive, how that through the Violence of the War you^
Children are reduced unto a very small Number, and therefore that they may
recruit and become more Powerful, they are resolved to Re-plant themselves at
their own Seat of Skachkook, where we beg your Fatherly Protection, and that
our peaceable Settlement there may not be distu^b'd by the savage and brutal
Inroad of our Enemies, but that the Paths leading thereunto man be kept clean
and clear from the Rovings of any Persons that may disturb us in the enjoyment
of that Tranquillity which will be the only means to invite other Nations of
Indians to come and co-habit with us* increase the Number of your Children, and
thereby enable us the more manfully to execute our Fathers Commands. Do give
two Beavers.

Father Corlaer* Now I am very sorry that I must acquaint you with an evil
practice that has continued a long time among the Brethren, and if not
prevented will endanger all that peaceab^e settlement we have resolved on,
which is, that when our young Indians come from hunting, so soon as the
Christians hear of it, they take their Horses and come to our Settlements, and
there seize upon what we have got in our Canows, under pretense of being in
their Debt, and not contented to take the Furze obtained in hunting but also
our Guns, and thereby render us unable to hunt again, by which means we become
extremely poor, and so must always run in debt for new ^uns and other
Necessaries to go hunt again, whereas if we had the liberty to bring our things
to Market, as other Indians do, we should not only be able to pay our D^bts,
but also have surplusage to supply our selves with other things needful. Do
give 2 Beavers.

Robert Livingstone, Secretary for the Indian-Affairs.

Proposi^ions made by the Mohaques, Oneydes, Onnondages, Cajouges and Sinnekes
Indians, To his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont Capt. General and
Governor in Chief of his Majesty's Provi^ce of New York, Massa^husets Bay,
New-H^m^shire etc. in Albany the 25th of July, School. Present his Excellency,
with the Gentlemen abovenamed.
Brother Corlaer;
WE come now to speak of a matter which we mentioned upon our first arrival
here, it is a concern of the D^vil, a Brother of ours of the Mohaques Nation
having been killed by one of your People, but we understand when the Fact was
committed the Murderer was drunk; we ^ust also tell you of the like wicked Fact
committed by another of your People in our own house in the Sinnekes Country,
he was a Person whom we kindly received and entertained in our ^astle, yet he
was so possessed with the Devil, that he killed one of our Sachems. ^ow, Great
Brother, that you may pe^ceive the great esteem we have for the ^ovenant Chain,
we are willing to forgive both those cruel and ungrateful Deeds, and desire
that the memory of them man be buried in a Pit of Oblivion, in which Pit we
will have a swift stream to run under the bottom of it* to carry a way the
Memory and the Thoughts of Revenge o^ said Deeds, and that there may be never
any thought or me^ory had of them in time to come, we put all our hands to the
roling of a great stone to cover the top of the said Pit that it may not be in
the power of any of our Nations to look into it again. And that you may be well
assured of the sincer^ty of this matter, we pray ou^ great ^rother, tha^ he
would loose the Bands of the two Prisoners, and set them free, and at the same
time give them pardon for their said Offenses, which we shall take and accep^
as a pledge of the Love of our great ^rot^er, to streng^hen the Covenant Chain
and we are the more earnest in this our prayer, because all the Relations of
the Persons murdered, who have been the greatest Sufferers, have killed their
Revenge, which will never come into me again. Did give seven Beavers and a Belt
of Wampum.

Brother Corlaer* We are now going to speak o^ that un^ort^nate thing, the
Re-settlement of Cadarachquie by the French; you seem to c^arge i^ upon us, as
if it had been done by our neglect, and as if it had been in our power to
prevent it, but it was not so; for in the beginning of the War we ^o^ced the
French to forsake it, and afterward acquainted our Brother, the late Governor
Coll. B^nj. Fletcher, whom we called Cayenquirago, of how great an advantage it
would be to the Brethren and us, that the said ^o^t of Cadarachquie were
demolished and made incapable to receive any of the French Forces again, who
seemed to join with us in our Reason, and did promise to supply us with men to
assist us in that Design, but we found, to our sad Exp^rience, the said Prom^se
delayed; we thereupon in a year or two afterward, acq^ain^ed our said Brother
Coll. Fletcher, that we had notice the French intended to Re-settle the said
Fort, and therefore required of him that he would give us the Assi^tance of men
he formerly promised us, that we might then go and demolish the same, to
prevent the French designs of Re-settlement which our Brother Coll. Fletcher
did again promise to perform; whereupon we retu^n'd home unto our Country, and
made great preparation for that design, having gathered ou^ Young men fit for
the War together, provided one hundred Canows to carry our Army over the Lake,
and gave our Brother Coll. Fletcher, named b^ us Cajenquirag^, notice ^he^eof,
that he might send us the men he promised but after we ^ad staid for them until
the Winter set in, which rendered our design impo^sible, there did not come up
one (...); so that the failure of that design is not to be imp^ted to u^, who
have been always ready to execute what we have undertaken to do for the
Brethren, but is wholly chargeable upon B^etheren who have so often failed of
their Promises in that matter.

And we further offer to (...) great Brothers Consideration, h^w faith^u^ we
have been, during the late War, to the Covenant Chain; for we have had
continually at our own charge our Scouts and Spies abroad in (...) ^ountry,
from whom we no sooner received any Intelligence of the D^sign^ of the French,
either upon the B^e^hren or us, but we sent the sam^ im^edia^^ly ^o o^r Brother
Coll. Fletcher, the late Governor who had always timely Not^ce enough to
recruit us with sufficient strength to repel any Design the Enemy might have
against the Brethren and us; but instead thereof the Enemy came c^mmonly in the
body of our Country, burnt our Castles, and did us all the m^schief they could
before the Brethren sent us any succor or relief; and during the whole War,
all the succor and relief that ever we had was from Coll. Pet^r Schuyler, who
marched into our Country with a few men, fought the French, and forced them to
fly, but our Brother Coll. Fletcher and the forces he bro^gh^ wi^^ him never
come to Albany in all the Invasions until the Enemy wa^ (...). Our Brother
Ca^enquirago, Coll. Fletcher, did often promise us, that upon the least notice
of the motion of the Enemy he would come in Person himself at the head of five
hundred men, but we once only desired three hund^ed men, but could never
procure the help of one man for him, bu^ in manner aforesaid.

And since we are upon this matter, our great Brother must not be angry with us
if we fu^ther expostulate with him, and tell him plainly and truly, that at the
time of the last Invasion of the French into the Onno^dages Country, we gave
our Bro^her Coll. Fletcher, the late Governor, no^ice that the French were
preparing a great Army to invade us, and required assistance to strengthen us
to ^^sist the Enemy, but it seems our Inte^ligence was little regarded; then
when the Enemy had marched with their Canows half way to our Country, with
(...) the Number of 1500 men, we sent an Express unto our Brother Coll.
Fletcher, acquainting him how far the Enemy was advanced toward the Invasion
o^ our Country, and begged a speedy Recruit, but without effect; and as the
Enemy approached nearer and nearer to our Country, we continued sending four
Expresses more unto our said Brother Coll. Fletcher, acquain^i^g him with the
said motion of the Enemy, begging of him speedy assistance, but could not
obt^in the help of one man; so since we could no^ depend on any a^sistance from
the Brethren, and not having sufficient strength of our selves to resist so
great a force of the Enemy, we shifted for our selves, deserting our Castles,
and suffered them to be exposed to the fury of the Enemy, who after they ^ad
burnt our Castles and destroyed our Indian Cor^, and done us all the mischief
they could, then they returned home with their great Army; after which retreat
our Brother Coll. Fletcher arrived at Albany for our assi^tance with the great
Number of 30 men instead of 500 he promised us.

We cannot imagine what our great Brother (...) when he charge^h the late loss
of our People upon the neglect of our (...), o^r great ^r^th^r sent an Express
into our Castles, and gave us notice, that the great King of England had
concluded a Peace with the French King, and required us to forbear all acts of
Hostility against the late Enemy which accordingly we obeyed, never imagining
that the Indian Subjects of our great King should be obliged by those Articles
of Peace to bury their Hatcher, and cease from doing the Enemy an^ more harm,
when at the same time the Indian Subjects of the French King should be
permitted to hurt us: We always thought that the Hrticles of Peace made between
our great King and the French King had included all the Subjects of each of
their Dominions; and if this Construction be true, we had no need to be so
watchful in time of Peace as in War, and therefore the late Mischief done us is
not to be attributed to our neglect or unwatchfulness, but unto the Treachery
and Unfaithfulness of the French, who have not so justly observed the Articles
of Peace as we have done.

Brother Corlaer, You have also charged us, That we should have no Treaty nor
Negotiation with the French upon any matter whatsoever, nor suffer any French
Priest to come and abide in any of ou^ Castles, but when any such come to bring
them hither, this is very good; but for the prevention thereof, it would be
very convenient that our great (...) should write to the Governor of Canada,
prohibiting him to send any such Persons amongst us. And in answer to the
Interchange of the Prisoners on both sides, we do desire, that if our great
Brother have any Treaty on that matter with the French, that he give us notice
thereof, that we may send some of our Sachems to be there present You seem to
press earnestly that we should have no Treaty with the French, and if that we
should, you will assign it to be a breach of the Covenant Chain. Brother
Corlaer, It is far from our thoughts to do any thing to break the Covenant
Chain; we came to renew it, which we have done with greater earnestness than
ever, and have planted the T^ee of Welfare, which can never be rooted up;
therefore be no^ apprehensive that we will ever break the Covenant Chain, or
that we will ever treat with the French, or do any thing that may give the
Brethren the least mis^trust of our ^ntegrity; for our hearts are so clean and
so free from any stain or corruption, that we can never be tainted with any
such evil. Did give ^8 Beavers, 6 Laps, 9 ^^tters.

We now give you the Names of our Prisoners that are detained in Canada, viz
The Oneyde Prisoners are 12 Men and 36 Women

Onnondage Prisoners, Orondesathton, Skachnawedgie, Assinhare, Annadais,
Sagogeeson, (these five are lately taken by the French Indians) Igongha,
Sojonwase, a Boy, Aronjaron, Tosidendon, and 3 Women, viz. Wadatsone,
Diolha^as^re and her Niece Tietgohoge.

Cajouges Prisoners, viz. Tieuchsaachton, a Woman and her Son, Canaeasticaet,
another Woman, and her Child, Canellerei, another Woman.

Sinnekes Prisoners are five, viz. Sajadassee, Adskeiraks, Castenjeenent,
Cadsirochka, Caniengera, his Cosen.

Robert Livingstone, Secretary for the Indian Affairs.

His Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Capt. General and Governor in Chief
of his Majesty's Province of New York, etc Answer to the Skachkook Indians in
Albany, the 26th day of July, School. Present his Excellency the Governor, with
the Gentlemen abovenamed.
Children,
I Am well pleased with your dutiful Salutation, and that you have behaved your
selves so well in the late War, and am truly grieved that the good Service you
have done therein should have been attended with so great a loss of my
Child^en, but since I perceive your Resolutions are to re-settle your old place
of residence S^achkook* I doubt not in some little time you will recover your
loss, and become more Numerous and formidable than ever, and there shall be
nothing wanting on my part in giving you all due encouragement* by protecting
you in your peaceable Settlement, but also giving the like unto such other
Indians as you shall invite and encourage to come and live among you; so that
you may have an entire confidence in my fatherly care of you. And as to your
complaint of the In^uries done you by the People in the Town in the manner you
express, I will give directions to the M^^or and the other Magistrates of
Albany, that they take effectual care to prevent the like Practices for the
fu^ure, and bring your Trade and m^thod of obtaining Credit under some better
regulation, though at the same time I am informed, that many of my Children are
much addicted to excessive drinking, whereby they expose themselves to many
inconveniences, forgetting what they then do, and so involve themselves in
debt unawares, and also, after they have been abroad a hunt-they carry what
they have got to other places in New-England^ and dispose thereof for D^ink and
often return to this place empty handed, and so by such courses bring Poverty
upon themselves, I therefore exhort my Children that of all Evils they avoid
that of intemperate drinking, it robbing them of their Reason, of their Health,
and of the little Interest they have; and exposes them to be a prey unto every
avaritious Person they have dealings with, and rend^rs them so (...) they can
neither mind their hunting, nor take care for their Wives and Children; so that
when they follow such courses they can e^o^^t nothing but poverty, but if they
will abstain from that Intemperance, they will have no more cause of such
Complaints, they will therefore do well that whatsoever they get in hunting
they bring home to this market at Albany. and then they will have the same
advantages that the other Indians have* and make their Wives and Children live
more comfortably. If my Children will follow this advice, they shall not want
all due encouragement, but always have the Protection and favor of a loving
Father, who will always be careful of his Children, and now links them into the
(...) Covenant Chain with the Brethren of the five Nations, in which they have
always been and shall forever be preserved. Then was given them (...) piece of
Duffels, one piece of Strouds, thirty Shirts, five Kettles, (...), 29 pair of
Stockings, 100 Knives, 1 dozen of hats, 12 gallons of (...) in six kegs, fifty
pound of Tobacco, one gross of Pipes, 30 bags of Power, 300 pound of Lead, 10
Guns, 100 flints, and 50 Loaves of Bread.

The Skachkook Indians, upon the receipt of the Present, said, Father, We
receive very thankfully your large Presents, we take them as a happiness from
Heaven, we have been grievously impoverished by a ^ong nine years War, but now
a^e much comforted by the kindness of our Father, and the expectation of the
enjoyment of a long Peace, which was so season^bly brought to us by our Father;
we shall be obedient to our Fathers advice, and not ramble into our Neighbor
Governments.

Robert Livingstone, Secr. for the Indian-Affairs.

His Excellency Richard Earl of B^llomont, Capt. General and Governor in chief
of his Majesty's Province of New York, his Reply to the Propositions of the
Mohaques, Oneydes, Onnondages, Cayouges and Sinnekes, in Albany the 27 Day of
July, School. Present his Excellency, with the Gentlemen abovenamed.
BRETHREN;
YOur desire to know what I meant, when I said, You ought to be upon your guard
with the Na^ion of the Dowaganha^s Indians, (...) meaning was this, That
understanding you were at War with them before the (...) between the King, my
Master, and the French King commenced, you had no reason to believe they would
be influenced by the present Peace; nay, to the contrary, you may b^ sure if
^he French can underhand instigate those Dowaganhaes ^ndians to continue the
War against you, they will do it, because they hate you, and us that are
English, and (...) do you all the Mischief they can; therefore my advice to you
is, That you defend your selves manfully, and if those Indians or any others,
or even the French themselv^s (...) any time assault you, that you kill as many
of them as ^ou can, and i^ so doing (...) L^ws of Nature and Nations will
justify you; and as I p^om^sed you before, you (...) have all the ^ssi^tance I
can give, on against all the Indians or French that shall attemp^ anythi^g
against you in Violation of the Peace.

Brethren, You cannot, in m^ judgment, (...) thing than make a Peace with the
Dowaganhaes Indians, and those other Nations which have been all this while at
war with you, and if you could by your Car^^es (...) to enter into the ^ovenant
Chain with you, both you and we should reap the advantag^ of such a (...), in
the Trade that would then be managed with them, and my great Master, the King,
would, I am certain, be thankful to (...) so wise a mannagement, and would
larg^^ recompense such a Service do^e him by you.

You desire that some ^f your Sachems may be present, if there be any
Negotiation between the Governou^ of Canada and my self, about ^he Ex^^ange of
Prisoners. (...) suppose the Prisoners on both sides will be delivered up
without (...) So^emnity, but if there happen to be a formal Treaty about that
matter, I will send you (...), that some of your Sachems may be present at that
Treat^, if they so ^hink fit (...) to kn^w what moved you to enter into a
separate Treaty of Peace with the French of Canada, without the leave and
consent of his Majesty, my great Master, or his Governor of this Province.

Brethren, In answer to your Proposition to me of pardoning the two Persons
that murdered some of your Friends, I must tell you, That as to that man that
is already condemned, I cannot pardon him, for I have it in command from my
Master, the great King, not to pardon Murder, but I will, at you^ request,
reprieve him, ti^l I acq^aint his Majesty, and know his pleasure therein. I
believe it is very much for your service that Justice be done upon both the
Murderers, for I understand that they are very vicious desperate Fellows, and
if they should escape from Justice, they and others may be encouraged to Murder
more of your Friends; as for the man that last murdered one of your Friends, he
has not yet stood his Trial, and by the Law of England, no man can be acquitted
of M^^der without a legal Trial; I shall appoint his being Tried for that
bloody Fact within a few days, and desire you will prepare to prosecute him, by
producing such Evidence as you have against him for that fact.

Robert Livingstone, Secr. for the Indian-Affairs.

The Examination of the Skachkook Indians, upon the Information of Mr. Hawley
and Mr. Parsons of Northampton in New England, given into (...) Excell^ncy the
Earl of Bellomont at Albany, That they had at the Town of Hatfi^ld, upon the
^5^h of ^uly last two men killed and scalp't, and two Boys taken Captive by
some Indians, which they ^^ppose to belong to the Skachkook Nation of Indians.
WHereupon his Excellency sent for the Skachkook Indians, to enquire of them
about the said Murder.

The Skachkook Indians being sent for, appeared. Then my Lord asked them as
follows, Quest Were all that belong to your Nation at Albany last week, at
the time the Prop^sitions were made by you? Answ. All our People were at Albany
when we shared the Presents made us, except two Men and a Boy, who went eleven
days a go to Hosak to fetch Bever, but all our People were not here at the time
the Propositions were made.

Quest. Were any of your People three weeks ago toward New-Englad, or further
Eastward a hunting? Ans. No.

Quest. Where is one of your Nation, called Winnepax? Ans. At Hosak.

Quest. Was the Indian called Winnepax here when you received your Presents
last week? Answ. He was gone to Hosak two days before we got our Present.

Quest. Were any of your People lately at Dee-fi^ld or Hadley? Ans. A great
while a go one Catosank came from thence, but not lately.

Quest. Where is Maganant the Indian? Ans. He is at Kinderhook.

Quest. Where is A^kowat the Indian? Answ. He is dead long ago.

Quest. Where is Wannacouset the Indian? Ans. He lives in Canada.

Quest. Where is Mask the Indian? Ans. He is also in Canada?

Quest. Why are the said Indians gone to Canada? Ans. Because they killed no
Beaver, and were much indebted here, and so were ashamed to come hither,
choosing rather to go to Canada.

Quest. Have you heard any thing of two men being killed at Hatfield by the
Indians fourteen days ago? Ans. We have been in and about Town ever since we
heard of his Lordships first coming; and if we had heard any such thing as
that, we should certainly have acquainted my Lord, our Father, with ^t; we do
assure you, we have heard nothing of it. My Lord told the Skachkook Indians,
That Mr. Hawly and Mr. Parsons were come on purpose to complain to his Lord^hip
of two E^glish men being killed and scalp't la^ely at Hatfield, and supposed to
be done by some of your Nation, and they of the Massat^usets Bay being the
King-Subjects, as well as the People of this Province, and I b^ing Governor of
that Province, as well as of this, therefore have the same Obligation to
enquire after the Murder of any of the Kings Subjects in that place as well as
in this, and strictly ^equire you to make search amongst you for such as the
said Gentl^men do suspect, and if you find any of your People have done, o^
have been privy, o^ had knowledge of the said fact, I require you to apprehend,
and bring them to me, that they may be punished according to Law, and for the
discovery of such, you shall have ten Pounds reward for each. Whereupon the
Indians said, When we received the first News of the Peace, we ord^red our
young men not to go far a hunting, but to hunt near ho^: for Martins, till all
things were rightly composed, being unwilling to expose their Youth to
uncertain dangers. Then my Lord did, at the request of those Gentlemen from
New England, conjure them not to have any correspondence with the Onnagonques
or Eastward Indians, that are in war with the English in New England. The
Indians said, We are not concerned with the War of the Eastern Indians, but we
must acquaint you, that about two year ago the French Indians did kill an
English Man at Hadley, for which two of our Nation were executed, which gave
great advantage to the French, the Enemy bragging, That they had ways to kill
us without fighting with us, for it was only to go into New England and kill a
Man there, and that would make the New England People kill us for it; and so by
that means the Enemy destroyed three, when they only killed on^.

Then my Lord did further require them, not to go hunt near New England, for
that People were jealous, that the hurt they received was from them. Whereupon
the Indians answered, They would follow my Lords directions, and not go hunt
there any more.

Robert Livingstone, Secretary for the Indian-Affairs.

To his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont Captain General and Governor in
chief of his Majesty's Province of New York, etc. The humble Address of the
Mayor, Recorder, Aldermen and Assistants of the City of Albany, convened in
Common Council.
May it please your Lordship;
WE cannot discharge that Trust reposed in us by the Inhabitants of this City,
with greater diligence, then most thankfully Congratulate your Lordships great
kindness in visiting the Fronteers, which are truly refreshed by your Lordships
presence, attended with all the Bl^ssing^ of a happy Peace, which is most
grateful unto this City, which has for these ten years past Labour^d under
the gre^te^t of Hardships, and daily exposed to unexpressible dangers, having
had many of the Inhabitants of the Fronteers killed, destroyed, skalped,
carried Captive, and others grievously injured by the furious Incursions of the
late Enemy the French; and Those Miseries have been likewise attended with a
grievou^ Burden and excessive Charge, in being obliged to give free Quarter
unto such Officers and Soldiers as have been posted here from time to time,
during the late War, for the Securi^^ and common defense of the Province; and
we have not only labored under all thos^ ^ifficulties but have been also
forced at our own particular Change, Labor and Expenc^ to fortif^ the City
twice with Stockadoes, and thereon to erect five Block-houses, which was
accomplished at so great Change, that many of the Inhabitants are thereby much
^mpoverish'd, and others by such grievous Charge constrained to desert. We fi^d
ou^ selves also engaged to acquaint your Excellency, That the Inhabitants of
this (...) did first settle themselves upon the expectation of their management
of an Indian Trad^, which was by all the former Governors Confined within the
Walls of the City, and that j^^g^d of (...) ^^nsequence that by their Charter
that Privilege was spec^al^^ given t^ them, as a thing of so great Importance
for his Majesty's Revenue, and the M^^^tenance of the Inha^it^nts, that all
other Places within the County of Albany were Prohibited to T^affique with the
Indians, under the Penalty of the forfeiture of such (...) as they s^ tra^ed,
and that that trade might be so nicely observed, all Negotiations and
^onferences with the fi^e Nations of Indians were commonly and usually
Transacted in this City, in the presence of the Magistrates.

We are also sensible of your Lordships good Intentions and Inclinations for
the good and welfare of this City, so signally manifested to us, in the
Proposals made unto the said five Nations, which we observed were so gratefully
received by the Indians, that we doubt not but by their future good behavior
and constant faithfuln^ss to his Majesty's Interest, they will in some little
time enable this City to redeem their late Losses. We therefore most Dutifully
acknowledge your Lordships great kindness, signifi^d in taking that affair of
the Indians so nearly under your Care and Direction. And now since your
Lordship has honored this place by your Presence, in Visiting the Front^ers,
your Lordship cannot but observe the great Danger we were exposed unto in the
late War, by the Insufficiency and Insignificancy of our Fortifications, which
were only of ^ood, which decays in four or five years, and so creates an
unexpressible Charge, in the rebuilding of them. We therefore humbly presume to
Represent unto your Lordship, as a thing of absolute Necessity, as well as of
special Service for ^is Majesty, for the securing the Fro^teers, in the time of
a future War, that there be at his M^jesties Charge, a Fort built of stone,
sufficient to receive and protect all the Inhabitants in the time of Invasion
or Incursion of the Enemy, as also for the keeping of such a sufficient
Garrison as may be able to Offend the Enemy, by Inroads into the Enemies
Cou^t^y, as for the Defense of the Fronteers, to the end that the Inhabitants
may not undergo a further Hardship in quartering of Soldiers in their private
Houses.

We (...) the deepest sense of all your L^rdships Favo^rs, so signally
intimated to (...) ^ndians Negotiated in the presence of the Magistrate^, most
heartily acknowledg^ your Lordships Justice therein, and shall with our utmost
Endeavors improve all your Lordships Favors granted unto this City, by
disposing the minds of all the Subjects within the same to such a Harmony and
Union, as to forget all Injuries, and become one in the maintai^ing of his
Majestie^ Interest, in your Lordships Administration of the Government. We
humbly become Supplicants unto your Lordship, in the behalf of this City, That
your Lordsoip would take the Premises into your serious C^nsideration, and
order that a Stone Fort may be built, according as above is requested, and also
that your Lordship would take the Bleeding state of this City into your
favorable Consideration, and take them under your Protection, and confirm unto
them all the Rights and Privileges that were formerly held and enjoyed by them.

Derick Wessells, Mayor, Alder-men.
Johannes Schuyler, Hend. van Ranslaer, Jan Lansingh,
Assistants.
David Schuyler, Bennony van Corlaer, Evert Wendel,
Jan Janse Bleeker, Recorder, Alder-men.
Jan Vinnagan, Henrick Hanse, Wessel ten Brock,
Assistants.
Johannes Bleeker, Johannes Myndert,



His Excellency's Answer to the Address of the Mayor, and the rest of the
Magistrates, and other Inhabitants of Albany, the 2d of August, School.
Gentlemen;
I Thank you for expressing so much Respect and Thankfulness to me in your
Address; and am glad you have so (...) escaped with your Lives, from the
dang^rs you were exposed to in the late War, though it mu^t needs (...) to y^u as
you suggest. It was indeed a great Providenc^ of God you were not (...) were
your N^ighbo^rs at Schenech^ady, consid^ring how poor a Defen^e ^he Fo^^ is and
^^w little care was taken to keep the Companies, in G^rrison here, complete an^
str^^g all the time of (...) War. Yo^ ^re Witnesses that it has cost me much
(...) ^ncourage the five Nations of Ind^ans, who met the with all the Ma^ks of
disconte^^ (...) could ^o^sible be, oc^^ssioned, partly, as I have great cause
to believe, b^ a sense they had of the N^glect of them by the late Government,
during the War, and partly too ^y the foolish Artific^^ of some People in this
Town. I will take all just m^asu^es to preser^e and improve the Trade of this
Town with the Indians, so as none shall encroach on you, or ^nt^^c^pt the same
from you. And I will apply to his M^j^sty for his grac^^us Consent ^o the
building such a Fort here as will secure you from the Rage and Cruelty of an
Enemy for the time to come.

To his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and Governor in
Chie^ of his Majesty's Province of New York, etc. The humble Petition of C^pt.
Johannes Sau^ders Glen, Lieut. Adam ^roman, Ensign (...) van Sl^ck, Isaac
S^its, Barent Wemp, in b^half o^ themselves and the rest of the Inhabitants of
his Majesty's (...) Town of Sch^nnechtady.
Shows,
THat this place being Situate in one of the extremest parts of the Province,
nearer unto the Fren^h than any other Settlement, and the chi^f Frontee^, by
which means i^ be^^me, (...) the beginning of the War^ subject to a grievous
^^road of the French, who by their b^^b^rous Fury and Cruelty. (...) their
(...) Ashes, ^illed many of the People* and carried away with them tw^n^y eight
Captive^, and those few of his Majesti^^ (...) have since labored under the
greatest (...) Hard^hips. And (...) great Sufferings, yet they have been twice
since (...) at their own proper cost and charge, to re-build a Fort, in which
they have lodged all the Inahbitants, as well as have made Lodgments for his
Majesty's Fo^ces posted here, which g^ievous Charge and Expense, together with
the insufferable Loss they have sust^ined in their Stock and Cattle, which have
been destroyed by our Friend Indians, as well as our Enemies, has reduced your
Excellency's Petitioners to such extreme Want and Poverty, that they will not
be able to re-build their Houses and settle their Plantations, without running
into Debt, and so thereby disabled to pay their Taxes and Quit-Rents.

Therefore your Lordships Petitioners humbly pray, That your Lordship would be
pleased to take the Premises into your favorable Consideration, and order that
the said Inhabitants may be freed for so many years from Quit-Rents and Taxes,
as to your Excellency shall seem reasonable and meet; and that there may be
now, in time of Peace, a Fort built for our future Security, at his Majesty's
Charge, or charge of the Province; and your Excellency's Petitioners, as in
duty bound, shall ever pray, etc.

Johannes Saunders Gen, Adam Vroman, Harmen van Slyck, E^sack Swits, Pieter van
Olinda, Barendt Wempe Reyer Schermerhoorn, Daniel Janse, Claus Lawrense,
Gysbert Gerritsen, Jan Vroomen, Jan Meebee, Abraham Groot,
TO the Address of the Inhabitants of Schennachtady, which was delivered to his
Excellency the 28th of July, School. his Excellency made the following Answer.

Gentlemen, I cannot but be moved to a compliance with your Desires, they
se^ming to me very reasonable. I heard, before my leaving England, of the great
Sufferings you had undergone for want of a Fort in this place, sufficient to
defend you, and how by that means the French and their Indians, in the
beginning of the War, had made a sudden Inroad on this place, entered the
Fort, and put the Garrison and all the Inhabitants to the Sword. As to the
first part of your Address, which desires an Exemption from Taxes for some
years to come, in consideration of your Sufferings by the la^e War, I will do
what I can to dispose the next Assembly to a tenderness of you. And as to what
relates to the building a Fort, for your future Security, I will lay that part
of your Request before his Majesty, who, I doubt not, will extend his Royal
Care and Goodness to you, as he daily does to the rest of his Subjects.

By his Excellency the Governor, etc. Instructions to Coll. Peter Schuyler, of
his Majesty's honorable Council of this Provin^e, and to the Mayor of the City
of Albany for the time being, and to Robert Livingstone, Esquire his Majesty's
Secretary for the Indian-Affairs, who are hereby required to convene and take
to their assistance the Alder-men, Recorder and Sheriff of the City of Albany,
for the time being, and also the Commanding Officer in this Garrison, as often
as they enter into any Negotiation with the Indians.
1. YOu are to use your best skill and endeavor to preserve the Kings Peace
within this City of Albany, and in order thereunto it is necessary you should by
your Example and Admoni^ions discourage Faction and Parties, as tending much to
the (...) of the Peace and good Correspondence that ought to be between his
Maje^^^es good ^^^jects, which Division of the People, and Distinction of
Parties, have (...) and fomented by ill men, to serve their own private ends,
and gratify their (...), without regard to the Honor and Interest of his
Majesty, or the Welfare of (...) Province which as a Fronteer to the French of
Canada, has been, and will always (...) War be more exposed than any of his
Majesty's Provinces in America, and therefore requi^e, that it^ I^habitants
(...) be entirely united, and of a piece, for their common security, and as
bound by their Allegiance to his Majesty.

2. You are, upon Notice and Complaint of any of the Indians, Subjects of his
Majesty, of any Acts of Hostility committed on them by the French or their
Indians, to take and use the most effectual and speedy course to relieve and
assist the said Indians; and if you see cause you are to send the Commanding
Officer of this Garrison, for the time being, with such a Number of the
Soldiers, as you shall think fit, to the assistance of the said Indians,
Subjects of his Majesty, giving such Orders to the said commanding Officer, as
you in your best discretion shall think proper for his Majesty's Service, and
the security of his Subjects; and all Officers and Soldiers in his Majesty's
pay are hereby ordered to obey all such Orders as they shall receive from you,
from time to time, for the ends and purposes aforesaid.

3. You are by all fair means to encourage and cherish the Indians, Subjects of
his Majesty, to the end they may continue firm under the Obedience of his
Majesty, and for the advantage of the Trade of this Province.

4. You are upon all Emergencies that shall happen, to give me Notice thereof
to New York, or in my absence from this Province, to the Lieut. Governor and
Council, sending at the same time your Opinion and Advice what you think most
proper to be done for the remedying all Mischiefs that shall any way be put in
Practice against his Majesty, and his People within this his Province, or
against the Indians, Subjects of his Majesty; and for all necessary contingent
Charges that shall attend the Service of his Majesty, and this his Province,
you are to apply your selves to Mr. Robert Livingstone, who is directed by me
to expend all such Sums of Money as you shall require of him from time to time,
by a written Order under the hands of you, or the major part of you, for the
Service aforesaid. Given under my Hand and Seal at Arms, at Albany, this first
day of August, School.

Bellomont.

At a Council held at his Majesty's Fort in New York, the 15th of August, School.
Present
His Excellency Richard Earl of BELLOMONT. Frederick Phillips, Esqr. Steph.
Cortlandt, Esqr. Nich. Baya^d, Esqr. William Smith, Esqr. Gab Minveill, Esqr.
John Lawrence, Esqr.
HIs Excellency did order the Propositions and Answers of the five Na^io^s of
Indians, in his late Expedition to Albany, to be re^d; and did acquaint the
Coun^il with the Addresses that were presented to him by the principal
Inhabitants of Albany and Schenechtady, wherein, amongst other things, they had
represented the weakness of their Forts, and prayed that new ones might be
buil^ for their future Secur^ty.

His Excellency also produced several Petitions delivered to him at Albany and
Schennec^t^dy by Persons who had given Credit to the Government, and being most
of them Necessitous, could not afford to be longer out of their Money,
therefore desired payment might be o^dered them out of hand, which was
consented to by the Council, after reading of s^id Petitions.

His Excellency also acquainting the Council, that upon Count Frontenac'^
haughty answ^r to his Excellency's Letter to him, Notifying the Peace, and
p^o^osing an Exchange of Prisoners, and also upon the grievous Complaint of the
five Nations of Indians to his Excellency at Albany, of the Hostilities
committed on them by the French since the Peace was proclaimed. And his
Excellency stepping to his Closet to fetch another ^et^er which he had newly
writ to the Governor of Canada, the Gen^lemen of the C^un^il took the
opportunity of his Excellency's short absence, to agree among themsel^es, that
Coll. William Smith, chief Justice, should in the Name of the rest of the
Council, complement his Excellency upon the successful Pains he had taken with
the Indians, in his Expedition to Albany, and the good humor he had put them
in. His Excellency being returned, and seated, Coll Smith stood up, and
express^d himself to his Exc^llency as followe^h*

My Lord, Your Excellency has been pleased to show us the Treaty you have
lately had with the Indians of the fi^e Nations at Albany, which having duly
considered, my Brethren (...) Council have prayed me to assure your Lordship,
they are of Opin^on the same has been managed by your Excellency with such
Conduct, Te^per and Prudence, as is very Extraordi^ary; and as we have great
Reason to hope the Effects of it will highly conduce to his Majesty's Service,
and the great Good, Benefit and Welfare of this Province, so we do all think
our selves obliged to ren^er your Excellency our humble Acknowledgment for the
(...) Care, great Pains and Fategue your Excellency has been pleased to take
upon you therein; and do pray that this may be entered in the Council Bo^k

His Excellency thanked the Council for the Complement they had m^de him by
Coll. Smith, which (he said) was as unexpected to him, as it was kind, for that
he thought the Pains he had taken in managing the Indians at Albany, was but a
bear performance of his Duty to the King and the Public. After which, his
Excellency did communicate to the Council his Letter to Count Frontinac, which
being written in French, he expounded into English, and his Excellency's
Expostulations thererein were thought very reasonable, and were approved of.

His Excellency did communicate his Instructions left at Albany, to Coll.
Schuyler, the Mayor, Mr. Livingstone, and the other Magistrates, relating to
the Government of that place in his absence, chiefly with relation to the
Indians, and the Charges accrewing by them. His Excellency laid before the
Council the Muster-Rolls of the three Companies, taken at Albany. His
Excellency did communicate the Tra^sactions that happened upon the Complaint of
the New England Messengers, for the killing of two Christians at Hadley,
supposed by them to be done by the River Indians.

His Excellency did communicate his Order for repairing the Barrachs at
Schenechtady, which was approved as a necessary Charge, the said Barrachs being
before all open to the Weat^e^, whereby the Soldiers suffered very great
Hardships.

His Excellency did appoint Mr. P^illips, Coll. Cortland, Coll Bayard and
Lieut. Coll. Minveille, or any three of them a Committee to examine all the
Accounts now depending, together with Mr. Livingstone's Memorial, containing a
demand of Money, due to him by the Government, upon the account of his
Excellency's Expedition to Albany.

A Message sent by the five Nations of Indians, the Mohaques, Oneydes,
Onnondages, Cayouges and Sinnekes, To his Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont,
Capt. General, etc. by Dekanitsore, one of the Sachems of Onnondag^, and two
more of that Nation, and in his Excellency's absence delivered to the
Magistrates of Albany the 1^th of August, School.
Brother Corlaer,
WE do now acquaint you with what happened in our Country before your arrival
at Albany, relating to our Prisoners taken by the French of Canada; as soon as
we heard that Coll. Schuyler was returned from Canada without bringing of them
with him, we resolved to try what we could do by the Interest of the Canada
Praying Indians, and there being two of said Indians in our Castle bound home,
who had lived a year with us, we laid hold of that opportunity to get ou^
Prisone^s set at liberty, and accordingly sent with them a Belt of Wampum to
the Canada praying Indians, desiring them to Interceed with the Governor of
Canada for our Priso^ers, which the said Praying Indians did, but the Governor
of Canada told them, as follows, I cannot understand that this Request of
yours comes from the five Nations, but only from Onnondage alone, and therefore
will not receive your Belt, nor grant your desire. I have been these six years
last past about making a Peace with the five Nations, but never could effect
it; I know the Government of New York has always obstruct^d that matter, though
it has often been insisted upon by the five Nations; I do not s^^ve you so,
when you desire any thing of me, therefore take up the Belt of Wampum, I will
not deliver up their Prisoners. Whereupon the Praying Indians took up the Belt,
and have sent it back again to us to Onnondage.

The praying Indians of Canada, replied and said to the Governor of Canada,
Father, (...) now amazed to see you decline those fair offers of Peace, it is
as i^* (...) bereaved of your Senses or Drunk; you have seen how courteous and
friendly those Gen^lemen sent by the Government of New York have been, and also
the Mohaques in Propounding all things tending to the public good, Peace and
Tranquillity of us all.

The Governor of Canada said, Children, I thank you for your good advice, and
Inclinations for the Peace; go to the four Nations, and try what you can do
with them, but have nothing to do with the Governor of New York, nor with the
Mohaques* When this was over the Governor of Canada and his praying Indians
came to this Conclusion, To send two French praying Onnondage Indians with two
Belts of Wampum to the 4 Nations, viz. the Sinnekes, Cayouges, Onnondages and
Oneydes; the first Belt, was to call from each of the four Nations a Sache^, to
come and treat with him at Canada; the second Belt was to have them to bring
all the French Prisoners they had in their Country along with the^, and this
being done in 45 or 50 days time, he would return them their Prisoners, and
make a firm Peace with them, but if they denied or refused to come in the said
time, then to tell them, he would come in a Hostile manner with the Hatchet,
and compel them* He gave them a further charge to tell the said four Nations,
That their said Sachems should not come to Canada by the way of Alb^ny, but
directly for O^nondage. All which the said 2 Messengers from Canada have so
delivered. Whereupon D^kanitsore, and another Onnondage Indian being sent by
the five N^tions to his Excellency the Earl of Bellomont, said in their behalf,
as follows,

Brother Corlaer, It is not many days ago since all the five Nations have been
with you, our great Brother, to ^enew the ancient Covenant Chain, and we have a
particular regard to what you then told us, and therefore will not hearken to
what the Governor of Canada P^oposes to us, for he designs to break our Union,
and separate us, but we will cle^ve fast to one another. Do give seven hands of
Wampum.

Brother Corlaer, You have told us in your Propositions, that there is a Peace
concluded between our great King and the French King, we have accepted of the
same, and will partake of the benefit thereof, hold the sam^ fast, pray let
the^e be a speed^ result in this matter, that we may reap a benefit by the
Peace as well as you do, and that all Mischief may be prevented, that otherwise
would befall us in our Country.

Brother Corlaer ^e desire that a Christian may go along with us to Onnondage,
to the general Meeting there, which will be in nine days time, to consult what
may be proper to be done on this Emergency.

The Gentlemen of A^bany answered the Indians, That what they had now said
should be sent dow^ forthwith to his Excellency the Governor, by Major
W^ss^ll^, Mayor of Alba^y and that if any of them were willing to go along with
the said Major Wess^ls to New York, they would be welcome, and in the mea^
time, that they should by no means send any Prisoners, or others, to Canada:
Was given them seven hands of Wampum.

At a Council held at his Majesty's Fort in New York, the 20th of August, School.
Present
His Excellency Richard Earl of BELLOMONT. Capt. John N^^fan, Lieut. Governor.
Frederick Phillips, Esqr. Steph. Cortlandt, Esqr. William Smith, Esqr. Gab.
Minveill, Esqr. John Lawrence, Esqr.
HIs Excellency told the Council, That the occasion of this Meeting is an
Express come from Albany and the Onnondage Country, with Intelligence, that
four of the five Nations have had a Message from Canada, that Count Frontinac
refused to deliver up some Prisoners of Onnondage to their M^ssengers, because
there came not Delegates from each of the four Nations, rejecting their Belt,
and threatening to pros^cute the War if they did not speedily submit, and make a
separate Peace with them. Whereupon there being a general Meeti^g appointed at
Onnondage, of the five Nations, they desire assistance, and that some Christi^^
from this Government may be present at their Meeting.

His Excellency order^d De^an^tsore and the other Indian to be called in, with
the Interpreter, and told them, That he had taken the Advice of the Council
upon this Message they have brought, and that he wa^ fully resolved to succor
and protect them* (...) that purpose h^ had ordered his Lieut. Governor and
his Company forthwith to (...) to Albany, where he is to remain to succor
them, upon occasion, with all the (...) the Fronteer^, and desir^d them to send
out Scouts toward (...) Dekanitsore said, it (...) there ^h^uld (...) a Peace,
and they have no benefit of (...) Excellency answered, That he sent not the
Lieut. Governor to begin a new Wa^, but ^o Succor them* in c^se the French
should break the Peace, and deny them the benefit of it, he will take care
(...) have ^n equal benefit of the Peace with the rest of his Majesty's
Chr^stian Subjects. His Excellency told them he would send the Mayor of Albany
along with them to the Meeting at Onnondage. Which Dekanitsore said, he liked
very well. His Excellency told them, he had wrote to the Governor of Canada,
that he will have them comprehended in the General Peace, or do his outmost
endeavor to force him to it.

Dekanitsore said, The same Rivers that lead to Onnondage have branches that
lead ^o Cayouge and Oneyde, so that they cannot come to help one another; and
if they cannot be protected from the French, they must make Peace with them,
for the way is far off for assistance to come up to them. His Excellency told
them, they should be no loosers, that if the French came with a Force
sufficient to overcome them, then they should send their Women and Children to
Albany, where they should be protected and maintained, and then he would go
with a sufficient force against Canada, to Revenge the Injuries done them, and
make good to them all their losses. His Excellency told them likewise, they
must not be discouraged, the great King of England has forced the French King
to make a Peace, and began the War upon their account, and will alw^^s support
them His Excellency told them, that the French Governor intended only (...)
them, and although he does propose Peace, yet will always e^deavour their Ruin.
That (...) Governor dare not break the Peace for all this, but is endeavoring
by (...) entice or frighten them to break the Covenant Chain, and make (...)
Father; but if he do begin the War upon them again, the great King of (...)
begun the War upon the account of the Brethren, will justify and d^fend (...)

Ordered, Co^l. Cortland do provide suitable Clothing for the (...)

Ordered, by his Excellency and Council, That Major W^ss^^^ (...), John
Baptista, the Interpreter, do go fo^th-with to ^he Meeti^g (...) Nations of
Indian^ at Onnondage, and there give them all the Enco^^agement ^e possi^ly
can, and do all other things pursuant to the Instructions to be giv^^ (...) by
his ^xcellency, and that care should be taken to reward the pains and defray
the Journey of the said ^ajor Wessels and John Baptista.

Ordered, by his Excellency and Council, That a Messenger be immediately sent
to C^^ada with a Letter from his Excellency, to the Governor of Canada, upon
the subject matter of the Message and Alarm brought by the said Dekanitsore and
another Indian.

FINIS.
Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty in the City of New York, School.


