ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England.

Begun and Held at Boston on Wednesday, the Twenty-fifth of May, School.

Anno Regni Guilielmi Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, Regis,
Decimo.



BOSTON. Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to the
Governor and Council. School.

Anno Regni Guilielmi Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, REGIS,
Decimo.
An Act, For Reviving and further continuation of several Acts that are Expired
and near Expiring.
FORASMUCH as notwithstanding the Peace lately Ratifyed and Confirmed betwixt
the Crowns of England and France, the Indians in these His Majesty's
Territories, do still lie out in Rebellion and continue their Hostilities, and
to make incursions, and commit Outrages and Murders upon His Majesty's
Subjects. For the Suppressing of which Rebels, and the Defense and Security of
His Majesty's Subjects and Interests, there may be Occasion from time to time
of Levying and sending forth of Soldiers, and Guarding of the Frontiers, and
giving Assistance His Majesty's Neighboring Governments.

Be it Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Assembly,
in General Court Gonvened, and by the Authority of the same,

That the several Acts and Law, herein after mentioned, That is to say, An Act
Entitled, An Act, For Levying Soldiers, made and passed in the Fifth year of
the Reign of His present Majesty and the late Queen MARY of Blessed Memory. An
Act Entitled, An Act, For giving Succors and Assistance to the Relief of His
Majesty's Subjects in the Neighboring Provinces or Colonies. An Act Entitled,
An Act, For putting the Militia of this Province into a Readiness for defense of
the same: And An Act Entitled, An Act, For Reviving the Act to prevent the
deserting of the Frontiers (these three last made and passed in the Ninth year
of His present Majesty's Reign.) And all and every the Branches, Articles,
Clauses, Powers, Penalties and Proviso's contained in the said Acts, and in
each and every of them, (Excepting what is therein mentioned relating to the
French) Be and are hereby revived and further continued to abide and remain in
full force and Effect, until the thirty first day of October next coming, and
to the end of the Sessions of the General Assembly thence next following, and
no longer. And for and during that term, shall be used, applied, practiced and
executed according to the Tenor true intent and meaning of the same, as fully
and effectually to all intents and purposes, as it the before recited Acts, and
every of them had been particularly Re Enacted.

An Act, To prevent Encroachments upon High Ways, Streets, etc.
FOrasmuch as diverse* Encumbrances and Incroachements have been made, in and
upon the Common Roads, Highways and Streets heretofore Laid out in several
Towns within this Province.

For Redress whereof,

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That henceforth no Edifice, Building or Fence whatsoever, shall be Raised,
Erected, Built or Set up, in, upon or over any of the said Roads, Highways,
Streets, Lanes, or Alleys, in any Town, within this Province, or any part of
any of them, whereby to straighten the passage, or any ways lessen the full
breadth, of any such Roads, Highways, Streets, Lanes or Alleys; and if any
Edifice, Building or Fence whatsoever shall be Raised, Erected, Built, or Set
up, upon, in or over any such Road, High way, Street or Alley, contrary
hereunto, every such Edifice, Building or Fence, shall be deemed and held to be
a common Musance; and the Court of General Sessions of the Peace for the
Country, in which such Town does Lie upon complaint, and making out the same
before them, are hereby Empowered to order and cause such Edifice, Building or
Fence to be taken down, Demolished and removed, and also to cause to be removed
all such Encroachments, or Encumbrances as heretofore have been made, upon, in
or over any common Road, Highway or Street as aforesaid, and the Charge
thereof to be answered and paid by disposing of so much of the Materials, as
shall be necessary to satisfy the same.

Provided nevertheless, That this Act shall not be intended or construed to
intend the prohibiting of the setting up of any Conduit, Watch-house, Cage or
Stocks, for public use in or upon any Highway or Street within any Town.

An Act, For Regulating of Tanners, Curriers, and Cordwainers.
FOR the better preventing of Deceits and Abuses by Tanners, Curriers, and
Dressers, or Workers up of Leather.

BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That no person or persons whatsoever using or occupying the Feat or Mystery of
a Butcher, Currier, or Shoemaker, No Butcher, Curryer or Shoemaker, to be a
Tanner.
by himself or any other, shall use or exercise the Feat or Mystery of a
Tanner, on pain of the forfeiture of Six Shillings and Eight-pence for every
Hide or Skin by him or them so Tanned, whilst he or they shall use or occupy
any of the Mysteries aforesaid. No Tanner to use the Trade of Butcher, Currier
or Shoemaker.
Nor shall any Tanner during his using the said Trade of Tanning by himself or
any other, use or occupy the Feat or Mystery either of Butcher, Currier or
Shoemaker, upon pain of the like forfeiture as aforesaid. And no Butcher
whatsoever by himself or any other person, shall gash or cut any Hide of Ox,
Bull, Steer or Cow in fleaing thereof or otherwise, whereby the same shall be
impaired or damaged, on pain of forfeiting Twelve-pence for every gash or cut
in any such Hide or Skin.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That no person or persons whatsoever using or which shall use the Mystery or
Faculty of Tanning, shall at any time or times hereafter, No Tanner to offer or
put to Sale any Leather insufficiently Tanned.
offer or put to Sale any kind of Leather which shall be insufficiently Tanned,
(...) which has been over limed, or burnt in the Limes, or which shall not
have been after the Tanning thereof well and thoroughly dried, or that shall not
be Sealed as in and by this Act is hereafter directed, upon pain of forfeiting
the whole Hide, half Hide or other piece of such Leather, so offered or put to
Sale. And no person or persons whatsoever using, or that shall hereafter use
the Mystery or Faculty of Tanning, No unkind heats to be used in Tanning.
shall set any of his or their Fatts in Tan-hills or other places where the
Woozes or Leather put to Tann in the same, shall or may take any unkind heats,
nor shall put any Leather into any hot or warm Woozes whatsoever, on pain of
forfeiting Twenty pounds for every such Offense.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That no person or persons whatsoever, using or occupying, or that (...) or out
of the possession of a Currier not being Sealed with the Mark or Seal to be
used for (...) Curried: In every such case it shall and may be lawful for (...)
and Sealers, or any of them, to Seiz all such insufficient or unsealed Leather,
whether it be wrought up into Wares or not. To Seize all insufficient or
unsealed Leather.
And if the Owner or Claimer thereof shall not submit to the Judgment of the
Officer or Officers that Seized the same, such Officer or Officers shall retain
such Leather in his or their Custody, until Trial thereof be had as is
hereafter directed, and Judgment thereon given. And in such case the said
Officer or Officers shall within three days next after such. Seizure, inform
some Justice of the Peace thereof, Tryors to be appointed.
who shall thereupon appoint (...) or six men, honest and skilful in Leather,
to view the same in the presence of the Owner or Claimer, or without him (if
having notice) he does not appear, and to report unto him upon their Oaths the
defects which they find in said Leather: Which Report such Justice shall return
unto the Court or Justice respectively before whom the Trial of said Leather
shall be. But in case the said Viewers shall report that they do not find such
Leather or Wares so Seized in any respect defective according to the intent of
this Act, the Justice that appointed such Viewers shall cause the same* to be
forthwith discharged from the Seizure made by such Officer or Officers.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That no person or persons whatsoever shall or may withstand or resist the
Searchers and Sealers in the due Execution of their Office, Penalty for
resisting the Searchers.
nor in the Seizing of any insufficient Leather or Wares, on pain of forfeiting
the Sum of Five Pounds for every such Offense. And the Fee for Searching and
Sealing of Leather shall be One Pe^ny per Hide for any parcel less than five,
and for all other parcels, after the rate of Six pence a Dickar; which Fee the
Tanner and Currier respectively shall pay upon Sealing of the said Leather from
time to time; Fee for Sealing.
and shall also pay Three pence per mile for every mile any Sealer or Searcher
shall travel above one for which he is not to be allowed any thing.

And no Sealer or Searcher of Leather shall refuse within convenient time to do
his Office, Penalty on Sealers for neglect of duty.
or shall allow any Leather or Wares which we not suffici^^^ on pain of
forfeiting Forty Shillings, no^ shall take any bribe, or exact more than his
due Fees, on pain of forfeiting the Sum of Ten Pounds for every such Offense.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Fines, Fines and Forfeitures how to be disposed.
Penalties and Forfeitures that shall arise and grow due by virtue of this Act
or any Clause therein contained, shall accrue and be disposed of in manner
following, viz. one third part thereof to the Treasurer of the County where the
offense is committed, for the defraying of County Charges, one third part
thereof to the Treasurer or Select men of the Town where the Offender
inhabiteth, to the use of the poor of such Town, and the other third part to
the Seizer or Seizers of such insufficients Leather or to him or them that
shall inform and sue for the said Fines, Penalties or Forfeitures to be
recovered by Action, Bill, Plaint or Information in any Inferior Court of
Common Pleas, or before any Justice of Peace, when the matter does not exceed
the value of Forty Shillings.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That when and so often as any Leather belonging to any Tanner or other person
shall be Seized and become forfeit for any defect of the Currier in his
Workmanship about or handling of the same, Curriers liable to make good the
value of all Leather Seized for ill workmanship.
such Currier shall be liable to make good unto the Tanner or other Owner of
such Leather so seized and forfeited, the full value thereof, with his just
Costs and Damages, to be recovered by Action to be therefore brought against
such Currier in any Inferior Court of Common Pleas, or before any Justice of
Peace, If the value exceed not Forty Shillings: For the better ascertaining of
which value, the persons to be appointed as aforesaid for viewing the defects
in Leather, shall (when the same is seized for being marred or spoiled by the
Currier) through his ill workmanship or handling, be also appointed to estimate
and judge the value thereof, and make report of the same together with the
defects.

An Act, For Establishing the form of the Writ and Precept, for calling a
Great and General Court or Assembly.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and
Ordained by the Authority of the same,

That the Writ to be at any time hereafter issued by the Governor or
Commander in Chief of this Province, for calling a Great and General Court or
Assembly, as also the Preceipt to be issued by the Sheriff or Marshal in
Observance thereof, to the Select men of the several Towns, and their Return
thereupon (when any Person or Persons shall be chosen to represent them in said
Court) shall be in the forms following. Writ for calling a Great and General
Court or Assembly.


That is to say,

WILLIAM the Third by the Grace of GOD of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc.

To Our Sheriff or Marshal of Our County of S. within Our Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England. Greeting.

We Command, That upon Receipt hereof, You forthwith make out your Precepts,
directed unto the Select men of each respective Town within your Precinct,
Requiring them to cause the Freeholders, and other Inhabitants of their several
Towns, duly qualifyed as in and by our Royal Charter is directed, to Assemble
at such time and place as they shall appoint, to elect and depute, one or more
Persons (being Freeholders and Resident in the same Town) according to the
number set and limited, by an Act of the Great and General Court or Assembly of
our aforesaid Province, to Serve for and Represent them respectively in a Great
and General Court or Assembly by Us appointed to be Convened, Held and Kept for
our Service: At the Town House in Boston, upon (...) the (...) day of (...)
next ensuing the Date of these presents, and to cause the person or persons so
Elected and Deputed by the major part of the Electors present at such Election,
to be timely notified and summoned by the Constable or Constables of such Town,
to attend our Service in the said Great and General Court or Assembly, on the
day above prefixed by nine in the morning, and so de Die in Diem, during their
Session and Sessions, and to return the said Precepts with the names of the
person or persons so Elected and Deputed unto your self, whereof you are to
make Return together with this Writ, and of your doings therein under your
hand, into our Secretaries Office at Boston, one day at the least before the
said Courts sitting. Hereof you may not fail at your Peril. Witness (...) and
Comander in Chief, in and over our Province of the Massachusetts Bay aforesaid.
Given at Boston under the Public Seal of our said Province the (...) day of
(...) In the (...) Year of our Reign. Annoque Domini

By Command of J. A. Secr.

Suffolk ss
IN Observance of His Majesty's Writ to me directed. These are in His Majesty's
Name to Will and Require you forthwith to cause the Freeholders and other
Inhabitants of your Town that have an Estate of Freehold in Land within this
Province or Territory, Precept to the Select-men for choice of Representatives.
of Forty Shillings Per Annum at the least, or other Estate, to the value of
Fifty Pounds Sterling, to assemble at such time and place as you shall appoint,
then and there to Elect and Depute one or more persons (being Freeholders and
resident in the same Town) according to the number set and limited by an Act of
the General Assembly, to Serve for and Represent them in a Great and General
Court or Assembly, appointed to be Convened, Held and Kept for His Majesty's
Service at the Town House in Boston, upon (...) the (...) day of (...) next
ensuing the Date hereof, and to cause the person or persons so Elected and
Deputed by the major part of the Electors present at such Election, to be
timely notified and summoned by one or more of the Constables of your Town, to
attend His Majesty's Service in the said Great and General Court or Assembly,
on the day above prefixed, by nine in the morning, and so De Die in Diers
during their Session and Sessions. Hereof fail not, and make Return of this
Precept with the names of the person or persons so Elected and Deputed with
their being Summoned, unto my self (...) days at the least before the said
(...) day of (...) (...) Given under my Hand and Seal at B. the (...) day of
(...) In the (...) Year of His Majesty's Reign. Annoqu^ Domini.

A. B. of the said County of Suffolk.

To the Select men of the Town of B. in the County abovesaid. Greeting.
Return to be indorsed on the Precept.
PUrsuant to the Precept within Written, the Freeholders and other Inhabitants
of the Town of B qualified as is therein directed, upon due warning given,
assembled and met together the (...) day of (...) and then did Elect and Depute
(...) to Serve (...) and Represent them in the Session and Sessions of the
Great and General Court or Assembly appointed to be convened, held and kept for
His Majesty's Service at the Town House in Boston, upon (...) the (...) day of
(...) the said person being Chosen by the major part of the Electors present as
said Meeting. Dated in B. aforesaid the (...) day of (...) Anno Domini

A. B. Select-men of B. C. D. Select-men of B. E. F. Select-men of B.

The person Chosen as above said, notified thereof and Summoned to attend
accordingly by me A. B. Constable of B.

An Act, For the Establishing of Precedents and Forms of Writts and Processes,
in Civil Causes.
BE it Enacted and Ordained by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted and
Ordained by the Authority of the same,

That the several Forms of Writts and Processes in Civil Causes hers under
written, be, and hereby are Established to be the Forms which the respective
Officers that are or shall be appointed to grant the same, shall observe and
use.

That is to say,

Essex ss.
TO the Sheriff or Marshal of the said County of E. or either of their Deputies
or Constables of the Town of S. within the said County, or to any or either of
them. Greeting. Summons for Appearance before a Justice of Peace.


In His Majesty's Name you are Required to Summon and give notice unto T. P. of
S. aforesaid, (...) addition (...) (if he may be found in your Precincts) that
he appear before me J. H. Esqr. one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for
the County aforesaid, at my Dwelling House in S. on (...) the (...) day of
(...) at (...) of the Clock in the (...) noon, then and there to answer to E.
L. of M. (...) addition (...) in an Action or plea of (...) which is to the
damage of the said E. L. the Sum of (...) Shillings, (...) as shall then and
there appear, with other due damages. You are (...) hereby further required to
signify unto the said T.P. That he may not fail in the premises as he will
answer the Contempt at the peril of the Law in this Case made and provided; and
of this Writ with your doings therein, you are to make true Return unto my self
at or before the said (...) day of (...) Dated at S. (...) the (...) day of
(...) In the (...) Year of (...) Majesty's Reign. Annoque Domini

J. H.

Essex ss.
TO the Sheriff or Marshal of the said County of E. or either of their
Deputies, Warrant for Contempt.
or Constables of the Town of S. within the said County, or to any or either of
them. Greeting.

Whereas T. P. of S. (...) addition (...) was Served with Summons granted by me
J. H. Esqr. one of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County
aforesaid, for his appearance before me, on (...) the (...) day of (...) to
answer E. L. of M (...) addition (...) in an action or plea of (...) And
whereas the said T. P. has made default in his said appearance. These are
therefore in His Majesty's Name to will and require you to take the Body of the
said T. P. (if he may be found in your Precincts) and him safely keep, so that
he may be had before me the said J. H. at my Dwelling House in S. on (...) the
(...) day of (...) at (...) of the Clock in the (...) noon, as well to answer
the said R. L. of his plea aforesaid, as for his said Contempt, and make true
Return of this Writ with your doings therein, unto my self at or before the
said (...) day of (...) Dated at S. the (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year of
His Majesty's Reign. Annoque Domini

J. H.

Essex ss.
TO the Sheriff or Marshal of the said County of E. or either of their Deputies
or Constables of the Town of S. within the said County or to any or either of
them. Greeting. Attachment before a Justice of Peace.


In His Majesty's Name you are required to attach the Goods or Estate of T. P.
of S. (...) addition (...) to the value of (...) Shillings (...) and for want
thereof to take the Body of the said T. P. (if he may be found in your
Precincts) and him safely keep, so that he may be had before me J. H. Esqr. one
of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County aforesaid, at my
Dwelling House in S. on (...) the (...) day of (...) at (...) of the Clock in
the (...) noon, then and there to answer to E. L. of M (...) addition (...) in
an Action or plea of (...) which is to the damage of the said E. L. the Sum of
(...) Shillings (...) as shall then and there appear with other due damages.
Hereof fail not, and make due Return of this Writ with your doings therein
unto my self at or before the said (...) day of (...) Dated at S. the (...) day
of (...). In the (...) Year of His Majesty's Reign. Annoque Domini.

J. H.

Essex ss.
WILLIAM the Third by the Grace of GOD of England, Scotland, Execution granted
by a Justice of Peace.
France and Ireland, KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Sheriff or
Marshal of our said County of E. or either of their Deputies, or Constables of
the Town of S. within our said County, or to any or either of them. Greeting.
Whereas E. L. of M (...) addition (...) on the (...) day of (...) before J. H.
Esqr. one of our Justices of the Peace for our County aforesaid, recovered
Judgment against T. P. of S. (...) addition (...) for the Sum of (...)
Shillings (...) Debt or Damage, and (...) Shillings and (...) pence for Charges
of Suit as to us appears of Record, whereof Execution remains to be done. We
Command you therefore, That of the Money of the said T. P. or of his Goods or
Chattels within your Precincts, at the value thereof in money you cause to be
levied paid and satisfied unto the said E. L. the aforesaid Sums being (...)
Pounds (...) Shillings and (...) pence in the whole, and also that out of the
said Money, Goods or Chattels, you levy Two Shillings more for this Writ,
together with your own Fees; and for want of such Money, Goods or Chattels of
the said T. P's to be by him shown unto you, or found within your Precincts to
the acceptance of the said E. L. for satisfying the aforesaid Sums: We Command
you to take the Body of the said T. P. and him Commit unto the keeper of our
Goal in S. in our County aforesaid within the said Prison: Whom we likewise
Command to receive the said T. P. and him safely keep, until he pay unto the
said E. L. the full Sums abovementioned, and be by him released, and also
satisfy your Fees. Hereof fail not, and make due Return of this Writ with
your doings therein unto our said Justice within Sixty Days next coming.
Witness our said Justice at S. the (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year of our
Reign. Annoque Domini

J. H.

Suffolk ss.
Attachment to the Superior or Inferior Court respectively.
WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Sheriff or Marshal of our
said County of S. his Undersheriff or Deputy. Greeting. We Command you to
attach the Goods or Estate of D. T. of B. (...) addition (...) to the vain of
(...) Pounds (...) and for want thereof to take the Body of the said D. T. (if
he may be found in your Precincts) and him safely keep, so that you have him
before our Justices at our next (...) Court of (...) to be Holden at B. (...)
within or for our County aforesaid, on the (...) Tuesday of (...) then and
there to answer unto C. L. of R. (...) addition (...) in an Action of (...)
which is to the damage of the said C. L. the Sum of (...) Pounds, as shall then
and there appear with other due damages: And have you there this Writ with your
doings therein. Witness E. H. Esqr. (...) at B. the (...) day of (...) In the
(...) Year of our Reign. Annoque Domini

J. W. Clerk.

Suffolk ss.
WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. To D. T. of B. (...) addition (...)
Greeting. Summons to the party whose goods are Attached
We Command you, That you appear at our (...) Court of (...) to be Holden at B.
within or for our County of S. aforesaid, on the (...) Tuesday of (...) to
answer unto C. L. of R. (...) addition (...) in an Action of (...) which Action
the said C L. has commenced, to be heard and determined at the said Court: To
respond which your Goods or Estate are attached to the value of (...) Pounds,
the damage laid in the said Action, being (...) Pounds. Hereof fail not at your
Peril. Witness E. H. Esqr. (...) at B. the (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year
of our Reign. Annoque Domini

J. W. Clerk.

Suffolk ss.
WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, King, Execution out of the Superior or Inferior Court respectively.
Defender of the Faith, etc To the Sheriff or Marshal of our said County of S.
his Under Sheriff or Deputy. Greeting. Whereas C. L. of R (...) addition (...)
recovered Judgment against D. T. of B. (...) addition (...) before our Justices
of our (...) Court of (...) holden for or within our County aforesaid, on the
(...) Tuesday of (...) for the Sum of (...) Pounds, Debt or Damage, and (...)
Pounds (...) Shillings and (...) Pence for Costs of Suit, as to Us appears of
Record whereof Execution remains to be done. We Command you therefore, That of
the Goods, Chattels or Lands of the said D. T. within your Precinct, you cause
to be paid and satisfied unto the said C. L. at the value thereof, in money,
the aforesaid Sums being (...) Pounds (...) Shillings and (...) Pence in the
whole, with Two Shillings more for this Writ, and thereof also to satisfy your
self for your own Fees. And for want of such Goods, Chattels or Lands of the
said D. T's to be by him shown unto you, or found within your Precinct to the
acceptance of the said C. L. to satisfy the aforesaid Sums, We Command you to
take the Body of the said D. T. and him Commit unto the Keeper of our Goal in
B. in our County aforesaid within the said Prison, Whom We likewise Command to
receive the said D. T. and him safely to keep, until he pay unto the said C. L.
the full Sums abovementioned, and be by him released, and also satisfy your
Fees. Hereof fail not, and make Return of this Writ with your doings therein
unto our said (...) Court of (...) to be holden at B. upon the (...) Tuesday of
(...) next. Witness E. H Esqr. (...) at B. the (...) day of (...) In the (...)
Year of our Reign. (...) Annoque Domini.

J. W. Clerk.

Suffolk. ss.
WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God, of England, Writ of Facias Haberi
possessionem, and Writ of Fieri Facias for damages and Costs, out of the
Superior or Inferior Court respectively.
Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Sheriff
or Marshal of Our said County of S. his Under Sheriff or Deputy. Greeting.
Whereas A. B. of C. (...) addition (...) before our Justices of our (...) Court
of (...) holden for or within our County aforesaid, at B. upon the (...)
Tuesday in (...) by the Consideration of our said Court, recovered Judgment for
his Title and possession of and in a certain Message or Tenement with the
appurtenances or (...) acres of Land, etc. lying and being in the Town of D.
against E. F. of G. (...) addition (...) who had unjustly put out and amoved
the said A. B. from his possession thereof and also at the said Court recovered
Judgment for (...) Pounds (...) Shillings and (...) Pence for Costs and Damages
which he has sustained by reason of the said Offense and ejectment, and
expended for the removal thereof, as to Us has been made to appear of Record.
We Command you therefore, that without delay you cause the said A. B. to have
possession of and in the said Message or Tenement with the appurtenances or
said (...) acres of Land, etc. We also Command you, That of the Goods, Chattels
or Lands of the said E. F. within your Precinct, at the value thereof in money,
you cause the said A. B. to be paid and satisfied the aforesaid Sum of (...)
Pounds (...) Shillings and (...) Pence, which to the said A B. was adjudged for
his Costs and Damages, with Two Shillings more for this Writ, and thereof also
to satisfy your self for your own Fees: And for want of such Goods, Chattels
or Lands of the said E. F. to be by him shown unto you, or found within your
Precinct, to satisfy the aforesaid Sum. We then Command you to take the Body
of the said E. F. and him commit to the Keeper of our Goal in B. in our County
aforesaid, within the said Prison: Whom We likewise Command to receive him the
said E. F. and him safely to keep, until he pay unto the said A. B. the full
Sum above mentioned, and be by him released, and also satisfy your Fees.
Hereof fail not, and make Return of this Writ, with your doings therein unto
our said (...) Court of (...) to be holden at B upon the (...) Tuesday in (...)
next. Witness T. D. Esqr. (...) at B (...) the (...) day of (...) In the (...)
Year of our Reign. Annoque Domini

A. D. Clerk.

Suffolk ss.
WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God, Writ of Scire Facias out of the
Superior or Inferior Court respectively.
of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. To
the Sheriff or Marshal of Our said County of S. his Under Sheriff or Deputy.
Greeting. Whereas C. D. of B. (...) addition (...) before our Justices of our
(...) Court of (...) holden for or within our said County of S. at B. on the
(...) Tuesday of (...) In the (...) Year of our Reign. By the consideration of
our said Justices recovered against A. B. of E. (...) addition (...) the Sum of
(...) Pounds (...) Shillings and (...) Pence, Debt or Damage, and also (...)
Pounds (...) Shillings and (...) Pence, for Costs and Charges by him about his
Suit in that behalf expended, whereof the said A. B. is convict as to Us
appears of Record, and although the Judgment be thereof rendered, yet the
Execution of the said Debt and Costs does yet remain to be made, whereof the
said C. D. has supplicated Us to provide remedy for him in that behalf. Now to
the end that Justice be done. We Command you, That by honest and lawful men of
your Precinct, you make known to the said A. B. that he be before our Justices
of our said Court of (...) to be holden within or for our said County of S. at
B. on the (...) Tuesday of (...) to show cause (if any he have) wherefore the
said C. D. ought not to have his Execution against him of the Debt and Costs
aforesaid, and further to do and receive that which our said Court shall then
consider, and have these then the names of them by whom to him you shall make
known the same and this Writ. Witness E. H. Esqr. (...) at B. the (...) day of
(...) In the (...) Year of our Reign. Annoque Domini

J. W. Clerk.

Suffolk ss.
WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, King, Attachment to Review, at the Superior or Inferior Court
respectively.
Defender of the Faith, etc. To the Sheriff or Marshal of our said County of S.
his under Sheriff or Deputy. Greeting. We Command you to attach the Goods or
Estate of I. M. of H. (...) addition (...) to the value of (...) Pounds: And
for want thereof to take the body of the said I. M. (if he may be found within
your Precinct) and him safely keep, so that you have him before our Justices at
our next (...) Court of (...) to be holden at B. for our County aforesaid, on
the (...) Tuesday of (...) then and there to answer unto L. K. of R (...)
addition (...) on review of an action or Suit commenced and Tried by the said
I. M. against the said L. K. Defendant at the (...) Court of (...) holden at B.
aforesaid, on the (...) Tuesday of (...) where Judgment was rendered for the
said I. M. to recover of the said L. K. (...) (...) and costs of Suit, which
Judgment the said L. K. says is w^ong and erroneous, and that he is thereby
damnifyed the Sum of (...) Pounds, as shall then and there be made to appear:
For the Reversing whereof and recovering back the said (...) (...) granted to
the said I. M. by the Judgment aforesaid: he the said L. K. brings this Suit,
as also for his cost and damage occasioned thereby. And have you there this
Writ with your doings therein, Witness T. D. Esquire. at B. the (...) day of (...)
In the (...) Year of Our Reign. Annoque Domini

A. D. Clerk.

Suffolk ss. To A. B. of C. Greeting.
Summons for Witnesses to give Evidence.
YOu are hereby required in His Majesty's Name to make your appearance before
His Majesty's Justices of the next (...) Court of (...) to be holden within or
for the said County of S. at B upon the (...) Tuesday of (...) to give Evidence
of what you know relating to a Plea or Action of (...) then and there to be
heard and tried betwixt A. B. of C. (...) addition (...) Plaintiff, and D. E.
of F. (...) addition (...) Defendant. Hereof fail not as you will answer your
Default under the pains and penalty of the Law in that behalf made and
provided. Dated in B. the (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year of His Majesty's
Reign. Annoque Domini

J. W. Clerk.

Suffolk ss.
TO the Sheriff or Marshal of the said County of S. his Undersheriff or Deputy
or Constables of the Town of B. within the said County, Replevin.
or to any or either of them. Greeting.

In His Majesty's Name you are Required to replevin (...) belonging unto T. P.
of B. (...) addition (...) now distreined or impounded by J. G. of B (...)
addition (...) and deliver the said (...) unto the said T. P. provided he give
Bond to the value of (...) Pounds, with sufficient Surety or Sureties to
prosecute his Replevin at the next Inferior Court of Common Pleas to be Holden
for the County aforesaid, at B on the (...) Tuesday of (...) and so from Court
to Court, until the Cause be ended, and to pay such Costs and Damages as the
said J. G. shall recover against him. Hereof fail not, and make true Return of
this Writ with your doings therein unto the said Court. Dated in B. the (...)
day of (...) In the (...) Year of His Majesty's Reign. Annoque Domini

J. W. Clerk.



The like Form of a Replevin to be observed for matters cognizeable before a
Justice of Peace, Mutatis mutandis.

Suffolk ss
WILLIAM the Third by the Grace of GOD of England, S^^tland France and Ireland,
Writ of Error.
KING, Defender of the Faith, etc. To A. B. Esqr. (...) Greeting. Whereas in
the Record and Process, and also in giving Judgment of a Suit which was before
you and other our Justices of our Inferior Court of Common Pleas holden at B.
within or for our said County of S. on the (...) Tuesday of (...) between C. D.
of E. (...) addition (...) Plaintiff, and F. G. of H (...) addition (...)
Defendant, in an Action of (...) Error manifest does appear to have intervened
to the grievous damage of the said F. G. as of his Complaint, We have received:
We therefore being willing that Error, (if any there be in this behalf) in due
manner be corrected, and that speedy Justice according to Law to the said F.G.
be therein done, as it becomes Us, Command you, That the Judgment in the Suit
aforesaid, and Execution thereupon issued (if any be) together with the whole
Record and Process of the said Suit, and all things touching the same in any
manner, you have before our Justices of our Superior Court of Judicature, to
be holden at B. for or within our said County of S on the (...) Tuesday of
(...) under your Seal: So that our said Justices of our said Superior Court
may then and there have them, and the Process and Record aforesaid, and also
may (af-the same are by them inspected) therein further do what of right ought
to be done: And if Execution of the Judgment aforesaid be not made out before
the receiving of this Writ, that then as well from granting thereof as from
further taking, imprisoning, or in any thing molesting the said F. G. on the
occasion aforesaid, until the Plea upon this Writ of Error to be corrected,
depending undiscussed, be fully determined, you altogether cease and supersede.
Hereof fail not, and have you then and there also this Writ with your doings.
Witness T. D. Esqr. (...) at B the (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year of our
Reign. Annoque Domini

A. D. Clerk.

Suffolk ff.
WILLIAM the Third, by the Grace of God, Supersedeas where Execution is granted
before the taking out a Writ of Error.
of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc. To
the Sheriff or Marshal of our said County of S. his Under Sheriff or Deputy.
Greeting. Whereas C. D. of E. (...) addition (...) before our Justices of our
Inferior Court of Common Pleas holden at B. within or for our said County of S
on the (...) Tuesday of (...) recovered Judgment against F. G. of H. (...)
addition (...) for (...) Pounds (...) Shillings Debt or Damage, and (...)
Shillings for Costs, as to Us appears of Record. And whereas from the grievous
Complaint of the said F. G. We have received that in the Record and Process and
in rend^ing of Judgment in the Suit aforesaid, Error manifest has intervened
to the grievous damage of the said F. G. and We being willing that Error
therein (if any be) in due manner be corrected, and that to the said F.G. full
and speedy Justice in this behalf be done, have by Our Writ commanded A. B.
Esqr. (...) Justice of Our said Inferior Court of Pleas: That the Judgment in
the Suit aforesaid, and Execution thereupon issued (if any be) together with
the whole Record and Process of the said Suit, and all things touching the same
in any manner, he have before Our Justices of Our Superior Court of
Judicature, to be holden at B. for or within Our said County of S. on the (...)
Tuesday of (...) under his Seal, that the Justices of Our said Superior Court
(after inspecting the Record and Process aforesaid) may therein further do what
of right ought to be done. But Forasmuch as the Record and Process aforesaid,
with all things touching the same, cannot be returned until the Sitting of the
said Superior Court on the (...) Tuesday of (...) aforesaid, and so Error
therein (if any be) in the mean time cannot be discussed. We therefore Command
you, That if Execution be issued upon or by occasion of the Judgment aforesaid
you cease and supersede the levying of the same on the said F. G. or on any of
his Goods, Chattels, Lands or Tenements whatsoever, until the Plea upon Our
Writ of Error to be corrected, depending undiscussed, be fully determined.
Hereof you may not fail, and have with you this Writ with your doings therein
at the Superior Court aforesaid. Witness T. D. Esqr. at B. the (...) day of
(...) In the (...) Year of Our Reign. Annoque Domini

A. D. Clerk.

To the Constables of the Town of B. in the County of S. (...) Greeting.
A Warrant for Collecting of Town Assessments.
IN His Majesty's Name you are Required forthwith to Levy and Collect of the
persons named in the List herewith committed unto you, each one his several
proportion (as therein set down) of the Sum total of such List, being a Tax or
Assessment granted and agreed upon by the Inhabitants of the said Town of B.
regularly assembled for defreying of the necessary Charges arising within the
same.

And to deliver and pay in the Sum and Sums which you shall so Levy and Collect
unto A. B. Treasurer of the said Town (where any such is appointed) or to the
Select-men, or to C. D. (being by them appointed to receive the same) at on or
before the (...) day of (...) And if any person or persons shall neglect or
refuse to make payment of the Sum or Sums whereat he or they are respectively
assessed and Set in the said List, to distrein the Goods or Chattels of such
person or persons to the value thereof, at an equal and indifferent Apprizment,
returning the Overpl^^^ if any be) unto the Owner or Owners. And for want of
Goods o^ Chattels whereon to make distress, you are to Seize the Body or Bodies
of the person or persons so refusing, and him or them to commit unto the common
Goal of the said County, there to remain until he or they pay and satisfy the
several Sum or Sums assessed upon him or them as aforesaid, unless the same or
any part thereof upon application made unto the Quarter or General Sessions of
the Peace shall be abated. Dated at B. the (...) day of (...) In the (...) Year
of His Majesty's Reign. Annoque Domini



And the like Form of a Warrant shall be used for the Collecting of County
Rates or Assessments, Mutatis mutandis.

And be it further Enacted,

That when the Officer appointed for Collecting any Rates by virtue of such
Warrant as aforesaid, Copy of the Warrant to be left with the keeper when any
persons are imprisoned by virtur thereof.
shall Seize the Body of any person or persons for want of Goods or Chattels
whereon to make distress, and shall commit him or them to Prison. A Copy of
said Warrant with the Sum or Sums such person or persons are to pay, Signed by
the said Officer, shall be a sufficient Warrant for the Jailer to receive and
hold such person or persons, until he or they shall pay the said Rate, and his
or their Charges of Imprisonment, with One Shilling for the Copy of said
Warrant.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That every person bringing a Writ of Error for the removal of any Case out of
the Inferior Court of Common Pleas for another hearing and Trial in the
Superior Court of Judicature, Proceedings upon a Writ of Error.
shall assign the Errors in the proceedings and Judgment given in the Inferior
Court, in writing under his own or Attorneys Hand, and file the same in the
Clerk's Office of such Inferior Court, fourteen days inclusive before the
Sitting of the Superior Court, at which the Case is to be heard, to the intent
the adverse party may have a Copy thereof (if desired) And shall also cause him
to be notified of the said Writ of Error, and Served with Summons out of the
Clerk's Office of the Superior Court, by the like space of fourteen days to
appear and defend the said Suit: And the party taking out such Writ of Error,
shall at his own Cost and Charge cause the Record and Process of the Case in
the Inferior Court, and all the proceedings thereon, together with the Errors
assigned therein, to be Certified unto the Superior Court of Judicature; which
cost and charge shall be repaid by the Defendant if upon such Trial the
Judgment given in the Inferior Court be reversed. Clerks of Courts to grant an
alias Execution ex Officio, upon return of the former Execution being satisfied
in part only. Costs to be allowed against persons discontinuing their Suit or
becoming nonsuit.

Writts out of the Superior Court to bear the test of the chief Justice.




And it is further Declared and Enacted,

That where any Execution shall be returned satisfied in part only, the Officer
who granted the same may Ex Officio renew or make out an alias Execution for
the Remainder; Provided it be done within the space of twelve months next after
Judgment given, without a Scire Facias being Sued forth by the party that
recovered the Judgment.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That whosoever shall cause Process to be Served upon any person or persons on
pretense of Debt, Trespass or other matter or cause, and discontinue his or
their Suit, or be Nonsuited, the person or persons on whom Process shall be so
Served, making it appear to the Justices of the Court where such Process is
returnable, shall be allowed his or their reasonable Costs and Charges.

And all Writs, as well Original as Judicial issuing out of the Clerk's Office
of the Superior Court of Judicature shall bear the Test of the Chief Justice,
and upon any vacancy of such Chief Justice, then of the Senior Justice of the
said Court for the time being. And all Writs as well Original as Judicial
issuing out of the Clerk's Office of the several Inferior Courts of Common
Pleas, Writts out of the Inferior Court to bear the test of the first Justice
named in the Commission.
shall bear the Test of the first Justice named in the Commission for holding
of said Court; And upon any vacancy by his death or removal then of the next
Justice in such Commission named for the time being.

Any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary of any thing herein before contained
notwithstanding.

An Act, For providing of Pounds, and to prevent Rescous and Pound breach.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That there shall be a sufficient Pound or Pounds made and maintained, Each
Town to maintain a sufficient Pound.
from time to time in every Town and Precinct within this Province, in such
part or places thereof, as the Select-men shall direct and appoint, at the cost
and charge of such Town or Precinct, for the impounding and restraining of all
Swine, Cattle or Sheep, liable to be impounded or restrained, for any of the
causes herein after mentioned.

For what causes Cattle etc. to be impounded.
And that it shall and may be lawful to and for any other Person or Persons, as
well as the Hawards or Field drivers, to take up and impound or cause to be
impounded, any Swine, Neat Cattle, Horses or Sheep, as shall be found damage
feasant in any Corn-field, or other enclosure; or Swine found unyoked or
unringed; Neat Cattle, Horses or Sheep going upon the Common, not allowed to
feed there by the major part of the Propriety, who are impowed to permit the
same; any Law to the contrary notwithstanding. And the Owners or Claimers of
any such Creatures impounded as aforesaid, shall pay the Fees Set in and by an
Act Entitled, An Act, For Regulating of Fences, Cattle, etc. unto the Pound
keeper, before they be delivered out of Pound, as also the Fee to the party
impounding and damage to the party injured, unless such Owner or Claimer shall
think (...) to Replevie his Creatures impounded, and give sufficient Bond with
one or more Sureties to prosecute his Replevin with Effect in Law, either
before a Justice of the Peace, within fifteen days inclusive from the date of
such Replevin, or at the next Inferior Court of common Pleas to be holden
within the same County, according to the value of the damages alleged to be
suffered, and to pay all such costs and damages as shall be awarded against him.

And every Person impounding any Swine, Neat Cattle, Horses or Sheep, shall
give present notice thereof unto the Owner, if known, The owner of Creatures
impounded, to be notifyed thereof (if known) if not the Creatures to be cried
and posted up.
or leave a Notification thereof in writing at his house or place of usual
abode, or if unknown, shall cause the same to be publicly cried or posted up
in some public place in such Town and in the two next Neighboring Towns, from
whence it may be most likely such Creatures came. And shall also cause the
Creatures so impounded, to be relieved with suitable meat and water, the charge
whereof shall be paid by the Owner or Owners, as also of the crying of them
after the rate of Three pence per Head, for a number not exceeding Twelve, and
no more than Three Shillings for a greater number. And if no Owner or Claimer
appear within the space of three days next after the impounding of any such
Creatures, Fee for crying.
then the person or persons so restraining of them shall proceed with them as
the Law provides respecting Strays. after three days to be proceeded with as
Strays.


And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any person or persons shall Rescue any Swine, Neat Cattle, Horses or
Sheep taken up as aforesaid, out of the hands of the Haward or other person
being about to drive them to the Pound, whereby the party injured may be liable
to lose his damages, Penalty for a Rescous.
and the Law be eluded, the party so offending, shall for such Rescous, forfeit
and pay the Sum of Forty Shillings to the use of the poor of the Town or
Precinct where the Offense is committed; besides all just damages unto the
party injured, to be recovered by Action, Bill, Plaint or Information in any of
His Majesty's Courts of Record. And if any person or persons shall make any
Pound breach, or by any other indirect ways or means howsoever, convey or
deliver any Creatures impounded out of the Pound, the party so offending being
duly convicted thereof, Penalty for pound breach
shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Five Pounds to the use of the Poor of the
Town or Precinct where the Offense is committed, as also all just damages to
the party injured by such Creatures to be had and recovered in manner as
aforesaid. And if such Rescous Pound breach or conveying of Creatures out of
the Pound happen to be committed by any Apprentices or persons under Age, not
having of their own wherewith to satisfy the Law, and their Parents or Masters
refuse to pay the Fine and Damages, which the Law in such case does inflict. It
shall and may be lawful to and for the Justices before whom such Action or
Plaint shall be depending, upon a due conviction of the person or persons
complained of, Committed by Apprentices or persons under age, how to be
punished.
and prosecuted for such Offense, to Commit him or them to the next Goal in the
County where the Offense is done, there to remain till Satisfaction be made as
abovesaid: Or otherwise may punish such Offender by Imprisonment, not
exceeding sixty days, in lieu of the Fine, and leave the party injured to his
remedy at Law, to recover his damage of the Parent or Master of such Child or
Apprentice; which such Parent or Master respectively shall be liable to have
recovered of him upon Action to be therefore brought, and Execution to be
accordingly awarded upon Judgment given in that respect.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That when and so often as any Trespass or Trespasses shall be done in Common
or General Fields, Trespass done in common or general Fields^
not being sufficiently F^^ced in as the Law directs, the party injured shall
forthwith procure two sufficient persons of good repute and credit, to view and
adjudge of the damage done, giving notice of such Trespass unto the Owner or
Claimer of the Beast or Cattle that did the same (if known and resident in the
same Town, or near by,) that he may be present, and nominate one of the
Apprizers if he see cause, and the damage to be answered according to such
Estimation.

the owner of defective Fence to make good damages.
And where damage happens through the insufficiency of the Fence the Owner or
Occupier of the Land to which the defective Fence belongs, shall be liable to
answer and make good all such Damage.

An Act, For preventing of Trespasses.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.

That all and every person and persons which shall unlawfully cut or take away
any Grass, Robbers of Orchards, Gardens etc. How to be punished.
Corn or Grain, growing, or rob any Orchard or Garden, or break or cut, pull
down or remove any Hedge, Pale, Rail or Fence, or that shall hurt or digg, or
pull up, or take away any Grafts or Fruit Trees, and their Procurers or
Receivers ^nowing the same, being thereof convict by confession of the party,
or by the testimony of sufficient Witnesses upon Oath before any Court, or any
one Justice of the Peace in the County where the Offense shall be committed,
shall pay unto the party injured, such recompense as by the Court or Justice
before whom the Trespass is found shall be awarded.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any person or persons shall cut or carry off any manner of Wood,
Penalty for cutting or carrying off any Trees, wood etc. from off another man's
Land, or off the common.
Underwood, Timber, Poles, or Trees standing, lying or growin^ ^n the Land of
any others, or off or from the Commons of any ^^wn, other than that to which he
does belong, or within the same Town, having no right or privilege there,
without leave or license from the major part of the Propriety of such Commons,
or the Owner or Owners of the Land whereon such Wood, Underwood, Timber, Poles
or Trees were standing* lying or growing: Every person so offending, shall
forfeit and pay unto the party or parties injured or trespassed upon, the Sum
of Twenty Shillings for every Tree of one foot over, and Ten Shillings for
every Tree or Pole under that bigness, and for other Wood or Underwood treble
the value thereof; to be recovered by Action, Bill, Plaint or Information
before any Justice of the Peace in the County where the Offense is committed,
if the forfeiture exceed not Forty Shillings, but if it be above that value,
then before the Inferior Court of Common Pleas within the same County.
Forfeiture upon a second convicton.
And if any person shall be convict of such Offense a second time, he shall
forfeit and pay to the use of the poor of the Town where the Offense is
committed, the Sum of Twenty Shillings, or suffer one months Imprisonment over
and above the forfeiture above said, or damages to the party injured.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any Children or Servants shall offend against this Act in any of the
particulars therein mentioned, Children or Servants offending against this Act,
how punished.
and their Parents or Masters refuse to answer the forfeiture or damage awarded
against them, they shall be punished by Whipping, setting in the Stocks or
Cage, or by Imprisonment, at the discretion of the Court or Justice before whom
the prosec^tion shall be, according to the nature and degree of the Offense and
circumstances aggravating.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That when in Action of Trespass brought before a Justice of Peace, In action
of Trespass before a Justice of Peace, if the Defendant justify on Plea of
Title, the case to be removed and be^d given.
the Defendant shall justify and demur upon plea of Title, a Record shall be
made thereof, and the matter of Fact be taken pro confesso, and the party
making such Plea shall become bound with one or were Sureties by way of
Recogniscance unto the adverse party in a reasonable Sum, not exceeding Twenty
Pounds; on condition that, he shall pursue his Plea, and bring forward a Suit
for a Trial of his Title, at the next Inferior Court of Common Pleas to be
holden for the County in which such Trespass is alleged to be done, and pay
and sati^fie, be all such damages and costs as by the said Court shall be
awarded against him; which Recogniscance the Justice is hereby Empowered to
require and take, and shall be paid for the same by the Reconuscer, Two
Shillings, and One Shilling for Recording his plea, and at the Charge also of
the same party shall certify the Process and Record of such plea, together
with the Recogniscance, unto the said Inferior Court of Common pleas. And if
such Reconuscer shall neglect to bring forward such Suit at the Inferior Court
according to the tenor of his Recogniscance, the default shall be Recorded,
and a Writ' of Scire Facias be issued out of the Clerk's Office of (...) same
Court, in manner as by Law is directed for the recovery of the Sum or penalty
in the Recogniscance mentioned of him, his Surety or Sureties. Or if upon Trial
before the said Court he shall not make out a Title to the Land or Tenement on
which the Trespass is laid to be done paramount to the possession or other
Title of the^ adverse party, Upon neglect or refusal to give bond, the case to
proceed.
Judgment shall be rendered for the party trespassed upon, for treble damages
and costs of Suit. But if the Defendant in Tres^pass justifying on plea of
Title shall refuse or neglect to become be and in manner as aforesaid, then his
plea shall abate, and the Justice notwithstanding the same shall proceed to try
the cause, and upon due proof or the Trespass committed by him shall award
damages against him according to what shall be made out, and cost of Suit.

And be it further Enacted,

That it in the opening and pleading of any Action of Trespass there be
disclosed and proved any breach of the Peace, breach of the Peace to be
punished.
the party or parties guilty thereof, shall be Fined to the King, or otherwise
punished as the Law in such case provides.

An Act, Against Receiving of Stolen Goods.
WHEREAS diverse lewd and evil minded Persons for the sake of filthy Lucre, do
frequently receive from Indians, Molato's, Negro's and other suspected Persons,
Money and Goods Stolen, or obtained by other indirect and unlawful ways and
means, thereby Encouraging of Theft.

For Redress whereof,

Be it Declared and Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council, and
Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That every person whomsoever which shall presume either openly or privately, to
buy or receive of or from any Indian, Molato or Negro Servant or Slave, Persons
receiving or buying Stolen Goods etc. to make restitution.
or of other known dissolute, lewd and disorderly person, of whom there is just
cause of Suspicion, any Money, Goods, Wares, Merchandises or Provisions: And it
appear the same Money, Goods, Wares, Merchandises or Provisions to have been
Stolen, gotten or obtained by any indirect or unlawful ways or means; every
person so offending and being thereof convicted, shall be sentenced to restore
all such Money, Goods, Wares, Merchandises or Provisions, unto the party
injured in Specie (if not altered) and also Forfeit to the said party the value
thereof over and above; or double the value, where the same are disposed of or
made away. And if the person so offending be unable, or shall not make
restitution as awarded, then to be openly Whip't with so many stripes, not
exceeding Twenty, as the Justice or Court that may have Cognizance of the
Offense shall order, or to make Satifaction by Service. And the Indian, Negro,
Molato or other suspicious person as aforesaid of or from whom such Money,
Goods, Wares, Merchandises or Provisions shall be received or bought, If unable
to make restitution, to be corporally punished.
shall be punished by Whipping, not exceeding Twenty Stripes, and be further
prosecuted as the Law directs in case of Theft, unless where such Money, Goods,
or Provisions shall be taken from the Master of such person.

An Act, Relating to Stray's and lost Goods, etc.
BE it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives,
Convened in General Assembly and by the Authority of the same,

That whosoever shall find any Money or Goods lost, Money or Goods found to be
Entered with the Town Clerk in 6 days after finding.
whereof the Owner is not known, the finder within Six days at the farthest
next after, shall give notice thereof in writing, unto the Clerk of the Town in
which they were found, to be entered in a Book to be kept for that purpose; and
shall also cause the same to be Cried by the Constable or Public Crier in such
Town, on three several day's, at a Public Meeting of the Inhabitants thereof;
and to be Posted up in some public place: And if the Money or Goods so found
be of the value of Twenty Shillings or upwards, to be cried and posted.
then to be Cried and Posted up in like manner at the two next adjacent Town's.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That every person who shall find and take up any Stray beast, shall cause the
same to be entered with the color and marks natural and artificial, Stray
beasts to be cried posted and wythed.
and also to be posted up and cried in manner and time as aforesaid, and
likewise within Twenty four hour's shall put, and from time to time keep a With
about the neck of such Stray Beast, on pain of losing all his Charges about it
afterward.

And the finder of any lost Goods or Stray Beast shall also within the time
before mentioned, The next Justice to be notifyed of lost Goods and Strays the
same to be apprized
Notify the next Justice of the Peace with in the same County thereof, and such
Justice shall forthwith thereupon order the same to be apprized by two meet
persons by him to be appointed, and shall administer an Oath unto them to deal
justly and indifferently therein.

And if the finder of any lost Goods or stray Beast shall neglect to cause the
same to be entered, cried and posted up in manner and time as before is expressed,
or to with such Beast, Penalty on the finder for neglect of entering, crying and
posting, and on the Town Clerk for his neglect.
or if the Town Clerk shall neglect to enter any lost Money, Goods or Stray,
whereof he shall be Notifyed, and have tendered unto him the Fee of Six pence,
(which he may demand and receive, and no more) such Finder or Town Clerk for
such omission and default respectively shall forfeit and pay to the use of the
Poor of such Town, one third part of the full value of such lost Money, Goods
or Stray^

And it is further Enacted,

That if the Owner of any such lost Money, Goods or stray Beast appear within
the space of one year next after such publication as aforesaid, and make out
his right and title thereto, Restitution to be made to the owner.
he shall have restitution of the same, or the full value thereof; allowing and
paying Three pence for each time it was Cried, Six pence for Entering thereof as
aforesaid; as also paying such necessary Charges as shall have arisen for the
keeping of such Strays, lost Money or Goods, or necessary Travel about them to
be adjusted and determined by the Justice that ordered the apprizal thereof, or
by some other Justice in the same County.

And if no Owner appear within one year as aforesaid, then such Strays, ^
lost Money or Goods shall be to the Finder, he paying one half of the value
thereof (all necessary charges being first deducted) according to apprizment,
unto the Treasurer or Overseers of the Poor for such Town, for the use of the
Poor thereof, and to be recovered by the Town Treasurer, Select men or
Overseers of the Poor respectively as in other Cases, upon neglect or refusal
to pay the same.

And be it further Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any Owner of any Stray Beast, or other person shall take the With off
from the same, Penalty for taking off the With, or taking away any Stray.
or take away such Stray before all the necessary Charges arisen for the
entering, crying and keeping thereof be defreyed, such person so offending shall
forfeit and pay unto the Finder of such Stray, the full value of the same.

All the Penalties and Forfeitures in this Act mentioned, to be recovered by
Action, Penalties etc. how to be recovered.
Bill, Plaint or Information before a Justice of the Peace, where the value
exceeds not his Cogniscance, or in any other of His Majesty's Courts within
this Province.

Provided, That no person from the first day of March to the first day of
December yearly, No Strays to be made from the first of March to the first of
December.
shall take up any Horse, Gelding, Mare or other Beast for a Stray, or account
or use them as Strays, though the Owner thereof be not known, unless such Beast
be taken damage feasant in Enclosures.

An Act, For the Inspecting and Suppressing of Disorders in Licensed Houses,
etc.
BE it Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same,

That all Inholders, Taverners and Common Victuallers shall at all times be
furnished with suitable Provisions and Lodging for the Refreshment and
Entertainment of Strangers and Travelers, Inn-holders etc. to be provided for
entertainment of men and horses.
Pasturing, Stable Room, Hay and Provender for Horses, on pain of being
deprived of their License.

And that no person who is o^ shall be Licenced to be an Inn-holder, Taverner,
Common Victualler or Retailer, shall suffer any Apprentice, Servant or Negro to
sit Drinking in his or her House, Penalty for entertaining of Servants or
Negro's.
or to have any manner of Drink there, without special order or allowance of
their respective Masters, on pain of Forfeiting the Sum of Ten Shillings for
every such Offense. Neither shall any Licensed person suffer any Inhabitant of
such Town where he dwells, or coming thither from any other Town, None to
continue in public houses above one hour, unless etc.
to sit Drinking or Tippling in his or her House, or any of the Dependencies
thereof, or to continue there above the space of one hour (other than
Travelers, persons upon business or extraordinary occasions) on the like
penalty of Ten Shillings for every Offense.

And every person who contrary to this Act, shall continue in any such House
Tippling or Drinking, or otherwise misordering him or her self, or above the
space of one hour (other then as aforesaid) shall forfeit and pay the Sum of
Three Shillings and four pence, or be set in the Stocks, not exceeding four
hours time.

And no person or persons Licensed as aforesaid, None to be suffered to be
drunk there or to be there on the Lords day, unless etc
shall suffer any person to Drink to Drunkenness, or excess in his or her
House, nor shall suffer any person as his or her Guest to be and remain in such
House, or any the Dependencies thereof, on the Lords Day (other than Strangers,
Travelers, or such as come thither for necessary refreshment,) on pain of
forfeiting the Sum of Five Shillings for every Offense in that kind.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Fines and Forfeitures arising for any of the Offenses before
mentioned, Penalty etc. how to be employed.
shall be one moiety thereof to the use of the poor of the Town where the
Offense is committed, and the other moiety to him or them that shall inform and
prosecute for the same, (except where such Offenses are presented by a Grand
jury, in which case, the whole forfeiture to be to the use of the Town) and
every Justice of the Peace within his Precincts is hereby empowered to hear and
determine concerning any of the Offenses aforesaid, Justice of the Peace his
power.
and to restrain and commit the Offender to Prison, until he pay and satisfy
the penalty or forfeiture, or otherwise by Warrant cause the same to be levied
by Distress and Sale of the Offenders Goods.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That before any person shall receive License to be an Inn holder, No
Inn-holder etc to receive License before entering into Recogniscance.
common Victualler, Taverner or Retailer, every such person shall become bound
by Recogniscance to His Majesty, in the Sum of Ten Pounds, the Principal, and
two Sureties in Five Pounds a piece, before one or more of the Justices of the
General Sessions of the Peace, On Condition following.

That is to say,

THE Condition of this Recogniscance is such, That whereas the above bounden A.
B. is admitted and allowed by the Justices of the Court of General Sessions of
the Peace, to keep a Common Inn, Alehouse, or Victualling house, and to use
common Selling of Wine, Beer, Ale, Cider, and other strong Liquors by Retail
for the space of one whole year next ensuing, and no longer, in the now
Dwelling House of the said A. B. in C. commonly known by the Sign of (...) and
no other: If therefore the said A. B. during the time aforesaid, shall not
permit, suffer or have any playing at Dice, Cards, Tables, Quoits, Loggets,
Bowls, Shuffle-board, Nine pins, Billiards, or any other unlawful Game or
Games in his House, Yard, Garden, Back side, or any of the Dependencies
thereof, Recogniscance for Inn-holders etc.
nor shall suffer to be or remain in his House any person or persons (not being
of his ordinary Household or Family) on the Lords Day or any part thereof,
contrary to Law, nor shall Sell any Wine, Liquors, or other Strong Drink to any
Apprentices, Servants, Indians, or Negro's, nor shall suffer any person or
persons to be there Tippling, Drinking, or continue there after nine of the
Clock in the night time, or otherwise contrary to Law. And in his said House,
shall and do use, maintain and uphold good order and Rule, and do endeavor the
due Observance of the Laws made for Regulation of such Houses. Then this
present Recogniscance to be void, but on default thereof, to abide and remain
in full force and virtue.

And before any person shall receive License to Retail any Wine or Strong
Liquors, to be spent out of Doors, and not otherwise, such person shall become
bound by Recogniscance as aforesaid, On Condition following.

That is to say,

THE Condition of this Recogniscance is such, That whereas the above bounden A.
B. is Licensed and allowed by the Justices of the Court of General Sessions of
the Peace, to Retail for the space of one whole year next ensuing, and no
longer, out of his now Dwelling House in C. (...) fort of Strong Liquors, (...)
to be spent out of Doors and not otherwise: If therefore the said A. B. shall
not entertain or suffer any person or persons to sit Drinking or Tippling in his
House, Recogniscance for Retailers out of doors.
Cellar, Back sides, or any of the Dependencies of said house, nor shall Sell
any other sort of drink than what he is Licensed for as above said. And shall
and do in and by all things observe the directions of the Law relating to
persons Licenced for Retailing out of Doors only. Then this present
Recogniscance to be void, but on default thereof to abide and remain in full
force and virtue.

For each of which aforesaid Recogniscances the party to whom such License
shall be granted shall pay Two Shillings, to be divided betwixt the Justice and
the Clerk.

And for the better Inspecting of Licensed Houses, and the discovery of such
persons as shall presume to Sell without License.

Be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Select men in each Town respectively shall take due care, That
Tything men, be annually chosen at the General Meeting for Choice of Town
Officers as is by Law provided, Tythingmen to be annually chosen.
and upon any vacancy to fill up the number at any other Town Meeting, which
Tyingmen shall have power, and whose Duty it shall be carefully to inspect all
Licensed Houses, and to inform of all disorders or misdemeanors which they
shall discover or know to be committed in them or any of them to a Justice of
the Peace, or Sessions of the Peace within the same County, as also of all such
as shall Sell by Retail, Tythingmen their Power and duty.
without License, and other disorders or misdemeanors committed in any such
House; and in like manner to present or inform of all idle and disorderly
persons, profane Swearers or Cursers, (...) ^^^th-breakers, and the like
Offenders, to the intent such Offenses and misdemeanors may be duly punished
and discouraged: Every of which Tything-men shall be Sworn before a Justice of
the Peace, or at the Sessions of the Peace, to the faithful discharge of his
Office, in manner following.

That is to say, YOU A. B. being Chosen a Tything-man within the Town of C. for
one year next ensuing, Oath.
and until another be Chosen and Sworn in your stead: Do Swear, That you will
faithfully endeavor and intend the Duty of your Office. So help you God.

Which Tything men shall have a black Staff of two foot long, Staff.
tip't at one end with brass about three inches, as a badge of their Office, to
be provided by the Select men, at the Charge of the Town.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any person being duly Chosen to the said Office, shall refuse to take
his Oath, or Serve therein, he shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Forty Shillings
to the use of the Poor of the Town whereto he belongs, Penalty for not serving.
upon Conviction of such refusal before the Justice of the Peace, or. Sessions
of the Peace where he is Summoned to be Sworn, Certificate being produced under
the Hand of the Town Cleck, that such person was legally Chosen to that Office.
And the said Forfeiture to be Levied by Distress and Sale of such persons
Goods, by Warrant from a Justice of the Peace, or Sessions of the Peace
respectively, and delivered to the Town Treasurer or Overseers of the Poor, for
the use aforesaid. And for want of such Goods whereon to make Distress, the
Officer in the said Warrant shall be required to Seiz the Body of the Offender,
and him commit unto Prison, to be there kept, until he shall answer and pay the
said Fine or Forfeiture, with the Charges of levying the same.

And all Tything men that shall inform and prosecute for the breach of any
penal Act, shall have the benefit of such part of the Forfeiture as does by Law
accrue unto the Informer. Tythingmen allowed the benefit of Informers.
And all persons prosecuted for breach of any Act relating to Retailing without
License, the penalty whereof for one Offense exceeds not Forty Shillings,
besides Charges may be convicted by two single Evidences upon Oath, though but
one to one breach of such Act, so as both the breaches be within one month, the
person accused or complained of not plainly and positively denying the Fact.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That every person to whom any License shall be granted before the receiving or
exercising of the same, Licensed persons also to enter into Recogniscance, for
paying their Excise.
over and above the Recogniscance required for the due observation of the Laws,
and keeping of good Rule and Order as aforesaid, shall also become bound unto
His Majesty in a distinct Recogniscance, with sufficient Sureties, in manner as
aforesaid, and in such Sum as the Justices in Sessions shall appoint. On
Condition that the person so Licensed shall duly and truly pay the Duties of
Excise for his Draught, according to the Rates by Law Established, or otherwise
perform such Agreement for the same as shall be made with the Officer or
Officers, that shall from time to time be appointed to agree for, and receive
the said Duties. For which Recogniscance he shall pay the like Foe before
mentioned.

And be it further Enacted,

Licenses to be granted at the next General Sessions of the Peace, after the 29
of June annually.
That for the future the time of granting of Lincences to Inn-holders and
Retailers of Drink, shall be at the first General Sessions of the Peace that
shall be held and kept in course within the several Counties at or next after
the nine and twentieth day of June annually, and that such as have already
obtained Licenses, shall hold them (unless they forfeit the same by breach of
Law) until the General Sessions of the Peace to be held in the respective
Counties as aforesaid, next after the nine and twentieth day of June, One
Thousand Six hundred Ninety and Nine. Any Law or Usage to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And the better to prevent Nursery's of Vice and Debauchery.

No more persons to be Licensed to keep Public houses, than what are necessary
for refreshment of Trav^ll^rs etc.
It is further Declared,

That the Justices of the General Sessions of the Peace in each County
respectively, be, and hereby are directed not to License more persons in any
Town or Precinct to keep Houses for common Entertainment, or to Retail Ale,
Beer, Cider, Wine or strong Liquors within or out of doors, than the said
Justices shall judge necessary for the receiving and refreshment of Travelers
and Strangers; and to Serve the public occasions of such Town or Precinct,
having regard to the Law for the Qualification and Approbation of the persons
so to be Licensed. And all public Houses shall be on or near the high Streets,
Public houses to be on high streets etc.
Roads, and places of great Resort.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Clerk of the Inferior Court of Common Pleas in each several County;
And the Clerk of the Superior Court of Judicature respectively, Clerks of the
several Courts to put in suit Recogniscences.
by direction of the Court from time to time, shall by Wr^t of Scire Facia^
prosecute to effect all such Recogniscances as shall be taken in Court, or
before any Justice, whereof default is or shall be made in not performing the
Condition of the same. And upon Execution awarded, to make out such Execution
unto the Sheriff of the County or his Deputy; who are accordingly to Levy the
Sum therein expressed; and to account for the Moneys or Estate Levied for
Satisfaction thereof, unto the Treasury, as by Law he is obliged. And no
Recogniscance for the keeping of good Rule and Order in public Licensed
Houses, or for Retailing out of doors, shall be put in Suit for any breach
thereof made, after the Expiration of two years from the time of taking such
Recogniscance.

An Act, For the Relief and Release of poor Prisoners for Debt.
BE it Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That it shall and may be lawful to and for any Justice of the Peace by Warrant
under his Hand and Seal, Justice of Peace on the Petition of Prisoners for Debt
to Administer an Oath to them
to require the Jailer or Keeper of any Prison within his Jurisdiction, from
time to time to bring without delay the Body of any person being in Prison for
Debt or Damages upon Execution (and petitioning such Justice to be discharged)
to some convenient place not exceeding the distance of one mile from the said
Prison, and to certify the cause and causes of the Imprisonment before the
same Justice, which Warrant every such Jailer and Keeper is hereby commanded to
obey.

And in case such Prisoner coming before such Justice shall take an Oath to
this Effect, viz. I A. B. do upon my Oath solemnly profess and declare before
Almighty God, That I have not any Estate re^^ or personal in possession, Oath
reversion or remainder of the value of Ten Pounds in the whole or sufficient
to pay the Debt or Damages, for which I am Imprisoned, and that I have not
directly or indirectly Sold, Leased or otherwise conveyed, disposed of or
entrusted all or any part of my Estate thereby to secure the same, to receive
or expect any profit or advantage thereof to defraud or deceive any Creditor or
Creditors whatsoever, to whom I stand Indebted.

Then after the taking of such Oath the said Justice shall Remand the Prisoner
to Prison, Notice of such Oath being taken to be given to the Creditor.
and shall give a Certificate thereof in Writing under his Hand and Seal to the
same Prisoner, to be Served upon such person or persons, his or her Executors
or Administrators, or to be left at the place of the usual abode of such person
or persons, at whose Suit the Prisoner stands charged and imprisoned, thereby
appointing as well the said person or persons as the said Prisoner to appear
before the Justices at the next General Sessions of the Peace, to be holden for
the same County. And if it shall then appear upon Oath, (which Oath the said
Justices are empowered to administer) that the said Certificate was so served
or left fifteen days or more before the said Sessions, and that the said Oath
taken by such Prisoner, be not disproved by good testimony of any credible
person or persons upon Oath to be administered by the said Justices by virtue of
this Act. Court of General Sessions to set at liberty prisoners for Debt.
Then the said Justices being satisfied therein, shall direct their Warrant
under their Hands and Seals to the said Jailer or Keeper of the Prison,
Commanding him to set at liberty, and discharge the said Prisoner, if
imprisoned for the Causes aforesaid, and no other, without paying any thing for
Fee or Chamber Rent, which Warrant shall be a sufficient discharge to the same
Jailer or Keeper of Prison, and no Action of Escape, or other Action shall be
brought against such Justice or Justices, Jailer or Keeper of Prison for the
same in any wise, and upon any such Action or Suit brought, he or they may
plead the general issue, and give this Act in Evidence which shall be a good
and sufficient Discharge, and shall save harmless every such Justice or
Justices, Jailer or Keeper, pleading the same. And if the Plaintiff in any such
Action, shall be Non suited, or Verdict pass against him, the Defendant shall
have double Costs to be taxed by the Court where such Action is brought.

Provided always, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That when such Prisoner or Prisoners for Debt shall have legally taken the
said Oath in this Act proposed to be taken, Creditors to make an allowance for
the maintenance of such Prisoners for Debt, as they shall desire to be
continued in prison, notwithstanding their having taken the Oath as aforesaid.
and shall have duly Summoned his or their Creditor or Creditors, if such
Creditor or Creditors after the said fifteen days time shall make no discovery
of any Estate of such Prisoner or Prisoners, nor disprove the said Oath, and
detect him or them of forswearing him or themselves, and notwithstanding will
not be satisfied therewith (that the said prisoner or prisoners may be set at
liberty) or will insist to have the said prisoner or prisoners continued in
Goal. Then the said Creditor or Creditors shall at his and their own Costs and
Charges allow and pay weekly a reasonable maintenance to the said prisoner or
prisoners themselves, such as the said Justices shall order and appoint, not
exceeding Two Shillings and Sixpence a week, and upon non-payment of the same
weekly, the said prisoner or prisoners shall be set at liberty according to the
true intent and meaning of this Act. And if within the space of three months
after such weekly allowance by any Creditor, no Estate of the prisoner shall be
discovered or made out before two Justices of the Peace of that County where
the said prisoner is kept in prison, The Prisoner upon default of having such
maintenance allowed him, to be set at liberty.
then the said prisoner shall forthwith be discharged by Warrant under the
Hands and Seals of any two Justices of the Peace in the County where said
prisoner shall be so in prison, to the Keeper of such prison in that behalf
directed, as fully and amply as if such prisoner had been discharged by the
Justices of the Peace at the General Sessions of the Peace, as is herein before
directed, and from thenceforth the said weekly allowance shall cease and
determine, as if the same had never been made.

Provided also, That if at any time after the taking of the aforesaid Oath,
Penalty on Prisoners convicted of false Swearing.
the s^id prisoner or prisoners shall upon any Indictment or Indictments, or by
his or their own confession or verdict of twelve men, be convicted of false
Swearing in any point or article contained in the said Oath, then such prisoner
or prisoners so convicted as aforesaid, shall suffer the pains and forfeitures
as by Law are to be inflicted upon any person convicted of wilful Perjury. And
also the Court by Process out of which the prisoner was imprisoned, shall award
a new Process directed to the Sheriff or his Deputy of such County, and shall
remand the said Prisoner into the prison whence he or she was dismissed, there
to remain in Execution in such manner and condition as he or she was before his
or her said Enlargement, and then and from thenceforth shall be adjudged to be
in Execution fully, as if he or she had never been discharged thereof. And the
Execution and Executions upon his or her Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods
and Chattels, it any such happen to be, after his or her said Discharge out of
Prison, and before he or she shall be remanded, shall stand also good and
effectual in Law. Any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That notwithstanding the discharge of the person of such Prisoner as aforesaid
upon taking the Oath aforesaid, Judgments against the Lands etc. of any
Prisoner to stand good, notwithstanding his discharge upon taking the Oath
aforesaid.
all and every Judgment had and given against him or her, shall be and stand
good and effectual in Law to all intents and purposes against the Lands,
Tenements, Goods and Chattels only, of the said Prisoner so discharged as
aforesaid; and it shall, and may be lawful, to and for such Creditor of such
P^isoner or Prisoners so discharged as aforesaid, his Executors, Administrators
or Assigns, to take out any new Execution against the Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Goods and Chattels of such Prisoner or Prisoners (his or her
wearing Apparel, Bedding for him and his, or her Family, and Tools necessary
for his or her Trade and Occupation only excepted) for the satisfaction of his
or their said Debt, in such sort, manner and form as he or they might have done
if the person or persons of such prisoner or prisoners had never been taken in
Execution. Any Law or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

Provided also, in case any Jailer or Keeper of Prison shall refuse or delay to
bring or discharge and set at liberty any prisoner according to the order of
the Justice or Justices, Penalty on any Jailer refusing to set any Prisoner at
liberty when duly required.
to be made in manner as aforesaid. Every such Jailer or Keeper of Prison shall
forfeit and pay to such Prisoner detained contrary to such Order, the Sum of
Twenty Pounds, to be recovered by Action of Debt in any Court of Record, and
shall also be subject to such Fine and punishment as the said Justices of the
Peace shall upon Complaint thereof to them made, order and award.

Provided also, And be it further Enacted, That no person shall be discharged
by this Act that has not or shall not before such Oath made, No person to be
discharged that has not been in Prison one month, etc.
have remained in prison by the space of one month, nor shall any person be
discharged by this Act, who shall stand charged in Execution, with more than
the Sum of Five Hundred Pounds to any one person, principal money and damages.

Provided also, That no Creditor insisting to have his Debtor continued in
Prison, shall be bound to make any weekly allowance for the subsistence of the
Prisoner where the Father, Creditor not obliged to maintain Prisoners having
able Relations.
Mother, Son or Daughter, or other person who by the Law of this Province, are
bound to maintain him in discharge of the Town, if he were at large, are of
sufficient ability to maintain such Prisoner.

And if any Creditor insisting to have his Debtor continued in Prison, and
ordered to make allowance toward his maintenance, shall desire to have his
Debtor, Debtors used to labor etc. to satisfy their Debts by Service, if
desired by the Creditor.
(being a person formerly using any Handicraft or day labor, and not having a
Wife or Family) to satisfy such Debt by Service; the Justices at the General
Sessions of the Peace within the same County, shall direct and order the Term
for which such Debtor shall Serve, and the Creditor shall, and hereby is
empowered to detain and hold him in Service, during such Term.

Provided also, That this Act shall not extend to any person or persons in
Execution for any Fine on him or her imposed.

And be it further Provided and Enacted.

Persons liable to answer the Debt of any Prisoner, not to be freed there from
by the Discharge of the Prisoner.
That the discharge of any person or persons by virtue of this Act, shall not
amount unto or be construed to free or discharge any other person or persons
jointly or severally bound for, or liable to answer or satisfy the said Debt,
or any part thereof, either as Principal or Surety, but that such other person
or persons shall be liable to answer the said Debt and Damages in such manner
to all intents and purposes, as they were before the discharge of such Prisoner.

Provided also, That no Prisoner shall be discharged by virtue of this Act,
Prisoners when discharged to give in a Schedule upon Oath of Debts etc. to them
owing.
until he shall before the Justices of the Peace, who are by this Act empowered
to discharge him; declare upon his Oath (which Oath the said Justices are
hereby empowered to administer) what Effects are belonging to him, or what Debt
or Debts are then owing to him within any of His Majesty's Dominions or
elsewhere, and by whom, and for what cause, and upon what security; of all
which a Schedule shall be made in the presence of such Justices, and subscribed
by the Prisoner, and shall be by such Justices returned to the next Sessions,
there to be kept for the better Information of the Creditors of such Prisoner,
who or such of them as will join may thereupon Sue for such Debt, or so much
thereof, as will reasonably satisfy them in the name of the Prisoner, and
after the same recovered, to render the Overplus (their own Debts and Charges
subducted) to the Prisoner.

An Act, For Explanation and Addition to the Act for Regulating of Fences,
Cattle, etc.
FORASMUCH as in and by an Act of this Province, Entitled, An Act For
Regulating of Fences, Cattle, etc. made and passed in the Fifth Year of the
Reign of His present Majesty, and His late Royal Confort, Queen Mary, of
blessed Memory, amongst other things therein contained, It is Enacted, That in
every Town and Peculiar within this Province, there be annuall^ ^hosen by the
Inhabitants thereof, two or more meet persons to be viewer. (...) Fences; but
no penalty provided by the said Act, in case the persons so Chosen refuse to
accept thereof.

Be it therefore Enacted and Declared by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That every meet person that shall hereafter be chosen a Viewer of Fences
within any Town, or Peculiar in this Province, Penalty for not Serving as a
Fence Viewer.
Refusing to accept thereof, or to be Sworn to the faithful discharge of that
Office, shall forfeit and pay to the use of the poor of such Town or Pecu^iar,
the Sum of Twenty Shillings, and another shall be forthwith chosen in his room.
And every person from time to time, chosen and sworn to the said Office, upon
due notice given him, and being requested by any person or persons interested
to view any insufficient and defective Fence in and about any general or common
Fi^ld, or in and about any particular Field or Enclosure, Penalty for not
attending his duty.
shall forth with attend the same: On pain of Forfeiting the Sum of Twenty
Shillings, one moiety thereof to the use of the poor of the Town or Peculiar,
and the other Moiety to him that shall inform or sue for the same. And each
Fence Viewer shall be allowed Three Shillings a day, and proportionably for
half a day, Allowance.
and under that Six pence an hour for his time spent in Viewing of any Fence or
Fences, to be paid him by the party that sets him on work, who shall be
reimburst the same by the Owner or Owners of the defective Fence. And when and
so often as it shall happen, any Fence to be broken or fallen down, or to be
otherwise defective, the Owner or Occupant of the Land to which such Fence
belongs, upon notice thereof given him shall forthwith repair the same. And in
case he refuse or neglect so to do, the Fence Viewers shall cause the same to
be sufficiently repaired as the Law directs. And ail divisional Fences betwixt
man and man shall be kept up in good repair for the whole year, unless the
Proprietors of the Lands shall otherwise agree.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That for the better enabling of the Fence Viewers to discharge their Duty
according to the true intent of the Law, Fence Viewers to be empowered by a
Warrant to impress work men etc.
It shall and may be lawful to and for any Fence Viewer by Warrant from the
next Justice of the Peace, or Select men, (in such Towns where no Justice
dwells) or the major part of them, who are hereby respectively empowered to
make out such Warrant, to impress Workmen and Teams for the speedy repairing
and making up of Fences that are defective or wanting; paying double the usual
and accustomed Rates for such Teams and Workmanship and to the Fence Viewer for
his time, to be adjusted and determined by the Select men, and to be by him
recovered against the Owner or Occupier of the Land about which such Fence is
set down or repaired, in manner as the Law directs.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That every party interested in any common or general Field shall from time to
time make and maintain his just and due part and proportion of the Fence for
enclosing the same according to his interest therein, Fence of common fields to
be maintained by the Prop^ietors in proportion.
in such manner as has or shall be agreed on by the major part of the
Propriety, the whole being duly warned and met to order the same, and the
Orders so made shall be binding and obliging upon the Proprietors absent. And a
third part of the propriety in such common or general F^eld, shall and may call
and summon a Meeting of the whole from time to time, as there shall be cause.

And no Proprietor in any such Field shall put or cause to be put any Beast,
Cattle or Sheep thereinto, over and above the number allowed him, or keep them
longer there than the time set and limited by the major part of the Propriety
or Interested, on penalty of answering double the damages that shall happen or
accrue thereby, to be recovered in any Court proper to try the same.

And it is further Enacted,

That all partition Fences betwixt Lands under improvement, shall be made and
maintained from time to time in equal halves by the Owners or Proprietors of
such Lands respectively. Parti^^on Fences to be maintained by the Proprietors
in equal halves.
And in case any Proprietor of Land shall improve his Land (the Land adjoining
not being under improvement) and so make the whole partition Fence; When and so
soon as the Owner or Proprietor of the adjoining Land shall also improve his,
he shall pay for the one half of such partition Fence, according to the value
thereof at that time, and keep up and maintain his half part thereof from
thenceforward; But if either of such Proprietors adjoining do cease to make
improvement of his Land, he that continues so to do, shall have liberty to
purchase the other part of such partition Fence, as it shall then be valued to
be worth, by persons indifferently chosen by each party for that purpose: And
in case any person Improving as aforesaid, shall neglect or refuse to make and
maintain one half of the partition Fence betwixt his Land and the Land next
adjoining, the Owner or Proprietor of such Land adjoining, shall be liable to a
(...) and to have recovered of him in any Court proper to try the same the full
value of the one half of such partition Fence according to Estimation thereof
upon apprizment, by the other party who makes and maintains the whole Fence,
together with his damage sustained by such neglect or refusal as aforesaid,
saving always to every person and persons any particular Agreement or
Agreements touching the making and maintaining of such divisional Fence between
their Lands. Fines and Penalties where to be recovered.


All Fines, Penalties, Forfeitures or Payments accruing by virtue of this Act
from time to time to be had, sued for and recovered in any Court proper to try
the same.

Provided, Proviso for house Lots not exceeding ten acres.
This Act shall not extend to House Lots not exceeding ten acres, but if the
Owner or Owners of such Lots shall improve, his Neighbor shall be compell^ble
to make and maintain one half of the Fence between them, whether he improve or
not.

Provided also, That it shall and may be lawful, major part of the propriety in
general field to lay down the same at pleasure.
to and for the major part of the Interests or Propriety in any common or
general Field, to dissolve and lay down the same at pleasure; All the
Propri^to^s being first duly warned, and there being six months time given
before any such Field is laid down

An Act, To prevent Default in the appearance of Jurors.
WHEREAS the Issues or Fine set upon Jurors for default of appearing and
attending the Service of the several Courts of Justice within this Province
whereto they are respectively Summoned, is by Law limited unto Twenty
Shillings; whereby persons most able, and suffficient oftimes decline the
Service, choosing rather to incur and undergo so small a penalty; which may
prove a general inconvenience* and tend greatly to the damage of particular
personsin cases of the greatest moment and concern. For Remedy whereof,

Be it Declared and Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Justices of the Superior Court
of Judicature, Court of Assize and General Goal delivery, and the Justices of
the General Sessions of the Peace, and of the Inferior Court of Common Pleas
respectively, to set reasonable Fines upon Jurors duly returned to Serve in
the said several Courts, and making default, at the discretion of the said
Justices, not exceeding the Sum of Forty Shillings each; And to cause the same
to be Levied. Any Law Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act, For granting unto His Majesty a Tax upon Polls and Estates.
WE His Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects the Representatives of this His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, Convened in General
Assembly, For and toward the payment of the Debts justly due and owing from
this Province, For the Subsistence and paying of Wages to Soldiers and Seamen
that have been, are, or shall be employed in His Majesty's Ser^ice, and for the
prosecuting and subduing of the Indian Rebels, and other Charges and Expenses
that shall arise thereupon; For the payment of such Salaries, Gratuities and
Allowances as have been or shall be made by the General Court or Assembly, and
all such Allowances and payments as are directed by any Act of this Province to
be made out of the Public Treasury; For the Support of the Government, and
answering of the incident and contingent Charges thereof, and for no other
ends, uses or intents whatsoever: Do unanimously Grant unto His Most Excellent
Majesty, A Tax of Three Thousand Forty Nine Pounds, Ten Shillings in Money to
be Levied upon Polls and Estates both real and personal within the said
Province, as in and by this present Act for the manner and proportion thereof
is directed and set forth.

And be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the Treasurer do seasonably send out his Warrants, directed unto the
Select men, Trustees or Assessors of each respective Town or Precinct within
this Province, Requiring them to Assess the Sum herein set and proportioned
unto such Town or Precinct upon all Rateable Male Polls above the Age of
Sixteen Years (except Elders of Churches, Settled Ministers, the Praesident,
Fellows and Students of Harvard College, Grammar School Masters, and such who
through Age, Infirmity or extreme poverty in the judgment of the Select-men,
Trustees or Assessors are rendered incapable to contribute toward public
Charges) at Two Shillings on the Poll, and all Estates both real and personal
lying within the limits and bounds of such Town or Precinct, and next unto the
same (not paying elsewhere) in whose hands, Tenure or Occupation soever the
same shall be found, at One Penny on the Pound, and to be abated or multiplied
(if need be) so as to make up, together with what shall arise upon Polls, the
full Sum hereby proportioned and set upon such Town or Precinct, Houses and
Lands to be Estimated at the yearly Rent or Income, whereat they usually are or
may reasonably be Let for in the places where they lie; All Indian, Molatto,
and Negro Servants, to be Estimated as other personal Estate, according to the
sound judgment and discretion of the Assessors, not excluding Faculties: Also
Requiring the said Select men, Trustees or Assessors to make fair Lists of the
said Assessment, setting forth in distinct Columns against each particular
persons name how much he is assessed at for Polls, Houses and Lands, and
personal Estate or Faculty; and the List or Lists so perfected and signed by
them or the major part of them, to commit to the Collector, Constable or
Constables of such Town or Precinct: And to return a Certificate of the name or
names of such Collector, Constable or Constables, together with the Sum Total
of the List to each of them respectively committed, unto himself some time
before the Tenth Day of August next ensuing: And the Treasurer upon receipt of
such Certificate is hereby Empowered and Ordered to issue forth his Warrants to
the Collector Constable or Constables of such Town, requiring him or them
respectively to Collect the Sum Total of the List or Lists to them committed,
and to pay the same into the Treasury, and issue the Accounts thereof with
himself or his Successor in said Office, at or before the last da^ o^ October
next coming. And the Treasurer is hereby also directed to send his aforesaid
Warrants enclosed to the Sheriff or Marshal of each respective County, who is
^equired immediately to disperse and transmit the same unto the Select men,
Trustees, Ass^ssors, Constables, or Collectors of the several Towns and
Precincts within such County, according to the directions thereof; And for his
Service, Charge and Expense therein, shall have a reasonable allowance ordered
him by the Justices of the General Sessions of the Peace in the same County, to
be paid out of the County Treasury, upon his laying the Account thereof before
them.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That each Town and Precinct within this Province, shall be assessed, and pay
as its proportion to this present Tax, the Sum hereafter following.

That is to say, In the County of SUFFOLK.
l. s. d. Boston, Five Hundred Eighty Five Pounds. 585 00 00 Roxbury, Forty
Eight Pounds. 48 00 00 Dorchester, Sixty Six Pounds. 66 00 00 Milton, Thirty
Pounds. 30 00 00 Brantrey, Forty Eight Pounds. 48 00 00 Weymouth, Thirty
Pounds, Fifteen Shillings. 30 15 00 Hingham, Fifty One Pounds. 51 00 00 Dedham,
Thirty Seven Pounds Ten Shillings. 37 10 00 Wrentham, Seven Pounds Ten
Shillings. 7 10 00 Medfield, Twenty Seven Pounds. 27 00 00 Mendon, Four Pounds
Ten Shillings. 4 10 00 Hull, Twenty Four Pounds. 24 00 00 In the County of
ESSEX.
Salem, One Hundred Twenty Six Pounds. 126 00 00 Ipswich, One Hundred Thirty
Seven Pounds Five Shillings. 137 05 00 Newbury, Ninety One Pounds Ten
Shillings. 91 10 00 Salisbury, Twenty One Pounds Fifteen Shillings. 21 15 00
Amsbury, Six Pounds. 6 00 00 Haverbill, Twenty Two Pounds Ten Shillings. 22 10
00 Andover, Thirty Pounds 30 00 00 Bradford, Twelve Pounds. 1^ 00 00 Topifie^d,
Twenty Six Pounds Five Shillings. 26 05 00 Marble head, Forty Five Pounds. 45
00 00 Lynn, Fifty One pounds. 51 00 00 Wenbam, Twenty Two pounds Ten Shillings.
22 10 00 Beverly, Thirty Seven pounds Ten Shillings. 37 10 00 Gloucester, Twenty
Five pounds Ten Shillings. 25 10 00 Manchester, Seven pounds Ten Shillings. 7
10 00 Rowley, Thirty Six pounds. 36 00 00 Boxford, Eighteen pounds. 18 00 00 In
the County of MIDDLESEX.
Charlstown, Eighty Seven pounds. 87 00 00 Cambridge, Sixty One pounds Ten
Shillings. 61 10 00 Watertown, Seventy Eight pounds. 78 00 00 New Town, Thirty
pounds. 30 00 00 Sudbury, Thirty Nine pounds. 39 00 00 Marlborough, Twenty Four
pounds Fifteen Shillings 24 15 00 Medford, Eleven pounds Five Shillings. 11 05
00 Malden, Twenty Eight pounds Ten Shillings. 28 10 00 Wooburn, Forty Five
pounds. 45 00 00 Reading, Thirty Three pounds. 33 00 00 Bil^erica, Thirteen
pounds Ten Shillings. 13 10 00 Chelmssord, Eighteen pounds. 18 00 00 Concord,
Forty Five pounds. 45 00 00 Stow, Three pounds. 3 00 00 Groton, Seven pounds
Ten Shillings. 7 10 00 Lanchester, Five pounds Five Shillings. 5 05 00
Sherbourn, Eighteen pounds. 18 00 00 Fr^mingham, Six pounds. 6 00 00 In the
County of HAMPSHIRE.
Springfield, Thirty Six pounds. 36 00 00 North^mpton, Thirty Four pounds Ten
Shillings. 34 10 00 Hadley, Twenty Four pounds. 24 00 00 Hatfield, Twenty One
pounds. 21 00 00 Southf^ield, Six pounds. 6 00 00 Westfield, Twelve pounds
Fifteen Shillings. 12 15 00 Enfield, Three pounds. 3 00 00 In the County of
PLYMOUTH.
Plymouth, Thirty Nine pounds. 39 00 00 Situate, Fifty Seven pounds. 57 00 00
Marshfield, Thirty Six pounds. 36 00 00 Duxbury, Twenty One pounds. 21 00 00
Bridgewater, Twenty Seven pounds. 27 00 00 Middleborough, Nine pounds. 9 00 00
In the County of BARNSTABLE.
Barnstable, Fifty One pounds. 51 00 00 Yarmouth, Twenty Eight pounds Ten
Shillings. 28 10 00 Eastham, Thirty Four pounds Ten Shillings. 34 10 00
Sandwich, Thirty Six pounds. 36 00 00 Falmouth, Nine pounds. 9 00 00 Manamoit,
Nine pounds. 9 00 00 Rochester, Nine pounds. 9 00 00 Harwich, Twelve pounds. 12
00 00 In the County of BRISTOL.
Bristol, Twenty Two pounds Ten Shillings. 22 10 00 Taunton, Forty Three pounds
Ten Shillings. 43 10 00 Dartmouth, Thirty Seven pounds Ten Shillings. 37 10 00
Freetown, Seven pounds Ten Shillings. 7 10 00 Rehoboth, Thirty Six pounds. 36
00 00 Swansey, Thirty One pounds Ten Shillings. 31 10 00 Litt^e Compton, Twenty
Eight pounds Ten Shillings. 28 10 00 Tiverton, Twelve pounds. 12 00 00
Att^^borough, Six pounds. 6 00 00 In the County of YORK.
York, Two pounds Five Shillings. 2 05 00 Wells, Two pounds Five Shillings. 2
05 00 Kittery, Twelve pounds. 12 00 00 In Dukes County.
Edgar-Town, Fifteen pounds. 15 00 00 ^isbury, Seven pounds Ten Shillings. 7 10
00 Chilwark, Ten pounds Ten Shillings. 10 10 00 Nantuckett, Thirty pounds. 30
00 00

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Select men or Trustees in each and every of the several Towns and
Precincts before mentioned, shall be the Ass^ss^rs of such Towns or Preci^^s
proportion herein before set unto this present Tax (where any others specially
chosen or to be chosen for that purpose refuse to accept thereof) and all
Ass^ss^^s before they enter upon the said work shall take the Oath following

That (...) say, ^

Which ^ath every Justice of the Peace and Town Clerk respectively (...) Town
where no Justice does reside is hereby empowered (...) Assessor (...) the
Service aforesaid, shall paid out of the Town Treasury, Two Shillings Per Diem
for each day he is necessarily employed there-about.

And be it furthet Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if the Select-men, or Trustees of any Town or Precinct, (or other
Assessor accepting that Trust) shall neglect or refuse to perform the Service
required of them by this Act or to take the Oath appointed as aforesaid for the
due performance thereof, they shall Forfeit and pay the Sum herein before set
and proportioned upon such Town or Precinct, to be Levied by Distress and Sale
of the Estates real or personal of such defective Select men, Trustees or
Assessors by Warrant from the Treasurer directed to the Sheriff or Marshal of
the County in which such Town or Precinct lies, and for want of Estate, their
Bodies to be taken and imprisoned, until they pay the same. And all Sheriffs,
Constables or Collectors failing of performing the Duty and Service of them
respectively hereby required, shall be liable and subject unto the pains,
penalties and forfeitures as are in or by any Act or Acts of the General
Assembly, or any clause, branch or article thereof in like Cases set and
declared to be prosecuted and recovered of them in the same way and manner as
in and by such Act or Acts is directed and prescribed: And the Treasurer shall
be, and is hereby also empowered to take, use, and exercise all such rules,
directions, powers and authorities for enforcing the collecting and paying in
this present Tax as is unto him given and granted by any Act or Acts of the
General Assembly, or any clauses, branches or articles thereof, to enforce the
collecting and paying in of any former Tax or Taxes whatsoever, as fully and
effectually as if the same rules, directions, powers and authorities had herein
been again particularly recited and re-enacted, and notwithstanding any
limitation or restraint thereof in or to the particular Act or Acts wherein the
same are enumerated, set down and expressed.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any person be agrieved at the Sum set upon him as his proportion
toward this Tax, such person making application to the Select men or
Assessors, and demonstrating that he is rated more than his proportion to the
Sum set upon their Town, said Select-men or Assessors shall ease him; and if
they refuse so to do, then the person agrieved, complaining unto the next
General Sessions of the Peace within that County, and making appear that he is
assessed more than his proportion as aforesaid, shall be heard and relieved by
the Justices in said Sessions, and such person shall be reimbursed out of the
Town Treasury so much as the said Justices or Assessors respectively shall see
cause to abate him.

And whereas diverse Towns or Precincts within this Province are behind and in
Arrear of their proportion to several former public Taxes and Assessments some
years since granted, and set upon them; and by reason of the Calamities of the
War, and other adversities and difficulties befalling of them; by the removal
and death of Constables, Collectors and other Inhabitants, alteration of the
properties of Estates, and otherwise they are rendered incapable to make good
the same.

Wherefore for the final Settlement and issuing of the Accounts thereof,

It is Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Towns and Precincts herealter named, be abated, remitted and forgiven
the Sums herein mentioned of their respective proportions unto former Taxes and
Assessments unpaid.

That is to say,

Southfield, Two Hundred Twenty Eight Pounds, Four Shillings and Nine-pence.
Enfield, Forty One Pounds, Three Shillings. Oxford, Thirty Three Pounds, Six
Shillings. Isles of Sholes, Twenty Two Pounds. Northampton, Eight Pounds, Six
Shillings. Salisbury, Fifteen Pounds, Fourteen Shillings and Six pence. Dedham,
Thirty Pounds, Fourteen Shillings and Eight pence. Kitterey, Thirty Six Pounds.
York, Twelve Pounds. Manamoit, One Pound Seven Shillings and Six pence. Salem,
Thirty Nine Pounds, which is Resting in Simon Willards hands, and is to be
discounted and set off with said Willard, for what he claims to be due to him
for Service as a Captain by Commission from Sir Edmund Andros when those claims
shall he paid. Cambridge, Forty Four Pounds, Three Shillings and Seven p^nce.
And Charlstown, One Hundred Forty Four Pounds, Eleven Shillings and Six pence,
saving only Ten Pounds thereout, which the said Town of Charlstown is to pay
unto Samuel Gookin, late Collector, there over and above what he has already
received; and the said Town shall have the benefit of what is lying in the
hands of (...) Frost, late Constable in the same, of the Collections made by
him: upon payment whereof his Estate taken in Execution for the same shall be
discharged.

And it is further Enacted and Declared,

That the Select men of the Towns of Charlstown, Cambridge and Dedham, and of
each of them, be, and hereby are respectively empowered to nominate and appoint
one or more Collectors within their several Towns, to gather in such and so
much of the said Arrears herein remitted of their proportion to former Taxes as
are outstanding and unpaid by their particular Inhabitants according to the
Lists thereof, to the use of the said Towns respectively; And to call in all
Lists and Papers in whose hands soever the same be relating thereunto.

And Whereas notwithstanding the above mentioned Abatements, there rests due
from some of the said Towns in Arrears to their proportion of formar Taxes, the
Sums following, to be paid into the Treasury.

That is to say,

From Charlestown, Sixty Pounds, from Cambridge, Sixty Pounds, from Dedham,
Seventy Pounds, and from Salisbury, Eleven Pounds Four Shillings and Eight
Pence.

Be it therefore Enacted and Declared by the Authorirty aforesaid,

That the Treasurer in his Warrant to be issued to the Select-men, Trustees or
Assessors of the aforesaid Towns of Charlestown, Cambridge, Dedham and
Salisbury, for Assessing the Sums in and by this Act set and proportioned unto
them respectively, shall require them to Assess together therewith the
aforesaid Sums remaining due from each of the said Towns, and to commit the
same also to the Collector, Constable or Constables of such Town, who shall be
enabled by the Treasurers Warrant to collect and pay in the same in manner and
time as is directed for the Tax herein granted.

Provided nevertheless, That forasmuch as John Phillips Esquire. late Treasurer,
heretofore drew an Order on the then Collectors in said Town of Cambridge, for
the payment of Thirty Pounds unto Captain Andrew Belcher, which is part of the
Sixty Pounds beforementioned: The said Order with Capt. Belchers Receipt
thereon being brought in, shall be accepted in discharge of the said Town of
Cambridge in the Treasury from so much of the said Sixty Pounds, and only the
remaining Thirty Pounds of the said Arrear to be Assessed and Collected upon
them.

And whereas there is outstanding and unpaid the several proportions of the
Towns of Bristol, Dartmouth, and Little Compton within the County of Bristol,
unto the Tax or Assessment granted by the General Assembly, at their Session in
October last past, viz. From Bristol, Fifty Two Pounds, Ten Shillings. From
Dartmouth, Eighty One Pounds. From Little Compton, Fifty Four Pounds; which
Sums were assessed upon the Inhabitants of said Towns respectively, by the
Select men, and committed unto the Constables then in being, to be Collected,
but through some failure not perfected by them.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Treasurer do forthwith send Warrants unto Usal Wardel, and John
Allen, late Constables of Bristol To John Spooner and John Soale, late
Constables of Dartmouth, and to John Cox and George Pierce, late Constables of
Little Compton. Impowring and requiring them, and every of them respectively,
to collect of the Inhabitants of their several Towns, the beforementioned Sum
assessed upon them as aforesaid, being their Towns proportion to the said
former Tax, and to pay in the same to the Treasury on or before the Twenty
Sixth Day of August next ensuing.

And upon their or either of their failure or neglect to perform their duty in
that behalf, the Treasurer is hereby Empowered by Warrant under his Hand and
Seal, to c^^se the said Sum and Sums respectively to be Levied upon the Estate
or Person of such of the said Constables that shall make default as the Law
does provide in like cases.

An Act, For Granting unto His Majesty several Duties of Impost, Excise and
Tunnage of Shipping.
WE His Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects, the Representatives of this His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, Taking into
Consideration the necessity of granting a Supply of Money, for the discharge
and payment of the Debts already contracted, and for defreying of the future
growing Charge in Support of the Government within this His Majesty's Province,
and for answering of the incident and contingent Charges in and about the same;
For the subsisting and paying of Wages to Soldiers that are and shall be
employed in His Majesty's Service for the defense of His Majesty's Subjects and
Interests within this Province, and the Suppressing of the Indian Rebels: For
payment of the Salaries and Allowances to the Officers employed in and about
the Execution of this Act, and such other Salaries, Gratuities and Allowances
as have been or shall be made by the General Assembly: Have cheerfully and
unanimously given and granted, and do hereby give and grant unto His Most
Excellent Majesty, to the ends and intents aforesaid, the several Duties and
Impositions upon all Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares and Merchandises that shall
be Imported into this Province, Excise, and Tunnage of Shipping herein
after-mentioned and expressed: And pray that it may be Enacted.

And be it accordingly Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, in General Court Assembled, and it is Enacted and Ordained by
the Authority of the same,

That from and after the Twenty Ninth Day of June, Continuation of the late
duties on Wines etc. unto the 29. of October School.
in this present year of our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Eight, until
the Twenty Ninth Day of October thence next fo^lowing, the several Rates and
Duties set upon all Wines and Liquors that shall be Imported into this
Province, in and by the Act Entitled, An Act, For granting unto His Majesty,
several Duties of Impost, Excise and Tunage of Shipping, made and passed by the
General Assembly begun and held at Boston, the Twenty Sixth Day of May in the
ninth year of His present Majesty's Reign, be, and hereby are continued to be
paid by the Importer thereof, as in and by the said Act i^ directed.

And that from and after the said Twenty Ninth Day of October for and during
the continuance of this present Act there shall be paid, by the Importer of all
Wines and Liquors that shall be Imported into this Province, the Rates and
Duties in and by this present Act here under set and expressed, and no other or
greater.

That is to say,

For every Pipe of Common Wine of the Western Islands, the Sum of Twenty
Shillings.

For every Pipe of Passado Wine, Forty Shillings.

Duties to be paid for Wines and Liquors.
For every Pipe of Madera Wine, Thirty Shillings.

For every Pipe of Canary, Malmsey, Malago or Sherry Wines, Forty Shillings.

For every Pipe of Port Wine, Thirty Shillings.

For every Pipe of Wine not of any of the sorts beforementioned, Thirty
Shillings.

And so proportionably for greater or lesser quantities.

And for every Gallon of Rhum or other Spirits Imported as aforesaid, Six pence.

And be it further Enacted,

That from and after the Twenty Ninth Day of June aforesaid, in this present
year of our Lord, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Eight, for and during the
continuance of this present Act, there shall be paid by the Importer, For all
Goods, Wares and Merchandises that shall he Imported as aforesaid (Salt, Cotton
Wool, Provisions, and every other thing of the growth and product of
New England excepted) the several Duties and Impositions following.

That is to say,

For every Hundred Pound Sterling in English Merchandises at the prime Cost in
England (the Original Invoices thereof to be produced and shown) the Sum of Ten
Shillings. Duties to be paid for Goods and Merchandises.


For every Hogshead of Sugar, Two Shillings.

For every Hogshead of Molasses, One Shilling.

For every Hogshead of Tobacco, Two Shillings Six pence.

For every Ton of Logwood, Three Shillings.

And for all other Commodities, Goods, Wares and Merchandise (except as before
excepted) One penny for every Twenty Shillings value here.

All which aforesaid Imposts, Rates and Duties shall be paid in current Money
of this Province, unto the Commissioner for Impost to be appointed as in and by
this Act is hereafter mentioned and expressed, One half of the Duties on Wines
etc. to be paid before landing, the other half in three months.
or to his Sub-receiver, the one half thereof for Wines and Liquors, and the
whole for Goods and Merchandises, at or before the Landing of any Wines,
Liquors or Goods, and three months time to be allowed to the Importer for
payment of the other half for Wines and Liquors if he shall desire the same,
and give Bond with sufficient Security to the Commissioner or Receiver, to be
by him appointed, for payment thereof accordingly; otherwise the whole to be
paid at or before the Landing of any such Wines or Liquors. And all Entries
where the Impost or Duty to be paid does not exceed Four Shillings, shall be
made without Charge to the Importer, Fee for entry.
and not more than six pence to be paid for any other single Entry to what
value soever. And for every Bond to be given as aforesaid, Fee for bond
there shall be paid Twelve pence and no more.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if all or any Wines or Liquors as aforesaid shall be Landed within this
Province, and afterward be Exported out of the same within twelve months after
Importation thereof (being so made to appear) there shall be repaid or
discounted by the said Commissioner or his Order unto the Importers or their
Assigns, the respective Sums following. That is to say,

For every Pipe of Common Wine of the Western Islands, the Sum of Ten
Shillings. Draw back for Wines and Liquors exported.


For every Pipe of Passado, Canary, Maimsey, Malago or Sherry Wines, Twenty
Five Shillings.

For every Pipe of Madera, Port Wine, or Wines not of any of the forts before
mentioned, Twenty Shillings.

For every Gallon of Rhum or other distilled Liquors Imported as aforesaid,
Four pence half penny.

And be it further Enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid,

That there shall be given granted and paid unto His Majesty for the use before
mentioned, in current money of this Province, Duties of Excise.
from and after the said Twenty Ninth Day of June, in this present year, One
Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Eight, during the continuance of this Act, An
Excise upon all Wines, Brandy, Rhum, and other distilled Liquors, Beer, Ale,
Perry, and Cider that shall be Sold by Retail in any Town or place within this
Province by those that shall Retail the same, according to the several Rates
herein after mentioned and expressed. That is to say,

For every Gallon of Common Wines of the Western Islands, the Sum of Six pence.

For every Gallon of Passado, Malago, Malmsey, Canary or Sherry Wines; the Sum
of Twelve pence.

For every Gallon of Madera, Port Wine, or other Wines not of any of the sorts
before mentioned, the Sum of Eight pence.

For every Gallon of Rhum, and all other sorts of distilled Spirits, the Sum of
One Shilling.

For every Barrel of Beer, Ale, Perry and Cider, the Sum of One Shilling and
Six pence.

And after the same rate for any greater or lesser quantities.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That from and after the said Twenty Ninth day of June in this present year,
One thousand six hundred ninety eight, during the continuance of this Act there
shall be paid by the Master of every Ship or other Vessel above Twelve Tuns
coming into any Port or Ports of this Province to Trade or Traffic the major
part of the Owners whereof are not belonging to this Province; Tunage of Powder
duty
every Voyage such Ship or Vessel does make the Sum of Twelve-pence per Ton, or
one pound of good and new Gunpowder for every Ton such Ship or Vessel is in
burden, to be employed for the supply of His Majesty's Castle and Forts within
this Province.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all and every the Sections, Paragraphs, clauses, articles, powers,
authorities, penalties and proviso's mentioned, expressed and contained in the
before recited Act passed by the General Assembly, at their Session begun and
held the Twenty Sixth Day of May. Continuation of former Powers to the Officers
In the Ninth Year of His Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act, For Granting unto
His Majesty, several Duties of Impost, Excise and Tunnage of Shipping, which
any ways relate to the managing, levying or collecting of the Duties of Impost,
Excise and Tunage of Shipping therein granted, or for the preventing of Frauds,
be, and hereby are revived to abide, remain and continue in full force for and
during the continuance of this Act, and shall be applied, practiced, executed
and observed by the respective Officers and persons whom they may concern, for
the managing, levying and collecting of the Duties of Impost, Excise and
Tunnage of Shipping, granted in and by this Act as fully and effectually to all
in^ents and purposes, as if the same had herein been again particularly recited
and re enacted.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That when and so often as any Wines or Liquors shall be Seized for being
Landed before the Duty and Impost thereof be paid or secured to be paid as by
this Act is provided: Onus probandi
The p^oof whether the Duties for such Wines or Liquors be paid, or secured to
be paid, shall lie upon the Claimer, whose Oath shall be accounted sufficient
proof. And any one Justice of the Peace shall, and hereby is Empowered to make
out his Warrant for searching of any Houses, Power to S^arch and break open
doors.
Cellars or Ware houses for Wines or Liquors, that he shall be informed where
they are carried to be concealed, in prejudice of this Act, and in the presence
of the chief Officer of the Impost in the same Port, to break open the doors of
such Houses, Cellars or Ware houses, where entrance shall be denied, in such
manner and sort and under the same Provisos as any two Justices of the Peace by
virtue of the afore-recited Act, could or might have done.

Penalty on Masters Suffering Wines or Liquors to be filled up on board.
And no Master of any Ship, or other Vessel, shall suffer any VVines to be
filled up on Board, without giving a Certificate of the quantity so filled,
under his Hand before the Landing thereof to the chief Officer of the Impost in
such Port; on pain of Forfei^ing the Sum of Fifty Pounds, one half thereof to
His Majesty, for the uses and intents for which the before mentioned Duties of
Impost, Excise, and Tunnage of Shipping are granted, and the other half to him
or them that shall inform and sue for the same in any Court of Record.

Wines and Liquors to be entered and duties paid within four day^s after entry
of the Ship.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all VVines and Liquors liable to the aforesaid Duties of Impost, which
shall not be Entered, and the Duties thereof paid or secured to be paid within
the space of four days, from and next after the Entry of the Ship or other
Vessel whereon the same are Imported, may by the Officer of the Impost in such
Port, be brought on Shore and put into the public Storehouse, until the Duty
and Charge be satisfied; and such Officer or Officers of the Impost shall be,
and hereby are Empowered to Enter any Ship or Vessel, and cause such Wines or
Liquors, not Entered as aforesaid, to be brought on Shore and secured.

Provided nevertheless, That when and so often as any Wines or Liquors shall by
the Importer, Wines or Liquors exported on the same bottom, with intent not to
be landed, to be free from Impost.
be really and bona fide designed and intended not to be Landed within this
Province, but Transported to some Port or place in another Plantation or
Government, upon the same Ship or Vessel whereon they were Imported and upon
the Account or Risque at the Importer or Owner without altering or transferring
the property thereof to any other person; And such Importer making Oath before
the Commissioner or chief Officer of the Impost in the same Port where such
Ship or Vessel is Entered, that such Wines or Liquors shall be so Transported as
aforesaid, for the proper account and Risque of the Importer, Oath thereof to
be made.
or person that Ship't the same, and not be Landed or put on Shore within this
Province by his Order, privity or procurement (which Oath the Commissioner or
chief Officer of the Impost in that Port are respectively empowered to
Administer:) In every such case it shall and may be lawful to and for such
Importer, to be Entered.
to keep such Wines or Liquors on Board the same Ship or Vessel, without paying
Impost for the same, or being liable to Seizure; So as Report and due Entry
thereof be made as of other Wines or Liquors that are to be Landed.

And it is further Enacted,

That all Oaths appointed by this or any other Act to be made at the Impost
Office, shall be taken before the Commissioner, Oaths to be administered by the
Commissioners or chief Officer of Impost.
or chief Officer of the Impost in each respective Port, and not otherwise. Any
Law or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted: (...) the Authority aforesaid,

That there be one fit person and no more nominated and appointed by this Court
as a Commissioner and Collector to have the general Inspection care and
management of the said Office of Impost, Commissioners for managing.
and Tunage of Shiping or Powder duty aforesaid, and whatsoever relates unto
the same; and that there be two n^ persons and no more, nominated and appointed
by the Court as Commissioners or Collectors, to have the general inspect^^^^,
care and management of the said Office of Excise, and whatsoever ^elates
thereunto; which Commissioner and Commissioners respectively shall receive
Commission for their said respective Offices, from the Governor or Commander
in Chief for the time being, with authority to nominate, appoint, employ and
empower such and so many Officers under him and them respectively, as with the
advice of the Treasurer for the time being, of this His Majesty's Province, he
and they shall think neccessary, for the well-ordering and managing of the
Affairs relating to each of the said Offices, and the better to prevent Frauds,
and to grant them Warrants for executing of the same. And the said Commissioner
and Commissioners respectively, and all other Officers under him and them,
before their entering upon the Execution of their respective Offices, shall be
Sworn to deal truly and faithfully therein, which said Commissioner and
Commissioners respectively, Commissioners and other Officers to be Sworn.
shall keep fair Books of all Entries and Duties arising by this Act, and the
same to lie open at all seasonable times, to the view and perusal of the
Treasurer and Receiver General of this Province with whom he and they shall
also Account for all Collections and Payments, and pay in all such Moneys as
shall be in his and their Hands as the Treasurer shall demand it; to keep fair
Accounts.
and the said Commissioners shall have and receive such Sum and Sums as the
General Assembly shall think (...) to allow him and them, for his and their
labor, care and expenses in the said Affair, and all other Officers, employed
under the said Commissioner and Commissioners respectively, shall be paid for
their Service, as he and they, together with the Treasurer shall agree upon
reasonable Terms. And the said Commissioner for Impost and Tunnage of Shipping,
their power.
or Powder Duty aforesaid; and the said Commissioners for Excise respectively,
and their Under Officers, shall have as large and ample power and authority, in
all matters and things relating to their said respective Offices, as by the
before reci^ed Act is given and granted to the Commissioner for Impost and
Tunnage of Shipping, and Commissioners for Excise respectively, and their Under
Officers, And it shall and may be lawful, Commissioners allowed to ferm out the
Excise.
to and for the Commissioners for Excise, to agree for, or to lo^t o^ ferm out
the same, or any part or parcel thereof, or to collect it themselves, and by
their Under Officers, according as they shall judge to be most of advantage to
the Province. And in case they shall let or farm out the same, or any part
thereof, such Fermer or Fermers respectively, and the Officers to be employed
under him or them, shall have as full power and authority to enforce the
collecting thereof, and for preventing Frauds as is herein before given and
granted to the said Commissioners, and their Under Officers.

Provided this Act shall continue in force for the space of one whole year,
from and after the said Twenty Ninth Day of June, in this present year One
Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Eight, This Act to continue for one year.
and no longer.

Provided also, That for all Wines and Liquors Imported and Landed within this
Province, Draw back on Wines and Liquors imported before the 29 th of October,
to be the same as before.
before the Twenty Ninth Day of October next, and afterward Exported out of
the same within twelve months after the Importation thereof (being so made to
appear) there shall be repaid or discounted to the Importers or their Assigns,
two third parts of what they paid, or secured to be paid upon Importation of
the same, according to the direction of the afore-recited Act. Any thing herein
contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act, Establishing of Sea Ports within this Province, and for ascertaining
the Fees for entering and clearing of Vessels inward and outward bound.
FOR the better preventing of undue and unlawful Trading, and of Frauds and
Abuses in the Duties and Impositions that are or shall be laid upon all Goods,
Wares or Merchandises, Wines, Liquors, or other Commodities that shall be
Imported or Exported out of this Province, as also for the remedying and
preventing the demanding or taking of excessive and unallowed Fees.

Be it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the Maritine Towns and places here after named, and no other, shall be
held, deemed and adjudged to be lawful Ports within this Province: That is to
say, Boston, (of which Charlstown is to be accounted a Member) Salem, Ports.
(whereof Marblehead is to be a^^^nted a Member,) Ipswich, Newbury, (of which
Salisbury is to be accounted a Member,) Kittery, Plymouth and Swansey, at every
of which aforesaid Ports, an Office shall be held and kept for the Entering and
Clearing of all Ships and other Vessels Trading to or from this Province, For
Lading and unlading.
to be called and known by the name of the Naval Office, as has been
heretofore accustomed; and at one of the Ports aforesaid, or some Member
thereof, and not elsewhere, all Ships or other Vessels Trading to or from this
Province, shall Lade and Unlade all Goods, Commodities, Wares and Merchandises
whatsoever, which they shall Import or Export. And that an Office be held and
kept at Marthas Vineyard and another at Nantuckett, to Enter and Clear all
Vessels passing to and from thence, but not to be accounted Ports for the
Unlivery or Lading of any of the Enumerated Commodities.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Fees in the said Office to be demanded and received, shall be these
following, and no other, viz. For entering all Ships and ^^ssels Trading to this
place from abroad ((...) from the ^rovinces or Colonies of Pe^silvania,
New York, East and West Jerseys, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Narraganset and New
Hampshire) One Shilling. 00 01 00 For Examining and Recording Certificates that
Bonds are given according to the Act of Navigation, Two Shillings. 00 02 00
Fees.
For a Bond given according to the Act of Navigation, Two Shillings. 00 02 00
For Clearing, and Certificate of the Lading, Two Shillings Six pence. 00 02 06
For all Vessels Trading to and from the Provinces or Colonies of Pens^lvania,
New York, East and West Jersey, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Narraganset and New
Hanpshire, Four Shillings per year, or Six pence entry and Six pence clearing
each Voyage at the Masters choice.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any Person employed in any of the said Offices shall demand or take
any other or greater Fees than by this Act are now made due, Penalty for taking
excessive Fees, and illegal delay of Entry and clearing.
or shall illegally delay and defer the Entering and Clearing any Ship or other
Vessel, such Officer shall be liable to double Costs and Damages, being thereof
duly convicted in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record within this Province.

FINIS.

