Men's Sana in Corpore Sano.

A Discourse UPON RECOVERY FROM Sickness.

Directing How Natural Health, may be Improved into Spiritual: Especially, by
them that have lately Recovered it.

Isa. XXXVIII.9. The Writing, -- When he had been Sick, and was Recovered of
his Sickness.

Haec Tibi, Si Recipis, dat Pagina Grata Salutem;
Si R^nuas, Eadem Pagina Testis erit.
BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Samuel Phillips, at the
Brick Shop. School.

Preface.
THE Discourses, Written by Ministers of the Gospel, on their own Recovery from
Sickness, have often been grateful Entertainments unto the Churches of God, in
many other Lands, as well as in both Englands: This Page cannot hold* the
Catalogue, that I could give of such Discourses. Nevertheless, The Author of
the Ensuing, had not permitted (...) on thereon, if there be (...) Recovery
from Sickness, (...) of it: for what can (...) in the Good (...) of so Mean a
Person? (...) Sermon Preached, when (...) yea, Thousands of the (...) had their
Health (...) Epidemical Calamity: And (...) Author, but some of Them, that have
n^w Committed unt6o the Press, this Feeble Essay of one Scarce got free from
the Illness, which had for near a Mo^^^ been Breaking him; and one ^o willing,
to be concealed from the Notice of Mankind, that he can gladly say, Modo haec
Lectori Sint usui, Quemvis Authorem Fingito: May the Reader b^ Edifyed, its no
matter who is the Author!

And now, Reader, Whether thou art Sick, or Well; I address thee, as the Jews
did use to Salute their Sick, The Merciful God Remember thee, with the Mercies
of Health!

A DISCOURSE Upon Recovery from Sickness. 10 d. 12 m. 1697, 8.
It is Written, in Isa. XXXIII.24. The Inhabitant shall not say, I am sick; the
people which dwell therein, shall be Forgiven their Iniquity.


SIckness having for some Time Indisposed us, it is very seasonable for us, now
we are come together again, to consider, What Improvement we should make of our
late Indisposition? And the Text now Laid before us, will notably Assist us, to
Improve it suitably!

The Great God, by his Holy Prophet Isaiah, does here foretell, the wonderful
Salvation of Jerusalem, from the Invasion of (...). And here is foretold, a
double Blessing, which the Inhabitants of the Town, should Enjoy, at the Time
of that wonderful Salvation.

First; A Temporal Blessing, is promised. The Inhabitant shall not say, I am
sick. The Town was to suffer such Hardships, as use to bring Sickness with
them. Yea, but says the Lord, I will so Preserve and Restore the Health of the
Town, that they shall not complain of Sickness: And, particularly, they shall
not by Sickness be disabled, from Seizing and Sharing the Prey of the Defeated
Enemies.

Next; A Spiritual Blessing is also promised: The people which dwell therein,
shall be Forgiven their Iniquity. There was a Blessed Esaias among them, to
plead the Great Sacrifice for the Congregation. Hence, though there were much
Iniquity in the Town, yet God so Forgave it, for the sake of the pleaded
Sacrifice of the Messiah, that He would not inflict on them the Deadly
Desolations which their Iniquity deserved.

King Hezekiah seems to have seen, a very peculiar Fulfillment of this Prophecy.
The Memorable Sickness of Hezekiah, was as it is thought, in that very Juncture
of Time, when the City was Besieged by the Assyrians. But God, in mercy to all
the people who dwelt therein, did, ^n a few days Heal the Malignant Squinancy
of this Eminent Inhabitant. Yea, (as there had now passed Fifteen Jubilees of
years from the Conquest of Canaan, and there were to be just Fifteen Weeks of
years from hence to the Captivity in Babylon, and as Hezekiah himself, was the
Fifteenth King from the Beginning of the Israelitish Monarchy!) Fifteen Years
were added unto the Days of this Great man, after the Sickness, which had now
been upon him.

We have Two Things that now ly before our Observation; and shall in a
Distinct* though Feeble, manner, discourse, with all Brevity upon them.

The First Observation.
The Forgiveness of Sin is a Blessedness* that may be Attained, and should
(...) Desired, by the Sinful Children of Men.

What the Angel said unto the Shepherds of Bethlehem, is now proper to be
spoken unto the Sinners, [And, Ah Lord, Such, even Such we are, every one of
us!] which are here met before the Lord: Behold, I bring you Good Tidings of
Great Joy! Those Good Tidings we have thus Expressed unto us, in Psalm. 130.4.
There is Forgiveness with thee, that thou may be Feared, O Lord.

The Oracles of God assert this Truth a Thousand times over unto us; And, He
has Appointed Sacraments to assure us of it. Yea, This most comfortable Truth,
is Evident from the Religion, wherein God has commanded Sinners to Draw Near
unto Him. 'Twould be to no purpose, for Sinners to be Directed and Invited as
they are, unto the ways of Communion with God, if they could not be Forgiven
their past Rebellion against Him; or, if His Name were not, as He has Himself
proclaimed it, The Lord Forgiving Iniquity, and Transgression, and Sin.

Let this vast matter of Meditation and Consolation, be with all possible
concise^ess, now summarily set before us, in Three Conclusions.

I. In the Forgiveness of Sin, the Sinner is not only Absolved, from his cursed
Guiltiness, but also possessed of a perfect Righteousness, through the Imputation
of that Obedience, which our Lord JESUS CHRIST, as our Surety, has yielded
unto God, for his Chosen

Let, first, a few preparatory Assertions, make our Thoughts ready to take in a
Right Notion of this Illustrious Benefit* The Forgiveness of our Sins.

It is to be Asserted, That we are (...) Sinners against the Law of God, and
have brought horrible Ruins on our selves by our Sins. We have this Assertion,
in To. 3.23. All have sinned, and come short of the Glory of God. We have by
our Sins, Forfeited all the Blessings, which the Law of God promised unto the
Keepers of that Law; yea, we have by our Sins Incurred all those Wants and
Woes, and Plagues, which the Law has denounced unto them that keep it not.

Again; It is to be Asserted, That the Chosen of God, cannot be Rescued, as He
has purposed, out of their Horrible Ruins, except the Law of God be Answered.
We have this Assertion, in Heb. 1.13. Thou can not Look upon Iniquity. God by
His most wise Law, has secured the Interests of His Glory; and He is a Judge,
that will by no means have the Equity, and the Verity, of His Law, Impeached.

Furthermore; It is to be Asserted, That our Lord Jesus Christ, has undertaken
to Answer the Law of God, as a Surety, on the Behalf of His Chosen. We have
this Assertion, in Heb. 7.22. Jesus was made a Surety. The Son of God, assuming
our Nature, became a Mediator; and by becoming a man, He became capable of
being Responsible to the Law of God, for us; for which cause, He actually put
Himself, into the Capacity of our Surety, that by answering the Exactions of
the Law, in our Stead, He might Accomplish the Atonement with God, for which He
was, as our High Priest concerned: So that He said, unto His Father concerning
Us, as Paul, (no doubt with some sense of That!) said unto Philemon, about his
Run away Servant, If he has wronged thee, or owes the^ any thing, put that on
my Account!

Moreover; It is to be Asserted, That it was with a mutual Agreement, between
God the Father, and our Lord Messiah, that our Lord Jesus Christ became a
Surety, to ^nswer the Law, for His Chosen. We have this Assertion, in Psalm.
89.3, 30, 32. I have made a Covenant with my Chosen, -- If His Children forsake
my Law, -- Then will I visit their Transgression with the Rod. God has indeed
bound himself by His Law, That He will be Acknowledged, either in the
Obedience, or in the Destruction, of His Creatures. But God has not, by His
Law, so bound Himself, that He may not Admit of a Surety, whose Obedience may
go for ours. Though the Old Covenant of Works do not mention a Surety, yet a
Surety was mentioned, and engaged and ordered, in the Ancient Covenant of
Redemption, whereto That was but Subservient, and wherein God is become, The
God of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Finally; It is to be Asserted, That our Lord Jesus Christ, has according to
Agreement, answered the Law of God, as our Surety; both by Enduring the Penalty
of the Law, whereto we had by our Sins Exposed our selves, and by Fulfilling
the Precept of it, in doing the whole will of God. We have this Assertion, in 1 John 5.6. Jesus Christ came, not by Water only, but by Water and Blood. He
came, not only with a Purity, and Sanctity, conformed, unto the Law of God, in
all things, but also with Expiatory Sufferings, to make Amends for our Breaches
of the Law.

Being furnished with these Preparatory Assertions, Let us now see, what is
done for us in the Forgiveness of our Sins.

First; In the Forgiveness of our Sins, the God of Heaven, does Release us,
from the Guiltiness, wherein we are bound over, to undergo* His Infinite Wrath.
The Law of God, by a Just Sentence, has condemned us to Endure Endless and
Easeless Miseries: But without any prejudice to the Law, God Himself now
Acquits us from that Condemnation and Obligation. It Is said* ^n Romans 8.1. There
is now no Condemnation to them which are in Christ, Jesus.

Yea, more than so; Secondly; In the Forgiveness of our Sins, the God of Heaven
does Invest us with a Righteousness, which is according to Law, the very
Condition of Happiness; Even a Righteousness, which the Law has annexed Life
Eternal as a Reward unto: a Righteousness, which in all things does come up to
the Demands of the Law. It Is therefore said, in 2 Cor. 5.21. We are made the
Righteousness of God.

But, How comes this to pass? Thirdly; In the Forgiveness of our Sins, the God
of Heaven, graciously Imputes unto us, the Obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ.
There was an Habitual Rectitude of Nature, which our Lord Jesus Christ was Born
withal; There was a Course of an Holy Life, which our Lord Jesus Christ Led for
many years together; There was, Lastly, the Exquisite Pain, and Shame, and
Horror, of the Curse due for Sin, Suffered by our Lord Jesus Christ. Now, God
Imputes to us, all this Obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the Forgiveness
of our Sins: That is to say; He looks on it, as belonging unto Us, in order to
our being Judicially dealt withal, according to the Merit of it. Hence, though it
be our Duty still our selves to Obey the Law of God, and all our coming short
thereof, is a Sin, for which we are to loath and judge our selves, as worthy of
Death for ever, yet we now Stand as without Fault before the Throne of God!
This it is to be Forgiven our Iniquity.

II. By Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ* and not Without Faith, and not Before
Faith, is that Blessedness, the Forgiveness of Sin, to be Attained. In our
Bible, which we may call, The Justification-Office, we (...) every where told,
as we are in Romans 5.1. We are Justified by Faith. But, Faith! What is That? It
is to Receive the Forgiveness of Sin, as the Gift of God, by our Lord Jesus
Christ, and Rely upon the Lord Jesus Christ for this Forgiveness. It is
heartily to say, with him, in Phil. 3.9. I suffer the loss of all things, that
I may win Christ, and be found in Him, not having my own Righteousness, which
is of the Law, ^ut that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness
which is of God by Faith* Indeed, Faith does not Justify us, as it is a Work:
It Is but Relatively, and Instrumentally, that it Justifies us. Faith, and only
Faith, has the Honor, to Justify us, because it carries us unto our Lord Jesus
Christ for our Justification, and ascribes unto the Lord Jesus Christ the
Honor of it all. It Is true, we read, That Faith is Reckoned unto the Faithful
for Righteousness. One thing in it, may be; That though Faith be from the
Operation of God upon us, yet God reckons it unto us, reckons it as our own,
accepts it as our Act; else it could not bring the Righteousness of the Lord
Jesus Christ, or any thing else, to be ours. But when it is said, Faith is
Reckoned for Righteousness, it is the Object of our Faith, which is thereby
intended; even the Obedience of our Lord Jesus Christ, on which our Faith is
placed. The Sovereign God, has fixed things in this Method; That upon our being
Enabled by Him, to Believe on our Lord Jesus Christ, our Lord Jesus Christ
Himself becomes ours, and so, His Obedience ^o God, becomes pleadable by us* as
our Title, to all the privileges of the Righteous for ever.

Don't Imagine, to (...) the Forgiveness of Sin granted, Without or B^f^re,
Believing on the Lord Jesus Christ for it. In the Golden Chain of Salvation,
the Links have this Conne^ion: Rom* 8 30. Whom He called* them He Justified.
Now, Faith is given to us, in our Effectual Calling. That we are Actually
Justified from Eternity; (...) is but a vain Imagination! As well say,
Sanctified from Eternity, and Glorified from Eternity. Do! go on, and say, That
the people of God never were in any State of Sin at all! But the Scripture of
Truth, will every where confute you, if you say so. What is the State of every
man, while yet an Unbeliever? Truly, [Joh. 3, 18, 36] He is condemned, and the
Wrath of God abides on him. A Rueful State. But how contrary is this, to a
State of Justification, I beseech you? Does not the Scripture say of Believers,
That once they were [Eph. 2 3.] Children of Wrath? Now, I pray, when was This?
(...) was Before they were Believers. (...) would ask, Whether every Justified
man does not please God? Yea; But I am sur^^ [Heb. 11 6.] Without Faith, it is
not possible to please God. Then, Without Faith it is not possible to be a
Justified man! What shall I say? If, Justified By Faith, certainly we are not
Justified, BEFORE it, or WITHOUT it.

There was a Time, when this Country, was much Infested with Antinomian
Er^^rs; but a Synod of our Churches then Damned those Errors, with Deciding*
That we are not Married and United unto the Lord Jesus Christ, without Faith
giving an Actual Consent of Soul unto it; and, That Gods Effectual Calling of
the Soul unto the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Souls Apprehending by an Act of
Faith, the offered Righ^^^^^ness of our Lord Jesus Christ, is in order of
Nature, before Gods Act of Justification upon the Soul. A Decision worthy to be
Held Fast among us!

III. That man who does not account, the Forgiveness of Sin, a Blessedness to
be Desired, has Madness in his heart while he Lives, and is going to the Dead.
Wonderfully Besotted is that Soul, that Subscribes not unto those Thoughts, in
Psalm. 32.1, 2. Blessed is he, whose Transgression is Forgiven, whose Sin is
covered; Blessed is the man, unto whom the Lord Imputes not Iniquity. God will
one day awaken thy Soul, O man, out of that Besotment!

It Is to be Admired, how any man, can well enjoy any thing he has, till Sin be
Forgiven unto him. Ah! what woeful ^arcoticks are there in the Pillow, of that
man, that can go to Sleep to night unpardoned! Our Good old Mr. Whiting, the
Venerable Pastor of Lyn, over heard certain Persons very Merry in a Room of an
Inn, by which he had occasion to pass: As he passed by, he just looked in, to
let fall that (...), with much Gravity, upon them, (...), If your Sins be all
Pardoned, you may very well, be cheerful! And God Thunderstruck the Souls of
some in the Company, with the pungent Remembrance of that passage, all their
Days. Truly, Sirs, If your Sins be all Pardoned, You may then, Eat your Bread
with Joy, and Drink your Wine with a cheerful Heart; for God Accepts your
Works. But if not, O miserable Soul, then the Almighty God is Angry with thee
Every Day, and thy Heart may break, (if it were not harder than an (...), it
would break!) under the Terro^ of that Thought, God counts me for His Enemy! A
Great Person in the English Nation, being assured, by the Physicians that his
Death was unavoidably Near unto him, Cried out with Hellish Anguish, Oh! that I
might Live, though it were but the life of a T^^d; for better that than H^ll!
Sinner, if thou Die Unpardoned, the life of a Toad will be a better life than
thine, throughout Eternal Ages!

Let me Expostulate with you.

Consider, How much of Sin, how many Talents, how heavy Mountains, of Sin, you
have lying on you. You may say, The First Sin of the First man, is become
ju^^ly mine! You may say, I have an Heart as full of Sin, as a Toad is full of
Poison* You may say, Ever since I began to Exercise my Reason, I have most
Unreasonably broken, every one of the Holy and Just, and Good Commandments,
which my God has given me. We may, every one of us, make that sad Lamentation,
in Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable evils have compassed me about, my Iniquities are
more than the Hairs of my Head.

And Consider, What a Dreadful, what a Doleful, Thing it is, to have Sin
Unpardoned. The Apostle spoke it, as the Dismallest Thing that could be spoken,
Ye are yet in your Sins! Our Savior uttered it, as the smartest of all his
Thunders, Ye shall Die in your Sins! Never was there a more terrible
Commination, than that in Amos 8.7. The Lord has Sworn, surely I will never
forget any of their Works. Alas, while you are unpardoned, you are in Hourly
Danger, of being Siezed by the Eternal Vengeanes of God, and of being made a
Sacrifice in the Flames of His Infinite Wrath: Sleepy Soul; Thou Sleep on
the Top of a M^st, and this in the midst o^ ^n Horrible ^iery Ocean too.

Be persuaded then, ^o pursue the ^^^giveness of Sin, with all Ferv^^cy (...).
As yet, it may be had; yea, For the Blackest, and Vilest Sinner among us all,
it may be had! But it will quickly be Too late: God only knows, ^ow soon, it
may be Too late. Until it be done, Thy Life hangs in doubt before Thee! Our God
will Abundantly Pardon; but then, O Thou Soul in Peril, Seek the Lord, while He
may be found! It may be, To Day; but no man alive can say, any Further than, To
Day! Wherefore, To Day, To Day, Oh! That you would hear the Voice of God!

We will now pass to,

The Second Observation.
The Consideration of Deliverance from Sickness, is particularly to provoke our
Diligence in Seeking after such a Blessedness.

Now, there is a CASE, upon which it will be profitable for us, to bestow a few
Reflections.

After what manner are we, to Consider the Forgiveness of Sin, in its Relation
to a Deliverance from Sickness?

And we will thus Reflect upon it.

I. Let us look upon Sin, as the Cause of Sickness. There are, it may be, Two
Thousand Sicknesses; and indeed, any one of them, able to Crush us! But what is
the Cause of all? Bear in mind, That Sin was that which First brought Sickness
upon a Sinful World, and which yet continues to Sicken the World, with a World
of Diseases. Our Sickness is in short, Flagellum Dei, Pro Peccatis Mundi.

First. Remember, That the Sin of our First Parents, was the First Parent of
all our Sickness. All our Sicknesses, are but the Execution, of that Primitive
Threatening, in Genesis 2.17. In the Day, that thou sinnest, thou shall surely Die,
If Crudities, and Obstructions, and Malignities, are the Parents of our
Sicknesses, it is very sure, that Sin is the Grand Parent of them, and the Sin
of our First-Parents is the First Parent of them all. We read, in Eccl* 9 18.
of, ONE Sinner destroying much Good. I find, some Jewish Rabbi's take our
Father Adam, to be meant by that ONE Sinner. Our Health is no small part of the
Good, which has been Destroyed by him. Had our First Parents Eaten of the Tree
of Life, doubtless a confirmed State of Perfect Health, both in Themselves and
their Off spring, had been the Fruit of it. But our First Parents criminally
applied themselves to the Forbidden Tree of Knowledge: This proved a Tree of
Death both to Themselves (...) their Offspring; and Sicknesses are among the
Punishments of that nefandous Crime. Alas; Our Father Ate Sour Grapes, and our
Teeth are set on Edge! When that Expression is used about our Lord Jesus
Christ, [Heb. 2.9.] He TASTED Death for us; I make no doubt, that it is an
Elegant Allusion, unto the Way, whereby Death at first came into the World;
This was by Tasting the Forbidden Fruit. As Death, so Sickness, the Inchoation
of Death, is but the Bitter Taste of that unhappy Action! Yea, The Breath of the
Old Serpent, whereto Mankind in our First Parents hearkened, has poisoned us
all. The poison, which that Serpent, who is, The Angel of Death, has insinuated
into us, has disturbed our Health, as well as depraved our Heart. Sin, Sin, was
that which opened the Flood Gates for a Flood of Wretchedness, to rush in upon
the World; and Sickness is one Instance of that Wretchedness. Cursed SIN; I
Indict thee, this Day, for Murdering of the World.

Secondly. Remember, That the Sin of every Individual man, does but Repeat and
^enew the Cause of Sickness unto him. We are informed, in Psalm. 107.17. Fools,
because of their Transgression, and because of their Iniquities, are Afflicted,
with Sickness. Indeed Sin, sometimes is Naturally the cause of Sickness. A
Sickness in the Spirit, will Naturally cause a Sickness in the Body. Inordinate
Passions Burn the Thread of Life. Intemperate Courses Drown the Lamp of Life.
The Wise man says about Uncleanness, It Consumes the Body. Plures Occidit
Crapula, quam gladius: The Cup ki^ls more than the Canon. And, mu^tos morbos,
Fercula multa faciunt; many (...) will b^eed many Diseases. Alas, when will men
Believe it! The Board S^^ce (...) the Sword. And one may say, (...) and
Surfeits, more have (...) all the Physicians in the world (...). The Apostle
says about (...) Griefs and Cares, They work (...). We may add, Ignavum Corrun
(...). But Sin is of^ner a Moral Cause of Sickness. What are Sicknesses, but
the (...), wherewith God corrects His own offending Children? Pious (...),
takes a wrong step, and he is Diseased in his Feet for it; God sends the (...)
upon him. And what are (...), but the Vindictive Strokes of Wrath, wherewith
God Revenges Himself upon the Children of Wrath? Jehoram did a Bloody Thing;
and, Lo, his Bowels fell out by reason of his Sickness; God smites him with a
Bloody Flux for it. Hence, our Sicknesses, are in the New Testament, called by
a Name, that has, Scourges, in the Signification of it. [Ponder, at Liesure,
Exodus 15.26. and Deuteronomy. 28.21, 22, 27; 35, 60.61. And say not, as he to whom the
Book of Happiness, was presented, I am not at Liesure!] Ah! Sin; How
mischievous art thou? A man may say of every Sin, when he meets with it, Have I
found thee, O mine Enemy! The Soul and the Body constitute one person; and the
Body is unto the Soul, the Instrument of Iniquity: hence for the Sins of the
one, there come Sufferings on the other. Syrs, Be afraid of Sin: I tell you,
It Is a very Unwholesome Thing. When you are going to drink the Stolen Waters of
Sin: There Is Death in the Pot.

Thirdly. Hence under Sickness, we should make a solemn Enquiry after Sin. A^
upon (...) Disasters, there was that (...) given, in Hag. 1.5, 7. Consider your
^^yes: it is to be heard most sensibly in our Sicknesses. There is a
Self-Examination incumbent upon All men; upon Sick men, it is peculiarly
incumbent. Pray, Let our Sickness be it self such an Emetic as to make us Vomit
up our Sin, with a penitent Confession of it. A Time there was, when
Sacramental Profanations, were Chastized with Sicknesses among the Corinthians;
They had not come in an orderly manner to the Body of the Lord, and God Rebuked
it, with Disorders upon Theirs. (Compare 2 Chronicles. 30 20.) Now, says the
Apostle, Judge your selves. Indeed, Sickness does not always come, to manage a
Controversy of God with us, for some Iniquity. A Job, that Perfect and Upright
man, may have his Ulcera Syriaca, [so tragically described by Aretaeus, and
admirably answering the Diagnosticks, which the Sacred Writ has given us of
Jobs Distemper:] to Try his Patience. It Is said, of that Man of God, Elisha, He
fell Sick, of his Sickness, whereof he died: It seems he had been Sick
sometimes before. Our Lord may (...) Lazarus, of whom it shall be said, One
whom thou ^^vest is Sick. Strange! Diseases may be Love Tokens. A Timothy, that
Rare Minister, whom one of the Ancients calls, An Admirable Young man, may be,
Troubled with Often Infirmities. Our Lord Jesus Christ is to be visited, in the
Sickness, of His Dearest Brethren: (Lord, That ever thou should call them
so!) But yet it becomes us, to be very Inquisitive, and Solicitous, lest there
be Wrath in our Sickness, and Thoughtful, What is the Controversy* Yea, Be the
Sickness never so Light.

Our Excellent Mitchel, being but Incommoded with an Hoarse Cold, wrote thus
upon it, in his Diary. My Sin is Legible in the Chastisement. Cold Duties, Cold
Prayers, (my voice in Prayer, i. e. my Spirit of Prayer fearfully gone,) my
Coldness in my whole Conversation, Chastized with a Cold: I fear that I have
not Improved my voice for God formerly, as I might have done, and therefore He
now takes it from me.

I have somewhere met with the Papers of another (...) under the pains of the
Toothache, (...) expressed himself. In the pains, that were now upon me, I set
my self, as well as I could, for my pains, to Search and Try my ways.
Especially, Whether I had not Sinned with my Teeth. Particularly, in Two
Things; By Sinful, Graceless, Excessive Eating; And by Evil Speeches, for there
are, Literae Dentales used in them.

Sirs, How Copious a Theme, is here to be Insisted on! But I must Insist no
further.

II. Both Under Sickness, and After it, we should be more concerned for being
Saved from Sin, than from Sickness. Our Sins, what are they, but the Terrible
Sicknesses, under which our Souls, are fearfully Languishing and Perishing. A
Sinful Soul, is a Sickly Soul. Original Sin, is the Plague of the Heart. Every
Lust, is a Distemper of the Soul. An Unsteady Soul, has a Palsy. A Wanton
Soul, has a Fever. A Worldly Soul has a Dropsy. An Angry Soul, has an
Erisypelas. Envy, is a Cancer in the Soul. Whenever we have Sinned, we have
cause to say, Lord, HEAL my Soul, for I have Sinned! Now, Sickness is to Awaken
our concern, first for the Pardon of such Maladies (...) our Souls, and so for
a Power against them all.

First; Under Sickness, what should be our chief concern? It should be That, in
Psalm 25.18. Lord, Look upon my Affliction and my Pain, and Forgive all my Sin.
If it be then put unto us, What lies heaviest now upon you? Say not, My
Sickness: but say, My Sinfulness! That I have done so little Service for my
Lord Jesus Christ: That I have misspent so much of my Precious Time: That I have
made no more Provision for Eternity: And, That I am still so Selfish, and
Slothful, and Sensual, and Carnal, and Alienated from the Life of God! And for
to Quicken this our concern under our Sickness, we are to think, What will
become of us, if we Die Unpardoned; what will become of us, throughout Eternal
Ages?

Next; After Sickness, What should be our chief concern? It should be That, in
Psalm. 103.3. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, who Forgiveth all thine Iniquities, who
Heals all thy Diseases. The Iniquities are to be taken away First, and Then
the Diseases. Let us not count our Sickness well gone, Except our Sin be gone
too. But let us now put this unto our selves, Am I now more Assured of my being
Pardoned, than I was before? Am I in better Terms with Heaven? Can I see and
say, It Is in Love to my Soul, that God has brought me back from the Pit of
Corruption? It should now be more of our care, That our Sickness be Removed in
Mercy, than ever it was, That it should be Removed at all.

Wherefore, In Fine; To this End, the Sickness which Enfeebles us, must make us
Fly more Vigorously than ever, to the Expiatory Sacrifice of our Lord Jesus
Christ, for the Forgiveness of our Sin. My Brethren, Our Sickness is utterly
lost upon us, if it render not a CHRIST more Precious unto us than ever He was,
and instruct us not how to make more Use of Him. As the Sick, in the Gospels,
much cried out for, A Christ! So Sickness, is to Teach us, the Worth of a
Christ, and cause us more to see, that without a Christ, we are undone for
ever. There is a Ransom, which a Sick man is to be minded of; that Ransom, in
Job 33.34. -- He is chastened with pain upon his Bed, his Flesh is consumed
away, his soul draws nigh to the Grave, -- Then God is gracious to him, and
says, Deliver him from going down to the Pit, I have found a Ransom. Sirs,
When we are Sick, let us Behold our Lord Jesus Christ, as Going down into the
Pit for us, and plead that Ransom that we may not our selves Go down. In the
Directories for Visiting the Sick, used many Ages ago, the Sick were directed
to say, Lord, I place the Death of my Savior Jesus Christ, between Thee and my
Sins. It Is Impossible to say a Better Thing than That!

Upon Sickness, our Addresses must be made unto our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom
it is said, in Math. 8.17. Himself Bare our Sicknesses. Indeed, we cannot say,
That there were any proper Sicknesses, among the Sufferings of our Lord Jesus
Christ; We do not find, that He was ever properly Sick. His Body being formed,
by a Special Efficacy of the Holy Spirit, seems to have been of so Exact a
Temper, as to be less liable unto Diseases than other men. But our Lord Jesus
Christ Bare our Sickn^sses, because, as it is elsewhere said for it, He bare
our Sins; which are the Cause of our Sicknesses. Wherefore, In every Sickness,
let us repair to the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Struggle with our
Unbelief, more than with our Sickness, until we are able to say; Lord, my whole
Dependence is on my Lord Jesus Christ, who has made Atonement, for the Sins,
for which thou have made me Sick in smiting me!

I Will Recite you, a Contempla^ion of the Blessed Austin's, which under
Sickness, may be the sweetest Anodyne of our uneasy minds. There lay Ex^ended
over the whole World, a Great Instance of Sickness; That is to say, All
Mankind, Subject unto many Diseases both of Soul and Body: And therefore there
is come into the World, that Great Physician, by whose Wounds we are Healed.
Indeed, we see, that the Soul of man, labors under the Numberless Diseases,
which are its Vices. And the Body of man Suffers more Diseases, than any other
Creature. But, O Admirable and Amiable matter, and a thing full of
Compassionate Goodness! [ Fusus est Sanguis medici, et factum est Medicamentum
Phrenetici!] The Blood of the Physician being shed, becomes the Cure of the
Patient!

III. Being Delivered from Sickness, Let us not be content without the Marks of
Sin Forgiven upon us. When we no more say, I am Sick, Let us make sure of those
Marks, which will help us with Good Assurance to say, I am Forgiven my Iniquity.

Now the Marks, by which we may discern, that we come out of Sickness, with our
Iniquity Forgiven unto us, will be found in our Answering the Ends, for which
our Sickness came upon us: And our coming out of Sickness, as Gold out of the
Fire. Wherefore, let us thus Question our selves.

Quest. I. After our Sickness, do we sincerely set our selves, to Reform all
our Sin, more than ever in our Lives before? It was wholesome Advice unto a
Sick-man, in Job 34.31. Surely, It is meet to be said unto God, I have born
Chastisement, I will not offend any more. Truly, one main Errand of Sickness,
is to Embitter our Sin unto us; the Language of it, is, Thy way, and thy Doings
have procured these things unto thee, this is thy Sinfulness, because it is
Bitter. As the famous Olevian, upon a Sickness could say, Ex hoc morbo didici,
quid (...) peccatum; By Sickness I have Learned what Sin is! Thus, under our
Sickness, we have been worse than Delirious, if we have not argued at this
Rate; My Sin brought this my Sickness upon me; I may thank my Sin for This; Now
if the Effect be so Bitter, what is the Cause? My Sins are worse than all the
pains of my Head, my Side, my Feet; for my Sins brought these my pains upon me.
Well then; Are we grown more Sick of Sin, by being Laid on a Bed of Sickness?
Do we see our Commissions of what is Forbidden, in the Commands of God, and
Reform them? Do we see our Omissions of what is Required, in the Commands of
Good, and Reform them? If it be not so, Then take, O man, that Awful Warning of
Heaven, Thou art made whole, Sin no more, Lest a worse Thing do come unto thee.
But if our Sickness, have by an Holy Diaphoresis, carried off our Sin, Then we
that no longer say, I am Sick, are, Forgiven our Iniquity!

Quest. II. After our Sickness, do we more zealously than ever, set our selves
to Glorify our Lord Jesus Christ? One that had been Brought Low, but been
helped, thought it R^asonable then to say, in Psalm. 116.12. What shall I Render
to the Lord, for all His Benefits toward me? Let us not come out of Sickness,
without such an Ingenuous, Quid Retribuam? We owe our Lives unto our Lord Jesus
Christ; Are we now more studious, How to Live unto Him? Being Rescued from
Sickness, do we study to be more Fruitful in our whole Conversation, That our
Lord Jesus Christ may be more Acknowledged, by every part of our Good
Conversation in Him? And, Do we Study to be more Useful in every Capa^ity, That
in every Relation, which we sustain, we may do more Good than ever we did? Yea,
Do we Study now, to do some Special Thing for the Name of our Lord Jesus
Christ? Of old, They that were Cured of any Sickness, were bound for to pay a
price, which they called, a SOSTPON, unto their Healer. It is our Lord Jesus
Christ, that has been, The Lord our Healer. Do we gratefully think, What
special Thing shall I now do, for the Honor of my Healer? Then, we that no
longer say, I am Sick, are, Forgiven our Iniquity!

Quest. III. After our Sickness, are we more Sick of this vain World, than ever
we were, since we come into the World? Of the Sick, it is said, in Psalm. 107.18.
Their Soul abhors all manner of meat, when they draw near unto the Gates of
Death. Has our Sickness made us to Abhor, or to Despise, those Gratifications
of our Flesh, which once were as the chief Good, unto us? As Esau said, when he
was Faint, Behold, I am at the point of Death, and what Good will this
Birthright do unto me? Thus, has the Faintness of Sickness, brought us to say,
Behold, I shall Die shortly, and what Good is there in all the Pleasures, and
all the Riches, and all the Honors of this Deceitful World? And are these
Dispositions continued and confirmed in us, after we com^ out of Sickness? We
are too ready, to account this present Evil World our Home, and promise our
selves Long Rest and Peace, and much Satisfaction in this World. But, This our
way is our Folly! And a Fault it is, that our God will never Endure in those,
for whom He has Reserved an Inheritance in Heaven, Uncorrupted and Undefiled,
and that fades not away. Now, upon our Sickness is this present World, made so
Evil unto us, that we are even Sick of being here; and has it filled us with
such Thoughts as these:

My Lord Jesus Christ, has bought for us, a better World than This. Wherefore,
Awake, O my Soul, Awake! Rouse up* Dream not of Abiding in such an Evil World
as This: But, Set thy Affections upon the Things that are above!

Then, We that no Longer say, I am Sick, are, Forgiven our Iniquity!

Quest. IV. After we have been made Low, by Sickness, are we more Lowly, and
Humble in our Spirit, than ever heretofore? Morbi Corporis ad Inhibendam Animi
superbiam, sunt Accommodatissimi. We are never fit, for either Comfort or
Service, but when Lying very Low, before the Lord. Now, we are brought Low by
Sickness, that so we may Lay our selves Low. Is this the Issue of it! When
Sickness has been Threatening to Lay us in the Dust, has it caused us, to Lay
our selves there, and made us with Humility to say, with Job, after he had been
Sick, Now I abhor my self as in Dust and Ashes? Luther noted it, That when he
had any special piece of work to do for the Church of God, some Fit of Sickness
usually came to Humble him, and prepare him for it. This, This was the occasion
of the Thorn in the Flesh, with which that Great Servant of the Lord Jesus
Christ, the Apostle Paul, was Exercised. [2 Cor. 12.7.] There has been much
Asking, What was the Apostles Thorn in the Flesh? There have been some
Expositions given of it, which carry in them, an unjust Affront unto that
Heavenly and Laborious Man of God. Whereas, there is nothing so probable, as a
Fit of Sickness, to be intended in it. I will not be positive, with Austin, and
Jerome, That it was a grievous Head ache; or, with Tertullian, That it was a
pain from a Cold, in one side of his Head; or with Aquinas, That it was the
Ilia^ Passion: or with some others, That it was the Ephialtes, or the Vertigo,
or the Gout. Nevertheless, it seems most probably, to be some sore Sickness
upon his Body, that was the Apostles, Thorn in the Flesh. He prayed, That he
might be set at Liberty from that Sickness; but God would not wholly set him at
Liberty, God would Employ a Sickly man, in the work of the Gospel, and neither
his Labor, nor Success therein should be hindered, by his being so Sickly: but
his being S^^kly, made him so Humble, as to Fit him for his Work exceedingly.
Let a man be never so Eminent an Instrument, for the Glory of the Lord Jesus
Christ, Sickness will cause him to contemn all the Applause of his Admirers,
and it will cause him to Ascribe unto the Lord Jesus Christ, the whole Glory of
all that shall be done by him. To make this, the more Efficacious, a Minister
of a Pauline Soul, must have, A Messenger of Satan to buffet him, with his
Thorn in the Flesh. I suspect, that the Apostle, in that, may allude unto the
Story of Micajah. That Minister of God, had a Rapture into Heaven, where he had
a Vision of wonderful Things. After this Abundance of Revelations, he was
Buffeted by a Messenger of Satan; A Zedekiah, a man full of Satan, then Smote
him on the Cheek. Thus, Quaere, Whether, the Messenger of Satan, accompanying
the Thorn in the Flesh, unto this Minister of God, may not be a Wicked man,
whom Satan had permission to Possess and Inspire, for the Reproaching of that
Faithful Preacher of Christ? I Leave it.

And I only say; Has our Sickness made us more Apprehensive of our Meanness and
(...)? Being just (...) from the (...) Sickness (...) with an (...) Worm, and
(...) now (...) all our years, in the (...) the Bitterness of our Soul, (...),
our Bitter Sickness? Are we (...), and Christ, and Grace, (...) All to (...) by
the Sickness, which was bringing us to Nothing? Then, We that no longer say, I
am Sick, are, Forgiven our Iniquity!

Yes, (...) Be of Good Cheer, Thy Sins are Forgiven thee.

Quest. V. Has God made us careful to ascribe the whole Honor of our
Deliverance from Sickness, unto our Lord Jesus Christ alone? It is the property
of a man that has had many Sins Forgiven him, to Love much the Lord Jesus
Christ, through whom it is that we receive our Forgiveness: But much Love to
our Lord Jesus Christ, will teach us to set upon His Head alone, the Crown, as
of every other Enjoyment, so of that Cure, wherein any Sickness has been
relieved. It is to be hoped, That Before we had our Cure, we placed our Hope on
our Lord Jesus Christ alone, for our Help. It was a great oversight of King
As^, when Sick, in 2 Chronicles. 16.12. In his Disease, he sought not unto the Lord,
but unto the Physicians. It has been Conjectured, that some of Asa's Ancestors
had been Medically disposed, and Students in the Art of Healing. From hence
they might have their Name; for Asa, is the Chaldee word for a Physician.
Possibly for this Cause, this King had the higher Esteem for those who were
skilled in Medicine, and put such Confidence in them, as to neglect, The Lord,
the Author and Giver of Health. Be this, how it will; it is to be hoped, that,
though we have been found in the use of Means for our Health, and prudently
made use of the Physician, as an Ordinance of God, yet we have not Relied upon
these Means, but upon the Lord Jesus Christ alone, who is the Health of our
Countenance, and our God.

And now, After we have our Cure, Don't we Forget the Hand that has Healed our
Diseases? Are we not like the Nine Lepers, who being brought out of their
Sickness, by the Lord Jesus Christ, went away without ever taking any more
Notice of Him? and so, without being Forgiven their Iniquity! Or, (...) we
come out of our Sickness, instead of ^eing Forgiven our Iniquity, as a Dog
Scrambling out of the Water which he has been thrown into, Shaking himself a
little, and running away, as much a Dog still as ever?

Sirs, If we come Forgiven, out of a Sickness, we shall be mindful of the
Experiences, which we have had, of the Divine Benignity toward us in it. It
may be, there has been some Remarkable Answer of Prayer, in our Deliverance:
It may not be Forgotten. Truly, I cannot without some Delight read one passage,
in the Great Austin, upon the occasion of a Malady, so common, that People
Scarce count Prayer to have any concernment about it. His words, (in his,
Confessions) are these.

Lord, Thou did Afflict me, with Pain of the Teeth; and when it was so great,
that I could not speak, it came into my mind, to admonish my Friends present to
Pray for me, unto the God of all Health. Writing this on Wax, I gave it 'em to
Read; and as soon as we kneeled down, the pain went away. I was amazed, I
confess, my Lord, my God; for I had never found any thing like it, in all my
Life.

All that I have now to say, is;

Has God given us, an Heart, for to Acknowledge the Merit of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as Purchasing our Deliverance from Sickness? It is said, in 1 Pet.
2.24. By His Stripes ye were Healed. All we have been like Run away Servants,
[and the Apostle is there discoursing to Servants*] and we deserve Stripes for
our thus Running away from the Service of God. In Sickness there are some of
our Deserved Stripes laid upon us; but when we come out of Sickness, do we,
with a Thankful Soul make this Acknowledgment; My Lord Jesus Christ, has felt
the Stripes that were due to me, and thus it is, that I am Healed!

And has God given us an Heart, for to Acknowledge the Power of our Lord Jesus
Christ, as Bestowing our Deliverance from Sickness? It was said in Mal. 4.2. To
you that Fear my Name, shall the Sun of Righteousness arise, with Healing in
His Wings. In the Eastern parts of the World, it has been a Custom among the
poor Pagans there, That when they have Ineffectually Tried all ordinary ways,
for the Succor of their Sick Folks, they would Expose them abroad unto the
Sun, Expecting that the Beams of the Sun, would perform for them, what could be
no other ways obtained. Yea, but instead of this, does our Soul, now make this
Thankful Acknowment; Nothing would Save me out of my Sickness, until that Sun
of Righteousness, my Lord Jesus Christ, arose upon me, with Healing in His
Wings! Truly, These Dispositions in us will argue, that when we no longer say,
I am Sick, we are also Forgiven our Iniquity.

And if this be our Case, how happily are we Prepared, for the Next Sickness
that shall Visit us? Perhaps, it will not be long, before another Sickness be
upon us; but being Forgiven our Iniquity, We may Refresh our selves, with such
Thoughts, as I find the famous Mr. C^tton, before ever he stood in the Pulpit,
of the Church, where I now (...) of your Fainting Fits, and Wearisome* Nights,
are weighed, and limited by His Hand, who has given you the Lord Jesus Christ,
to take upon Him your Infirmities, and bear your Sicknesses.

And then, my Brethren, if our Sickness come upon us, while we have yet Youth
or Strength enough in our years, to do any more work for our Lord Jesus Christ,
we may sweetly Express that Lovely Contradiction in Christianity; Vitam habere
in patientia, mortem in Desiderio: To say, on the one side, I know that the
Hour of my Departure, will be the best Hour that ever I saw: when I Depart, I
shall be with Christ, which is by far the best of all: I shall be then Lodged
among the Angels of God; and I Long to be so! I Long for it, with Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory! To say, at the same Time, on the other side, Yet
for all this, I ask to (...) that I may Serve Him who is my Lif^* I am
heartily, most heartily willing, (...) stay among the Bitter Temptations of
this Evil World, that I may Serve the dear Name of my Lord Jesus Christ, in a
World, where I have (...) against (...)


