ACTS AND LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England.

Begun and Held at Boston on Wednesday the Twenty-seventh of May, 1696.

Anno Regni Guilielmi Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, Regis,
Octavo.

BOSTON. Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to the
Governor and Council. 1696.

Anno Regni Guilielmi Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, REGIS,
Octavo.
An Act, For continuing of several Acts here in after mentioned, that are near
Expiring.
W E His Majesty's Dutiful Subjects the Representatives of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, in General Court Assembled, being duly
sensible of the great Charges and Expenses which have already risen, and are
daily growing and increasing for the Defense of His Majesty's Subjects and
Interests within this His Province; For the more effectual Prosecuting the
present War against the French and other His Majesty's Enemies; For defraying
the necessary and contingent Charges in and about the Support of the Government
of the Province; And for the payment of such Grants, Salaries and Allowances as
have or shall be Made and Ordered by the General Assembly.

Therefore to the ends and intents aforesaid, May it be Enacted.

And be it accordingly Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council, and
Representatives Convened in General Court, and by the Authority of the same,

That the several Impositions, Continuation of the Duties of Impost, Excise and
Tunage of Shipping.
Rates and Duties upon all Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares and Merchandises that
shall be Imported into this Province; Tunnage of Shipping, and the Duties of
Excise Granted unto His Majesty, Enumerated in and by an Act of the Great and
General Court or Assembly: Entitled, An Act, For Impost, Excise and Tunnage of
Shipping; and by one other Additional Act, For Impost and Excise: both made in
the Fourth Year of the Reign of His Present Majesty, and of our late most
Gracious Sovereign Lady, Queen Mary, of blessed Memory; and one other Act,
Entitled, An Act, For the better Collecting the Impost and Excise, and
preventing Frauds: Made in the Fifth Year of Their said Majesty's Reign: and by
one other Act, Entitled, An Act, For the Reviving and Continuing of the Duties
upon Goods, Impost, Excise and Tunnage of Shipping, and the Acts for granting
of the same: Made in the Sixth Year of Their said Majesty's Reign; and the
additional Rates and Duties of Impost upon Wines, Liquors, Goods, Wares
Merchandises and Tunnage of Shipping, mentioned in an Act, Entitled, An Act,
For granting unto Their Majesty's, a Tax on Polls and Estates, and additional
Duties of Impost and Tunnage of Shipping: Made in the Seventh Year of His
present Majesty's Reign: Be and are hereby further granted and continued until
the Twenty-ninth-Day of June, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Seven, and no
longer, and that the said several Acts before mentioned, and the Act Entitled,
An Act, For Continuing certain Rates and Duties of Impost, Excise and Tunnage
of Shipping, and Reviving of the Acts for Granting the same: Made and passed by
the General Assembly begun and held the Twenty-ninth Day of May, One Thousand
Six Hundred Ninety Five. In the Seventh Year of His said Majesty's Reign: And
all the Powers, Penalties Articles and Clauses in the said several Acts
contained, other than what of any of them are already altered or repealed, or
that shall otherwise in this present Act be altered or provided for, shall
continue and be of full force and effect, until the said Twenty-ninth Day of
June, One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Seven, and no longer; and for and during
that Term shall be applied practiced and executed for the Levying, Collecting,
answering and paying the said Rates and Duties hereby continued, according to
the Tenor and Intent of this present Act, as fully to all intents and purposes,
as if all and every the Clauses, Matters and Things in said Acts or any of them
contained, had been again Repeated in this Act, and particularly Enacted.

Provided nevertheless, And be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That whereas in and by the said Acts, Draw back upon Exportation within Twelve
Months.
no Draw-back is to be had upon the Exportation of Wines and Liquors after the
expiration of nine months next following their being Imported, the said time of
nine months is hereby enlarged unto twelve months for all Wines and Liquors
that shall be Imported after the Twenty-ninth Day of June, in this present Year
One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Six. Any former Law, Usage or Custom to the
contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted,

That all Masters of Ships or other Vessels, shall make Oath to the account
which the Law obliges them to give under their Hands to the Commissioner for
Impost and Excise, Masters of Ships to make Oath to their manifest
of any Goods which they have on Board liable by Law to pay Impost; which Oath
shall be, That the same is a true account to the best of their knowledge, of
the quantities, and to whom the Goods are consigned, with the marks thereof; to
be administered by the Commissioner or Receiver respectively, who are hereby
Empowered thereto.

And if it be made appear, Abatement for Decayed Wines.
That any Wines Imported in any Ship or Vessel be decayed at the time of
Landing thereof, or in twenty four hours afterward, Oath being made (if
required) before the said Commissioner or Receiver, that the same has not been
Landed above that time, the Duties of Impost for such decayed Wines shall be
abated. And the said Commissioner is hereby also Empowered to Let or Farm out
the Excise within the Counties of Hampshire, York, Dukes County, and the Island
of Nantucket, for the best profit and advantage of the Public that he can for
the Ensuing Year.

And be it further Encted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Act Entitled, An Act, Encouraging a Post Office: Made in the Fifth
Year of the Reign of His present Majesty, and the Late Queen Mary, Continuance
of the Post Office.
of Blessed Memory: And all the Clauses and Articles therein contained, be, and
hereby is revived and continued to be, abide and remain in full force for the
space of three years from the Publication hereof, and no longer.

And be it further Enacted.

That the Act Entitled, An Act, To prevent the Deserting of the Frontiers:
Continuance of the Act to prevent deserting the Frontiers etc.
And the Act Entitled, An Act, For the further continuance of several Acts
relating to the Prosecution of the War: Both made in the Seventh Year of His
said Majesty's Reign, and all the Clauses and Articles in each of said Acts
contained, be, and hereby are revived and continued to be, abide and remain in
full force unto the Twenty Ninth Day of June, One Thousand Six Hundred
Ninety-seven, and to longer.

And be it further Enacted.

That the Act Entitled, Continuance of the Act against Exportation of Grain,
An Act, To prohibit the Exportation of Grain Made at the Sitting of the
General Assembly in November last, in the Seventh Year of His said Majesty's
Reign; Be, and hereby is revived and continued to be, abide and remain in full
force until the and of the next Sessions of this present General Assemby and no
longer.

An Act, for the Settlement and well Ordering of a Public Market and Fairs,
within the Town of Boston.
W HEREAS by Long Experience within His Majesty's Kingdom of England, the
Setting up of Fairs and Markets in Cities, Seaports, and other Populous Towns
and Places has been found of general benefit and advantage: And forasmuch as
great inconveniences are observed to attend not only the Inhabitants of the
Town of Boston, but also the Country People living near the same, for want of a
Public and Open Market in said Town, to the intent that Forestalling,
Regarding and Ingressing of Victuals and other Commodities may the better be
prevented.

Be it therefore enacted by the Lieutenant Governor Council, and
Representatives in General Court, Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That hence forward there be a Market held and kept within the said Town of
Boston, upon each Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday in every Week weekly and on no
other days, to be kept at such place or places in said Town, where the major
part of the Justices of Peace, Market days
and Select-men of said Town shall agree and assign for the most convenience of
the Inhabitants in general, and the Country People resorting to said Market.

And for the opening and raising of the said Market, It is enacted by the
Authority aforesaid,

That a Bell be Rung every Market Day at the Opening of the Market, at Twelve a
Clock, and at the ending of the Market: That is to say, A Bell to ring at the
opening of the Market etc
From the first day of March, until the first day of May yearly, at Seven a
Clock in the Morning, and from the first day of May, to the first Day of
September yearly, at Six a Clock in the Morning; and from the first day of
September, to the first day of March yearly, at Nine a Clock before-noon. And
that the Market shall not hold and continue after six a Clock Afternoon, from
the first of March, to the first of September; nor after four a Clock
Afternoon, from the first of September, until the first of March yearly. And if
any person or persons shall Sell, or put to open Sale in the said Market, any
manner of Provisions, or other Commodities, No Sale to be in the Market till
the bell Ring.
before the Ringing of the Market Bell, at the said several hours and times in
the morning respectively; such Offender or Offenders being thereof convict,
shall be deemed and reputed to be Forestallers of the Market, and shall be
proceeded against as such, as by this Act in that case is directed and
appointed.

And it is further Declared and Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That no person or persons, from and after the setting up of the said Market,
shall buy or cause to be Bought any Victuals or any other Commodities
whatsoever, No Sale to be but in the Market
coming to the said Market by Land or Water; or make any Bargain, Contract or
Promise for the having and buying of the same, or any part thereof so coming as
aforesaid, before the same shall be brought into the said Market, ready to be
there Sold; or shall make any motion by word, Letter or otherwise to any person
for the Enhancing of the price, or dearer Selling any Commodity in the said
Market, on pain of being proceeded against as a Forestaller of the Market.

And it is also further enacted, (In regard that the Market is principally
intended for the benefit of Housekeepers who Buy for their own use and behoof)
That the Retailers, Retailers, Hucksters etc to buy until the afternoon
Hucksters and Traders of the Town, shall not enter into the Market, to make
their Provisions, and Buy of any of the Market People there, until the
Afternoon of every Market Day, to the intent that the Housekeepers may provide
themselves in the morning of every day at the first hand, and pay moderate
Rates for their Provisions; On pain that every very such Retailer, Huckster or
Trader, for every time offending herein, shall be proceeded against as a
Regrater of Ingrosser.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That no person or persons bringing any sort of Provisions or other Commodities
out of the Country unto the Town of Boston for Sale, from and after the setting
up of the said Market, No Sale to be in any other place but in the Market.
shall sell, utter or put to show or Sale any of the same in any private House,
Warehouse, Inn, Alehouse, Tavern, Lane, Alley, Street, or other place or
places whatsoever within the said Town or Precincts or Liberties thereof, but
in the Market place, and in Market-time only, according as is before appointed;
On pain that every such person so carrying or offering to put to Sale in any
otherwise, and Provision or other Commodities shall forfeit the same so offered
to Sale, or the value thereof, without any manner of Favor.

Provided always, No Merchant, Factors or others to be restreined from
purchasing of Grains or dead Provisions etc.
That no Clause or Expression herein contained shall extend, be intended,
deemed or adjudged to restrain or abridge any Merchant, Factor, or others from
Buying, Purchasing, Agreeing, or Contracting for any sort of Grain, or Dead
Provision whatsoever, with design and intent to Transport the same beyond the
Seas, nor unto Butchers selling their Victuals in open Shop or Shops, not shall
intend to hinder any person or persons that do Import any Grain or Provisions,
and other Commodities in Sloops or other Vessels, from any Towns within this
Province, Neighboring Colonies, or other Places to Sell the same upon their
Arrival in Boston, without carrying the same into the Market, nor unto the
Selling of Fish, Hay, Wood, Timber, Lumber, Pigeons, Milk, Cider, Pease, or
Beans in the Shell, Fruits and Herbs, as has been accustomed.

And it is further Provided, That no Tax or Toll be paid for any Goods or
Commodities brought into the Market, Fish, Pigeons, Milk, Pease, Beans.
nor for the use of Stands, or other Places, for the disposing of said
Commodities: And that what Provisions or Commodities are left Unfold in the
Market; the Owner or Owners thereof shall have free liberty to sell and dispose
at any other time.

Be it further enacted,

That there be two Fairs held in the Town of Boston Annually, in the place or
places to be appointed by the major part of the Justices and Select-men of said
Town, Two Fairs
That is to say, One on the last Tuesday in May, and the other on the last
Tuesday in October; each Fair to continue four days.

And it is likewise enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That every Warehouse or Shop in the Town of Boston aforesaid, Warehouses and
Shops to be Market overt.
shall be Market-Overt for such Goods, Wares and Commodities as are usually
Bought and Sold therein, and the property of all such Goods, Wares and
Commodities by their being bought and sold or disposed of in such Warehouse or
Shop shall be legally vested in the Purchaser: Any thing herein contained to
the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it further enacted,

That for the better order and quiet of the Market People, Clerks of the Market
how to be appointed.
there shall be one or more Clerks of the Market nominated and appointed by the
Select-men of said Town, which said Clerk or Clerks of the Market are hereby
empowered to Supervise the said Market, and to take effectual care to prevent
all frauds, abuses and disorders that may arise therein; and shall frequently
attend and be in the said Market, during Market-time.

And it is further enacted,

That the person or persons appointed in manner and form as is herein before
prescribed to be Clerk or Clerks of the Market, Clerks of the Market to be
Sealers of Weights etc.
shall from time to time be Sealer or Sealers of Weights and Measures for the
Town of Boston: Any former Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary in any wise
notwithstanding.

And be it further Ordained and enacted by the Authority of this present
General Assembly.

That every Forestaller Regrater of Ingrosser for every Conviction of any
Offense in that kind, shall forfeit and pay the Sum of Twenty Shillings: And
that all pains, forfeitures, Penalties, Sum and Sums of Money to be forfeited
by virtue of this Act, shall be employed, inure and accrue; one moiety thereof
to the use of the Poor of said Town of Boston, and the other moiety to him or
them that shall inform and sue for the same by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or
Information before two or more Justices of the Peace within said Town.

And for the further Encouragement and better Governing of the said Market.

It is enacted and Ordained by the Authority aforesaid,

That it shall and may be lawful, to and for any two or more of the Justices of
the Peace within the Town of Boston to have, hold use and exercise the Powers,
Justices Power.
Authorities and Jurisdictions of a Court, and to make out Process for to hear
and determine all matters, controversies, quarrels and things arising in the
said Market, and offenses against the Rules thereof, and therein to proceed
summarily, and give Judgment immediately without being obliged to follow the
strict Rules of ordinary Process: Any Law, Ordinance, Custom or Usage to the
contrary notwithstanding.

Provided Nevertheless, That neither this Act nor any thing therein contained,
shall be, and continue in force any longer than one year from the first opening
of the said Market.

An Act, For Granting unto His Majesty a Tax upon Polls and Estate.
W E His Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects the Representatives of this His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, Convened in General
Assembly. For and toward the Repair of His Majesty's Castle upon Castle Island
near Boston, and Support of the Garrison there; For the Subsistence and Paying
of Wages to Seamen and Soldiers, that are or shall be employed in His
Majesty's Service, for the defense of this His Province, and a Vigorous
Prosecution of the War, against His Majesty's Enemies; For the Payment of such
Salaries, Grants and Allowances as have been or shall be made by the General
Court or Assembly, and all such Allowances and Payments as are already directed
by any Act of this Province to be made out of the Public Treasury; For the
Discharging the Arrears of Debts, due from each of the late Colonies of the
Massachusetts and Plymouth, and the Public Debts now due from this Province,
or that shall be Contracted on the Public Account within the same; For the
Support of the Government, and answering of the Incident and Contingent Charges
thereof; and for no other ends or intents whatsoever. Do Unanimously Grant unto
His most Excellent Majesty, a Tax of Six thousand three hundred forty four
Pounds, in Money, to be levied upon Polls and Estates both real and personal
within the said Province, as in and by this present Act for the manner and
proportion thereof is directed and set forth.

And be it enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representatives in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the Treasurer do forthwith send out his Warrants directed unto the Select
men, Trustees or Assessors of each respective Town or Precinct within this
Province, Requiring them forthwith to Assess the Sums herein set and
proportioned unto such Town or Precinct, upon all Rateable Male Polls above the
Age of Sixteen Years (except Elders of Churches, settled Ministers, the
Praesident, Fellows and Students of Harvard College, Grammar School masters,
and such who through Age, Infirmity or extreme Poverty in the Judgment of the
Assessors are rendered incapable to contribute toward public Charges) and upon
all Estates both real and personal lying within the Limits and Bounds of such
Town or Precinct, and next unto the same (not paying else where) in whose hands
or possession soever the same shall be found, in just and equal proportion as
near as may be according to their best judgment and discretion, making no
differrence (...) to the Sum set upon Polls; All Indian, Melatto and Negro
Servants to be Estimated as other personal Estate; And to make two distinct
(...) of the Assessment of said Sum upon the Polls and Estates within such Town
or Precinct, each List containing one just half of the said Towns or Precincts
proportion to this Tax; therein setting forth what each particular person is to
pay toward the same, against his or her name respectively. And the Lists so
perfected and signed by the said Assessors, or the major part of them, to
commit to the Collector, Constable or Constables of such Town or Precinct, as
also to return a Certificate of the name or names of such Collector, Constable
or Constables, together with the Sum total of the List or Lists to each of them
respectively committed, unto the Treasurer, at or before the Fifteenth day of
August next coming.

And the Treasurer upon Receipt of such Certificate, is hereby empowered and
ordered to issue forth his Warrant or Warrants to the said Collector, Constable
or Constables, requiring him or them respectively to Collect the Sum total of
one of the said Lists, and to pay the same into the Treasury, and issue the
Accounts thereof with himself or his Successor in said Office, at or before the
first day of October next ensueing. Also to Collect the Sum total of the other
of said Lists, and pay the same in, and issue the Accounts thereof as
aforesaid, at or before the first day of January next following. And the
Treasurer is hereby also directed to send his aforesaid Warrants enclosed to
the Sheriff or Marshal of each respective County, who is hereby required
immediately to disperse and transmit the same unto the Select-men, Trustees,
Assessors, Constables or Collectors, of the several Towns and Precincts,
according to the directions thereof; and for his said Service, Charge and
Expenses therein, shall have a reasonable allowance ordered him by the Court of
Quarter Sessions in such County, out of the County Treasury, upon his laying
the Account thereof before them.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That each Town and Precinct within this Province shall be Assessed and pay as
its proportion to this present Tax, the Sums hereafter following. That is to
say,

In the County of SUFFOLK.
l. s. d. Boston, Twelve Hundred Pounds 1200 00 00 Dorchester, One Hundred
Forty Six Pounds 146 00 00 Roxbury, One Hundred and Ten Pounds. 110 00 00
Milton, Sixty Pounds. 60 00 00 Brantrey, One Hundred Pounds. 100 00 00
Weymouth, Seventy six Pounds. 76 00 00 Hingham, One Hundred and Four Pounds.
104 00 00 Dedham, Eighty Pounds. 80 00 00 Medfield, Fifty Two Pounds. 52 00 00
Wrentham, Twenty Pounds. 20 00 00 (...), Sixteen Pounds. 16 00 00 (...), Twenty
Six Pounds. 26 00 00 In the County of ESSEX.
(...), Two Hundred and Seventy Pounds. 270 00 00 (...), Two Hundred and Ninety
Pounds. 290 00 00 (...), Two Hundred and Twenty Pounds. 220 00 00 Salisbury,
Forty Pounds. 40 00 00 Topifield, Fifty two Pounds. 52 00 00 (...), Eighteen
Pounds. 18 00 00 Haverhill, Fifty six Pounds. 56 00 00 Andover, Seventy six
Pounds. 76 00 00 Bradford, Twenty Four Pounds. 24 00 00 Boxford, Thirty Pounds.
30 00 00 Marble-head, One Hundred and Sixteen Pounds. 116 00 00 Lynn, One
Hundred and Twelve Pounds. 112 00 00 Wenham, Fifty six Pounds. 56 00 00
Beverly, Eighty Pounds. 80 00 00 Gloucester, Fifty two Pounds. 52 00 00
Manchester, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00 Rowley, Sixty Eight Pounds. 68 00 00 In the
County of MIDDLESEX.
Charistown, Two Hundred Pounds. 200 00 00 Cambridge, One Hundred Twenty six
pounds. 126 00 00 Watertown, One Hundred Eighty eight pounds. 188 00 00 New
town, Sixty eight Pounds. 68 00 00 Sudbury Eighty pounds. 80 00 00 Marlborough,
Fifty four pounds. 54 00 00 Medford, Twenty pounds. 20 00 00 Malden, Sixty
pounds. 60 00 00 Wooburn, Ninety six Pounds. 96 00 00 Reading, Sixty six
Pounds. 66 00 00 Billerica, Thirty four Pounds. 34 00 00 Chelmsford, Forty
Eight Pounds. 48 00 00 Concord, One Hundred and eight pounds. 108 00 00 Stew,
Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00 Groton, Twenty Pounds. 20 00 00 Lancaster, Sixteen
Pounds. 16 00 00 Sherbourn, Thirty Pounds. 30 00 00 In the County of HAMPSHIRE.
Springfield, Eighty Pounds. 80 00 00 Northampton, Seventy six Pounds. 76 00 00
Hadley, Forty Eight Pounds. 48 00 00 Hatfield, Forty two pounds 42 00 00
Southfield, Sixteen pounds. 16 00 00 Westfield, Twenty six pounds. 26 00 00
Enfield, Four Pounds. 4 00 00 In the County of PLYMOUTH
Plymouth, Seventy four pounds. 74 00 00 Situate, One Hundred and six pounds.
106 00 00 Marshfield, Sixty-six pounds. 66 00 00 Duxbury, Forty six Pounds. 46
00 00 Middleborough, Twenty Pounds. 20 00 00 Bridgwater, Forty Eight Pounds. 48
00 00 In the County of BARNSTABLE.
Barnstable, Seventy-six pounds. 76 00 00 Yarmouth, Fifty six pounds. 56 00 00
Eastham, Fifty Eight Pounds. 58 00 00 Sandwich, Sixty four pounds. 64 00 00
Falmouth, Fourteen pounds. 14 00 00 Manamoit, Fourteen pounds. 14 00 00
Harwich, Twenty two pounds. 22 00 00 Rochester, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00 In the
County of BRISTOL,
Bristol, Forty two Pounds. 42 00 00 Taunton, Eighty four Pounds. 84 00 00
Dartmouth, Eighty Pounds. 80 00 00 Freetown, Ten Pounds. 10 00 00 Rehoboth,
Seventy four Pounds. 74 00 00 Attleboroug, Ten Pounds. 10 00 00 Swansey, Fifty
Eight Pounds. 58 00 00 Little Compton, Forty two Pounds. 42 00 00 Tiverton,
Sixteen Pounds. 16 00 00 In the County of YORK.
York Eight Pounds. 8 00 00 Wells, Eight Pounds. 8 00 00 Kittery, Sixteen
Pounds. 16 00 00 In Dukes COUNTY.
Edgar Town, Thirty Pounds. 30 00 00 Tisbury, Twenty Pounds. 20 00 00 Chilmark,
Twenty Pounds. 20 00 00 Nantuckett, Seventy Pounds. 70 00 00

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That it shall and may be lawful, to and for the Select-men or Trustees of any
of the Towns or Precincts aforementioned, and they have hereby full power and
authority to cause the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of their respective
Towns or Precincts, qualified by Law to Vote in Town Affairs, to assemble at
such time and place as they shall appoint, and to elect and depute seven, five
or three persons being Free holders within such Town or Precinct, to be
Assessors for the proportioning and assessing the Sum before set on such Town
or Precinct upon the Male Polls and Estate within the same: and all and every
such person, so Chosen for Assessors, and accepting, thereof, shall take the
Oath following. That is to say,

YOU A B. being Chosen an Assessor for the Town of C. for this present Tax, Oath
de Swear, That in the discharge of said Trust, you will deal impartially and
equally therein, in proportioning the Sum to be Assessed upon the said Town,
after the best of your discretion and judgment. So help you God etc.

(...) Oath the Town Clerk of each Town or Precinct, where (...) Justice of the
Peace, is hereby empowered to administer. (...) Select-men or Trustees of any
Town or Precinct, (...) refuse to cause Assessors to be Chosen as aforesaid, or
in such Assessors to chosen shall refuse to accept of the said Trust; the
present Select men or Trustees of such Town or Precinct, shall be, and a (...)
declared the Assessors of the same, and shall severally take the Oath before
mentioned. And every Assessor attending the Service aforesaid, shall be paid by
the Town Treasurer, or out of the Town (...), Two Shillings Per Diem for each
day he attends said Service.

And be it further enacted,

That if (...) of any Town or Precinct shall neglect or refuse to perform the
Service required of them by this Act,they shall pay the Sum set and
proportioned upon such Town or Precinct, in and by this Act, to be Levied by
distress and sale of the Estates real or personal of such defective Assessors
by a Warrant from the Treasurer directed to the Sheriff or Marshal of the
County in which such Town or Precinct lies, and for want of Estate, their
Bodies to be taken and imprisoned, until they pay the same. And all Sheriffs,
Constables or Collectors failing of performing the Duty and Service of them
respectively required, shall be liable and subject unto the like Pains,
Penalties and Forfeitures, to be prosecuted and recovered of them in the same
way and manner as in and by any Act or Acts of the General Assembly, or any
clause, branch or article thereof are set, declared and described.

And for the better enabling the Treasurer to Enforce the bringing in the (...)
granted or due from any Town or Precict, or in the hands of any (...) Constable
or Collector.

Be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Treasurer be, and hereby is empowered, to take, use and exercise, as
well all such rules, directions, powers and authorities as have heretofore been
given him in and by any Act or Acts of the General Assembly, or in any clause,
branch or article thereof, as in and by this present Act for the obtaining and
drawing into the Treasury, the Money herein granted, as also the Arrears of all
former Rates, (...) and effectually, as if the same directions, powers and
authorities had herein been again particularly recited and re-enacted; and
notwithstanding any limitation or restraint thereof in or to the particular Act
or Acts wherein the same are enumerated, set down and (...).

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Treasurer be, and hereby is empowered to issue forth and pay a certain
number of the Bills of Credit of the late Colony of the Massachusetts, Endorst
in manner as is directed by the Act, Entitled, An Act, For a present Supply of
the Treasury, to the Sum of Four Thousand Pounds and no more, toward the Uses
for which this present Tax is granted; which Bills shall pass out of the
Treasury at the value therein expressed, the Treasurer to have Credit in his
Accounts after the rate of Five Pounds Per Cent, more for such Sum in said
Bills as he shall so issue forth as aforesaid, having been received into the
Treasury at that value, and the said Bills shall be taken and accepted in all
public Payments, with the advance of twelve pence on the Pound over and above
the Sum therein expressed. And this present Tax, together with the Impost and
Excise granted and continued by this Court, to be a Fund for the Re-payment of
all such Sums in said Bills, as shall be in the hands of particular persons in
current Money of this Province.

AND WHEREAS the several Towns and Precincts here-after mentioned, are behind
in Arrears of former Taxes granted by the General Assembly, as appears by an
Account thereof laid before this Court by the Treasurer, the several and
respective Sums following, That is to say,

Marthas Vineyard, in the Tax for Thirty thousand Pounds. Three hundred and
fifty Pounds. Two hundred Pounds, whereof is remitted to them by this Court,
the remaining One hundred and fifty Pounds to be Assessed upon the several
Towns and Precincts on said Island in proportion following, That is to say
Edger-Town, Sixty five Pounds thereof, Chilmark, Forty two Pounds Ten
Shillings, thereof, and Tisbury, Forty two Pounds Ten Shillings, thereof. 150
00 00 One hundred and fifty Pounds. Nantucket, in the said Tax of Thirty
thousand Pounds. Two hundred Pounds. 200 00 00 Tisbury on Marthas-Vineyard, in
the Additional Tax to the Tax of Twelve Pence on the Poll and one Penny on the
Pound for Estates, Twenty three Pounds eleven Shillings and three Pence. In the
Tax for payment of the Province Debts, Sixteen Pounds. 60 17 11 In the Tax upon
Polls and Estates, Granted at May Sessions, One thousand six hundred ninety
five, and Additional Tax Granted in February Following, Twenty one Pounds six
Shillings and eight Pence. In all, Sixty Pounds seventeen Shillings and eleven
Pence. Chilmark on Marthas Vineyard, in the Tax for Polls and Estates, Granted
in February, One thousand six hundred ninety four, five, Ten Pounds. 31 06 08
And in the Tax upon Polls and Estates, Granted at May Sessions, One thousand
six hundred ninety five and Additional Tax Granted in February following,
Twenty one Pounds six Shillings and eight Pence. In all Thirty one Pounds six
Shilling and eight Pence. Edger town on Marthas Vineyard, in the Additional
Grant in September One thousand six hundred ninety four, to the (...) of Twelve
Pence on the Poll and one Penny on the Pound for Estates, Twenty nine Pounds,
nine Shillings. 108 15 08 In the Tax for payment of the Province Debts, Twenty
three Pounds. In the Tax upon Polls and Estates, Granted in March, One thousand
six hundred ninety four, five, Fifteen Pounds fourteen Shillings and six Pence.
In the Tax upon Polls and Estates, Granted at the Sessions in May, One thousand
six hundred ninety five, and the Additional Tax in February following, Forty
one Pounds. Making in all, One hundred and eight Pounds fifteen Shillings and
eight Pence. Dartmouth, in the old Arrears, Eleven Pounds eight Shillings and
ten Pence. 11 08 10 Mendon, in the two last parts of the Tax for Thirty
thousand Pounds, Sixty five Pounds, whereof Twenty Pounds is remitted to them
by this Court, the remainder to be Assessed is, Forty five Pounds. 45 00 00
Little Compton, in their proportion of Fifty eight Pounds, in the second part
of the Tax for Thirty thousand Pounds, when Tiverton was annexed to said Town,
Thirty nine Pounds. 39 00 00 Tiverton, in their proportion of said Sum, when
annexed as abovesaid, Nineteen Pounds. 19 00 00 Tiverton, in their proportion
to the last part of the Tax for Thirty thousand Pounds, while they were annexed
to said Little Compton, Thirty Pounds seven Shillings and two Pence. 30 07 02
Kittery, in their proportion to the Tax upon Polls and Estates, Granted in May,
One thousand six hundred ninety five, Twenty Pounds. 20 00 00

Be it therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That the Treasurer do send forth his Warrants to the Select men, Trustees or
Assessors of each of the Towns and Precincts before named, requiring them to
Assess the said several and respective Sum and Sums which they are in Arrear as
aforesaid, in manner and form as is directed for the Tax herein granted, and to
return a Certificate thereof unto himself in manner before described. And the
Treasurer is also ordered upon receipt of such Certificate, to issue forth his
Warrants for the collecting and paying in the same, in manner, and at times in
and by this Act set, limited and directed for the Tax therein granted. And all
persons sailing of their duty, either in the Assessing, collecting or paying in
of the said Arrears; or any other thing of them lawfully required concerning
the same, shall be liable to the same pains, penalties and forfeitures, as such
as neglect their duty in any thing required of them relating to this present
Tax.

An Act, Against Piracy and Robbing upon the Sea.
W HEREAS diverse great Disorders, wicked practices and depradations have been
and are frequently committed by several of His Majesty's Subjects in and upon
the Seas, to the great damage and prejudice of His Majesty's Allies, and
contrary to Treaties of Peace, and the good Correspondence which ought to be
maintained amongst Christian Kings, Princes, and States is thereby lessened and
impaired. And whereas, also diverse of His Majesty's Subjects have and do commit
diverse Inhumane and Hostile Acts and Depradations upon the Subjects and Allies
of diverse Princes and States in Foreign Parts, in amity with His Majesty;
which by reason of the remoteness; of the place where the Fact was committed,
can very rarely be proved by witness indifferent, and many times Kill and
Murder such persons being in the Ship or Boat where such Offenses are
perpetrated, which should bear witness against them in that behalf. And whereas
diverse persons to whom private Commissions of War are granted, do many times
take, Job and spoil the Ships, Goods Merchandises, and things belonging to the
Subjects of Princes and States in Amity with the Crown of England, and Burn,
Sink or Destroy such Ships or Vessels wherein such Goods, Merchandises and
Things were taken, that the same may not be discovered and knows, contrary to
the intent and meaning of the Granting of such Commissions, and the
Instructions therewith given them. Which disorders, wicked practices and
depradations ought to be detested and abhorred by all His Majesty's Subjects:
And for Prevention and Reformation thereof.

Be it enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and Representative Convened
in General Assembly: And it is hereby enacted by the Authority of the same.

That all Treasons, Treasons, Felonies, Roberies etc. committed on the Sea, to
be heard and Judged in (...) and as (...) be (...) by Commission.
Felonies, Robberies and Confederacies hereafter to be committed in or upon the
Sea, shall be Enquired, Tried, Heard Determined and Judged in such Counties and
Places as shall be limited by Commission or Commissions from the Governor,
Lieutenant Governor, or Commander in Chief for the time being of this
Province, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Council, to be directed for
the same in like manner and form, as it such Offense or Offenses had been
committed or done in or upon the Land: And such Commissions shall be had under
the Seal of the Province, directed to three or more substantial persons from
time to time, and as often as need shall require to hear and determine such
Offenses after the common course of the Laws, of this Province, used for
Treasons, Felonies, Robberies, Murders and Confederacies done and committed
upon the Land within the same.

And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That such persons to whom such Commission or Commissions shall be directed,
Such Offenses to be (...) of by the oath of 12. men.
or three of them at the least, shall have full power and authority to Enquire
of such Offenses, by the Oaths of twelve good and lawful Inhabitants in the
Shire limited in their Commission in such like manner and form, as if such
Offenses had been committed upon the Land within the same Shire: And that every
Indictment found and presented before such Commissioners, of any Treasons,
Felonies, Robberies, Murders, Man-slaughters, or such other Offenses be
committed or done, in and upon the Seas, shall be good and effectual in the
Law: And if any person or persons happen to be Indicted for any such offense
hereafter to be done in and upon the Seas, or in any other place above limited;
That then such Order, Process, Judgment and Execution shall be used, had done
or made, to, and against every such person and persons, so being indicted and
found, as against Traitors, Felons and Murderers, for Treason, Felony,
Robbery, Murder, or such other Offenses done upon the Land, as by the Laws of
this Province is or shall be accustomed. And that the Trial of such Offense or
Offenses, if it be denied by the Offender or Offenders, shall be had by twelve
lawful (...) inhabiting in the Shire, limited in such Commission, which (...)
be directed as is aforesaid. And such as shall be convicted of any such Offense
or Offenses by Verdict, Confession, or Process by Authority of any such
Commission, shall have and suffer such pains of Death, losses of Goods and
Chattels, as if they had been attainted and convicted of any Treasons, Felonies
or Robberies, or other the said Offenses done upon the Land, for and toward
the Support of the Government within this His Majesty's Province.

Provided always, Saving for Persons compeled by necessary that shall take
Victuals and that may be conveniently spared.
That this Act extend not to be prejudicial or hurtful to any person or
persons, for taking any Victual, Cables Ropes, Anchors or Sails, which any
person or persons (compelled by necessity) takes of or in any Ship which may
conveniently spare the same, so as the same person or persons pay out of hand
for the same Victual, Cables, Ropes, Anchors or Sails, money, or mony-worth, to
the value of the thing so taken, or do deliver for the same, a sufficient Bill
Obligatory payable in reasonable time, not exceeding twelve months; and that
the makers of such Bills well and truly pay the same Debt at the day to be
limited within the said Bills.

And be it also further enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That if any suspected person or persons, shall hereafter bring into this
Province any Foreign Coins, Suspected persons to be Seized and Secured, as
also their Treasure
Gold, Bullion, Merchandise, and other Treasure, supposed to be taken in and
upon the Seas, in manner aforesaid: That then, and in every such case, the next
Justice or Justices of the Peace, or other Magistrate then present upon the
place, are hereby required and empowered upon his or their own knowledge or
information given to him or them thereof to Grant Warrants to the Sheriff or
Constable of the Place, to Apprehend and Seize every such person or persons,
his and their Money, Gold, Bullion, Merchandise and Treasure, and to bring the
same before such Justice or Magistrates, to be Examined and Proceeded against
as the Law directs; and in case such suspected person or persons cannot produce
a Certificate, or produce, two Evidences, where, and how he came by such
Moneys, Gold Fullion, Merchandise or Treasure, then such Justices or
Magistrates may Commit such person or persons to Goal, without Bayl or
Mainprize, until he or they be discharged by Law, and secure such Money, Gold,
Bullion, Merchandise or Treasure, to be disposed of as the Law directs. And
every such Sheriff or other Officer, Officers to be Assisted in making such
Seizures.
to whom such Warrant or Warrants shall be directed, shall require and take
such a number of persons with Arms, or otherwise, as he or they shall think
meet, for the seizing and apprehending such person or persons, and carrying him
or them before such Justice or Magistrate as aforesaid, and every person or
persons refusing or neglecting to be aiding and assisting to such Officer or
Officers, in the Execution of such Warrant or Warrants, shall be proceeded
against as the Law directs, and in such manner, and under such penalties, as in
other the like cases is accustomed and provided; Penalty for neglect.
and every such Officer or Officers offending or neglective in his Office, and
Execution thereof, shall be punished as the (...) also directs.

And it is hereby further enacted,

That if any person or persons to whom such private Commission or Commissions
is, Private men of War to bring what they take in to some of His Majesty's
Ports for adjudication according to their Instructions.
are, or shall be granted, do hereafter take, surprise and seize any Ship,
Vessel, Goods, Merchandises and Things of the Subjects of any Prince or State
whatsoever, and do not bring such Ship, Vessel, Goods, Merchandises and Things
into some Port or Ports belonging to His Majesty, pursuant to their Commissions
and Instructions, there to Receive Legal Condemnation, unless hindered by the
inevitable Providence of God, whereof sufficient proof shall be made, or
produce two at least of the Company belonging to the Ship or Vessel so taken,
to manifest that the Ship, Vessel and Goods so taken, belonged at the time of
the Caption thereof to the Subjects of the Enemies of the Crown of England,
shall be prosecuted as Robbers and Felons, and as if no such Commission or
Commissions had been granted to them, and under such pains and penalties as
before in this Act is mentioned inflicted and declared.

FINIS.

