By His Excellency Coll. Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and Governor in
Chief of His Majesty's Province of New York, etc. A P^OCLAMATION
Whereas I have received certain intelligence of a late horrid and detestable
conspiracy, against the sacred life of Our Sovereign Lord King William, and of
an intended invasion to be made (...) the Kingdom of England, upon the ^atal
intended blow: all which by the great and (...) Almighty God is wonderfully
discovered and prevented to the gre^ joy and (...) Majestyes loving and loyal
Subjects I have therefore by advice of his Majestyes (...) Povince thought fit
to appoint, thursday the 4th of June next ensuing be observed and kept (...) of
thanks giving; to render praises to Al^^ghty God for his gracious and
wonderful (...), kindness, in granting us this happy deliverance, and to
supplicate for the continuation of (...) mercy toward us, in preserving his
M^^estyes Sacred Person, so frequently exposed (...) the safety and welfare of
his people, and to give success and Victory to his Majestyes arms at Sea and
Land. And all Ministers and Preachers of the word of God, and all other Persons
whatsoever within this Province and dependancyes, (...) hereby required
strictly to observe and keep the same (...) Churches or public meeting houses;
(...) they will answer the contrary at their peril.

Given (...) his Majestys Fort in New York, the 2 (...) of May, in the Eighth
Year of the Reign of our Soveragn Lord WILLIAM the Third King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. Annoque Domini 1696.
Ben. Fletcher

God Save the KING
Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to His Majesty at the Bible in
the City of New York 1696.


