A SERMON Preached before the GENERAL ASSEMBLY Of the COLONY OF Connecticut At
Hartford in NEW ENGLAND. May 13. 1697.

BEING The Day for Electing the GOVERNOR DEPUTY GOVERNOR and ASSISTANTS, for
that COLONY.

Published by Authority.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND. Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Duncan Campbel,
over against the Old-Meeting-House. 1697.

A SERMON Preached before the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the COLONY OF Connecticut.
EZEKIEL. XIX.14. And fire is gone out of a Rod of her Branches which has
devoured her fruit, so that she has no strong Rod to be a Scepter to Rule This
is a Lamentation, and shall be for Lamentation.


WHatever Differences of Opin^^on there have been in the World, concerning
either the Original or Pre-eminenc^ of those various Forms of ^^^vil
Government, that have been Extant in i^ yet the Thing it self has ever been
esteeme^ ^f great necessity, and universally acknowledged, (...) a Blessin^
(...) Importance to the Weal of (...) People: Insomuch that the General Nature
of (...) Commonweal, with the Specifications there^nto belonging, do
necessarily relate to Civil Go^ernment, and the several kinds of it, as to
their ^ormal Cause; whence it seems, That in things of a Civil Nature, there
could not without Government, be any such thing as a Com^on Good in the World.
Most certain it is, that by this Medium, Divine Wisdom has provi^ed to give
check to those wretched Principles, of Pride and Contradiction, Disorder and
Con^usion, which the first Rebellion has unhappily brought into the hearts of
men; As also to pre^ent those Exorbitant Practices, and Intolerable Doings,
[the genuine Product of such Principles] which are destructive to the Peace,
and ^uinous to the Comforts of Mankind: So that, ^n truth, of all those
Favors, which God in his most Gracious Providence, has distributed for the
common benefit of the Children of men, this of Civil Government, deserves to be
reputed among the Principal; for that, both the Advantages of it, are of such
vast Extent; reaching to the utmost limits of the Rational World: and the
Benefits of it are so exceeding great; since it is this, which under God is our
Safeguard from Evils, Domestic and Foreign, and secureth to us whatsoever is
valuable in the World. And from the Experience that men have had of these
Benefits, as well as from Gods Overruling Influence upon their Hearts, it
comes to pass, that there is such a willingness and Disposition in the most, to
submit to those Powers that God in his Providence places over them.

Indeed we read of those that Despise the Government, 2 Pet. 2 10. who, in
defiance of this Subjection, Speak Evil of Dignities; [And what Ordinance of
God is there, that has not met with such as dare despise and condemn it?] Yet
that many, even of These, [whatever their presumption and willfulness, (which
infamous Notes the Apostle does there brand them with,) may prompt them to say,
or do against Government specifically considered, or rather against the Person
vested with it,] are not so void of common Understanding, as to condemn such
Authority in General; appears, (if from no other Reason, yet at least) from
the over weaning conceit they ordinarily have, of their own Abilities, to
rectify the Male-Administrations of those that are in Authority, and so mend
the Faults, they accuse the Government of, had they but their Advantages. It
must be confessed, that some, such (I may call them) Monsters of Men and
Sinners there have been, as have openly professed themselves Mortal Enemies, to
the Nature and Being of Civil Government (loading it with the odious ^l^nders,
of an Antichristian Stratagem, Limb of the Beast, and such as these) But that
man, who shall oppose the Furious Notions, of such Frantic men, against the
concurring voice of all Nations, consenting to the Necessity and Usefulness of
this Ordinance, will truly merit the Character, which the Apostle in the 12 th.
verse of that fore cited Chapter, gives those Defamers, viz. Of Natural Bruit
Beasts; and justly ^ncur the Judgment he declares concerning them in that same
verse; in those words, Made to be taken and destroyed, -- and shall utterly
perish. And surely whatever Detractions from the Honor and Excellency of Civil
Authority, This or any other Set of Opposers, (blinded by their own
willfulness) are guilty of; such as have wisdom to discern the Circumstances of
Men in General, with the present State of these Mundane Affairs, cannot but as
highly magnify it; As the great Buckler (when rightly managed) both of
Religion and Property, and the best Expedient to Save a People from becoming a
Prey to those who hate them. The want of which Authority, (whether we
understand it of a total Failure, or of an undue, lame, and ineffectual
Management) has ever been of fatal consequence, and opened a Gap for Ruin upon
Ruin to break in upon a people. Whence, whosoever shall well weigh, the no less
natural than usual Concomitants and Consequents of this State deficiency, and
shall consider, what Irreligion and Profaneness, Unrighteousness, and
Oppression, Disorder, and Confusion, do use to invade a People, when the Rod of
Dominion is broken, the Bands of Authority dissolved, and every man is his own
King, will soon see reason to reckon Government in the prime Rank of God's
Mercies. In the close of the Book of Judges, Chap. ult. ult. We have, as the
very Reason, both of the great Abominations that had defiled the Land of
Israel, and of the great Devastations that had raged in it, This given us; In
these Days there was no King (or Chief Magistrate) in Israel.

Now, by how much greater the Blessing of Civil Government is (which is
designed for the Prevention and Removal of those Grievances that are incident
to men) by so much the more intolerable is it, when it is either not improved
at all, or not to any good purpose or effect, or mis-improved; when, either Wit
or Will to prosecute the Ends of Rule are wanting; and such as have the
managing of it, are either Unskilful, and know not; or Weak, and cannot; or
perverse and will not consult the Peace and Weal of those they bear rule over.
Though the Calamities, and Confusions of Anarchy, are very dreadful, yet the
Instances of such as have been ruin^ed by the abuse, rather than the want of
Civi^ Authority, are more frequent, and as formida^ble. It is a sad case that a
People is in, when there are no Rods at all, for a Scepter to Rule and it is
not much (if it be any thing) bette^ when those Rods that are, are not strong
Rods and those Scepters, Scepters of Righteousnes^ This has a very ominous
Aspect upon a People This affords a pleasing Prospect to their Enemies, and
will not be long in bringing the whole State of their Affairs into a lamentable
Confusion.

This is it which the Prophet in our Text observes, to be the miserable case of
the State of Judah; They that once had Men of Piety, Wisdom, Truth and Majesty,
to adorn the Throne of Sovereignty, and Seats of Justice, were brought to that
deplorable pass, that they had not a strong Rod to Rule them. And this was, to
all that understood the worth of so great a Mercy, or should feel the want of
it, such matter of sorrow, that we have it ingeminated by the Prophet. This is
a Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation.

There are two things (mutually illustrating each the other) which from these
words of the Prophet, may be recommended to your Consideration; and I hope not
unsuitably to the present Occasion.

The first is, The much to be lamented Circumstances of a State or People, over
whom, there are None* or None such as there should be, holding the Reins of
Authority, with a just and steady, strong and impartial Hand: This is
expressed; This is it which the Prophet so bewails.

The second is implied, viz. The Happiness of a People who have Strong Rods,
for Scepters to Rule them. And so far as we shall find, (in the handling of
these cases) either of them to b^ co-incident with our own, There will arise a
variety of Duties, belonging to us respectively in our several Stations; and
those of great Importance, both for the preventing and removing of that Misery,
and for the procuring and perpetuating this Happiness

This Chapter (wherein is our Text) does contain a Description of the Present,
with the next Preceding State of the Kingdom of Judah, (ascending, as is
generally concluded, as far as to the end of King Josiahs Reign) in a Twofold
Parable.

The First, of a Lioness and her Whelps, catching the Prey, and devouring until
they* were taken in the Pit. From verse 2. to the 9 th inclusively. Which
Parable refers to the Time of the Two Kings, successively following Josiah*
Jehoahaz and Jehojakim.

The Second (from the 10 th verse to the end) of a Vine, fruitful and full of
Branches, but plucked up at length and cast to the Ground. Which sets forth the
augmented Miseries of that declining State, under the two next Kings Jehojachin
and Zedekiah.

This last verse, seems to be not only a Narrative of the Low Ebb, that the
Regal Authority of the Kings of Judah, was already fallen in^to; (who were
rather Princes than Kings, and those Tributaries to the King of Babylon) Bu^
also, a Prediction what a lamentable pass, the Civil Affairs of that Kingdom
(already so perplexed) should come to, after Zedekiahs Captivity, which was now
at Hand. Concerning which (to show the certainty of it) the Prophet here speaks
of it as already come: And Fire is gone out, etc. which has devoured her
Fruit: verified considerably by what they daily saw and sustained; but
afterward, more in those horrid Tumults, Murders and Confusions, that fell out
in Gedaliah's Time; whom Nebuchadnezzar had appointed Governor over the
Residue of the Jews, permitted to abide in the Land.

In the words themselves we may Observe,

1. How the Judaean State came to be involved in these Calamities. And Fire is
gone out of a Rod of her Branches. This was it which had ruined them: All the
Fruits of this Vine, were by this means devoured.

2. The Calamity it self, here noted by the Prophet, in which they were
involved. So that she has no Strong Rod, for a Scepter to Rule.

3. The Prophets Reflection thereupon; This is a Lamentation, and shall be for
a Lamentation: The two last I principally design to speak to.

The Political State of the Jews, is here resembled to us by a Vine; Their
Kings (who were from among themselves, an ancient Blessing which God had
promised them. Deuteronomy. 17.15.) were the Rods of the Branches of this Vine; and
these were They, that by their Sin and Folly, kindled the Fire which consumed,
both themselves and the State. This is the Sum of the first part of the verse;
And belongs, as to its Application, to the three Kings or Princes, preceding
Zedekiah (all of them gross Idolaters:) And especially to Zedekiah's revolting
from, and afterward refusing to submit to the King of Babylon; (as the Prophet
Jeremiah counseled him: Jer. 38.17, 23.) This set Fire to the Rage of that
Potent Monarch, and that Fire destroyed the City of Jerusalem, the Temple, and
(in a great measure) the Ancient Civil Polity of the Jewish Nation.

The Figurative Terms in the latter part of the verse are obvious; and need not
much to be said for their Explication. I shall add what is needful in a few
words.

Rod.] The same word is rendered Staff. The word according to the Notation of
it, signifies a Thing to Lean upon. Hence it is Metaphorically put for
whatsoever is necessary for the Subsistence of another. So the Staff of Bread,
in Lev. 26.26. and Ezekiel. 4.16. is that supply of such Kind, which a Person or
People has dependence upon, and cannot subsist without: Hence it sig^nifieth
Power, Authority, or Government; Isa* 9.4 and 10.24 Per. Metaph. Because
Govern^ment is the very Prop and Support of a Stat^ and that by which it does
subsist. Or, (as some would have it) It may be put for Governme^^ or Authority,
Per Metonymiam Adjuncti, the si^^ being put for the Thing signified. Because
su^^ Rods were an Ancient Badge of those that were in Authority. Whence the
same word signifies a Tribe. Psalm. 78.7. Because every Tribe had a Rod, with
the Name of that Tribe on it, which the Princes of the Tribes used to carry in
their Hands as Ensigns of their Authority. So that by Rods, we are to
understand Persons in Authority; the Adjunct being put for the Subject.

Scepter.] Is a word of the same Import: A Scepter is a Mark of Majesty and
Severity which Kings of old, as well as now, were wont to use. Yet it is not to
be restrained to Kingly Dominion only: ( in Amos 1.8. It is used concerning the
State of the Philistines which was Aristocratical:) And it signifies, by the
same Metonymie, any Power or Majesty, of Government or Rule, under what form or
Name soever. This then explaineth the former word; No Rods for a Scepter; i. e.
Men in Authority, or Civil Government; for the Term Scepter is no where applied
to any other kind of Government exercised by Men over one another.

To Rule.] The word is of great Extent, implies a Right and Authority over
Persons and Actions, and whatever can be Governed: In a word, it comprehends
here, whatever belongs to the Exercise of Civil Power: as to Enact Laws, ^o
assure Rewards to the Obedient; to determine Penalties for the Disobedient, and
to distribute ^oth Rewards and Punishments. No Rod for a ^cepter to Rule; i. e.
Such were wanting as should hold the Reins of Government, manage Affairs of
State, preserve Order and Peace.

But, How so? Was not Zedekiah King? And had he not Officers under him? This
Difficulty will easily be removed, by considering the Quality of these Rods;
which the Prophet adds; and is principally to be taken notice of, and observed
here. Rods they had, but not Strong Ones.

No Strong Rod.] or Rod of strength. Commonly applied to Kings and Kingdoms,
which are for the most part, won and held thereby. This the Prophet adds to
complete the Description of those, whose help the state wanted: and that very
agreeably with the Metaphor of a Rod or Staff, here used. If a Staff have no
strength in it, it will prove but a Deceit, Cheat and Disappointment, to
whomsoever make use of it: it is its strength that makes it Serviceable. The
same is true also, in this figurative use of the Word; or of those whom the
Prophet here styles Rods. Whatsoever is requisite to accomplish Those that
bear Rule, that the state may safely have dependence upon them; and without
hazard lean upon their Conduct, whether it be Wisdom, Justice, Piety, Prowess;
that is the strength of these Rods, the Prophet here speaks of. And it is
evident, he speaks of them under this Consideration ( viz. as so accomplished)
for men in Authority there were; Zedekiah was now King; after him the King of
Babylon ap^pointed Gedaliah Governor; (the time was no^ yet come for the
Scepter to depart from Judah, Genesis 49.10.) But these Rods, were not strong
ones; accomplished for their places, and the Service of their Generations.

Thus you have the Prophet's Representation of their calamitous Circumstances.
Next follows his Reflection upon them. This is a Lamentation] It is a word that
signifies the deepest Mourning, 2 Samuel 1.16. But how was this a Lamentation?
It was so, both. (1.) Formally. It was of it self ground of great Sorrow; That
a State, o^ce famous and flourishing, and (which is more) so peculiarly
favored of God above all others, should be thus cast down to the Ground. v.
12. (2.) Effectively. It would open a Gap to numberless Ruins; which both they
that now lived should smart under; and they also should rue, who were yet
unborn.

It is, and shall be for a Lamentation: noting both the Certainty and Duration
of these Calamities and Sorrows. For evils that come in at the Door of a Weak,
Remiss, Lax Government, don't use to be speedily turned out again.

So you have the case of this People opened (so far as concerns their Civil
State) and you have it lamented as very sorrowful. Whosoever shall look back to
the times of King David, with those next following, and, shall take a view of
the Conquests of that Reign; of Enemies subdued; Cities taken; Countries
subjected; People made tributary; Religion and Justice flourishing; and the
Nation formidable to all that were round about them; together with the
peaceful Policy and Glory of Solomon his Son and Successor; and shall consider
further, what all this was at length come to, in the times of our Prophet,
through the grievous Sins, and gross Imprudence, of the highest Ranks and
degrees of men accompanied with the wretched Degeneracy of the whole People (a
natural consequent of the former) will without Hesitation subscribe to this of
the Prophet; and acknowledge it to be just matter of Lamentation. It were
enough to make a sensible man's heart ache, to compare the Miseries of this time
wherein the Prophet wrote, with the Glories of the former.

These things, are they not written for our Learning? Certainly, It is an
obvious Truth that from hence lies before us; Viz. That no greater Misery can
well befall a People (considered in their politic Capacity) than to be
destitute of such Rulers as the Prophet here speaks of; or to be under the
Government of others. It is this that the Prophet here Laments, as that which
was and would be, a dreadful inlet to undoing Evils. And consequently, the
happy state of a People, is hence inferred, who have Strong Rods for Scepters
to rule them.

This is the Lesson; And we shall be happy, if we can learn it from the Harms
of others, and not our own. Faelix quem faciunt aliena Pericula cautum.

This therefore give me leave to recommend to you at this Time, in this general
Inference from the Words, as the Doctrine to be considered and improved. Viz.

DOCTRINE.
Able and Faithful Rulers, are Rich Blessings to a People, and the want of such
is Ruinous. Or thus; Civil Rulers, able for, and faithful in their Places, are
rich Blessings to their People; and the want of such, is fatal.
When those that are Vested with such Authority, are meetly accomplished for
their Places, and faithful in discharging the Trust reposed in them, they are
incomparable Blessings; Blessings of such Importance, that when they fail, it
brings Ruin upon a People. They are great Blessings themselves, and may be
happy Instruments of many more. These are the Strong Rods, unto which the
Prophet in the Context, ver. 11. does attribute the Grandeur and Glory of the
once Flourishing State of Judah. And She had Strong Rods, for the Scepter of
them that bear Rule, and her Stature was Exalted among the thick Branches, etc.
But now, O Tempora! O Mo^es! Things had quite another Face; The Rods had no
Strength in them; All the Ancient Glory was laid in the Dust, and every thing
covered over with Disorder and Confusion.

Here are two things to be considered.

1. The Subjects spoken of: Rulers. 2. What it is makes Them such great
Blessings
1. The Subjects are Rulers, i. e. Such as are in Places of Civil Authority,
and have the Government of others. Of these the Prophet here speaks. And the
metaphorical terms used in the Description, do point out Civil Rulers, a^ the
Persons described. For if the Term Rod^ may be applied to some other kind of
Govern^ment, beside Civil; yet at least, Scepters, (which is the other Term,)
are proper Badges of thi^ kind of Authority, and belong only to Civi^ Rulers.

Of these, some are Supreme; who Stand i^ the Highest Rank of Dominion among
Men and are accountable only to the King of King^ These, in respect of all
Inferior Ranks, are ((...) it were) the Fountains of all Rightful Authority
and like the Sun, Shine with their own Light^ There are others, who are
Subordinate; who though they Shine also in their proper Sphaere^ yet they Shine
with a borrowed Light; and de^rive that Authority which they have, from the
Higher Powers; and are accountable to those by whom they are Authorized. Of
both the Apostle makes mention. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.

And (as there are these two Degrees of R^^lers, so) there is a Twofold
Authority residin^ in them.

1. There is a Power of Legislation, makin^ ^aws, enjoining a Rule of
Obedience, with the ^romise of a Reward; and the Addition of a Penalty, in case
of Disobedience: All which, ^ome (it seems not so rightly) take to be so
Essential to Sovereignty, that it cannot be grant^d to any Subordinate Ruler,
without admitting Him to a Participation of Sovereignty; or rather without
destroying that Sovereignty it self.

2. There is an Executive Power, (or if I may ^se the word) a Power of
Legisaction; whereby ^he Laws Enacted are put in Force; Justice ac^ording to
Law Administered; Right is secured; ^njuries are suppressed; Offenders are
punished; ^he Obedient are Rewarded; The Good Order and Peace designed is
preserved, and the General ^eal promoted.

This twofold Power there is in Civil Rulers, and may respectively belong to
both Supreme and Subordinate.

Of this latter sort there is a great variety; There are Viceroys of Countries
and Kingdoms; ^overnours of Colonies, and Corporations; Judge, (...) Causes,
Civil and Criminal; Magistrates, Justices, and (as the word is abused)
Commissioners; ^ome that represent the Commonalty, and are ^eputed to act for
Them: With many more; according to the various Forms and Methods of ^overnment,
that are in use among men. Who ^ave All of them (some more, some less of)
^uthority residing in them; and each of these ^rders, according to their
several distinct Proportions of this Authority, may come under ^ Denomination
of Civil Rulers.

2. What is it that makes them such (...) Blessings?

The Doctrine informs us, That the Stren^^^ of these Rods lies in these two
things.

1. Their Ability. 2. Their Fidelity.

The one Respects their Accomplishment their Places. The other, their Honesty
in the Places. And these two, like the two Pillars* the Temple, are the main
Props of a Comm^^ Weal.

To begin with the First; That they may such Blessings.

1. They must be Able Men. Exodus 18.21. else it will be a Vanity, to expect any
Secu^^ or Benefit from their Conduct; and a poin^ the greatest madness to be
Flattered with* Hope of it.

Here Observe these few Particulars.

1. They should be Men of Knowledge and (...). Deuteronomy. 1.13. Without Knowledge,
(...) can Wholesome Laws be Enacted; or those (...) are so, understood, or put
in Execution. (...) is not (perhaps) any Study more copious (...) any Practice
more difficult, than that of (...) Law: There is such a vast Variety of Act
(...) requiring a particular Application of the (...) Rules of Justice to them;
there are so (...) knotty, intricate Cases, wherein the Truth (...) not ly so
shallow, as to be easily come at; (...) (...) be of any tolerable Seize
in this sort (...) Skill, calls for Good Parts, and a good Im^^ovement of them.
This Wisdom Solomon (...) of God, 2 Chronicles. 1.10. And, when he (...) it, he
found it so rich a Jewel in his Crown, (...) necessary to Government, that he
speaks of (...), which had not a good measure of it, as (...) worthy To Speak
in the Gate. Prove. 24.7. i. e. ^ have any thing to do as Judges in Matters of
^^dicature. The Gates of Cities, being of Anci^^t Time, the Places where they
Held their ^^urts of Justice.

Such is the Unskilfulness of some that have an ^^^est and just Cause; Such the
Craft and Subtilty (...) many that have a bad one; such the Tricks and Shifts
(...) men have devised, to pervert the Sense of (...) best, and to Evade the
Force of the strongest ^^ws; such the Fair Colors, that the wicked ^^ngues,
and worse Consciences of unconscionable ^^vocates study to put upon the most
unjust and ^egal Actions; that if there be not Wisdom to ^arch out the Matter,
there will be no Judging (...) which side Truth and Justice lies. Again;
^^udence is another Branch of this Requisite; (...) a principal Ornament of an
Able Ruler. (...) Wise men are not Prudent Rulers. They ^ast have moreover a
Discretion and Aptness, (...) apply the Knowledge they have, to the Ends (...)
Government; and to the Nature and Circum^^nces of those things that come under
their ^^ndling; that Matters of State may be mana^^ with a suitable Honor and
Decorum. This will command Respect from all that are concern in them; and
pres^rve Government from falli^^ under the Contempt of those, that will regard
no longer, than while it has an Aw upon the In a word, many things may be
lawful in the^^selves, which are not expedient for the Good (...) the Common
Weal; He is a Wise man (...) knows them; and he is a Prudent Ruler, that kno^
how to avoid them. It was David's Praise, (...) when God had set him over his
People, He (...) them by the Skilfulness of his Hands. Psalm. 78.^

2. They must be Just and Upright Men. (...) unless they be such, all their
Knowledge will (...) serve to render them the more heinous Sinne^ and the worse
Commonwealth's Men. (...) must be Men of Truth: Exodus 18.21. (...) 2 Samuel
23.3. Such an one was Job; concerni^^ whom the Lord testifies that he was
Uprig^^ Job 1.1. And Job professes concerning (...) self, chap. 29.14. I put
on Righteousness, etc. (...) Judgment was as a Robe and Diadem. These V^^^tues
were the Attire and Ornaments of his (...) The work which God and men call them
to, (...) to distribute Justice to others, and without (...) be such men
themselves, they can never do (...) If they have not a steady, constant Care and
(...) and Love, to promote Justice and Righteous^^^ among men, they will but
abuse their (...) and be false to their Trust; and this care (...) zeal they
can never have, unless they be men^ just and honest Principles themselves. Be
(...) (...) they are to Rule by, never so good and ^^^lesome, yet Judges of a
corrupt Conscience, (...) either wittingly misconstrue them; wilfully ^^^vert
the true intention of them; (or wink at (...) that do it ignorantly) or they
may delay (...) Justice Sued for upon them, or positively (...). When such as
Rule over others, own no ^^jection to the known Rules of Justice and ^^nesty,
their own wills shall be their Law; or (...) man's will beside, that has but
Wickedness ^^ugh to go to the cost of purchasing it at their (...). Flattery
and Bribery come upon such, (...) armed men, and there is no Power nor ^^art to
withstand them. Finally that Authori^^ which is not exercised under the
Influence of (...) Principles, will prove either Arbitrary and ^^annical, or
turn to Anarchy and Confusion.

^. They must be Men of Courage and Resolution. (...) if they knew never so
well what they ought (...), and if they have never so much a mind to do ^et a
faint heart will betray both their Know^^^ge and their Honesty, to the Will of
any (...) One that dares to oppose them. Moses before gives it in Charge to his
Judges, Deuteronomy. ^7. Ye shall not be Afraid of the Face of Man, (...)* Let their
Looks be never so big, or their (...) never so bold; you that have the Sword
justice, should not be daunted at them. Those (...) Corruptions in men, that
make Government ^^^^ssary, make it as necessary, that Rulers should (...) Viri
Fortes, Strong Rods, or they will soon be trampled down, and become
insignificant. The Poor when they transgress may be easily punished and kept
under; a little Courage if there be but any care and Conscience in the
Magistrate, will serve to reduce them to order, and make them weary of their
disorders: But when men of a higher Rank do offend (and that is as often as
any) when they that should be Examples of Obedience to others, scorn to stoop
to the Laws themselves, bid defiance to those Ordinances which they owe
Subjection to, and when they have so done, think by their Riches, or Power* or
Friends, or Interest, or any thing else to stand by, and justify what they have
done He is a man of Courage that takes such as these to task; and he is not fit
to wear the Sword o^ Justice, that dares not do it. One such Cowardly instance,
may be an irreparable Prejudice to the whole State; and tends (in the issue) to
rende^ Authority contemptible to the Vilest amon^ them.

4. And Lastly. They must be Pious Godly Me^ This, though it be mentioned in
the last place is not the least of these Excellent properties (...) Able
Rulers. Yea, this is it which intro^duceth a Divine Blessing upon the
Improveme^^ of the other; and adds a Luster and Beauty (...) them all. The
Purest Politics are but insipid Tra^^ unless they have this seasoning; It is
this the influenceth and actuates, the principles of Mo^^ Honesty and Justice;
It is this that must stren^^then the Hearts and rouse ^he Courage of Rulers,
against the most daring Transgressors. Therefore it was excellent Counsel of
Jethro to Moses, Exodus 18.21. When he laid it down to him as the principal
Character of Able Rulers, that they should be such as fear God.

I do not say, That none do or may, legally, or justly rule over others, who
are not so qualified, or have not this fear: it is an undeniable Truth, that,
Temporal Dominion is not founded on Grace. Such men may by an indisputable
Right, sway the Scepters of Earthly Kingdoms, who do not belong themselves to
the Spiritual Kingdom of Christ; I am not speaking of men's Right to Govern
others; but of their being qualifyed for it. A man may have a just right in a
thing, and a legal Possession of it, and yet not be fit to make use of it. So
here, whatsoever legal Right men have to rule over others, or whatever
Authority of this kind they are vested with; yet Piety is one thing requisite,
to the orderly and right improvement of it; because it is to be exercised ^n
the Fear of God 2 Samuel 23.3. And to be di^ected to Gods Glory as the Ultimate
end of it. Whether Sound Christians, or Good Politicians are ^ittest to bear
Rule in Christian Common-weals, ^s another Question, and foreign from my
pre^ent Business; who am considering, not which (...) the most Excellent of
those Properties that are ^equired, and have been mentioned as necessary, ^o
render men Able Rulers: but whether these that have been mentioned are not
needful; and this especially among the rest. And surely, though there are a great
many Good men, who would make but poor Rulers; yet it cannot be rationally
thought, that such as han't the Fear of God ruling in their own hearts, are
qualified as they ought to be for the weighty Charge of Governmen^ To conclude:
Whatever may be necessary, to be patiently submitted to, by a People fearing
the Lord, whose Rulers have their Right to Govern them by Succession, or any
other way, without their Consent or Choice; yet, certainly, it is much to be
desired and endeavored, by such as have the Liberty and Favor of appointing
their own Rulers; That those who will not have God to rule in their own hearts,
should have as little as may be to do, in the ruling of his People.

Let us nextly in a Word or two, consider the Second Branch of the Description:
their Fidelity.

2. They must be faithful in their Places. This is also requisite, to render
Rulers such Blessings to their People. If men hold Offices of never so great
Advantage to Serve the Public, and are never so well accomplished for them;
yet, if they are not industrious to improve those accomplishments, and careful
to make use of those advantages; they not only do no Good themselves, but
(which is a double wrong) they take up the Room from, and so prevent others,
who have as good Qualifications, and would make a good use of them. But (on the
other hand) The Fidelity of Rulers crowns their Ability, and makes it to be
both seen and honored of all.

Let me here instance in a few things, wherein this Fidelity of Rulers should,
and will be discovered. It will be seen in:

1. A sedulous applying themselves to the Wo^k of their Office. The Apostle
says, Romans 12.8. He that rules, let him rule with Diligence. And it is as
needful in Civil, as in any kind of Government. Whatever it is, that God calls
us to Serve him in, we are to wait upon that thing. And a Heathen could say;
Spartam quam nactus es, hanc orna. Civil Rulers are (by the Ordinance both of
God and man) not only set apart from, but set above others, for a Special and
Honorable Service; which cannot therefore with a good Conscience be neglected.
King Jehosaphat gave this Instruction in special, with the Commission he had
granted to those Judges that were to set at Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 19.9. Thus ye
shall do: q. d. mind the thing that you have now in Commission, and let it be
done without fail. And for this reason, God has provided, that such as thus
Serve the Public, should have not only the Honor of Reverence, but also of
Tribute; Romans 13.6. For this cause pay you Tribute also; for ^hey are Gods
Ministers, attending continually on this ^very Thing. That, as the former
relates to the Dignity; so the latter should honorably support them, and
supply the necessities arising from that attendance. Thus, the same right that
Rulers have to these civil Dues, Tribute, or Salary, (call it by which name you
please) than which right, nothing can be more indisputable, as being the
express command of God, Romans 13.7; The same reason have they to attend to that
Service which acquires it.

2. A diligent Enquiry into all Causes depending before them. The Judges says
Moses, Deuteronomy. 19.18. shall make diligent Inquisition; and Job says, chap.
29.16. The Cause that I knew not, I searched out; yea, It is the Honor of a
King to search out a matter. Prove. 25.2. And before this is well done, before
consideration had, and Examination made, of all Witnesses and Circumstances,
Proofs and Pleas (with whatever else may be worthy of it, or serve to give
Light in the Case) It is not safe but shameful to determine any thing Prove.
18.13. He that answers a matter before he hears it, it is folly and shame
unto him. The Truth many times lies deep, and cannot be discovered without this
course be taken, and diligently followed. This therefore is none of the least
difficult parts of a Rulers Task; it requires a great deal, both of pains and
patience, and must be undergone. There is the Onus, as well as the Honos, the
Burden as well as the Honor of Government; and they that will not bear the
one, are not worthy to wear the other. When such men as have the Rule of
others, are either slowthful in the Busness which belongs to them as such, or
careless about it, and ( Gallio like) value not whether Matters go right or
wrong, so they can but Serve themselves, and get rid of the trouble of being
concerned with them, they are not only injurious to particulars, but the very
disgrace of their Places, so long as they hold them.

3. An upright and impartial Judging in every Cause occurring: not warped in
the least, from the straight Rule of Just and Right, either by Flattery or
Bribery, Favor or Affection. They must not respect persons in Judgment. Deuteronomy
1.17. Prove. 24.23. No not the poorest man in his Cause, if he has not Right on
his side. Exodus, 23.3. Justice is to be Given, not Sold, and that with an equal
steady hand; so that, neither a foolish Compassion on the miserable when they
are culpable, nor affection to Friends, nor the Insinuations of the Crafty, nor
the Daubings of Flatterers, the Gifts of the Wealthy, the Favor of Great Ones,
nor yet the Frowns or Threats of the Mighty, should make it incline in the
least to either side. Whatever Difference in respect of Dignity there may be
between the Parties concerned in the Justice to be Administered, yet Justice
remains one and the same; and the Law by which it is to be Administered, ought
to be duly regarded, and kept unto; and not bowed and bent on every turn, as
may serve Occasion: This will maintain the Honor of the Laws, and of him who
Executes them; whereas if this be n^glected, they will be both despised.

4. A conscientious regulating themselves, according to those Laws by which
they Rule. For although they owe this Obedience, considered in a more private
capacity, yet their yielding of it, not a little conduces to their faithful
management of their public Office; since they cannot be more false to that
Trust, than when they are themselves Actors of that Evil, which they are
entrusted to punish in others. They (...) Custodes tam Pietatis, quam Justitiae
inter Homines. Keepers, Preservers, Promoters of Piety and Righteousness among
men: This is it which they have in Charge from God and men; this is the great
Matter committed to them. And for men to violate that thing (whatsoever it be)
which is committed to their Care, is among the highest Notes of Infidelity.
Good and Faithful Rulers, will be far from thinking, that their Authority
(which is to suppress Evil in others) serves as a Dispensation to themselves,
to be, and do as they please. They will not esteem themselves at such a
liberty; or think that they are as much above the Law they are to Rule by, as
they are above those they are to Rule over. But, they know that (considering
the Places they stand in) it does as much concern them, to approve themselves
worthy Patterns of all Holiness Righteousness and Obedience, as to punish the
d^^^ult of these in others. They know that their bad Examples, will be more
followed (and by more) then their Authority will be feared. Prove. 29 12. And
that therefore, they can never be honest in their Places, unless they labor to
be Instances of that Reverence themselves, which they expect all others should
show to the Laws under their Administration. And (to add no more) when they
that should be a Terror to Evil Doers, set themselves up for an Example to
them; and do the very things, that they should bear witness against in others,
we may be sure, The Wicked will walk on every side Psalm. 12.8. without Fear
either of God or man. But when those that are in Authority, do by their own
Obedience, practically honor the Laws they administer, this is not only an
Encouragement to those that do well, but a Terror to all that do otherwise;
and utterly takes away the Hope of Impunity from the most presumptuous. For
this Instance of a Rulers Fidelity is the best Assurance that he has taken up
David's Resolution. Psalm. 75.10. To cut off all the Horns of the Wicked; and
that he will not bear the Sword of Justice in vain.

Thus you see, who are the Strong Rods; and what it is makes them so: Wise and
Just, Courageous and Pious Rulers: Devoting themselves to the work or their
Office, diligently enquiring into, and impartially judging in Causes depending,
and of Exemplary Conversation.

It remains that we show them to be rich Blessings.

And that we may make a right Estimate of the worth of such men, and come to
know what Blessings they are to the Public; we may first consider, wherein the
Public Weal consists; and then what Influence they have upon it: And from
their Serviceableness to that great End of Government, we may fairly compute
what value we ought to put upon them. Wherein this Weal does lie, the Apostle
tells us, 1 Timothy 2.2. viz. in a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness and
Honesty. In which words, he points out to us the two great things, that are the
grand Interests of a People; Religion and Property. When a people have the
liberty of professing the True and Orthodox Faith of the Gospel, and of
Worshipping and Serving the Lord in the ways of his own Appointment, according
to the prescription of his blessed Word; and when a people may enjoy their
proper Rights and Privileges, according to Gods Laws and their own; when they
have that liberty secured to them, against the Invasions of Error, Profaneness
and Superstition; and these Rights and Privileges maintained both against the
Annoyances of a Foreign Power, and against the Attempts of Domestic
Oppression, Fraud and Violence, so that as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 144.14.
There is no breaking in, nor going out, nor complaining in their Streets. Then
they enjoy this Quietness and Peace, in all Godliness and Honesty; And that
People is happy, that is in such a case.

Now therefore, if it can be evinced, that Able and Faithful Rulers, are the
great means under God, for the attaining these great ends of Government, and
for the procuring and establishing this Happiness: the matter will be out of
all doubt; and that People must be confessed happy, that have such to rule
them. And here.

Whosoever shall well weigh the Condition of a People under other
Circumstances; whether we consider them as wholly destitute of Rulers; or their
Rulers destitute of such Qualifications; shall never want Conviction in this
Particular.

1. For, As to the first of these Cases, viz. When it is the condition of a
People to be destitute of Rulers; their case is woeful. The Consequents of
Anarchy are so manifestly fatal to the whole and to particulars, that the very
Authors of it, have blushed to be it is Advocates. Nature it self allows us not
to imagine, that the Civil Felicity of a People can subsist without Government.
Whatever Dissatisfaction men have conceived, against the Powers that are, they
are rather against the Person, than the Authority: Yea, they, that being weary
of any present Powers, are given to Change, do ever pretend to hope for better;
which shows, that the Necessity of Government to the common Good of a People,
is such a conclusion of the Light of Nature, as cannot be concealed, no not in
the most Disaffected. And (which brings to the other case) the same Light that
commends some Government as necessary, condemns a bad one.

2. Nor (Secondly) does it mend the matter much, if a People have such to rule
them, as are not suitably qualified: Who have either no Wisdom to discern Time
and Judgment; or if they have Wisdom, that Wisdom is not regulated by Justice;
or that Justice not strengthened by Courage; or this Courage not influenced by
Piety; but they are though ambitious of the Honor, yet careless of the change
of Government; impatient in Examination; rash in Judging; partial in their
Sentence; culpable in their Deportment; Examples of that Impiety which they
should suppress in others. And what can be expected from such, but the Ruin of
a People? They don't know, or if they do, they will not regard the Interest of
the Public; and be sure, will never Expose themselves in the Defense of it.
They have more advantage than others to wrong the Public, and as little
conscience as any, to restrain them. These are they that will justify the
wicked for a Reward, and take away the Righteousness of the Righteous from him.
Isa. 5.23. instead of ^ighting those that are injured, they will add to the
wrong. Religion suffers deeply by them, and especially by their Immoralities;
and the crafty Oppressor takes heart in his wickedness; presuming either to
escape their observance, or to have their Connivance. Whoever seek the Hurt of
their People, these will do little (to purpose) to prevent them; but if a fair
opportunity present, they will become Parties in the Design; and please
themselves, if they may have but the luck to build their own private Fortunes
on the Public Ruins: Or (at least) if they do not thus of set purpose, they will
do the same out of ignorance, sluggishness or cowardice, that others do out of
desi^^* and that is every whit as mischievous to the Public. ^^^^mon paints
these men to the life. Prove. 28.15. As a Roaring Lion, and a Ranging Bear; so
is a Wicked Ruler over the poor People. This is the character of Folly set in
great Dignity. Eccles. 10.6. And these are some of the many miseries that flow
from such a Conduct.

I shall not need to enlarge much in so plain a case. Give me leave to add two
or three Considerations further, concerning those Rulers in special that have
been characterized in this Discourse; and I come to the Application.

1. Consider, Such Rulers will study and promote those things that make for the
Weal of their People; and in this regard are rich Blessings to them. It was for
their sake as well as his own, that Solomon in 2 Chronicles. 1.10. begged Wisdom of
God; Prudentiam Regitivam, that he might know to go out, and come in before his
People. They know that for this end, God has given them their Promotion, with
all the advantages that attend it; and that unless they do accordingly improve
it, they shall never be able to yield an account of the Price that is in their
Hands; they esteem the Salus Populi, the Public Good, to be one of the Chief
Subordinate Ends of Government; and that whosever does not faithfully endeavor
the same, can never attain the Ultimate. And though the Lord has advanced them
above their Fellow Creatures, and made them Gods among (and in a sense over)
men; yet they will remember that they are Ministers for their Good; Romans 13 4.
And accordingly do whatsoever lies in their Power, that it may be advanced
under their management; that if God bless them therein, they may live the
Desire of their People; their Deaths, whether Civil or Natural, be lamented; or
their Memories Blessed.

2. Consider, As they have the greatest Advantage to keep out, and to keep off
Evil from their People; so they will diligently and vigorously improve it. They
may do much (none more) to shut the Door against approaching Evil. And they
will do as much as they can; especially the greatest Evil of Sin, which opens
the Door to all the rest they will conscientiously oppose, not only by strict
Laws, and severe Punishments; but also, by laboring to be such a Pattern of
Piety themselves, as shall be a powerful Incentive to the well-minded, and as
great a dread to those that are otherwise. And ^^ough when such Rulers have
done their best, (...) may be very heinous Transgressions among their People;
yet they will endeavor that those Transgressions shall remain personal; and
not amount to public Crimes* by being allowed of, or winked at. And when at
any time the Wall of Gods Protection about a People is broken down, these are
the Men to Stand in the Gap, to repair the Breach; and they may, by their Zeal
for Gods Glory, seasonably shown, in a suitable Witness-bearing against the
crying Sins that kindled the Lord's Anger, turn away his Wrath from such a
People. So did Phinehas. Numb. 25.7, 8.

3. Consider. The success of the most Excellent Forms of Government, and most
suitable Laws, does under God, mainly depend upon the Ability and Fidelity of
those that are in the Government. Which further shows such as these to be
exceeding great Blessings. Though there are diverse Forms of Government lawful,
and many Laws just in themselves; yet all are not equally expedient for every
People. As it is a great part of Prudence in Rulers, to know and consider what
is most fitting for, and what manner of Government and Laws is most accomodable
to the State and Condi^ion of those that are under them; so also it cont^ibutes
not a little to the Happiness of a People when they are under such a Method of
Government, and under such Laws, as suit them in regard of their proper
Circumstances and Design. But yet, let all this be supposed of a People, it is
all nothing, if such Rulers as these I am speaking of be wanting. If they that
have the Sword of Justice in their Hands, want either Skill or Courage or
Conscience to manage it aright; the Government will soon become ineffectual,
and the Law be but a dead Letter; which has its Life and Power, from an honest
and vigorous Execution of it. And whatever a Peoples Privileges are, though*
they have the best contrived Model of Government in the World, and Laws as
suitable as can be made for them; yet if they that have the Rule of them, are
not men of such Principles as those that have been mentioned, they will be
miserable notwithstanding. Lamentable Instances of which do abound in the
Chronicles of the Monarchies of Israel and Judah; which though they had a Body
of Judicial Laws, compiled for them by God himself; yet, never any Common Weal,
fuller of Fraud, Oppression, Injuries, Violence, and Wickedness of all sorts,
(as the frequent complaints of the Prophets do testify) than these were, when
unable, or unfaithful Rulers had the Administration of those Laws among them.

4. Consider. The Lord by whom Princes rule and Nobles even all the Judges of
the Earth, Prove. 8*16. Does warrant able and faithful Rulers to us, for Public
and great Blessings; and condemn others as the Causes of a Peoples ruin. What
an honorable Character does the Spirit of God give us, of Moses, Joshua and
Samuel among the Judges? Of David, Solomon, Jehosaphat (and some others) among
the Kings? And what an everlasting Brand of Infamy, the Scripture has set upon
those Kings of Judah and Israel, that were not so qualified, as you have heard,
is obvious to every one that reads the Chronicles of those times with
Observation.

To this therefore I shall add only these two or three Particulars, wherein you
may see the Lord commending able and faithful Rulers to us as rich Blessings,
and condemning others as ruinous.

1. It is recommended in Deuteronomy. 1.13. and Exodus 18.21. to all that have the
liberty and power of Electing Civil Rulers, that in their designation of
Persons to Places of Authority, they should have special regard to their being
so qualified. And that which then contributed to the happiness of a People,
cannot now be thought to cross it.

2. The Lord gives such Rulers in Mercy to a People. In 2 Chronicles 9.8. It is said
concerning Solomon; Because thy God Loved Israel* to establish them for ever,
therefore made he thee King over them, to do Judgment and Justice. It was a
blessed Promise, that God supported his people with, when they were languishing
under the miseries of a Government, not regarding the Administration of
Justice; That he would restore them Judges as at the first, and Counselors as
at the Beginning; Isa. 1.26. i. e. such as Moses and Joshua; David and Solomon.
And when such as these are removed from a People, their case is awful, and God
threatens it as a sore Judgment. Isa. 3.1, 2.

3. God sends other Rulers in wrath to a People. I gave thee a King in mine
anger says the Lord concerning Saul; Hos. 13.11. And again Isa. 3.4. God
threatens that People with this Curse, I will give Children to be their
Princes, and Babes shall rule over them. Dreadful are the consequents of this
mentioned in the next verse. The people shall be oppressed every one by
another, and every one by his neighbor: The Child shall behave himself proudly
against the Ancient, and the base against the honorable. In a word, Violence
and Insolence will bear down all before them.

4. Able and Faithful Rulers have the Promise of God's Presence and Blessing:
Prove. 29.14. The King that faithfully judges the Poor, his Throne shall be
established for ever. 2 Chronicles 19 ult. Deal Courageously, and the Lord shall be
with the good. And God in blessing them, blesses the whole People. When their
methods are Prudent, their aims Right, their endeavors Vigorous, their hearts
Valiant, their hands Strong, and God is pleased to be Crowning them with
Success; the Public will reap the benefit. It is said, Judges 2.7. The People
served the Lord all the days of Joshua. Joshua faithfully endeavored it, and
God smiled upon his endeavors; God was with him, and the People flourished in
Piety and Prosperity: but it was not long after Joshua^s Head was laid in the
Grave, before they knew the difference.

The APPLICATION of the Doctrine may be, USE 1. By way of INSTRUCTION.
Learn hence.

1. That it is a signal token of the Divine Favor to a People, when they have
such men to rule over them. Their Promotion comes not from the East or from
the West etc. Psalm. 75.6, 7. It Is God that sets them up; and His Love is to be
seen in it, and ought to be acknowledged.

2. What matter of humbling it is to a People, when such are either denied unto
them, or removed from them. When the Elders were ceased from the Gate, Lam.
5.14. The Prophet says upon it. v. 16. The Crown is fallen from our Heads:
when good men are taken away, it is a sad Omen; but when such good men, thus
removed, were good Rulers too, it is much more ominous. Such losses are hardly
repaired; therefore they are a Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation.

3. How much it concerns Rulers to be, and approve themselves such men; Strong
Rods; as they would not be charged with the Ruining of their People. And, that
being themselves rich Blessings, they themselves might be blessed both of God
and men.

4. That, Those that are Professed Enemies to such a Government as has Strong
Rods to rule, or to such Rulers as these, are upon no Terms to be born withal.
But I may not enlarge on these Particulars; the chief that I aim at in the
Present Improvement of this Truth, shall be in two words farther.

Of Direction, and of Exhortation; USE II. Of Direction.
This Doctrine affords Excellent Counsel to all such as have the Power of
Choosing, and Liberty (by divine Providence, and the Royal favor) of Electing
Persons into any Office of Civil Rule and Government among this People. And it
ought to be taken no^ice of by you, as a necessary Direction in the work that
is now before you. It highly concerns you to be very careful of not abusing so
great a Trust. It is a piece of Service that requires your utmost Care and
Conscience. You are this day to transact a matter of great Importance to the
Weal of this People: and the Eyes of God and m^n is upon you: Of God, to
observe your Spi^its, Designs, and Ends in this Days wo^k, to bless you
accordingly: and the Eyes of Men are upon you; some to rejoice in all the happy
effects that may follow your prudent choice; others to take advantage of all
the follies that you may this day be guilty of. I may well conclude my self
very much a Stranger to the particular Methods and Customs usual in the manner
of your Elections: But, I suppose (whatever steps have been already taken in
other places of this Government) there are many in this Assembly who are still
to give in their Suffrage. To whom therefore I would more particularly
recommend this Rule, that the Doctrine lays before us) and in them to all
others, that may hereafter be concerned in the same, or like affai^) as that
which you ought to attend to. If you would not this day, do that which will be
for a Lamentation to this People, and remain so. Let your Care then be, to
Elect such as may be Able for their Places, and Faithful in them. Don't think
your Voices are so your own, that you may bestow them upon whom you will,
merely because you will. Let not that Liberty you have, be abused to an undoing
Licentiousness. Beware of those corrupt and sinister Ends, which are too too
apt to blind your Judgments, and biass your Affections, from the Rule thus set
before you. I shall but hint at some of them.

There are some (of plausible pretenses indeed but ungoverned Spirits) who in
Affairs of this nature, consult only their own Humors; and choose for such as
they hope will most indulge them. These had rather they should be in Authority,
then such as have Wisdom and Spirit to control them; and if they have any
secret Grudge against a man of Worth, besure it shall weigh heavier with them
than all his Accomplishments.

Some are wholly Swayed by the Favor they have received from, and the
Friendship and Acquaintance they have with these and those men; they think it
but a point of Civility, to Vote for such as have been civil, kind, and
obliging to them: But we ought to consider that our good Friends may be poor
Patrons of the Commonweal; they may be as bad Counselors for the State, as
Jobs were Comforters to him; Good men should have other ways to express their
Gratitude to their Friends, than by the public Injury; and (if it must needs
be so) we had bettor disgust them, than do that which is worse.

Some don't so much consider the man, as the Party he belongs to; if he be but
of such a sort or set of men, that is the principal Recommendation they look
at; this alone is enough with them, to cover a multitude of Infirmities, and as
many Sins; whereas the greatest Worth, if it be on the other side, is wholly
slighted.

Some look at nothing so much as Faction, and would with their good wills, have
none to sway the Scepter of Government, but such as will be sticklers for, and
strenuous promote^s of, the Separate Intreagues, and private Designs, which
under the Countenance of Authority, they hope to drive on successfully, against
all that shall oppose them.

But surely these, (and all such as these) are pernicious Ends and Designs, to
be abhorred by all those that are Well willers to the Commonweal; and to be
avoided by all that have any Interest in the Electing of Persons to any Places
of Civil Power. Don't think therefore, that you have nothing to do in this
Election, but to please your selves, or gratify your Friends, or maintain a
Party, and uphold a Faction; But

Remember, That God has entrusted you with an Advantage of being Instrumental
to procure Rich Blessings to this People. The Rulers that are this Day to be
set over you, will be so far such, as they shall answer the Character that has
been given: And you are bound in Conscience both to God and his People,
(detesting the base Ends mentioned) to pitch upon those, concerning whom, you
man ^easonably hope that they will prove accordingly.

Give me leave therefore a little more distinctly (and as briefly as I may) to
open the Particulars of that General Rule, in a few plain Directions.

1. Direction. Look at Wisdom as a principal thing, and seek for men of
Understanding. Solomon tells us, That by such as these a State is prolonged.
Prove. 28.2. Religion commends it to us as a duty, and the Light of Reason as
the most Excellent Policy. Nebuchadnezzar, though a Heathen, spoke wisely, when
he gave those Instructions unto Ashpenaz, concerning the Choice he was to make
among the Children of the Captivity, for some to be improved in Affairs of
State. Dan. 1.4, 5. that they should be such, as were Skilful in all wisdom,
cunning in knowledge, and understanding Science; who were first to be
instructed in the Affairs that were to be committed to them, v. 4 since they
were to be taught the learning of the Chaldeans, and afterward, in the end of
three years, to stand before the King, v. 5. i e. to be introduced to Service.
Those that are well knowing, and versed in the concerns that belong to any
place of Public Trust, are most likely to do good in it. Others (perhaps) may,
but when they do, it is but by accident; And it is a mere chance if an
unskilful Pilot escape a Shipwreck. It is knowledge that lights the way, and
discovers the path of Justice; and it is knowledge that begets a confidence in
the Administration of it. If men know the way they are in to be right, it makes
them go on boldly in it; but if they are once at a loss, it soon disheartens
them. In a word, There Is the Power Legislative and Executive, and neither can
stand without there be wisdom to support it. The making of good and wholesome
Laws, the vigorous and successful Execu^ing of them, when they are made; the
maintaining of the Honor and Dignity of Government, which are all of great
Importance to a Commonweal, and principal parts of the care of Rulers; (and
they are things that belong to the Wise; Prove. 24.23.) They are to be expected
from none other; and therefore these only are to be entrusted with the
management of them.

2. Direction. Account that Just men (only) will become the Seats of Justice;
and that none but such are worthy to have any thing to do in the Administration
of it. When the Ministers of Justice have wisdom and knowledge to inform them
about the R^le, and Conscience to keep up to it, we may then hope, that
Judgment will run down as Waters, and Righteousness as a mighty Stream. Amos
5.24. That Advice of Christ's, Mat. 10.16. is very accommodable to Rulers; They
should be wise as Serpents, but harmless as Doves withal. David was eminent in
his place, as well for the Integrity of his Heart, as for the skilfulness of
his hands. Psalm. 78.72 And in Jethro's Advice to Moses, Exodus 18.21. He
counsels him to Choose Men of Truth, hating Coveteousness, i. e. such as out of
their Love of, and Zeal to Justice, would abho^ to be temp^ed, either by
Flattery, Bribery, of Company, (Honor, Profit or Friendship) to w^ong their
Consciences, and wrest Judgment* These are they that will respect not the
Persons, but he Cause, and do that which is right to the small ^s well as the
great: as Moses charged the Judges he set over that People* Deuteronomy. 1.17. Bu^
(...) that are of unrighteous dishonest Principles, though they may possibly
sometimes do that which is just; yet it is not so, as it is done by them; nor
is it reasonably to be expected from them. When the Adminstration of Justice
^alls into their Hands, they cannot have any greater care about it than to make
^ain of it. He that will have it shall purchase (...); and if it will not go
off so, Injustice shall (...) put instead of it; to them the matter is one
(...) the same, so they can but get by the Bargain.

3. Direction. Think none fit to wear the Sword Justice, but such as have
Courage and Resolution, ^^d Zeal to manage it. Such as dare say with ^avid:
Psalm. 75.10. All the Horns of the Wicked ^ill I cut off, and dare, whenever
there is need, (...) as good as their word. Such as are concern^d for the
Honor of that Authority they are ^ested with; and fear not to undertake
whosoever shall adventure to trample upon it. They abhor ^uch a tameness of
Spirit, as can endure the saw^^ Insolences of such as should Honor them in
their Places: And whatever Resemblance it may pretend to Patience, they know it
too well to be ^eceived by it, and justly reckon it to be an in^xcusable
shameful Timorousness. These are ^hey that know they should not, and will make
all now they will not bear the Sword of Justice in ^ain. All others are more
for show than any ^ood Service. Be advised therefore in your ^hoice to avoid
them: Do you see any, that ^ill be daunted with great words, or fear the fa^^s
of men; that will tremble at the Frowns of ^^me that can do them a diskindness,
or at the ^hreats of one that can do them a Favor, or ^at dare not (with
Phinehas) show themselves in (...) Front, to make head against prevailing
im^^rious Wickedness: Never expect much of such men: A Sword will never do any
Feats, so long as it is in a Cowards hand: And for them that hope for Defense
and Protection by it, to put it into such hand as these, is (to say no worse of
it) the greatest indiscretion.

4. Direction. Let the Fear of the Lord be deemed a principal Qualification of
those that are to be entrusted with the Government. Able men are men ^^a^ing
God. Exodus 18.21. Those that are Ruled themselves by the fear of God, will Rule
others in his fear; and that is the only Government which has the promise of a
Blessing. You have been often assured (and especially by those Servants of the
Lord, that have delivered his message to you upon the like Occasion with this
of the present day) that the maintaining of the Truths of Gods Word, in Honor
and Purity; the promoting of Piety; the Punishing and Suppressing of all
Wickedness; are the grand Interest of a People professing the Name of the Lord;
and of your selves in Particular, who have been so signally owned of God in the
work of the Gospel. Let me yet once more renew this Message to you in the words
of the Prophet. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. The Lord is with you while you be with him (...)
and if ye seek him he will be found of you, but if ye forsake him, he will
forsake you: Be ass^^ed, that if this work dies, we shall dye with it: and that
there is great danger of i^s dying, if th^se that Rule us under God, have not
his Fear planted in their hearts; but are wholly void of any thing within that
may oblige them to be true to him. Irreligious men will be no better Rulers: He
that is an Enemy to his own Soul, (and so is every one that does not fear God)
He that has no more Religion than what will serve to deceive others withal;
and is (as all such are) false to the Profession that he makes of Religion;
will be no better to his Country, whenever he thinks he may be so to his
Advantage. Such as don't fear God, will easily be vassalized to the Wills of
any that are greater than themselves, and can do them an Injury; these would be
very corrupt Judge^ in that case, which the Apostles dared to refer to the
Consciences of their own Judges, Acts 4.14. viz. Whether it be better to obey
God or men. And it may be said to such, as Tertullian of old objected to some
among the Romans; Majore formidine Caesarem observatis, quam ipsum de O^ympo
Jovem. But such as fear God, will be afraid (for that very reason) of Injuring
men. They will as they are Custodes Tabularum, not only command them to be
kept, and provide that due Testimony may be born against those that do not; but
also they will commend the Observation of them, by a Pattern worthy of those,
whose eminency renders their Example more observable and more effectual. In a
word, This fear will influence th^^ to all Fidelity, Diligence, and Honesty,
(...), Pains, and Equity. They will remember that the Judgment is the Lords*
and if any (...) be wrong done by any of his Vicegerents here below, the
meanest of his Subjects over whom they rule, have a fair Plea, and Prohibition
lying against it in the Court of Heaven, where it shall be called over again,
and Justice done them. Such Rulers as these will be Nursing Fathers indeed; and
in Conscience toward God, seek the good of their People; advance the common
Interest, be zealous Promoters of Piety; and all ungodliness they will reprove
in the Gate. These are the Strong Rods; whereas from all others, there will go
out a Fire, devouring all the fruit, and destroying all the comforts of a
People.

5. I might add farther. Put Honor upon such as will stand firm for the Common
Interest, and make the Weal of the Public their chief Care and Business. In
this case especially, they that are given to Change are not to be meddled with.
Prove. 24.21. In all Revolutions (that are not absolutely necessary for the
Preservation of Justice and Equity) it is hazardable whether the Public will
not come by the loss; and when it does, it does not always recover it again;
and that too (for the most part) a long time first: and for this reason, such
as are so addicted, are to be eschewed. Yet, beware of thinking, that all that
have been aspersed as Enemies to the Common Weal, do deserve that Character
(which it may be is but the effect of some Secret Grudge of malignant men
against them.) We shall be very unwise, to deprive our selves of the benefit of
those, that can do God and their Country Service, for the Calumnies and
Reproaches, that they are laden withal by their Ignorant and Unthankful
Neighbors.

6. Again. Respect such as will adorn their Authority with an Example worthy of
the Dignity that they sustain. Remember that great Examples, if they be good,
will confirm the weak; and if they be bad, will enervate and weaken the
Strongest Laws. When it may be said to them that Rule, as once Christ said, in
that case mentioned, Joh. 8.7. He that is without sin among you, let him cast
the first Stone. There will either be no Punishment of Wickedness, or no Good
will come of it. They are very unfit to punish others, who are themselves
Transgressors. But I omit what Particulars might be added, as being comprised
in the General Directions given: and proceed to the last,

USE. III. Of Exhortation.
In two Branches.

1. To such as are, or may this day be Elected and Established the Civil Rulers
of this People. You see (Honored and much Esteemed) wherein you may be Rich
Blessings. As it is our duty incessantly to pray God that you may be so, so
also we submissively pray you that you would be so. Be you therefore entreated
(whosoever you are, upon whom the over ruling Hand of the Lord shall order the
Lot to fall this day) to approve your selves Strong Rods. Esteem this to be
your greatest Glory; the contrary to this will be both your and our Ruin. Let
the Qualifications which have at this time been described to you, be
exemplified in all your managements; that our own Experience may teach us the
happiness of a People, who are in such a case, who have Strong Rods for a
Scepter to rule them. Your Ability is under God our strength; your Fidelity,
our Security: If these Foundations are destroyed what shall the Righteous do?
Psalm. 11.3. If these Foundations are out of course, nothing will go right, or
stand long among us. It is a great Trust which is this day to be committed to
you; your Advantages hereupon to do much for the Glory of God among his People,
by going before them, and leading them in the way of the Lord, are very
Eminent: And God has answerable Expectations concerning you; you may be for a
Name and a Praise unto him; (and we may be so too, by God's blessing on your
Conduct.) This God expects; and this is the Hope and Prayer of such as fear the
Lord among us. You have our hearty Wishes that God would be with you, as he
has been with those that are gone before you: That you may be as the Mountains
that bring Peace, and as the Hills that produce Righteousness to his People:
That your Wisdom, Justice, Courage, Piety, may be the safeguard of our Land,
and the Stability of our Times: These are the things, which duly improved,
will make you Rich Blessings. Be entreated therefore to shine in the
Improvement of them. The Lord has said, Ye are Gods, Psalm. 82.6. Let these
Virtues appear, as inseparable Properties of your Deity: If you lack these
things, you cannot stand, and we must fall. I might remember you of many
particulars by way of Motive. As,

1. You have the Care and Charge of a People whom God has by special Favor,
taken to be his own Peculiar. And such a Trust as this ought to be strenuously
and faithfully discharged. The Lord our God has by signal Protections, and a
stretched out Arm, made these (once dark) corners of the earth a place of
comfortable Entertainment to a Remnant of his faithful Servants, and their
Seed: Here he has entrusted us with the choice Mercies of his Word and
Ordinances; we have had them and enjoyed them, in safety from all the
Endeavors of such, as with an envious eye and vexed Soul, have beheld what God
has been doing for us; and though we have sadly proved our selves ungrateful,
backsliding Children, untrue to the Interest of the Gospel, and Kingdom of
Christ among us: yet Oh! how are Covenant Mercies prolonged to us? and how
great are the Covenant Engagements and Obligations, that we are continued under
to this Day? And what is the Lords end in all this, but that we should be
holiness unto him? What does God design, but that we should show forth his
Praises, who has thus crowned us? What does the Lord look for from us, but
such fruit as this? And, the Honor God puts upon you, whom he makes the Rulers
of his People, the Authority which he does vest you with, is with Subserviency
to this end. God has designed the Civil Government of his People, to concenter
with Ecclesiastical Administrations: and (though by different Mediums) they are
both levelled at the same end; the maintaining of Piety, and promoting of a
Covenant walk with him. That which is the Lords Aim in this, should be yours
also; all your Conducts should center here. This is the work that belongs to
you in your Public Capacities; and it calls for your Wisdom and Justice, and
Zeal and Holiness; if you would be found thus ruling with God, and faithful
with his Saints. Hosea 11.12.

2. Again. Do not those palpable Declensions from the way of the Lord, and
Covenant Violations which we are manifestly guilty of, loudly proclaim it
necessary for you to bestir your selves with a holy Prudence, and Zeal for the
Cause of God among us? Oh! how justly may the Lord complain of us, that we are
become the degenerate Plane of a strange Vine unto him? Where is that Zeal for
God and his ways? that high esteem of Gospel Privileges; that faithful
improvement of Sacred Ordinances; that Gate and Concernment for the Advancing
of the Kingdom of Christ? which things were once our praise. Are not these
great Interests miserably disregarded? And Oh! what Irreligion, Lukewarmness,
Profaneness, and Immoralities, have usurped their Room? And does not the Lord
expect that the Leaders of his People should be their Reformers? You have great
Examples, the Royal Presidents of Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, famous in this
matter, accepted and blessed of the Lord. Let this then be your great Care, to
recover us a sinful sinning People, from all our Apostasies. And Oh! how much
may you do, by your Wisdom and Piety, Zeal and Justice, Precept and Example,
Authority and Awe, to awaken us, and recover us again to the good ways of God?
The Good Lord strengthen you yet more and more in all your endeavors for this;
and think upon you, according to all that you have done, and shall still be
doing for his People.

3. Further. Has not the Lord himself been coming near to Judgment! and
pleading with and against his People? It is obvious that God has a Controversy
with us, and He is wrath with his Inheritance. The tender mercy of God indeed
does spare us to this day, many good and pleasant things; yet in diverse
respects, God has been and is humbling us, and bringing us low. Tho we may
with thankful Admiration at the Divine Goodness; say as the Psalmist, Psalm.
78.38. (concerning the Lords Dispensations toward us) Many a time turned He
his anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath; yet if we consider the
Blood^shed, and ruinous Devastations in some Places o^ this Land, together with
the languishing State o^ the whole Country at this Day, we may also take up the
Psalmists complaint, Psalm. 80.5. And say, Thou feedest us with the Bread of
Tears, and gi^vest us Tears to drink without measure. I shall no^ need to
mention those various Rebukes of Provi^dence, (as Blastings and Mildews,
Droughts, Unseasonable Frosts of late, Sickness, and the Sword) which you have
so often, in your Orders for Public Humiliation, piously directed us to take
notice of, as Tokens of the Lords Anger; surely by these Providence God has
been loudly testifying against our Transgressions: And we may read in them,
that of the Prophet. Jer. 5.25. Your Sins have withholden good things from you.
We have a case fit and proper for us under our present Circumstances to
propound and consider, stated and resolved to our hand, in Deuteronomy 29.23, 24.
Wherefore has the Lord done thus unto this Land, what means the Heat of this
great Anger? Then men shall say, because they have forsaken the Covenant of the
Lord God of their Fathers. And if this be a Day wherein the Lord is coming out
against us in Judgment; Oh! How should you that are the Lords Substitutes bear
witness in your places against the Transgressions which provoke him? If you are
thus a Terror to Evil Doers, it may be God will do no more terrible things in
Judgment against us: If you do wisely and courageously Execute Judgment, who
knows but it may divert the Lords. Phinehas did so, and the Plague was stayed,
Psalm 106 30.

4 You do ordinarily (I suppose I may say constantly) bring your selves under
the Sacred Bond of a Solemn Oath, with impartiality and fidelity to discharge
the Trust committed to you, and so Rule this People according to the Laws of
God, and the King; than which nothing can be a stricter tie to those that know
and believe, that the same God, whom they have thus called upon to be a witness
of the sincerity and integrity of their hearts, in what they are undertaking;
will, if they be either careless or false, not suffer them to escape his
Righteous Judgment, and most severe Reflections.

5. Shall I add this one consideration further, (both to stir you up to, and
strengthen you in your public work:) It is this; You have the Royal Favor of
a most Gracious Sovereign, whom the Divine Providence has in a wonderful
manner raised up, and hitherto preserved, to be the Bulwark of Religion and
Property, to the English Israel: We are a little Branch of that Vine; our Civil
Life and Liberty is bound up in theirs; we have felt the warmth of those benign
Influences, which have refreshed the wearied Land of our Fore fathers
Sepulchers; and as the Prophet Ezekiel speaks, chap. 34.27. God has broken the
Bands of the Yoke that were upon us, and delivered us out of the Hands of those
that would have served themselves of us. God who has the Hearts of Princes in
his Hand, has (whatever our Enemies have endeavored to the contrary) given
you Favor in the sight of the King: You have in this respect great opportunity
and advantage to be consulting and promoting the things which will be for the
Glory of God, the Interest of his Kingdom, and the Weal of his People:
According as it is improved* we may hope God will prolong it; He will not take
it well at our hands if it be neglected. Give me leave then to say, to you that
are, or may this Day be Rulers over us, as once it was said to Ezra, chap.
10.4. This matter belongs unto you: It is your part principally to take care
for the Improvement of such an Opportunity, and ours to be with you in it. When
the Lord by whom Princes rule, makes them Nursing Fathers to his People, it
opens a wide door of Liberty and Power, to all that derive Authority from
them to be in their respective places, Rods of Strength, for defending and
encouraging the Good, for suppres^ng and punishing the Wicked, for promoting
Piety and Righteousness; and if there be an heart wanting to improve such an
advantage, we may probably repent it, when we can do nothing else.

Suffer then the Exhortation, I beseech you in the words of the Lord, which you
have in Hag. 2.4. Be strong O Zerubbabel and work: Do the work of your public
Capacities, with Prudence, Honor and Fidelity: I am with you says the Lord of
Hosts. Thus if you approve your selves, it will be Honor to God, your Comfort,
our Weal, and the rejoicing of all that love God and his People.

There are a few things, which I would crave your Patience (Honored and much
Respected) that I may briefly recommend unto you; as needful to be much in your
Eyes, and upon your Hearts, if you would thus acquit your selves; and be Strong
Rods to us at such a Day as this.

1. Let the Interest of Religion and Holiness, be your principal care: Labor
the reviving and promoting of it with all your strength. This is both our Decus
and Tutamen; we may truly say of this great Article, that it is, Articulus
stantis et cadentis Nov. Angliae. It is this that engages the Lord to deal
graciously with his people, and to be their Savior* in Isa. 63.7. When the
Church had reckoned up the Loving-kindnesses of God, many ways expressed; we
have in the following verse the consideration intimated, upon which the Lord
proceeded in doing those great things for his people, verse 8. For he said,
surely they are my People, Children that will not lie, so he was their Savior;
q. d. They will not be false to my Covenant, they will walk in my ways, and
keep my Commandments, they will remember their Engagements and fulfill them; and
upon their so doing, he had and would show them his Salvation. In this way they
might hope for it; but if they should prove lying, unholy, backsliding
Children, they would but deceive themselves to expect it. Upon this ground has
the Lord been proceeding with our Fathers in time past; and upon the same will
he deal with us at this Day. If we consider the things that were at the
beginning, when God first laid the Foundations of Gospel work in these Ends of
the Earth; if we remember the Wonders of old, which we have heard, and our
Fathers have told us; we may say of those Providence, whereby God through many
Difficulties, brought a Remnant of his faithful People into these remote
corners of the World, planted and preserved them here, as David does, Psalm.
44.7. That the Lord did it; By his Righthand, etc. because he had a favor for
them. By great Deliverances and Salvations did the Lord manifest his Presence
among them, and Loving Kindness to them: and they were all upon this account*
Psalm 22.4. Our Fathers trusted in thee; they trusted, and thou did deliver
them. They had Holiness to the Lord Engraven upon their hearts, designs, and
ways, and God was with them. If we are true to this Interest and Cause of God,
and walk in the Covenant of the Lord God of our Fathers, it shall be well with
us. Exodus 20.6. But if there be a declining, backsliding, apostatizing Spirit
in us; if we give the Lord cause to take up that Complaint concerning us, in
Mal. 3.7. Even from the days of your Fathers, ye are gone away from mine
Ordinances, and have not kept them. Oh! what Presumption, what Madness will it
be for us to hope, that as he was theirs, so he will be our Savior. Alas! How
many are there that have forgotten and forsaken this great Interest of the Lord
among us? Be you entreated therefore (who shall have the rule of this People)
to consider it, and engage your hearts to the advancing of it. Remember that
there is a Solemn Covenant between God and this his People; God has taken them
to be his, and they have owned themselves to be the Lords; upon this Foundation
stand all our Mercies, Privileges, Enjoyments, and whatsoever can contribute
any thing to our present or future Felicity: and therefore the recovering of us
from all our Apostasies, and the maintaining and promoting of serious Godliness
among us, should and will be the chief Scope of such Rulers, as make Conscience
to Serve either God, or his People.

2. Express a high Veneration for, and Regard unto Gods holy Ordinances. Let
them have all that Security from the Blasphemous Reproaches, and Abuses of
Ungodly men, that either your Laws, or your Examples can afford them. If they
that go before a People go out of this way, sad Experience proves it but too
natural a practice for them to follow their Leaders. So Jeroboam the son of
Nebat made Israel to Sin. 1 King. 16 26. He led the Dance and he had the far
greatest part of a Nation to follow him. If you don't make much of these things,
others will make light of them: If you violate in never so small a Degree the
Honor of Sacred things, others will be kept within no Bounds: it will be
encouragement enough to them, if they have any hope to be tolerated in their
profaneness; but it will be much more, if they have such as should punish it for
a President.

3. Labor to settle prudent Methods for the transmitting of the public Gospel
Worship unto the Rising Generation, upon as firm and lasting Foundations as may
be. There is nothing in the World, that we ought to be more concerned to leave
to Posterity. If any thing in order to this, may be done by the Legislative
Power among us (which I submit to your most serious consideration) we may be
sure it will be a good Improvement of it. We shall never lose by what we lay
out for that Interest of Christ's Kingdom; but the starving of this Interest,
has brought a Curse upon a People. Mal. 3.9, 10, 11, 12. And because many of
the Passages in this Text do so directly point at many of the Lords humbling
Dispensations toward us, I cannot but mention it at large, Ye are Cursed with
a Curse, for you have robbed me, even this whole Nation. Bring ye all the
tithes into the storehouse, that there may be meat in mine house, and prove me
now herewith, says the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of
heaven* and pour you out a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to
receive it. And I will rebuke the devourer for your sakes: and he shall not
destroy the fruits of your ground, neither shall your vine cast her fruit
before the time in the field, says the Lord of hosts. And all Nations shall
call you blessed: for ye shall be a delightsome land, says the Lord of hosts.
Whatever Policy was in it, it was one of Jeroboams Sins. 1 King. 13.33, 34.
That he took of the lowest of the People, and made them Priests: And certainly
it will be found a Sin too, when a course is taken to make those that are
separated to the Service of God, the meanest among a People. To prevent which,
though some things may have been worthily done, yet it is well worthy our
Consideration, whether the Experience we have had of the unsuccesfulness of
those measures that have been already taken, does not call for something
farther to be done: And the sad pass things of this nature are already come to
in some places, does awaken to as quick a dispatch as may be. How long the
price (the Liberty and Authority for this) which you now have, will be in your
hands, the Lord only knows: And besides, when things are once going down
hill, the further they go, the harder it is to stop them. We may rationally
look that if what is amiss in a matter of so great Concernment as this, both to
our selves and ours, be not rectified speedily, it will grow worse and worse,
and be beyond all Remedy at last.

4. Be a swift witness against the Crying Sins and fearful Abominations that
Defile the Land. When the Providence of God has brought such wickedness to
Light, let it not be smoothered, but brought out to condign Punishment. You are
God's Vicegerents, and should in this Imitate him, who says, Mal. 3.5. I will
be a swift witness against the Sorcerers, and against the Adulterers, and
against false Swearers, etc. The Lord has set you up to be a Terror to Evil
Doers; consider then upon what account God has a Controversy with the
Inhabitants of the Land. Let not your Eye pity, nor your Hand spare those that
dare declare their Sin as Sodom, when the Land is mourning because of the
Iniquities that abound in it. There is (to mention a few things) Idleness,
Pride, Falsehood, Contention, Backbiting and Slander, Profanation of Gods
Sacred Name, and Holy Day, Uncleanness, Unrighteousness, either by Fraud or
Force, in our common dealings one with another: Drunkenness, and the
propagating of that Sin (for filthy Lucres sake) among the Heathen, who are
therefore justly the Rod of Gods Anger against us at this Day; Are not these
some of our crying Sins? They are Sins which God has often warned us of, long
humbled us for; yea, and for these, is not the Hand of the Lord stretched our
against us still? For the Lords sake therefore, for your own sakes, and for
ours, Do you that have the Sword of Justice in your Hands, strike at, and spare
not these Transgressions: Let the wholesome Laws already provided against them
be fearlesly. Executed; and if need be, let stricter be made; let every thing
be done that can be done, to root out this Wickedness.

5. In matters of Judgment, or respecting the Administration of Justice; be not
easy in crediting Reports, especially when they are made out of Place, Order,
and Season. The simple says Solomon, believes every word, but the Prudent man
looks well to his going. Prove. 14.15. The Judgment may easily be forestalled.
Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own Cause seems just. It is no hard
matter to contrive a fair Tale, and to make that seem just, which is very
unrighteous; but it behooves therefore such as sit in Judgment, e're they
credit it, to search it out. It is the Honor of a King to search out a matter.
Prove. 25.2. And Prudence to sift out and discover the Truth, (if there be but a
Conscience to judge accordingly) will be found the Ornament and Glory of those
that are upon the Seat of Justice.

6. Be impartially just to all that have occasion to seek for Justice at your
Hands. When you have heard the Cause, judge according to the merit of it.
Remember what the Psalmist says, Psalm. 75.2. When I shall receive the
Congregation, I will judge uprightly. None have (ordinarily) more or greater
Temptations to Injustice, than those that have the dispensing of Justice in
their hands; avoid them carefully. These snares are some of them more obvious,
and can take none but such as are willing to be caught; some are more out of
view, and therefore most to be feared and watched against, by those that have a
Principle of Justice in them. There Is a sort of Bribery more gross by gifts;
and there is another sort more private and subtle, when men by secret arts and
flatteries do wheedle and insinuate themselves into the Affections; which,
whenever it takes, is as great a dishonor to the Dignity of Magistracy, and
tends as much to the corruption of Judgment, and perverting of Justice and
Right, as any. By this means, a man may for less than a piece of Bread, buy
Injustice enough to starve and ruin his honest Neighbor. Again, there are
some, who would perhaps baulk at the grosser Temptations of Flattery or
Bribery, who may be unawares snared by others; and do very unjustly, when they
are far from suspecting it. They may be readily drawn away, to decline after
many to wrest Judgment, which we are warned against. Exodus 23 2. They may be
too easily moved in their Affections, and ready to show Indulgence to
Offenders, when it consists neither with Piety, nor Justice. But, Remember
always; that with you there ought to be no such respect of Persons. Prove.
24.23. Be deaf to the cries of the Poorest, when they cannot be heard without
wrong to Justice: and regard not the Clamours of the Mighty to the prejudice of
Truth.

7. In animadverting upon Offenses committed against good and wholesome Laws,
hold a steady course of Punishment: To neglect which, makes the Timorous grow
venturesome and presumptuous, and the presumptuous grow more fearless. I shall
not dispute how far it may be lawful for Rulers to pardon Offenders; it is but
seldom that Subjects have reason to complain upon this score; the Severity of
Rulers, not their Lenity is mostly blamed: Yet it cannot be denied, but that
when the Powers that are, do degenerate into a coldness and remissness in
punishing Delinquents; into an easiness of bearing with insolent and proud
Offenders; it gives as deep, not to say, a deeper wound to the Weal of the
State, than an excess on the other hand would. It is a mighty discouragement to
the well willing and obedient, when they see those that trample upon the Laws,
escaping the penalty of them; it, also hardens the Disobedient and Rebellious;
the hope of escaping will make men venture; and at length they will grow to
such an height of In^^lence, as will not be contented with any thing (...) than
trampling upon the Authority that has (...) attempted, or shall attempt to
curb them. It (...) well said by Seneca of a Prince, Paenam, si tuto (...)
terit, donet. i.e. If he can do it not only with his (...) private, but with
the public safety also. It oug^^ to be considered in the pardoning of
Offender, that one main end of the Law is, Salus Populi, (...) Public Good;
which lies chiefly in preservi^^ the Authority of the Laws, preventing
Injuri^^ and securing men's Rights, as also in vindicati^^ of his or their
Dignity and Honor, who (...) care of the Commonweal; and where that (...) may
in these ways be promoted withal, it (...) not be unmeet that Lenity should be
exercis^* But to pardon Offenses, purely out of hope (...) win Offenders,
(which is the fairest pretenc^ imprudent men) without considering whether
Public will not sustain more damage other (...) than it can be profited by the
amendment of (...) Offenders, if they should chance to be wor^^ very absurd and
foolish.

8. Do your utmost to remove every thing that (...) the appearance of Deceit
and Falsehood in it, as (...) it is possible, from all Affairs pertaining to the
Ad^^^^^stration of Justice. It is a sad thing, when (...) comes a Ruled Case
with those that have too in such Pleadings as are proper for Courts (...), that
it is but a venial matter, to aver (...) thing, be it never so wrong, if they
can but (...) ^^serve the Cause which they have undertaken. and when such as
are paid for their speaking, are (...) basely mercinary, as to speak more
according (...) their Fee, than their Consciences; it is a horrid ^^^ctice, not
to be tolerated by such whose busi^^ss it is to search the matter, and discover
the ^^uth. These ought to be frowned upon, and ^^ers countenanced. Prove. 16.13.
Righteous Lips (...) the delight of Kings, and they love him that spea^^^h
right. They that crowd in their Opinions, (...) color of being Amici Curiae,
are no ways (...) be allowed of, if they notoriously appear to be ^^stitiae
Inimici. If silence be but a moderate Pe^ce to be Enjoined those that have not
wit e^^ugh to speak to the Case: Cer^^inly, it is as (...) and fitting for
those that have not honesty e^^^gh to speak the truth in it. And if wise men
(...) have patience enough to bear with the folly (...) the former; yet good
Rulers should have more ^^nscience than to bear with the wickedness of (...)
latter.

^. Consult the Honor of Government and maintain (...) There are few things
that do more conduce ^he good of a Common Weal. It was a cala^ous Day in Israel
mentioned, Isa. 3.5. when (...) Base rose up against the Honorable. And ^as a
time when they had no Strong Rods to (...) them; when such abuses as these are
not (...) reflected upon, the very Authors of them (...) fault with it. For
when they entrench upon (...) Honor of Authority, they know it is a
Misdemeanour, which may not be tolerated; they know themselves blame worthy
enough, but they secretly think also, that you who should punish such
intolerable Injuries to the Public are more to blame in suffering them to
escape unpunished And it may be they are not herein much mista^ken. Well, Let
them never have occasion for such a Calumny; keep a strict hand over them easy
methods were never calculated for such un^grateful turbulent Spirits; Peri^
quod facis Ingrat^ All Gentleness is utterly lost upon them.

10. When any Public Trust is committed to other that are in Inferior Places
of Power, see to them tha^ they do their Duty faithfully. Their Neglects an^
Male doings are among men commonly charge^ to your Account, who sit (...), and
have the ad^vantage of inspecting and seeing that things ar^ carried in a right
Channel: And indeed, the^ will be reputed yours in the sight of God too; (...)
through carelessness you don't look after them, (...) through Favor wink at
them.

11. Arm your selves with Courage. Think often of David's words to Solomon. 1
King. 2.2. Be tho^ strong, and show thy self a man: And of Jehosapha^ Charge to
his Judges. 2 Chronicles. 19.11. Deal Cour^^giously. To rule over men in the Fear of
God is a work that will meet with no slender oppos^^tion. You must expect to
have to do with Sons (...) Belial; and the man that touches them must (...)
fenced with Iron, and the Staff of a Spear (we appointed and fearless.)
Whatever Difficulties the^ (...) attending this work, yet it is the Lords; and
^^ch as he calls to Execute it, must neither shrink ^ack for them, or turn
aside in the least. Every Common Wealth will have some Filth and Of^^ouring in
it, though never so much pains be taken (...) keep it neat; and it is no easy
thing to cleanse (...). There are Beasts of Prey, that live by catch^^g and
devouring, to be found in the best and ^ost orderly Polities in the World. And
these (...) they cannot be chased away, yet their Jaws must ^e broken; and the
Prey plucked out of their ^eeth. This belongs to you; so did Job, chapt. ^9.17.
And it argued that he had an Heart un^aunted. Resolve thus to do in the Fear of
God, and he will strengthen you.

12. Consider the Circumstances of the present Day, (...) as to be in Prudence
providing against any threatened ^vil. Among other of the sore Judgments of God,
whereby it is a Day of treading down in ^he Valley of Vision, that of the Sword
is one. and though considering it as the Rod of Divine An^er, it behooveth us to
be deeply humbled under (...); yet considering it as in the Hand of an unjust
^nemy, in whose Heart it is only to destroy as is ^id of the Assyrian Enemy,
Isa. 10.7. And so it (...) a Duty both natural and religious to arm against it.
It is good Policy even in a Time of ^eace, to follow David's steps, who
commanded ^^at the Children of Judah should be taught the (...) of the Bow. 2 Samuel 1.18. And certainly to (...) deficient in this point, when the noise of
War is in our streets, will be very unpardonable To be unprovided and secure
too, at such a time, is a notable Judgment. God forbid we should trust to our
Bow, to our Skill, or to any arm of Flesh whatsoever, (we have as little
pretenses for it as any People under the Sun) yet it behooves us to be up and
providing for our selves; and wherein we may to be up and doing for the succor
of others. We have many more instances than that of Laish, to warn us of the
Fate of those that dwell carelessly and at quiet, in a time of danger. Yet it is
well worthy our noting, what is said in that case, as giving us one great
reason of that Security. Judge. 18.7. There was no Magistrate in the Land, that
might put them to shame in any thing. You know also, who were cursed for their
Sluggishness and Backwardness to jeapord themselves in the High Places of the
Field, to help the People of the Lord against the Mighty. Judge. 5.23. You know
the Distresses of the Eastern Parts of the Country; You frequently hear of the
barbarous Cruelties of those Heathenish Miscreants that shed the blood of the
Lords People; I need not mind you of the Danger of our Sea Coasts; the God of
all Wisdom direct you, that are our Leaders, and the Captains of his
Inheritance, that you may discern the Times; and know what may be requisite for
our own safety; and how far it may be Duty for us, to expose and put our selves
for^ward in the Defense of the Common Interest o^ God's People in this
Wilderness. That this Rui^ may not be advanced by any Neglect of ours, or be
under your Hand.

13. Study Unity in your Councils, Proceedings, and in all your Managements.
You know the familar similitude, whereby the Strength and Power of Concord is
usually Illustrated. A Bundle of Rods; they cannot be broken, while they are
taken together, but are easily snap'd asunder when they are severed. Vis unita
fortior, is an old Maxim and true. Divide and Impera was hellish Policy from
the Beginning; and it is that which the World is thoroughly versed in now a
days. Let your Agreement defeat the hopes of all that may thus attempt to
practice upon you. A Harmony in your Councils and Determinations, is the best
way to be answered with another in our Obedience.

14 Be often recommending your selves in all the Affair^^ especially) proper to
your Places, unto the Lord by earnest Prayer for his Assistance and Blessing.
He is a God of Wisdom, Justice, Power and Holiness; would you be Strong Rods,
for the Defense and Rule of his People, by Faith lay hold on his Strength, and
he will make you so. You have been used thus to wait upon the Lord, go on
still. Beg the Lords Direction, Influence, Blessing Do it heartily, and he who
has made you ours, will be your Guide; He will be with you, and make you the
Repairers of our Breaches, the Restorers of our Paths. Isa. 58.12. exceeding
great Blessings ^o his Distressed People.

2. The second Branch of the Exhortation concerns (...) all, who are the Body
of this People.

If it be such a Privilege to have Strong Rods for Scepters to rule us; and if
the want of such cannot but be of fatal Consequence; then How much does it
concern us to endeavor wherein we may the Procurement and Preservation of such
a Public Blessing? We consult our own Good, and (which ought to be as dear to
us) the good of our Posterity, when we do so. Be you then exhorted, for your
own sakes, and for their sakes, to mind this thing. That Civil Liberty of
Election, which you are this day assembled to exercise, does advantage many of
you to be in this Respect, eminently Serviceable to the Public Weal; let it
then be wisely improved. Remember the Directions that have been given you, and
act in the fear of God; that by the Blessing of the most High upon your prudent
endeavors, we may have no such cause as the Prophet in our Text, of
Lamentation. And as you especially have a great Advantage to procure it; so we
have all of us a great Interest in such a general Blessing, and are jointly
concerned to do all we can to advance this Common Felicity. There are many
things which for this end God expects of us all, our neglect of which (whatever
prudent methods, the most Sufficient and Able men may take to prevent it) will
certainly involve us in a most inevitable Ruin. There may be Maladies in the
Body which* if they be not speedily healed, will ruin the head and all.
Whatever the advantages are which Rulers have to promote the Peoples good, and
whatever Pains they take to improve them, yet Rulers themselves, are but Second
Causes, and will fail in their endeavors, and of their Aims, as God shall
withold his Blessing: and that God oftentim^s does, as a just Punishment of
the Peoples Sins. When any Detriment befalls the State, it is common for the
Ministers of it to bear the Blame; when as they many times least deserve it.
For, if there be an Ungrateful, Murmuring, Proud Spirit, a Mutinous, Envious
and Rebellious Spirit, an Irreligious Spirit Prevailing among a People; it is
not all the Counsels of the Wisest, nor Understanding of the Prudent, nor
Conduct of the most Sufficient men, that can keep off Ruin from them. Such a
People may be miserable, do their Rulers what they can. It was not King J^siahs
Piety or Prudence (however at the present it laid some kind of Restraint upon
them) that could divert the approaching lamentable Fate of that Stubborn Sinful
People he had the rule of. If there be never so skilful a Hand at H^lm, the
Ship that will not feel her Helm, may stave upon the Rocks, or Strand upon the
Shore at last. There is much of the Success of Government depending upon the
suitable becoming behavior of the People under it. And this is it which we are
all Exhorted to at this time. Strong Rods are Rich Blessings: God has a Favor
for that People on whom he bestows them. But then we must remember the Tenure
by which a People so Privileged do hold them; It is the same with that on
which they have received their Authority from God. Viz Quamdiu been se
gesserint. When a People fail of their Duty, and carry it unworthily under the
Command and Conduct of such Rulers; God has ways enough to discharge them; to
take them from such a People; or (if ^he does not so, yet) to cause that they
shall not profit them.

For the Prevention of which, I have but these few words to offer, and so shall
close.

Are Able and Faithful Rulers such Rich Blessings, and would we contribute to
this our Happiness. then,

1. Let us be thankful to God for such Mercies. When the Lord gives Kings to be
Nursing Fathers to his People, as he promises, Isa 49 23. Should not the
Praise^ of the Lord resound throughout all the Gates of the ^^ughter of Zion?
Do we also see such advanced to ^^bordinate Places of Power? Let us remember,
that (...) Promotion is from God; It is He that sets them up. ^^al. 7 5 6, 7.
They are of Him: Romans 13.1. And by Him ^^ey Ru^e: Prove. 8.16 We cast the Lot,
but the Lord that (...) on High, has the whole disposing of it. Prove. 16 33.
(...) that our Choice is also of Gods Appointment; If ^^ey be of our desiring,
they are of His giving And as ^hen others bear rule over a People, it is a
Signal of ^ods Displeasure, under which they ought to Mourn; (...) when our
Rods are Strong, it is a Fruit of the Lord's ^avour, and He ought to have the
Praise. In Psalm. 72. after the Psalmist had in a Prophetical Contemplation
^elebrated the happy State of the Commonweal of ^^rael, in a Day when they
enjoyed the Blessing, which (...) Doctrine speaks of (for the Glory of which
Felicity (...) is considered as a Type of Christ's Kingdom) closes (...) with
Repeated Acclamations of Praise and Honor (...) God, as the Author of it, at
v. 18.19. Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does wondrous
things. And blessed be his glorious Name for ever, and let the who^e ^arth be
filled with his Glory: Amen and Amen.

2. Let us highly Prize and Honor them. That Pre^ept the Apostle with
Reference to Rulers Ecclesiasti^al, is of as great Force in this case. 1 These
5.13. Where ^e charge us to esteem them that are over us, very ^ighly; and
undervalued Mercies are not like to be long continued. Consider it and be Wise.
We have not many such to spare; certainly then, it is our Prudence and Interest
not to provoke the Lord to remove them. Again, let our high Esteem of them, be
testified by an ^onourable Deference toward them: The Apostle Paul ^aith
concerning them. Romans 13.7. That Honor is to be rendered them. They are Gods,
Psalm. 82.6. And as such there is a Civil Worship and Reverence due to them,
both in Word and Action. Speak no Evil of Dignities; Abhor that Unchristian way
of Detraction, Backbiting and Slander. If they are God's Vicegerents, certainly
it must be a Crying Sin and Shame for us thus to treat them. Do our Enemies
charge us, that this is the way wherein we have been used to requite those that
with greatest Pains, have travailed for the Public good? Let us refute this
Slander; and if we can do no more, yet at least, Let us Love and Honor such as
have Rule over us.

3. Take we Care that we don't make them, or provoke them to be other wise. As
they are sometimes Accessory to our Sins, when they either connive at us doing
them, allow us in them, or indulge us afterward; so shall we be to their Male
Administrations, if we seek to corrupt, discourage, pervert, and dis^hearten,
or any way weaken them. There was a very Laudible Spirit in the People when
they said to Ezra Chap. 10.4. Arise, This matter belongs unto thee, we also
will be with thee; be of good Courage and do it. And that matter did
accordingly Succeed very ha^^ily. But when there is a perverse Spirit of
Dislike and Contradiction in us, to thwart the Counsels, and control the
Methods, of such as are entrusted with the Care of the Public: if those
Counsels prove abortive, and those Methods vain, it is no more than may
reasonably be expected, and we may thank our selves for it.

4. I shall not exceed the Bounds of my Commission, (and I hope neither those
of your Patience) if I put you in Remembrance, That you be Subject to those
that are set over you. St Paul left this in Charge with Titus respecting his
Cretians, Tit. 3 1. And it is a Duty as Obvious to the light of Nature; so
also, positively enjoined us in the Word of God. Eccl. 8.2. I Counsel thee to
keep the Kings Commandment, and that in regard of the Oath of

What can be more Express than that of the A^^^tle Peter. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
Submit your selves to every ^^inance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the (...) as Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that (...) sent by
them. The General Precept of Obedience, (...) Apostle does here particularly
apply, with Respect (...) Degrees of Authority, both Supreme and Subordinate:
(...) so plainly declares it to be the Mind of God. v. 15. (...) so is the
Will of God: That a man must Violate (...) and Conscience to gain say it The
Apostle Paul (...) the same Duty, in his Epistle to the Romans: Chap. (...) 1.
Let every Soul be subject unto the higher Powers. And (...) that the Christians
Obligation thereunto has its ^^^ginal from a Power, which no man can dispure
but (...) is utmost Peril. v. 2. Whosoever therefore resists the (...),
resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist, (...) receive to
themselves Damnation. We might argue (...), as the Apostle does in the Context.
v. 4. From the ^^mmon good, which shall then flourish, when there is spirit of
Wisdom, Prudence and Judgment in those that (...), and of Subjection in others:
and upon this Account, (...) must needs be Subject (as the Apostle adds v. 5.)
(...) for wrath, but for Conscience sake. There are but (...) things that can
rationally be pretended, to dispense (...) this Obligation: The First is, when
the Commands (...) do cross the Will of God. And the Second is, (...) the
Authority commanding is not Legal. As to First. It is a ruled Case, Act. 5.29.
God is to be obeyed (...) than men. Active Obedience is due, where it may with
a safe Conscience; else not: yet here, All en^^vours are to be carefully used,
to assure our selves, the Repugnancy which we conceive to be between (...)
Divine and Humane be not only in our Imagina^^^^; for otherwise, while we
pretend to obey the Lord, ^efusing Obedience unto men, we shall be found (which
without doubt is the unhappy Condition of some) disobedient both to God and
man. As to the latter. viz The ^llegality of the Authority Commanding: I shall
only say, That whatever disputes there may be, about the various Methods that
are in use among men, for the Desig^nation of Persons to Places of Authority;
or about tho^^ that are Vested with Authority, whether they came righ^^fully by
it or no; certainly, they that have the Libert^ of Electing their own Rulers,
have the least Reason (...) insist upon this Objection, against such as are of
their ow^ Choice; or to hope that it will excuse, and be a (...) for their
Disobedience

5. Remember how expressly God has required us, that (...) should ^ield them
the Honor of Maintenance, as well (...) that of Respect and Obedience And
that there might be (...) less room for Dispute in a point which an avaritious
(...) niggardly World, would be so ready to callin questio^^ We have not only
the Command it self, but the Rea^^ of it annexed. Romans 13.6, 7. For this cause
pay you Tribu^^ also, for they are Gods Ministers, attending continually (...)
this very thing. Render therefore to all their dues, Tribute whom Tribute is
due, Custom to whom Custom. Yea, we ha^^ this Duty enforced upon us, by the
express Precept (...) Christ himself Mat 22.21. Render therefore unto Caes^^
the things which are Caesar's. And our blessed Savior (...) rather to work a
Miracle (whatever might have (...) pleaded for his own exemption) than omit the
Duty offend by not doing it; as you may see, Mat 17 26, 2^ And if it were not
for those natural Seeds of Rebellion which every man is the worse for, it would
be a wo^^der that so plain a Precept and Duty should be so (...) regarded. And
certainly, it will be as great a wonde^ if that Government that wants this
Honorable Suppo^^ does not finally sink under its own Burden, with (...) that
depends on it.

6 Beware of Murmuring and Faction. God is highly ^ispleased with it; and can
easily make us know it. We (...) ever to remember, that the condition of
persons, as ^ell as State of Affairs here below, will not admit of Per^^ction: and
should consider that the Ablest Rulers on ^arth are men of many Infirmities,
and subject to mis^oing as well as others. If they miss it in some things, ^et
if in the main they are right, we have reason ^o bless ^od for it; and not to
be dissatisfied: If we be, the more ^ou^ sin; and whoever gets by it, we are
like to be (...)* They that are pleased with nothing that is pre^^nt, but are
given to Change, when they have what they ^esi^^d, do seldom sit easy under it.
It was such a per^erse humor among the People of Israel, that occasion^d a
Revolution in the Days of Samuel, which we read (...) 1 Samuel 8 But when it was
eff^cted; they that pro^ably did as much desire it as any, soon thought they
^ad little cause to boast of it. 1 Samuel* 10.27. But the ^hildren of Belial said,
How shall this man save us! and (...) despised him.

7* Address the Throne of Grace in their Behalf, and pray ^^r^estly, that God
in mercy both to them and us, would ^ant them a Spirit of Wisdom and Judgment,
Zeal and ^oliness, and make them men after his own heart, that they ^ay rule us
in the fear of God. 1 Timothy 2 1, 2. St. Paul Ex^orts to this Duty. This indeed
is to consult our grea^^st Good: We may then hope to lead quiet and peaceable
(...), as he speaks, v 2 Thus if we do, God will own (...); for as in v. 3.
This is good and acceptable in the ^^ght of our God and Savior.

8 Finally; Let us put away all Iniquity far from us, and (...) in the Fear of
God. It is an awful Judgment not to ^ave Strong Rods for Scepters to Rule us:
Our Sins merit

The Lord sometimes threatens thus to punish the I^iquity of his people: When
Israel had degenerated, and their Religion was become Formality, their Devotio^
Hypocrisy, ^he Lord says, Isa. 29 14 -- The wisdom their wise m^n shall
perish. Thus Samuel threatens (...) people^: 1 Samuel 12 25. But if ye shall still
do wicked ye shall be consumed, both ye and your King When the Lo^^ forsak^s
those that have the Rule of his people, no wo^^der if we have cause to
complain, as in Isa. 3.12. (...) which lead thee cause thee to cry; but the
Rise of this m^^^chief is oftentimes in the wickedness of the people (...) when
God left David to sin in numbering the People (...) Sam 2 4 1. (...) is said it
was because Gods Anger was (...) against Israel; and you know what it is that
kindle^^ it: Think often often then of Samue^s advice to the people (...)
Israel, ^^ow they might obtain the Favor of God, upon their Rulers, and upon
themselves. 1 Samuel 12.24 (...) Fear the Lord and Serve him in truth with all
your hea^^ If there (...) such a heart in us, if we will fear the Lo^^ and
walk^ humbly with him; If we will deny Ungod^^^ness, and Serve the Lord in
Truth, and with all (...) hearts; we may then hope that our Rods shall be (...)
and that th^se whom God shall this Day Set over (...) shall be greatly blessed
of the Lord, and be rich B^^ssings unto us.

To Conclude. Let us now look up to God, each of us in (...) Respective Places,
to give us Understanding in these things: (...) is wanting and what is weak
among us, let us all as we are (...), consider: Let us beg of God to supply us
with what is lack^ and let us be watchful, and strengthen the things that
remain; if don't ^o so, the Prophet tells us what we may conclude; (...) Not
^nly that it is now, but will still be more and more for a (...). And to add no
more; if thi^ course be not taken us; I dare say, that whatever Blessings of
this kind, whereof have heard at this time, are yet remaining among us, They
soon be removed into Corners; and the Places that know (...) now, shall know
them no more.

FINIS

