The sixth Assembly, First Sessions: ^^ginning the first Day of October, and
ending the 26th of the same, Anno Regni Regis Gulielmi, Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae and Hiberniae, Septimo.
An Act for the raising the Sum of Eight Hundred Sixty Four Pounds and fifteen
Shillings, for the paying and maintaining a Company of Fuzileers employed on
the Fronteers, and at present under the Command of Major Schuyler, from the
first of August last, till the first of March next following.
BE it Enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in
General Assembly, and by the Authortiy of the same, That the sum of Eight
Hundred sixty four Pounds and fifteen Shillings current Money of this Province
be laid, assessed, raised and levied upon all and every of the Inhabitants,
Residenters, Sojourners and Freeholders of and in this Province, for the paying
and maintaining the Officers and Soldiers Employed on the Fronteers, and at
present under the Command of Major Schuyler, now in service for the Security of
the Fronteers at Albany, from the first day of August now last past, until the
first day of March next ensuing the publication hereof, according to the the
Establishment hereunto annexed, to be Laid, Assessed levied and paid unto his
Majesty's Collector and Receiver General for the time being, at his Majesty's
Custom-house in the City of New York at or before the 25 day of March next
ensuing the publication hereof, according to the several and Respective Quotas
and Proportions hereafter following, That is to say, for the City and County of
New York the Sum of 265 l. 17 s. being their Quota and Proportion of the Eight
hundred sixty four Pounds fifteen shillings aforesaid. For the County of
Westchester the sum of 47 l. 11 s. 6 d. being their Quota and Proportion as
aforesaid. For the County of Richmond the sum of 21 l. 12 s. 9 d. being their
Quota and Proportion as aforesaid. For Kings County, the sum of 151 l. 7 s
being their Quota and Proportion as aforesaid. For Queens County, 136 l. 4 s.
being their Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid. For Suffolk County the sum of
155 l. 13 s. 3 d being their Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid. For Vlster and
Duchess County, the sum of 77 l. 16 s. 7 d. being their Quota and Proportion,
as aforesaid. For Orange County, the sum of 8 l. 12 s. 11 d. being their Quota
and Proportion, as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the better
Assessing, Raising and paying the aforesaid sum of 864 l. 15 s. Current Money
aforesaid, The Mayor and Aldermen of the City of New York, the Justices of the
Peace, the Assessors and Collectors for the time being, of all and every
respective Cities, Counties, Towns, Manors, Liberties, or Jurisdictions within
this Province, are hereby Required, Empowered and Authorized to Summons, Assess,
Collect and pay the several Sums of Money herein before mentioned, according to
the Proportions before expressed, in such ways and means, and according to
such manner, Rule and Direction, and under such Pains and penalties as are
contained, enjoined and directed in an Act of General Assembly passed in the
sixth year of his Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act for the Raising and paying
one hundred and seventy men for the securing the Fronteers of this Province in
the City and County of Albany. And all and every Article, Rule, Clause, Pains
and Penalties mentioned in the aforesaid Act, for and concerning the Summoning,
Assessing, Collecting and paying or Refusing and Neglecting the Execution of
the respective Duties required therein, shall be, abide and remain in full
force and Effect to all intents and Purposes, and in as full and Ample manner
for the due Execution of this Act, until the abovesaid sum of eight hundred
sixty and four Pounds fifteen shillings be duly, fully and Completely
assessed, collected and paid, as abovesaid directed, as fully and in like
manner as if the same were particularly and at large recited and set down in
the Body of this Act, any thing contained therein to the contrary hereof in any
wise notwithstanding. And the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of New York, and
all and every the Justices, Assessors and Collectors of the ^espective Cities
and Counties aforesaid, and all others concerned herein are to take notice
hereof accordingly.

An Establishment for the pay of a Company of Fuzeleers Employed on the
Fronteers, at present under the Command of Major Schuyler, for the security of
the Fronteers of this Province in Albany, from the first day of August last,
until the first day of March next following, viz^
l. s. d. The Captain 212 days, at 8 per diem 84 16 00 One Lieutenant at 4 s.
per diem 42 08 00 One ditto at 3 s. per diem 31 16 00 4 Sergeants, at 1 s. 6 d.
each per diem 63 12 00 Fifty private Centinals, at 12 d. each per diem 530 00
00 One Town Major, at 4 s. per diem, 42 08 00 One Chyrurgion, at 2 s. 6 d. 26
10 00 For Incidentals, 27 08 00 One Muster-Master, from the first of August, to
the 10th of October, at 2 s. 6 d. per diem, 08 15 00 For ditto from the 10 of
October, to the first of March, is 142 days, at 1 s. 07 02 00 864 15 00

An Act for the ras^ing the Sum of Seven Hundred Pounds, to enable his
Excellency to keep the men that are now in the Companys appointed by his
Majesty, and to encourage others to list themselves in the same.
BE it Enacted by the Governor and Council, and the Representatives Convened
in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That a Supply of Seven
Hundred Pounds current Money of this Province be laid, assessed, raised and
levied upon all and every the Inhabitants, Residenters, Sojourners and
Freeholders of and in this Province, Five Hundred Pounds, whereof to be
employed by his Excellency, for the supplying the Companies appointed by his
Majesty, with sundery Necessaries, and the other two hundred Pounds thereof to
be employed by his Excellency for listing of men to keep the said Companys
full, and to free the Inhabitants of this Province from Detachments until the
first day of May, next ensuing the Publication hereof, except in case of
Invasion or Rebellion. To be laid, assessed, raised, levied and paid unto his
Majesty's Collector and Receiver General for the time being, at his Majesty's
Custom house in the City of New York, at or before the 25th day of March next
ensuing the publication hereof, according to the several and respective Quotas
and Proportions hereafter following, That is to say, for the City and County of
New York, the sum of 215 l 5 s. being their Quota and Proportion of seven
hundred pounds Current money as aforesaid. For the County of Westchester, The
sum of 38 l. 10 s. being there Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid. For the
County of Richmond the sum of 17 l. 10 s being their Quota and Proportion, as
aforesaid. For Kings County, the sum of 122 l. 10 s. being their Quota and
Proportion, as aforesaid. For Queens County, the sum of 110 l. 5 s. being their
Quota and Proportion as aforesaid. For the County of Suffolk, the sum of 126 l.
being their Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid. For Vlster and Duchess County,
the sum of 63 l. being their Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid. For the County
of Orange, the sum of 7 l. being their Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid.

And for the better assessing, raising, levying and paying the aforesaid Sum of
seven hundred Pounds Current Money aforesaid, Be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of New York, the
Justices of the Peace, the Assessors and Collectors for the time being, of all
and every the respective Cities, Countys, Towns, Manors, Liberties or
Jurisdictions within this Province, are hereby required, empowered and
authorized to summons, Assess, Collect and Pay the several Sums of Money herein
before mentioned, according to the Proportions before expressed, in such ways
and means, and according to such manner, rule and direction, and under such
Pains and penalties as are contained, enjoined, prescribed and directed in an
Act of General Assembly passed in the sixth year of his Majesty's Reign,
Entitled, An A^t for the Raising and paying one hundred and seventy men for
the Securing the Fronteers of this Province in the City and County of Albany.
And all and every Article, Rule, Clause, Pains and Penalties mentioned in the
aforesaid Act for and concerning the Summoning, Assessing, Collecting and
paying, or refusing and neglecting the Execution of their respective duties
therein required, shall be, abide and remain in full force and effect, to all
intents and purposes, and in as full and ample manner, for the due execution of
this Act, until the abovesaid Sum of seven hundred Pounds be duly, fully and
Completely Assessed, Collected and paid, as abovesaid directed, as fully and in
like manner as if the same were particularly and at large Recited and set down
in the Body of this Act, any thing therein to the Contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding. And the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of New York and all and
every the Justices, Assessors and Collectors of the respective Cities and
Counties aforesaid, and all others herein concerned are to take notice hereof
accordingly.

An Act for the raising One Thousand Pounds, to be employed by an Agent for the
Representation of the State of this Province.
BE it Enacted by the Gorvernor and Council, and Representatives Convened in
General Assembly, and by the Authority of the Same, That the Sum of one
thousand Pounds current Money of this Province, he laid, assessed, raised and
levied upon all and every of the Inhabitants Residents, Sojourners and
Freeholders of and in this Province, To be employed by Wiliam Nicolls, Esquire one
of his Majesty's Council for this Province, elected and appointed Agent by the
Representatives of the same, for the Representation of the state of this
Province, and how far the security of the Fronteers at Albany has been a
Barrier and Place of Defense for the Preservation of all his Majesty's adjacent
Collonies, and withal to Represent unto his Majesty the heavy burdens that has
lain upon the Inhabitants of this Province since the beginning of this War; and
Most humbly to Address and Supplicate his Most Excellent Majesty, That he would
be most graciously pleased to ease and free his most Dutyful and Loyal Subjects
Inhabiting within this Province from the like grievous and heavy burdens for
the future according to such ways and means as his Most Excellent Majesty, in
his great Wisdom and Prudence shall think meet. To be Laid, Assessed, Raised,
Levied and paid unto his Majesty's Collector and Receiver General for the time
being at his Majesty's Custom-house in the City of New York, at or before the
25 day of March next ensuing the publication hereof, according to the several
and respective Quotas and Proportions hereafter following, That is to say, for
the City and County of New York, 289 l. 1 s. being their Quota and Proportion
of the Sum of one thousand Pounds Current Money aforesaid. For the County of
West Chester, 51 l 14 s. being their Quota and Proportion as aforesaid. For the
County of Richmond, 23 l. 10 s, being their Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid.
For Kings County, 164 l. 10 s. being their Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid.
For Queens County, 148 l. 1 s. being their Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid.
For the County of Suffolk, 169 l. 4 s. being their Quota and Proportion, as
aforesaid. For Vlster and Duchess County, 84 l. 12 s. being their Quota and
Proportion, as aforesaid. For the County of Orange, 9 l. 8 s. being their Quota
and Proportion, as aforesaid. And for the City and County of Albany 60 l. being
their Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid.

And for the better Assessing, Raising, Levying and paying the aforesaid Sum of
one thousand Pounds Current Money aforesaid, Be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the Mayor and Aldermen of the City and County of
New York, The Mayor and Aldermen of the City and County of Albany, The Justices
of the Peace, the Assessors and Collectors for the time being, of all and every
respective Citys, Countyes, Towns, Manors, Libertyes or Jurisdictions within
this Province, are hereby Required, and Empowered and Authorized to summons,
assess, collect and pay the several Sums of Money herein before mentioned,
according to the Proportions before expressed in such ways and means, and
according to such manner, rule and direction, and under such pains and
penalties as are contained, enjoined, prescribed and directed in an Act of
General Assembly, passed in the Sixth year of his Majesty's Reign, Entitled,
An Act for the Raising and paying one hundred and seventy men for securing the
Fronteers of this Province In the City and County of Albany. And all and every
Article, Rule, Clause, Pains and Penalties mentioned in the aforesaid Act, for
and Concerning the summoning, assess^ing, collecting and paying, or refusing
and neglecting the Execution of the respective Duties required therein, shall
be, abide, and remain in full force and effect to all intents and purposes, and
in as full and ample manner, for the due Execution of this Act, until the
abovesaid Sum of one thousand Pounds be duly, fully and completely assessed,
collected and paid, as abovesaid directed, as fully and in like manner, as if
the same were particularly and at large recited and set down in the Body of
this Act, any thing contained, therein to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding. And the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of New York, The Mayor
and Aldermen of the City of Albany, and all and every the Justices, Assessors
and Collectors of the Respective Cities and Counties aforesaid, and all others
concerned herein, are to take notice hereof accordingly.

An Act for Confirming and Continuing an Act of General Assembly, Entitled, An
Act for the Establishing Courts of Judicature for the ease and benefit of each
respective City, Town and County within this Province.
WHereas the Act for Settling of Courts of Judicature within this Province, is
expired, by its own limitation, and it being needful to Confirm the Same, for
the preventing the delay of Justice, Be it Enacted by the Governor and Council,
and Representatives Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
Same, That an Act made in the fifth year of his Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An
Act for the Establishing Courts of Judicature for the ease and benefit of each
respective City, Town and County within this Province, And all and every
Article, Rule, and Clause therein mentioned, shall be, abide, continue and
remain in full force and effect, To all Intents and Purposes whatsoever, as
well for the keeping and holding the several and respective Courts of
Judicature therein mentioned, at the several and respective Towns also therein
Expressed, but also for the Hearing and determining of all Actions, and Causes
of Actions, of what Nature soever, therein likewise mentioned and according to
the Rules, methods, and Limitations therein Directed, as fully, and in like
manner as if the same were particularly and at large Recited and set down in
the Body of this Act, any thing contained therein, or in any other Act to the
contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding. Provided always, and it is hereby
Enacted, That the several and Respective Courts of Pleas held in each of the
Respective Cities and Counties within this Province, shall have hereby Power,
Authority and Jurisdiction to hear and determine any matter or thing Relating
or concerning Titles of Land within their Respective Counties, any thing
Contained herein, or in any other Law, to the Contrary hereof notwithstanding.
And Provided always, and it is the true Intent and meaning of this Act, That
any Person or Persons that shall be any ways Interested or concerned in any
Process wherein the Title of Land is concerned in the said Courts, shall have
liberty to Remove the same by Habeas Corpus Certiorari, or any other lawful
Writ, and after Judgment he or they have the liberty to Appeal to the Supreme
Court of Judicature, from any Sentence, Judgment and Decree that shall be given
thereon. Always Provided, That this Act nor any Article, Rule or Clause
therein, shall continue nor be in force longer then two years from and after
the publication thereof.

An Act against the Profanation of the Lords Day, called, Sunday.
WHereas the true and sincere Service and Worship of God, according to his Holy
Will and Commandments, is often Profaned and neglected by many of the
Inhabitants and Sojourners within this Province, who do not keep holy the Lords
Day, but in a Disorderly manner, accustom themselves to Travel, Laboring,
Working, Shooting, Fishing, Sporting, Playing, Horse-Racing, Frequenting of
Tipling-houses, and the using many other Unlawful Exercises and Pastimes upon
the Lords day. To the great scandal of the holy Christian Faith, Be it
therefore Enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives Convened in
General Assembly, and by the Authority of the Same, That from and after forty
days next after the Publication hereof, There shall be no Traveling Servile
Laboring and Working, Shooting, Fishing, Sporting, Playing, Horse-Racing,
Hunting or Frequenting of Tipling-houses, or the using of any other Unlawful
Exercises or Pastimes by any of the Inhabitants or Sojourners within this
Province, or by any of their Slaves or Servants, on the Lords day; and that
every Person or Persons offending In the premises, shall Forfit for every
Offense the Sum of six Shillings Current Money of this Province, The same to be
employed and Collected to the use of the Poor of the Place where such Offense
shall be Committed. And that any one Justice of the Peace within the several
respective Citys and Countys within this Province, where such Offense shall be
committed, upon his or their View, Confession of the Party, or proof of any one
or more Witnesses, by Oath, which the said Justice, by Virtue of this Act, is
authorized to administer, shall find any Person or Persons, Offending in the
Premises, The said Justice shall give Warrant under his Hand and Seal, to the
Constables of the respective places where such Offense Is committed, To levy
the said Penalty, so to by assessed, by way of distress and Sale of the
Offenders Goods, Rendering to the said Offender the overplus of the said Money
raised of the Goods so to be Sold, If any be. And in default of such distress,
that the party offending to be set publicly in the Stocks by the space of
three hours. But if the offender of the Premises, be either an Indian or Negro
Slave, or a Servant, shall for each such offense whereof he or they shall be
convicted of, as aforesaid, forfeit the Sum of six Shillings Current Money as
aforesaid. But in Default of not paying, then the Indian, Negro Slave and
Servant offending in the premises, shall receive thirteen Lashes upon the
Naked back, for each offense committed by such Indian or Negro Slave and
Servant, as aforesaid. And that if any Person or Persons be sued for the
Execution of this Law, he shall and may plead the General Issue, and give the
said matter of Justification in Evidence. Provided that no person be sued or
questioned by this Act, Except he be called in question within one month next
after the said offense be Committed. And Provided also, that it shall be lawful
for any person to travel upon the Lords day, or to do any Act of Necessity, and
to go to the Service and Worship of God in any Church or lawful Meeting within
this Province, and from thence to return. Provided, such Journey shall not
exceed the number of twenty Miles: and also provided, that it shall be lawful
for the Post, or any other person employed in his Majesty's Service, or for any
Person employed to bring a Physician or a Midwife, to travel upon the Lords
day, any thing contained herein to the contrary in any ways notwithstanding.
Provided, that this Law shall no ways extend to any Native or free Indian
within this Province, not professing the Christian Religion.

An Act for the Regulating the Retaining Attorneys at Law.
WHereas the Number of Attorneys at Law, that practice at the Bar, In this
Province, are but few, and that many persons Retain most of them on one side,
to the great prejudice and discouragement of others that have or may have Suits
at Law: To the end therefore, That Justice may be Equally administered, and no
Room left for Complaint, Be it Enacted by the Governor and Council and
Representatives Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the Same,
That from and after the Publication hereof, That no person or persons that
shall have any Suit at Law, in any of the Courts of Record within this
Province, shall Retain more then two Attorneys at Law, for the Prosecution or
management of any such Suit or Process at Law, that they shall have, and if
they Retain any more, It shall be lawful for the Justices of the Bench, where
the Suit is depending. To order all such Attorneys as shall be Retained, more
then two, as aforesaid, to plead for the other side, without Returning the fee
received, any thing contained in this or any other Act To the Contrary hereof
In any wise notwithstanding. Provided, that this Act, nor any thing contained
therein shall continue in force any longer then two years after the publication
hereof.


