The Fifth Assembly, Third Sessions. Beginning the 25th Day of March, and
ending the 24th Day of April, Anno Regni Regis Gulielmi (...) Angliae, Scotiae,
Franciae and Hiberniae, Sexto.
An Act for the better enabling the Executors of Thomas Lloyd, Esquire deceased,
for selling of Land for the payment of Debts and Portions settled by the said
Thomas Lloyd and Patience his Wife, upon her Children by her former Husband
Robert Story, deceased.
WHereas here are several pieces or parcels of ground, with the Houses and
Appurtenances belonging, situate without the North Gate of the City of
New York, with an Island, called Dyers or Oyster Island, which William Dyer,
late of New York aforesaid, and Mary his wife, both since deceased, by their
Indenture of Bargain and Sale, dated the 23d day of April, 1686, made between
them the said William and Mary Dyer of the one part, and Thomas Lloyd, then of
New York aforesaid, of the other part, for the Consideration therein
mentioned, did grant, bargain and sell unto the said Thomas Lloyd, to hold to
him, his Heirs and Assigns forever, to the intent that the said Thomas Lloyd
and his Heirs should from hence forth stand and be seized of the Premises, to
the use of him the said Thomas Lloyd and Patience his then Wife, during their
joint natural Lives, and after the decease of either of them, to the use of the
longest Liver of them, their Heirs and Assigns forever, as by the said
Indenture, recorded in the Secretary's Office at New York (...) being thereunto
had, may mo^e (...) large appear. And whereas the said Thomas Lloyd and
Patience his said Wife, by their Deed Poll, dated the 30th day of April, 1686.
importing a further Declaration of the Uses of the said recited Indentures of
Bargain and Sale, to be, that the said several pieces or parcels of Ground,
Island, Houses, and all other the said Premises, should be, and remain engaged
as security for the payment of three hundred Pounds to (...) Story, as part of
the Legatory Portion given him by the last (...) of Robert Story, his late
Father, deceased; and the like Sum of three hundred Pounds to Mercy Story, as
(...) Portion given her by her said deceased Father, Robert Story. A (...) they
the said Thomas Lloyd and Patience his Wife, did thereby declare their further
intent to be. That after the decease of the longest Liver of them, the said
Thomas and Patience the said several Parcels of Land, Island and all other the
Premises, with the Appurtenances, the said six hundred Pounds being first paid
to the said Enoch and Mercy, should descend and come to the youngest Children
of him the said Thomas Lloyd, that is to say, to his Daughter Elizabeth and
Margaret, and to their Heirs and Assigns forever, as by the said Deed Poll
recorded in the said Office at New York, may more fully appear.

And whereas the said Thomas Lloyd afterward, to wit, in the year 1692. out of
a generous Disposition and good design to encourage and promote the improvement
of the said City, as well by paying the Debts due by Robert Story deceased, his
Predecessors, as to answer his own private utility and occasions, did obtain
the leave and concurrence of the then Mayor and Principal Men of the Town, for
the laying out of the said several parcels of Ground into Lots and Streets
suitable to accomodate the same. And thereupon he the said Thomas Lloyd and
Patience his said Wife, not knowing but that their Sales of the Premises might
create the Purchasors a sufficient and absolute Title, did bargain and fell
some part of the said Ground, with the Appurtenances, in order to discharge the
said 600 l. and other Debts, due from the Estate of the said Robert Story
deceased. And whereas the said Tho. Lloyd by his last Will and Testament, dated
the 10th of September, 1694. did empower his Executors, or any two of them, to
sell, dispose and convey all his Estate, Right, Title and Interest of, in or to
all or any part of his Land and Hereditaments in New York, or elsewhere* and
made his said Wife Patience Lloyd, his Son Mordecai Lloyd, with Isaac Norris
and David Lloyd, his Executors, and shortly after dyed; after whose decease the
said David Lloyd and Isaac Norris took upon them the burden of the said
Executorship, and with the consent of the Overseers of the said Robert Story's
last Will, did pay unto the said Patience Lloyd the said 300 l. so as aforesaid
secured to the said Enoch, and also did pay the said 300 l. so secured to the
said Mercy, unto her Husband John Godfrey, since their intermarriage, in full
performance of the Condition or Proviso contained in the said Deed Poll,
whereby the said Premises were pledged and bound for the payment of the said
600 l. aforesaid. And whereas also, that although the said Elizabeth, the
surviving Daughter of the said Thomas Lloyd is arrived to the age of nineteen
years, and does signify her readiness and assent to join with the said
Executors in any act or acts that may preclude and debar her and her Heirs from
the said remainder, or any other Right, Interest, Remainder or Reversion of, in
or to the said several parcels of Ground, and other the Premises, or any part
thereof, yet nevertheless, her Nonage, according the strict Rules of Law,
renders her incapable to execute any Conveyance for the releasing her said
Right or Interest, by reason whereof the said Executors are retarded in the
Administration of the said Estate, and in paying the Debts due by the said
Robert Story and Thomas Lloyd deceased, for want of having the said Estate
improved to the greatest advantage by sale. And the said Purchasors
apprehending themselves likewise insecure, Therefore for the further security
of the purch^^^^ (...) better enabling of the said Executors to sell, convey
and (...) of the said Ground and Premises, and that the same, (...), may be
converted, according to the true intent and meaning of this Act, for the
payment of the said Debts of Robert Story and Thomas Lloyd, and to no other use
and intent whatsoever. And after their said Debts are well and truly paid, the
residue and remainder, if any there shall be, to be equally divided, two thirds
thereof unto the said Elizabeth Lloyd, and the other third part unto the said
Patience, her Executors, Administrators and Assigns forever, according to
certain Articles of Agreement made and concluded between the said Executors and
Patience, bearing date the 28th day of March, relation being thereunto had, may
more fully and at large appear. May it please his Excellency Benjamin Fletcher
Captain General and Governor in chief in and over the Province of New York,
etc. and Council and Representatives of the same in General Assembly, at the
humble Petition and Request of the said Patience Lloyd, David Lloyd, Isaac
Norris, John Godfrey and Elizabeth Lloyd, That it may be Declared and Enacted,
and Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives
convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That the
Enrollment and Record of the said recited Deed Poll made by the said Thomas
Lloyd and Patience his said Wife in manner aforesaid, shall, by the Authority
of this General Assembly be made void and cancelled, and that the Uses and
Remainders thereby raised, limited and declared, or therein mentioned or
intended to be raised, limited or declared, shall from henceforth cease,
determine and be utterly void and of none effect.

And to the end and intent that the said Executors may be the better enabled to
pay the said Debts and Portions, and distribute the remainder or reside of the
said Estate, if any there be, in manner aforesaid, Be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That they the said Executors of the said Thomas Lloyds
last Will and Testament aforesaid, their Heirs, Executors and Assigns may be
enabled, and are hereby enabled and empowered by their Conveyance to be
executed in due form of Law, as well to confirm the said Sales so made by the
said Thomas and Patience Lloyd in his Life time, as aforesaid, to the
Purchasors abovementioned, and to every of them their Heirs and Assigns
forever, as also to sell, convey and assure all and every part of the said
several pieces of Ground, Island, and all other the Premises, with their and
every of (...) Appurtenances remaining unsold by the said Thomas and Patience,
to hold to such Person or Persons as shall purchase the same in fee simple or
otherwise, the said recited Deed Poll, or any Article, Covenant, Clause,
Proviso or Condition therein, or in any other Deed whatsoever contained to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act for the raising of one hundred and twenty effective Men, to be (...) by
his Excellency for the re-inforcing and strengthening the Fronteers of the
Province at Albany, over and above the present Number of Forces posted and
employed there for the safety of this and Neighboring Provinces, to continue
there for one whole year from the first of May next to the first of May in the
year 16^7. and for the raising the Sum of Two Thousand Five Hundred Ninety
Three Pounds, six Shillings and eight Pence, to be distributed by his
Excellency* the Captain General, amongst the said Men, and the rest of the four
Companies s^n over by his Majesty.
WHereas the Forces lately sent over by his most Excellent Majesty, at the
humble Request and Desire of his Excellency, his Majesty's Captain General
(...) ease and safety of this Province, are since their arrival much weakened
by Death, Desertion and Sickness, and the strength of the (...) at Albany
thereby much lessened, to the great endangering of this and the adjacient
Neighboring Plantations that place having been, since the War, the only
Barrier and place of Defense, whereby the said adjacent Plantations have been
preserved from the Violence and Incursions of the Enemy. And whereas it is
indispensibly necessary that the said Fronteers should be reinforced, and
sufficiently strengthened for the future Safeguard of our said neighboring
adjacent Plantations, and the like Preservation of this Province, The
Representatives convened in General Assembly taking the same into their serious
Consideration, by the special direction of his Excellency's Speech made to them
at the opening of this Sessions of General Assembly, as a matter of great
weight, and a Compliance thereunto as the best Return, and the most acceptable
Service that his Majesty's Subjects in this Province can make unto his most
sacred Majesty, who in the midst of his Pressures, and the great and bloody War
his sacred Person is engaged in, has graciously condescended to remember the
little handful of his People inhabiting in this his Majesty's Province, do
therefore with the deepest Sense, in most humble and most dutiful
Acknowledgment of his Majesty's most gracious Favor in fencing Supplies of
Men, Artillary, and other Stores of War, for the case and safety of his most
Loyal Subjects inhabiting within his Majesty's said Province, as well as in
rendering an entire Obedience unto his Majesty's Royal Command, communicated in
General Assembly by his Excellency, his Majesty's Captain General's Speech, as
aforesaid, Humbly pray that it may be Enacted, And Be it therefore Enacted by
his Excellency the Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in
General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That a Fund of Twenty five
hundred ninety three Pounds, six Shillings and eight Pence, current Money of
this Province, be laid assessed, raised and levied upon all and every the
Inhabitants, Residents, Sojourners and Freeholders of and in this Province,
which together with the Sum of Two hundred Pounds, like current Money, raised
formerly by virtue of an Act of Assembly, entitled, An Act for the raising the
Sum of Seven Hundred Pounds, etc. makes in the whole the Sum (...) ^wo Thousand
seven hundred ninety and three Pounds, six Shillings and eight Pence, to be
employed by his Excellency for the reinforcing and strengthening the Fronteers
of this Province at Albany with one hundred and twenty effective men, over and
above the present Number of Forces posted and employed there for the safety of
this and Neighboring Provinces, and to remain and continue there for the said
service, and to free the Inhabitants of the Province from Detachments, except
in case of inevitable necessity, for the space and during the term of one whole
year, to commence on the first day of May next ensuing the publication hereof,
and to end and terminate upon the first day of May then next following, which
shall be in the year of our Lord 1697. which Number of Men are to be listed and
formed in such ways, and after such manner as his Excellency the Captain
General shall think fit, and the said Sum of 2793 l. 6 s. 8 d. to be employed
and distributed by his said Excellency the Captain General, amongst the said
Number of 120 effective Men, to be posted and employed for the re-inforcing and
strengthening the Fronteers, as aforesaid, and the rest of the four Companies
sent over by his Majesty, for the case and safety of this Province, in such
manner and Proportion as to his Excellency in his discretion shall be thought
convenient and needful. To be laid, assessed, raised and paid unto His
Majesty's Receiver General, for the time being, at the City of New York, in two
equal payments, the one moiety to equal half part of the said Sum of 2593 l. 6
s. 8 d. at or before the 29th Day of September next, and the other moiety or
equal half part thereof, at or before the 25th of March then next following,
which shall be in the year of our Lord 1697. according to the several and
respective Quota's and Proportions following, that is to say,

For the City and County of New York, Seven hundred ninety seven Pounds nine
Shillings, being their Quota and Proportion of 2593 l. 6 s. 8 d. for the Uses
aforesaid.

For the County of Westchester, One hundred forty two Pounds, twelve Shillings
and eight Pence, being their Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid, for the Uses
aforesaid.

For the County of Richmond, Sixty four Pounds, sixteen Shillings and eight
Pence, being their Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid, for the Uses aforesaid.

Kings County, Four hundred fifty five Pounds, two Shillings and eight pence,
being their Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid, for the Uses aforesaid.

Queens County, Four hundred and seven Pounds, three Shillings, being their
Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid, for the Uses aforesaid.

Suffolk County, Four hundred sixty six Pounds, sixteen Shillings, being their
Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid, for the Uses aforesaid.

Ulster and Duchess County, Two hundred thirty three Pounds eight Shillings,
being their Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid, for the Uses aforesaid.

And Orange County, Twenty five Pounds, eighteen Shillings and eight Pence,
being their Quota and Proportion, as aforesaid, for the Uses aforesaid.

And for the assessing, levying and paying the aforesaid Sum of 2593 l. 6 s. 8
d. current Money aforesaid, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,
That the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of New York, the Justices of the Peace,
the Assessors and Collectors, for the time being, of all and every the
respective Cities, Counties, Towns, Manors, Liberties and Jurisdictions within
this Province, are hereby required, empowered and authorized to summons,
assess, collect and pay the several sums of Money herein before mentioned,
according to the Proportions before expressed, in such ways and means, and
according to such manner, rule and direction, and under such Pains and
Penalties as is contained, enjoined, prescribed and directed in an Act of
General Assembly, passed in the sixth Year of his Majesty's Reign, entitled,
An Act for the raising and paying one hundred and seventy Men for the securing
the Fronteers of this Province in the City and County of Albany: and all and
every Article, Rule, Clause, Pains and Penalties mentioned in the aforesaid
Act, for or concerning the summoning, assessing, collecting and paying, or
refusing and neglecting the Execution of their respective Duties therein
required, shall be, abide and remain in full force and effect to all intents
and purposes, has full and ample manner, for the due Execution of this Act,
until the iabove-said Sum of 2593 l. 6 s. 8 d. be duly, fully and completely
assessed, collected and paid, as above directed, as fully and in like manner as
if the fame were particularly and at large recited and set down in the Body of
this Act, any thing contained therein to the contrary hereof in any ways
notwithstanding. And the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of New York, and all
and every the Justices, Assessors and Collectors of the respective Cities and
Counties aforesaid, and all others herein concerned, are to take Notice hereof
accordingly.

An Act for the Confirming and Continuing an Act of General Assembly made in
fourth Year of his Majesty's Reign, entitled, An Act for the satisfying and
paying the Debts of the Government, Eighteen Months longer than the term
therein mentioned, for the paying the Debts therein expressed.
THe Representatives convened in General Assembly, upon Examination of the
Debts of the Government, do find it absolutely necessary that the for
Additional Duty be continued eighteen Months longer then the time limited the
expiration thereof, for the ends and purposes hereafter mentioned, and to no
other purpose whatsoever. Be it therefore Enacted by his Excellency, the
Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly, and by
the Authority of the same, That an Act of General Assembly made in the fourth
Year of his Majesty's Reign, entitled, An Act for the satisfying and paying
the Debts of the Government, and since continued by two several Acts of General
Assembly, for the purposes and ends therein mentioned, until the fourteenth day
of November next, shall be continued and confirmed from the said 14th day of
November next, until the end and term of eighteen Kalander Months then next
following, that is to say from the said 14th day of November next, until the
14th day of May that shall be in the Year of our Lord School. and no longer.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Additional
Rates and duties, made payable upon Merchandises and Liquors imported into this
Province, by virtue of the said Act, shall be levied, collected and paid unto
his Majesty's Reciver General for the time being, at his Majesty's Custom House
in the City of New York, for the Term aforesaid, and no longer, according to
such Rules and Directions, and under such Pains, and Forfeitures as is
contained and enjoined by the said Act. And the aforesaid Act and every
Article, Rule and Clause therein mentioned, shall be, abide, continue and
remain in full force, virtue and effect, to all intents and purposes, for the
payment of the said Sums of Money hereafter mentioned, in such due and equal
Proportions as in the aforesaid Act is expressed and directed, and to no other
purpose or intent, or in any other manner or proportion whatsoever, as fully
and in like manner as if the same were particularly and at large recited and
set down in the Body of this Act, any thing contained in the aforesaid Acts to
the contrary hereof in any ways notwithstanding.

And to the end that the Rates and Duties paid in manner aforesaid, and now in
hand by virtue of the said Acts, and the Rates and Duties that are to be paid
by virtue of this Act, may be duly, truly, and in the proportions aforesaid,
paid and employed unto the several and respective Persons and Uses hereafter
mentioned, and to no other use, purpose or intent whatsoever, Be it further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sum of Two Thousand seven hundred
thirty four Pounds eleven Shillings and three Farthings now in hand, and raised
by virtue of the said Acts, be distributed according to the Proportions
aforesaid, amongst the Persons and to the Uses hereafter mentioned; and the
residue and remainder that shall arise and become payable by virtue of this
Act, to be likewise distributed in like manner as aforesaid, unto the purposes
hereafter mentioned, until the same be completely paid and satisfied, that is
to say, for the paying and satisfying of 317 l. 13 s. 1 qr. due from the
Government for Incidental Charges expended for the security of the Fronteers
from the 28th Day of March, 1691. to the first day of May, 1696. And likewise
for the paying and satisfying the Sum of 250 l. together with the Interest of
Ten per Cent. per Annum, until the same be paid, due for the pay of the
Officers and Soldiers of Major Schuylers Company, according to establishment.
And likewise the Sum of 1056 l. 13 s. 11 d. 1 qr. to Coll. Stephanus
Courtlandt, being a Debt due to him from the Government, and for the payment
thereof the Additional Duty was first raised. And likewise the Sum of 1103 l. 9
s. 8 d. 1 qr. to Major Brockholst and Capt. Baxter's Company, being a Debt due
as last aforesaid. And likewise the Sum of 74 l. 8 s. to Major Wessellst being
a Debt due as last aforesaid. And likewise the Sum of 1224 l. 6 s. 4 d., being
a Debt due to the Magistrates of Albany, as last aforesaid. And likewise the
Sum of 77 l. 8 s. 8 d. 1 ob. being a Debt due to Thomas Clark, as last
aforesaid. And also the Sum of 15 l. being a Debt due to John Rosy, as last
aforesaid. And also the sum of 15 l. being a Debt due to David Schuyler, at
last aforesaid. The whole of the said Debts, for which the said Additional Duty
and Rates was first raised, amounting to the Sum of Three Thousand five hundred
sixty six Pounds six Shilling and eight Pence. And likewise for finishing of
his Majesty's Chapel in the Fort the Sum of 4^0 l And likewise the Sum of 150
l. to Coll. Richard Ingoldsby, for the defraying the extraordinary Charge he
has been at by being posted at Albany for the security of the Fronteers. All
which Debts and Sums of Money amount in the whole unto the Sum of Four Thousand
Seven Hundred Thirty Three Pounds Nineteen Shillings and Eight Pence Farthing.

And for the more regular payment of the Debts aforesaid, Be it further Enacted
by the Authority aforesaid, That within one Month after the Publication hereof
the several and respective Creditors heretofore mentioned and expressed, shall
register, or cause to be registered the Debts due to them respectively, in
Book, at his Majesty's Custom-house of New York, which his Majesty's Receiver
General, for the time being, shall have for that purpose, wherein he shall
likewise keep a perfect and distinct Account of the Rates and Duties upon
Merchandise, that shall become payable unto him by virtue of this Act, and the
same shall adjust every three Months, and make payment thereof to the Persons
abovementioned, their Executors, Administrators or Assigns, in Quarterly
payments, and in equal Proportion, according to the greatness and smallness of
the several and respective Sums aforesaid, and to no other use, purpose, nor in
any other manner or way whatsoever, any thing contained herein to the contrary
hereof, or in any other of the said Acts notwithstanding.

Reasons offered to the Council by his Excellency the Governor, against
passing the Bill raising 2593 l. 6 s. 8 d.
First, THe Bill does not answer the end, there is no Provision made for the
Expense of Officers that must be employed to the Neighboring Collonies, in
raising of the Men, nor for the incidental Charge of marching and transporting
the Men to the Fronteers, if they can be raised, (which is yet a doubt) And
allowing the Money to be all solvent, and paid at the time appointed (which can
never be expected) it cannot answer the Sum of three Pounds a Man, Levy Money,
which must be instantly paid them in hand.

Secondly, If these Men cannot be levied upon this Encouragement, there is no
Provision made for the security of the Province. Money without hands gives no
Defense* And though you may allow me to be judge of the Inevitable Necessity,
the Representatives plainly show they are not of this Opinion, by refusing to
allow such a Proviso to be put in the Bill.

Thirdly, By this Bill the Power of Detachments seems to be cut off for a
twelve Month, the words [ Inevitable Necessity] will need an Explanation, which
the Assembly (as they have done in another case) will always pretend to be
judges of, by which means the People will be blown up to a (...) and deny
Obedience to my Commands, be the Necessity never to great and inevitable.

Reasons offered by the Council for the passing of the Bill for raising Two
Thousand five hundred Ninety three Pounds, six Shillings and eight Pence, etc.
Is amended by the Assembly, the 23d of April, 1696.
WE are humbly of Opinion with your Excellency, That this Bill does not fully
nor perfectly answer the end, but we do humbly offer, That after many Debates
and Conferences with the Committees of the said Assembly upon these Heads, We
do not find any other better ways or means can be at present obtained. And that
although there is by the said Act no provision made for incidental Charges,
that must certainly accrue in the employing O^^^cers for the procuring, levying
and transporting such men as shall be so got, yet in regard the disposition of
this Money for this end, is left to be employed, as your Excellency shall judge
fit, We are of Opinion, That such part thereof as may be needful, and can be
presently raised, may be properly applicable to the employing Officers, for
that end, to the Neighboring Provinces.

To the Second, We are humbly of Opinion, That though in express words, in case
the way of raising Men by this Bill, without Detachment, fail, there is no
other certain way proposed, yet we are humbly of Opinion, That if after all
means used for levying these Men without Detachments, they cannot be got, it
must then be understood, there will then be an Inevitable Necessity for
detaching Men out of this Province, and that your Excellency will be pleased to
send for the whole House, and so explain that Clause to them.

To the Third, We do humbly offer our Opinion to your Excellency, That by this
Act, your Excellency's Power of Detaching is not out off, but restrained, as in
the foregoing Article is explained, and such an Explanation must prevent all
Mis-interpretations on that Head.

For which Reasons. We are humbly of Opinion, That it is agreeable to his
Majesty's Service, and for the ease and benefit of this Province, that your
Excellency do give your assent unto the said Bill, which is humbly submitted by

Your Excellency's Obedient Servants, N. Bayard; S. Cortland, C. Heathcote, G.
Munveil, W. Pinhorn, P. Schuyler, W. Smith


His Excellency the Governor's Speech to the Assembly at their Adjournment,
April 24. 1696.
Mr. Speaker, and you Gentlemen Representatives,
THis is the chief Bill upon which our Safety hinges, its for Money to levy Men
to recruit his Majesty's Companies, for the strengthening of the Fronteers: I
have some Exceptions to the wording of it, and the Substance: I was against the
passing of it, and gave my Reasons to the Council: It does not seem to answer
the end. The Gentlemen of the Council have given me their Opinions under their
Hands for passing of it. I have resigned my Reason to theirs, and therefore
pass it.

Gentlemen, I am as tender of the Peoples Ease as any of you, and have
earnestly both studied that and their safety. Yet if Men cannot be found for
the encouragement you enable me to give, notwithstanding the endeavors and
pains I shall take to procure them, and the Fronteers become weak and exposed,
I shall think the necessity of Detachments Inevitable, being resolved not to
lose one foot of this Province while I have Hands to defend it. When the
Disease is desperate, the Cure must be so, and as this is the sharpest Remedy,
it shall be the last I shall use, and obvious to all good Men the necessity is
inevitable.

The Second is a Bill for payment of Debts, contracted long before my arrival:
It is commendable in you to keep up the Credit of the Government. I have been
as good a Husband of the King's Revenue as ever I was of my own private
Fortune. I understand not an Account, I left that part to the Gentlemen of the
Council, who are of the greatest Interest amongst you, whom I believe to be
honest Men, and to have dealt fairly in the matter of the Public Accounts.

The Third is a Bill to cut off a Deed of Trust, with Uses, for payment of
Debts, it is private. I suppose most of your Affairs will call you home I think
fit to adjourn you to the 29th of September next, and desire Mr, Speaker to
adjourn the House accordingly.

Printed by William Bradford, Printer to the King's Excellent Majesty, at the
Bible in New York, 1696.


