A Dead Faith Anatomized

A DISCOURSE ON The Nature, and the Danger, With the Deadly Symptoms OF A Dead
Faith In those Who profess the Faith of Christ.

By SAMUEL MATHER, Pastor of the Church at Windsor, in the Colony of
Connecticut.

Hoc est Retia Salutis Expandere. BOSTON in New England, Printed by Bartholomew
Green, and John Allen. 1697.

Preface.
THAT Great Preacher of the Gospel, and Insatiable Admirer of the Lord Jesus
Christ, our Apostle Paul, in all his Writings, but especially in the Epistle,
which he wrote unto the Romans, [which was by Melancthon well called, The
Protestants Confession of Faith,] as well as his Epistle to the Galatians, does
abundantly maintain this Article of (...) Faith, That a man is not Justified by
the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ. Justifying Faith i^ a
Receiving of, and a Relying on the Gift of Righteousness from God, by our Lord
Jesus Christ; or the Consent of a Distressed Soul* to be Justified, by Gods
Graciously Imputing unto him, the Obedience which the Lord Jesus Christ* as our
Surety, yielded unto God, on the behalf of His Elect. This Faith does Justify a
Sinner, not as it is a Work; but Organically and Relatively; Inasmuch as it is
the Instrument, by which a man apprehends the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus
Christ, as freely Tendered unto the Sinner in the Gospel; It Is only in this
(...), that Faith, and no Grace, but this Faith, has the Honor to Justify us.
This is the Good old way, of arriving unto Rest; and, Aliter qui Vadit, cadit.

But every Jewel has a Counterfeit. And, How shall a man know, that his Faith
in the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, for his Justification, is not a
Counterseit?

To answer that Case, the Blessed Apostle James, under the Inspirations of the
Almighty, declares unto us, the Marks of a Justifying Faith; and those Marks
are, the Works which it perpetually disposes the Believer unto.

Now among the Admonitions of the Apostle to this purpose, there is a special
Remark due to that, in Jam. 2.20. Will thou know, O vain man, that Faith
without works is Dead?

The Reader will presently observe in this Remarkable passage; both the
Character of the Faith, which does not produce and promote Good Works, in the
man that has it: It is a Dead Faith; it will be of no use unto the man in whom
it is; it can do nothing for him: and then, the Character of the Man who has
this Faith; He is a vain man; he seems, and he boasts, to have, what he has
not; and he flatters himself with Hopes that never shall be made Good unto him.
So that, we are now Assured, A Workless Faith is a Worthless Faith.

Paul, who Professedly handles the Doctrine of Justification, does plainly
assert, That no man living is Justified by Works, but a man is Justified only
by Faith. James does nevertheless assert, That a man is Justified by Works, and
a man is not Justified by Faith only. And yet, however some of the Ancients, as
well as Luther stumbled at this Appearance of Contradiction, the Assertions do
not Contradict one another at all. Paul treats of our Justification before God,
and the Right unto Everlasting Life, therein granted unto us, which is only by
Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. James treats of that which may manifest our
Justification unto men, that See and Hear, our Profession of our Faith; and
here Works are significant. The Conscience of a man, may be distressed with a
twofold Accusation.

First, A man may be Accused of Iniquity; It may be said, Thou have broken the
Law, and thereby wronged the Name, of God, and the terrible penalty of that
Law, now belongs unto thee. The Answer to this Accusation is to be, My Lord
Jesus Christ has fully obeyed the will of God, and suffered the penalty due to
me for my Disobedience; and I do by Faith depend on this Righteousness of my
Lord Jesus Christ, for my Acceptance with God for ever.

Secondly, A man may be Accused of Hypocrisy; It may be said, Thou Talkest of
thy Faith; but is it not mere Talk? How can thou prove, that thy Faith is any
more, than what is in the very Devils themselves? The Answer to this Accusation
is, The works of a Sanctified man, which I am doing every Day, are the Proof of
my Faith. According hereunto it is asserted by Paul, That a man is Justified
alone by Faith: but it is asserted by James, That a man is not Justified by a
Faith which is alone. The Question discoursed by Paul is, How a Guilty Person
may come to be Acquitted by the Lord, from all the Guilt that lies upon him?
The Answer to this Question, is, Not by any Works of our own, but only by the
Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is, on our part, only by Faith
applied unto us. The Question discoursed by James, is, Whether a man pretending
to Faith in the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, shall be saved, though
he continue without the works of an Holy Life, agreeable thereunto? The Answer
to this Question is, No, Such a man has no Saving Faith at all. And that James
is to be taken in that sense, is evident from This: He does insist upon the
Instance of Abraham; and yet Abraham was a Justified man, Thirty years, before
those Works, which are said here to Justify him Upon the whole then, we see
Paul and James, Reconciled, or, indeed, never contrdicting. And we are Advised
after all; It Is a Vanity in any man to Profess, that he has a True Faith in the
Lord Jesus Christ, if his Faith be not Fruitful in those Good Works, which may
Justify the man's Profession.

There are Two very Important Cases, about which the Thoughts of every
Christian, cannot but be Exercised; and we will here bestow some of our
Thoughts thereupon.

The first Case which a Christian, must Consider, if he would be a Christian,
is, What are those Good Works, which a True Faith, will Quicken and Incline the
Believer unto?

Now we may thus conceive of them; Good Works, are Sincere Essays to observe
the Law of God. Our God has given us a Rule of Life, in (...) ^^ich we call,
The Moral Law. None of our Works are Perfectly Good, if in any point they fall
short of that Rule. But none of our Works do Perfectly come up to the Rule, as
long as we are lodged in this Body which is to Die. The Best men alive, when
they look upon the Best Works of their Lives, may cry out, with one of the
Ancients, Terret me tota vita mea, nam apparet mihi, aut Peecatum, aut tota
Sterilitas; The Sinfulness, and Barranness, of all my Life, strikes me with a
Deadly Terror of Soul! Nevertheless, there are Sincere Essays toward
Perfection, which all Believers are Conscientiously making every Day. Now these
Essays are Good, in the Merciful Reckoning of God, our Father in our Lord
Jesus Christ. Though none of our Sincere Essays at Well-doing are such Good
works as to Justify us, before that Thrice Holy God, who is of Purer eyes than
to behold Evil, and whose Pure Eyes yet behold in our Good Works, a world of
Evil: Yet our Sincere Essays are pleasing unto our God, who by His Good Spirit
has Excited them, and Assisted them; and, Whose workmanship we are, Created in
Christ Jesus unto Good works, which God has before ordained, that we should
walk in them. Such Good Works, as our Prayers, are, as it is said, in Prove. 15.8.
The Delight of the Lord; and such Good Works, as our Alms, are, as it is said, in
Heb. 13.16. The Sacrifices wherewith God is well pleased.

But now, to speak strictly, Good Works must have these Four Ingredients to
render them such.

First; The Matter of our Works must be* according to the Law of God, or, His
Will Revealed in His Word. The Prophet could say, in Mic. 6.8. He has showed
thee, O man, the thing that is Good; and what does the Lord require of thee,
but to Do Justice, and to Love Mercy, and to walk Humbly with thy God. Good
Works must be such, as the Lord has shown to us, that He has Required of us.
They are no Good Works, whereof our God may say, Who has required 'em? Works
of Piety, are Good Works; for we have the Word of our God for them; as in Psalm.
92.1. It is a Good Thing to give Thanks unto the Lord. Works of Charity are
Good Works; for we have the word of our God for them; as in Heb. 13.16. To Do
Good, and to Communicate, forget not. No works are Good, but such as are
contained in the Two Tables of the Ten Commandments; the Commandments of Love
to God, and of Love to Man.

But unto the Constitution of Good Works, it is not enough, that the matter of
what we do, be according to the Law of God. Men may do Works that shall be Good
for the matter of them, and yet, Every work of their Hands be unclean, says
the Lord. Plowing is Lawful, and Praying is Lawful; and yet these works may be
sinful in the Doer of them. Wherefore,

Secondly, The Manner of our Works, must be Right, as well as the Matter of
them. A man may incur the Wrath of God, by his Good Works, if he do them not in
any manner according to the Law, as they should be done. We find, in 1 Chronicles.
15.13. The Lord our God is offended at those who Seek Him not after the due
Order. No mere External Actions are to be Esteemed Good Works; there must
Internal Cautions go along with them; else they are but the matter of Good
Works, without the Form. Good Works must be done with Regular Circumstances, if
they would be called, Good.

Thirdly, The Design of our Works must be Right, as well as the manner of them.
The Design which the Law of God has assigned for our Good Works, is, That the
Great God, may be acknowledged, and magnified, and glorified: And the Gospel of
God, coming in, has assigned a further Design for them; namely, To express our
Gratitude unto our Lord Redeemer, for His Redeeming of us. Thus it is Enjoined,
in 1 Cor. 10.30. Whatever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. An Evil Intention
will utterly spoil any Good Works, though they were otherwise never so Good. And
a merely Selfish Intention is an Evil one. Good Works must all be done, with an
Eye, to the Honor of God, and the Service of Christ, before any Temporal
Advantage to Self: else the Best Sacrifices are but an Abomination.

Fourthly, Good Works must proceed from a Good Principle; or ^therwise they
will have no Real Goodness i^ them. Waters that Flow from a bi^^er and a
p^ison'd Fountain, cannot be Good. A G^^d Heart, Like a Good Fountain, must be
the Principle, from whence Good Works are to flow. We are told, in Mat. 12.35.
A Good man, out of the Good Treasure of the Heart, brings forth Good Things.
A Good Principle within, is a Good Treasure of the Heart. Works done merely
from a Principle of Slavish Fear, or Fleshly Love, are not Good, though they be
never so Good. There must be a Principle of Respect unto God in Christ, wooing
us unto all our Good Works, or else they are Stark Naught. Yea, the Spirit of
our Lord Jesus Christ, must be in us, as a Vital Principle, for our Good Works,
or else they are Dead Works, every one of them. Hence, no Good Works were ever
done by any one Unregenerate man, since the World began; for every Unregenerate
man is destitu^e of the Principle, which is to be acted in them: the most
Splendid Works of the Unregenerate, are but (as Austin called them) Splendid
Sins before the Lord.

And now there is a Second Case which a Christian has to consider, that so he
may be stirred up, and helped on, to do those Good Works by which he may
approve himself indeed a Christian.

Where Lies the Necessity of Good Works, in a Justified Belsever, to Justify
the Faith, which he is a Professor of?

Now we do know this; That our Good Works are not Antecedently necessary unto
our Justification before the God of Heaven. For Good Works cannot be done by
any man, until he be Justified. Until a man be United unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, who is our Life, he is a Dead man: and what Good Works can a Dead man
do? This is a thing Livelily Preached unto us, by our Lord Himself, in the
fifteenth Chapter of John; The mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Hence that
common saying of Austin, Bona Opera sequuntur Justification, non praecedunt
Justificandum. No, nor is Faith it self, As doing of Good Works, that which
Enti^les us unto the Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ, for our
Justification; It Is Faith, only As it Lays Hold on the Righteousness of the
Lord Jesus Christ, for the chief of Sinners, that Justifies us; And until this
be done, we cannot be carried forth unto any Good Works at all.

But then, Good Works, are consequently necessary upon our Justification. It Is
indeed said, That God Justifies the Ungodly; but then, He does not Leave them
Ungodly when He has Justified them. Well, And where Lies the Necessity? Truly,
if we would not be vain men, we must Know such Things as these.

First, Will thou know, O man? That it is in the very Nature of a Justifying
Faith, to put a man upon the Doing of Good Works. Faith is a Purifier of the
Heart: [Acts 15.9.] and so, it cannot but be a Purifier of the Life. The same
Faith, which Embraces the Lord Jesus Christ, as a Priest, for Atonement, (and
As doing this, it Justifies!) Embraces Him also, as a Prophet, and as a King:
Now this Prophet will Instruct, and this King will Injoin, our doing of Good
Works for ever. A Justifying Faith, Receives Christ the Sacrificer, and the
Intercessor; and in that Notion, it Justifies: But is this all? No, it also,
according to Col. 2.6. Receives Christ the Lord. Now Good Works are by that
Lord Required. It Is no True Faith, which any man has, if it be not for a whole
Christ. The Devil said unto our Lord Jesus Christ, What have we to do with
thee, Thou Holy One? If a man would be concerned with our Lord Jesus Christ,
only as a Merciful One, and a Gracious One, and not likewise as an Holy One,
that man has no more Faith than a Devil! Justifying Faith is a Tree, which
cannot but have the Good Fruits of Good Works growing upon it. It is the Holy
Spirit of God, that Creates, and that Bestows, a Justifying Faith, wherever it
is; and that Holy Spirit cannot suffer any Soul, in which He dwells, to be
wholly Remiss about the Good Works which are agreeable unto His Holiness.

Briefly; It Is in the very Nature of a Saving Faith to be a Working Faith. The
Scriptures of Truth, assure us, in Gal. 5.6. Faith works, by Love. It was well
said, therefore by John Hus, Ubi Bona Opera non apparent ad extra, ibi Fides
non est ad intra: Faith is not within, if Good Works are not without. Faith
must become visible, and (as has been sometimes said) Incarnate, by Good
Works upon it.

Again; Will thou know, O man? That Good works are no Small part of the Great
Salvation, which is the Hope and claim of all the Justified. Our Lord Jesus
Christ has Redeemed us by His Blood; What for? We are informed, in Tit. 2.14.
To purify unto Himself, a peculiar People, zealous of Good works. The following
words, Let no man despise thee, Calvin thinks them spoken to the People,
because People often don't care to Hear of this; but it is a Thing to be spoken
with all Authority. A main Thing, Bought for us by the Righteousness of our
Lord Jesus Christ, is, that we may be made Happy, by our Enjoying a Resemblance
of that Righteousness, in our own doing of Good works, wherein we shall be
conformed unto His Exemple. The Doing of Good works is one main Thing, in that
Blessedness, which our Lord Jesus Christ has purchased for us, in His being
made a Curse on our behalf: And a man has no True Faith in him, until he be
thus persuaded! Very grand is the mistake of men, about Salvation: Salvation is
not merely our Fruition of the Good Things reserved for us, in the unseen and
future state; but Salvation lies also in our Performance of Good works leading
thereunto. Our Captivity to the Devil, is that from which we are in our
Salvation rescued: and that Captivity keeps a man from doing of Good works. For
a man to be set at Liberty from the Devil, and so to do those Good works, which
are contrary to the Works of the Devil, This, This is our Salvation. A man's
being made Able and Willing to Do Good works, like the Good Angels of Heaven,
This is the Sal^ation, which Faith does make out after; It Is the End of our
Faith, and the Salvation of our Soul.

Furthermore; Will thou know, O man? That the Commandment of Heaven has made
Good works incumbent on every man on Earth. It Is true, when we are in our Lord
Jesus Christ, we are not under a Covenant of works. Our own doing of Good
works, is not now, the Condition of our Entering into Life. But still, the
Covenant of Grace does not Release us, from all Obligation, to do those Good
works, which once were the Terms of our Entering into Life; the Language of it
is that in Rom 3.31. Do we then make void the (...) through Faith? God forbid:
Yea, we Establish the Law. Because we are under the Covenant of Grace, are we
not still obliged unto all that Holines^, all that Watchfulness, all that
Exactness, which was demanded in the Old Covenant? God forbid! Yea, we do still
so Establish the Law, that if we fail in any one thing, it is our Sin, it should
be our Grief, it will be our Shame; and we must, with Contrition of Heart, make
our Confession, That we come short of our Duty. Indeed, because we cannot but
continually Transgress, and, In many things we offend all, therefore the
New Covenant has provided a Remedy for us: It Is only the Good works of our Lord
Jesus Christ Reputed Ours, that cause us to stand as without Fault before the
Throne of God. But we must own it still, as a Fault in us, a Fault worthy of
Death, whenever we miss of doing any Thing, that is demanded as a Duty, in the
Old Covenant: There is a Sin, in Every Transgression of the Law; a Sin to be
Confessed, Bewailed, Abhorred. Yea, and our Lord Jesus Christ in the Gospel,
does, How often? Repeat those Precepts; in Math. 5.16. Let your Light so shine
before men, that they may see your Good works: and in Tit. 3.8. This is a
Faithful saying, That they which have Believed in God, should be careful of
Good works: and in 1 John 2.1. These Things write I unto you, that ye do not
Sin.

Moreover; Will thou know, O man? That without Good works we are Abominably and
Inexcusably Ungrateful unto our Lord Jesus Christ, who has done so many kind
works for us? The Evangelical Reason for our Good works, is, That we may show
our Thankfulness unto Him, Who has Loved us, and given Himself for us; unto
Him, Who has Loved us, and washed away our Sins, in His own Blood. If a man
have the least Grain of True Faith in him, he will make that Enquiry before our
Lord Jesus Christ, in Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render to the Lord, for all
His Benefits. Now the Reply that Faith makes to this Enquiry, i^ the same that
our Lord Himself makes; Let those Good works be done, which may adorn the
Doctrine of God the Savior! It was argued, in Romans 12.1. I beseech you
Brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your Bodies, a Living
Sacrifice, Holy, Acceptable to God, which is your Reasonable Service. Even so,
All the Return, which our Lord Jesus Christ expects from us, for all His
Mercies, is, That we Devote our selves unto the Service of our Lord: And Faith
says, That this is a Thing infinitely Reasonable. Where Faith has been infused
into the Heart of any man, there is no Motive unto Good Works more powerful
than this upon him. If he could think, I shall escape Hell, yea, I shall merit
Heaven, by my good works! This were not such a powerful motive to good works,
for an Heart that has Faith in it, as to think, I shall by my good works
Glorify, my Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, who has done so much for me! That man
has no Faith in him, on whom this motive has not a very constraining operation.
For us to be without good works, would be an horrible Reproach unto the Lord
Jesus Christ, as if He were, A Patron of Sin, and as if He were a God that had
pleasure in wickedness, and evil might dwell with Him. Now a True Faith will
never let a man be so wicked, as thus to Reproach the Lord. Foolish and Unwise
are all they, that thus Requite the Lord!

Finally, VVilt thou know, O man? That an Heart set for the Doing of Good
Works, is a Qualification, and a Preparation of them that shall Inherit the
Recompenses of Evarlasting Life. There is no passing into the most Holy
Heavens, without being, as it is expressed in Col. 1 12. Made meet to be
Partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. All the Partakers of the
Heavenly Inheritance, are doing of Good Works therein for ever; they do nothing
but Good works there throughout Eternal Ages. Now, except a man have an Heart
for Good works [in Conversion, Mat. 18.3.] given unto him, he is not meet for
that Inheritance, whereinto there Enters nothing that shall Defile. The Good
works which our weekly Sabbath is to be filled withal, make it very wearisome
unto an Unrenewed Soul: they say, What a weariness is it? When the
Sanctification of the Lords Day, was lately Urged upon a grave Ceremonious
Clergyman, he replied, What? Would you have a man be upon the Rack, a whole Day
together? Truly, The Eternal Sabbath, which our Glorious Jesus carries all His
People into, Men will be weary of it, it will be a Rack unto them, they will not
be suited in it, if they should not have an Heart for Good works inspired into
them; none but those that are thus pure in Heart, will be fit for the Beatifick
Sight of the most Holy God. Our God must work us for that self-same thing, [2
Cor. 5.5.] or, else the Thing would be Distastful unto us: now, it is by a
Spirit for Good works, that He does work us up hereunto. And He has warned us,
in Heb. 12.14. Without Holiness, no man shall see the Lord. Though we shall not
go to Heaven For our Good works, we cannot go to Heaven without them.

Now what should be the Result of our Thoughts upon these Two Cases thus
offered, but This?

We are to be advised, first of all; That we do not Expect, to be Justified by
our Good works, or to Do any Good works until we are Justified, in our
Believing on the Lord Jesus Christ. It is of no little Importance unto us, That
our Good works have their due place in our Divinity: and many Treatises of such
Divinity as the English Nations has been of later years Defiled and Abused
withal, have not only been Ineffectual to procure those Good Works, which they
have pretended for, but also been really prejudicial thereunto, for their want
of This. We must Beware how we go to patch up a Righteousness of our own, out
of those Good Works whereto God may Enable us, or do like them* who in Romans 10
3. Being ignorant of Gods Righteousness, and going about to establish their own
Righteousness, have not submitted themselves unto the Righteousness of God.
There is not a more fatal Rock for the Shipwreck of a Soul, than this! When
Sinners are Awakened, with the Apprehensions of the Divine Vengeance pursuing
of them, for their Sins, this is (...) First Thing that they usually betake
themselves unto: They (...) First unto the Good Works of a Reformation in their
faul^y Lives* No, O (...) man; Will thou Know? Thy First Flight should be unto
the Lord Jesus Christ, for His Righteousness to be conferred upon the most
Loathsome Sinner out of Hell; and that thou may, Be found in Him, not having
thy own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but that which is through the Faith
of Christ, the Rigteousness which is of God by Faith. It Is a vain Imagination
that thou may not Believe on the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, for
thy Justification, until by doing of Good works thou art made Fit for the
Imputation of that Righteousness. Many say, indeed they would Lay Hold on the
Lord Jesus Christ, and on His Righteousness, but they dare not, because they
are not Fit for Him. Alas, this also is but another and a finer strain, to set
up our own Righteousness. How, Not Fit? The wretched circumstances of thy Soul,
that make thee say, Not Fit, are thy very Fitness. We must come to our Lord
Jesus Christ For those things, which the preposterous Hearts of men would come
unto Him, With. It is an Error for men to venture their Everlasting Interest
upon the Lord Jesus Christ, under this Encouragement, That they have attained
unto such and such Godly Dispositions, as will Recommend us unto Him; We must
go to Him, and His Righteousness, and venture to cast our selves upon it, as
Recommended by nothing, but our own Horrible misery, thereunto. Certainly, It
will never make Sincere Converts, to talk of R^^^ing off men's Fingers from
catching Hold of Christ, before they are fit for Him. It Is our Catching Hold of
Him, that must make us Fit for Him, and for every Good work! We shall do Good
Works when we have come utterly without them, unto the Lord Jesus Christ,
first; for a share in the Righteousness of the Good Works which He did for us,
and then, for the Assistance to Do Good Works our selves, in a measure Like
unto them. Well, and when we have Done our Good Works, we must after all,
Remember this, That we are to Renounce them all; Renounce all Dependence on
them for the purchase of the Divine Favor unto us. When some told our Dying
Herbert, the many Good works which he had been doing in his Life, he only said,
Good Works, if sprinkled with the Blood of Christ! It is the Blood of Christ,
and not our Good works, that must be of any value with us. They that Build
their Faith on their Good works, Build on a Sandy-Foundation: The Primitive
Christians were found in this Article; ( Justin Martyr will clear it:) That we
are Justified only by a wonderful Commutation between our Lord and us, He
taking our Guiltiness, and we having His Righteousness: It Is well declared by
Cyprian^ Non aspernatur Dei Filius carnem Hominis induere, ut cum peccare ipse
non posset, aliena peccata portaret. Immortalitate interim posita, fieri se
mortalem patitur, ut Inno^ens pro Nocentium Salute Perimatur: It Is well
declared by Theodoret, who Expounding that passage in the Psalms, I restored
that which I took not away, applies it unto our Lord Jesus Christ. q d. Others
robbed God of His Glory, but I (says our Lord) have restored it again; the Sins
by which 'twas done, they were mine by Imputation, though never mine by
Inhoerancy. The Protestant Reformers were so full in this Article, That they
did not scruple to say, Amisso Articulo Justificationis, simul amissa est tot a
Doctrina Christiana, and as they Lived and Died in the Judgment of that Martyr,
whose Expiring words, were, Behold, a mavelous Exchange, my Lord has my
Guiltiness, and I have His Righteousness! thus, they have generally ever since*
been clear in it, until some of Late, have darkened the Truth, under pretense
of preserving the Interests of Holiness; Albeit, as our Incomparable Owen,
says, I am not satisfied, that any of those, who at present oppose this
Doctrine, do in Holiness and Righteousness, and the Exercise all Christian
Graces, surpass those who in the Last Ages, both in this and other Nations,
firmly adhaered unto it. Yea, some of the Papists themselves, have been under
such Convictions, as have compelled them to Subscribe unto this Article;
especially, when the Approaches of Death, have given them with a Lively Sense
to feel themselves going to appear before the Judgment Seat of God. Ernestus,
the Archbishop of Mag^^burgh, when he was near his Death, was comforted by a
Minorite, who told him, That the merit of his Good works, would make sure a
place in Heaven for him* whereupon the Dying man cried out, Nullo modo, I will
by no means trust unto the merit of any Good works, done by any man whatever,
but thi^ Good works of Christ are sufficient for me! Bellarmine himself, who
had Lived so Blamelesly, that he was not conscious of his ever having once told
a Lie, when he came to Auricular Confession he could find nothing to mention,
without Looking back so far as his Childhood, yet when his Death was arresting
him, he durst no more trust unto the merit of his Good works, but would have
that clause inserted in his Will, That he desired the Lord to Receive him, Non
ut aestimater meriti, sed (...) Largi^or veniae; Not on Merit, but in Mercy!

But we are in the next place to be Advised, That having first Believed on the
Lord Jesus Christ, that we may be Justified, we do then Abound in those Good
works, which are the proper and Genuine Symptoms of Believers; those Good
works, which the Oracles of Heaven call, The Fruits of Righteousness. We
should, as the Apostle speaks, in 1 Cor. 15.58. Always abound in the work of
the Lord. The Bible has no Good words any where, for those Antinomian Wretches,
with whom Good works are despised and neglected: It spits nothing but
Sulphurous Fire, in the Faces of those Libertines! If we are destitute of Good
works, we have none but a Dead Faith, and a Dead Faith will very little
befriend a Dead Soul. To have no Good works then, is a woeful Thing: and, the
P^aemonition is, in Math. 3.10. Every Tree which bri^geth not forth Good Fruit,
is (...) down, and cast unto the (...)* What then will be the Woe, how woeful
will be the Doom of those that are full of Evil works, and bring forth much of
that Evil (...), which grows on the Vine of Sodom, and in the Field of
Gomorruh? Sad will it be for us to perish among Unbelievers, after we have
seemed mightily to Believe; and after a fair show of our Faith, to be Damned
among, The workers of Iniquity. Surely, If we would with the Joy of Faith, be
Satisfied, that the Seal of the Holy Spirit, which we seem to have, when we
Entertain our Assurance, That the Righteousness of God, which is by the Faith
of Jesus Christ is upon us, is not a Cheat, a Sham, a Self-deluding Enthusiasm,
it becomes us, with a Constant Zeal for Good works, to Exercise our selves, at
keeping a Conscience void of Offense toward God and man. It becomes us, to
Ponder, How much we Owe unto our Lord Jesus Christ, and Study, How to Serve the
Lord that has Bought us; and with Good works always to be at work for Him. It
becomes us, to forethink, How little Time we have to be Working in, how near we
are to the Time where there can be no Working, and to Do as many Good works, as
we can in our Time; yea, to call our selves unto a Daily Account, with
unspeakable Trouble, if we have let one Day pass without many of them. It
becomes us even to ra^^ our Civil and Natural, as well as Religious works, unto
the Dignity of Good works, by the most Frequent, most Explicit, and most
Ennobling Dedications of all our Works, into the Lord. So, it will not be long
before we rest from our Labors, but our Works will follow us.

These Things being so, it is a Great Service unto the Souls of men, to supply
them, with Rules of Trial, by which they may Examine themselves, as well
concerning their Faith, as concerning the Good works, which they pretend unto.
Now, to accommodate his Neighbors with such Rules of Trial, the Reverend
Author of the Ensuing Discourse, has permitted their Desires to be gratified
in the Publication of it. The Discourse is what was delivered unto a Popular
Auditory, for which cause, the Reader must not wonder, if he find somewhat of
Inculcation in it: he will seek in such a Discourse, Non Scientiam, sed
Saporem; and no doubt, he will find what he seeks. But such was the Savor
which it left upon the minds of the Hearers, when it was delivered, as that the
Notes thereof are here come abroad, for them to Ruminate, ye^ more thoroughly
upon that, wherein they have already found themselves not a little Edified. The
Author is known, throughout the Churches of the famous and happy Colony, to
none of the least whereof he has for many years been a faithful Pastor; Known,
for his Piety, Gravity, and Usefulness, more than any Recommendations of mine
can render him: and my Relation to him, will easily excuse me as well as his
Modesty forbid me, for saying any more. Nor have I any thing further to add,
but my Hearty Prayers, That these Good Works of this Worthy Person, may be so
Profitable among the People of God, in this Wilderness, as may fully answer the
Holy Designs, of him that has thus offered unto the Service of the Tabernacle.

Cotton Mather.

A Dead Faith Anatomized
James 2.20. But will thou know, O Vain Man, that Faith without Works is Dead?


THE Apostle Paul had abundantly taught (as appears in diverse of his Epistles)
that man is Justified by Faith alone, without Works: See Romans 3.28. Therefore
we conclude, that a man is Justified by Faith, without the deeds of the Law.
Gal. 2.16. Knowing that a (...) is not Justified* by the Works of the Law, but
(...) Faith of Jesus Christ. This Doctrine did th^^ Apostle much insist upon,
especially in the Epistles, but now mentioned: neither did thy of the Apostles
of Christ teach otherwise, or contrary thereunto: howbeit, it seems there were
some, that made an ill use of this Doctrine, as also they did of some other
things, in Paul's Epistles. See 2 Pet. 3.16. Some be like there were then that
did turn the Grace of God into Wanto^ness, thinking to be Saved by Faith (not
knowing indeed what Faith is) and so to Live a loose and careless Life: (and
thus it is with many, in these our times, wherein the Gospel has been so
abundantly Published, and with so much perspicuity and clearness.) These, and
such like persons, this Apostle James rebukes, and endeavors to rectify.
He had told them in verse 17. that Faith without Works is dead: in this 20 th.
verse, he inculcateth, and presses the same Doctrine again; and he shows,

1. That there is such a thing as a Dead Faith: this is plainly implied in the
words.

2. He shows what this Dead Faith is, viz. a Faith without Works: such a
Faith as has not Good Works to be the fruits thereof: that Faith which does
not bring forth good fruit, is a Dead Faith, and hence can be no evidence of
Life in that Soul, where it is found.

3. He calls him a vain man, that would, from any thing that had been taught,
by any of the Holy Apostles, gather any ^ther conclusion.

4. He affectionately expostulates the case with such, in those words, but will thou know, etc. q d. will thou understand, and be convinced? it is easy to see
the Error here, unless men be willingly and wilfully ignorant: will thou know,
etc. it is true, we read of some that hold fast deceit, and refuse to return.
Jer. 8.5. and many such there be in our days also.

But the point of Doctrine is this: viz.

DOCTRINE.
That there is such a thing as a Dead Faith, with which some under the Gospel
do deceive themselves.



They think that they have Faith, or do Believe, and that they shall be Saved,
but in the issue they are disappointed, and ashamed of their hopes; and how
fearful is it, when so it is! See Heb. 10.31. Psalm. 119.116. Such are at last
Led forth with Workers of Iniquity, as Psalm. 125. ult. and to them will Christ
profess, and say, I never knew you: depart from me, etc. as Math. 7 23. A Dead
Faith is a deadly thing: A Soul-ruining thing. A true, a Living Faith Saves;
but this we speak of is contrary, it ruins and undoeth men, because it
deceives them: and yet this is all the Faith that many have, who yet think
that they have something that will stand by them.

The first thing that I shall do, in handling this point, is to show in
general, That there is such a thing as a Dead Faith; a Faith that is not a true
Saving Faith, and yet the Scripture calls it a Faith, a Believing.

1. See the verse before the Text: Thou Believe that there is one God, thou
do well; the Devils also believe and tremble. The Heathens say that there are
many Gods: thou art no Heathen; it is well, so far; yet remember the Devils
believe too, and tremble: So then, a man may believe, and be affected also,
with what he does believe, and yet his Faith, for all that, be no other than a
Dead Faith, though you should see a man to believe and tremble; or, to believe
and rejoice, as Mat. 13 20. this proves not his Faith to be a lively, or a
Living Faith. 1 Pet. 1.3. there is a lively hope, or a living hope, or an
enlivening hope, under which, Faith is included, from whence this Hope arises:
for hope is (as it were) the Daughter of Faith: So on the other hand, there is
a Dead Faith, yea, where there is much affection stirring, as will more appear,
by and by: when persons find their affections much moved toward Spiritual
Things, they are apt to be taken with it, and to conclude that there is some
true Grace in them, but alas, it often times proves otherwise: a multitude of
Sacrifices will not prove true Grace to be. Isa. 1.11. so neither will
abundance of affections prove a man's Faith to be a lively or a living Faith: In
this case, it is not so much the quantity, as the kind or quality that is to be
considered. Certainly they miss it much, that think, that true Grace differs
from that which we call common Grace, only in degree: Let common affections,
such as be often found in Unsound Professors, be enlarged never so much, this
will not alter a man's Estate God ward; he may be a deeper, and a more profound
Hypocrite, but this will not make a man sincere; for that which is naught can
never come to be good by increasing: have thou affections Godward, so had
they. Isa. 58.2 consider then, not so much how great they be, as whether they
be of the right kind, or sort: a little true Gold will be accepted, when a heap
of Counters will be rejected wholly, as Coin that will not pass at all. Ephesians.
4.24. we read of True Holiness, or, Holiness of Truth: So there is True Love,
etc. a little of it is better than Gold; but abundance of affections may be
toward Spiritual Things, and yet no Truth; no Spiritual Life; it is a Dead
Soul still; and abiding as it is, will be a Damned Soul too, e're long.

2. See Joh. 2.23, 24. Many believed in his Name, but Jesus Christ knew them,
and would not trust himself with them: Mark it, it is said, Many believed in
his Name. Why did not Christ commit himself to them? the reason was, he knew
all men; and he knew that their Faith was but a Dead Faith, and would not hold,
and abide the Furnace: for as Gold is tried in the Furnace, so shall every man's
Faith be tried, one time or other. 1 Pet. 1.7. and happy are they, whose Faith
on trial, is found unto praise, and honor, and glory, at the Appearing of
Christ. Christ knew all men, and he knew that such as now Cried, Hosanna to the
Son of David, would some of them e're long, cry, Crucify him, Crucify him, away
with him: and truly, we may see something of this often, how common and
frequent is it for such as for a season were much affected, and taken with the
Word of Christ (as it is called, Col. 3.16.) in the Public Dispensation of it,
to turn quite about, and quarrel with it; of such Paul complains, Gal. 4.14,
15, 16. they received him as an Angel, they could have plucked out their Eyes
for him once; yet now he was become their Enemy, for telling them the truth;
the case was quite altered with them: little do persons think, many times, what
they shall be, and the reason is, they know not what they are at present. 2
King. 8.12, 13. Hazael seemed at present to abhor the thoughts of doing such a
great wickedness, as the Prophet foretold that he would do: Is thy Servant a
Dog, that he should do this great thing? Alas, he did not know his own heart,
what a Dog he was, what a furious beast he would prove in time. And thus it is
with many, while yet they are under restraints, and feel not what cursed
Hearts, and Natures they have; especially when under common Convictions, they
cannot think, that they shall ever be, or do, as they see many others do: yet
sometimes such as these come to be found among the worst of men: their Faith
and Affections issue in the highest degrees of wickedness: though other some are
still held under restraints, and they wear out all their time in Formality, and
in an Unprofitable Profession of Religion.

3. See Luke 8.13. where we read of some, That receive the Word with joy, and
yet they have no root, and for a while believe, and yet fall away in a time of
Temptation. Mark what is said of them: they Received the Word; they did not
wholly reject it, as many others did* and they received it with joy too; and
they believed for a season; and yet fell away in a time of Temptation; for they
had no root; their Faith was a Dead Faith, whatever it seemed to be; thus it is
with many under the Gospel, they are much affected with the Word for a time,
they hear it gladly, as also Herod sometime did. Mark 6.20. and they show much
love to it, as they did, Ezekiel. 33.31. and they believe the Word, but it is but
a Dead Faith; yet it may deceive not only themselves, but others too, seeing
there is so much joy and affection with it: there are many that have been much
taken with their own affections, and undone by them; they joy in their own joy,
and at last ly down in sorrow; see Isa. 50. ult. Walk in the light of your
fire: do so as long as you will, and if it be never so long, yet the end will
be to Ly down in Sorrow.

4. See Act 8.13. Simon believed, and was baptized, etc. yet verse 21, 23. see
what is said of him; he was in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
Iniquity: see how much he was wrought upon, it is said, he believed, the Word
had some effect in him, and upon him: some entertainment the Word had with him;
and he was baptized; now he makes a Public Profession of the true Religion,
and so to do, was in those days a great thing, as much as a man's life, and all
he had in this World, was worth: also he continued with Phillip, and was much
affected with what he saw, he wondered it is said, etc. yet his heart was not
right in the sight of God: in his own sight perhaps it was; and many precious
ones did hope well of him, for a season: but he was in a miserable condition:
he believed, but his Faith was a Dead Faith; and hence left him, in his sins
still; and in them he perished, for ought appears to the contrary. Let us see
one Instance more.

5. See Psalm. 106.12, 13. compared with Psalm. 78.35, 37. for in both places he
speaks of the same people, and it is said, They believed his Word, and sang his
praise: but soon forgot his Works; they remembered that God was their Rock, and
the High God their Redeemer; yet their heart was not right with him. And how
are many wrought upon, when some Special Providence helps to set on the word;
great Awakenings, and strange Enlightnings they have; they Seek God, they
Enquire early after him; there is much Reformation, for they return, and these
things work on unto a seeming good issue of Faith in Christ as their Redeemer;
they remembered that the Lord was their Rock, and their Redeemer, and yet all is
but a Dead Faith: thus it is with many.

When Persons Conversions want due, and rightly expected Reformations, we judge
their work was not a through work; and so when persons have had great
Convictions, and have been in much trouble, and all dies away, after a while,
without any work of Faith at all, such cannot be in any good, or right way: but
when much trouble for sin, and about a man's Estate, issues in a work of Faith,
and comfort from some Promise; we hope well of such many times, but if it be,
(as often it is) but a Dead Faith, the condition is sad, and the end like to be
misery for ever: If never so many Promises come to a man's mind, and if never so
much Comfort arise therefrom; yet if a person do take comfort (as many do) and
yet not take Christ, his comfort shall be taken from him, some time or other:
yea, if he take Christ also, as many do, after a sort, yet if it be not by a
Lively Faith, (and what that is we shall show) it profits him nothing: many
will say, Lord, Lord, we have prophesied in thy Name, and in thy Name have cast
out Devils, etc. yet he will profess that he never knew them; and they must
depart from him for ever: see Mat. 7.21, 22. many think they have Christ, who
yet indeed fall short of him: not knowing him indeed, Whom to Know is Life
Eternal, Joh. 17.3. nor knowing the way to him, nor what it is to believe
aright in him: they believe, but their Faith is a Dead Faith.

The point being thus far confirmed, in the next place, we shall Enquire more
particularly, What this Dead Faith is, and Why it is so called; and we must
endeavor to make some discovery of it, and to distinguish it from that which
is a true Saving Justi^ying Faith: Now the Apostle tells us, that Faith without
Works is dead: And the Enquiry may be, How may we understand that?

Answ. 1. It is a sure Evidence that a man's Faith is a Dead Faith, when it is
without Works; or when it is alone: Indeed Works don't Justify us, they have no
hand in that at all: it is Faith only that Justifies us, Romans 3.28. -- A man is
Justified by Faith without the deeds of the Law. Romans 5.1. Therefore being
Justified by Faith, etc. yet it is also true, that that Faith which is alone,
is not a Justifying Faith: and therefore as Context, verse. 18. Show me thy
faith without thy works, says the Apostle. This is the miserable delusion that
many are held in, they believe (as they say) and they trust in Christ, and
there they rest themselves, but they take no due care of good works: ask them
where their Faith is; they do think they can tell you: but alas! where are
their Works? where is their Repentance, their Sorrow and Mourning for Sin,
where is their Mortification of Corruptions? See Romans 8.13. where is their
daily Watch, and Warfare; their Fighting, and Wrestling, of which the Scripture
speaks? Where be their Tears, and Prayers, and Cries, and Sighs and Groans
Unutterable? these alas are not; and what says our Apostle in this case? Will thou know, Oh! vain man, that Faith without Works is dead? have thou Faith,
show it by thy Works: it is in vain to talk of Faith without Works answerable:
when persons profess, that they believe, and trust in Christ, but do not walk
in any measure answerably, they deceive themselves; yet many such there be,
They Pro^^ss to know God, but in works deny him. Tit. 1. ult. they say they
believe in Christ, but their Conversation says otherwise; and their secret
Walk is otherwise; Oh! it is a Dead Faith, however such deceive their own
hearts.

2. It is not every kind, or sort of good works that will evidence a man's Faith
not to be a dead faith: for they in Psalm. 78. forenamed, sought God, they
returned, they enquired early after God. Also Herod Mark 6.20. heard John
gladly, and did many things. So those in Isa 58.2. Sought him daily, and asked
of him the Ordinances of Justice; they took delight in approaching unto God:
yet were they not upright before God: there are many that are full of good
works. Isa. 1.11. They have a multitude of them; they are good for the matter
of them: and yet God abhors them, because they proceed from no other than a
Dead Faith. See at large, Isa 1.13, 14, 15. Surely they made great account of
their Works, otherwise they would not have so abounded in them; yet the Lord
did not accept them: nay, all was Iniquity, a Trouble to him, and he was weary
to bear them. Some are full of good works, (as we may call them) and of good
desires, and of good affections; and yet their Faith is naught, it is but a
Dead Faith; and this is so plain from the fore named Instances, as that there
is no room to make any objection. And those good works, (as they seem to be)
when searched into, are but dead works, though seemingly never so full of Life;
and hence they are all as rotten, and unsound things. Heb. 6.1. we read of dead
works: and indeed all a man's works are such, until he come to a true Faith in
Christ; his most affectionate Prayers, yea, his highest Reformations are but
dead works; though a person afflict (not his Body only, but) his very Soul; yet
God will take no knowledge of it. Isa. 58.3. and how many be in such a case as
this is, and how miserable are they, wretched, naked, and know it not. Rev.
3.17.

3. The works that the Apostle here speaks of are not such as are only Moral,
but Evangelical, and in that sense good: Works Evangelically good, will
evidence a true Faith, but no other works, how many, or how good soever they
be: We shall therefore open this particular a little, and show when a persons
works may be said to be Evangelically good: for I would not mention any thing
to Enlighten our way, and then by mentioning a thing in general only, leave the
matter in a manner as much in the dark as it was before.

Two things then make our good works to be Evangelically Good. (1.) They must
be from: and (2) Unto the Lord. And if they be the first, they will be the
latter. we shall therefore chiefly consider the former, viz. whether our good
works are from the Lord, and show what is the import, and meaning of that
expression. -- Now they are from him, when we acknowledge him, and deny our
selves in all we do: when so to do is the frame and disposition of our hearts:
when there is that Principle in us, that Enableth us (through Divine
Assistance) so to do; and disposes our hearts to desire that we actually, and
daily do it, tasting (at least at times) a precious sweetness in that way of
living and doing, together with a dislike of the contrary in our selves. See
Isa. 26.12. Lord (say they) thou have wrought all our works for us, or in us. I
Live, says Paul, yet not I but Christ lives in me. Gal. 2.20. Also see Gal.
5.22, 23. All our good works are fruits of the Spirit; and God would have us
own all our fruits to be from him: hence he tells us, Hos. 14.8. From me is thy
fruit found. So then if you think you have good works, consider whether you can
deny your selves in them, and acknowledge God in them all: Perhaps you say, I
Live, but do you say also, yet not I but Christ, etc. If your works be from God
(in that sense we are speaking of) God will own them, accept them and reward
them: what is his own, he will acknowledge and reward it in us, though it be
never so little, and never so much despised in our own eyes, or in the eyes of
others. Zech. 4.10. The day of small things is apt to be despised: yet what are
(in some sense) small things, are sometimes great things: Poor Prayers as we
count them, small performances, little weak things, are great things, when they
are fruits of the Spirit; works of faith and love; and they will when we meet
them again another day appear to be such, as we can hardly acknowledge them to
have been ours: Math. 25.37 -- Lord when saw we thee an hungry: Lord, when did
we Pray, and Love, and Believe in such manner, and perform such duties? and
then shall all be opened, and made plain; and the Lord shall have the Glory of
his own works, in his, and they the comfort for ever.

But some may say, who is there that will not own all his Works to be of God,
and deny himself in them? This may seem to be no great matter: did not the
Pharisee do so. Luke 18.11. God, I thank thee, etc. he seems to acknowledge
God, and his Grace, in what he was, and did, or had attained unto in Religion:
and so it is with many still, who are yet unsound.

Answ. 1. A verbal acknowledgment is an easy thing many times, and especially
when a Good Education leads us to own the truth; many have a form of knowledge,
and of the truth, being instructed, etc. Rom 2.18, 20. to speak good words, is
no hard matter: this many can do in Praying, in Preaching, and in discourse
with others, and have excellent Gifts indeed, who yet are Strangers to the
thing that we are speaking of; and there be diverse things that concu^ to it: it
may be a man has been well Educated he has lived where this truth has been
generally acknowledged by all; visibly opposed by none, and frequently
inculcated; and hence he goes with the dream, he gives a common assent to the
truth, and owns in words, That a man of himself, is Nothing that is good. Also
common experience teaches persons something of this: there is hardly any man,
that endeavors to do any thing in religious works, but he finds something of
his inability to do what he should: unsound ones have some experience of
themselves as well as others; and many go far, that yet fall short at last:
this Paul knew; and hence that 1 Cor. 9 27. a man may be able to teach others,
and yet himself be a Cast away: Education, common experience, and industry
meeting together, may, and doubtless does carry many a man far, and make him
see in somewhat, nay, much in Religion, when as he is but like them. Rev. 3.1.
Who had a name to live, but were dead.

2. A through sight of a man's own nothingness is a great thing, and very far
different from what is in unsound ones. I shall endeavor to make some
discovery of it.

1. It is not only Notional, or Doctrinal, but it is Experimental also: a man
does not only hear it, or read it in some good book, but he does also feel, and
find it, as he said, Romans 7.21. I find then a Law, etc. how did he know that
there was such a Law of Sin in him? such a sinf^^ heart, and nature, why, says
he, I find it: h^ had bitter experience of it: he saw it not only in some book:
but in his members, warring there verse 23. he felt it in himself; and so must
you feel your own Nothingness and Inability, or else you will never be
thoroughly convinced of it and suitably affected with it. A man may hear^ it,
and be affected with it, but this goes but a little way; till a man comes to
find, and feel there will want deepness, Mat. 13.5. as the Stony Ground did:
when a man sees and feels, this will be something indeed.

2. This knowledge and through conviction of a persons own Nothingness, uses not
to come easily: a man is brought to it through much difficulty, and opposition:
that which is easily gotten, is hardly good: Mat. 7.14. but it may be you came
lightly by your knowledge of your selves; Oh! take heed that you be not
deceived, as many, many be. Now I say, it is not easily obtained, and that upon
diverse accounts.

1. In that the heart of man is Naturally so averse unto it: there is a
mavelous opposition in man's carnal heart against it: it is impossible but
that it must be an exceeding bitter, yea, a killing thing to a man's carnal
heart to see his heart, so far forth as it is carnal; and every man's heart is
so, in some degree at least, and most men's hearts are wholly and only carnal: 1
Cor. 3.1. Such as are in Christ are yet carnal in some measure, but others are
wholly so: and hence some opposition against this knowledge, and the increase
of it, will be found in the best; how much more in those that are ye^
Unbelievers, in whom as yet pride, ignorance, and security do reign, with
diverse other lusts, and corruptions? To illustrate this a little: Suppose a man
Rich in this World; or suppose that he have but a little, and that which he
has, whatever it be, got with much (...), and difficulty, will such an one
easily part with what he has, and (...) down upon a dunghill? or i^ a man has
thought himself to be Rich, at least worth something, if such an one come
suddenly to see himself to have been deceived, and not worth one mite, how will
it trouble him? especially, when he sees at present no way to recover what is
lost; nay, sees that he can never do it. Such like is the case we are now
speaking of. Some Ungodly Ones think, they are Rich in Spiritual Things. Rev.
3.17. and whatever any may say, or think to the contrary, there is no secure,
unconvinced Sinner, but what thinks he has more than indeed he has; most
think they have ability to turn to God, and promise themselves that in their
own time they will do it: and what Promises do they make in times of sickness,
danger, when fears are upon them: Others please themselves in thinking that
they be bad, yet not so bad, etc. and hence hope to deal with God about Pardon
of Sin, and acceptance at an easy rate: however there is something in
themselves, upon which they have a secret dependence, and relyance; and are not
themselves aware how it is with them. Now for such an one to be stripped of all,
to suffer the loss of all, yea of those things which were once gain to him, as
he speaks, Phil. 3.7, 8. this will not be easy; nay, it will be a killing
thing: for these things are a man's Life, until a better Way be discovered unto
him. Romans 7.9. I was (...) once, (that is in his own conceit,) but when the
commandment (...) revived, and I dyed. Consider then; Know you what it is to
Die? nay, to be Slain, as verse 11. -- It slew me: Is it a light or small
matter? Oh! when the real trial shall come, it will be found otherwise; nay, it
may be, you know nothing of that LIFE that should be taken away; and so are
alive still, as Paul once was, but indeed dead.

2. In that persons will hardly believe, or be thoroughly convinced of their own
Nothingness, until they have tried the matter; they will first try whether they
can do nothing, before they will be convinced thoroughly that so it is indeed.
Nothing but their own Experience will convince them, for what else can be
supposed to do it? there is nothing in themselves to do it, until experience do
it: there is something of the Law in all men's hearts, Romans 2.14. but not one
tittle of this: man in his first estate was able to keep the Law of God; and he
knows nothing but that he can do so still, save what he does experience to the
contrary. And very hardly will he believe his own experience in this matter; he
will try, and try, and try again, and try the matter out to the utmost, before
that he will indeed yield the case, and sit down humbled under that
acknowledgment: viz. I am Nothing, I can do nothing that is good. It is true,
the word shows it plainly, that we in our selves are nothing; and that in us
dwells no good thing: but the word in this thing is no more believed than in
other things; and Ignorance, At^^is^^ and Unbelief are ruling or reigning
things, in every Unconverted man's heart. Hence tell a man what you will, and
let him in words own what he will, concerning his own Nothingness; yea, though
he think he does believe it; yet whenever he shall be in good earnest about
his Soul, by a powerful awakening, he will try what he can do, before he will
yield, and sit down under the conviction beforementioned; he will work, and he
will try; yea he will not be convinced, until he have wrought himself unto
death, and then will he own himself to be a dead man; and then, and not till
then, will God show him the way unto life: he must despair in himself, before
he will, or can indeed believe in Christ. Now a man does not easily come to
take such pains, as we have been speaking of; it must be a great awakening to
bring him to it; they must be hard driven that shall travel thus far,
especially if we consider what opposition is in all men's hearts against any
thing which is good, or tends thereunto: Sin within, and Satan without, will
do their utmost to hinder: it is folly to expect any other.

And further consider this: we say, persons will try what they can do, when
awakened, before they will be convinced that they can do nothing: for how can
it be otherwise? what shall a poor Sinner do? Shall he sit still, and ly
quietly in his Sins? No, he shall not, he cannot: the terror of the Lord makes
him afraid; there is no rest in his Soul now by reason of his sin, and the
danger that he is in thereby: well then, shall he fall in with the way of the
Gospel? He should indeed, but he cannot: for he is ignorant thereof, as they
were. Romans 20.3. though he have heard much of it, yet he understands it not;
though he think he does, yet he does not; nay, till God show it, he cannot know
it, it is foolishness to him, 1 Cor. 2.14, Hence the first thing a man does
naturally when awakened, is to seek to Save himself, and when he finds he
cannot, he will despair in himself, and is so far prepared for to hear of a
new, and living way, of which nature knows nothing, though of the Law it
knows something. So then, this knowledge of a man's nothingness does not use to
come easily.

3. This knowledge of a man's self, and nothingness, is an heart affecting
thing: it goes to a man's heart, when he is made to see his own heart, and to
know himself: not only the head is enlightened, but the heart is much affected
also. There be many that have much knowledge in their heads, but they have
hardened hearts; they have head knowledge, but they want heart knowledge. And
hence that in Jer. 24.7. I will give them an heart to know etc. But that which
I am now to open, and show is this, viz. that this self knowledge, or knowledge
of ones self is an hea^^ affecting thing. And so it is, for (1.) It (...) a man
with shame; when he comes to le^ himself, he is ashamed of himself: as he said
when he saw and viewed his own, and others sinfulness. Ezr. 9.6. O my God, I am
ashamed, and blush. And every new discovery of a man's own self to himself has
something of this Effect on him. In Rev. 3.18. -- We read of the shame of a
Persons Nakedness: when Persons are stripped Naked, they are ashamed: and so it
is much more, when Persons are made to see their own Spiritual Nakedness, or
Nothingness, they will then be ashamed. Jer. 2.26. A thief is ashamed when
found, or discovered. So is a Person when he comes to have his own heart
discovered to him; and he that never was ashamed of himself, never yet saw
himself as he ought to see. (2.) It abaseth a man, it lowereth and takes down a
man's Spirit in him, which is naturally very high, and lifted up in him: it
makes and keeps a man poor in Spirit, as Math. 5.3. There are some such; but
Persons do never come to be such, until they come to see themselves. See what
Paul says of himself. Ephesians. 3.8. he calls himself, less than the least of all
Saints: and it was no complement; he speaks his heart in those words; and every
one that sees himself aright can say after him, in some measure. But in
Preparation work a man does not see himself to be Little, but, Nothing, quite
Nothing that is good, and this wonderfully abas^^h a man, and lays him very
low, in his own (...) and it is ^^eet that he should be in his own eyes, what
he is indeed: for why should he live in ignorance, etc in self deceivings? (3.)
It even breaks the heart in a man, when he sees himself, and also the Evil that
is in Sin. There is such a thing as a broken heart; though few ever feel it,
and but a few understand what it is. Isa. 61.1. And this sight breaks the
heart; it does not only ashame, and abase a man, but breaks the heart, or does
give a great stroke toward it; and this is a great thing: For (1.) When the
heart is indeed once broken, all the world cannot heal it again. Until the
Blood of Christ be applied, there is no healing: If Christ don't heal, there is
none else that can. Daubing, as the Prophet calls it, Ezekiel. 13.10. is indeed
very dangerous. But in this case it availes nothing, when God wounds, and
breaks the heart indeed, there is none that can heal, but he only that wounded:
it is his work. (2.) The Spirit fails, if the Lord don't step in and help. For
both these, See Isa. 57.15, 16. and 61.1. Now then consider these things. Did
you ever know, or feel what a broken heart is? if not, you never saw your own
nothingness a^ight: and all your Good Works, are but an Abomination before the
Lord, how many, and good soever they be, or seem to be.

4. This knowledge of a man's Nothingness, makes him to abhor his own
Righteousnass, and to magnify that of Christ. That is, this ever follows there
upon, when God will do good un^^ any: you have both there in that one (...):
See Phil. 3.8. (1.) He accounts all that he had before he knew Christ, as Loss;
yea as Dung: his Good Works, his Prayers, his Tears, his good Desires, or what
ever else he had of like nature, before he knew Christ: what does he do with
them all? he throws them all out upon the Dunghill; all is loss, and dross, and
dung, in comparison of Christ, and the knowledge of him. Let such as read
consider; Sirs, do you know what this means, to suffer loss, yea the loss of
all things, yea of those things, which once were accounted gain, to account
them loss, and dross? It may be these things are a Mystery unto you, and you
know them not: you have no experience, and so, no understanding of them;
consider the matter well. (2.) He magnifies the Righteousness of Christ: that
was glorious in his eyes: the Excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my
Lord. Oh! Consider; was the Righteousness of Christ, ever, the most glorious
thing in your eye, that ever you saw: or did ever admire, and wonder at it.
He is wonderful, Isa. 9 6. It is his Name; and as is his Name, so is He: not
only in himself; but in some measure, in the eyes of those that are His. See
also 1 Pet. 2.7. To such as believe, he is precious: and unless when they
slumber, and neglect him, he is more and more so, unto them.

5. This knowledge of a man's own Nothingness, is a growing thing: it still
increases; and a Christian still grows (as one may say) a greater ^^thing.
You will say, perhaps, how can this (...) when a man is brought to Nothing, he
can go no further: there is not any thing beyond that. Answ. Yes, there is a
further, a fuller, a clearer discovery, of that which he saw before: for in
this life, there is nothing perfect. And consider it, there is no growth in
Faith or in any good thing without a growth in this: wherefore let him that
hears consider it well: have you been growing in this thing? have you been
growing less, and less since your first Conversion, and can you now say, more
sensibly than ever, as he did, Phil. 3.8. Who am less, than the least of all
Saints?

The next thing is to show, why this faith that has not works, Evangelically
good, to be the fruits of it, is called a Dead Faith, though it have with it,
never so many affections and works, that are morally good? The reason is
because all those works that are not Evangelically good, are but Dead work^,
though they may seem to be full of Life; and as the works are but Dead works,
so the Faith is but a Dead Faith.

Obj. But how can Fasting and Prayer, and Mourning and Reforming, and the like,
be Dead works? and how may it appear that sometimes they are such? and how may
we discover and discern it, when they be such?

To all this I Answer, in the following Propositions.

1. That such works ^re sometimes no better, no other than Dead works, (...)
appear thus (...) That God neither accepts the works, nor (...) sons with whom
they are found: th^^ is the case many times: and see, what God says of such
works, Isa. 1.13, 14, 15. He calls them Vain, Iniquity, and Abomination; He
says, I cannot away with them; my Soul hates them, they are a trouble to me,
I am weary to bear them; and when you make many Prayers, I will not hear. Why
does the Lord speak thus of them? Oh! they were all Dead works; and hence as
loathsome to him, as a Dead, rotten Carcass is unto us, and more also. By t^^
way, Note, Oh! what disappointment will (...) meet with, who now think
themselves, (...) as they did, Rev. 3.17. And in the issue, all (...) but Dead
works; their best works as a loath (...) Carrion. See an other example, in Luke
18.11, 12, 14. He thought with himself (and thanks God for it too) that he was
not as other men; and yet indeed he was Nothing; blind and naked though he
fasted twice in a week, and paid tithes of all that he had; though he was not
as other men yet God accepted him not: all his works were Dead works, otherwise
surely he had had acceptance with God: who accepts of us, a little, so it be
Sincere: Yea two mites, is accounted a great deal, if it be all we have; much
more than the abundance of self-righteous Pharisees. The most lively, and
affectionate Prayers, and ^^^^ormances of unsound, of unregenerate ones, are
but Dead works: though at (...) Persons don't see, or (...), yet indeed they
are such, and (...) at last appear to be such: and how much (...) such may
justify themselves; yet God knows their hearts: and oftentimes, that which is
highly esteemed among men, is an abomination in the sight of God: as Luke 16.15.

2. These works are dead works in regard of Spiritual Life, whatever there be
of any other Life in them. In a true Christian there is a twofold Life. (1.)
That whereby he lives as a man. (2.) That whereby he lives as a Christi^^, or
as a sound Believer. Of this latter sort, (...) is nothing in Unconverted
persons: see (...) 2.20. a man, as he is a man, can labor, (...) reason, and
take pains; and he has many (...) affections, as of fear, love, delight,
sorrow, etc. and these affections may be stirred, and moved (though as yet there
be not true Grace) so as to set a man on to the doing of many things that are
morally good, though there be no Spiritual Life: See Mark 6.20. Herod heard the
Word gladly, and did many things: and yet he was still Dead in his Sin. And yet
this is all the Conversion which many have, and in which they rest: viz.
through the power of common Convictions, they have their natural affections
stirred (...), and drawn forth, even toward things in themselves, spiritual,
and good; and hence a great Change ^^^lows, both in the Conversation Outwardly,
and in the (...) Inwardly, yet no Spiritual Life; another heart (...) and
another man as 1 Samuel 10.6, 9. but not a (...) Heart (...) is necessary unto
Salvation, Ezekiel. 18*3^. there is nothing of that new man, of which we read,
Ephesians. 4.24 he that is thus wrought upon, is not a New, though another man: and
though he walk on now, in a way not so manifestly filthy and vile; yet really
and indeed, the end thereof is the Ways of Death* as Prove. 14.12. And this
woeful privilege he has, viz. he can go down to the pit, more quietly, and
with less disturbance then otherwise he could. Some make it manifest what they
are: Isa. 3.9. 2 Timothy 5.24. others (as it were) Steal down to Hell more
quietly; others don't suspect them, and they themselves hope all is well, until
a fearful disappointment. Let them see what must be their Everlasting Condition.

3. Spiritual Life is an effect of Creating Power: where this Life is, there is
a new Creation, a new Creature, Ephesians. 4.24. 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be in
Christ, he is a New Creature, as we have already hinted; not the old one
altered, and in many respects amended, but a New One. Wherefore consider this,
it may be you are much, perhaps very much altered and amended, perhap^ all
round about, gaze upon the Change, and ma^ny rejoice to see it, but is there a
New Creation* otherwise all thy works are but dead works; tho never so good,
and glorious in thine own eyes or in the eyes of others: Oh! take (...), tha^
you don't rest in Changes, though never so great, without a New Creation which
brings in not on^^ another, but a (...) Life. And if any one (...) we know
whether there be in us, this New Creation, and so any Spiritual Life, or not: I
answer, attend to and consider what follows.

This Spiritual Life, may be discovered, or enquired after, in considering
these things.

1. It is brought out of Death: i. e. where was nothing but Death, there is now
Life; and the Soul is made sensible that it was once dead, if now it be alive,
Ephesians. 2.1. Ye were dead. That they were so is certain, but he speaks of it, as
of a thing which they knew full well: you that never knew and felt your
Spiritual Death, have none of this Spiritual Life: you have it may be had
Convictions, and that many and great also; and you have been wounded much, but
never slain, as Romans 7.11. you have found your selves weak add feeble, and that
of your selves you could not do what you should, nor what (you think) you
would; but you never found your selves dead, quite dead in Sin, and shut up
under Sin. as Gal. 3.22. if so, it is to be feared, that you are dead still:
and whatever life, or religious liveliness be in you, yet that there is no
Spiritual Life. And to open this a little further, consider these things.

1. When a man sees himself dead in sin, as he must see, if good come unto him,
it is by a Spirit of C^^^iction that he sees it: it is by (...) Light that
powerfully breaks in upon the Soul^ it is made to see, whether it will or no;
(...) is now put forth a power (...) comes a light unavoidable, shining into
the heart; for could persons shut their eyes, and avoid this light, they would
surely do it: but, now, that which perhaps a person had heard, and read, full
many a time, and knew it doctrinally, he now knows it otherwise: it is now (in
some measure at least) plain, clear, evident unto him; in that there is both
light and experience to show it; it is a thing both seen and felt, as Romans
7.10. I found to be unto death. See verse 21, 23. I find, I see: he found and
felt, and saw; so it is in this case; it may be you think you have seen, but if
you have not found and felt your own deadness, the rest will profit little.

2. When a man sees this his deadness aright, it may be truly said, that he
sees what he did not see before. Now that the Spirit is come to convince a
person, he sees that, and sees so, as all his hearing, reading, studying, could
never show him* before the Spirit of Conviction came upon him: See Joh. 16.8.
it is the Spirit that convinces of Sin; and so of (...) in it: it may be* you
think you have seen your own deadness: bu^ I say, how came you to see it? is it
by your own abilities, making improvement of means? or have you also had a
Spirit of Conviction come upon you, to show it to you? is it a work of the
Spirit? is it that which you did not once see, and could not have seen, had not
a work of the Spirit shown (...) to you, nay would not (...) seen, (...) a
powerful work of the Spirit (...) prevailed against all opposition against it;
either from the corruption of the heart within, which make no little
opposition; or from the Evil One without, who also hinders what he can? for as
in other respects, so in this also, the God of this World does blind men. 2
Cor. 4.4.

3. When a man sees his Deadness aright, then that Life which he once had, or
seems to have had, is taken away from him. Romans 7.9. I was alive once. i. e.
in his own conceit. So is every natural man alive, as Paul was, what ever he
says to the contrary. Now then consider this, has that Life that once you had
been taken away? yea the things that were once gain to you, Phil. 3.7. In Death
there is a Privation of Life: what Life have you been deprived of? Paul says,
the Commandment came, sin revived, and I dyed* can you say so too?

4. When a man comes to see himself not only sick and weak, but also Dead, he
is wonderfully affected with it. When he knew it only by hearsay, it did not so
much affect him, but now he is much moved at it: and it is a time of great
difficulty and distress with the Soul; and that upon diverse accounts: For (1.)
A Person now has lost all his former hopes: that is, his presump^uous, and
self righteous hopes. He was full of them once, and had none other: but now
they are gone, they are lost, they are cut off: as they said ^n another case,
Ezekiel. ^7.11. Our Bones are dried, our hope is lost; we are cut off for our
parts. The groundwork, and foundations, all (...) ^aileth: A poor Creature
thought that ^e ^as something that is good, or could do something, or get
something: and he had light and slighty thoughts of Sin, and of God; he counted
that he could easily deal with him, about his Salvation: but now he finds it
far otherwise than he thought. And indeed all that Peace and Security which
ungodly ones, and unsound Professors have, arises chiefly from, a secret
Contempt of God, in their hearts, and slighty thoughts of sin. See Psalm. 50.21.
Thou thoughtest I was altogether such an one as thy self. Ungodly ones don't
know God, and hence don't fear him aright: And whatever any of them pretend or
think, Atheistical Principles are predominate, and reign in them. (2.) It is a
time of distress with the Soul now: because he sees his danger is real,
present, great; and he sees no way of escape: all his own ways utterly fail
him: and though there be a way of escape, yet he sees it not: God has not yet
discovered it to him. He is therefore in a sad case, in his own account and
reckoning: he is going unto destruction; he is in the way of Death; he is under
Wrath, and God is angry with him: and h^ sees no way of escape: and hence he
cannot bu^ be much affected now.

Lastly, A Person comes to find and feel hi^ Deadness, by the irritation of
Corruption; the stirring of it up. Romans 7.9. When the Commandment (...), sin
revived (...) I dyed. Many Lusts that (...) seen before, now appear and show
themselves: so that a person finds himself to b^ such as once he little thought
he was; and it i^ with him in this case, much like as it is with a sick man,
that grows worse and worse, until he is quite Dead. He sees more and more of
his own Sinfulness, until he see himself to be quite dead, in trespasses and
sins. O consider these things, and weigh them deeply in your secret thoughts:
you (it may be) hope you have some Spiritual Life, but how came you by it? was
it brought out o^ Death? when did you see, and feel your selves quite dead in
sin? you perhaps think your selves to be alive, but it may be, it is no
otherwise then Paul was before his Conversion. Romans 7.9. I was alive: how was
that? he was brought up at the feet of one that was a Doctor of the Law: Yes,
and he profited much in his own Religion: but it was with him, as now a days it
is with many that have a good Education; he was a forward Professor indeed, but
without a powerful, killing work of the Law; and what he did in Persecuting of
the Church, he did it in his ignorance and in a zeal of God. See Phil. 3.6. You
have a work, it may be, unto much Conviction, and unto great awakenings, but
not such as to show you THIS DEATH: and hence though you have been much
wounded, yet you have recovered (...) to Security by false comfort: you never
^^me to Die, and so are Dead still; and your (...) works are Dead works, and how
sad is that condition!

2. Where this Spiritual Life is in any, there is a double life. This we have
hinted at before. See it further opened now: from that place, Gal. 2.20. -- The
life which I now live in the flesh. He now lived a life, which before he did
not. So that where Spiritual Life is, there is a New Life, a double life. Mark,
that I say not an other life only, but a new one: for in many unsound ones,
there is a very great Change; an other man, and an other life, but not a new
one. The distinction here is good, and founded upon the word of God, as has
been already shown. See 1 Samuel 6.9. If a man be never so much, and so often
changed, and that for the better too, all is nothing, as to Salvation, unless
he become a New man, a New Creature; such, in the Apostles sense, 2 Cor. 5.17.
Many, and great Changes, some unsound one meet with, and they live other lives
than on^ they did, but yet still it is not a new life, which they live: it is
the old life which they live still though much altered in many things, from
which alteration it is that we call it an other life.

And concerning this New Life, this Spiritua^ Life; we may consider these few
things, to mak^ some further discovery of it, that we may know what we be, and
what our faith is.

1. It differs from the former religious Life; no^ in degree only but in kind:
So it was with the Life that Paul said he now lived; before Conver^ion, he
lived a sensitive, a rational life, as other men did; and he had a Religious
Life too: touching the Righteousness of the Law blameless: he was also zealous.
Phil. 3 6 And so were they, Romans 10.2. But now he lived an other Life, such as
he never did before: and this Life differed from the former, not only in
degree, for then he had been only a greater Pharisee, and indeed a worse man
than he was before: but this life differed in sort, or kind from what he had
before. Now let such as hope consider this. You (it may be) have had the
benefit, or advantage of a good Education, and have had Convictions also, by
hearing and reading of the Word, and otherwise, and thereby have been brought
on to some Profession, and Practice of Religion, without being born again; this
is the case with many: but know that you must have a Religion of a new kind, or
else perish in your old Religion, though you increase it, or add to it never so
much, and it become never so fair and specious. You know, Men and Beasts are
both of them Animals, living Creatures, yet they differ in kind,
notwithstanding the other agreement. So much must your Religion differ from
what it once was, else it will prove to be of little worth, at last, even no
more than that of the Pharisees.

2. He that has this new Life, he lives a Holy Life, without which no man
shall see the Lord. Heb. 12.14. he is Spiritually minded, he Walks after the
Spirit. Romans 8.1, 4, 5, 6. he minds and seeks the things above; the things of
another World, where Jesus Christ is. Col. 3.1. Phil. 3.19. he that minds
Earthly Things, his end his destruction: this is the true Word of God. Joh.
17.17. Thy Word is Truth. Let men flatter, and deceive themselves how they
will; if they do not live a holy life, and walk after the Spirit, they are in
their Sins still; and their faith, if they pretend to any, is but a Dead Faith.
It is true, this Spiritual Life may be much clouded, and the Operations of it
much impedited, and hindered, but there it is; it is not always easy to be
discovered, as it is with a Child in the Womb, if it have Life, it will stir,
and be felt at times, though sometimes, and in some cases, it may be not of a
good while: so it is in this case: and this Life may perhaps at some times be
best discovered, by the opposition that is made against it, by that Lusting
spoken of in Gal. 5.17. of the Flesh against the Spirit: by that Warring. Romans
7.23. Some persons fear they have no Life, because they have that which is
indeed a good evidence of Life: i^ there be any thing of the Spirit in us, the
Flesh will Lust against it; and so also as that we cannon do the things which
we would: if there be tha^ Law of the mind spoken of, Romans 7.23. ther^ will be
sound another Law warring, and bringing as into Captivity, unto the Law of Sin,
which is in our members: and it is true also, that a Christian must not sit
down under complaints, and give way to the inward workings of Corruptions, the
issue of that will be sad; yet where a Lively Faith is, that Soul is full of
sad and sorrowful complaints Paul was so, and who more than he? see Romans 7. at
large: and indeed, if there be no War, there is no Life of Grace; and he that
will approve himself to be a Living Christian, must be in good earnest in this
Warfare, and will have a sorrowful experience daily of what it is to be brought
into Captivity. Oh! wretched man that I am: he says not, that I was, but, that
I am. Let those think of this, who go on in an easy way; neither Sin, nor Satan
trouble them much: Formality may pass on easily; but the Power of Godliness
will meet with the forest Conflicts and Oppositions; for this strikes right
down blows at Sin, and meets with answerable opposition: who had more Grace
than Paul? and who more sensible of Opposition, than he? so that when or when
ever he would do good, any good thing, evil was present with him. Romans 7.21.
thus it was with him, thus it is with others. And for this there is a cloud of
Witnesses: may the number of them be increased daily!

3. Where this Spiritual Life is, Christ lives in the Soul: Gal. 2.20. Christ
lives in me. -- Oh! see here the privilege, the glory, and the happiness of a
Child of God: and consider it* you it may be, have many duties, good desires
and affections, and the like, in which you secretly trust: but consider, does
Christ live in you does he dwell, and rule in you? if not, you have no well
grounded hope, Col 1.27. Christ in you the hope of Glory: If Christ be not in
you, you have no well-grounded hope of Glory. Consider it well; you have this
in you, and that in you, and the other thing, it may be increased in Good, as
they said of themselves. Rev. 3.17. common Convictions have brought you on to
many things; well, but is Christ in you, or not? if he be not, e're long you
will be ashamed of your hope.

Now if Christ be in you, Then,

1. You live a Life of self-abasement: the more Christ lives, and rules in any
one, the more mean, and low, little and nothing is such an one in his own eyes:
who have had more of Christ in them than Paul had? none more; or for certain,
he had very much: yet see what he says of himself. 2 Cor. 12.11. -- I be
nothing, Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I. Ephesians. 3.8. -- Who am less then the least
of all Saints. When a man lives a self-righteous life, he exalts himself; all
his abasements and humiliations, are in the issue, but his exaltation, and as a
stepping stone to raise himself upon; the secret language of his heart is, I,
I: I am this, and I am that, and I can do, and do do these and those things:
But when Christ comes in to the Soul, there is a great change, then the
language is still; Not I, not I! then Christ is all in all: a person desires to
acknowledge him in all: and to set the Crown upon his head; and the Soul seeks
it self, in abasing it self, and in exalting of the Lord Christ: and fain would
do so, more, and better; and if this be not the frame of our hearts, and the
Spirit of our Religion, we indeed may call it Christian, but the Lord will not
call it as we do. Wherefore consider thi^; did you ever find any thing of this
Change, of this new way of living; do you grow still less and less, and does
Christ grow greater and greater in your hearts? (...) ^ohn said of Christ; he
must increase, but I ^ust decrease. Joh. 3 30. and as verse 29. therein he
would rejoice: know you what it is, thus to rejoice? did you ever feel any of
this kind of joy? the Lord help you rightly to reflect upon your selves, and to
consider thereof.

2. If Christ live in you, there will be a dying unto the world. Gal 2.20. I am
crucified with Christ. Crucified, unto sin, and unto the World. If Persons Love
the World, and the things of it, as 1 John ^.15. Christ does not live in them:
in this case the word is plain, let persons look to themselves as well as they
can. Also see Gal. 6.14. If you be not Crucified unto the World, and that to
you, you have as yet no saving acquaintance with the Cross of Christ. And yet
we would have none of the Children of God discouraged: and therefore if any
such object, and say, I can find but little or nothing of this dying unto the
World, yea rather there seems to be much of the contrary. viz A heart much
cleaving unto these things. I answer, yet it may be God is carrying on this
work: you know there is pain upon the Cross, and so, it may be (1) The Lord is
embittering unto you, all these things, in which you have been too much seeking
rest: it may be you have seldom had any outward Comfort, but you have had your
Cross with it; yea greatest Comforts, and Sweets, have had their bitters with
them. All thy Roses have had their thorns; and (2.) It may be God has made you
weary of the worldliness, and carnalness of your own hearts; and also shown
unto you a better way of living; though you cannot come at it, as you would,
yet you can account it precious, if you could attain it: and you say, Oh! how
happy should I be, if I could live in a Spiritual Frame, and walk after the
Spirit. as Romans 8.1. Now ask your selves, what you would have, if you might
have what you would; cannot you say as he did. Psalm. 119.30. I have chosen the
way of truth. Perhaps you will say, I find a strong desire after the things of
this World, and I doubt, I choose these things. Answ. But are there not times
when it is otherwise; and has not God shown unto you, a more excellent way?
perhaps it is now a dark time, but consider what has been; remember the times,
of which you are ready to say, then it was better with me, than Now: had you
never any sensible fellowship with the Father, and with his Son Christ Jesus?
yea, does not your judgment still stand for a Spiritual way of Living, though
you cannot regulate, and command your affections as you would, but are daily
brought into Captivity unto the Law of Sin, as he complains. Romans 7.23.

3. If Christ live in you, he will sometimes manifest himself unto you. Joh.
14.21. he will not be wholly a Stranger unto you, he will sometimes let you see
something of his face, and some times more than at other times. Sometimes you
shall sit down under his shadow, if not with great, yet with some delight at
least. as Cant. 2.3. and his Fruit shall be sweet unto your taste. Yea, he will
bring you into his Banqueting House, though your Entertainment there may not be
so full, and large, as some have experience of. And to open this a little,
consider these things.

1. Sometimes he manifests himself to his by a sudden and sensible breaking in
of light upon the Soul, 2 Cor. 4.6. As in the first Creation, so in this
second. God who Commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in
our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God, in the face
(...) Jesus Christ. This is sometimes sudden, it is ^re person is aware. As
Cant. 6.12. The Word of God Light. 2 Pet. 1.19. And one principal use of it,
unto us, is to give us light: Even Spiritual light, and Spiritual discerning of
Spiritual things. Psalm. 19.8. and 119.130. It does enlighten' the eyes, and
gives light: and if it have not this effect in us; we have no real benefit by
it: if thus it be hid to us, we are lost. 2 Cor. 4.3, 4. But that which I show
is, that the Lord can, and sometimes does make the light of his word, suddenly
and gloriously shine in upon the hearts of them that are his. Oh! how precious
is a word, sometimes made to be unto a Child of God, which he hears or reads,
or is made to come, into his mind! And he thinks he shall never forget such a
word, and such a time. And many times, these breakings in of light are at such
times, when they are least of all expected. And he that has any taste of this,
will desire more of this light, and enlightening. Thus he Psalm. 119.18. Open
thou mine eyes that I may behold wondrous things out of thy Law. And all these
Openings and Enlightnings, come from above; they can in no wise be gotten,
unless they be given. Jam. 1.17. And does any p^or Soul that has had them,
fear they are of his own waking? let him then, if he can make more. The Lord
gives them how, and when, and to whom, and in what degree, he pleases.

2. Sometimes by a more gradual discovery of the way of the Gospel, whereby the
Soul comes to see more clearly into it. This is sometimes, as the dawning of
the day, by degrees, and hence less sensible unto them that have it; but yet
hereby Christ is more known; and the Soul increases in Spiritual knowledge, or
understanding, as it is called. Col. 1.9. There is a notional knowledge of
Spiritual things; and a Spiritual understanding; this is only found with true
Believers. 1 Cor. 2.14, 15. And some thing of it, with all such: and where it
is, it shall be increased: and this should be much endeavored by all such. 2
Pet. 3. ult. And this is that which the Apostle so much desires for them, in
Ephesians. 1.17. By the improvement of Sanctified reason, called by the Apostle, the
Spirit of Wisdom (for so I understand it) Christians grow into a further
measure of the knowledge of God, and of his Son Christ Jesus, whom to know, is
life eternal. Joh. 17.3. And so are by degrees further rooted and built up in
him, and more established in the faith. Compare Col. 2. and Verses 2, 7.

USE. I.
Try your selves whether your faith be a Dead faith, or no: I suppose you to
have faith, to be believers, and to have hopes that your condition, God ward,
is Good; and it may be you say you will trust in Christ, and whatever come of
it, you will do so; and for all the World, I would not willingly stagger the
hopes, and make sad the heart of the meanest of those that are indeed true
Believers in Christ Jesus. Nevertheless (these times abounding with such as be
but formal Professors) let us search and try the matter, and not lightly pass
it over. And Consider,

Trial. 1. It may be your trust in him arises from one, or all of these
things: and so it is with many, and if so, with you? your faith is a Dead
faith; and what ever else you be, you are yet in your sins. (1) Perhaps it
arises from ignorance of your selves, and of sin, and of God etc. It will one
day appear, that the very bottom and foundation of some men's faith, the Corner
stone of it is laid in, and springs from ignorance of themselves, and of sin;
and from secret, unseen, but a real Contempt of God, whom they seem to fear,
and pretend to trust in: they trust in him, so did they, Mic. 3.11. Not because
they knew him, but rather because they knew him not. Oh! consider it, you say
you trust in Christ, but it may be you never saw your selves yet, nor the
Plague of your own hearts. The Commandment never came, and sin never revived,
as he speaks, Romans 7.9. It may be you never saw the evil of sin. You neither
know God, nor have seen your ignorance of God. Now while a man is thus without
a through Conviction, it may be a thing of no great difficulty for him, to trust
in Christ; as he thinks: but when he comes to see himself, and the Law, his
faith and trust will vanish; and he must begin again upon a new bottom: and now
it appear^ that his former trust and faith, was nothing, but Presumption,
rashness, folly, delusion: all which had its foundation laid, in a destructive,
ruining ignorance of himself, and of that, holy, holy dreadful Majesty with
whom we have to do, and who will by no means clear the guilty. (2) Perhaps it
arises only from an Historical, notional knowledge, of the way of the Gospel.
It may be you have read, and heard much of this way, and seemed to fall in with
it, and there you rest, but know nothing of the power of it, or of the
difficulties that be in it. See 1 Cor. 4.20. The kingdom of God is not in word,
but in power. 1 These. 1.5. Our Gospel came, not in word only, but in power. The
Law must come in power to kill us, that we may Live unto God, Gal. 2.19. And so
must the Gospel come in power too, or else we shall have no saving benefit by
it. In power. (1) To overcome the heart, that we may submit to it: for the
heart is ever full of opposition to the way of the Gospel; and that upon
diverse accounts. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Pulling down strong holds, casting down
imaginations, or reasonings, and every high thing that exalts it self, etc. (2)
To affect the heart much; it is an affecting thing, when the Gospel comes in
power. An excellent, and wonderful thing is in the way of the Gospel: in it
self it is so, and to all that have a right understanding of it. Phil. 3.8.
Also it is powerful in melting the heart for, and turning of it from sin. Tit.
2.11, 12. (2) Perhaps your faith is a cover of, and a pillow for Spiritual
sloth; and then it is surely a Dead faith. Sometimes persons being unsound,
they are lazy and slothful; they will not watch, and war, and work, as they
ought; they secretly mentain a Truce with their lusts, they will not be at
pains to purge themselves, and to mortify their lusts; which yet they must do,
or die in them, and for them. Romans 8.13. Well, what rest can they have in that
way, and how can they be quiet? Answ. They trust in Christ, as they say, and
will venture themselves there, and this quiets them. Oh! Adulterous Generation!
Do you make Christ a Pillow for sloth, a Patron of sin? It is no better: will
ye fight against him with his own Weapons? Cry, Hail Master, and betray him? He
knows how to discover, and to deal with such well enough; and will do it in due
time; he will discover the guile and treachery of their own hearts to
themselves, and to all the world. Ponder that place, 1 John 3.3. He that has
this hope (which springs from a lively faith) purifies himself. But he that
sits down in sloth, and loves his sin, has a Dead faith. I say not, he that
Complains of Spiritual slothfulness in himself: for what almost do many Godly
ones complain of more? and they account that it is never better with them, then
when they can get some power against it. How often does the Psalmist beg, and
pray, Quicken me: And see Psalm. 119.32. When thou shall enlarge my heart, etc

Trial 2. If your Faith be not a Dead Faith, it will have fruits: even such as
we read of. Romans 6.2. Fruits unto holiness: I shall instance in three things.
(1.) Repentance. (2.) Mortification. (3) Vivification. Now these are great
points and to open fully any one of them, requires a treatise by it self. I
mention them only by way of trial, to discover whether our Faith be a Dead
Faith or not. And therefore must pass over them briefly.

Fruit 1. One fruit is Repentance; and this makes way for, and unto holiness of
heart and life. Acts 11.18. it is therefore called Repentance unto Life.
Repentance (if it be true) and Faith go together. Mark 1.15. Repent ye, and
beeieve, etc. there is a Repentance preparatory, and antecedaneous unto Faith:
and there is a Repentance that is a consequent, and a fruit of it. Now it is
this Repentance of which I am to speak; and I shall consider these few things
only, in speaking to which yet I may take in, some of those things (...) so,
which are preparatory to, though chiefly I shall speak of those things which
follow Faith: the design of the whole is, to discover to us what our Faith is,
whether a Dead Faith or not (1.) A sight of sin. (2.) A sorrow for sin. and (3)
A shame, or self-abasement for it. (4.) The main, or principal spring and rise
of that sorrow or shame, viz. some Gospel consideration, something seen of
Christ, and of the Gospel.

(...). There must be a sight of sin: until a man sees (...), he will never, he
can never repent of it: an^ he must see it aright, e're he can repent of it
aright: and to that end there must be an enlightening, and an opening of the
eyes: a turning from darkness unto light, which is a main work, and fruit of
the Ministry of the Word. Acts 26.18. Man's natural state, is a state of
darkness, blindness, ignorance, though he know it not, yet so it is: now when
God will do good to any, He calls them out of darkness into his mavelous
light: but that which I show is, that when God will do good to any, by giving
them Repentance unto life, he gives them a sight of sin: till they see it, they
will not repent of it; and when they do see it, they will repent of it, and
turn from it.

Obj. But don't all men own themselves to be Sinners, and most men own
themselves to be great Sinners too; what is this sight of sin, of which you
speak?

Answ. There are (among the rest) these three things in it, which I shall
observe from that seventh of the Romans, where Paul shows how it was with
him, when God came to do him good. (1.) Such a sight as came from the coming of
the Commandment, verse 9. the Commandment came. How? Why, it came with light,
and was set on with power upon his heart: there is no through knowledge of our
selves, and of sin, without this. verse 7. I had not known sin, but by the Law:
i. e. by its coming thus: for otherwise he knew the Law before, and (...) too;
and thought he knew all that he had (...) to know: this is therefore to be
considered; (...) on say, you know, and see sin, but I ask, how did you come to
see it? did the Commandment ever come with light, and power? has the Word ever
been a powerful, enlightening word unto your Souls? Psalm. 19.8. yea, has there
been such a sight, as could never have been obtained, by all reading, hearing
studying, and use of means, without this work of which we speak? (2) Such a
sight as comes from the reviving of sin: sin revived says Paul: the
Commandment came, and sin revived: what is that? Answ. See verse 8. Without the
Law, sin was dead: the Sin before that seemed to be dead, was now irritated,
now it revives, it appears to be alive, and shows it self. You may understand
it thus; I will open it in three things only, and briefly.

1. There be all sorts of sin, there is every lust in the heart of every man:
there is a mighty Host, and Army of Sins, and Lusts in the heart; and hence the
heart is said to be full of evil. Eccles. 9.3. and hence when he had a sight of
himself in such renewed convictions as God saw meet to give him, he saw his
Sins to be innumerable, even more than the hairs of his head: Psalm. 40.12. and
so Paul, Romans 7 8. saw in himself all manner of concupiscence; and it is
frequent with persons under convictions, to say that they find (...) themselves
all manner of sin: but that (...) say is, whatever they see, every (...)
really, and they shall know it too, ever the Lord have done with them, if he
mean to make through work with them.

2. All these particular Lusts that be in the heart, do not always actually
stir or work; they are like to Enemies that Ly Entrenched, all ready, upon the
Watchword, or Alarm given, to show themselves, and to make a fierce assault,
as occasion may be; whereas many of them Ly still, and stir not at all, or but
little, of a long time together: much so it is here, in (...) All men are by
nature, what (...) one is; Unclean, Drunkards, Murderers, and the like; all
these, and all other sins are in them, they Ly Encamped, and Entrenched in the
heart, all ready when a Temptation shall come, and restraints be removed, which
are many, and various, and of which, I cannot now speak in particular; they
will surely show themselves, as much as any other sins, which do stir, and work
in the heart or life. Hazael will show himself to be a Dog, though at present
he himself cannot think it. 2 King. 8.13.

3. When the Commandment comes, there is as it were a great Alarm given to
Corruption, and hence there is a great stir in the Soul, as it were a rally,
and up-rising of Corruptions; and hence Paul says, that when the Commandment
came, it wrought in him: i. e. it did irritate, and stir up in him, all manner
of Concupiscence, or Corruption. Sin was now, (if I may so express it) (...) up
in Arms; when the Commandment came, it (...) up on sin in good earnest to
destroy it, and to (...) it out; and hence Sin, did (as it were) stand up for
its Life: it showed it self, its strength its rage unto the utmost; before this
the Commandment did nothing to the purpose, it made no vigorous on set upon the
Soul; the most (...) did, was to bring the Soul to some Outward Conformity to
the Law, which Sin within might the more easily dispense with, because it might
stil^ (...) and reign in the Soul notwithstanding (...) but when indeed the
Commandment comes the ease is otherwise; sin perceives it self to be in real
danger, its very life and being is sorely struck at; and hence it will stir,
work and show it self, even all that it can. Alas, wha^ do many persons think
of Sin! will it die easily and quietly leave its station, will it do nothing and
speak never a word for its life? are our Lusts such tame and feeble things? Oh!
no, Paul found it otherwise; and so shall any one that shall indeed put the
matter upon trial: yea after Conversion, though sin, and formality may tollerably
agree together; yet wherever the Power of Godliness, is in any good measure,
there ensues a sore war with Sin; and the more there is of the Power of
Godliness, the more sore and close will the Combat and Conflict be: (...)
complains more, than that great Christian. Romans 7.23, 24. and in the foregoing
verses? and why does he thus complain? was it because he was (...), and had
less Grace? No, it was just the ^^^^rary. In a word, let us be sincere, and in
good earnest with our Lusts, to destroy them, and we shall then have a very
humbling, abasing experience of their strength and power in us: while in the
mean while Formality may pass along in the world, and through all our religious
performances much more quietly.

3. It must be a killing sight of sin. See Romans 7.9, 10, 11, 13. Sin revived,
and I dyed -- I found to be unto death -- and by it slew me -- working (...) in
me. Here is a heap of expressions, all of them showing the same thing in
general; we must consider therefore the more deeply what may be the meaning of
them. This then I say, this sight must be a killing sight, such as will slay a
man: It slew me. When Paul saw himself full of all manner of Concupiscence; and
when he saw sin appearing in its own colors; it had no vizard on, it did but
look like it self; it did appear sin, verse 13. he immediately falls down
dead at the sight of it; it wrought death in him, it slew him. And note here,
it is a great thing to die, and it is more terrible still to be slain. Now to
Open this a little, this dying, killing, slaying, has these things in it,
besides what else might be named.

1^ It takes away from a person the life which once he thought he had, and in
which he trusted; every man naturally thinks himself to be alive, though indeed
he be dead in sins. Romans 7.9. I was alive once; i. e. in hi^ own conceit: (...)
are many: and they trust in this life, they lea^^ (...) live upon it, it is
their confidence, and their ^^^joycing, they account it gain, as he speaks,
Phil. 3.7. and this many do, whatever they think, pretend, or profess to the
contrary: now this Life is taken away, when a person comes to see himself, and
his sin aright. Consider then these things, know you what this means to have
this life taken away? else you be alive still, as Paul before Conversion was:
that is, in conceit alive, but dead indeed; and on some accounts in a worse
condition then many of those, who are yet far from Christ: you must die, you
must be slain, that so you may be quickened, and may Live unto God Gal. 2.19.
mark what he says* -- I am dead that I might live. q d. It was needful that I
should die, that I might live: a man without this may indeed live unto himself,
but not unto God, how religious soever he may be, or seem to be.

2. It leaves a man without the least ability, or hope to help himself: he
says, he finds, and feels that he has no ability to help himself, no more
than a dead man has: and he has no hope in that matter; we say, as long as
there is life, there is hope; but when a man is once dead, there is no hope: so
it is here, while, a man is alive in himself, he has many self-righteous
hopes; but when the Commandment comes, and sin revives, and he dies, all these
hopes are gone; and trul^ persons do not easily come to say there is no ^ope.
Isa. 57.10. Men indeed do easily own themselves, many times, to be wholly
helpless in themselves, but when they come indeed to feel, and find it so, it
is grievous, it is a killing thing to them, and cannot be otherwise; but I
shall not enlarge in this point, yet a word of it; wherefore I say,

3. It is a terrible thing unto the Soul to come unto this, as we have
formerly, and but now also hinted; and that for th^^^ reasons (1*) The Soul is
now under the (...) sense of Soul concerns, and highly engaged to se^k for
help; he cannot make a light thing of peri^hing, as many do, and as perhaps
himself once long did; no, it is now unto him, as indeed it i^ in it self: a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God. Heb. 10.31. he cannot
bear the thoughts of perishing for ever: he lies under a deep sense of a
necessity of having help; he has no rest because of sin, and his iniquities
are an heavy burden, too heavy for him. Psalm. 38.3, 4. the Spirit is wounded,
and he cannot bear it; a sense of wrath lies on him, so that now he can no more
rest, and sleep as in days past (2.) All that he has built, and leaned upon,
now fails him: he would have done what they endeavored. Rom 10 3. viz. have
established his own righteousness. There is not one man among all Adams
Posterity, that is not naturally very strongly inclined this way; but he sees
now that he cannot do it; he cannot make his own way stand; he labors in vain
and instead of growing better, he complains that as is worse and worse, and
therefore now know^ not what to do, nor what course to take, nor which way to
turn himself. Act. 2.37. and then (3) He sees no other way of help as yet: the
right way he knows not. Isa. 59.8. and as ye^ there is no judgment in his
goings: all his own ways fail him; and hence he must needs be distressed; and
a through sight of sin does not come lightly with any; though some have more
grievous, and ^o^er travel than others have Oh! consider these things, it may
be, you have not taken the first ^tep toward Repentance, you have not had a
through sight of sin: if so, the rest is wanting, and your Faith, but a Dead
Faith.

2. Another thing in this Repentance, which is a fruit of a lively Faith, is
Sorrow for Sin; the Scripture abundantly makes mention of this; and often sets
it forth in very high Expressions. See Ezekiel. 7 16. Where true Repentance is,
there is a Mourning for sin -- All of them mourning, every one for his
iniquity: and Zech. 12.10. They shall mourn, as one mourns for his only son,
and shall be in bitterness. 2 Cor. 7.9. Ye sorrowed unto Repentance.

3. Another thing in this Repentance is Shame, and Abasement of Soul for Sin.
See Romans 6 21. -- Those things whereof ye are now ashamed. When God gives
Repentance to a Person, he is ashamed of his former ways and courses; whether
he walked in a way of grosser sinning, or in a way of Pharisa^^^, and self
righteousness, as Paul once did, trusting in a blameless Life, as he calls it,
Phil. 3.6. When his eyes are opened, he will be ashamed of himself, his sin and
folly, showing it self, in his former ways and courses. And of this sorrow and
shame I shall say these things briefly; a little to open, and enlighten the
things we are upon, as we go along. (1.) This sorrow and abasement arises from
an enlightening to show a man more of sin, than once he saw in himself; and to
show him the evil that is in sin. First there must be an enlightening, Act.
26.18. To open their eyes, and to turn them from (...) to light. There must
then be an enlightening, as also we have already hinted: and they have nothing
of this enlightening, that know nothing of their own blindness and darkness, who
never saw, felt and mourned under that. And this enlightening is to show a man
more of himself, than once he did see: for this is certain, persons though they
live under the light of the Gospel, yet they don't know how bad and vile they
be, until God open their eyes, and cause them to know their abominations; which
is usually by the work of the Ministry, Ezekiel. 16 2. The Spirit working with the
word; otherwise all is nothing: or the most that a person will attain, is an
Historical knowledge of himself, and of his own vileness; and his Faith and
Repentance will be answerable. Also the evil of sin (as we said) must be seen:
sin must be seen in another manner, and look with another face, than once it
did: it must appear sin, which it does but to a few, and become exceeding
sinful. Romans 7.13. And then a man will be ashamed and mourn, and not else. (2.)
This sorrow and mourning has always a great mixture of hardness and pride of
heart with it: for in nothing are we perfect in this life; and what is there
almost that a humbled Soul complains of more, and desires to get rid of more,
than of an hard, and a proud heart; and so much of this is sometimes seen, and
felt, that a person fears there is nothing else. See Isa. 63.17. This is
certainly one part of a Christians work, and his Warfare is within his own
heart, with the pride, hardness, unbrokenness, and other distempers thereof.
Some Professors indeed find no hard work with their own hearts, they think they
have all things, and have need of nothing; but these are indeed miserable,
wretched, blind and naked, Rev. 3.17. They indeed Pray for many things, but not
from a sight and sense of their wants: they are only empty words, which they
speak, and the Lord abhors their best Prayers. (3.) This sorrow and abasement
is a growing thing: if other Graces grow, this does; and as this grows so do
all other: if a person don't grow in Humiliation and Repentance, he grows not
at all, so as indeed to increase with the increase of God. Now this growth in
some, indeed is very little; as some men, so some Christians are very low in
stature: and there are Winter seasons in many Christians lives, in which they
grow but little, or not at all: yet in their general course they do grow. Joh.
15.2. He purges them that they may bring forth more fruit. Now consider this;
some say, they have Repented of sin; and hence sit down, as if all the
difficulty were over, and they had no more to do: but if their work be right,
it must continue, increase and grow. If your Repentance be all over, and done,
it was never yet well begun: Alas you have deceived your selves: think of it,
while time lasts.

4. The main spring of this sorrow and abasement, is some Gospel Consideration:
something of Christ, and the Grace of God in him. Tit. 2.11, 12. What is that
which effectually teaches a person to deny his sin, and to repent of it? Truly
nothing so much as this: viz. the Grace of God appearing. There be other
things, but this is the main. See Ezekiel. 16. two last verses. Consider then what
influences, and motives you are under: is it things Legal or Evangelical? is it
Law or Gospel that chiefly moves you? you will say, how shall I know that? Answ.

(1.) Has the light of the glorious Gospel, ever been made to shine in unto
your hearts? To some it is hid. See 2 Cor* 4.3, 4, 6. But God shines into the
hearts of some to give light. Has he ever shined into thy heart? Has the
light of the Gospel been unto thee, the most glorious light?

(2.) Do Gospel Considerations influence, and work on your hearts? it may be
you can sometimes fear: but does the Love of Christ ever constrain you. 2 Cor.
5.14, 15. If you do live at all a Spiritual Life, you Live to him that dyed for
you, and his Love constrains you: and indeed whatever we do in Religion, if it
be not a fruit of Faith, and of Love; (for faith works by Love, Gal. 5.6.) all
is nothing; and whatever, and how much soever it be, the Lord accepts it not
with any good will.

Now here is a Knot that should be untied, as we go along, left we leave
matters too dark. viz. Some think they have Love to Christ, when indeed they
have no^e: and some fear they have none, when indeed they have much, at least
some. A word of each.

1. Some think they have much Love to Christ, but they have none in truth: or
no true Love. For as we read of true holiness: or holiness of truth. Ephesians. 4.24.
So there is a true Love; and a Love that is not of truth; and the Love which
many have to Christ is no better than that which they had of old, who one while
Cried, Hosanna to the Son of David; and afterward, Crucify him, Crucify him,
away with him: or that of the young man that came running to Christ, with much
zeal, and by and by, he turns his back on him; he went away sorrowful. So it is
wit^ many, they seem to have much Love for a season, but in time it withers, as
Joh 5.35. The reason is, they never knew Christ, nor themselves neither, not
thoroughly: and hence it is with them, as with the stony ground. Matthew. 13.5, 20,
21. There wanted deepness of earth: thorowness of Conviction; and hence though
the word were received with joy, yet all dureth but for a while; he has no
root in himself: no inward principle of Spiritual life and love; only the
natu^^^ affections are raised, by the power of Convictions, and turned (in some
sort) another way than formerly, but there being no Sanctifying change, in
time, all turns again to the old Channel: or else a person contents himself
with common love, and affections, instead of that which is Spiritual, and flows
from a Sanctifying charge in the Soul.

2. There are some that (...) much Love, or at least true Love to Christ, that
fear that they have none at all. Obj. How can this be? if a man have true Love,
he may know it, one would think. Answ. No, not always: we can neither discern
Christ's Love to us, nor our Love to him, unless the Spirit of God, discover the
same unto us. 1 Cor. 2.12. We are said to receive the Spirit, that we may know
the things that are freely given to us of God. So also those things that are
freely wrought in us, will be all clouded and in darkness, unless the Spirit do
enlighten our minds, and discover them unto us. See Romans 8.16. The Spirit it
self bears witness with our Spirit. O^^ Spirit will, it can witness nothing to
us, for our comfort, unless the Spirit of God join and witness together
therewith: if this Spirit as to this work of it, be withdrawn (as many times it
is) we are all in darkness, and have no light, though we fear God and they him;
there is no light sufficient to discover that to us, which indeed is in us. A
persons love to Christ is always seen, and discerned by Christ, but not always
by himself, yet we should seek to find it out in our selves: and therefore as
we pass along in our work, consider only these two things in this place.

1. Have you seen Christ? if you have, you ca^ not but Love, and believe in
him: and so e' contr^^ Seen (...)? how is that? Answ. Not with bodily eyes: for
when he was on earth, many saw him so, and perished for ever: and to see him
now with our bodily eyes, would be like to confound us, rather than profit
(...)* however it is not to be expected by us. Not by hearsay, and report
only: for so all see him under the Gospel: but have you seen him, by a work of
the Spirit revealing Christ in you? Gal. 1.15, 16. When it pleased God to
reveal his Son in me, or to me. Christ is never seen, or known by any, how much
soever they hear of him, till God reveal him. Now, if you have seen him, there
is at least a latent, rooted Love to, and belief in him, which shall never
utterly fail, but in due time appear, and at last be found unto Salvation. And
if you have seen him, you have seen your Spiritual ignorance of him; and that
ignorance that yet remains, is among your chief complaints.

2. If you Love him, you will Love those that are his. 1 John 3.14. And on this
account, for that of him, that is in them: and he that does not Love the people
of God, does not Love God himself. 1 John 4.20. If we Love him, we shall Love
them that are his, because they are his: and they are one, as God and Christ
are one. John 17.11, 21, 22.

2. The second fruit to be considered of (by way of trial) is Mortification of
sin, or the purifying of the Soul from it, which is a fruit of faith. Acts
15.9. Purifying their hearts by faith. The heart is never purified; and sin is
never mortified, until faith come: and that always does something this way,
unless it be a Dead faith. Sin may be as it were stunned, and knocked on the
head, by Convictions, and legal terrors, but is never mortified, until faith
come, and then something is done indeed.

Now, having mentioned this, as one thing to try our selves by, we must clear
and open the point, and endeavor to free it, ere we leave it, from whatsoever
might cloud and darken it: And the difficulty is to show the difference between
the effects of Legal terrors, and Common Convictions in restraining sin, and
that of Faith in mortifying sin: and the difference between that effect which
that faith which is yet indeed but a Dead faith may have upon sin, and that
which a Lively faith has in mortifying of sin.

And first we shall consider the difference that is between Legal Terrors
restraining Sin; and that of Faith in mortifying it. And here I promise this
one thing: viz. that particular Lusts, by Legal Terrors, and common
convictions, are many times, as it were benumbed, in a swound, when not at all
mortifyed; and here many deceive themselves; they find no present disposition,
or inclination to their former lusts, but some aversation from them, and hence
they think they are thoroughly reformed, and mortified, when as there is no such
thing; they have only changed their way of sinning; as he that was a gross
Sinner perhaps, is now a formal Professor, a self-righteous Sin^ner: Sin in him
now runs out in another channel* he is as much a Sinner as ever, though in
another way, and he sees it not.

Now when sin is only stunned and benumbed with Legal Terrors, and forced as it
were to pull in its head, and to shrink back into the deep, etc dark corners of
the heart, and so to find another vent, a more secret, and undiscovered
passage. Then,

1. A man's life in Religion is mercenary; all his Obedience is Legal, and
Servile; not filial: such a persons Obedience is but an endeavoring to pay the
debt of Satisfaction for Sin which he ows to God, and to pacify his anger,
which he hopes to do, by a better walking then formerly; and though such
persons do not profess so, yet really it is so, with them. And hence one of
these things following, may be said of them: either (1) They deceive themselves
in thinking all is well with them, when it is not. (2) They find that they
cannot make their peace with God, and so return again to folly; or else (3)
Spend their time in a wearyish formality, and so perish for ever at last. --
(1) Some think, they have paid their debt, by their repentings, and reformings,
and other good works; and hence their minds are at rest, in some measure; but
there comes an after reckoning at death, when it appears that their coin is not
current: and what they trust to will not be accepted; the Lord abhors all that
they have offered to him for payment; and hence they are cast into Hell, where
they are for ever tormented; for they can never pay the debt. (2) Some find
that by all they do, they cannot make their peace with God; they are still
running into arrearages: still God is provoked by them daily; and hence
complain that their labor is in vain, that they serve an hard master. Mat.
25.24. that gathers where he had not sown; that requires obedience, but gives
not strength answerable; and hence grow discouraged, and like the Israelites of
old, finding the difficulties of the Wilderness, would return into Egypt again:
so these forsake the Lord, and his Service, and return to their old ways
again, or some other as bad: as the dog to his vomit. 2 Pet. 2. ult. (3) Some
wear out their time in a heartless, uncomfortable, and unprofitable attendance
to the duties of Religion; they do hope, and fear much according as be the
wainings or increase of their own righteousness, or legal performances: for the
way of peace they have not known; and there is no judgment in their goings.

But now the true believer, his obedience is filial: he goes to work, but not
to pay his debt: for he has seen that done already by another, or knows that
if ever it be done, it must be by another; and hence the main spring of his
obedience, is Love to God, and his great Redeemer; his faith works by love.
Gal. 5.6. it will work, or set a man on work; but how? by love. 2 Cor. 5.14.
The love of Christ constrains us, says the Apostle. This Faith then does not
set a man on work, to pay old debts, or new, which no man can do any thing of,
either more or less: though many attempt it daily, who yet perhaps understand
not what they do, and so undo themselves, but see not how, until it be too late.

2. Then a man's hope and comfort is not like that of a true believers: What is
the legal man's hope? Answ. That God will not cast him into Hell, when he dies.
What is his comfort in this world? Answ. His comfort is partly that hope, and
partly some lust, or creature-comfort, that he feeds upon, and commits
Spiritual Adultery with every day, continually. What do these hopes stand on?
What are they built on? Answ. His own Obedience, and something in himself; and
hence as he find things there, better or worse as he reckons, so his hopes are
higher, or lower, they ebb or flow accordingly, as we have but now intimated.
Well, how is it with the true believer, what are his hopes? Answ. That God is
at peace with him through his Son, Christ Jesus: and also that he shall see,
and enjoy him for ever, of which Inheritance he has some earnest here; and
hence hopes, and sometimes perhaps longs also for the full possession. Phil.
1.23. Having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ, which is far better,
than any thing, than all, than every thing that is here in this World to be
had. Obj. But do all true believers find in themselves, this desire to be with
Christ? Answ. No, unless it be at times? In some, the love of this World
prevails, and that sadly, and that for a long time; one would hardly think,
that there were any Grace in them: Others are almost always under clouds and
darkness. Isa. 50.10. they walk in darkness, and have no light; and hence dying
is terrible unto them: but they have all that principle in them, which (if the
actings of it were not one way or other obstructed in them) would show it self
in such hopes and desires, as we have mentioned. But what is the true believers
comfort here in this World, for the present, so far as he is, and acts like a
believer, li^e himself? Answ. One main thing in which it lies, is this: viz. in
what he can get and enjoy of God here: hence let his hopes stand never so fast,
he can mourn for his want of getting more of God. here; that he can find so
little of him in his Ordinances, and Duties of his Worship: if the Lord be
much, or long absent, he will lament after him; if he cannot see, as he has
seen in his Sanctuary; yea though he do dwell in his house, yet if there he
cannot behold his beauty, he will complain, Cant 5.6. my Beloved had withdrawn
himself, and was gone, -- my Soul failed when, etc. the Legallist mourns not if
his hopes will but stand: for his comfort lies in that, and in an Adulterous
Communion with Creature comforts, and the vanities of this World: And if you
ask, what the believers hope is built on? Answ. Christ, and Free Grace is the
foundation of it. Col. 1.27. Christ in you the hope of glory. 2 These. 2.
penult. Good hope through grace. 1 Timothy 1.1. Jesus Christ which is our hope.
Nothing so hard, nothing so sweet, as to live on the free, rich Grace of God in
Christ Jesus only; and nothing so pleasing unto God, as that we should do so;
and hereby he has more glory by us, then if we could present him a perfect
Obedience of our own.

3 When sin is only benumbed, etc. whatever convictions there have been, yet
the Commandment never so came, as to make sin revive, and so as to work in a
man, all manner of Concupiscence, so as to make a man feel sin, in its
strength, and dominion in him: for this would bring him to despair in himself,
and spoil all his own righteousness, and self righteous hopes; and prepare him
to seek a remedy, not in himself, but out of himself, in the Grace of God in
Christ Jesus, when discovered to him; and unto unprepared ones, it is not wont
to be discovered. Luke 3.5. Every valley shall be filled, and every mountain,
and hill shall be brought low; -- and then, All flesh shall see the Salvation
of God. It is through the Law that we are dead unto the Law. And the Law is our
School master to bring us unto Christ. Gal. 2.19. and 3.24. we then must come
under a work of the Law, that we may be prepared, for the light of the Gospel;
its shining into our hearts, which many wanting, whatever they profess, the
Gospel is hid unto them; it shines not. 2 Cor. 4.3. no^ as to the hearsay of
it, but as to the power, and saving efficacy of it.

The next thing to be spoken to is this, viz. the difference between that
effect which that faith, which is indeed but a Dead faith may have upon sin,
and that which a Lively faith has in mortifying of sin: for there is in some a
work; not only merely legal, or rather, in that degree legal: for some
legallists are more gross than others: but together with it, there is a Faith,
though indeed, but a Dead faith, and even this faith has in them, some effects
on sin, to restrain it, though it never mortify it. Thus, I conceive it was
with them, Psalm. 78.34, 35, 36. They sought him; and they returned, and
enquired early after God: and not only so; but they remembered that God was
their rock, and the high God, their Redeemer. What then is, and how may we
discover the difference? In true faith there is Love; so in that which is yet
but A Dead faith, there is A Love too, though not such a Love, as is in the
former: we must then see, if we can make the difference, or show it, in some
few things at least.

1. Where this true love, or lively faith is, which purifies the heart, and
engages the Soul in mortifying of sin, there is an hatred to All sin. Psa.
119.104 I hate every false way. In others there may be a falling out, with a
sin, a quarrel with it for a season; as true Lovers may have their fallings
out: but here is a real, and a rooted Hatred. Now it must needs be a great work
whereby, and ^ great change wherein a person is brought to Hate that which he
once Loved above all other things. To Hate those things which once he delighted
in, and which wore to him as a Right Eye, or a Right Hand; yea as his very
self. Math. 16.24. Let him deny himself. How impossible is this to every man,
and how far is he from it, until a great work, and change be wrought in him? he
may think he can do it, and does do it, but if ever the matter come indeed to
trial, he will find himself as far from it, as unable to do it, as a dead man
from raising himself out of the Grave, and doing the works of the living. It is
God only, by his mighty power, that can give life unto the Spiritually dead.
Ephesians. 2.1.5. When ye were dead in sins. And where this hatred is, there are
these things. (1.) A sensible mixture of Love to that which a man hates: so
that he loves what he hates, and hates what he loves, and abhors himself for
that l^^e he finds unto sin. Romans 7.15. What I ^ate that do I. And he not only
did it, but there was also some love to it: for his hatred of sin was not
perfect, though sincere. Phil. 3.12. Not already perfect: no, not in any one
point; he was yet carnal and sold under sin, as to the unregenerate part, verse
14. though as to the inward man, it was otherwise, as verse 22. As long as we
have sin in us, we shall have some love to it: those then that think they have
no love to sin, in them, do deceive themselves; they do not know themselves;
and it is to be feared, that they have no true hatred. (2.) A making out, in
the use of means after, an utter abolition, and rooting cut of sin: so that
nothing will give the heart full rest, or content, while any thing of sin still
remains. Outward comforts, inward affections, and enlargements, and
assistances in duties, and such like, are things in which many unsound ones
rest. But he that Hates all sin, will never rest, until it is All gone: yea
the more help he has against sin, and the more it dies in him, the more he is
set against it still: whereas it is contrary with others, that take up their
stand, and make their rest in Reformation, without Mortification.

2. This true, lively faith, which makes a person to seek to Mortify his sin;
it sets him on work, as Gal. 5.6. He will up, and be doing. That he may mortify
his lust; he must work, Phil. 2.12. And not only so, but it teaches him, as to
work, so to look beyond all his own works, and doings and to own himself to be
a poor Nothing: else it is but (as I may call it) a legal faith. Paul did much,
and so did Apollos too, yet neither of them were any thing, 1 Cor. 3.5, 6, 7.
So in this case, for a person to do much, and yet after all to say, I am
nothing, as he did, 2 Cor. 12.11. is a Mystery, which faith only teaches; and
few know what it is, to be diligent in doing, and to rely only, on the power
and grace of God in Christ for supply of all wants. We may have a general
notion of this, but a lively sense and feeling of it, is both bitter and sweet,
and an effect of a Lively faith only.

Now it is true that an unsound Professor may do many things, as Herod did,
Mark 6.20. he may abound with Religious performances, as they Isa. 1.11. had
multitude of sacrifices, yet to no purpose: the Lord says that he was full of
them: So they Isa. 58.2. Sought him daily. Yet there is this difference also,
besides what has been said. (1.) Such as be unsound ones, usually rest in the
External performance of duties; and much farther from that they never go. But
true faith teaches a man to look chiefly where God looks chiefly, viz. to the
manner of performance, to the sincerity and uprightness of the heart in all
duties. And hence what complaints do true believers many times make of
Hypocrisy, and by ends in duties, of self seekings, and the like, which they
cannot wholly lay aside and free themselves from? Something of this nature no
doubt he found which brought forth that cry, Psalm. 119.80. Let my heart be
sound in thy statutes, that I be not ashamed. A true Christians great work in
all his religious Services, is with his own heart, that in all he may approve
himself unto God. (2.) Unsound ones do seek, and rest in themselves in all they
do. Zech. 7.5, 6. They did fast, and mourn etc. but says God, did ye at all do
it unto me, even unto me? they did all for themselves. A sound believer has
respect to God, and the pleasing of him, and finds rest in this. Psalm. 19. ult.
Let the words of my mouth, and the meditations of my (...) be acceptable in thy
sight, O Lord my strength, and my Redeemer. q. d. if God accept me, if I may
please him, it is well, it is enough; he has been good to me, my Redeemer, and
if I may but please him, that is the great thing that I seek. Here, understand
aright.

1. There is no man that can deny himself, so as not to seek himself more than
he should: self will be rising up, but grace will snub and rebuke it, and say
to it, get hence! and would have no more to do with it; as they said of their
Idols. Hos. 14.8. Self is the great Idol which almost all men, worship and
serve.

2. No man is bound not to have any Eye to himself at all, in what he does.
Heb. 11.26. yet a gracious respect to God, should and does influence every
gracious Soul, in what he does, in his Service. And many there be, I doubt not,
that if called to it, would deny themselves, so as to forsake all for Christ,
yea, to die in his cause, however they have jealous, and low thoughts of
themselves; and so it is with many that hold on in a steady way of obedience,
attending conscientiously to all the Ordinances of God, and known duties of his
Worship; what they do, is in some measure from their good respect, and love to
God, and his ways, who yet cannot say it of themselves, and not from servile
fear only. And that appears thus. (1) If it were from servile fear only, they
would in time grow weary, of Gods ^^ayes, as many do. Mal. 1.13. and Isa.
43.22. it is true, there is often some, yea much servile fear in a Child of
God, and there is also a weariness in Spiritual work; but then how is this
complained of? do not they loath themselves for it? are not they weary of that
weariness? and God makes good that promise unto them. Isa. 40. ult. the meaning
is, not that they shall find no weariness, or faintings at all, who wait on
God, but that it shall not prevail so, but that as in the beginning of the
verse, they shall renew their strength, and go on still. 2 Cor. 4.1. -- we
faint not: but hold out still: so here; but as verse 16. they don't faint,
because the inner man is renewed day by day. Yet David complained that his Soul
fainted for Gods Salvation. Psalm. 119.81. (2) If it were only from servile
fear, a Form of Godliness would content them, they would not still be making
after, and prizing the Power of Godliness, in their own hearts, and lives, and
in others too: yea, the Power of Godliness would be a thing unknown to them; as
it is unto many: and there be these things in it. See Phil. 3.13, 14. (1) A
forgetting the things that are behind, contrary to a resting in present
seize, as they did, Rev. 3.17. who had enough, and need of nothing: as a
man that runs in a race, he minds not what is behind him: and when a man
forgets the things that are behind him, he sees a need to be doing still, and
is desirous of getting more still, as well as of getting some at first: for
what profit is it, to set out in a Race, if a person do not hold out* and go on
in it? (2) A clear conviction (...) persons imperfections, and a sight of
things yet before him, which are precious in his e^es; as more strength, and
diligence in duties; more conformity unto the will of God; a further rest, and
a fuller contentment, and satisfaction in God, as a man's portion. Psalm. 16.5.
these are things before a man, and precious in his eyes, if the Power of
Godliness be in him: Hence (3.) There is a reaching after these things: a
pressing on toward them: a person does not only use means, but in them he
seeks after these things: if the question be as to them of old, Joh. 1.28. Whom
seek ye? the answer will be as before; more of God, and more of Christ, etc.
these are the things which they so much seek; to whom it may be said, as to
them, in Mat. 28.5. fear not, ye seek Jesus; and that they so did, appears in
those sad complaints which they made, when Ordinances are, or seem to be, empty
things to them; and him whom they seek, they do not there find. Oh! consider
it; you attend means, but what seek ye? is it to pacify Conscience, and to
satisfy Convictions only, and to patch up a self-righteous peace only; or is it
Jesus that you seek, and more of him? Let your peace be, according as you find
in these things.

3. The third Fruit mentioned by way of Trial; (for it is an Use of Trial that
we are (...)) is Vivification, or a living, or a being alive unto God, as it is
called. Romans 6.11. Gal. 2.19. Now seeing there is such a thing as living unto
God, or being alive unto God, and that it is, wherever true Faith is, as
appears from the last named place, verses 19, 20. compared together; it
concerns us to consider, whether we have any thing of this Living to God, or
no. Let us then consider a few things, as briefly as we can, out of this last
named Text, which may help us to discover whether we be alive to God, or not.

1. A man must be dead unto the Law, before he can be alive unto God: he that
is alive unto the Law, is alive unto himself, as Paul once was. Romans 7.9. and
indeed such an one lives unto himself, while he seems most of all to be alive
unto God; and the Lord abhors even the best, that is to be found with such a
man: well then; a man must be dead unto the Law, before he can, I say, can live
unto God. Now this is a great thing, and it is a great work of God, to bring a
person to it: viz. to be dead unto the Law, none but he that made Heaven and
Earth, can do it: for consider,

1. Every man naturally is alive unto the Law, as Paul says he once was; and
to take away life is a great thing, and makes a very great change, in what
sense soever you understand it: it is great in respect of the change that is
made; and in respect of the reluctance and opposition that is made against it:
indeed there is a difference some die more easily than others do. (...) say,
that every man naturally, is alive u^^o the Law: i. e. he seeks life by the
Law, as they did. Romans 9. penult. many times persons don't know that they do
thus; they may profess, and protest against it, and ^et do it; and it is surely
so with persons, when they have only a doctrinal knowledge of the way of the
Gospel, but never saw any need of, or never came under a powerful work of the
Spirit, to convince them of righteousness, as well as of sin: the^e is as much
need of the one, as of the other* for if there be any difference (as I think
there is, on diverse accounts) we are more easily convinced of sin, then of the
way of the Gospel: for we naturally know something of the Law,, but of the
Gospel, we know nothing by nature: and all the whole body of d^^th in us,
opposes it, unto the utmost; there is nothing in us, but as it is under the
management and influence of Corruption, opposes the way of the Gospel, not ^nly
much, but unto the (...), or as much as can be: it is far easier to convince a
man, that he is a Sinner, and deserves to die; than convince him, that he may be
Saved by Faith in Christ Jesus: yet how many know nothing of the Plague of
their own hearts in this matter!

2. He that is Dead unto the Law, has experienced his own inability to
perform, or keep the Law. It is not persons having heard, or having been told,
that will suffice thoroughly to convince them, of their inability to keep the
Law: for they ^^ill not thoroughly believe it, until they have trye^ it, and
have an Experimental knowledge of it. This we see by constant Experience; and
it may be otherwise evidenced also: though persons have Lived all their days
under the Gospel, and have had a good Education, and have gathered much head
knowledge, yet when Convictions, and awakenings come upon them, the first thing
that they do, is to seek Righteousness, as it were by the works of the Law.
Some indeed have a notion, and also some experience, of their own inability to
keep the Law; but yet for want of a through awakening, and through the prevailings
of a Spirit of slothfulness, and averseness unto Spiritual work, they never
make through trial, and so never come to a through sight of themselves, and of
their own Nothingness: they say, Oh! they can do nothing of themselves! and
that they find it so too: but it is no otherwise with them, than with a
slothful Servant, that lifts a little at a heavy burden, and cries out, that he
cannot stir, or move it, whereas he never put forth his strength, to try what
he can do; a cudgil or whip would make him do more, a great deal. So it is
here, small awakenings, bring forth small endeavors, and leave persons alive
unto the Law still. Consider this then, it may be thy Convictions of thy own
nothingness are but what the slothful Servant has; if so, thou must go to work
again: and get thee to thy old fears and terrors, which were smothered, by one
means or other, and dyed away too soon. There be many that die in the birth;
many whose C^nvictions issue in formality, refined self righteousness, and self
deceiving.

3. He that is dead unto the Law, is convinced of the evil and folly of seeking
righteousness by it. He has been made to see the pride and folly of his own
heart in that matter, and is ashamed of it. Persons must be ashamed of their
own ways, before they will come to Gods way. You that say, you never sought
righteousness, as it were by works of the Law, you always knew better than to
do so; you may do well to consider deeply whether you do not deceive your
selves. And this know for certain, that whatsoever your Religion, progress, and
seize therein be; you don't live to God, and your faith is but a Dead
faith, if you be not Dead unto the Law; all you have (if it be much) will be
found at last to be, no better, no other, than a fine spun thread of Pharisaism,
and self delusion; and after all you have done, a fearful perdition, will be
the issue.

2. He that lives unto God, lives a Life of faith; or, the life that he now
lives is by the faith of the Son of God, as he speaks, Gal. 2.20. Not a Dead
faith; but that of the Son of God. And where this faith comes and prevails in
the Soul.

1. It does as it were Annihilate the Creature 2 Cor. 12.11. It Empties a man,
it (as it were) takes him off his own legs: it makes a man, in his highest
seize, to be nothing in his own eyes. So, in that second of Gal. I live,
yet not I. This is a Mystery, I, and yet not I. Before faith comes, or before a
man is humbled, he is A Great Something, in his own eyes, though indeed worse
than Nothing. Rev. 3.17. But when faith comes, he is both a real something, and
a great nothing. And this, as I said, is a great Mystery; a piece of
unintelligible nonsense to a carnal heart. 2 Cor. 3.5. E're faith comes a man's
self sufficiency is gone, and all his sufficiency is of God; he has no
sufficiency in himself, no, no not so much as to think a good thought.

And in this Annihilation of the Creature, there are these things to be
considered, besides what else might be named.

1. A disappointment of Expectation, as to the way of liv^ing a Life of
Religion. First, a man thinks he has something of himself, and he will not
easily think otherwise; and then he expects to have something given to him,
whereby he may set up again, and live upon himself; but when the matter comes
to trial, he finds that he must live upon another; and live (as we say) from
hand to mouth: Yesterdayes Assistance, will not help him for this days work.
He that could do all things Yesterday, can do nothing this day, unless he have
Assistance from the same hand, which is Arbitrary, given or taken, or denied,
as he pleases from whom it is. And hence often arise great discouragements. A
person says, I thought ere now, I should have been able to do more, than, I
find, I can: I am still vile, still a poor wretched Creature; I can do nothing,
perform no duty, as I ought: yea the Children of God, are often left to
themselves, that they may know themselves, and where their ^^pendance is. See 2 Chronicles. 32.31. And in a Christians ordinary course, wonted Assistance may now
and then be withdrawn, on the same account.

2. An Abasement of Soul: A person is brought to be poor in Spirit: he has a
low esteem of himself. Ephesians. 3.8. is exceeding vile in his own eyes. Job 40.4.
Faith indeed purifies the heart, but it also opens a persons eyes, so that he
sees something of the sin that still dwells in them; and great Faith, and a
little sight of that, will hardly consist together: sometimes, where true faith
is, there is a great mixture of presumption, which makes faith seem to be much
more, and greater than indeed it is.

3. An Inward Contest, or Strife in the Soul respecting this Nothingness and
Abasement; the unregenerate part reluctates, and opposes, this way of
abasement: the new man closes with it, as the best way, as an excellent way.
Phil. 3 8. the knowledge of Christ, and the way of the Gospel, has an
Excellency in it. And the knowledge of our selves, Christ, and of our own
Nothingness go together: He that Exalts Christ must debase himself; he that
prizeth Christ, must deny and abhor himself: Self exalting, and Christ
exalting, are inconsistent, in the power thereof.

Now consider this; you that can easily exalt, and magnify Christ (as you
think) verily you have cause to fear that you never knew what it was: ^^u are
utter strangers to a Life of Faith, which though it be sweet, and precious, yet
by reason of Corruption, and through Temptation, it is usually very difficult,
especially at times.

2. This Faith carries out the Soul unto God, and that in these three respects.
(1.) As looking to Him for all it wants. (2) In acknowledging him, in All it
has. (3.) In uniting the heart to God in Love.

1. In Looking to Him for all it wants: Faith leads the Soul to Wisdoms Gates,
to the posts of her door, and there it stands and knocks, and waits, as Prove.
8.34. the heart will be stealing out, and turning aside to other doors, but
when this is seen, the Soul rebukes it self for it, and is ashamed of its own
folly. Now is it thus with you? whither go you for help? perhaps you you will
say, I go to God alone? but do not you turn aside elsewhere sometimes: if you
say no: you do not know your own hearts: and it is as if you should say, you
have no unbelief, no self-righteousness working, and prevailing in you; and who
shall believe you in that? this sin, if any, dwells in you, and will carry you
Captive, sometimes: But I say, Faith carries the Soul out of it self, unto God,
in Christ Jesus, for supply of wants; and therefore in this respect it does two
things. (1.) It shows the Soul its own emptiness. (2.) Christ's fullness, or all
sufficiency.

1. The Soul is made to see its own emptiness, and nothingness: It may be you
will say, this you have seen, and do see this: but I say, consider, whether it
be so indeed, or not: have you ever seen a need of Almighty Power to make you
see it, to cause you to see it. Ezekiel. 16.2. have you seen the enmity and
opposition of your hearts against this sight of your selves: Doctrinal
Knowledge of Spiritual Things, is more easy, but Experimental Knowledge, and
clear convictions, affect men's hearts, and break them to pieces; and there is
much in the heart to oppose, and withstand the same.

2. The Soul is shown, or made to see the Sufficiency of Christ Jesus: it
could never see it, or believe it, if it were not shown, by a powerful work of
the Spirit: yea, the heart of man makes strong opposition against the way of
the Gospel, it hates the knowledge thereof. Prove. 1.29. and the secret language
and voice of the heart is, as Job 21.14. we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways. It is true, there is in the heart an enmity against God, and all of God;
all his Ways and Laws, and people; but especially against Christ, and a saving
knowledge of him: and hence I say, there must be a mighty work of the Spirit,
to show Christ, and his fitness, and sufficiency to Save Lost Sinners; and it
is a glorious sight when seen. Joh. 1.14. We beheld his glory, the glory, etc.
consider it then, have thou ever seen the Glory of Jesus Christ? you have heard
of him, read of him, spoke of him; but has he been revealed to you, and have
you seen him? Joh. 6.40. you must see him, not with bodily eyes, for that would
confound you: and God must show him, else you cannot see him: and if you see
him not, you cannot believe in him: Hence if the Gospel be hid (which sets him
forth) it is to such as be lost 2 Cor. 4.3. and hence in verse sixth, God who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to
give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus
Christ. Here mark; it is God that gives this light; it is he that shines in our
hearts; and there must be an Almighty Power put forth, else to us the Gospel
will be hid. He must command the Light, etc. else the God of this World will
blind us, so as that, the Light of the Gospel of the glory of God (for so I
read the words) shall not shine unto us, or in our hearts: in darkness we be by
nature, and so abide, until he do powerfully call us into his mavelous light.

2. In acknowledging him in all it has: as the Soul receives all from God, by
Faith: so Faith leads it, to acknowledge him in all it has; as he said; I
live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me; and again, else where, he says, he
could do all things through Christ strengthening him: Still whatever he did, he
ascribes all to Christ: so he, Psalm. 144.1, 2, 3. The Lord my strength, who
teaches my hands to war, -- my goodness, etc. mark, how he ascribes all to
God. Now this the believing Soul does in some measure, and desires to do it
more fully: it is a pleasure to a Believer to be doing for Christ, and when he
has done all, to be setting the Crown still upon the head of Christ; I, yet
not I but Christ; it is the voice and language of Faith. Indeed to acknowledge
Christ in all a person has, or does, in words only, is easy; but really and
sensibly to do it, is difficult, and much averseness is in the heart of a man
against it. Consider then, how you find it, do you acknowledge Christ in all? do
you find it a hard thing so to do? do you bewail the contrary, and beg help
against it? if you think it an easy thing, you know not what it is?

3. In uniting the heart to God by love: Faith and Love always go together;
they cannot be separated. 1 Timothy 1.14. he that believes, he also loves: as soon
as a man has a sight of Christ, he falls in love with him: he is altogether
Lovely: as soon as the Grace of God that brings Salv^^^^n, does appear unto the
Soul, it does unite the heart un^^ him, by love: Ephesians. 6.23. Peace be unto the
brethren, and love with faith; he means an increase of love, and faith: and
puts them together, because they are never separated; and hence he curses all
that don't Love the Lord Jesus.

Now, (as we go along) because that many a gracious Soul may be at a loss, and
unable to find their love to Christ, and thereupon be discouraged; we shall
mention some things, in which, it usually discovers it self, and may sometimes
be found, when persons cannot look directly on it, and find, and feel those
sensible workings of it in their Souls, which at some other times perhaps they
can; and therefore though they have it, they cannot discern it.

1. In a desire of fellowship, and communion with him in his ordinances, as
Cant. 1.1. Let him kiss me with etc. -- his Love is better than wine -- this
was a sign, and an evidence of Love in them, and so was that in verse fourth,
Draw me etc. So here, when the Soul desires Christ in his Ordinances, and
breaths after, or accounts precious, the discoveries, and manifestations of
Christ unto the Soul, in his Ordinances, this is better than wine; when though
many will say, who will show us any good; yet the Soul joins with them that
say, Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us, Psalm. 4.6. And it
is not Ordinances, and duties that will satisfy the Soul, but Christ in them;
this is an evidence of Love. Cant. 3.1. I sought him whom my soul loves; that
seeking shows love. You then that wait on, and attend to these and those
Ordinances, and duties of Gods Worship, what, or whom seek ye? is it, the Lord
Jesus Christ? or is it some what else? if it be him you seek; it is from a
likeance of, and a love to him.

2. This love appears sometimes, in that they are so deeply sensible of it,
when they see any wrong offered unto the Lord, his name, ways, people, or
institutions, Psalm. 69.9. And that this is from Love to God, and his ways,
appears in that they are so ready to Condemn themselves, as well as others:
they are grieved at the evil ways of others, Psalm. 119.158. But they judge
themselves as chief of sinners, abhor and loath themselves, especially at times.
Job 42.6.

3. In their following after God, in all the ways that he has appointed,
Cant. 3.1. I sought HIM whom my soul loves. I sought Him and that by night
too, on her bed: this was an evidence of Love. So when the Soul seeks God, not
only in Public duties, but also, where no eye of man sees; and it is the Lord
himself that is there sought; this is an evidence of much love sometimes. I say
not when much pains in duties is taken; for that may come from other causes,
but when also CHRIST is sought for in them: Psalm. 63.8. His soul followed hard
after God. Slothfulness in duties argues little, or no love; but when Go^
sought, and that diligently too, it is an evidence of love: especially when not
his favor only, but his holiness is sought for, to be partakers of that. Heb.
12.10.

USE. II. Of Exhortation and Direction.
Take heed of resting in a Dead faith; and labor for a Lively faith. In other
words, see that you accept the Offers of the Gospel, sincerely; or that you
submit to, accept of Christ as offered in the Gospel: I use that word submit:
the Apostle uses it. Romans 10.3. We cannot find a better word. You will say, how
is Christ Offered? Answ. As a Prophet, as a Priest, as a King. These things, I
shall briefly open, when first of all, I have premised these things.

1. It is the Person of the Lord Christ that true faith closes with: it is Him
that true faith looks to. Isa. 45.22. Look unto ME. HE is the Propitiation: as
many as received him, Joh. 1.12. He is the portion of the Soul, and in Him it
hopes. Lam. 3.24. In Him the Soul does acquiesce and rest. Psalm. 73.25. And
hence the Counsel, and Direction here is this, viz. See that you don't fall
short of Christ himself; for nothing else but Christ himself, will stand you in
any stead. You have it may be many things; as gifts, common graces, affections,
and enlargements comforts, and the like: but have you Christ ^^^self? are you
married unto him? have you ^osed with him? He that has the son has life, and
he that has not the son, has not life; for life is in the son. 1 John 5.11,
12. But it comes to none, but to such as receive him. I^ a woman be never so
rich, he only has hers, that has her, or matcheth with her. Would you have
Christ's benefits (he is rich) than match with him; if you have him, you have
all; miss of him, and you have nothing, but conceit.

If you say, how shall I know whether I have Christ or no? I Answ. As your
Conviction is, such your faith is: as is the preparation work, such is the
closing with Christ. It is a sure rule; and this is the reason, why we so much,
and so often press for preparation work. The Soul must be prepared for Christ,
before it can come to Christ, or close with Christ. See Luke 3.4, 5, 6. And
there is more preparation needful, than many think for: it is a great work of
God to prepare the Soul for Christ, which is naturally full of all enmity and
opposition, against Christ: the heart being every way, on every side, straightly
shut up, and fortified against Christ; and there are strong holds to be pulled
down. Consider that place, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Here then Consider whether you have
seen Christ or not: for till a person see him, he cannot come to, or close with
him, as Joh 6.40. As we have already intimated. Persons do not use to match
with a person, whom they have never seen; or if they (...) it seldom proves
well afterward: so in the case: Christ must be seen, and then the Soul will
love, and choose, and close with him: otherwise it may match indeed with him,
after a sort, through common Convictions etc. but it will not prove well; in a
time of trial and temptation, such an one will forsake Christ, and his cause:
and thus many do, that do not openly Apostatise, yet their hearts are secretly
withdrawn from him, and his works, and they inwardly cast off his yoke: and
will not mortify their lusts, and purify themselves, as he is pure; as all true
believers do, 1 John 3.3. Now if you have seen Christ, you have seen your
ignorance of him. See Prove. 30.2, 3. That light which discovers Christ unto the
Soul, shows a person both his former, and yet abiding ignorance of him. 2 Cor.
4.6. This light comes out of darkness.

2. If you have seen him, it has been a wonderful sight. Jesus Christ is a
wonderful one; his n^me is wonderful. Isa 9.6. And when he is see^ he appears
so to be unto the Soul: he is so in himself, and will be so to his for ever.
His Prayer for his was, that they might behold his glory. Joh. 17.24. A little
glimmering of which, here, at times, outbids all that the world has to give;
and makes us despise the one, and long for more of the other. See Romans 8.23. We
have the first fruits, etc.

3. When Christ is seen, it makes a person vile in his own eyes, Isa. 6.5. When
his eyes had seen the King, the Lord of Hosts, he cries ^ut, I am unclean etc.
The more any one knows ^f Christ, the viler he is in his own eyes: who ever
knew more of Christ than Paul did? yet see what he says of himself. See 1 Timothy
1.15. -- Chief of sinners. And Ephesians. 3.8. Less than the least of all Saints.
Hence several sorts of Persons may receive Conviction.

1. Such as close with Christ only upon a notional historical knowledge of him:
they have had, it may be great Convictions, and much inward trouble, about
their own sinfulness, and guiltiness; and hence fly to and catch hold of Jesus
Christ; and the bottom of all is (if they could see it) to Ease them in, and
not to Save them from their sins: and this faith of theirs smothers their
Convictions; and they are healed slightly; and cry peace, peace to themselves,
when there is no peace. Consider what knowledge of Christ you have, is it more
than may be obtained by common industry, without a Supernatural work of the
Spirit of God? it is true; you may have great enlightnings, and yet fall short
of Christ: such as hardly fall short of a miracle, Heb. 6.5, 6. yea, you may
work miracles, and yet perish for ever. As Matthew. 7.22. Wherefore consider
further.

2. Such as close with Promises, but not with Christ in them. Thus do many:
there be precious Promises in the word; as to such as mourn; to such as hunger
and thirst after righteousness etc. I am such (...) one, says a person, and
hence takes comfort, (...) takes not Christ. Perhaps you have read many
Promises, and have had much comfort from them, but have you had Christ in them?
Comfort without Christ, is but like a Shadow without substance, or worse. Many
there be that catch at, and take hold of Promises, that do miss of Christ, and
hence have nothing, when they think they have all things. Rev. 3.17. Among the
rest that might be named, I shall mention one sort. viz. Such as look at peace
more than holiness? Consider wherein is your rest? is it in peace and
satisfying Convictions, or in conformity to the will of God? to be conformed
thereto, is this glory, and happiness in your account? Christ came to Save his
people from their sins, Matthew. 1.21. And to unlose, or destroy the work of the
Devil in them, 1 John 3.8. To set men at liberty from sin, as well as to
deliver them from wrath to come. Is he then, on that account dear, and precious
unto you? And consider all that has been said; and what is it, that you have
closed with? is it Christ himself, or is it not? And I further add two things.

If you close with, and love the Lord Christ himself.

1. You will abhor your selves; and there will be a continual contest with, and
opposition against your own righteousness: you will still endeavor to be
beating down that: as he Phil. 3.8, 9. and you will never wholly get clear of a
self righteous principle, and the wo^^^ngs of it while you live; it will still
be wo^^^ng, and making trouble one way or other, more or less: when you would
reject it, and think perhaps you have, it will arise again, and be present.
Romans 7.21.

2. If you Love him, you will Love what is his: his House. Psalm. 26.8. his
Laws. Psalm. 119.97. his People. 1 John 3.14. here note, that true love springs
out of a seen, felt enmity against God, and all of God, which the Soul has
been greatly humbled, and abased for.

3. If you Love him, you will Love his Holiness, his Graces; and seek to keep
all his Commandments: see Joh. 14.21. he that has my Commandments, and keeps
them, he it is that loves me. And there will be not only some outward
conformity thereto; but more than that; as he said, Psalm 119.129. Thy
Testimonies are wonderful, therefore does my Soul keep them.

We have shown that Christ himself is closed with by a true Faith; now I add
more particularly; in all his Offices he is closed with, or accepted of,
otherwise we fall short of him at last.

1. As a Prophet: Jesus Christ is a Prophet; and it is a precious
consideration: it was foretold of him that he should be so. Deuteronomy. 18.15. Acts
3.22. and he executes this Office in revealing to his people the will of God,
and their duty toward h^^: this he does, not only in his Word, (for so it is
revealed unto multitudes of reprobates) but by a mighty work of his Spirit, in
them that are his: else his Word would be as a clasped or sealed book to them,
and the Gospel be hid, as to any saving knowledge thereof; and so in seeing,
they should see and not perceive, which is the woeful condition of many. Mat.
13.14.

I shall open this particular thus.

1. We have the Will of God revealed to us, in the Word of God: and the Word of
God is complete, and perfect; there is no need to have it altered, by adding to
it, or taking from it. Prove. 30.5, 6. Rev. 22.18, 19. so that if in any case we
would know what our duty is, what we be, or what God would have us be, we must
look into the Word of God. Isa. 8.20. to the Law and Testimony: and if we will
follow the guidance of the Word of God, we shall walk safely: in all our
difficulties, temptations, dangers, we shall at last be more than conquerors;
and he took that course, Psa. 119.24. Kings use to have their Counselors, and
so had David; but above all, in all his difficulties, which were many, he
sought his guidance in, and from the Word of God; his testimonies were his
Counselors; and verse 105. his word a Lamp to his feet, and a Light to his
path.

Hence all that do indeed believe, have a great respect unto the Word of God:
have they been born again? It is by the word of God. ^ Pet. 1.23. I have
begotten you through the Gospel, says Paul unto them, in 1 Cor. 4.15. And have
they found the narrow way which Leads to Life, which few do find, Mat. 7.14. It
is the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, which showed them the way, and
led them by Christ, to God, whom they had lost, and were mere strangers to,
when there was no judgment, or nothing right in their goings, but they made
crooked paths unto themselves, not knowing the way of peace. Isa. 59.8. and had
wandered and wildered all their days, and perished for ever, had not the Word
of Christ been a light unto their path: it is from the Word that they seek the
mind, and will of Christ their Prophet: and it is by that, that he teaches
them, that are his: it was by that, that he got understanding; and hence the
Word was so sweet to his taste: Psalm. 119.103, 104. and hence that request,
verse 133. Order my steps in thy Word. The best and sweetest life is when a
persons steps are most of all ordered in, or according to Gods word: hence a
true believer loves, and esteems much of Gods Word: as Psalm. 119.127, 128.
Teach me the way of thy statutes, give we understanding, and I shall keep thy
Law; yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart: make me to go in the way of
thy Commandments, for therein do I delight.

Now then consider what esteem you have of the Word, by which Christ reveals
his, and his Fathers Will unto his people? if you accept of him, as your
Prophet, you will regard his Word: and hence we enquire what esteem you have
thereof? hear what he said, Job 23.12. I have esteemed the word of his mouth,
more than my necesry food* it may be you will say, I hope I love and prize, and
esteem his word much more: but to some I may reply, how is it then that you
look into it no more? that you meditate in it so little? perhaps you can let
the Book of God ly by you day after day, and not so much as Look into it at
all: others th^^e be that do indeed read in it daily, by course, ^^t improve it
not; they labor not to find the power of it in their hearts: and when so, is
it not a Dead Faith that such rest in; or in great measure a Religion of words
without works, or such works as may evidence a Lively Faith? the matter should
be considered by them, whom it does concern.

2. Christ reveals things to us by his Spirit, and hence we have the Promise of
the Spirit, Joh. 16.7. And we read of the Spirit of Wisdom, and of revelation.
Ephesians. 1.17. The word indeed is full of light. 2 Pet. 1.19. It is a light that
shines etc But the misery is, our minds are full of darkness: we walk in the
thick, dark shades of our natural blindness, until God call us out of it: and
though the light shine in the word, and in the dispensation of it, never so
brightly, our darkness comprehends it not, as Joh. 1.5. Hence we need the
Spirit to enlighten; and a great work of the Spirit it is to call us out of a
darkness, as the phrase is. 1 Pet. 2.9. It is a work of the Spirit to give us
eyes: we have much light in the word, but alas we want Eyes: Sin and Satan,
has put out our Eyes, and blinded us. 2 Cor. 4.4. And it is the work of the
Spirit to open the blind eyes. See Isa. 42.7. And if your faith be right, it
will lead you to Christ for this: for the Spirit will never come unless he send
it.

And of these that come to him, for this enlightening, these things may be said.

1. They have seen their need of it: how else should they go to him, for his
help? did you ever mourn under your darkness, and find a need of the Spirit to
enlighten you? did you ever see your selves to be in darkness, in the midst of
light? do you know what that means, to see, and yet not to see? Matthew. 13.14.
-- Seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive. Did you ever see a need to know
the things, that you knew before: to know Spiritually, what you know
Doctrinally; there is a form of knowledge, and of the truth. Romans 2.20. And
there is a Spiritual discerning of Spiritual things, which no natural man has.
1 Cor. 2.14, 15. In heaven, we shall see Christ with bodily eyes: Job 19.27.
But even there, there is a Spiritual sight of him, and of Spiritual things,
something of which is here; and before Conversion there is nothing of it: but
when it comes it is life eternal. Joh. 17.3.

They know something of the necessity thereof. There is not only some need, but
a Great necessity thereof. He that walks in much darkness, will quickly come
into much deadness; and formality of Spirit will grow upon him: and hence that
request of Paul for them, in the forenamed, Ep^ 1.17. This light is indeed, in
some sort, the life and strength of the Soul: where there is no light, there is
no life, no strength. See Psalm. 36.9. With thee is the fountain of life, in thy
light etc.

2. They have tasted the sweetness of this light: it is a pleasant thing to
behold the Sun: much more to have the light, which comes from the Son of God,
the Sun of Righteousness. Mal. 4.2. when-soever he shall arise upon the Soul;
for there is also healing in his wings, and such shall go forth, and grow up:
if you would grow, labor for an increase of Spiritual Light.

3. They have seen something of the enmity, and opposition of their hearts
against the knowledge of the Truth, and the Light of the Gospel; the heart
naturally is full of this enmity, and opposition. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. the true
believer knows something of this, of those strong holds, of those reasonings,
of those high things, which exalt themselves (in the Soul) against the
Knowledge of God, and the things of God: and he sees the more a need, a
necessity of Christ, of going to, and closing with him, for his help: man's
natural frame is that in Prove. 1.29. he hates life, but Christ teaches
powerfully, commands the light to shine. 2 Cor. 4.6.

2. As a Priest: He is a Priest, and as such to be looked to, and closed with.
Heb. 7.17, 21. the Priests work was to Offer Gifts and Sacrifices for Sins.
Heb. 5.1. now Christ Offered up Himself. Heb. 7.27. His design therein was to
take away our sin. 1 John 3.5. and hence he is the Propitiation for our sin. 1 John 2.2.

Christ Suffered for us, in our room, and stead: and for our Sin. 1 Pet. 2.21,
24. -- that also Suffered for us -- his own self bear our sin -- and chap.
3.18. Christ also ^ath once Suffered for Sins; and he has fully satisfied for
Sin, there is nothing left for us to do in that matter, if there were, he would
not be a perfect Priest, if he needed any of our help: and hence I say, we must
look to him, and to him only, for pardon of sin, and acceptance with God.
Wherefore accept him and his righteousness, and Sufferings, and all is well:
And this is the next thing that you are to be Exhorted to, and directed in.

And here consider these things.

1. Every man, one as well as another, is inclined naturally to seek
righteousness, by the works of the Law, as they did. Romans 9.31, 32. and 10.3.
men are not at any time more addicted to their vile lusts, which they hardly
part with, than unto this; how hard is it to bring persons off from their
Lusts? and it is as hard, or more hard in some respects, to bring them off from
their own righteousess; it is (and on fundry accounts) of the two more hard to
deny righteous self, then to deny sinful self: it is naturally so to any man,
and to all men. Do you find it thus, or be you a stranger to these things?
Consider further,

2. If any man think he be not strongly inclined this way; it is because he
does not know himself, and because the matter never came indeed to trial, in
the Soul. Many there be that have a no^^^^al knowledge of the way of the
Gospel, and they seem to fall in readily with it, as the only way. But two
things are to be considered, wherein they miss it.

1. Those that thus fall in with the way of the Gospel, do indeed but abuse it,
while they seem to close with it; they make it an Asylum, or Sanctuary, for
them to shelter themselves in, while in the mean time, they live in Sin, and so
fight against God, and (as one says) they take the Light of the Gospel, to let
them see by, to Sin the more securely; they secretly fight against God with his
own weapons: a deep ditch of deceit it is, in which many lurk, and ly hid,
until a dreadful day discover them. And here consider that nothing sets a man
more against Sin, and strengthens him in his Warfare, then a true discovery of
the way of the Gospel. Tit. 2.11, 12. the Grace of God teaches us to deny
ungodliness.

2. Such persons never had the matter brought to trial, in their own Souls:
persons may think, that they can do this, or that, until the matter be brought
to trial, and then they find it otherwise, than they thought: so here, the
matter (in this point) was never brought to trial: i. e. they were never
thoroughly convinced of Sin: of the strictness of the Law: their consciences
(whatever convictions they have had) were never thoroughly enlightened, and
awakened, they never knew what it was to have Sin revive in them, and to work
death in them; as he speaks, Romans 7.9, 13. to take hold on them, as Psalm.
40.12. No, they would then know what he did mean, when he said, his heart did
fail him, and he was not able to look up: before a man's eyes are opened to see
himself, and his Sin, he can look up well enough, his heart don't fail him: but
when Sin is seen, there is a great change: if God do not some way or other
uphold him, he sinks into the lowest bott^m of despair, and no man can help him.

3. When persons make Objections against believing from their own sinfulness
and vileness, it is from their ignorance of, and opposition against the way of
the Gospel: it is not, because they are deeply humbled, (as some may think) but
rather because they are not humbled enough; it is from their ignorance, and
Spiritual Pride which still prevails in them: to believe, is an act of
Obedience. 1 John 3.2, 3. this is his Commandment, that we believe; and what
Humility is that which leads us to disobey the Commandment of God? you say,
perhaps that you dare not believe, you dare not cast your selves upon Jesus
Christ, and you think you are much humbled; but the truth is, you are full of
ignorance, and Spiritual Pride, and in danger of eternal ruin. See Mat. 16.16.
Joh. 3. ult. the wrath of God abides upon you, while you abide in Unbelief: and
abiding in that condition there is no hope, nor help for you.

4. The way to have a Savior is to accept him on free gift: and consider what
should hinder your acceptance. (1.) Are your sins many and great? Christ has
done enough to satisfy for them all. See Isa. 1.18. and 55.7, 8, 9. The number
and greatness of your sins, should not in the least hinder you from coming to
Christ: his Blood cleaneth from all sin. 1 John 1.7. All manner of sin. Matthew.
31. You dishonor him, if you think otherwise; and submit not to the way of the
Second Covenant, and see not the vileness of so doing: and woe to you if you do
not see, and bewail it, before you go hence and appear in another world. (2) Do
you want a Righteousness to render you acceptable unto God? the righteousness
of Christ, which is the righteousness of God. Romans 10.3. is a perfect
righteousness, every way sufficient. Rev. 3.18. (3) Do you say, but I do and
shall sin still. Answ. See 1 John 2.1, 2. If any man sin we have an Advocate
with the father. One that is every way able to plead, and manage our case. (4)
You object, Oh! but I cannot come to, and believe on Jesus Christ. Answ. It is
true; but consider what hinders you? The main thing is, you will not come to
him Joh. 5.40. Rev. 22.17. Whosoever will let him come: The Spirit and the
Bride, say come. God and Christ, and all that are friends to him, say, Come,
and if you do not, it is because your Will is not bowed there unto; and from
your Ignorance of Christ. Hence the Exhortation is, Come unto Jesus Christ. See
Isa. 55.1, 2. And here mind, first the invitation, Come, let him Come; arise
then, and Come, behold he calls thee; even thee, whoever thou art: and then
mind the terms propounded, against which no Objection can be made, except what
proceeds from Pride, Ignorance of, and Enmity against the way of the Gospel,
Come without Money, and without price: have you no worthin^ss, none at all?
(...) come without: yea, so come, or you will never come, or not aright. And
why do you spend your labor for that which is not bread, and which satisfyeth
not! The things of this world are such, and your own righteousness is such: you
would fain make your selves better, but you labor in vain, you can never do
it: when will you see the fruitlesness, folly, and sinfulness of your own way?
And if any obstinately stand out, they must perish: yea the Lord says, let
them perish; he will not pity them. 1 Cor. 16.22. Let them be Anathema
Maranatha; it is just they should, and they must perish for ever and ever.

3. Jesus Christ is a King, and as such to be submitted to, and is so, where
true Faith is: and this submission also you are to be exhorted to, and directed
in. Concerning which I will express my self thus.

1. Jesus Christ is a King: as he is a Prophet and a Priest, so he is a King.
Psalm. 2.6. Act. 17.7. 1 Timothy 6.14, 15. 1 Cor. 15.25. He is the blessed and only
potentate, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and he must reign: and let his
Kingdom come.

2. We must submit to his Government: he must rule us; dispense to us, dispose
of us, and of all that does concern us, as he will: and he that will be his
disciple must deny himself, take up his Cross and follow him. Matthew. 16.24.
This is difficult, and yet it must be done, and that daily, Luke 9.23. This
submitting is in a low degree in some of the Children of God: but where there
is nothing of it, there is no true faith. And he lives the sweetest life of
all, that lives most in a a real resignation of himself, and of all his
concerns, into the hands of Jesus Christ, submitting all unto the will, and
wisdom of this King of Kings: and this is to be endeavored by all that profess
faith in Christ Jesus. To believe in him, and rebel against him, how do these
agree? or to say, he shall be King, but yet not rule us: but we will direct him
in his dealings with us, or with ours, or with the Church of God. It is certain
that there are many that reject the Government of Christ, and hence whatever
they pretend, their Faith is not right. And when I have opened this a little,
you will further see what it is, that I exhort, and direct you to.

1. Some do openly and manifestly reject the Government of Christ Jesus: they
live in open rebellion against him. Isa. 3.9. They practically say as Luke
19.14, 27. We will not have this man to reign over us; and he calls them his
Enemies. Some do openly, and manifestly cast off his Government. (1) Sometimes
by living in sins of Commission. (2) Sometimes by living in sins of Omission;
when they will not attend to every known duty. Luke 1.6. They did walk in all
the Ordinances, and Commandments of the Lord: when any known duty, or ordinance
of Christ is neglected, and men continue so to do, how does Christ rule in
them; do not they cast off his yoke?

2. Some do secretly cast off his Government; though they make an outward
profession of Religion, and be outwardly conformable unto his Laws; yet
inwardly they reject him, and cast off his Government. Thus do many, as,

1. Such as live in any particular known sin, though it be secret: thus do
many. 2 King. 17.9. There is secret Drunkenness, and secret Uncleanness, and
secret neglects of duties, and Closet work: now when persons live in secret
sins, they do really though not manifestly cast off the yoke and Government of
Christ. Ephesians. 5.12. It is a shame to speak what some do in secret. And what some
do actually, others do in their secret thoughts and cogitations: there is heart
Adultery, and heart Murder, and heart Pride, and the like; little or nothing of
which appears outwardly: but the day comes, when the hidden things of darkness,
shall be brought to light, and the counsels of the heart made manifest. 1 Cor.
4.5. And then it will be seen that many that now carry a fair face among men,
are abominable Creatures.

2. Such as are not at all kept at work with their own hearts day by day: these
secretly cast off his Government: it appears thus; our great work every day is
with our own hearts, and we must watch them, and keep them for Christ. He has
so commanded, Prove. 4.23. The heart is the Temple of God in which he desires to
dwell; and we must endeavor to keep it for him, least we prove treacherous and
traitors. See 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. We may talk of trusting in him, but we deceive
our selves; we have faith, but it is a Dead faith. It is in vain to cry, Hail
Master, to make a fair Profession, while our hearts are in a manner only a
possession of unclean, or vain things.

3. Such as quarrel with crosses and afflictions. Amos 3.6. no evil in the
City, but the Lord has done it; no cross but he has sent it; it is his cross;
now when persons will not take up the Cross, but their hearts will break,
before their wills will bow, how does Christ now reign, and rule in their
hearts? it is true, much unsubduedness is in some of the Children of God, even
Jonah was very froward. chapter 4.9. but when persons will not labor to ly under
the will of Christ, and so to do is not precious to them; truly they cast off
his Government, and may consider whether or not there is cause to fear that he
will reject, and cast off them at last, as such as would not deny them selves,
and submit to his Cross.

4. Such as seem to submit themselves unto the will of Christ, but not by the
power of Christ: what they do is by their own power, and ability: this is to
bring in a foreign power secretly, and Christ is not King in that Soul, he
does not reign there. See 2 These. 1.11, 12. He must work all, by his power,
that he may be glorified. Now consider this; you say, you do this or that, and
you submit to the will of God, but by what power? is it by the power of Christ?
you will it may be, say, Yes: but I answer, consider it well: if it be, then
the more you attain, the meaner and lesser you will be in your own eyes, as
Paul that had attained unto much, yet says, I am nothing. 2 Cor. 12.11. do you
find it thus? as I may say, gaining one way, and loosing another, growing
greater, and yet withal growing less? understand aright, and consider it.

5. Such as seem to submit to Christ, but not out of respect, and love to
Christ, but in all they do, they seek themselves, as they did. Zech. 7.5, 6.
did you do it unto me, even unto me. -- So here, you read, you pray, you do
many things, which Christ commands; did not Herod as much. Mark 6.20. but if
the Lord say at last, did you do it unto me, even unto me, that will be said.
Again, some seem to submit under Crosses, and Afflictions, but sometimes it is
rather hardness of heart, than submission; they cry not when he binds them;
they despise the Chastisement of the Lord; and then seem to submit: in other
some it is more from natural temper, than from Grace. And often there is no
Submission, where there seem to be a great deal; and that which is a great
trial to one man, is none at all to another.

Now to close, and shut up all that I shall say on this Subject, consider only
this word; viz. if your Faith be found at last to be a Dead Faith, it will be
dreadful: for consider what else might be said.

1. These few Sermons will be so many Witnesses against you that have heard
them; they will rise up in Judgment against you: He that Uttered them, and all
they also that profited by them, shall appear in Judgment against you; and
perhaps these and those whom you now despise, shall one day be your Judges. 1
Cor. 6.2.

2. It shall then appear that you had means of Conviction: but you would not
see that you held fast deceit, as they did. Jer. 8.5. that you would not come
unto the light; now it may be, you say, you are willing to see, but then it
will appear, that you refused Conviction; and being evil, chose darkness rather
than light, and indeed hated knowledge. Prove. 1.29.

3. Your Damnation will be the greater, your Hell the hotter, your punishment
the heavier, and torment the more intolerable: you may now neglect Sabbaths,
and make light of Sermons, and soon forget all Searching Truths; but there is a
day coming, when persons shall be judged, according to what they have been, and
done and means of Grace which they have enjoyed it is good to think much of
that great and dreadful day, and thereby be stirred up to labor for, and to
make sure of, A Faith in Christ, which will not at last be found a Dead Faith;
all such will be Led forth with Workers of Iniquity: as Psalm. 125. ult. whose
Faith is when tried, but a Dead Faith. Let your great care be to be Sound in
the Faith, as the phrase is. Tit. 1.13. and Examine your selves daily, whether
you be in the Faith; prove your own selves. 2 Cor. 13.5. all we can do here, is
little enough to prepare and provide for that one hour of Death; that time when
we must go hence, and be no more seen in this World.

FINIS.

