LETTER From A Gentleman OF THE City of New York To ^^other, Concerning the
Troubles which happened in That Province in the Time of the late Happy
REVOLUTION.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford at the Sign of the Bible in New York School.

SIR;
I Cannot but admire to hear that some Gentlemen still have a good Opinion of
the late Disorders committed by Capt. Jacob Leys^er, and his Accomplices, in
New York, as if they had been for His Majesty's Service, and the Security of
that Province; and that such Monstrous F^^shoods do find Credit. That the
Persons before in Commission, and did labor to oppose and prevent those
Disorders, were Jac^bites, or Persons ill affected to the Happy Revolution in
England. But it has been often the Calamity of all ^ges to palliate Vice with
false Glosses* and to criminat^ the bent ^ctions of the mo^^ Virtuous and most
(...) Men. So that Truth and Innocence, without some (...) not proved at all
times a sufficient Bullwo^k against malicious Falsehoods and Calumnies.
Wherefore I shall endeavor to give you a true and brief Account of (...)
matter, as I my self have been a Personal Witness (...) of them.

It was about the beginning of April. 168^* when the first Reports arrived at
New York, that the Prince of Orange* now his present Majesty* was arri^ed in
England wi^h considerable (...), and that the late King Jam^^ was ^led into
France, and (...) was expected War would be soon proclaimed between England and
France.

The (...) Fran^^^ N^^ho^s^n, and the Council, being (...), resolved thereupon
to (...) Roman (...) Command and Places (...) in the Government, and (...)
suspended (...) Bax^^r from being a Member of Council and Captain of a Company
at Albany, and Bartholomew R^sse^ from being (...) in the (...) at New York,
they both being Papists, who forthwith ^eft their Command, and departed the
Province.

And because ^ut three Members of the Council were residing in N^w York, viz.
Mr. Frederick Phi^lips* Coll. Stephanus Cor^^a^^t, and ^oll. N^c^olas Bayard,
all of Dutch ^irth, (...) Members, and the two last, for the space of near
thirty Years (...) Elders and Deacons of the Dutch Protestant Church in New
Yo^k, and most affectionate to the Royal House of Orange; It was Resolved by
the said L^eu^. Gov^rnor and Council, to call and conveen to their Assistance
all the Justices of the Peace, and other civil Magistrates, and the Commission
Officers in the Prov^nce, for to consult and advise with them what might be
proper for the Preservation of the Peace, and the Safety of said Province in
that Conjuncture, till Orders should arrive from England.

Whereupon the said Justices, Magistrates and Officers were accordingly
convened, and styled by the Name of The General Conventi^n for the Province of
New York; and a^l matters of Government were carried on and managed by the
major Vote of that Convention.

And in the first place it was by them agreed and ordered, Forthwith to
fortify the City of New York.

And that for the better Security of the Fort (since the Garrison was weak, and
to prevent all manner of Doubts and Jealousies) a competent Number of the City
Militia should keep Guard in said Fort, and Nicholas Bayard, Coll. of said
Militia recommended to give suitable Orders accordingly.

And that the Revenue should be continued and received by some Gentlemen
appointed by that Convention, for Repairing the ^ort, and Fortify^ng of the
City; but against this Order Capt Leysler (who as a Captain was a^ Member of
that Convention) did enter his dissent, with some few others.

It was also recommended to said Coll. Bayard to hasten to fortify the City
with a^l possib^e speed, who upon the Credit of the Revenue did advance what
Money was needful for Materials. And by the Assistance of the Militia Officers,
and daily Labor of the Inhabitants had the same finished before the end of
May, excepting Capt. Leysler's Q^ota.

About the middle of May the Ship B^aver, John Corbi^ Master, being ready to
sail for England, the Lieu^. Governor and Council sent in her by Mr. John
Riggs, and in several other Ships that soon followed, Letters to the Earl, now
Duke of Shrewsbury, then Principal Secretary of State, and to the Lords of the
Committee for Trade and Plantations, wherein they signified their rejoicing at
the News of his Royal Highness, the Prince of Orange, now his present Majesty's
arrival in England, in order to Redress the Grievances of the Nation, and
giving a particular Account of the state of Affairs of this Province, and that
they wou^d endeavor to preserve its ^e^ce and ^ecurity till Orders should
arrive from England, which they humbly prayed might be hastened with all
po^sible speed. Which sa^d Letters were most graciously received, and answered
by his Majesty's Letter bearing date the 30th of J^ly, 1689.

But against Expectation, it soon happened, that on the last day of said Month
of May, Capt. Leysler having a Vessel with some W^nes in the Road, for which he
refused to pay the Duty, did in a Seditious manner stir up the meanest sort of
the Inhabitants (affirming, That King James being fled the Kingdom, all manner
of Government was fallen in this Province) to rise in Arms, and forcibly
possess themselves of the Fort and Stores, which accordingly was effected
whilst the Lieut. Governor and Council, with the Convention, were met at the
City Hall to consult what might be proper for the common Good and Safety; where
a party of Armed Men came from the Fort, and forced the Lieut. Governor to
deliver them the Keys; and seized also in his Chamber a Chest with Seven
Hundred Seventy Three Poun^s, Twelve Shil^ings in Money of the Government. And
though Coll Ba^ard, with some others appointed by the Convention, used all
endeavors to prevent those Disorders, all proved vain; for most of those that
appeared in Arms were Drunk, and cried out, They disowned al^ manner of
Government Whereupon, by Capt. Leysler's persuasion, they proclaimed him to be
their Commander, there being then no other Commission Officer amongst them.

Capt. Leysler being in this manner possessed of the Fort, took some Persons to
his Assistance, which he called, The Committee of Safety. And the Lieut.
Governor, Francis Nicollson being in this manner forced out of his Command,
for the safety of his Person, which was daily threatened, withdrew out of the
Province.

About a week after, R^ports came from Boston. That their Royal H^ghn^sses, the
Prince and Princes of Orange were proclaimed King and Queen of England
Where^^on the Council and Convention were very desirous to (...) Proclamation,
and not only wrote for it, but some of them hearing that two Gentlemen were
coming from Co^necticut with a Copy of said Proclamation, went (...) two days
to meet them, in expectation of having the ^appiness to proclaim it bu^ Major
Gold^ and Mr. (...) missing them, having put the Proclamation into Capt.
Leysler's hands, he, without taking any Notice o^ the Council o^ Convention,
did proclaim the same, though very disorderly, after which he went with his
Accomplices to the Fort, and the Gentlemen of the Council and Magistrates, and
most of the principal Inhabitants and Merchants went to Coll. Bayards House and
drank the Health and Prosperity o^ King William and Queen Mary with great
Expressions of Joy.

Two days after, a printed Proclamation was procured by some of the Council,
dated the 14th of February, 1688. whereby their Majesty's confirmed all
Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Collectors and Receivers of the Revenues, etc.
being Protestants; which was forthwith published at the City Hall by the Mayor
and Alder men, accompanied with the Council, and most of the chief Citizens and
Merchants. And pursuant thereunto the Collector, Mat. Plo^man, being a Papist,
was forthwith suspended by the Convention; and Coll. Bayard, Alder man. Paul
Richards, Capt. Thomas Winham, and Lieut. John (...), Merchants, were by them
commissionated and appointed to collect the Revenue until Orders should arrive
from England Whereupon those Gentlemen were sworn by Coll. C^rtl^nd, then Major
of the City, they being the first in this Province that took the Oaths to
their Majesty's appointed by Act of Parliament, instead of the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supreamacy.

But as soon as those Gentlemen entered upon the Office, Capt. Leysler with a
party of his Men in Arms, and Drink, fell upon them at the Custom-House, and
with Naked Swords bea^ them thence, endeavoring to Massacree some of them,
which were Rescued by Providence. Whereupon said Leysler beat an Alarm, crying
about the City, Treason* Treason, and made a strict search to seize Coll.
Bay^rd, who made his escape, and departed for Albany, where he staid all
Summer* in hopes that Orders might arrive from England to (...) those Disorders.

The said Capt. L^ysler finding almost every man of Sen^^, Reputation or Estate
in the place to oppose and (...) his Irregularities, caused frequent false
Alarms to be made, and sent several parties of his armed Men out of the Fort,
dragged into nasty Goals within said Fort several of the principal Magistrates,
Officers and Gentlemen, and others, that would not own his Power to be lawful,
which he kept in close Prison during Will and Pleasure, without any Process, or
allowing them to Ba^l. And he further published several times, by beat of
Drums, That all those who would not come into the Fort and sign their hands,
and so thereby to own his Power to be lawful, should be deemed and esteemed as
Enemies to his Majesty and the Country, and be by him treated accordingly By
which means many of the Inhabitants, though they abhorred his Actions, only to
escape a n^sty Goal, and to secure their E^tates, were by fear and compulsion
drove to comply, submit and sign to whatever he commanded.

And though Capt. Leysl^r had at first so violently opposed the collecting of
the Revenue, alleging it unlawful, as soon as his Wines were landed, and that
he got into some Power, he forthwith set up for himself the collecting of said
Revenue by Peter d' Lanoy, allowing him a great Sallary, and all the Perquisits
of that Office.

Upon the 10th of December following returned the said M^. John R^ggs from
England, with Letters from his Majesty and the Lords, in answer to the Letters
sent by the Lieut. Governor and Council above recited, Directed, To Our Trusty
and Well-beloved Francis Nicholson, Esquire Our Lieutenant Governor and Commander
in chief of Ou^ Pro^^nce of New York in ^merica, and in his absence To such as
for the time being, take care for the Preservation of the Peace, and
adminis^ring the Laws in Our said Province Whereby his Majesty approved of the
Proceedings and Care that had been taken by said Lieut. Governor and Council
for the Peace and Safety of the Province, with further Power and Directions to
continue therein t^ll further Orders. Which said Letters the said Mr. Riggs
desi^n^d to deliver on the following Morning to the ^entlemen of the Council,
to whom they properly did belong being an answer to their said Letter; but was
obstructed therein by said Leysler, who sent a party of his Men in Arms, and
brought said Riggs to the Fort, where he ^orc^d said Letters from him, though
some Gentlemen of the Council, that went the same time to the Fort, protested
against it, but he drove them out of the F^rt, calling them Rogues, Pap^sts,
and other opprobious Names.

Soon after the Receipt of said Letters said Capt. (...) himself Lieutenant
Governor, appointed a Council, and presumed further to call a select Number of
his own ^arty, who called themselves The General A^sembly of the Province, and
by their advice and assistance ^aised several Taxes and great Sums of Money
from their (...) Subjects within this Province. Which Taxes together with that
773 l. 12 s. in Money, which he had seized from the Government, and the w^o^e
(...) he applied to his own use, and to maintain said (...), allowing his
p^ivate m^n 18 d. per D^^, and to (...) proportion^bly*

On the 20^h of January following Coll. Bayard and M^ (...) had the (...)
^ortune to fa^l into his (...)* and were in a barbarous man^er, by a par^y in
(...) (...) the F^rt, and there put into a Nasty place, without (...) manner of
Process, or being allowed to bayl, though (...) same was offered for said Coll.
Bayard, by some of the (...) and richest Inhabitants to the Sum of Twenty (...)
Pounds, either for his appearance to answer* (...) the Province, or to go for
England; but (...) Cause given, or Reasons assigned, laid said Coll. (...) in
Irons, and kept him and Mr. Nicolls close P^^^oners for the space o^ fourteen
Months, where they, with several others, that had been long detained
Prisoners, were set at Liberty by Governor Slaughter.

And whilst he kept those Gentlemen in Prison, he quartered his armed Men in
their Houses, where they ^^mmitted all manner of Outrages; And to give one
Instance of many others, A Party of twelve Men were quartered at the House of
Coll. Bayard, with directions to pillage and plunder at discretion, which was
bought off with Money and plentiful Entertainment But the same day, when that
party had received their Money, another party came in with Naked Swords, opened
several Chambers and Chests in said House, and did Rob and carry away what
Money and other Goods they found.

At the same time Coll Bayard and Mr. Nicolls were taken, (...) search was made
for Coll. Cortlandt, but he, with several other Gentlemen, having made their
escape, were forced to leave their Families and Concerns, and remain in Exile,
till relieved by the arrival of Governor Sl^^^hter*

It is hard^y to be expressed what Cruelties Capt. Leysler and his (...) imposed
upon the said Prisoners and all oth^^^ that would not own his Power to be
lawful. N^^th^r (...) the Protestant M^nisters in the Province escape their
Malice and Cruelty; for Mr. Selyns, Minister of New York, was most grossly
abused by Leysler himself i^ the Church at the time of Divine Service, and
threatened to be silenced, etc. Mr. D^ll^us, Minister at Albany, to escape a
nasty Coal, was forced to leave his Flock, and ^ly for shelter into New
England. Mr. Va^^ck, Minister of the Dutch Towns on (...) Island, was by armed
men dragged out of his House to the Fort, then imprisoned without bayl, for
speaking (as was pretended) Treasonable words against Capt. Leysler and the
Fort; then prosecuted, and decreed by Peter d' Lanoy* pretended Judge, without
any Commission or Authority, To be deprived from his Ministerial Function,
(...) in a Fine of 80 l. and to remain in close Prison till that Fine should be
paid; yea, he was so tormented, that in all likelihood it occasioned and
hastened the sudden Death of that most Reverend and Religious Man. The French
Ministers, Mr. Perret and Mr. Delli^ had some better Quarters, but were often
threatened to be prosecuted in like manner, because they would not approve of
his Power and disorderly proceedings.

None in the Province, but those of his Faction, had any safety in their
Estates; for said Capt. Leysler, at will and pleasure, sent to those who
disapproved of his Actions to fu^nish him with Money, Provisions, and what else
he wanted, and upon denial, sent armed men out of the Fort, and f^rc^bly broke
open several Houses, Shops, C^llars, Vessels, and other places where they
expected ^o be supplied, and without any the (...) payment or satisfaction,
carried their Plunder to the Fort; (...) which was extremely approved of by
those poor ^ello^s which he had about him, and was forced to feed and maintain;
and so he styled those his Robberies with the gilded Name* and Pretense, That
it was for their Maj^sties King William and Queen Mary 's special Service,
though it was a^t^r found out, that whole Cargo's of those stolen goods were
sold to his Friends in the City, and shipped off for the West Indies and else
where.

In this manner he the said Leysler, with his Accomplices, did force, p^^lage,
rob and steal from their Majesty's good Subjects within this Province, almost
to their u^ter Ruin, vast Sums of Money, and other Effects, the estimation of
the Damages done only within this City of New York, amounting, as by Account
may appear, to the Sum of Thirteen Thousand Nine Hundred and Fifty Nine Pounds,
beside the Rapines, S^oils and ^iolences done at ^oll. Will^^s on
Na^^aw-Island, and to many others in several parts of the Province.

And thus you may see how he used and exercised an Exorbitant, Arbitrary and
Unlawful Power over the Persons and Estates of his Majesty's good Subjects
here, against the known and Fundamental Laws of the Land, and in subvertion of
the same, to the great Oppression of his Majesty's Subjects, and to the
apparent decay of Trade and Commerce.

In this Calamity, Misery and Confusion was this P^ovince, by those Disorders,
enthrawled near the space of two years, until the arrival of his Majesty's
Forces, under the command of Major Ingoldsby, who, with several Gentlemen of
the Council, arrived about the last day of January, 169^* which said Gentlemen
of the Council, f^r the Preservation of the Peace, sent and offered to said
Leysler, That he might stay and continue his Command in the ^ort, only desiring
for themselves and the Kings Forces quietly to quarter and refresh themselves
in the Cit^, till Governor Sl^ughter should arriv^; but the said Leysler,
instead of complying, asked Mr. Brook* one of his Majesty's Council* Who were
appointed of the Council in this Province? and Mr. Brook having named Mr.
Phillips, Coll. Cortland and Coll Bayard, he fell into a Passion, and cried,
What! those Papist Dogs Rogues Sacrament if the King should send Three Thousand
such I would cut them all off; And without any cause given, he proclaimed open
War against them. Whereupon, they, for Self-preservation, protection of the
Kings Forces and Stores, and the safety of the City, were necessitated to
persuade to their assistance several of their Majesty's good Subjects then in
Opposition against the said Leysler, with no other intent, as they signified to
him by several Letters and Messages, but only for self-security and Defense;
yet notwithstanding, the said Leysler proceeded to make War against them and
the Kings Forces, and fired a vast Number of great and small Shot in the City,
whereby several of his Majesty's Subjects were killed and wounded as they
passed in the stree^s upon their lawful Occasions, though no Opposition was made
on the other side.

At this height of Ex^remity was it when Governor Slaughter arrived on the
19th of March, 1691. who having published his Commi^sion from the ^ity Hall,
with great signs of Joy, by firing all the Artillary within and round the City,
sent thrice to demand the surrender of the Fort from Capt. Leysler and his
Accomplices, which (...) thrice denied, but upon great Threatenings, the
following Day surrendered to Governor Slaughter, who forth with caused the said
Capt. Leysler, with some of the chief Malefactors to be bound over to answer
their Crimes at the next Supreme Court of Judica^ure, where the (...) L^ysler
and his pretended Secretary Millborn did appear, (...) used to plead to the
Indictment of the grand J^^y or to own the Jurisdiction of that Court; and so
after (...) hearings, as Mutes, were found guilty of High Treason and Murder,
and executed accordingly.

Several of the other Malefactors that pleaded (...) ^ound Guilty, and
particularly one Abraham Governo^^ for Murdering of (...) Old Man peaceably
passing al^ng the Street, but were Reprieved by Governor Slou^hter, and upon
Coll. Fle^^^er's arrival by him set at liberty, upon their Submission and
promise of good Behavior.

Sir, All what is here set down is True, and can be proved and justified by the
Men of greatest Probity and best Figure amongst us. If I were to give a
particular Narrative of all the Cru^lties and Robberies perpetrated upon their
Majesty's most affectionate Subjects in this Province, they would fill a
Volumn: There was no need of any Revolution here; there were not ten Jacobites
in the whole; they were all well known, and the strict^st Protestants, and men
of best Figure, Reputation and Estates were at the Helm, it may plainly be
p^rceived by the several steps and measures were f^llowed at that time, and by
their Letters to the then Earl, now Duke of Shrewsbury, and to the Lords, and
the Kings Answer thereunto. The Copy of which Answer, and some other Papers
worthy of your perusal are enclosed.

So soon as Governor Sloughter arrived, an Assembly was called, which upon the
18th of April, 1691. did present an Address to his Excellency, signed by their
Speaker, together with the Resolves of that H^use, which when you are pleased
to read, gives the Conclusive Opinion and Judgment of the General Assembly of
this Province, of all those disor^erly Proceedings, for which those two have
suffered Death, and their S^ntence was since approved by Her Majesty, of ever
blessed Memory, in Council.

Many worthy Protestants in England, and other parts of the world, being
sincerely devoted to his Majesty's Interest, have yet notwithstanding
(unacquainted with our Circumstances, and not duly apprized of the truth) been
more easily induced to give credit to the false Glosses and Calumnies of
biased and disaffected Persons from this Province. But in my Observation, most
Gentlemen that have come hither so prepossessed, after some time spent here,
have been through* convinced of their Mistake, and that those men who suffered
Death, did not from pure zeal for their Majesty's Interest, and the Protestant
Religion, but being of desperate Fortune, thrust themselves into Power, of
purpose to make up their wants by the Ruin and Plunder of his Majesty's Loyal
Subjects, and were so far engaged in their repeated Crimes, that they were
driven to that height of Desperation, had not the Providence of Almighty God
prevented it, the whole Province had been Ruined and D^stroyed.

I have put this in writing at your Request, to assist your Memory, and leave
it to his Excellency Coll. Fletcher, and your own Observations, to enlarge upon
the Characters of those Persons who have been the greatest Sufferers in the
time of those Disorders, and of their Patience and Moderation since your
arrival; also, of the Disaffected, and the Causes which you have frequently
observed to hold this Province in Disquiet and Trouble. Notwithstan^ing all
which, and the frequent Attachs of the French and Indians upon our Fronteers,
this Province has no^ lost one foot of ground during the War, but have had
considerable Advantages upon the En^my, which, under God, is due to the prudent
and steady Conduct and great Care and Diligence of Coll. Fletcher, our present
Governor.

You have been an Eye*Wit^ess, and have had Time and Experience enough to
enable you to inform others in England, which if you will please to do* I doubt
not but it will gain Credit, and be an extraordinary piece of Service to this
Province. I am,

SIR, Your Most Humble Servant.
New York, December 31. 1697.
The KING's Letter.
William R.

TRusty and Well^beloved* We greet you well. Whereas We have been given to
understand by Letters from you, and others the principal Inhabitants of Our
Province of New York, of your Dutiful Submission to Our Royal Pleasure, and
readiness to receive from Us such Orders as We should think requisite for
settling the Peace and good Government of Our Province of New York. We have
thought fit hereby to signify unto you, That We are taking such Resolution
concerning the same as may tend to the Welfare of Our Subjects, Inhabitants
there. And in the mean time We do hereby Authorize and Empower you to take upon
you the Government of the said Province, ^^lling to your Assistance, in the
Administration thereof, the principal Freeholders and Inhabitants of the same,
or so many of them as you shall think fit, Willing and Requiring you to do and
perform all things which to the Place and Office of Our Lieutenant Governor
and Commander in Chief of Our Province of New York, does or may appertain, as
you shall find necessary for Our S^rvice, and the good of Our Subjects,
according to the Laws and Customs of Our said Province, until further Order
from Us. And so We bid you Farewell. Given at Our Court at White Hall the 30th
Day of July, 1689. in the first Year of Our Reign.

By His Majesty's Command, Nottingham.
Was Superscribed,

To Our Trusty and Well-beloved Francis Nichollson* Esquire Our Lieut. Governor
and Commander in Chief of Our Province of New York in America; And in his
Absence, To such as for the time being take care for preserving the Peace and
administering the Laws in Our said Province of New York in America.



The Resolves of the House of Representatives, etc.
House of Representatives for the Province of New York, April 17. 1691. P. M.
UPON further Consideration of the Petition presented to this House by many of
the Freeholders and Inhabitants within this City and Province.

Resolved, (...) Contradicente*

That Jacob Leyster, Samuel (...), and diverse others aiding, assisting and
abetting him in the Dissolving the Convention that was convened at the City of
New York for the Preservation of the Peace, the Execution of Justice, and the
securing o^ this Province for their Majesty's Service, King William and Queen
Mary, King and Queen ^f England, etc. was Tumultuous, Illegal and against their
M^jesties Right over this their Province, being a Dominion of their Crown of
England.

Resolved,

That the Imprisoning of their Majesty's Protestant Subjects into Doleful and
Nations Prisons, and their keeping them by Force and Violence, without any
Commitment, or the assignment of any legal Cause, was Arbitrary, Illegal, and
against the Peace and Dignity of their Majesty's Crown of England, and also a
Violation of the R^ghts and Privileges of Their Majesty's Subjects inhabiting
within this Province.

Resolved,

That the prosecuting and (...) their Majesty's Protestant (...) to fly their
Habitations, and forsake the care of their (...) by which (...) strength of
this Province was much weakened* was also Arbitrary, Illegal, and Destructive
to Their Majesty's Interest in this Province.

Resolved,

That the Depredations made by the French and Indians upon (...), and other
Plantations in the County of (...), by which many of their Majesty's Protestant
Subjects were slain, their Houses burn, and others carried into Captivity;
which great loss is only to be attributed to the Disorders and Disturbances
that were raised by those who had usurped a Power contrary to their Majesty's
Authority and Right of Government over this Province.

Resolved,

That the seizing and forcibly taking away of the Goods and Merchandises from
the Merchants and Persons inhabiting within this City and Province, was a
Violation of their M^jesties Peace, and the Destruction of their Laws, and to
the manifest Ruin of many of their good Protestant Subjects within this City
and Province.

Resolved,

That the levying and raising of Money upon their Majesty's Subjects without
lawful Authority, is Arbitrary a^^ ^^legal, and against the Rights and
Privileges of their M^jesties Subjects inhabiting within this Province.

Resolved,

That the raising of Forces, and keeping their Majesty's Fort of New York
against their Majesty's Officers and Soldiers lately arrived, was Rebellious,
and in prejudice to their Majesty's Right and Dominion of this Province.

Resolved,

That the denying the Surrender of their Majesty's Fort to his Excellency,
after his arrival, and publication of their Majesty's Commission to him, was
Rebellious, and against the Dignity and Authority of their Majesty's Crown of
England.

Ordered,

For the prevention of the like Mistakes and Disorders amongst their Majesty's
Subjects in this Province for the time to come, That these Resolves be sent to
the Governor and Council, with the desire of this House, that they would be
pleased to give the Concurrence of their Board thereunto.

Ordered,

That an Address be made to his Excellency of the Resolution of this House to
support and defend their Majesty's Right and Dominion over this their Province,
as it is now established by their Majesty's Authority, in the administration of
his Excellency, with our Lives and Fortunes against all their Majesty's Enemies.

By Order of the House of Representatives, Ja. Graham, Speaker.

An Address to his Excellency Colonel Slaughter.
May it please your Excellency;
WE Their Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects convened by their Majesty's
most gracious Favor, in General Assembly, in this Province, do in all most
Humble manner heartily congratulate your Excellency's arrival in this
Government; and withal, pre^ume to acquaint your Excellency, That as in our
hearts we do abhor and detest all the Rebellions Arbitrary and Illegal
Proceedings of the late U^urpers of their Majesty's Authority over this
Province so we do, from the bottom of our hearts, with all I^tegr^^,
acknowledge and declare, That there are none that (...) ought to have Right to
Rule and Govern their Majesty's Subjects here, bu^ by their Majesty's
Authority, which is now placed in your Excellency. And therefore we do solemnly
declare, That we will with our Lives and Fortunes support and maintain the
Administration of your Excellency's Government, under their Majesty's, against
all their Majesty's Enemies whatsoever.

And this we humbly pray your Excellency to accept as the sincere
Acknowledgment of all their Majesty's good Subjects within this their Province,
praying for their Majesty's long and happy Reign over us, and that your
Excellency may long Live and Rule us, according to Their Majesty's most
excellent Constitution of Governing his Subjects by a General Assembly.

By Order of the House of Representatives, Ja. Graham, Speaker.
April 17. 1691.
At the Court at White Hall the 17th of March, 1691. PRESENT The Queens most
Excellent Majesty in Council.
WHereas the Right Honorable, the Lords of the Committee for Trade and
Plantations, have by their Report, dated the 11th Instant, represented to Her
Majesty, That they have examined the matter of the Petition of Jacob Leyster,
the Son of Jacob Leyster of New York, deceased, referred to the Committee by
Her Majesty's Order in Coucil of the 7th of January last, Complaining of
Proceedings against his Father and Jacob Milbourn, by Coll. Slaughter at
New York, who were thereupon condemned and put to Death, and their Estates
confiscated. And their Lordships having fully heard the said Jacob Leyster, the
Petitioner, by his Council learned, upon the whole matter, are humbly of
Opinion, That the said Jacob Leyster and Jacob Milbourn, deceased, (...)
condemned and (...) suffered according to Law. But the Lordships do humbly
offer their Intercession to her Maje^^^, in behalf of their Families* as fit
Objects of their Majesty's Mercy* That the Estates of the said Jacob Leyster
and Jacob Millbourn, deceased, may be Restored to them, upon their humble
Application to their Majesty's by Petition for the same. Her Majesty in Council
is this day pleased to Approve the said Report, and to declare. That upon the
humble Application of the Relations of the said Jacob Leyster and Jacob
Millbourn deceased. Her Majesty will order the Estates of Jacob Leyster and
Jacob Milbourn to be restored to their Families, as Objects of her Majesty's
Mercy.

Rich. Colinge.

FINIS.

