A DISCOURSE Concerning the Uncertainty of the Times of Men, AND The Necessity
of being Prepared for Sudden Changes and DEATH.

Delivered in a SERMON Preached at Cambridge in New England December. 6. 1696. On
Occasion of the Sudden Death of Two Scholars belonging to Harvard College

By INCREASE MATHER, Praesident of that College.

1 Samuel 3.18. And he said, It is the Lord, Let Him do what seems Him Good

Boston in New England. Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Samuel Phillips,
at the Brick Shop. 1697.

TO My Worthy Friend Mr. JOHN AIR, One of His Majesty's Justices of the Peace,
at Boston in New England.
Dear SIR,
THE Love which is in the Heart of a Father toward his Children is no small
Love: and thence the Sorrow for their Death is no little Sorrow. We see it in
Ephraim, of whom it is Recorded, that when his Sons were taken away by an
Immature Death; Their Father Mourned many Days, 1 Chronicles. ^.22. An
Extraordinary Mourning is expressed by that of Mourning as one that Mourns
for an Only Son. Zech. 12.10. It is a bitter aggravation of the Death of
Children, when there is no ground to believe that they are gone to a better
World. No doubt, but that was the Reason, why David was so much moved when he
first heard of the sudden Death of His Absalom. 2 Samuel 18.33. He wept, and as
he wept, He thus said, O my Son Absalom! my Son, my Son Absalom, would God I
had Dyed for thee, O Absalom! My Son, my Son. So it does very much alleviate
grief, when we can Mourn not without Hope, of seeing our Children at the Right
hand of Christ in the Resurrection at the Last Day. As for your Son who now is
not, I could never observe any thing in him, but what was Laudable; and his
Worthy Tutor gives him the like Character. Although Death found him using
Recreations (which Students need for their Healths sake) they were lawful
Recreations. Nor was he willing to divert himself at that time, without a
particular permission from his Superiors, as I understand: and therefore let
not the Circumstances of his Death make too great an Impression on your Spirit.
Had Death found him Sinning, the Evil which f^^l upon him suddenly, would have
been much sadder.

If you lay this Affliction too deeply to Heart, you will Dishonor God and
your self too. (...) discovered much Humane Frailty, when he refused to be
comforted, and said, I will go down into the Grave to my Son mourning. Genesis
37.35. The Jewish Doctors have a saying, That the Spirit of God dwells not in a
sad Soul, which they confirm by that Instance of Jacob, concerning whom they
say, that the Spirit of Prophecy withdrew from him all the time of his
inordinate grief for his Sons supposed Death. But this is certain, that excess
of Worldly Sorrow is an offense to the Holy Spirit, as well as Excess in carnal
mirth. Nothing has befallen you, but what is common to men, yea, and to the
best of men. Aaron the Saint of the Lord had two of his Sons taken from him by
a sudden and awful Hand of Heaven. This is written that you might have Comfort
through the Scriptures, and also that you might Imitate his Example in a
submissive frame of Spirit to the Will of God under the like (though not so
sadly aggravated) Dispensation. Aaron Held his peace. The Lord help you by his
Spirit with the same Grace. Say with Eli, It is the Lord, let Him do what
seems Him good: Say with Hezekiah, when He Received sad tidings concerning
his Children, Good is the Word of the Lord. Isa 39.8. If instead of your own
Son, which is taken from you, God shall give you more of His Son, happy are
you. Whether your (...) will be made up again in the Creature, the Lord only
knows, but God can easily make it up in Himself.

I have Read of an Holy man that having lost a Son that was very Dear to him,
Retired himself to pour out his Soul to God, where the Lord met with him: after
which he was cheerful; An intimate friend of his wondering at it, asked him the
reason of his Cheerfulness; To whom he Replied, I could be content to Bury a
Son every Day, on Condition I might meet with so much of God every day as I
have done this day. Now the Lord give you more of that good part which cannot
be taken from you. Let the Lord give you a Name (...) than of Sons, an
Everlasting Name, which shall not be cut off. Which is the Prayer of him who
is, in much Affection,

YOURS to Serve, Increase Mather.

Man Knows not his Time.
Eccles. 9.12. Man knows not his Time.


SOLOMON in this Book shows the Vanity and Uncertainty of all humane affairs,
and the Misery which does on that account attend men whilst they are on the
Earth. He takes notice of many Vanities, one whereof is mentioned in the
preceding Verse, namely, That Events and Successes are not always as men
Judging by Second Causes conclude they will be. One would think that the
swiftest Runner should come to the End of the Race soonest; and that when there
is a battle to be fought, they that have the greatest Number and Strength
should win the day; but sometimes it falls out to be quite contrary, that the
race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong. For which there are two
Reasons assigned. (1.) The overruling Providence of God. Time and Chance
happens to them all. There is nothing that Chances in respect of God, who
knows and has determined all Events* but as to man, Casualties, Accidents
happen which cause things to fall out otherwise then according to probable
rational Conjectures would have been; in all which there is a Providence, and
sometimes there is a great Providence in a small Accident. (2.) Another Reason
is in the words before u^, because Man kn^ws not his Time: which is not to be
understood Universally, as if no man did ever in any thing know what Times
should pass over him: but for the most part and in most things they are
Ignorant thereof. So then the Doctrine at present before us, is,

That for the most part the Miserable Children of Men, know not their Time.

There are three things for us here briefly to Enquire into. (1.) What Times
they are which Men know not? (2.) How it does appear that they are Ignorant
thereof. (3.) The Reason Why they are kept in Ignorance of their Time.

Quest. 1. What Times are they which men know not?

Ans. 1. Time is sometimes put for the proper season for Action. For the
fittest season for a man to Effect what he is undertaking. The Seventy Greek
Interpreters translate the words KAIRON AUIOU. There is a Season, a fit Time
for men to go to work in. If they take hold of that nick of opportunity, they
will prosper and succeed in their Endeavors. It is a great part of wisdom to
know that season. Hence it is said, A wise man's Heart discerns both Time and
Judgment. Eccles. 8.5. but few have that wisdom or knowledge. Therefore it is
added in the next verse. because to every purpose there is Time and Judgment,
therefore the misery of man is great upon him. The meaning is, because men
discern not the proper Time for them to Effect what they purpose, their misery
is great. If they would attempt such a thing just at such a Time, they would
make themselves and others happy, but missing that Opportunity great misery
comes upon them. So it is as to Civil Affairs very frequently. Men discern not
the proper only season for them to obtain what they desire. Yea, and so it is
as to Spirituals. Men are not aware of the proper season wherein they may
obtain good for their Souls. There is a price put into their hands to get
Wisdom, but they have no heart to know and improve it. There is a day of Grace
in which i^ men seek to God for mercy they shall find it. Isa. 55.6. Seek ye
the Lord while he may be found. The most of them that have such a day know it
not until their finding Time is past. Thus it was with Israel of old. Jere.
8.7. The Stork in the heaven knows her appointed Time, the Turtle, and the
Crane, and the Swallow observe the Time of their coming, but my People know not
the Judgment of the Lord. They discerned not the Judgments, that is the
dispensations of God. They had a Summer of prosperity but did not improve it.
There was a Winter of Adversity coming on them, but they knew it not, nor did
they use the proper only means to prevent it. So the Jews when Christ was
amongst them, had a blessed time if they had known it: but they knew not the
things of their peace, in the day of their peace; they knew not the Time of
their Visitation.

2. A man knows not what Changes shall attend him whilst in this World.
Changes of Providence are in the Scripture called Times. It is said that the
Acts of David, and the Times that went over him, and over Israel, and over all
the Kingdoms of the Countries, were written by Samuel, and Nathan the Prophet,
and in the Book of Gad the S^er, meaning the Changes of Providence which they
were subject unto. 1 Chronicles. 29.30. A man knows not whether he shall see good or
evil days for the Time to come: he knows what his past days have been; but
does not know what they shall be for the time to come. It may be he is now in
prosperity: he has Friends, Children, Relations, which he takes delight in, he
has Health, an Estate, and Esteem in the World, he does not know that he shall
have any of these things for the future. Indeed, men in Prosperity are apt to
think (as they would have it) that they shall always, or for a long time be
so: but very often they find themselves greatly mistaken. The Psalmist
confesses that it was so with him. Psalm. 30.6, 7. In my prosperity I said, I
shall never be moved, Lord, by thy favor, thou have made my Mountain to stand
strong: thou did hide thy face and I was troubled. His Enemies were all
subdued: his Mountain, that is his Kingdom, especially his Royal Palace in
Mount Sion was become exceeding strong, that now he thought all dangers were
over, but Absaloms unexpected Rebellion involved him and the whole Land in
Trouble. The good People in Iosiahs time promised themselves great happiness
for many a year under the Government of such a King as he was. Lam. 4.20. Of
whom we said under his shadow we shall Live. But his sudden Death made a sad
Change in all the Public Affairs. A man knows not what Afflictions shall come
upon him whilst on the earth. This is true concerning particular Persons: they
may know in general, that Afflictions shall attend them in an evil Sinful World
But what those Afflictions in particular shall be they know not. Thus the
Apostle speaks, Act 20.22, 23. I go bound in Spirit to Jerusalem, no^ knowing
what things shall befall me there, save tha^ the holy Spirit witnesses in
every City, (...), tha^ Bonds and Afflictions abide me. So that he kne^ in
general that he should meet with Affliction, but not in special what the
Affliction would be. So is it true concerning a People, that they know not what
Times or Changes may pass over them. Little was it thought that whilst Hoshea
(who was the best of all the Nineteen Kings that had Ruled over the Ten Tribes)
was Reigning, a Powerful foreign Enemy should invade the Land and make them
all Slaves. Little did the Jews think that when Josiah was but Thirty nine
years old, he should die before that year was out, and they never see good day
more after his Death. And as men know not What their Changes and Afflictions
must be, so neither When they (...) come upon them. Whether it will be a long
or a short time before those Changes overtake them. Mar. 13.35. You know not
when the Master of the House comes, at even, or at midnight, or at the Cock
crowing, or in the morning. Thus a man knows not whether the sharpest
Afflictions which are reserved for him, shall come upon him in his Youth, or in
his middle age, or in his old age; though for the most part men's greatest
Afflictions overtake them in their old age. Nor can any man know whether his
Afflictons shall be soon over, or continue for a longer time. Indeed, the Lords
People knew that their Capti^ity in Babylon should last for Seventy years and
no longer; but that knowledge was by divine Revelation. As for some other
Persecutions they knew not how long they would continue. Psalm. 74.9. There is
no more a Prophet, neither is there any that knows how long. Those words seem
to respect the Persecution under Antiochus, when there was no Prophet.

3. A man knows not the Time of his Death: Often it is so, that when Death
falls upon a man, he thinks no more of it, than the Fishes think of the Net
before they are Caught in it; or then the Birds think of the Snare before they
are taken in it, as Solomon here speaks. It uses to be said, (and it is a
plain, weighty known Truth) that nothing is more certain then that every man
shall Die, and nothing more uncertain than the Time when. Old Isaac said* Genesis
27.2. Behold, I know not the day of my Death. Though he Lived above twenty
years after he spoke those words, he did not know that he should Live a day
longer. A man cannot know how long himself or another shall live. It is true
that Hezekiah was ascertained that he should not die before fifteen years were
expired. And the Prophet Jeremy knew that Hananiah should not live a year to an
end. Jer. 28.16. This year thou shall Die, because thou have Taught Rebellion
against the Lord. But these were extraordinary cases. It is not a usual thing
for a man to know beforehand how many months or years he shall live in this
World: Nor may he desire to know it, but he ought to leave that with God.
Although David prayed, saying, Lord make me to know my End, and the numbe^ of
my Days, what it is. Psalm. 39.4. Hi^ meaning is, not that he might know just
how many days he should live, but that he might be made duly sensible of his
own frailty and mortality, and lead his life accordingly. Oftentimes Death is
nearest to men when they least think of it; especially it is so with ungodly
men: we have an instance of it in Agag. He came before Samuel, delicately, and
said, surely the bitterness of death is past. 1 Samuel 15.32. Little did he
think, that within a few hours, he should be cut in pieces. When Haman boasted
of his being the chief Favorite at Court, and that the Queen had invited no
one but the King and himself to a Banquet, he little thought of the destruction
which was then preparing for him. When Belshazzar was in the beginning of the
night drinking and making merry with his profane Companions, he little thought
that he should be a dead man before morning; but that night was Belshazzar
slain. Dan. 5.30. The Rich Fool in the Gospel dreamed of a long life and merry:
He said to his Soul, Eat, Drink and be merry, thou have Goods laid up for many
years. But God said, This night thy Soul shall be required of thee: He must
appear immediately before the dreadful Tribunal. Luke 12.20. Thus we see what
Time it is which men know not.

The second thing to be Enquired into, is, How it does appear that men know not
their Time.

Answ. 1 It is evident, In that all future Contingencies are known to God only.
Hence Christ said to the Disciples, It is not for you to know the Times and the
Seasons which the Father has put in his own power. Act 1.7. Future Times and
Contingent Events, the knowledge and disposal of them has God reserved to
himself. There are future things which happen necessarily, that a man may know
them long before they come to pass: God has appointed Lights in the Heaven to
be for Signs and Seasons. Genesis 1.14. These move regularly and unfailably
according to that Order which the Creator has established. Therefore a man may
know infallibly how many hours or minutes such a day or night will be long
before the Time comes: He may know when there will be an Eclipse of the Sun or
of the Moon, twenty, or an hundred years before it comes to pass: but for
Contingent Things, which have no necessary dependence on the constituted Order
of Nature, but upon the mere Pleasure and Providence of God, they are not known
except unto God, or to them unto whom he shall reveal them. The Lord
challenges this as his Prerogative. The Idols whom the Heathen worshipped,
could not make known future Contingencies. Isa 41.22, 23. Let them show us what
shall happen, or declare us things for to come, show the things that are to
come hereafter, that we may know they are Gods. To do this was past their
skill. The Devil knows many future things which men are ignorant of; He could
foretell Saul's ruin, and David's coming to the Kingdom. Nevertheless, there are
many future Events which he has no knowledge of. Therefore he often deludes
those that Enquire of him with deceitful and uncertain Answers. But as for men
they are ignorant of future things, which most nearly concern themselves, or
their own Families. No man knows so much as who shall be his Heir, or Enjoy the
Estate which he has labored for. Psalm. 39.6. Surely every man walks in a vain
show, he heapeth up riches, and knows not who shall gather them. He knows not
whether one of his Relations, or a mere stranger shall possess that Estate
which he has taken so much pains, and disquieted himself so much for the
obtaining of it. This meditation made Solomon out of Love with this World. He
knew as much as any man, and yet he confesses that he did not know whether the
man that should come after him, and enjoy all that he had Labored for, would
be a wise man or a fool, Eccles. 2.18, 19. And he says, A man knows not that
which shall be; for who can tell him when it shall be. Eccles. 8.7. He knows
neither what nor when it shall be. And again he says, A man cannot tell what
shall be; and what shall be after him who can tell him! Eccl. 10.14. This is to
be understood concerning Contingent Events. Such as the particular Afflictions
which are to befall a man, or the Time, Place, or manner of his Death.

2. The Times of men are ordered according to the Decree of God. There is
nothing comes to pass in the Earth, but what was first determined by a wise
decree in Heaven. Act. 15.18. Known unto God are all his works from the
beginning of the World. God knows what he has to do. The Apostle speaks there
concerning the Conversion of the Gentiles. This did God foreknow and decree
from the beginning of the World, yea from all Eternity. The like is to be said
concerning every thing which happens in the World. Not a Sparrow falls to the
Ground without his Providence, and therefore not without his decree, the one
being an Infallible Effect of the other. He has decreed when and where every
man that comes into the World shall be Born; and where he shall live, in what
Country, and in what Town; yea, and in what House too. Act. 17.26. He has
determined the times before app^inted, and the bounds of their Habitation. He
has decreed when every man shall die. Eccl. 3.2. There is a Time to be Born, and
a Time to Die. That is to say, a Time decreed and appointed by God when every
man shall be born, and when he shall die. Nor shall any man live a day longer
than the Time which the Lord has appointed for him. Job 14.5. His days are
determined, the number of his months are with thee, thou have appointed his
bounds that he cann^t pass. All the Circumstances attending every man's Death,
the place and the manner of it, whether he shall die by Sickness, or by any
other Accident, all is determined in Heaven before it comes to pass on the
Earth. Now the decrees of God are Secret things until the Event or some alivine
Revelation shall discover them. Deuteronomy. 29.29. Secret things belong unto the Lord
our God. His divine dec^ees are those secret things, which Himself alone knows*
Rom 11.34* For who has known the mind of the Lord? or, who has been his
Counselor?

3. The Conversations of men generally make it manifest, that they know not
their Time. They do many things which they would not do, and they neglect many
things which they would certainly practice, if they knew what Times are near
them. Math. 24.43. If the good man of the house had known in what watch the
Thief would come, he would have watched, and would not have suffered his house
to be broken up. Thus men live in a ca^eless neglect of God, and of their own
Souls and Salvation, but if they knew that (...) will come stealing suddenly
upon them* they would watch and pray. Did they know that before the next week,
they shall be in another World, they would live after another manner than now
they do. Most commonly Persons are light and v^in in their Spi^its, when heavy
Tidings is near to them. Did they know what sad News they shall ^ear shortly,
they would be in a more solemn frame of Spirit. Isa. 5.12. The harp and the
vi^l, the tabret, and the pipe, and wine are in their feasts, but they regard
not the work of the Lord, neither cons^der the operati^n of his hands. Had they
known what work God intended to make with them speedily, they would have minded
something else besides their sensual pleasures and delights.

We proceed to Enquire 3. Whence it is that men know not their Time.

Answ. It is from God. He will have them to be kept in ignorance and
uncertainties about their Time: And this for wise and holy Ends. e g.

1. That so his Children might live by Faith. That so they might live a li^e of
holy dependence upon God continually. They must not know their Times, that so
they might Trust in the Lord at all times. God would not have his Children to
be anxiously solicitous about future Events, but to leave themselves and theirs
with their Heavenly Father, to dispose of all t^eir Concernments, as He in his
Infinite Wisdom and Faithfulness shall see good.

2. That their Obedience may be tried. That they may follow the Lord, as it
were blind fold, whithersoever He shall l^ad them, though they do not see one
step of their way before them, as Abraham did. Heb. 11.8. When he was called to
go out into a place which he should after receive for an Inheritance, he
obeyed, and went out not knowing whither he went. We must follow God, though we
know not what He will do with us, or how He will dispose of us, as to our
Temporal Concerns, submitting our selves, yea, our lives and all entirely to
the Will of God in every thing. That saying ought to be often in our mouths, If
the Lord will, and we shall live, and do this or that. Iam. 4.15.

3. Men must not know their Time, that so they may (...) ever watchful. Math.
25.13. Watch therefore, for you know neither the day nor the hour wherein the
Son of Man comes. The generality of men, if they had it revealed to them (as
Hezekiah) that they should certainly live so many years, they would in the mean
time be careless about their Souls, and the World to come. We see that
notwithstanding they are uncertain how short their Time may be, they are
regardless about their future eternal Estate. How much more would they be so,
if they knew that Death and Judgment were (...) far off from them?

4. As to some they are kept in Ignorance of their Times, that so they may with
the more comfort and composure of Spirit follow the work which they are called
unto: That they may with diligence and cheerfulness attend the duties of their
general and particular Calling; which they could not do, if they knew what Evil
Times and Things are appointed for them. The terror of what is coming on them,
would be so dismal to them, that they could not enjoy themselves, nor take
comfort in any thing they enjoy. As the Apostle speaks to the covetous Jews,
Jam. 5.1. Go to now you rich men, weep and howl for your miseries that shall
come upon you. So there are many in the World, that would spend their days in
weeping and howling, did they but know what is coming on them and theirs. When
the Prophet Elisha had i^ revealed to him, that sad things were coming on the
Land, by reason of a bloody Neighbor Nation, which would break in upon them,
and exercise barbarous Cruelties; the holy man wept at the foreknowledge of it.
2 King. 3.11. The man of God wept. So there would be nothing but weeping in
many Families, weeping in many Towns, and in some whole Countries, did men but
know their Times. Therefore they must be kept in ignorance thereof until the
things come upon them.

We proceed to the USE of this Doctrine.

First by way of Information.

Inf. I. We see the Reason of those Meserable Disappointments which men
frequently meet with; It is because they know not their Time. If they had set
about such an enterprise a little sooner, they had succeeded well, but not
knowing that, all their labor is lost. So it is often as to matters wherein
the Souls of men are concerned. How came Esau to be disappointed of the
Blessing; if he had come but a few hours sooner, he had certainly attained it;
but he knew not that, and so was eternally frustrated of all his hopes and
expectations. The foolish Virgins cr^ed for Oil when their Lamps were going
out, they should have done that sooner. They came for Admission to the Marriage
after the Door was shut. Thus by not knowing their Time they lost their Souls,
and missed of Heaven for ever. Mat. 25.9, 10. Thus also it is as to Temporal
Concerns. Some Accident not foreseen happens, and brings a frustration on all a
man's Endeavors. Mariners go to Sea, and they meet with Enemies, where they
least expected them. They come near home, a Storm happens, and they suffer
Shipwreck. Had they been aware of those Evils, they would have been more
careful to have avoided them. The Husbandman after much pains taken in Tilling
the Ground, has an hopeful prospect of a good Harvest, but Blasting, or Mildew,
or Droughts, or great Rains, or unseasonable Frost, dis^ppoints all his hopes.
These were things which he could not foresee nor avoid. A man Builds an House,
hopes he shall Enjoy the Comfort of it many years: A Casualty never thought of,
causes the House to be Burnt: Had he known this, he would never have been at
the Cost of such a Building.

Inf. II. We may here see the Vanity and Impiety of those Persons who pretend
to know their own, or other men's Times. There are some that will not engage in
a design on such or such days, because they are not (as they speak) Lucky
days. Some (as Mr. Cartwright in his Commentary on the Text before us
observes) will not undertake a matter on a Saturday, because they say Saturn
has made that to be an unfortunate Time for Action. There are some wicked
Almanacks, which tell men that such a day of the Month is a Lucky Time, to
begin a Journey in: And that some other days are Unlucky ones. This is that
which the Scripture calls Observing Tines; and it is a most heinous Sin to do
so. The Heathen of old did practice such things. But God in his Word declars
them to be Heathenish Abominations, and with the highest Severity has changed
his People not to do thus. Deuteronomy. 18.10. It is mentioned as one of the Crying
Sins of Manassah, that he Observed Times, 2 King. 21.6. And that wicked Haman,
who designed the bloody destructi^n of the Lords People, would go to Conjuring*
that he might know when would be a Lucky Time for him to Execute his purposed
Mischief. Est. 3.7. And of this nature is that fallacious Art, which bears the
Name of Judicial Astrology, when men will Calculate Nativities, and p^etend to
know by the Stars, what Times shall pass over such Persons. Zanchy, Gassendus,
and other Learned men have notably discovered the Vanity and Impiety of all
such Planetarians. The old Chaldrans had as much skill as ever any man had in
this Art or Science falsely so called. But how does the Prophet deride them? Isa
47.13, 14. Let now the Astrologers, the Stargazers, the Monthly Prognosticators
stand up and save thee from these things, that shall come upon thee; behold
they shall be as Stubble, the fire shall burn them, they shall not deliver
themselves from the Power of the flame. They pretended to know the Fate of
Kingdoms, and yet could not tell their own and the Nations ruin before the day
that it came upon them all. There are cursed Fortune tellers, who pretend to
know what shall befall particular persons, how they shall be disposed of; when,
and where they shall Dye. It is a sad thing, that ever any person should dare
to do thus in New England. Time was, when the Air of New England was
intolerable to such Vipers. Dreadful guilt is upon the Souls of them, that
have gone to Enquire of such vile Creatures, and so of the Devil by them. That
famous Gentlewoman, Mrs. Honeywood, who was a long Time under doleful
desertions, the first Occasion of her sore Conflicts was that she had Enquired
of a Forune teller concerning the Recovery of a sick Child. Much more is it
Evil to be a Practitioner in this Iniquity. And it deserves to be Lamented with
tears of Blood, that ever any one that has had a Standing in this College,
should be found in the number of those horrid Creatures. A late Writer
observes, that persons who consult Fortune tellers, or Judicial Astrologers,
are many times visited with signal Judgments: And that this was an usual
practice in Iamaico, a little before the late dreadful Earthquake there; and
yet those Wretches could not foretell that Earthquake before they were swallowed
up alive in it.

Inf. 3. If men know not their Time, then they are concerned to make a good
(...) of the present Time. How does it concern us to spend our Time well? And
Now whilst we have Time, to do all the Service for God, and for Jesus Christ
that possibly we can! we know not how soon our Opportunities for Service may be
gone. Either Death or Sickness, or some other Providence may deprive us of
them. We should therefore imitate the good Angel in Thyatira, unto whom the
Lord Jesus Christ said, I know thy Service and thy works, and that the last be
more than the first. Rev. 2.19. That thought will be a comfort to a man
whatever Times or Changes may come upon him. It was so to Hezekiah, when he was
Sick, and in his own apprehension a dying man. Isa. 38.3. Remember war, O Lord,
I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect
heart, and have done that which was good in thy sight. If a man can say, as for
the time past of my life, I have (through the grace of Christ) spent it w^ll,
and this Sickness, this Death finds me walking with God, that is comfortable.
And because we know not our Time, we should do all the good we can for men: And
that in every respect wherein we are capable of doing good. If God has blessed
any of us with Estates, let us do good with them. Eccl 11.2. Give a portion to
seven, and also to eight, for thou know not what Evil shall be upon the
Earth. Such Evil Times may come as you shall loose your Estates. Therefore be
liberal and charitable. If a man has lost his Estate, and can then say, when I
had an Estate, I did good with it* I honored God with my Substance, and was
bountiful to his poor according to my ability; he may then be sure, that his
Estate is taken from him, not in Judgment but in Mercy. But if his Conscience
shall say to him, thou did with hold more than is meet, and therefore Poverty
is now come upon thee* that will be a sad thought. And because we know not our
Time, we should be always doing good. We should never be idle. When some would
have (...) Calvin, because of his Bodily Infirmities to have ce^sed from his
accustomed Studies, what (says he) vultis (...) d^minum, me otiosum invenire.
Would you have the Lord find me Idle? When Death comes, would you have it find
me doing nothing? Because we know not our Time, we should be careful not to Sin
at any time. Luk 21.34. Take heed to your selves, l^st at any time your hearts
be overcharged with Surf^ting and Drunkenness, and Cares of this Life, and so
that day come upon you unawares. If Death should come upon a man, presently
after he has committed some grievous sin, how sad would that be; or if Death
should find him acting sin, as it did Zimri and Cozbi, who were Slain in the
act of wickedness, so Nadab and Abihu, at the time when they were profaning the
Name of God, Lightning killed them. If Death should find a man profaning the
Sabbath, or in Lewd Company it would be most uncomfortable; or if Death* should
find him in Drink, as very often it is so with notorious Drunkards: And although
many a sober and godly man is Drowned, nevertheless, it is observable
concerning Drunkards, that their sin is often s^^n in their punishment. They
have us^d to drown themselves in Drink, and they often (...) by Drowning: and
are drowned too at the time of their being Drunk. This is very sad.

Let the Last USE be for EXHORTATION.

Be we Prepared for a Change of Times, especially for the great Change of DEATH
which will come upon us, we know not how soon, nor how suddenly. Who can say
what Changes may come upon us? It was said of Moab, Jer. 48.11. Moab has been
at ease from his Youth, and he has settled on his Lees, and has not been
emptied from Vessel to Vessel. It cannot be said so of New England. Although we
are too much settled on our Lees, yet we have not been always at Ease, but we
have been emp^ied from Vessel to Vessel. God has Racked this Land: One Change
after another has come upon us, and some very awful ones. We have seen Changes
of Government in our Civil State: And some of them very sad ones; when we were
delivered into the hands of some that hated us, and when we could call nothing
our own, but our Civil Liberties were gone, and our Sacred Liberties in utmost
danger of being taken from us also. Changes and War have been against us. We
had (...) Peace for many years together, but now the sound of the Trumpet and
the Alarm of War, and how long shall we hear it! A long War has afflicted us
now for eight years together. Our Land has been changed from Plenty to
Scarcity; we were wont to supply other Plantations, but these two last years we
stood in need of supplies from other places. What the Lord will do with us for
the future we know not: According to Humane Judgment, either there is to be a
Peace among the Nations, or we shall fall into the Hands of a formidable Enemy,
before the next year is Expired; but God has ways which we know not of, to
prevent what our Sins deserve, and what we may rationally fear. There are awful
symptoms upon us: And in special the multiplied sudden Deaths which have been
of late. The last week two desirable young Scholars were Drowned here in
Cambridge. The Week before that, seven persons were Drowned in another place,
and two the week before that. And do you not hear of a very sad Accident, a
young Child eight years old happened to kill his Brother not above two years
old; besides some other awful Providence. Is there not a voice of Heaven in
these things! The words of Christ should be considered by us. Luke 13.4, 5.
Those Eighteen on whom the Tower of Siloam sell and slew them, think ye that
they were Sinners above all men that dwell in Jerusalem, I tell you nay, but
except you repent, you shall likewise perish. So do you suppose that those
thirteen persons who have been taken away by sudden strokes within these three
weeks last past, were greater Sinne^s th^n any in New England. Nay, but these
Evils falling suddenly upon them, are Warnings to all. God can as easily bring
sudden Changes upon a whole Land, as upon a few particular persons.

But especially we are by such Providence called upon to to prepare for Death.
I will want a^l the days of my appointed time until my Change come. Job 14.14.
Death brings a wonderful Change with it. So it does as to the Bodies of men.
They are turned to Corruption; for the most part after they are dead, either
Worms or Fishes feed upon them. And a Change as to the Souls of m^n. When once
they are out of their Bodies, they know in a moment where they must be to all
Eternity They then see Angels, and they behold (...) Majesty of the Terrible
God. (...) here.

Consider 1 Death may come on us suddenly. So does the Text and Context before
us intimate. It is said, N^mb 69. If any man die very suddenly. That then is
possible, and we see Instances of it before (...) E^es ^^equently. The Scholars
now gone, who were in this House the last Lords Day, hearing the Word of God,
did not think that they should be dead the next day; no more then any of you
think of being in another World before to morrow* sometimes Death does not give
a days warning before it comes. Prove 27.1. Boast not t^y self of to ^^rrow, for
thou know not what a day (...) f^rth. You know not what shall b^ ^n the
morrow, nor where you your selves shall be, no, not what World your S^uls shall
be in on the morrow. It may be, Death will not give an hours warning; nay, not
a min^te^ wa^ning. Have you not known some that the thunder of God has struck
them dead in a momen^? They were alive and in perfect health, and in less then
a minute stark dead. Have you not heard of many in these late years, that
fearful Earthquakes have swallowed them up in a moment? How many Hundreds did
there so perish in Iamaica! You heard also how it was in Sicily, but a few
years ago, above an hundred thousand Souls there went down alive into the pit.
God by such things speaks to all that dwell on the Earth and ^ear thereof. Let
none of you say, we are young, and Death is far from us. Were not they young
and as likely to live as any of you, whose sudden Deaths has caused me to
Preach this Sermon.

Consider. 2. When Time is ended Eternity begins. Time ends with Death. Then as
the Angel says concerning the Fourth Monarchy, Time shall be no longer. Rev.
10.6. When Time shall be no longer, Eternity begins. After Dives was dead and
his Soul in Hell, Abraham told him, that there was a great Gulf fixed, that
they that would go from Hell could not do it. Eternity is a great Gulf. When
once a man's Soul is out of his body, he is got into a Gulf of Eternity: he is
fixed where he must be forever. Rocks shall sooner move out of their places,
than he shall stir from the place where he is. If a man die, shall he live
again? No, he shall never live again in this World as formerly. Suppose Death
should come upon a man and find him wholly unprepared; i^ he could come into
the World again to mend his Error that were another Case: but this shall never
be. Job 7.9, 10. He that goes down to the Grave, shall come up no more, he
shall return no more to his house, neither shall his place kn^w him any more.
Though a man would be willing to give never so much to live again, it shall not
be granted to him. I have heard of one that when dying, said, If I had Ten
Thousand Worlds I would give them all that I might live one day longer. Without
doubt it is so, with the Souls in Hell. If they had Ten Thousand Worlds to
give, they would gladly part with them all, that they might live but one day
longer on the Earth, to Repent and Pray in, and earnestly endeavor that their
peace might be made with God through Jesus Christ.

You will say, but What is to be done by us, that so we may be prepared for
Death?

Ans. 1. Let us make sure that Death find us in Christ. That was Paul's great
care, that he might be found in him. Phil. 3.9. If a man was got into the City
of Refuge, the Avenger of blood could not hurt him. Neither can Death hurt that
man who is in Christ. There are none of us all, but Death may come suddenly
upon us. As Eminent Saints, as ever lived have dyed suddenly: was it not so
with Moses? was he not well and dead in a Moment of Time, without ever being
sick? Have you not known or heard of many Eminent Servants of the Lord with
whom it has been thus? That Holy Learned man, Mr. Brightman, was taken with
Death as he was Riding in a Coach, having a Greek Testament in his hand,
because he would loose no time. Our famous Mr. Norton, was taken with Death as
he was walking in his House, fell down and never spoke a word more. Those
Worthy Governors, Mr. Eaton, and Haines dyed in their sleep. So has it been
with many a dear Servant of God, that has gone to Bed well, and dyed in his
sleep. So did Mr. Vines, and Mr. Capel, after they had Preached twice the Lords
Day before. And therefore I do not advise you to pray (as some do) that you may
not die suddenly, but to make sure of your being in Christ, and then let Death
come never so suddenly, you shall receive no harm by it. There are Angels by
you to take care of your Souls. But if Death finds a man out of Christ, woe unto
him that ever he was born. What terrible work will Death make with that man? It
will tear him in pieces, Body and Soul, and send both to Prison, his Body to
the Prison of the Grave, and his Soul to a worse Prison, there to remain in a
certain fearful expectation of Judgment, and of Fiery Indignation at the Great
Day.

2. Live as you will wish you had lived when Time shall be no longer with you.
I have read of a King that sent to a Minister, desiring that he would tell him
how he must live, that so he might be sure to be a good and an happy man: Sir,
(said he) Liv^ as you (...) you had lived the last time that you were Sick, and
thought (...) should die, and then you will certainly be a good and an happy
man. They that would die well, must live well. Be always serving and glorifying
God in Jesus Christ, and then if an^ body tells you of Death, you may smile at
it, and say, If Death comes it shall be welcome, when ever the Lord pleases to
send it.

ANd now as I have spoken these things to all this Assembly, so let me apply
them in a special manner to you the Scholars of this College, who are here
present before the Lord. I am concerned in my Spirit for you. All of you are my
Children: And do you think that I can see my Children Drowned, and not be
troubled for it? God has come among you this last week, and lessened two of
your number by a sad and awful Providence. Do you think these two were greater
Sinners than any amongst you. No, no, they were both of them hopeful youths.
One of them (young Eyres) was an only Son, and a desirable dutiful Son, of a
sweet amiable Temper, beloved by every body. He was observed to read the
Scriptures constantly every day with great Alacrity. A sign that there was some
good thing in him toward the God of Israel. As for the other ( Maxwell) the
Rebuke of Heaven in taking him away is the more solemn, in that his pious
Relations sent him from far: to be Educated in this Nursery, for Religion and
good Literature. I took special notice of him; but could never observe any
thing in him, but what was commendable, He was ingenious, and industrious, and
I believe truly pious; had he lived, he was like to have been a choice
Instrument of Service to the Church of God in his Time. And I am persuaded that
his Soul is among the Angels of God. But if this be done to the green Tree,
what shall be done to the Dry? This fatal blow looks ominously on the poor
College. Considering some other circumstances; there is cause to fear l^st
suddenly there will be no College in New England; and this as a sign that ere
long there will be no Churches there. I know there is a blessed day to the
visible Church not far off; but it is the Judgment of very Learned men, that in
the Glorious Times promised to the Church on Earth, America will be Hell. And
although there is a number of the Elect of God yet to be born here, I am verily
afraid, that in process of Time, New England will be the wofullest place in all
America, as some other parts of the World once famous for Religion, are now the
^^lefullest on the Earth, perfect Emblems and Pictures o^ Hell. When you see
this little Academy fall^n to the ground (as now it is shaking and most like to
fall) then know it is a terrible thing which God is about to bring upon this
Land. In the mean time, you the Student^ here, are concerned to bewail the
Breach which the Lord has made (...) you. If you slight and make light of this
hand of the Lord, or do not make a due improvement of it, you may fear, that
God has not done with you, but that he has more arrows to shoot amongst you,
that shall suddenly strike some of you ere long. But Oh that the Lord would
sanctify what has happened to awaken you unto serious thoughts about Death and
Eternity. Who knows but that God may make these sudden Deaths, an occasion of
promoting the Salvation, and Eternal Life of some amongst you. It is related
concerning Waldo, (He from whom the Waldenses have that Name given them) that
the occasion of his Conversion was the Sudden Death of one of his Companions.
The sight of that made him serious. He did not know, but that he might die
suddenly too, and that he was therefore concerned to be always fit to die. So
did he turn to the Lord, and became a great Instrument of Glory to God and good
to his Church. Oh! that it might be so with you. Wherefore I pray you; yea, and
I Charge you in the Name of the Lord; as my beloved Sons, I warn and charge
you, that every one of you endeavor that you may be able to give a good Answer
to three plain, short Questions.

1. Let every one of you be able to give a good Answer to this Enquiry: What am
I? Am I a true Believer, yea or no? Am I a Regenerate Person: it may be I am a
Civil, Moral young man, but what is that without Faith and Regeneration? If any
man is in Christ, he is a new Creature, Am I so? The Apostle says that in
Christ Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a
new Creature. Gal. 6.15. So it is not material to a man's Salvation whether he
be a Learned or an Unlearned man, but whether he is in Christ and a new
Creature. Though you should attain unto an Hundred Times more Learning than what
you have, you may perish Eternally notwithstanding that, if you be not in
Christ, or if you are not new Creatures. As Austin speaks, Surgunt indocti et
rapiunt Coelum, at nos cum omni doctrina nostra Mergimur in gehennam. All your
Parts and Learning will but aggravate your Misery at last, if you have not
Christ and Grace in your Souls. If a man is Cast away with Bags of Gold about
him, he will sink the faster and the deeper for it; so they that have Golden
parts, but ungodly hearts and lives, will of all Persons sink the deepest into
Hell. Grotius, who was one of the Learndest men that this age has produced,
professed, that he would willingly part with all his Learning, for the Piety of
a poor Godly Country man, who was wont to spend his Time every day* after this
manner: Eight hours of the day he followed his Calling with diligence, he
allowed himself eight hours for sleep; the other eight hours he spent in
Reading the Scriptures, and in Prayer, Meditation and Communion with God. Then
let your chief care be about matters wherein your Souls and Eternal Estates are
concerned. Let every one of you think often with himself, If I should die this
day, is my Soul safe? He that knows not whether he is in Christ, and as an
effect thereof, a Sanctified Person, knows not what will become of his Soul to
all Eternity. And how dare any of you live at peradventures about a matter of
such Infinite Moment, one day to an end? It is related in the Life of that
Eminent Saint, Mr. Ignatius Iurdain, that if he met any Scholar, and such an
one especially as applied himself to the Study of Divinity (as there are some
Scores belonging to this Academy, who are designed for the work of the
Ministry) his usual question to such was, What Evidence have you for Heaven?
You Scholars (said he) have the best Opportunities of all men for the getting
of Assurance: you are still looking into Gods Book, and into other good Books,
and should acquaint your selves with your Spiritual Estate toward God. Truly,
it is a sad thing, when Scholars the design of whose life is to gain knowledge,
yet know not what their Spiritual Estate is, or what shall become of their
Souls for ever. Why! you cannot know what will become of your Bodies for a day;
but you may know what will become of your Souls throughout an endless Eternity.
Rest not then without being able to give a good Answer to that Question. I
doubt many of you cannot say more than Berengiraus did, (it may be some of you
not so much) who when he was dying, thus expressed himself, I am now going to
appear before God the Judge of all; what will become of my Soul, I cannot tell;
I have some hopes that I shall be Saved, but I am afraid that I shall be
Damned. Poor man! A sad word for so Learned a Person as he was to go out of the
World with.

2. Let every one of you be always able to give a good Answer to this Question,
Where am I? Have I allowance from God who sees me, to be in this place, and
amongst this Company at this Time? Am I in a Tavern, or in an Ale house? Is
that a fit place for a Scholar to be in, except there be some special reason to
induce and warrant him, since the Statutes of this and other Reformed
Universities have prohibited Students from being seen in such places? Ought I
not at this Time to be in my Study rather? What Company am I now Conversing
with? Am I willing, that my li^e should be gathered with such Sinners? If Death
should come upon us suddenly, am I willing that my Soul should be gathered
where theirs must be? When Persons will be Venturing where they have no call,
they are oftentimes surprised with Evils, Like Fishes in an evil net, which
they least thought of. Tertullian speaks of a Christian Woman, that going to a
Stage Play, an Evil Spirit, there took possession of her, who when it was
wondered at, that he should get possession of one that was a Christian, said, I
found her in my own ground, and therefore might well take possession of her.
Let not the Devil at any Time find any of you in his ground, or in any other
place or Company, but where God in his Word gives you leave to be.

3 ly. and Finally, be always able to give a good Answer to this Question,
What am I doing? Is the thing that I am about a Lawful thing? Am I using
Recreations for my Health sake? And is it a Lawful Recreation, which no Law
neither of God nor man has forbidden? The two young men that were Drowned the
other day, Death found them in a Recreation: It Is well, it was a Lawful one
Skating on the Ice is so, if used seasonably and with due discretion and
moderation. But how dismal is it when Death shall surprise Persons when they
are diverting themselves with Scandalous Pastimes. Histories tell us of some
who whilst they have been Playing at Cards, the Lightning has struck them and
they have been found Dead with the Cards in their hands. My dear Children! In
the fear of God* let it never be so with any of you. Be often putting that
Question to your selves, do I spend my Time well? Am I still attending some
work either of my particular or my general Calling? Am I diligent in my S^udy?
That was it which your Parents sent you hither for. As Iunius his father used
to direct Letters to him when in the University, as one that was Missus ad
Studendion? If Death should come Suddenly on me, would it not find me
squ^ndring away my precious hours, in doing nothing? Do I Remember that an
hours Idleness, is a Sin as well as an hours Drunkenness: I must give an
account to Jesus Christ the Son of God concerning every hour of my life. Am I
not forgetful of my Duty toward God every day? Do I Read the Scriptures and
Pray in Secret constantly? Do I often think how Christ lived in the World, and
endeavor to be like Him: Am I always doing the things that please God? Now if
you can give a good Answer to these three Questions, What am I? Where am I?
What am I doing? you need not be afraid of Death, let it come never so
suddenly. Blessed is that Servant, yea Blessed is that Scholar, Whom the Lord
at His coming shall find so doing.

THE END.
Errata. p. 20. l. 24. dele not. p. 27 l* 1* for me (...)*


