By His Excellency Coll. Benjamin Fletcher, Captain General and Governor in
^^^ef of His Majesty's Province of New York, etc. A PROCLAMATION.
WHereas, by Advice of His Majesty's Council for this Province, upon the (...)
of the Mayor of New York, to remove a Grievance from the Inhabitants (the ^^^t
of Bread) occasioned by great Quantities thereof, and of Flower and Corn
exported to (...) West Indies and Boston, I did issue forth Proclamation,
prohibiting the Exportation of Flower, B^ead and Corn until the first of August
next ensuing. And whereas many and frequent Applications (...) made to me for
liberty to Export the same, to supply the Neighboring Provinces, who are in
great want thereof, I have therefore, by the said Mayor and Aldermen of the
said City, got Informa^^on of what Quantity of Grain, Meal and Biscuit remains
therein. And to the end our Neighbo^rs may have what Supply may be reasonably
spared. I have, with Advice of the Council, given (...) Liberty to all Persons,
to Export Flower, Bread and Corn for the space of eight days, and from
thence-forth, saving o^^y that the former Prohibition shall continue in force
against the Exportation of Corneel and course Biscuit, any thing in the said
Proclamation (bearing date the 11th of June last) to the contrary in any ways
notwithstanding. And all Officers of his Majestes Custom-House, and others are
Required to take Notice thereof accordingly.

Given at Fort William Henry, the 2 d Day of July, in the Eighth Year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord WILLIAM the Third, King of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, Defender of the Fait^ etc. Annoque Domini 1696. Ben.
Fletcher

God Save the KING
Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to the Kings Excellent Majesty
at the Bible in New York, 1696.


