A SERMON Preached at the Funeral OF Mrs. Elizabeth Riscarrick.

December 20th School.

So teach Us to number our days, that we may apply Our Hearts to Wisdom.

Psalm. 90.12. (...) 1. Unde veneris. 2. Quo sis (...) 3. Coram quo sis rationem
(...).

St. Bernard. Boston in New England, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen. School.

A FUNERAL Sermon.
Text. Psalm. XXXIX. Verse 4. Lord, make me to know mine end, and the measure of
my days, what it is: that I may know how frail I am.


UPon a like sad and melancholy Occasion, after I had largely Expounded the
words read unto you; I propounded these follewing Heads to be discoursed on.
Namely,

1. To ^^lain more particularly, what it is to know (...) End, and wherein this
Knowedge does consist.

2. Show whereto this same Knowledge of our Mortality serves, and what
Benefits accrue therefrom.

3. Consider who it is that must furnish us with his Wisdom, and dispose us by
his Grace, to know our Mortality? namely, God; implied in these words: Lord
make me to know, etc.

4. Enquire what Course is to be taken, and what to be done on our parts, that
we may prevail with the Lord to bestow that Wisdom and Grace upon us.

5thly and Lastly, Make some suitable Application.

I began with the first thing proposed, which was to explain more particularly,
what it is to know our End, and wherein this Knowledge does consist.

And therefore to know our End, does as I take it, imply these two things.

1. The serious Thoughts and Consideration of Death.

2. The good Effects which those Thoughts, and that Consideration ought to have
on the remaining part of our Lives.

1. The serious thoughts and consideration of Death, i. e of our Departure into
another World, or of the Souls deserting the Body.

And concerning this, there are three things chiefly which we are concerned to
take notice of.

1. That our Lives are in the (...) God, which he may either prolong or
abbreviate as in his Godly Wisdom he sees convenient, either continue to us,
or take from us, when and by what means soever He pleases.

2. That how long soever our End or Removal hence be delayed, we have great
reason to prepare immediately for it.

3. That whether we make a due Preparation for Death, or whether we forbear,
it is certain it will come, and that in no long time neither. The first of
these, I have already dispatched. I pass therefore immediately to the Second
Observation: Which is,

2. That how long, etc. Multitudes we daily see are suddenly snacht away; so
suddenly, that they are scarce spared a little while, to take leave of their
Surviving Friends, before they go hence, and are no more seen.

And therefore O man, whosoever thou art, whether aged and decriped, or even in
thy young and healthful days, flatter not thy self with imaginary hopes that
thou shall have time enough to make thy self ready for another State, when
Sickness comes and fairly warns thee to depart out of This; for thou know
not how soon the King of Terrors may surprise thee; and by how much the more
secure thou art, by so much the more unexpected and astonishing will his coming
be.

But farther, suppose Death should lay hold on thee when thou think not of
him, what Probability is there that thou should in that Consternation which
is common in these Cases, be so much thy self, or retain such Presence of Mind,
as to make a sufficient Preparation? Alas! Vain man! How shall I expostulate
this Matter with thee? Shall I show thee the Danger and folly of delaying to
put thy self in a readiness? I fear thou will look on this as a needless work,
should I undertake it; for if the Almighty can Cut us off when he is minded, and
when we are not in the least aware of it, (as surely he can) it must
undoubtedly be the greatest Wisdom and Safety in us to make a timely Provision,
and to be always on our Guard, if we mean so to Finish our Course, that from
thenceforth there may be Laid up for us a Crown of Life.

Or rather, shall I Instruct thee in the mischievous Consequences of trusting
to a late Provision? Why this is the main Concern of our Lives, and is Old Age
that State that is generally attended with continual Infirmities, Aches and
Defects, a proper Season to begin the Greatest and most Difficult Task in? In
our temporal Concerns, though of infinite less Moment, we act with greater
Reason, and more like our selves; it is only in the management of our Spiritual
Affairs, and things of the highest Concernment, that we so shamefully Expose
our selves. Do we not for Example when the Case of some urgent, weighty Buiness
lies upon us, endeavor to dispatch it with all the Expedition possible? How
seldom do we fail, when a long and tedious Journey is to be taken, to be
beforehand with the Sun, at least to set out betimes in the Morning?

Now does any Business in the World require so much haste and care in the
Execution of it, as that of, Working out our own Salvation with Fear and
Trembling, since this Task is extremely difficult, and this short Life the only
time we have to perform it in; and why then do you not immediately set about it.

Again, Are we not all Traveling to a better Country? and are we not all
Strangers and Sojourners here, and bound for Heaven, as all our Fathers were;
nay, and is not the Gate strait, and the Way narrow that leads to it; are
there not multitudes of Hardships to be encountered, and innumerable
Difficulties to be rubbed through, before we can come to possess that Good
Land: And why then (in Gods Name) do ye loiter? Why do ye put off the Journey
from one time to another? as though 'twere a matter indifferent whether you
advance or no; or as though God in His Superabundant Mercy would bring Happiness
to you, when by reason of Age, and Weakness you are less fit and disposed to
seek after That. Sirs, be not deceived, for though God must be confessed to be of
great Kindness, and rich in Love; yet seeing his Goodness, does not swallow up
his Justice and Truth, seeing he has Ordained, that by Running the Race that is
set before us, we should only presume to obtain the promised Reward; seeing we
cannot hope to procure this any other way; nay lastly, seeing we have been
idle, and lavished away that Time, and those blessed Opportunities which were
afforded on Purpose that we might prepare for our Change; we by trusting to a
Late, or Deathbed Repentance, do not only run the Risk of having our Sun set
before our Work be done; but also of provoking God to accelerate and hasten our
End, to abridge his Long-sufferance, and to plung us down quick into
Unspeakable and Endless Misery.

It highly concerns us therefore most seriously to observe that wholesome
Admonition of our Lord and Savior, Mat. 24.42, 43, 44. Watch therefore, for ye
know not what Hour your Lord does come. But know this, that if the Good man of
the House had known in what Watch the Thief would come, he would have watched,
and would not have suffered his House to be broken up. Therefore be ye also
ready; for in such an Hour as ye think not, the Son of Man comes.

Farther yet, suppose, which nevertheless we cannot possibly be well assured
of, that we shall not be immaturely taken hence, but have some monitory
symptoms of approaching Death, some friendly Sickness advertise us of our
Danger; yet it is very uncertain, whether we shall then be in a Capacity to
prepare our selves or not. For (the truth is) the very Distemper, which we
depend upon, to forewarn us of our hazzardous Condition, and to Summon us to
our Duty, may peradventure inpispose us too. Was you ever brought down to a
Sickbed? or do you know what it is to labor under the Pains and Throws, and
Agonies of a Diseased Body? If any among you will say they do, and can call to
mind what the Effects of your Sufferings of this nature have been, let me
appeal to the Consciences of those People, whether the extremity of Anguish did
not altogether unfit them for the undertaking, prosecuting or effecting any
manner of Business, be it of greater or lesser Moment.

Take any man that is in present Torture, let it be the Girds and Twitches of
the Gout or Stone, or some such Tormenting Evil, engage him on any Concern of
your own, and put the Business wholly into his hands; let him but try for once
how well he can manage it: and you will be satisfied in a little while that such
an one is utterly incapable of minding any thing but the Accuteness of his
Misery. If he that has a swimming Head, and an aching Heart, a disturbed Brain,
and unrelishing Palate, feeble Hands, and trembling Joints; and in short, no
sound Part in his whole Body: If I say such a distempered creature can be
supposed to act rightly and commendably according to the nature of the Concern
he is driving at, and the Exigency of the Occasion that moves him to it, then I
confess I have hitherto entertained a wrong notion of Sickness. But if on the
contrary, he cannot be allowed to act thus, as I am sure he cannot, what should
make us believe that they are not bewitched, and given up to Sin, forsaken of
their Reason, and to be despaired of, who will not repent nor think of their
Morality in their Health, in their blooming Strength, and best Days?

I rather think we have greater Reason to upbraid and exclaim bitterly against
them, but that they may too soon find an opportunity to save us that trouble,
and be their own Accusers. May be the next time such an one retires into his
Closet, or lays down his restless Body on his Couch; nothing but Satyr and
Invective and disjoynted Complaints will come of it. Go hide thy self in some
private Corner, and hearken what he will say then; See with what melting words he
begins to wish now that he had employed his early Time, his gay and briskest
Days in preparing his accounts for a future Life: confessing the mischief and
unreasonableness of deferring so necessary, and withal so difficult a work to
Sickness, the unfittest and most improper Time; appealing to himself, whom he
also condemns for the heinousness and presumption of so doing: looking back on
this his Negligence and Carelessness, with Remorse and Regret, and observing
before him the terrible Prospect of eternal Misery with Horror and Distraction.

Now the Graceless Wretch is brought to know himself, and to speak his
Thoughts; being under the awful sense or his lamentable Condition; arising from
the consideration of his own Conscience, chiding and rating him within for his
Wickedness, and the Punishment awarded to his impious Practices without; of his
resisting the Checks and Restraints of Nature, before he contracted his Guilt,
and of his being just ready to be consigned over to insufferable Torments for
ever after.

To conclude then; if it be true, that to delay our Reformation, or making
ready for another World, till Sickness or Old Age forces us unto it, be a
foolish and dangerous Adventure: if a sudden and unexpected Death may come and
defeat all treacherous Hopes of this kind; if suppose we do live to be Old, and
had a long warning given us before we die, (which yet is no good Policy to trust
to:) we cannot tell by reason of the deceitfulness of Sin, and our own Hearts
together, and our often, contemning the Divine Grace already, whether we shall
be in our right Senses, and capable to prepare for our Change or not; or
whether God will uouchsafe to follow us with his despised Grace any longer: It
must be confessed on the force of all these Considerations, that we ought to day
while it is called to day, without either Demur or Procrastination, to set
about our Duty in good earnest; and that because, whether we do this or not, we
must certainly Die, and be called to a strict Judgment in a very short Time:
which brings me to my next Particular, to show.

3. That whether we make a due preparation for Death, or whether we forbear,
it is certain that will come, and indeed very quickly too. I am sensible, 'twere
impertinent to prove, that all must once Die; this is so well known, that it
never was, nor ever will be doubted by any man in his right mind: but to tell
people that they shall Die e're long, in I know not how short a Space, before
they have time perhaps to confess their Sins, or to cry out for Mercy, is
thought a hard saying, and few there be that are both able and willing to bear
it. It Is usual for men of dissolute lives and Manners to disbelieve those
things that they do not like; they are firmly resolved to put nothing in their
Creed, but what makes for them. And this in some measure is the reason why many
are so hardly persuaded of the Propinquity or Nearness of their Dying Day. They
know they must part with their darling Vices, let it come when it will. They
fear contrary to that false Confidence and forced Bravery wherewith they were
wont to deny the chief Articles of the Christian Faith, that things may prove
in the End quite otherwise then was desired; that there is a Judge to Condemn,
and a Devil to torment, an Heaven lost and forfeited, and an Hell which they
must unavoidably and irrecoverably be cast into

From hence therefore we may conclude that the Reason why men wont entertain
the Belief of these things, is because it goes Counter to their Wishes; (for
Affection you know, is too apt to Bias Reason) and interfers with their
Fancied Interest.

But after all, it matters not how secure and confident such Atheistical
Persons are, that all Things will be Hereafter as they Suppose and Hope for
Here. Nay (to come closer to the present Design) it signifies nothing what a
Strong Presumption they pretend to have, that Death is a great way off; for
it is impossible that any Man barely fancying things to be at such or such a
Distance from him, should presently make 'em Vanish When, and Whither He would
have them. It Is common for Children to imagine that the Tops of Mountains touch
the very Skies, but the Mountains will never be removed to that height by
Virtue of that Childish Imagination No more can He, that (being in perfect
Health) presumes most on a long Life, if Death is nearly though invisibly
advancing toward him, either drive the hasty Messenger back, or make him keep
at a remoter Distance, by the Strength and Peremptoriness of his Conceit. Alas!
Death is as resolute as we can be for our Lives, whatever we think of him, and
will by little and little Steal upon us.

Men of twenty or thirty may Fancy that Death is in all likelihood far enough
from them, and therefore will scorn to disturb their Heads about it yet;
esteeming it a point of Gallantry to defy it, and endeavor to blot out of
their Minds all Apprehensions, Fears and Jealousies, at least to stiff them
for a while; but notwithstanding the Sand in the Glass runs down apace, without
Stop or Intermission; and Time, Deaths Substitute and chief Officer, whose
Power nothing can resist or escape, may for ought any body can tell mow them
down in the prime of their Days, and midst of their Journey. By common
Experience, we may be convinced upon how weak and infirm a Thread our Lives are
hung, and what a perfect Hair it is that holds us from dropping into our Grave.
Upon the very Tombs of our deceas't Relations we may read if we will, our own
Frailty; They Instruct as well as Grieve; the Consideration of our Friends
being there laid in a cold Bed of Earth, directs us to infer that we shall soon
ly by his Side; and the Thoughts of his having been but a little before,
perhaps more young and lively and brisk then we are, supposes that we have no
Certainty that we shall tarry long behind.

But besides, how frequently do we see with our own Eyes, many a strong,
healthy, robust Youth attended to his Burial by those Companions, whose weak
and sickly Constitution he was used to pity? What a common thing is it for the
best and most unlikely to Die first? How many strange Instances of this Nature
have we heard of within the Compass of some few Years? Nay, how many can our
own Knowledge and Memory furnish us withal? By odd and unaccountable Accidents
are Multitudes brought to an unexpected End. It Is considerable, that the finer
and more curious any thing is, the more easily it may be corrupted and spoiled.
We see this constantly verified in most Cases; but in no one more apparently,
than in that of Life and Health, which, (next to the Watchful Providence of
God) depend principally on the good Decorum of this beautiful and regular Frame
of Humane Nature, I mean the Body: So Numerous, and yet so Nearly Linkt
together, are all the Parts, so various and so necessary their Functions, that
the smallest matter almost can disorder, and this again go near to destroy the
admirable Contexture of it. A Blow upon the Head, or a Bruise in the Flesh, the
Spraining of a Limb, or breaking a Vein, can Shatter the whole Frame into a
Confusion, fatal and incurable. The Inflammation of the Spirits, or Defect of
Vital Heat; an Emptiness of the Vessels that should contain the Blood, or even
a Superfluity of the Blood it self; a Disease, or a Wound may pall our Courage,
Enervate our Strength, Stop our Breath, and contrary to Expectation, put a
quick Period to our Lives. Many a man has died in his Sleep, when all the while
such as lay with him, knew nothing of the Matter; others have Died at Meals,
when the Food, which they received into their Throats to nourish and strengthen
the Body, stuck immoveably in the Passage, and choked them. Others moreover
have been taken away in the very Act of Sinning. So we read, Act. 5. that
Ananias and Saphira his Wife were struck dead with a Ly in their Mouths.

And there are not wanting later Examples of those who have been surprised in
the very utterance of an Oath, an Imprecation, a Calumny, or a Falsehood. Who
knows not that some have gone instantly from the heat of a Debauch, to the Fire
of Hell; from wallowing in Voluptuousness to be tormented for ever; from
Soaking in Drunkenness, to Dwell with Everlasting Burnings; as it fared with
the Rich man in the Gospel, of whom it is recorded in Scripture, that Living in
the greatest Splendor, and the Enjoyment of all good things whatever his heart
could desire, he in the midst of all his Plenty, Died, and was turned into
Hell; where we afterward find him crying out, and begging earnestly for one
drop of Water to Cool his Scorched Tongue, and to extinguish the Flames that
occasioned his Pain; and yet he could not with all his Entreaties and Tears,
nor with all his former Riches neither, (supposing he might have been restored
once more to the Possession of them) purchase one Minutes cessation from
Torment, or so much as a drop of Water to allay it.

I mention these things to represent to you, as faithfully as I can, the
Uncertainty, Emptiness, and inconsiderable Vanity of our present State; that so
you may divert your Affections and Mind from it, and find a more proper
Entertainment for them in preparing for a New Scene, a New and Lasting Scene,
to be Shortly entered on; Lasting as the vast incommensurate Space of Eternity;
and New as well because we are Strangers to it yet, as that it will not
Commence till our Acting here is ended.

But here it may not be amiss to consider further, that over and above this
frailty (hitherto Chiefly discours't of) which is congeneal with us, and
proceeds immediately from the very Principles of our Constitution, there are
innumerable accidental Casualties that may happen to Come from abroad, and
bring Destruction along with them.

So that let a man be temperate, and sober and chaste, and not given to any of
those Vices, which in their own Nature, hasten Death; yet even then he cannot
be secure with respect to his Temporal Safety; though to his great Comfort his
Spiritual Part be out of Danger. The best of men are liable to desperate
Chances, and though these do not happen to All, yet all are in danger of them.
And therefore the Question which the Apostle puts in the case of the
Resurrection, is no less applicable to this, 1 Cor. 15.30. Else (says he) Why
Stand we in Jeopardy every Hour? i e. in constant Dread of some Unseen Accident
or other that may befall us, and presently end our days, before we can be
sensible of what has happened; or perceive by what means the Affliction came.

But if you be of Opinion, that all those Disquiets and Fears are the Effect of
a deep Melancholy, or a disturbed Imagination; such as have no Foundation in
Nature, but are groundless and unreasonable (which yet no man of Wisdom or
Sobriety can be induced to think.) I shall take no other Method to convince
you, save only to desire you to examine your Memories, how frequently you have
both heard and read of many Excellent and Worthy Persons that have been either
Murdered, or Drowned or Poisoned, or even by more uncouth and strange
Misfortunes then these brought to an Untimely Death.

There are many Undeniable Instances of this kind to be met with in Holy
Scripture. Shall I put you in Mind of Abel, who (the Sacred Story tells us)
received a Sudden but Mortal Wound from the bloody Hands of his own cruel
Brother, and that for no other reason for ought we can find, but because He and
his Offering were respected by God? Or shall I bring to your Remembrance the
Violent dispatch of Abner the Renowned Captain of Saul's Host, Whom Joab took
aside in the Gate, to speak with him quietly and friendly; and smote him under
the Fifth Rib, that he died, as a Fool dies; nay, as a man falls before
Wicked men: So fell this Great and Famous General. In the 2 Samuel 3 Chap. is the
whole Relation to be found, which you may peruse at your leisure. In the like
manner, I may ask you, if you never read how Uzza was smote down dead upon the
place, because he endeavored to hold up the unsteady Ark from falling? 1 Chronicles. 13.9, 10. How all the innocent Children from two years Old and Under,
that were in Bethlehem, and in all the Coasts thereof, fell in one night a
Sacrifice to the Malice and Cruelty of an enraged Tyrant? St. Math. 2.16. Or
lastly, how (not long after that Execrable Tragical Murder was committed on
the poor Infants, who had neither deserved, nor could hinder the Villainous
Execution) John Baptist was Beheaded by the Command of the same insatiable
Persecuter. Thus while the Good man was Preaching Repentance, and endeavoring
to Save the Lives of others, his ungrateful Auditors deprived him of his own.
verse. 20.

There might be produced, were it needful, a Multitude of such like Examples;
and too frequent Instances of Excellent Men, who have thus by some unthought of
Calamity, or other, been speedily and without Warning; translated from a bad to
a better Region.

And here we are not to imagine that these Historical Relations are now
impertinent, because of a very ancient standing; and that they do not at all
concern us, because we are removed so many Centuries from the respective Times
when those several Facts were committed; for it is the Apostles affirmation,
Whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning. Romans
15.4.

But the truth is, it is no rare infrequent thing for good men to be caught away
on a sudden, even in these latter days: what the Wise man says in another Case,
I may say in this, It is an evil that I have seen under the Sun, and it is
common among Men. Nay, not among the Vicious and Profane only, but even the
better and more Religious sort of them.

And yet granting for once, what however cannot be allowed that there are few or
no Modern Examples of these discernable Misfortunes, yet (we know) whatsoever
has been, may be; and surely if an Ill thing may betide any, and does
frequently betide some, then every one is insecure.

So that they are extremely to blame (if any such there be) who though they cannot
deny the Truth and Reality of the Observation in Former Ages, have yet the
Confidence to presume on an Indemnity in the Present; Especially considering
that the World as it grows in Age, so it decays in Strength, and waxes worse
and worse every day; and seeing this is no less true of every particular thing
in Nature, then of Nature it self: From hence it is but reasonable to infer
that we who come upon the Stage toward the Conclusion, and live in the
declining State of the World, should be obnoxious to as many if not more Evils,
and Mischiefs, and sudden Deaths then those were liable to, who came on the
Stage very early, and acted but one or two Scenes, while as yet Sin the Cursed
Patent of all, had not Exerted its Power and Impire so prodigiously nor so
miserably Enslaved Mankind as it has done of Late; nor perhaps did Mankind (the
more is our shame) so tamely and Universally submit.

Let therefore those who look back on the Annals of Antiquity be so far from
thinking (if common Experience do not preclude such a Thought) that the things
we speak of are outdated, that they should make an Experiment of the Truth of
them (as far as possible) upon themselves by Dying Daily, i. e. by providing
against Death, and looking constantly for him every day, one after another,
that so the main Chance may be secured whatever happen, and that whether he
Steals in, and lays his cold hands on them e're they perceive it, or whether he
knocks before hand at their Doors, and premonisheth them of his coming for them
by and by, they may have no Business lying on their Hands to dispatch, no Will
to make, nor Affairs to Settle in this World, nor any Accounts to make ready
for a Future; yea, indeed not any thing to do, but to thank God for discharging
them from a troublesome hazardous Condition so soon, which they are now to
Exchange for an Unchangeable Happiness, for a continuance in the Presence of
God, and Conversation with Glorious Angels and Glorified Saints above, and so
with a cheerful and ready Compliance to embrace the Opportunity of Departing in
Peace.

And now, it is no doubt expected, I should discourse something concerning the
Party Deceas't. I am not ignorant this Employment is not without Peril, as has
been long ago observed; for Friends, and those that Loved their Memory will
think too Little, when others, either out of Ignorance or Envy will think too
much is spoken; and I may on the One Hand be blamed for Partiality, and on the
Other be charged with Flattery. And indeed it may be sometimes Wisdom to be
Sparing in such Exercises, referring the Commendation of the Dead to the Words
of Solomon, Let her own Works praise her. But nevertheless it cannot be denied
but that this Ceremony is both ancient and imitable, as might be plentifully
proved from Scripture, and the Writings of the Ancient Fathers. So that however
the Infirmities of Christians ought to be buried, yet the Memorial of their
Virtues is a Part of that civil Honor which we owe to those who are departed
this Life, and are at Rest with God.

But then it cannot be reasonably expected, that I should discourse much of One
whom I but lately knew, or relate ancient Passages of her Life, when mine
Acquaintance was but of a Modern Date.

But since her coming to this place, I must confess, I observed in Her a Kind
and Affable and Virtuous Demeanor; and I charitably conclude a Vital Principle
of true Piety and Virtue; a Love to God and Religion, and attendance on the
Sacrament and other Means of Grace. During the Time of her Sickness, let none
Uncharitably, and Unchristianly impute that to the Person, which was justly
chargeable on the Disease: I Am sure while I attended, she manifested a Patient
and Contented Frame of Spirit under Gods afflicting Hand, earnestly desired my
constant Prayers for Her; told me she was very ready to resign her self to Gods
disposal, and willing to Die, if it pleased God, she should so now, still
praying to the last, that Almighty God would Pity and Pardon Her. And soon
after my Departure, calmly and easily, without those Struglings and Agonies
that some Deaths are attended with, Resigned up her Spirit to God that Gave it,
and as (I charitably Conclude, is now Entered into Rest, and Lodged in the
Mansions of the Blessed.

What then remains, but that we all Redeem the Time; earnestly beg of God, to
teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our Hearts to wisdom; and
Vigorously and Constantly resolve and endeavor by the Grace of God to lead
such Pious and Virtuous Lives in this World, that we may at the Period of this
Mortal Life, arrive to the Fruition of that Fullness of Joy and inestable
Pleasures that are at Gods Right Hand for Evermore.

Which God of His Infinite Mercy grant for the Merits Sake of his only Son our
Savior Jesus Christ, to whom with the Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all
Honor, Glory and Power, for Ever and for Ever, Amen.

FINIS.

