ACTS and LAWS, Passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly of His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England.

Begun at Boston the Twenty seventh Day of May, 1696. and continued by
Adjournment until Wednesday the Sixteenth of September following.

Anno Regni Guilielmi Tertii, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae, et Hiberniae, REGIS,
Octavo.

BOSTON.

Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Printers to the Governor and
Council. 1696.

An Act, for the Reviving and Establishing of Judicatories and Courts of
Justice: And the Forms of Writts and Processes.
W HEREAS His Majesty's Pleasure has been signified for the Repealing and
making Void an Act made and passed by the Great and General Court or Assembly,
Anno, One thousand six hundred ninety two, In the Fourth Year of the Reign of
His present Majesty, and the late QUEEN MARY His Royal Consort, of Blessed
Memory, Entitled, An Act, For the Establishing of Judicatories and Courts of
Justice within this Province: Also for the Repealing and making Void one other
Act, passed at the same Sitting of the (...) Entitled, An Act, For the
Establishing of Presidents and Forms of Writts and Processes: With the
particular Reasons of His Majesty's disallowance of said Acts, for the
Information and Direction of the General Assembly; and the Amendments and
Considerations necessary for the Supply thereof. And whereas it is absolutely
necessary that speedy Provision be made, That His Majesty's Subjects may not
suffer for the want of due Course of Justice.

Be it therefore Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives, Convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same,

That the beforementioned Act, Entitled, An Act, For the Establishing of
Judicatories, and Courts of Justice within this Province; and all and singular
the Paragraphs, Articles, Clauses and Sentences thereof (except the Paragraph
for Constituting a Court of Chancery, and such other Articles, Clauses and
Sentences in the said Act, as have been heretofore Repealed, Altered, or
otherwise provided for, in and by any other Act or Acts of the General Assembly
of this Province, or which in and by this present Act shall be altered
otherwise provided for, or declared to be null and void) Be and hereby are
Revived and continued to abide and remain in full force and virtue until the
end of the first Session of the General Assembly to be Begun and Held upon the
last Wednesday of the Month of May next, in the Year of our Lord, One Thousand
Six Hundred Ninety Seven, and no longer.

Provided nevertheless, That the words ( and no other) in the Section or
Paragraph of the said Act providing for liberty of Appeal unto His Majesty in
Council, be, and hereby are declared void and of none effect.

Provided also, That the Courts of Common Pleas, and General Sessions of the
Peace, appointed in and by the said Act, to be Held for the Island of
Martha's-Vineyard, be there now held and kept for Dukes County, the said
Island, and adjacent Islands being constituted a County, by the name of Dukes
County, by a late Act of the General Assembly.

And Whereas several Courts to have been held and kept according to the
Establishment in the said Act, by reason of disallowance thereof, have been
discontinued.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That all Parties that had day by any Pleas, Writs, Bills, Actions, Suits,
Plaints, Process, or other thing or things whatsoever at any Court or Courts to
have been Hold and Kept at the several days and times according to the
Establishment by Law, and that have been or shall be discontinued by reason of
the not holding any of the said Courts, shall respectively appear at such next
Court to be holden within or for the same County, under the penalty of
forfeiting any Obligations or Recognizances conditioned for the appearance of
the said Parties at the aforesaid Courts respectively so discontinued, or (...)
any other penalty that might have incurred upon the said Par^^^or not appearing
at any of the said Courts, if the same had been (...) and kept at time or times
as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted ^y the Authority aforesaid,

That the Act Entitled, An Act, For the Establishing of Presidents and Forms
of Writs and Processes, and all and singular the Forms, Articles, Clauses,
Matters and Things therein contained, with the Alterations and Amendments
heretofore made, and herein after mentioned, Be, and are hereby revived and
continued to abide and remain in full force and virtue until the end of the
first Session of the General Assembly to be begun and held upon the last
Wednesday of the Month of May next, in the said Year of our Lord One Thousand
Six Hundred Ninety Seven, and no longer.

Provided nevertheless, That all Writts and Process shall bear the (...), and
be Issued in His Name only.

Provided also, That the words Forty Pounds Sterling in the Precept to be
Issued by the Sheriffs or Marshals respectively for Electing of Representatives
to Serve in the General Assembly, be, and hereby are altered and the words
Fifty Pounds Sterling be inserted instead thereof in the said Precepts to be
hereafter Issued: Any former Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

AN ACT, For the further continuing of an Act, Entitled, An Act to prohibit
the Exportation of Grain etc. and to prohibit the Malting of Barley and Rye.
W HEREAS the present Harvest, through the Holy and Righteous Hand of God has
been much diminished and cut short, and will scarcely supply the Occasions of
the Province in the Ensuing Year.

B E it therefore Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the Act to Prohibit the Exportation of Grain, Biscuit and Flower, Made and
Passed at the Session of the Great and General Court or Assembly in November,
One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Five. In the Seventh Year of His present
Majesty's Reign, Entitled, An Act, To Prohibit Exportation of Grain, etc. and
all the Branches, Articles, Clauses, Powers, Penalties and Proviso's therein
contained, be, and hereby are revived and further continued to abide and remain
in full force, during the continuance of this Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid,

That from and after the Publication hereof, no Barley or Rye (...), or wet in
order to Malting within this Province, on pain of Forfeiting the same two
thirds thereof unto the Select men or Overseers of the Poor in the Town where
it shall be Seized, to the use of the Poor of such Town; and the other third to
him or them that shall Seiz, Inform or Sue for the same by Bill, Plaint or
Information, in any of His Majesty's Courts of Record, within the County where
the same shall be Seized; And every Justice of the Peace in the County where he
Resides upon Complaint or Information to him given of any Malt made, or Barley
or Rye wet in (...) to Making contrary to this Act, is hereby Authorized to
grant his Warrant directed unto the Sheriff of the County, or Constable of the
Town to enter any House or Houses in the day time where the same shall be, and
to cause Seizure thereof to be made to be proceeded against, and disposed of as
is before directed.

Provided nevertheless, That this Act shall continue in Force until the end of
the next Sitting of the General Assembly, and no longer.

AN ACT, For a more speedy supply of the Treasury, until a Tax can be Raised.
B E it Enacted by the Lieutenant Governor, Council, and Representatives, in
General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,

That the Treasurer be, and hereby is Empowered to Issue forth the Sum of Two
Thousand Pounds in the Endorst Bills of Public Credit, for the answering of
such Payments as shall be orderly demanded from the Treasury for the Ends
mentioned in the Act for the Tax granted by this Court at their Session begun
the Twenty-seventh day of May last; which Bills shall pass out of the Treasury
at the value therein expressed, the Treasurer to have Credit in his Account,
after the rate of Five Pounds Per Cent. more for such Sum in said Bills as he
shall so issue, having been received into the Treasury at that value, and the
said Bills shall be taken and accepted in all Public Payments, with the
advance of Twelve-pence on the Pound over and above the Sum therein expressed.
And the Duties of Impost, Excise and Tunage of Shiping are hereby granted as a
Fund for the Repayment of all such Sums in said Bills as shall be in the hands
of particular persons in current Money of this Province.

FINIS.

