ANGELOGRAPHIA, OR A Discourse Concerning the Nature and Power of the Holy
Angels, and the Great Benefit which the True Fearers of GOD Receive by their
Ministry: Delivered in several SERMONS: To which is added, A SERMON concerning
the Sin and Misery of the Fallen Angels: Also a Disquisition concerning
Angelical-Apparitions.

By INCREASE MATHER, Praesident of Harvard College, in Cambridge, and Preacher
of the Gospel at Boston, in New England.

Are they not all Ministering Spirits sent forth to Minister for them who shall
be heirs of Salvation?

Heb. 1 14. Boston in N E. Printed by B. Green and J. Allen, for Samuel
Phillips at the Brick Shop. 1696.

HOc maximum existimo beneficium, quod ab actu Nativitatis moeoe, Angelum pacis
ad me Custodiendum, usque ad finem meum, dedit mihi Dominus.

August. Medit. Lib. 1. Cap. 12. The Epistle Dedicatory. To the Right
Honorable, HUGH BOSCAWEN Esquire. One of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.
SIR,
THE only Reason of this Dedication, is, That so I might Testify the Grateful
Sense, which I have (and ever ought to have) of the kindness, which Your Honor
has Obliged the People of New England by, in that You have upon all Occasions
according to the Capacity and High Station, which the Divine Providence has
set You in, improved Your Interest for their Benefit. You have many years since
approved Your self an Obadiah to the Lord's Prophets and Servants: And now the
Most High by a Wonderful Revolution, has placed You, where Your Talent for the
Service of God and Your Country, is greater than formerly: I see in You
another Mordecai, who, being near unto the King, sought the Wealth of his
People. And such is Your diffusive Goodness, as that You have been willing to
do Kind Offices for a poor People afar off in a Wilderness, where You have no
Temporal Interest, or Relations, nor Expectation of any Reward from men, and
which therefore, nothing but a Christian Generosity could incline You unto. The
Lord Jesus Christ, and His Holy Angels, are Witnesses of all that You have
done, or spoken, in the Behalf of any of them that fear Him, and He will
Acknowledge it before His Father, and before His Angels, another Day. To His
Grace, I Humbly Recommend YOU, and Remain,

Right Honorable SIR, Your humble Servant, Increase Mather.

TO THE READER.
THE Doctrine which Concerns the Ministry of HOLY ANGELS, is a Subject most
worthy to be Searched into. Several Learned Men have Published Elaborate and
Solid Discourses thereon: In sp^cial Zanchy, Rivius, and Stuckius. There are
also sundry Useful English Treatises, in which this Argument is Judiciously
Handled. Particularly, by Bishop Hall, Mr. Lawrence, and Mr. Ambrose; This
notwithstanding, a Learned Divine Laments, that there are so few Books Written,
or Sermons Preached, concerning the Angels, of whom the Scripture speaks so
much. I have from that Consideration been Induced to Publish what is Emitted
herewith. As for Philosophical Questions about the Nature of Angels, and the
way of their Understanding Things, whether it be Per Species Intelligibiles
Insitas vel Acquisitas, and many the like, which Thomists and Scotists have
such wrangling Contests about, I have wholly declined them. Heerboord in his
Select Disputations, and Schiebler, in his M^taphysicks, are among the clearest
Authors, tha^ Treat on those Speculations, whose Books are in the Hands of
Scholars. To offer such things unto a Popular Auditory, would be to feed them
with Stones instead of Bread. Nor have I determined any thing concerning that
Problem, Whether every man has a particular Angel to be his constant Companion,
from the time of his Birth to his Death? The Platonicks, and other Philosophers
among the Gentiles of old, did believe it, unto an high Degree of Superstition:
A Magician advised Anthony not to contend with Augustus, because he said the
Genius of Augustus, was the most Powerful* The Jews are persuaded, that there
is an Ange^ Guardian deputed to each particular man. Their Cabbalists, (which
are too much favored by Mersennus) undertake to tell us, what were the Names
of the Angel Guardians belonging to Adam^ Shem, and Abraham. V. Gassendi Examen
Fludd^ Philos. p. 243. Another Author ( Caesar Longinus, p. 476.) tells us, who
were the Angels of Joseph, Joshua, David Elisha, etc. Psellus has Written a
Book De proprio Daemone. And all the Pontificial Doctors mentain the
Affirmative of the Problem mentioned, unto which also some Eminent Protestant
Divines incline, though not as Comprehending every man, only every Elect
Vessel; grounding their Belief chiefly on those two Scriptures, Math. 18.10.
and Acts 12.15. The very Learned, and very Pious Doctor Rivet, (according to
his usual manner) expresses himself with great Caution and Judgment concerning
it. That every One of them, who shall be Heirs of Salvation, has, besides what
may be, with him on extraordinary Occasions, always One particular Angel with
him, he supposes it to be a probable Truth, and that it is not against the
Scripture. Nevertheless, that we cannot from thence Infer, that it is always
the same Angel: He adds, That it is an Opinion not worth the Contending about.

I have therefore Declined that Question, and endeavored (so far as I am able
to Discern) to keep unto clear Scripture Revelation, in what I have delivered;
and so to speak, as that the most ordinary Capacities might Understand and be
Edified. I have not Liesure to Transcribe my own Notes: Therefore, These
Sermons (as well as some, on other Subjects lately sent to the Press) are
Published, as they were taken from me, in Shorthand, by One of my Hearers. I
have perused them, and here Present them without any great Alteration. The
Ingenuous Reader will pardon the Inculcations in them, considering to whom they
were Preached, and for whose sake they are, in this way made public.

ANGELS (both the Good and Evil Ones) have a greater Influence on this World,
than men are generally aware of. Monitions of Dangers, and of Great Changes are
oftentimes from Good Angels. Beza was strangely affected with a Dream, which he
Communicated to the Magistrates of Geneva, by means whereof the City was Saved
from an Impending Mischief. This could not be from an Evil Angel. Nevertheless,
Providence does sometimes Permit and Order Moni^ions of Future Evils by them:
Thus Brutus was by a Demon Forewarned of his Death. Archbishop Spotwood
Writes, that One of the Kings of Scotland was terrified with the Vision of a
Person, whom he had caused to Sin much against his Conscience, who C^yed to
him. Woe worth the Day that ever I knew thee, for because I have sought to
please thee against God and His Servants, I am now adjudged to the Torments of
Hell. The next morning he understood, that that man was dead, and that he dyed
just at the Hour, when he appeared to him, after that affrighting manner. He
also dreamed that Sir James Hamilton, whom he had caused to be Executed, came
to him with a Drawn Sword, and therewith cut off both his Arms, whilst he was
musing what should be the meaning of that Dream, News was brought him of the
Death of both his Sons. Our English Histories report, that the Lord Stanly, had
a Dream, in which it seemed to him, that a Boar Gored him, and the Lord
Hastings; and because the D. of Gloucester gave the Boar for his Arms or
Cognizance, it made a dreadful Impression upon his Spirit, that mischief was by
him secretly intended against them. He that Night sent to the Lord Hastings
about it, who looked on it, as no more than a Dream or Phansy; but the next
day, the Lord Stanly was Wounded, and the Lord Hastings was Murdered by the
Bloody Treachery of that Boar, the D. of Gloucester, who was afterward K.
Richard 3. And we know from the Scripture, that an Evil Angel foretold, the
Fall of Saul and Jonathan, and the Great Mutations, which should then happen,
in the Kingdom of Israel. Jewish Commentators say, that the Reason, why Saul
cut off the Witches throughout the Land, was, because they Foretold that David
should be King. I Remember, that once in Discourse with the Learned Doctor
Spencer, in Cambridge, concerning his Book of Prodigies, he said to me, that
his Judgment was, That the Evil Angels had Praenotions of many Future Things,
and did accordingly give strange Premoni^ions of them. No doubt it is often so,
and yet as Lavater, Schottus, and others have noted, there are sometimes Things
signified by Angels, which it is not easy to determine of what sort those Genii
are. What shall be thought of the Phantom, which appeared to General Vesselini,
assuring him that he might take the City of Muran, by the Assistance of a Widow
which Lived in that City, which strangely came to pass accordingly, in the Year
1644. There comes to my mind a very Unaccountable Thing, which happened at
London above Thirty Years ago. It was this, One Mr. Cutty (an honest Citizen)
passing between Milk-street and Wood street in Cheap Side, on March 2 d. 1664.
took up a Letter Sealed. The Superscription whereof was these words following;
From Geneva, to a Friend. Within the Letter these words were Written. This is
to give both timely and speedy Notice, that in the Year 1665. in the latter end
of May, shall begin a Plague, and hold very Hot, till the latter end of
December, and then cease, but not quite; and then go on, till the latter end of
the Spring the next Year. And in 1665 and 66. putting both together, shall not
only happen a Plague, but great Sea Fights, such as the like was scarce ever
heard of; and this shall not be all, but in the Year 1666. on the Second of
September, shall happen a Fire, that shall Burn down One of the Eminentest
Cities in the World. Mr. Cutty carried the Letter to the then Lord Mayor. A
Reverend Divine in London, who was of his Acquaintance, had a Copy of it,
before the sad Things here Praedicted came to pass; and at my last being at
London, was pleased to favor me with it, as it is here Related. This Account
bing certainly true, and very surprising, I thought it not unworthy the
Publication.

As for the annexed Discourse, concerning Angelical Apparitions, more Instances
than one or two, here in New England, of Appearing Pretended Angels, have made
it necessary, that something should be Written to prevent the Deception of
several that have been, and of others, that were in Eminent Danger of being
Imposed upon. Some may think it Extraordinary, That such Things should happen
in a Place, where the Light of the Gospel (which has ever been wont to shine
away the Angels of Darkness) does prevail. But it is no new thing for men to be
thu^ d^l^ded. Some Good men have Credited strange Relations about Apparitions
of Saints Departed, as well as of Angels. Eusebius, in his Ecclesiastical
History, ( Lib. 6. cap. 4.) reports that Potamiaena, three days after her
Martyrdom, appeared to Basilides, and caused him to turn a Christian; and
afterward to many in Alexandria, on whom the Apparition ha^ the like Effect.
Fabulous Relations (and such I take those of Eusebius to be) are more like to
Confirm Infidels, than to make Christians.

I have reason to believe, that it has been a signal Mercy to this Country,
that the pretended Angels have been suspected to be no better than Satan
transforming himself into an Angel of Light. Nor is it at all to be wondered at,
that the Spirits of Darkness should be able to Deceive men's Senses; making them
believe that they see that which is not. A man that is Skilled in Optics, may
Impose on the Senses of others, as did Descartes, when he caused Admiration in
his Friend Brassieus by Representing to him a Company of Soldiers, marching in
his Chamber; but this proceeded from the small Figures of Soldiers which he
concealed, and by a Glass brought such multiplied without doors. And who, that
has Read Porta, Longinus, Zimara, Weckerus, or such like Writers, knows not
that by Natural, without Superstitious Magic, Things of this Nature may be
done? How easy then is it for Demons, who have a perfect Understanding in
Optics, and in the Power of Nature to deceive the Eyes, and delude the
Imaginations of Silly Mortals?

It was in my thoughts to have Written something concerning that Power, which
by the Permission, and Righteous Judgment of God, the Evil Angels have over the
sinful, miserable Children of men. There are some, who will not Believe, that
ever a Wizzard or C^njurer should be able to set the Devils upon their
Neighbors, or that those Infernal Spirits should have Power to Hurt them. But
the Scriptures assures us, that Balak sent for that Infamous Southsayer Balaam,
to Curse his Enemies, which he would never have do^^ if it had not been a thing
notoriously known, that Balaam could by his Charms do such things. And the
reason of his being no more affrighted when his Ass spoke to him, was doubtless
because he did not at first think that it was a Good Angel that spoke, but
rather one of those Evil Spirits with whom he had maintained a familiar
Conversation. Nor can it be denied, but that there are cursed Books in the
World, which Instruct men what Ceremonies they must use, and what Words they
must utter, that so when the Signals which are of the Devils Institution, are
observed, he may do what his Worshippers desire of him, so far as the most High
shall give him Leave, without whose Permission he cannot so much as enter into
any man's Swine. The Superstitious Gentiles of Old, set a very High Price on
such DIABOLLICAL-BOOKS. The Converted Ephesians burnt those Books, and they
counted the Price of them, and found it to be Fifty thousand Pieces of Silver,
which amounts to One Thousand Five Hundred Sixty Two Pounds, Ten Shillings,
English Money, Acts 19.19. Because the Ephesians were notorious for doing
Mischief by Magical Spells [ EPHESIA GRAMMATA] became a Proverb. That such
Instruments of Satan cannot always hurt whom they would is most certain.
Cyprian (who was afterward a famous Minister and Martyr) found it to be so,
when he made the Attempt. It is Related in the Life of Ambrose, that Magicians
did in vain seek to do him Hurt. One that many years since was Executed at
Hartford, in Connecticut-Colony, on the Account of Witchcraft, confessed, that
she had Employed Evil Spirits to be Revenged on several; but that when she
would have had them do the like to Mr. Stone (the Eminent Teacher of the Church
there) they told her, they had not leave to do it: Nor is this to be Evaded by
saying some Persons (as of late in New England) have falsely accused themselves,
for this Person was upon Rational Grounds, thought to be a true Penitent,
before her death. We cannot argue, that because some have failed in their
cursed Attempts, that therefore never any Succeeded. But the known Success of
many was that which Emboldned others to Endeavor the like. Some of the Indian
Pawaws (i. e. Wizzards) in this Country, having received the Gospel, and given
Good Evidence of a True Conversion to God in Christ, have, with much sorrow of
Heart, declared how they had, whilst in their Heathenism, by the hands of Evil
Angels Murdered their Neighbors. There are, who, by Spells or Muttering a few
words, have caused Diseases to be Removed from those, that have applied
themselves to them. It is Impudence to Deny this, since the Persons are Extant
among us, concerning whom it is to be Averred. But if the Charms of Impious
Sorcerers, will cause Invisible Agents, to heal Diseases, Reason says, they may
as well have Power to Inflict them. These are plain, clear Arguments, and it is
more easy to Slight and Ridicule them, than to give a Refutation of them. But
of this, no more, nor have I mentioned These Things, as expecting that Sadduces
or Semisadduces, who are Judicially hardened in their Error, will be Convinced
and Converted (for no Arguments in the World will ever do that) Nevertheless,
others will be Confirmed in the Truth thereby.

We ought to Admire the Grace of God toward us Sinful Creatures, in that, He
has appointed His Holy Angels to Guard us against the Mischiefs designed by
Wicked Spirits, who are always Intending our Hurt, both as to our Bodies and
Souls. After the Psalmest had said, The Angel of the Lord Encampeth round about
them that Fear Him, and delivers them, he adds immediately O! Taste and see
that the Lord is Good; herein Good, in bestowing such a Guard upon us. It was
(as that Great Divine Doctor Arrowsmith well observes) an Act of Royal
Benignity toward Mordecai, in King Ahashuerus, to make the chief Favorite in
the Court his Attendant; but how much Greater is this Kindness? That the
Blessed Angels, those Fevourites in the Court of Heaven, should be Ministering
Spirits for them, that shall be Heirs of Salvation! Although they are
Ministering Spirits, we may not suppose them to be our Servants, no more than
the Shepherd is the Servant of the Sheep, whom his Master Commands him to look
after. They are in themselves far more Noble Creatures than we are,
Nevertheless, out of Obedience to GOD Their Father, and Our's, and out of Love
to us, their Younger Brethren, of whom they have a most tender Care, they do,
without Grudging, perform the Charge committed to them, as Dr. Fuller expresses
it: The Natives of Heaven grudge not to Guard Those who are only Free Denizens
thereof. Excellent was the saying of one of the Ancients: We see the whole
Heaven at Work for our Salvation; God the Father sending His Son, to Redeem us;
the Father and the Son sending Their Spirit to Guide us* the Father, Son and
Spirit sending Their Angels to Minister for us.

Bless the Lord, Ye His Angels, Bless the Lord, O my Soul.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the Power and Ministry of Holy Angels.
Psalm. 34.7. The Angel of the Lord Encampeth round about them that fear Him,
and delivers them.


WE may say of this Psalm, as one of the Ancients speaks of the whole Bible,
The of^ner a man Reads it, the more sweetness shall he find in it. There is a
singular Excellency in it, both as to matter, and manner of Composure. It is an
Aerostick, or an Alphabetical Psalm. In the Original, every Verse (except the
last) begins with a new Letter, ac^cording to the Order of the Hebrew Alphabet*
which made it the more easy to be remembered* The Author, Time, and Occasion of
its being Penned, we see in the Title. It was Penned by David, when he Changed
his Behavior before Abi^melech. The History of that matter is Recorded* 1 Samuel
21.10. He who in Samuel is called by the name of Achish, the King of Gath, is
in the Title of this Psalm called Abimelech. That (it seems) was a common name
to all the Kings of the Philistines, as Pharaoh was to the Kings of Egypt and as
Caesar is to the Roman Emperors. Dav^^ being Persecuted by Saul, he ^lies for
Safety (...) Abimelech, that is, to Achish, the King of Gat^* But when he came
there, he found himself to (...) in extreme danger: it was quickly known wh^ he
was: and Gath being the Town of Golia^^ whom David had Slain; he was fallen
into the Hands of Goliah's Kins-folk; and there he hear^ them repeat the very
words, that had been Sun^ in Praise of his Victory over Goliath; so that h^ was
in a most hazardous Condition, and now H^ changes his Behavior. The Hebrew
word for Behavior, signifies Discretion: Men are known what they are, by their
Behavior, whether they are wise or foolish. David feigned himself (...) Mope,
or a Madman, a thing very unbecomin^ either a wise, or a good (...) to do:
Neverthel^^^ God was graciously pleased (...) overlook these I^^firmities, and
wonderfully to deliver his Servant. The means of which Deliverance, is noted in
this Text and Context.

1. Prayer unto God, was a means thereof: David himself did Pray. At that time,
he could not make any Prayer more than Ejaculatory, such as Jehoshaphat in
great Distress did; he listed up his He^^t, and the Cries of his Soul came
before God. Thus in the 4 th. verse, I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and
delivered me from all my fears. And in the 6 th. verse, This poor man cried,
and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of all his troubles. And not only did
David himself Cry unto the Lord, but he had many Godly Friends, who knowing
where he was, Prayed earnestly for him, verse. 5. They looked unto him, and
were lightened. David's Godly Friends, Looked up to Heaven on his behalf, and God
was pleased to answer them, to their great lightning and consolation.

2. Another means of his Deliverance, is mentioned in the words before us,
which are expressive of the benefit David received by the Ministry of Holy
Angels: God Commands his Angels to Encamp round about his Servants, and to
Deliver them. A man that has Enemies, if there be ^n Army round him, may,
notwithstanding his Dangers be Delivered. Thus it was with David: and thus it is
with all that truly fear God: There is an Host, an Army about them. One Angel
is ^ble to defend many against their Enemies: yet such is the Care of God
concerning, and such his Love toward his Children, as that he appoints many
Angels, on Occasion, no less than an Host, enough to make a Camp, to Save one
Servant of his.

There are then two Doctrines before us.

1. That the Great God has an Army of Holy Angels at His Disp^se.

2. That they who truly Fear the Lord, Receive much Benefit, by the Min^stry of
Holy Angels.

I have many things in my heart, to speak to you, concerning the Ministry of
Holy Angels, (if God permit) but at this time, we shall only Discourse on the
First of these Doctrines: namely,

DOCTRINE I. That the Great God has an Army of Holy Angels at His Dispose.
This Doctrine may be Cleared, and Confirmed, in several Propositions.

PROPOSITION 1. That the Angels are of all Second or Created Beings, the most
Excellen^ and Glorious.
There are several things contained in this Proposition.

1. That the Angels are Real Beings. I say, There are such Beings as Angels.
They are not mere Entia rationis, Imagina^y Beings, or Apparitions only, but
true and real Beings. That Opinion was the Error of the Sadduces, they did not
believe any such Real Beings, Acts 23.8. It is said there, that the Sadduces
Deny the Resurrection, and say, there is neither Angel nor Spirit; the
Pharisees confess both. The Sadducees said, there were no such Real Beings as
Angels; and no Spirit, no Immortal Sou^, no Spirit of man, really Existing in a
State of Separation from the Body, and consequently, that there is no
Resurrection. But the Pharisees did believe both these: that there shall be a
Resurrection, and that there are Angels and Spirits, or Immortal Souls of m^n.
One may wonder, that the Sadduces should deny the Being of Angels, considering
they did receive the Books of Moses, in which there is frequent mention made of
Angels of God. But t^erefore some have Observed, that their Opini^n was, that
the Angels are not Real Beings, but only Apparitions, and Impressions made on
the minds of men: whenas the Scripture declares them to be Real Spiritual
Substances, that have a Personal Subsistence. Hence they are said to be
Spirits, and to be sent forth, Heb. 1.14. and Spirits that speak, Acts 10.19.
and they are Living Creatures* Ezekiel. 1.5. That by Ezekiels Living Creatures,
Angels are meant, is evident from their being called Cherubims, Ezekiel. 10.16.
and they are called, Au^thorities and Powers, 1 Pet. 3. ult. Which shows that
they are Causes by Counsel, Beings that are En^dued with those Faculties of
Understanding and Will: and are therefore represented in the Scrip^ture, as
doing such things, as none but Rationa^ Agents can do. They are represented in
the Scripture, as beholding and admiring the Wisdom of God. Ephesians. 3.10. The
manifold Wisdom (...) God (says the Apostle) is made known to the
Prin^cipalities and Powers in Heavenly Places. They are represented in the
Scripture, as Discoursing with one another. Zech. 2.3, 4. an Angel did appear,
and said to another Angel concerning the Prophet Go and make this Young man
understand the Vision* And they are represented in the Scripture, as exciting
one another to Glorify God. Isa. 6.3. The Seraphims Cry each to other, Holy,
holy, holy Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of thy Glory. So then they
are Real Rational Creatures; and thence it is, that they a^e Subjects capable
of Rewards and Punishments: the Angelical Nature is so. A^ for the Elect
Angels, their Obedience is rewarded with Everlasting Happiness, and the Sin of
Reprobate Angels is rewarded with Everlasting Punishment. 2 Pet. 2.4. God
spared not the Angels tha^ Sinned: they are cast down into Hell, reserved in
E^verlasting Chains of Darkness, for the Judgment o^ the Great Day. These
things then make it clear unto us who believe the Scriptures, that there are
such real Beings as Angels. And indeed, reason does dictate no less unto men;
for it is evident, that there are Evil Angels: Men cannot but perceive that.
And it was manifest from the Oracles of the Gentiles of old; the Evil Angels
did speak in them. This also is sadly evident from Bodily Possessions, of which
every Age gives instances to the World. Now then, if there are Evil Angels,
reason says, they were once good: they are not originally Evil. The Creator,
who is Perfect, Infinite, Goodness, did not make them Evil: they must needs
come Holy out of His Hands. And if the Evil Angels were once good, we may
rationally conclude, that there are some who are as originally they were Holy
Spirits. Hence the Gentiles, who had not the Light of Scripture to inform them;
nevertheless believed, that there were good, as well as evil Spirits. They have
said of God, that He is [ PATER ANDRONTE THEONTE] the Father of Spirits, as
well as the Father of Men.

2. These Angels are Second Beings, Created Beings; they receive whatever they
are, their very Being, and all from another. Some of the Heathen Philosophers,
supposed the Angels to be Coeternal with the Great God. But it is not so, nor
is that possible to be true: There can be but one First, but one Eternal Being.
It is the Prerogative of the Great God, and of him alone, to be from all
Eternity, Hab. 1.12. Thou art from Everlasting: that is more than can be said
of any Ang^l in Heaven. It cannot be said of them nor of any amongst them, that
they are from Eternity: Six Thousand Years ago, there was not one Angel. The
Angels are as much beholden to God for their Beings, as the poorest Worm on the
earth: He did Create them, or else they would never have been: God made them
all out of nothing. By him all things were Created i^ Heaven and Earth, things
visible, and invisible, Col. 1 16. The Angels are Invisible Things: but the
things belonging to the Invisible World, were as truly Created by God, as any
of those things in t^^s Visible World, which our Eyes behold continually. It is
true, the Scripture does not so expressly declare, on what day of the Week the
Angels were made, as it does concerning the several sorts of Creatures in this
lower World. Nevertheless, it is certain, that it was on one of those six
days, in which the World was Created. God made Heaven and Earth, and Sea, and
all that in them is, in the space of six days, Exodus 20.11. If all the things
which are in Heaven, were made in the space of six days, then the Angels were
so. The Scripture gives us to understand, that before the Seventh Day, the
Heavens and all the Hosts thereof, were Created, Genesis 2.1, 2. Now the Angels
are the Hosts of Heaven. As for this Heaven, that our Eyes look upon, the Stars
are the Hosts thereof* but as for the Third Heaven, which is to men on Earth
Invisible, there is an Host belonging to that Heaven; and the Holy Angels are
the Hosts thereof: They are called the Hosts of Heaven, Neh. 9.6. Thou have
made the Heaven of Heavens with all their H^st, and the Host of Heaven
Worshippeth thee. The Blessed Angels are that Host of Heaven, which does
Worship God: And it is also clear from the Scriptures, that the Angels were
Created before this Earth, that we now Live upon: and therefore before the
Third Day of the Week; for the Earth was made the Third Day. And then the Sons
of God Shouted for Joy, and the Morning Stars Sang together. Job 38.7. In the
Septuagint it is [ PANTES ANGELOI,] All the Angels, they were the Sons of God,
that shouted for joy, when the Earth was made. It is most probable, the Angels
were Created in the same day, that the Light was, viz. in the first day of the
Week; Then was the Light Created, and probably the Angels of Light also. The
Scripture calls them the Morning Stars. They are Stars, in respect of
brightness and glory, and Morning Stars, as being brought forth in the very
beginning of the Creation. So then we see, that Angels are Creatures or Second
Beings.

3. They are of all Creatures, the most Excellent and Glorious. Man is the most
Excellent Creature in this lower World: but he is Inferior to the Angels, and
was so in his first and best Estate Psalm. 8.5. He was made lower than the
Angels. Therefore the Scripture does say of the Angels, that they are the
highest Creatures. Eccles. 5.8* Solomon says concerning the great Tyrants,
that oppress the Earth, There be Higher than they, an^ He that is Higher than
the Highest, will regard it* God will take notice of it, and He is higher tha^
the Angels, who are the highest of Created Be^ings. They are more like unto
God, than an^ Creatures are, and are therefore sometimes called Elohim, i. e.
Gods, in the Scripture. Psalm. 97.7. Worship Him, all ye Gods, that is, all ye
Angels, for so does the Apostle interpret those words of the Psalmist, Heb.
1.6. The Angels are styled God^ not in respect of Nature, for so there is but
on^ God; but in respect of similitude. They have much of the Image of God in
them: Therefore also are they styled, the Sons of God, as in tha^ place but now
mentioned in Job; so likewise i^ Job 1.6. There was a day when the Sons of God
di^^appear before him, and Satan came among them: The Sons of God; the Angels
are so called, because they resemble God, as Children resemble their Father.
Angels resemble the Glorious God more than any other Creatures do, and that
especially in Four Things.

1. In that they are Spiritual Beings: And there^fore like unto God. Joh. 4.24.
God is a Spirit* Now in as much as God is a Spirit, the more Spi^ritual any
Beings are, the more do they resembl^ him. The Angels have not such gross
Bodies, (...) men, and all Creatures in this World have; an^ therefore it is,
that they are Invisible: Angels cannot be seen, though they stand by men: This
Assembly is full of them at this hour, yet we see them not; neither can they be
felt or discerned, but by their effects and operations. By this argument Christ
convinced his Disciples, that he was not a Spirit, but a real Body. When Christ
appeared to them after his Resurrection, they were troubled, and thought he had
been a Spirit* Christ said to them, Behold, my hands and my feet, handle me,
see that it is I: a Spirit has not flesh and bones, as you see me have. Luke
24.39. You cannot handle a Spirit, therefore come and handle me: You may see and
feel, that I have a real Body, and that therefore I am not a Spirit, as you
fear: And from hence it is, that Angels can come into Houses, when the doors
are shut; though there are Bars of Iron upon them, they can pass through them,
because they are Spi^itual Beings. It is true, the Angels themselves compared
with God, are not Spiritual. Hence some of the Ancients were wont to say, that
every Creature is Corporeal, that is, comparatively, or in respect of God.
Nevertheless, if Angels be compared with other Creatures, they are Spiritual
and Incorporeal: Whether they have not Vehicles of a more Spiritual Nature,
than the Bodies of other Creatures, is a Philosophical Question, not proper to
be here Discussed: But in the Scripture they are called Spirits, in distinction
and opposition to Bodies.

2. They are Immortal, and in that respect resem^ble the Glorious God. The Lord
is styled, the Everlasting God, and the Immortal King: and i^ is said of him, 1 Timothy 6.16. that He only has Im^mortality: He only has it originally; He only
has Immortality of himself; but Angels have Immortality by the Gift of God.
Although Eternity cannot be affirmed of the Angels; nevertheless, Eviternity,
or Immortality may be affirmed o^ them. Though they had a Beginning, once they
were not,, they shall never cease to be: what they are now, they shall be for
ever. An Ange^ cannot dye. It is said, that after the Resurrection, the
Children of God shall be [ ISANGELOI,] Equal unto, or like the Angels, neither
can they Dye. Luke 20.36. They will be made like the Angels, in respect of
Immortality, or an impossibility of Dying. An Angel is a Creature that can
never Dye. Indeed, God that made them, can annihilate them at his pleasure; but
they are not Subjects capable of Death or Dissolution: as not being out of Pre
existent Principles. Nor does Nature decay in them, as in Mortal Creatures.
Although they have Lived now for the space of more than Five Thousand Years, they
are not subject to any decay of Nature, but are as strong and vigorous, as in
the day they were made.

3. Angels Resemble God in respect of Wisdom and Knowledge. The Lord is a God
of Knowledge: He is styled, The only wise God. In that respect, Angels are most
like to him; they have a wonderful measure of Wisdom and Knowledge. David's
extraordinary Wisdom, is expressed, by saying, That he was wise, according to
the wisdom of an Angel of God, to know all the things on the Earth. 2 Samuel
14.20. An Angel of God knows all the things on the Earth; such Wisdom have
they. The most knowing man in all the World, knows little or nothing
comparatively to what an Angel knows. It is said, co^^erning the time of the
Day of Judgment, Of that Hour knows no man, no, not the Angels in Heaven, Math.
24.36. intimating, that the Angels of Heaven, have a far greater knowledge,
than men have. Adam, before sin darkened his understanding, had a greater
measure of knowledge, than any man in the World since has had; but his
knowledge was short of the Angels. Hence, the Devil tempted our first Parents
with that, If you eat the forbidden fruit, you shall be like unto Elohim, like
Gods, h. e. like Angels, say the Jewish Interpreters on those words, Genesis 3.5.
The Angels are great Philosophers: they know the Principles, the Causes, the
Nature, and Properties of every Creature in the World. They are great Statists:
they know all the affairs of State in this World. In Dan. 10.13. The Angel
said, I remained with the King in Persia: that Angel knew all the State
affairs, of all the Kingdoms of the whole World. They have a Wonderful Natural
Knowledge and Wisdom in them, and their knowledge is increased very much by
Experience. They have had above five thousand years experience, which has
added to their knowledge. And they have a greater measure of Revealed
Knowledge, than men may pretend unto. They know the Scriptures, better than any
man in the World. They have a deeper insight into Scripture Mysteries. Hence
the Angel said to Daniel, Chap. 10.21. I am come to show thee, that which is
noted in the Scriptures of truth. They know what things are in the Scripture,
and can give the sense and meaning of them. They are more knowing in the
Counsels of God, more privy to the Counsels of Heaven, than any men on the
earth are. And they know what will befall some men and women many years before
the things come to pass, yea, before such Persons are born, Dan. 11.6. Hence
they are compared to living Creatures full of eyes behind and before, Rev. 4.6.
Because they are full of Knowledge and Wisdom. They are said to have eyes
behind, because they know what is past. No such Historians in the World, as the
Angels are: they can give an account of all that has happened in the World, for
these five thousand years^ They ^^ve eyes before, inasmuch as they can see
forward a great way. As for future things, they have a wonderful sight into
them: and as for futurities, which they don't know certainly, they can give
such Conjectures, as men cannot reach unto. And God reveals more to them, then
He does to men: and has oftentimes revealed future things to men, by the
Ministry of His Angels: so that in respect of Knowledge, the blessed Angels
have an Eminency of the Divine Image in them.

Lastly, They are like to God in respect of Holiness. The Image of God is in
Holiness especially. Exodus 15.11. He is Glorious in Holiness. God is Infinite
Holiness. 1 Samuel 2.2. There is none Holy as the Lord. Hence the more holiness
is in any, the more like to God are they: this is true concerning the blessed
Angels, they are the most holy Creatures in all the World: They are styled in
the Scripture, the Holy Ones, Dan. 4.17. and Holy Angels. When Christ comes to
Judgment, all the Holy Angels shall come down from Heaven with Him. Math.
25.31. Therefore are they in the Scripture said to be, Angels of Light, 2 Cor.
11.14. Because of the light of Holiness, in which they were Created: and in
that light and life do they still abide. The Elect Angels never did sin
against God. Hence, when they have appeared unto men, usually they did seem to
have bright Apparel, and Garments as white as Snow, and like unto the light as
an Emblem of their Innocence, Purity, and Holiness. Dan 10.5. Math. 28.4. Act.
10.30. These things show, that the blessed Angels are of all Created beings the
most Glorious.

PROPOSITION. II. That there is an Order among the Angels of Heaven.
This is employed in the Text before us, which compares the Angels unto an Army:
that shows there is an Order among them. Though for men to take upon them to
declare the particulars of that Order; or to show by what Laws the Invisible
World is Governed, is presumption, and sinful Curiosity; such are condemned by
the Apostle, as intruding into those things, which they have not seen. There is
a Book, which passes under the counterfeit name of Dionysius the Areopagite*
wherein the Author ventures to describe the Caelestial Hierarchy, as if he had
Lived and Conversed many years among them; pretending that there are nine
distinct Orders amongst the Angels of Heaven. He has taken his Notions partly
from the Jews, and partly from the Pythagorean and Platonic Philosophers. But
we may not assert any thing in Subjects of this nature, beyond what we have
Scripture Light for. Now though the Holy Angels may, for ought any thing that
the Scripture declares to the contrary, be all Equal in respect of Nature; it
is certain, that some are in respect of their Office, and Employment superior
to others. There are some, who are as Captains and Leaders, and others follow
them, according as God is pleased to Employ them: It is said in the Text, The
Angel of the Lord Encampeth round about them that fear him. One Angel cannot
make a Camp, but many Angels under the Conduct of one, under one as a Leader,
may do it, and they do do it. Hence the Angel which came unto the Shepherds,
and brought them the Tidings of the Birth of Christ, said, I bring you glad
Tidings, Luke 2. and in v. 13. it is said, that there was with the Angel, a
Multitude of the Heavenly Host Praising God. So that there was an Host, a
Multitude of Angels, who were under the Conduct of one Angel. That there is a
distinction among the Angels, in respect of Office, and that some are Superior
to others, is clear from that Scripture, in Col. 1.16. where the Apostle
speaking concerning the Creatures in the Invisible World, does distinguish them
into Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, and Powers. Now Thrones are Superior
to Dominions; Dominions to Principalities; and Principalities to Powers: The
words allude to Earthly Governments. In Civil Polities, Kings or Vice-Royes sit
upon Thrones, Dukes and Princes, are called Dominions; Governors Commissioned
by them, and set over particular Provinces, are called Principalities; and
Inferior Magistrates are called Powers: The Abstract is put for the Concrete.
So that from these Expressions we may gather, that there is an Order among the
Angels of Heaven. Hence also the Scripture speaks expressly, not only concerning
Angels, but Archangels; these are styled in the Scripture, Hasarim Harishonim,
Dan. 10.13. Not only Princes, but Chief Princes. We have the names of one or
two of the Archangels mentioned in the Scripture: One of them is named
Michael; He is the great Prince amongst the Angels. Dan. 12.1. Of him does Jude
speak in the 9 th. verse of his Epistle. Some (...) thought, that by Michael,
Christ is meant; but that c^^not be, for it is said, He durst not bring a
railing Accusation, when disputing with the Devil. It is true, Christ cannot
Sin, because of the Holiness of his Nature; but it would be an harsh
expression, to say of the Eternal Son of God, that he dare not Sin: therefore
Michael is a Created Angel. Christ is no^ any where called an Arch angel, but
plainly distinguished from the Arch angel, 1 These. 4.16. This Michael seems to
be the chief of all the Angels, and of all the Archangels of God: and
therefore He is said to be, not only an Archangel, but the Arch angel; and is
called the Great Prince, as in the Scripture but now quoted in Daniel. These
Arch angels are supposed to be seven in number: they seem to be signified by
the Seven Lamps, that Burned in the Temple before or over against the
Mercy-Seat, which wa^ the Throne of God. Zech. 4.10. Hence John speaks of Seven
Spirits of God, which are the eyes, and the horns of the Lamb, Rev. 5.6. It is
harsh to interpret the words, as many do, of the Eternal Spirit of God; or to
say of him, that He is not only the Eyes, but the Horns of the Lamb, i. e. of
Christ, considered as man, or as one that has been Slain: The Eternal Spirit of
God is not inferior to the Lamb that was Slain; but the Angels are, and the
Archangels are. All the Angels in Heaven are inferior to the Man Christ
Jesus; and it is by them, that he Exerts his Power, and provides for the Safety
of his Church in the World: and therefore are they fitly expressed by that
similitude of the Horns and the Eyes of the Lamb. Moreover, those Seven Spirits
of God, are expressly called, Seven Angels, Rev. 8.2. These seem to be the
general Inspectors of the whole World, and thence are said to be Sent forth
into all the Earth.

PROPOSITION III.
The Angels are at Gods Dispose. Ezekiel. 1.12. It is said, Whither the Spirit
went, the Living Creatures went. The Angels are not at their own Dispose, but
follow the direction of the Eternal Spirit; and are therefore styled, The
Angels of the Lord, Angels of God, and Spirits of God. An Angel is sometimes in
the Scripture called, The Spirit of the Lord. It was said to Elijah, The Spirit
of the Lord shall carry thee whither I know not. 1 King. 18.12. And concerning
Philip, that the Spirit of the Lord caught him away, Act. 8.39. That Spirit of
the Lord seems to be an Angel of the Lord, the same that spoke to Philip, v.
26. They are Spirits, whom God has made, and imployes, when, and where, and
about what business He pleases. The Great God is the Lord of Angels: He is
their General, and they are his Soldiers and Servants: He is on that account
especially, said to be, The Lord of Hosts, for that the Angels, The Hosts of
Heaven, are under His Command, and all disposed of by him: They are his
Messengers and Ministers. The word Angel, signifies a Messenger, from the Greek
word [ ANGELLEIN,] which signifies to send on a Message: So the Hebrew word [
MALAK,] comes from Laak, Legavit. They are the Legates of Heaven: When God has
any Service for them to do, any Errand to send them upon, they are most ready
to obey; they hearken, and wait for the word to proceed out of the mouth of
God, that so they may dispatch, what He shall see meet to employ them about.
Psalm. 103.20. Ye his Angels, that do his Commandments, hearkening to the voice
of his Word: Ye Ministers of His, that do His pleasure. The greatest of them
stand before God, ready to do what He shall Command them: and therefore
Gabriel, (who seems to be an Arch angel) said unto Zechary, I am Gabriel that
stand in the Presence of God. Luke 1.19. As a Servant stands in the presence of
his Master; a Servant goes the Errand that his Master has sent him about, and
then returns, and stands before his Master, and waits his pleasure, to know
what he would have him do next. Thus it is with all the Angels of Heaven; God
sends them into the World to do the Work He appoints them unto, they do it, and
return, and then stand ready to hear what He shall Command them next.

These things the Scripture makes clear unto us.

Thus you have seen the Doctrine Explained and Confirmed.

The APPLICATION of it follows in a few words.

USE I.
Behold the Majesty of the Great God, who has such Glorious Creatures as the
Angels are, to Wait upon him, and to do His pleasure. God is called by the name
of Majesty, in the Scripture: Heb. 1.3. The Right Hand of the Majesty on High,
that is, of God. The Majesty of Earthly Kings, appears in their Servants and
Attendants, and in the greatness of their Courts; and in special, in that they
have Great Ones to attend them: A King has Lords and Nobles, the greatest in
the Kingdom about him, as his Servants. But the Great God the King of Heaven,
has those that are higher than they, and more Attendants, than all the Kings
of the Earth have: He has Thousands that attend Him continually. In Heaven
there is a Glorious Court. Psalm. 68.17. The Chariots of God are Twenty
Thousands, even Thousands of Angels: Nay, there are Millions of them. Daniel
beheld, and there were, Thousands of Thousands, and Ten Thousand Times Ten
Thousand, that stood before Him. There is none that may be compared with the
Great God: Men are not to compare with Angels; but Angels are not to compare
with God. Psalm. 89.6. Who among the Sons of the Mighty can be Likened unto the
Lord? There i^ none among the mighty Angels of Heaven, tha^ can be likened unto
him: The most Exalted An^gel does confess this, by his name Michael, which
signifies, Who is like unto God? There is none whose Majesty may be compared
unto the Infi^nite Majesty. Angels humble themselves to loo^ after men; those
glorious Spirits humble them^selves, to look after such poor worms of the dust*
as we are, to watch over us, and to take care o^ us continually. But the Great
God does humbl^ himself infinitely more to look upon them. Psa^* 113.6. The
Lord humbles himself to behold the things done in Heaven: He humbles himself
to loo^ upon the Angels of Heaven: He charge Hi^ Angels with folly; the
Heavens are not pure i^ His sight: Such is the Majesty of the Great God. Angels
are nothing compared with him though the most Glorious of all Second Beings
they are but shadows of Being, compared wit^ God; it is therefore said, There
is none beside the^ 1 Samuel 2.2. The best of Creatures are nothing to him; yea,
less than nothing and vanity, Isa* 40.17. And the glorious Angels do
acknowledg^ their own Nothingness, when they stand before Him. Isa. 6.2. The
Seraphims, the Angels tha^ is, They cover their faces, and say, Holy, holy,
hol^ Lord of Hosts. They cover their faces, why? (...) thereby acknowledging,
that they are unworth^ to look upon God, or that God should Look upon them.

USE II.
God does not stand in need of us, or of any of our Services. For He has
Angels at His Dispose; an infinite number of glorious Angels, to do any
Service, that he would have to be done; and He does not need them neither. Act.
17.25. God is not worshipped, as though he needed any thing; who has given
unto all, Life and Breath, and all things: So, as for the Angels, God has
given to them their Beings, and their Life, and all those glorious
Accomplishments they are adorned with: and therefore he needs them not. Before
ever there was any Angel, World, or Creature, God was Blessed in the Enjoyment
of Himself: God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, did take Infinite Satisfaction
in their own Glory, from the Days of Eternity. Angels can add nothing to his
Essential Glory. H^ did not make them, because He stood in any need of them: He
has manifested, that he did not need them, since He suffered Millions of them
to fall down from Heaven, and Dismissed them his Service; and for their
Rebellion, committed them to that Dungeon, where there is Blackness of Darkness
for ever. God shows to all the World, That he does not stand in need of any of
his Creatures; much less has he need of us, seeing he needed not Angels. One
Angel can do more for God in one day, than millions of men can do in a thousand
years. Does he need us then? And though He Commands us to Praise Him, it is
not, because He needs us, no, He has Angels, that never Sinned, who Praise Him
continually, after a better manner, than ever we did. There are Creatures in
Heaven, saying, Blessing, and Honor, and Glory be to Him that Sits on the
Throne, for ever and ever, Rev. 5.13. What foolish Creatures are those of the
Children of men, that think, if they Serve God, he is beholden to them; that if
they keep His Commandments, he is become their Debtor! No, verily, it is not
so: after we have done all, we are unprofitable Servants. And what foolish
Wretches are they, that live, as if they did not stand in need of God; that
Live without Prayer to Him! Oh! sinful Creatures, do you think, you have no
need of God? I profess to you, in His Name this day, that He stands in no need
of you, who has all the Angels of Heaven to be his Servants for ever-more.

USE. III.
Take heed then of Offending this God. He can let loose Angels, upon those that
provoke Him; and one Angel of His, is able to destroy all the men upon the face
of the whole Earth, in a very little time. An Angel went through the Land of
Egypt, and in one night destroyed the first born in every Family, that there
was not one House in all that Kingdom, wherein there was not one Dead: One
Angel did this in a nights time One Angel did kill among the Children of
Israel, Seventy thousand in a few days. And in the Army of Sennacherib, an
Angel slew above an hundred and fourscore thousand in one night. Angels are
mighty Creatures, and can by thunder and lightning destroy all before them. It
seems as if they did in that way destroy Sennacheribs Army: for it is on that
account said, Who can stand before a Consuming fire? Isa. 33.15. When the Law
was given, by the disposition of Angels on mount Sinai, there were terrible
Thundering and Lightnings, and the Lord descended upon it in fire. Angels can
make the Earth shake under us. It is said, There was a great Earthquake, for
the Angel descended from Heaven, Math. 28.2. Oh! then fear this great God, who
is the Lord of Angels: He that has the Angels at his dispose, must needs have
other Creatures at his dispose. There are Evil Angels, as well as good, and
they are (though against their wills) at the Command of God. Oh! fear to offend
God, lest He should let them loose upon you. And what are there any of you,
that go to them, to make discoveries of things that cannot be otherwise known?
I hear there are some such in this place, that have gone to an ungodly
Fortune Tellers, to reveal such things, as cannot be known, but by the help of
Evil Angels. It is a sad thing, that such abominations should be heard of in
this Land of Light. Doubtless, we man suppose, that that has been one reason
why the Holy God has been provoked, to let loose (...) Angels upon New England
two years ago. Me^ and Women have been Conjuring with their Sieves, and Keys,
and Glasses; and are they now in Boston going to enquire of Devils, by the
mouth of a wicked Fortune Tellers? If the Lord be provoked to deliver you into
the hands of evi^ Angels, you will find them terrible Creatures* And all other
Creatures are at his dispose too* The Stars in their course did He make to
figh^ against Sisera: Thunder, Lightning, Hail, Snow, Rain, Wind, Storms, all
fulfill his Word. The^^ fear this great God! All these Creatures are ready to
take part with God against sinners, and to be avenged in the quarrel of their
Creator. They say to God, as that King did to the Prophet, 2 King. 6.21. My
Father, shall I smite them? shall I smite them? Thus, every Creature is ready
to say so before God, LORD, there is such a sinner, shall I smite him? Shall I
kill him, and send him to hell? The Lightning says, LORD, shall I smite him?
When he goes to Sea, the Sea says, LORD, shall I drown him? The Earth he
treads on, says, LORD, shall I open my mouth, and swallow him up alive, that
he may go down alive into the pit. Therefore I say unto you, Fear to offend
God. Remember the Words of the Lord Jesus Christ, with which at this time I
conclude, Luke 12.5. I will forewarn you, whom ye shall fear: Fear him, which
after he has killed, has power (...) cast into hell, yea, I say unto you, Fear
Him.

We Proceed now unto the Second Doctrine, Namely,

DOCTRINE. 2. That they, who truly fear God, have many deliverances, and
receive many benefits, by the Ministry of Holy Angels.
For the clearing of this Doctrine, there are three Particulars, which may be
enquired into.

1. Who are the Object of the Care and inspection of the Angels of Heaven?

2. What Benefits they that fear God, receive by the Ministry of His Holy
Angels?

3. The Reason, why the Ministry of Angels is by the Lord made use of?

Quest. I. Who are the Object of the Care and Inspection of the Angels of
Heaven?
For Answer,

1. The Church of God is the special Object of the Care and Tutelage of His
Holy Angels. This might be signified to us by those Cherubims, that were on the
Curtains belonging to the Tabernacle, of which you read, Exodus 26.1. And also
by the Cherubims, that were drawn on the Walls of the Temple, declaring this
Mystery to us, that there is a Communion between the Angels in Heaven, and the
Church on Earth, and that the Church is Surrounded with Angels, as the Temple
was with Cherubims. The Elect of God are said to b^ the Church of the
firstborn, whose names are written in Heaven: Now the Scripture is express and
clear, that All the Angels of Heaven (not one excepted) are made use of to
promote the Salvation of the Elect of God: Heb. 1.14. Are they not all
Ministering Spirits, sent forth to Minister for them, who shall be the heirs of
Salvation? And therefore particular Churches and Societies of Saints are under
a special Inspection of the Angels of God. As the Church of the Jews of old was
favored and honored with that privilege, as we see in Dan. 12.1. So we have
reason to conclude, that Churches consisting of Christians, are under a
peculiar Inspection of Elect Angels. If particular Countries and Provinces, are
under their Guardianship, (as there is reason to believe) particular Churches
are so much more, as being more eminently under the care of Christ, the Lord of
Angels. It is certain (as the Text before us does intimate) that in a most
peculiar manner, such as truly fear God, receive advantage, by the Ministry of
Holy Angels: But for their sakes, others are also benefited thereby.
Hypocrites, who are only external Worshipers of God, are many ways benefited
by the Ministration of Angels, for the sake of them, who are sincere. Every man
in the Church of Israel did receive benefit by the Ministry of the Angels of
Heaven: they All did eat of the Manna; which Manna was prepared by Angels.
Therefore it is said, that Man did eat Angels Food, Psalm. 78.25. Because the
Manna was prepared for them by the Angels. So is it now in the days of the
Gospel, when God does provide Spiritual food for men, all that are the Objects
thereof, are or may be better for it. Where there are faithful, able Preachers
of the Word of God, all have the advantage of that Light: Now such things are
by Christ's appointment brought to pass, by the Secret Invisible Ministry of
Angels. When Peter was sent to Preach the Gospel to Cornelius, and his Family,
it was an Angel that did direct him unto them. When Paul and other Ministers
Preached the Gospel to the Macedonians, an Angel of Heaven by Divine
Appointment, caused them to do it, Acts. 16.9. Paul had a Vision, there stood a
man of Macedonia, and Prayed him saying, Come over into Macedonia, and help us:
h. e. He saw an Angel habited like a Macedonian, who spoke those Words to him,
whence he and others with him concluded, that they were called to Preach the
Gospel in Macedonia, and that God and his Angels would be with them there.
Towns and Cities in which there are Churches of Saints Worshipping God in
Christ, have no doubt their peculiar Angels to watch over them. When Jerusalem
was besieged by the Assyrians, it is said the Angel of the Lord went out and
smote the Camp of the Assyrians, 1 King. 19.35. It seems then, there was an
Angel that did reside in and preside over that City, where the Temple was, who
upon this Occasion went out of it. So then, (as on^ expresses it) Angels are
the Guard of the Queen of Heaven, the Lambs Wife.

2. The Care and Inspection of Angels, is not Limited to the Church only. That
in a special manner, is the Object thereof; yet for the Churches sake, their
Care and Tutelage does extend much further. Many a Great man in the World, has
been wonderfully Protected and Delivered by the Angels of God, out of respect
to his Church and People; though that man himself did never fea^ God. Thus it
was with Darius, the Emperor of Persia: an Angel did stand by him, and did
confirm and strengthen him, Dan. 11.1. This the Angel did out of respect to the
Lord's People* For Darius himself was an Idolater, and not a Worshipper of God.
So Alexander, Surnamed the Great, he was far from being a true Feare^ of God,
but he was kind to the Jews, then the only People of God in the World, and he
was wonderfully preserved and prospered by the Angels of Heaven. He was
delivered in miraculous Dangers: once he was Shot in his Shoulder, and another
time sorely Wounded in his Leg, but strangely preserved in the midst of his
Enemies, because God did design to humble and break the Enemies of his People,
by the hand of that Alexander: Angels delivered him, until such time, as he had
done the Work God had appointed for him. God then does Govern the whole World
by the Ministry of His Holy Angels: They are in Heaven as a Watchtower, and
they keep the World. Hence Daniel saw a Watcher, an Holy One, come down from
Heaven. Dan. 4.13. The Angels are those Holy Ones, that Watch the World: They
are the great Intelligencers of Heaven, whom the Lord Christ sends throughout
the Earth, to observe, and give him an account, how the Affairs thereof are. We
see in the first Chapter of Zachary, that the Angels come unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, who is the Increated Angel, and the Lord of all the Angels: they say to
him, We have Walked to and fro through the Earth, and behold, all the Earth is
at rest. v. 11. Thus do they inspect the World, and give an account of their
Ministry. Hence it is said, that the Living Creatures, (Angels I told you are
meant by the Living Creatures) ran and returned, as the appearance of a Flash
of Lightning. Ezekiel. 1.14. When the Lord sends them on an Errand, they Run, and
they Return again, when they have dispatched the business they were sent upon.
And they run as swiftly as a flash of Lightning: they go from Heaven to Earth,
and from Earth to Heaven like Lightning. Although they that fear the Lord, are
the peculiar Charge of Holy Angels, whom they constantly attend; nevertheless,
that the World in general is under their Inspection, is evident from the
Scriptures: For

1. God does Dispense both signal Mercies and Judgments by their hands. Ezekiel.
1.13. The Living Creatures are said to be as a Lamp, and as Coals of fire. They
are unto such as fear God, as a Lamp, to direct and light them: but they are
unto wicked men, as Coals of Fire to consume them. This we see described at
large in the 6 th Chapter of Zachary, from the first to the ninth verse; where
we read of four Chariots, that is to say, the Angels of God, sent forth into
the four Corners of the World, North, South, East and West: and the Horses that
represent the Angels, appear in several Colors: there was Red Horses, noting
bloody Judgments, Desolations by War, and this by the Ministry of Angels; Black
Horses, signifying the Pestilence and Famine, and the like Judgments coming
upon the World; and White Horses, intimating Victory and Mercy to the People of
God; and there were Grisled Horses, emblematically setting forth mixed
Dispensations of Divine Providence: and all by the Ministry of Angels: Of these
the Lord says, They have quieted my Spirit in the North Country. The Angels
were sent into the North-Country, namely to Babylon, to Execute Judgment there;
and then the Holy Spirit of God was satisfied, when He saw, that Justice was
done by his Angels, on his and his People's Enemies. David Prayed that Judgment
might be Executed on his Enemies, by the hands of Angels. Psalm. 35.5, 6. Let
the Angel of the Lord chase them, and let the Angel of the Lord Persecute them.
It is true, that no Judgment befa^s the World, but God does it. Amos 3.6. Shall
there be Evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it. Nevertheless, the Lord
is not wont to Execute Judgment upon men, by His own Immediate Hand, but by the
Ministry of Angels: When it is done by men, yet Angels have an hand therein.
Sometimes indeed by the Hands of Evil Angels, whom the Lord lets Loose, and
punishes a wicked World by them; but many times by the Hands of His Holy
Angels. Thus, when Sodom was Destroyed, they were the Angels of Heaven, that
did that terrible and glorious work of Justice, on provoking Sinners. The
Angels said to Lot, We will destroy this place, the Lord has sent us to destroy
it. Genesis 19.13. As for the Angel who Killed the First born of Egypt, the Jews
think He was, The King of Devils; whom they call by the name of Ashmodai, which
signifies a Destroyer. The Scripture calls him a Destroyer, Heb. 11.28. He
might notwithstanding that, be a good Angel: For no work is more becoming those
Holy Spirits, than to Execute the Judgments of God on Impenitent Sinners. And
although it is said concerning the Egyptians, Psalm. 78.49. That the Lord did
cast upon them the fierceness of his Anger, By sending Evil Angels among them:
Judicious Expositors conceive, That those Angels are styled, Evil Angels, not
in respect of their Nature, but in respect of the sad Message they were sent
upon, in that they were the Messengers of Evil Tidings; they were the
Messengers of Death to the Egyptians. The Egyptians had made use of wicked
Angels to oppose Moses, and to withstand the Design of God for the Salvation of
His People: and now God to punish them, would make use of the Holy Angels, as
the Instruments of His Providence. When Seventy Thousand men among the Children
of Israel, Dyed of the Plague, they were smitten by the Hand of an Angel. David
saw the Angel stretched out his Hand over Jerusalem to destroy it, but the Lord
said to the Angel that destroyed, it is enough, stay now thine hand 2 Samuel
24.16. When Jerusalem was laid waste by the Babylonians: Holy Angels had a hand
in the Execution of that Righteous Judgment; A Whirlwind came out of the North,
Ezekiel. 1.4. The Babylonians came like a Whirlwind, and the Angels of Heaven had
a Hand in Raising the Storm, that carried Jerusalem away before it. Hence in v.
24. It is said of the Living Creatures, That the noise of their Wings was as
the Noise of an Host: The Angels fetched (...) Host to destroy Jerusalem. So
when Jerusalem was the last time destroyed by the Romans, the Angels of the
Lord did forsake the City. The Jewish Historian relates, That a voice was heard
in the Temple, saying, [ METABAINOMEN ENTEUTHEN,] Let us depart from hence; and
Tacitus reports, that in Jerusalem there was heard a voice greater than Humane,
saying, The God's are departing from this place. The Angels of God departed
from that place, and now it lay open to the Fury of their Enemies. The Trumpets
in the Revelation, signifying Judgments on the Roman Empire, were sounded by
Angel; and the Vials denoting Judgments on the Antichristian Papal Empire, are
poured out by Angels, because these things are Effected by their Mini^^^y

2. When it is a time of War, (...) are obtained by the Invisible Agency of the
A^gels of Heaven. Thus in 2 Samuel 5.24. the^e was (...) of going in the Tops of
the M^lberry Trees: Angels caused that Sound; and then David obtained a
wonderful Victory over the Philistines. Thus when Samaria was Besieged by the
Syrians, the Syrians thought they did hear a noise of Chariots, and of Horses,
as i^ it had been the noise of a great Host: whereupon they arose, and fled, 2
King. 7.6. God sent his Angels, and they caused that noise to be heard. Thus in
Jehoshaphat's time, when the Edomites, the Ammonites, and the Moabites did
Combine against Judah, it is said, 2 Chr. 20.22 That the Lord set Ambushments
against them: and then the other two Nations stood up against the Ed^mites, and
after that they destroyed one another. How did the Lord set Ambushments, but by
the Ministry of Holy Angels? Doubtless, the Angels in the shape and appearance
of Moabites, and Ammonites, fell upon them of Mount (...), and then they all
fell upon one another, till the whole Army was destroyed. Sometimes when there
have been but very few, they have obtained mavelous Victories, over far
greater numbers, than themselves, because Angels were with them, and helped
them. In the time of the Maccabees, Judas Maccabeus, with Six Thousand Men,
destroyed above Twenty Thousand of the Enemy. The Historian relates, that when
the two Armies were set in Battle Array, the Jews General began the Battle with
Prayer, Lord, (said he) Thou art the God, who in the time of Hezekiah, did
send thy Angel, to destroy the Host of Sennacherib; send, I pray thee, an Angel
before us. The Lord heard that Prayer: Their chief Enemy was taken Prisoner,
and Five and Thirty Thousand were Slain, by a small number of the Jews; their
Enemies professing, that they saw two men standing, one at the Right, and the
other at the Left hand of Maccabeus, (the Jews General) who kept off the
Arrows, that they could not hurt him. We read also in Histories, how the
Graecians did sometime with small numbers prevail against the Persians. The
Prince of Persia came against the Realm of Greece, with the mightiest Army,
that ever was, which was foretold by Daniel. chap. 11. v. 2. No History, Sacred
or Profane, mentions the like; he had several Millions in his Army: And the
Graecians, with inconsiderable Numbers, Routed and Ruined them; and the Nav^ of
that Prince was Destroyed by Storms: The Profane Historians speak of it as very
strange, that the Persians should have such ill success: only they say, That
Fortune favored the Graecians. But we that have the Scripture know, that the
Angels fought against the Prince of Persia. Dan. 11.20. No wonder, that the
Persians had such ill success in their Affairs, when Angels fought against
them, or that the Graecians prospered, when they were secretly and invisibly
animated by Angels. Therefore,

3. When there are great Revolutions, when mighty Changes happen in the World,
such things are brought to pass by the Ministry of Angels. Hence in Ezekiel. 1.19.
It is said, That When the Living Creatures went, then the Wheels went by them.
The World did Wheel about, according to the motion of the Living Creatures;
namely, the Angels of the Lord. When Nebuchadnezzar, the Emperor of the World,
was Deposed from his Throne, and his Kingly Glory given to another, it caused a
stupendous Change in the Court of Babylon: and this was done by the Angels of
God; It was by the Decree of the Watchers, and the Demand, by the Word of the
Holy Ones. Dan. 4.17. The Angels of Heaven, those Watchers, those Inspectors of
the World, (as was said but ^ow) they did demand it; they prayed for i^; they
petitioned the Great God, that they might vindicate His Name and Glory, on so
great a Tyrant, as Nebuchadnezzar had been. When afterward ^^^shazzar, the
King of Babylon was Slain, and all his Nobles with him, and the City was taken,
and the power of the whole Empire fell into the Hands of the Medes and
Persians, it caused a mighty and an amazing Revolution throughout the World:
but this came not to pass, without the Invisible Agency of Holy Angels. They
that Write the History of those Times, give us to understand that when the
Medes and Persians, under the Conduct of Darius and Cyrus, did Besiege Babylon,
some of the Babylonian Deserters directed Darius to the Emperors Palace, where
they found him, and all his Lords, Drinking, who were all put to the Sword; and
the Scripture gives us to understand, that an Angel by an Handwriting on the
Wall, had intimated to them but a few hours before, that so it should be:
Angels also assisted Darius in keepi^g the Government of that Empire after he
had possession of it. Dan. 11.1. In the first year of Darius the Mede, I (says
the Angel) stood ^o confirm and strengthen him. When the Imperi^l Diadem was
above two Hundred Year^ after, taken from the Persians, and given to the
Graecians, it^ was an astonishing Revolution, and Effected by the Ministry of
Holy Angels. I^ was a wonderful thing, that Alexander with so few should set
upon an Emperor, that had so great an Army; his Friends with all importunity
did dissuade him from it; and many thought him little better than a mad man, to
make such a daring attempt. The Emperor, against whom he came, ordered his
Lieutenants, that they should take Alexander alive, and that they should Sell
his Soldiers for Slaves; yet did he overcome that mighty Emperor. The
Scripture tells how this came to pass, Dan. 10.20. I (says the Angel) will
Fight with the Prince of Persia, and when I am gone forth, lo, the Prince of
Graecia shall come* Lo, (says the Angel) here i^ a wonderful thing, that the
King of Graecia with Thirty or Forty Thousand men, should set himself against,
and preva^^ over the whole power of the Empire of Persia, which was able to
oppose him with millions of Armed m^n. But the Angels of God did by Divine
Appointment, stir up the Spirit of Alexander unto mighty Undertakings: and
thence in the beginning of the 11 th Chapter, it is intimated, that it was by
the Ministry of Angels, that the Kingdom was taken from the Babylonians, and
given to the Persians; and that therefore Daniel might conclude, that when Gods
time was come, to give it to the Graecians, those Angels, that had made the
former Revolution, were able to make the latter also. So when the Roman Empire
of Pagan became Christian, it was a wonderful Revolution. For many years, no
man might be in any place of Power, if he was a Christian: But God so ordered
and altered the Affairs of the World, that Constantine, a Christian, and a good
man, was made Emperor, and all of a sudden, the World was turned up side-down,
and no man was to be in place of Power, except a Christian; The Dragon found no
place in Heaven. This was the greatest Revolution, that ever happened in the
World; and the Angels of Heaven were instrumental in the accomplishment of it.
Rev. 12.7. Michael and his Angels Fought and prevailed against the Dragon and
his Angels. It was the Angels of Heaven then, that did bring about that happy
Revolution. Thus we see, that this Visible, is, by God's Appointment, Governed
by the Invisible World.

II. The Second thing to be inquired into, is, What benefit they that fear God,
do receive by the Ministry of Holy Angels?
For Answer,

1. They are by them preserved from many Evils, that otherwise would befall
them. They do as a guard, stand between them and many dangers, that are ready
to overtake them. The Angels of Heaven are as Nurses to the Children of God.
Psalm. 91.11, 12. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, and they shall bear
thee in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a Stone. As a Nurse holds
the Child she has the care and charge of, in her arms: so they that fear the
Lord, are kept from many a fall, preserved from many a hurt and blow, that
would light upon them, did not Angels look after them. Hence the fearers of God
have special Protections in Journies, that they (...) according to his will.
Thus, when Jacob was to go that great Journey from his Fathers house, in the
Land of Canaan, to his Uncle in Padan Aram, he saw Angels of God Ascending and
Descending, Ge^^ 28.12. To intimate, that the Lord would send his Angels, both
to go with him, and to return with him again: And when Jacob was returning to
the Land of Canaan, the Angels of God met him on his way: There were two hosts
of them, Genesis 32.1, 2. It seems there was one host of Angels, that went with
him from Mesopotamia, to the land of Canaan, and when he came into his own
Country, another host met him to take him under their especial care and
guardianship. So when God calls his Servants to go in great and hazardous
Voyages at Sea, He gives his Holy Angels charge concerning them. Of this the
Apostle Paul had experience, Act. 27.23, 24. When there was a Storm, and the
Vess^l at last cast away, the Angel of God stood by him, and said to him, fear
not, for God has given to thee, all them that Sail with thee. There were
Angels of God with him at Sea, that did incamp round about him there, and for
his sake, about all that were in the same Vessel wi^h him. They that fear God,
are always exposed unto danger, from the Invisible World especially. The Devil
is always watching an Opportunity to do them one mischief or other. Your
Adversary the Devil (says the Apostle) goes about, like a roaring Lion,
seeking, whom he may devour. Therefore the Angels of Heaven are always about
them, to protect and preserve them, from those mischiefs, that their Spiritual
and Invisible enemies are designing against them. The Devils are powerful
enemies: but the good Angels are more powerful than they; Michael and his
Angels, are more powerful, than Satan and all his Angels* And when Instruments
of Satan, that is to say, wicked men, do intend and attempt evil against those
that fear God, Holy Angels oftentimes disappoint them, and so deliver the Lords
Servants from many a Snare Balaam had a mischievous design against the Children
of Israel, but an Angel met him, and disappointed him: The Angel of the Lord
stood in the way for an adversary against him, and said, I we^^ out to
withstand thee, because thy way is perverse before me, Numb. 22.32. And when
the King of Syria s^nt an Army to surround ^othan, and to apprehend the
Prophet, Elisha, an Army of Angel^ prevented them, and d^livered the Prophet, 2
King. 6.17. And when God will have it to be so, the Holy Angels cut off those
that seek the hurt (...) them that fear Him. They kill those wicked men who, if
they were suffered to live any longer would do hurt unto the Fearers of the
Lord. Ha^ the Soldiers in Sennacheribs Army, lived a while longer, they would
have fallen upon Jerusalem^ Therefore did Angels kill an hundred and fourscore
and five thousand of them in one night Herod began to Persecute the Church: had
he lived longer, he would have gone on with hi^ Persecution. Therefore an Angel
was sent from Heaven to kill him.

2. The Angels do not only deliver from Evil; but positive Blessings and
Benefits are conveyed by their Hands. To instance in two or three particulars.

1. They assist God's Servan^s) in their Undertaking^ which are according to
His Will. They make them successful in lawful Undertakings, especially in great
Undertakings. Sometimes they that do not fear God, have Angelical Aides and
Assistances, for the sake of such as do fear him. It was before noted, that the
Angel said of Darius, I stood to confirm and strengthen him: and yet we cannot
say, that Darius was a true Fearer of the Lord. But much more do they assist
them, that do indeed fear him, when they are called to any singular Service for
his Name. It was from this consideration, that Abraham did encourage his
Servant to go on that great Concern, which he was sent to manage, for his
Masters Family: The Lord (said he) before whom I walk, will send His Angel with
thee, and prosper thy way, Genesis 24.40. His way was made prosperous; he did
obtain that which he was sent about, because God sent Angels with him, who
caused his faithful Endeavors to prove successful.

2. The Holy Angels do perform the Office of Tutors unto God's Children. Hence
they are sometimes instructed in glorious Truths, by their Ministry, which
otherwise they would not have been acquainted with. An Angel Informed Daniel,
and said, I am come to give thee skill and understanding. Dan. 9.22. The Angel
that talked with the Prophet Zachary, said unto him, I will show unto thee,
what these be. Zach. 1.9. The Revelation was given to John by an Angel. God
gave it to Christ, Christ to the Angel; the Angel was the Minister that brought
it to John, and John has (...) it to the People of God. Rev. 1.1. Angels (...)
and informed the Shepherds concerning the Birth of Christ: Angels informed the
Disciples, of the Resurrection of Christ, and after what manner he will come
again to Judge the World, at the last Day. And we find in the Scriptures, that
the Fearers of the Lord have been excited unto and directed in, that which has
been their duty, by the Angels of Heaven. Thus Manoah and his Wife, were
directed by an Angel, after what manner they should Educate their Son. Thus
when Elijah was in a strait, whether to show himself to the King or no, An
Angel of the Lord said to him, go and be not afraid, and he arose, and went to
the King. 2 King. 1.15. Thus again, an Angel spoke to the Apostles, and bid
them go, and Preach the Word of Life in the Temple. Act 5.19. It was an Angel
that directed Philip, to go to the place, where he met with a Great man, whom
he instructed in the Principles of Religion: and by means of that man, was a
whole Kingdom Enlightened in the Knowledge of Christ. The Angels, like faithful
Tutors, and Monitors, do sometimes correct and discipline the Children of God,
when they have offended. When Hagar Ran-away from her Mistress, that dealt
hardly with her, an Angel of the Lord said to her, Return to thy Mistress, and
submit thy self unto her Hands. Genesis 16.9. An Angel smote Zacharias, the
Priest, Dumb, for his Unbelief; Thou shall be (...), and not speak, because
thou believe not my (...), did the Angel Gabriel say unto him. Luke 1.20. No
question of it, but that many times God's own Children are smitten with
Diseases, by the Angels of Heaven, to correct them for some Sin they have been
guilty of.

3. The Holy Angels have a great influence, upon the thoughts, minds, and
Spirits of men. Evil Angels inject evil thoughts into the mind. The Devil put
it into the heart of Judas, that he should go, and betray his Master, Joh.
13.1. Evil Angels stir up those Corruptions, that are in the hearts of men.
They have a powerful influence and operation on the Spirits of the Children of
disobedience, in whom they work effectually. Hence the Prophet Micaiah saw the
Lord on his throne, and the host of Heaven round about him, and heard him
saying, Who shall deceive Ahab, that he may go up to Ramoth Gilead, and fall
there: and one said on this manner, and another on that manner: and there came
forth an Evil Spirit, and said, I will go, and be a lying Spirit in the mouth
of all his Prophets: and the Lord said, Thou shall persuade him, and prevail
also, 1 Kin. 22.22. By which it appears, that evil Angels have a great
influence on the Spirits of wicked men. So have the Holy Angels a great
influence on the Spirits of them that fear the Lord, exciting them unto the
things that are good. They have the benefit of Angelical Suggestion, in many
good motions, more than themselves are aware of. It is true, that all Holy
thoughts are originally from the Spirit of (...) Nevertheless, He is pleased
oftentimes to make (...) of the Ministry of Angels therein. Angelical motions
are ab extra. Angels do not dwell in the Souls of Believers, as the Holy and
Eternal Spirit does: nor have they power to make their Suggestions effectual:
they cannot give Life and Grace with the good motions Suggested by them, as the
Spirit of God does. Ministers in Preaching may propose Arguments to men, and
can do no more. The Eternal Spirit only can make those Arguments to prevail.
That which Ministers do externally and visibly, the Holy Angels do after a
Spiritual and invisible manner. Sometimes wicked men have strange Impulses from
evil Angels, whence i^ is t^^t they are hurried on, to the perpetration o^ the
most abominable and enormous crimes. The^ do they become guilty of Blasphemies,
Adulteries* Murders, and sometimes of Self-Murder. So ther^ are sometimes very
unaccountable Motions and Impressions on the Spirits of good men, which are
wrought in them, by the Ministry of Holy Angels whose work it is, to prevent
and disappoint the designs of Satan and of his evil Angels. I remember one
relates a remarkable passage of a good man, that, when he was reading in his
house, he could not rest in his Spirit, but he must step out of doors: which he
had no sooner done, but he saw a Child in a pond of Water, ready to perish
which would have been gone past recovery, had (...) gone out of his doors, just
at that moment. (...) Impression must needs be from a good Angel. And an other
like passage is related in the Life o^ that Holy man, Mr. Dod: One evening
(thoug^ he had other work to attend) he could not bu^ he must go to such a
Neighbors house: when he came to him, he told him, he knew not what he was
come for; but he could not rest in his Spirit, until he had visited him. The
poor man was astonished: for he had in the Violence of a Temptation, put a Rope
into his Pocket, with an intent to have destroyed himself, had not Mr. Dod's
thus coming prevented it. Surely an Angel of the Lord was in this Providence.
Bishop Hall speaks of one whom he knew, that having been for Sixteen years a
Cripple, had these monitions in his Sleep, that he should go and wash in St.
Matherus Well in Cornwell, which he did, and was suddenly recovered. This he
thinks was from Angelical Suggestion. Marcus Aurelius Antoninus did in a Dream,
receive the prescript of a remedy for his disease, which the Physicians could
not cure. A Physician of Uratislavium followed the Counsil he had given him in
a Dream, concerning the cure of a disease which was to him incurable, and he
recovered his patient. It added to the wonder, that a few years after, he met
with that Receipt in a Book then newly Printed. Histories report that the like
to this happened to Philip, and to Galen. If Angels may Suggest things beneficial
unto the minds of men who are Strangers to God, much more unto them that fear
him!

We proceed to inquire into the Reasons, Why the Ministry of Holy Angels is
made use of?

1. The first and great Reason of it is, because it is the Sovereign will and
pleasure of God, to have i^ so, with respect unto his own Glory. Gods Will is
the Reason of all Reasons. We have showed, that He does not make use of Angels,
as though he stood in any need of them, or of their Services. That God, who
made the World, without their help, can preserve the World and His People
therein, without any of them, if He so pleased: But He does use them, for the
same Reason, for which He did Create them, namely his own pleasure. Rev. 4.11.
Thou have Created all things, and for thy pleasure they are, and were Created.
All things, and therefore all the Angels in Heaven, were Created for the
Pleasure of the Great God. S^ are they, all of them, for the same reason, mad^
use of, as Ministering Spirits: and it pleases God to have it so out of respect
to his own Glory. That which is the best End, must needs be God's End, in all
His Works of Creation and Providence. Now the Glory of His own Name, is the
best end. God, who alone is infinitely wise knows, what does best become his
own Greatne^^ and Goodness. And if the Lord did not see that it would be most
for His Glory, that things should be managed by the Hands of His Holy Angels,
rather than by His own Immediate Hand on^y; it would not be as it is. The Lord
is able to Convert men without sending Ministers t^ Preach to them: To heal the
Sick without Phi^sicians; to preserve Humane Societies without Magistrates, to
defend his People from Enemies, without the use of Arms; but it is His Will and
Pleasure, that secondary Causes should be made use of. The like is to be said
of Angelical Protection: God is the Fountain of all our Mercies and
Preservations. Angels and Ordinances are but Cesterns, which it is His Pleasure
to make use of.

2. Another Reason is, That so the Obedience of the Angels may be tried,
exercised and rewarded. By this the Obedience of Angels, and their humility is
tried, whether they will readily stoop unto, and comply with the Command of
God. It is a great Trial of their Obedience, that they should be set as a Guard
to such poor, sorry Creatures, as the Children of men are. What is man, (says
the Psalmist) thou have made him lower than the Angels, Psalm. 8.4, 5. In as
much therefore as they Minister to him, their subjection to the Will of God is
put upon the Trial. It is generally supposed, that the Sin of Reprobate Angels,
was their refusing to comply with the Command of God in this matter: that they
did think scorn of it, to be made Attendants, on such a Creature as man, so
much inferior to them. But the Elect Angels think no Service too mean, that
the glorious God shall see meet to employ them in: and they do by this become
Patterns of Obedience unto us. If the Angels that are so much above us, do most
willingly and gladly comply with the Will of God in whatever He shall appoint
them unto, men ought to do so. If Angels do not think much to look after them
that fear God* then it does become the Greatest man in all the World, to be
willing to serve or promote the Welfare of the meanest Saint, that is upon the
Earth: Angels set a pattern of Obedience in thi^ respect; and thus their
Obedience is exercised* even from the beginning, to the end of the World: for
they continue their Ministration from the beginning to the end of the World:
and when they have accomplished the course of their Obedience, they shall have
their Reward: the^ (as a Great Divine of our own, does well an^ truly express
it) They shall be Rewarded with the contemplation of the Infinite Excellencies
of God, an^ the Enjoyment of him, throughout Eternal Ages which is the greatest
happiness, that any Creature is capable of. And in the mean time, it is no
small honor to the Angels of Heaven, that the should be used in such a
Service; that they should join with the most High God, in that which (...) of
all his Works the most glorious, namely, the Preservation and Salvation of his
Elect.

3. Another Reason, why the Ministry of Hol^ Angels is made use of, is, That so
the Devils may b^ kept in awe, and in a perpetual vexation and tormen^* For,
certain it is, that the Angels of Heaven, have a great awe upon the evil Angels
to restrain their Power, and (...) disappoint them in their maliciou^ Designs;
which they are able to do by the speaking of a word. You see in the ninth verse
of Judes Epistle, that when the Devil was contending about the Body of Moses,
the Arch Angel did but speak a word; He did but say, The Lord rebuke thee,
Satan, and all the Devils Design was at an end presently. The Evil Angels know
the power of the Holy Angels: they know, that they are able to withstand them:
And they do not know, but that they may meet with them at every turn, and
disappoint all that they have been contriving, which must needs be a perpetual
vexation to those Evil Spirits: It is a torment to the Devil to see and behold
an Host of Angels Encamping round about all them that fear God; so that the
Devil is not able to destroy one of them all, because there are Holy Angels
Encamping round about them. And it is a torment and vexation to the Devil, to
see the Holy Angels gloriously and triumphingly employed in Service for the
Great God, and rewarded by him; whilst they in the mean time are made to Eat
the Dust, being rejected and abdicated to the vilest Services, that any part in
the whole Creation are exercised in. It cannot but cut the Devil to the heart,
to see those very Angels, that are of the same nature with him, and with whom
he was once a Companion in Heaven, thus triumphingly Serving God. And what a
tormenting reproach must it needs be, when at the same time he shall hear it
said to him, this might have been thy Employment, and should have been so, if
thou had not by sinning against the Great God, brought eternal damnation upon
thy self.

4. A fourth Reason, Why the ministry of Holy Angeli is made use of, is, That
so Communion and Love may be maintained and increased among those that are
Members of the Glorious Family of God. Some part of God's Family is here upon
Earth; they that fear him are here: But then another part of the Family belongs
to Heaven, namely, the Blessed Angels. I Bow my Knees to the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named. Ephesians. 3.15.
They that Fear God are the Family on Earth: the Angels of the Lord are of the
Family in Heaven: it is meet that there should be a Communion between those
that are of the same Family. We cannot any way be helpful to the Angels, nor do
they need our help in any thing: all our help, it is limited unto the Saints on
the Earth, Psalm. 16.3. My Goodness (says David) extends not to thee, but
unto the Saints, the Excellent in the Earth, in whom is all my delight. We
cannot be beneficial to the Saints in Heaven, or to the Angels there: But the
Angels can help us, and w^ need their help. In that way therefore must the
Communion, which becomes the Members of this Glorious Family, be maintained.
And therefore the Love of Angels unto the Children of God, is confirmed and
increased: Love is increased by kind offices: we see, that Nurses have a
special affection, to the Children that have been fostred by them. So have the
Angels of God unto His Children, that have been under their Care and Education;
those Heirs of Salvation, whom from their Cradle unto their Graves, they have
been fostring and taking care of, they must needs have a great affection for.
Holy Angels, and all such as truly fear God, shall live together in the same
Heaven, World without End. It is meet then, that there should be a great Love
and Friendship between them: This Ministry of theirs must needs cause it to be
so. Thus have we seen the Doctrine Explained and Confirmed.

Before we proceed to Application, it may be needful to remove an Objection or
two.

1. It may be Objected, That they that Fear God, are subject unto the like
Casualties with other men; as much subjected to Dangers and Afflictions, yea,
and sometimes more, then they that do not fear him. Does not the Scripture say,
That all things happen alike to all; there is one Event to the Righteous and
the Wicked, to him that Swears, and to him that fears an Oath? How then can
it be said, that the Angel of the Lord delivers them that fear him, when they
fall into Evils no less than such as do not fear him? Take the Answer in these
following particulars.

1. The Ministry of Angels is limited by the Holy Pleasure of God. Psalm.
103.21. The Angels that do His Pleasure. And therefore so far as it is the
Pleasure of God, to have them to secure, or to deliver his Children from
outward Evils, they are not wanting to do it. But sometimes it is God's Holy
Pleasure to have it otherwise, they must be suffered to fall into great
Temptations, for their good, and that God may have Glory thereby. Yea, not only
such as truly fear God, but such as fear him above many, that are Eminent
Servants and Fearers of the Lord, very sad Temptations and Afflictions in the
World* may befall them. God sees it meet to have it so. We see this in the
Instance of Job, who wa^ Eminent for the Fear of God: There was none like him
in the Earth, that did Fear God, and Eschew Evil, so much as he: And for a long
time the Angels delivered him; they kept of the malice of Satan, from taking
any effect up^on him. Thence the Devil complained, Th^^ there was an Hedge
round about. Job. The Hedge of Divine Protection by the Ministry of Holy
Angels, the Devil could not break through, not get over: He did therefore get
leave of God to fall upon Job; and the Angels were by, when the Devil had that
liberty granted to him: those Sons of God were by, and did hear the Devil
begging and obtaining leave to fall upon Job: Then they might not oppose. Then
Evils came upon him from day to day; not but that the Angels could have
diverted those Evils, and delivered Job from them all, if so had been the
Pleasure of God; but they knew that God had appointed otherwise. So when any
outward Calamity befalls a Child of God in the World, the reason of it is not,
that the Angels of the Lord are not able to prevent the Calamity, or that they
are any way invigilant or negligent in that which is their Charge; they always
do what God commands them, as in the Psalm but now, Ye his Angels that do His
Commandments. They know, what the Pleasure of God is, and act accordingly.

2. It is possible, that such as belong to God, may, (and too often they do)
give way to Sin and Temptation, and so deprive themselves of the Protection of
God, and His Angels. By Sinning against God, they provoke him to countermand
and suspend the wonted Protection of His Holy Angels. For, their Ministration,
and the Charge that they have to keep and guard us, does run with this express
limitation, that we shall keep our selves in the way, that God has bid us keep
in Psalm. 91.11. He shall give his Angels charge over thee, to keep thee in all
thy ways. But if men go out of their way, then they go from under the Charge of
those Holy Angels. When they sin against God, they go out of their way: when
they hearken unto the Tempter, he will certainly lead them out of the way: when
they sin against God, they Run away out of the Hands of Holy Angels, and do
thereby put themselves into the Hands of Evil Angels; they deprive themselves
of Divine, and consequently of Angel Protection. We have an awful instance
concerning this, in 1 King. 13.22, 24. You read there of a man of God, that was
sent unto Je^^boam: and the Lord commanded him, that he should neither eat nor
drink, till he returned home to his own House again. As he was returning, an
old lying Prophet came to him, desiring him to turn in to his house, to eat and
drink there. No (says the man of God) I may not do so: for, God has charged
me, that I should not. The Lying Prophet replied, I am a Prophet as well as
thou, and an Angel has spoken to me, and told me, that thou must come into my
house. The poor man of God was deceived, and did so, and the issue was, He
never lived to come Home; but a Lion met him by the way, and killed him. This
was, because he went out of God's way, and so from under God's Protection. It
is indeed, a blessed truth, that God will not utterly depart from any of his
Faithful Servants; he will not utterly forsake them; for so his Covenant is,
Heb. 13.5. I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. Nevertheless, he may for a
time, and he may in a great measure forsake them, in case they sin against him:
As it was with Sampson, though he did not apprehend it at the first: Judge.
16.20. He wist not, that the Lord was departed from him. Sampson had given way
to Temptation; and now the Lord was departed from him. So it is true concerning
the man, that fears the Lord, the Holy Angels do never utterly depart from
him, yet for some time, and in a great measure, they may; that he shall not be
so favored with Angel Protection, as sometimes he was, when he Walked more
closely with God. As the Holy and Eternal Spirit does never wholly depart from
true Believers, Joh. 14.16. He does abide with them for ever: this
notwithstanding, he may in a great measure withdraw from them: David was
sensible of this, and that made him pray, as in Psalm. 51.11. Cast me not away
from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me. God sometimes takes
away h^s Holy Spirit from his own dear Children, as to the quickening and
comforting presence thereof: therefore they had need be careful, that they
grieve not the Holy Spirit, and that they quench not the Spirit. True Believers
may grieve the Spirit of God, and grieve him away from them, so as that the
Comforter, that should relieve their Souls, shall be far from them. When any of
Gods Children do behave themselves, so as to grieve his Spirit, the Angels are
also grieved: and if the Spirit of God goes from them, the Angels of God go
from them too; for they are perfectly directed and acted by the Eternal Spirit,
Ezekiel. 1.20. It is said, that whithersoever the Spirit was to go, thither the
Living Creatures went. If Gods Children shall give way to sin; if they shall
become guilty of any Scandalous iniquity, the Spirit of God withdraws from
them, and the Holy Angels go away with him.

3. When they that walk in the fear of God, fall into great Afflictions and
Miseries, Holy Angels are with them, notwithstanding those Temptations. Angels
are with the^ to support and comfort them, in all their Temptations. Our
blessed Lord was tempted and Victorious over all his temptation: It is
recor^ded that then Angels came, and ministered unto (...)* Math. 4.11. So it is
as to Believers in their Spiritua^ conflicts, though the ministration of Angels
is invisible and unperceivable by them that are concerned therein. When they
are in Agonies of Soul, Holy Angels desert them not. We read concern^ng the
Lord Jesus Christ, that when he was i^ his Agony, there appeared Angels unto
him from Heaven, strengthening him, Luke 22.43. Then (as on^ observes) the
Master was comforted by the Ser^vant: an Angel from Heaven came, and
strengthened the blessed Lord Jesus in his Agonies. But th^^ are Believers
oftentimes comforted in their de^jections by the secret Ministry of Holy Angel^
We see it in the Prophet Isaiah: He was dejected and disconsolate in his
Spirit, at the consideration of his exceeding sinfulness. We hear him crying,
Woe is me, I am undone! I am a man of unclean lips: Alas, (says he) though I
have been called to the Work and Office of a Prophet, I have not used my tongue
for God so much as I should have done* now a Seraphim did comfort him in his
dejection; an Angel came and said unto him, Thy sin is purged, thine iniquity
is taken away, Isa: 6.7. Daniel was disconsolate, in thinking of the Afflicted
state of the People of God; his Spirit was much exercised and dejected in him,
but an Angel came unto him when in these dejections and temptations, and tell
him, that he was, a man greatly bel^ved, Dan. 10.11 Angels do enable Gods
Children to bear their temptations. It is wonderful and astonishing, to
consider, how the Martyrs were sometimes enabled to bear the greatest Tortures
and Torments, that the Devil could invent for them: They had Angels with them.
Those instances of Babyl^s and Theodorus are famously known. Martyrs that were
put to the Torture of the Rack, some of their friends afterward inquired of
them, how they could possibly endure such intolerable pain; they told them,
that when they were first on the Rack they were in great pain, but there seemed
a young man to stand by them, who refreshed them with cold Water, that after a
while they felt no pain, but their Torments were a pleasure to them, and they
were grieved, when they were taken down from the Rack* One of our English
Martyrs, in the time of Popery, in the midst of the Flames, could say to those
that were Spectators, Papists ask for a miracle, here you may see one: I feel
no more pain in this fire, then if I were in a soft bed. Surely then the Angels
of Heaven were sent to quench the Violence of fire.

4. God in due time will send his Angels to deliver his Servants out of all
their Troubles. Sometimes Angels are sent to pluck them out of the very mouth
of destruction. As it was with Lot and his Family: Angels did lay their hands
upon him, and on his Children, and delivered them from the burnings, Genesis
19.16. Such things still happen, though in a more unperceivable way. I could
relate examples to you, of some who have by (...) strange Instinct, removed
from the places when they were: they have no sooner gone out (...) doors, but
the house has fallen down: had they stayed there but a minute or two longer,
they had perished in the Ruins. Doubtless there is a Secret Influence of the
Angels of Heaven, in such things as these are. Sometimes, when the Lord
Servants are in the Jaws of death; he sends his Angels to deliver them. So it
was with Daniel* My God (says he) has sent his Angel, and ha^^ shut the Lions
mouths that they have not hurt me. Dan. 6.22. That he saw an Angel, it is not
said; but, he saw the Lions did not hurt him, and therefore might conclude,
that God sent his Angel to shu^ the mouths of those Lions. Sometimes when they
were deprived of liberty, Angels have be^^ the Instruments of restoring it to
them again. The Apostles were cast into the common Prison, and an Angel came in
the night, and set open the Prison-doors, Act. 5.19. So it was with Peter; he
was cast into Prison, and the next day was to have been made a Sacrifice: but
God sent his An^gel to deliver him, Act. 12.11. Sometimes me^ that have been
deprived of Health, have had i^ restored to them, by the Ministry of Holy
Angels. An Angel did trouble the Waters in the Pool of Bethesda, and who-ever
first stepped in afte^ the Angel had troubled the Waters, was mad^ whole,
whatever disease he had, Job. 5.4. Evi^ Angels do frequently bring diseases,
and goo^ Angels frequently remove them. And when they ^^at fear God, have done
all the work that He has for them to do in the World, then he sends his Angels
to fetch them away to Heaven. So are they by the Angels of the Lord delivered
out of all their troubles. When Elijah had finished his course, there came a
Chariot and Horses of fire, that is to say, Angels from Heaven, and did carry
away Elijah thither. So when they that fear God, have done and suffered all
that He has appointed for them, then he sends Chariots and Horses of fire, to
fetch-away their Souls. So are they by the Angels of the Lord delivered from
all evil.

Object. 2. But there is another Objection to be answered, viz. That it is the
Lord that delivers those that fear him; He is the Preserver of men: and shall
we ascribe their Deliverances to Angels? Is not that a Dishonor to God, to
attribute that which is His Work to Angels, who are his Creatures?

The Answer is clear, That God does it by them; the Glory of Deliverances does
not belong to the Angels, but to God, who sets them on work: It is said in this
Psalm, concerning the Righteous man, Verse. 20. That the Lord keeps all his
Bones, not one of them is broken; but this He does by giving his Angels Charge
over them. The Lord is said to do that which is done by Angels immediately. It
is said, God overthrew Sodom, Amos 4.16. And yet the Angels did it Genesis 19.13.
The Angels said, We are sent to de^stroy this place. Well then, though Angels
did it, God did it, and that by their Ministry. When the Enemies of them that
feared the Lord, were routed and ruined by Holy Angels in Jehoshaphat^ Times;
nevertheless, That Battle was the Lords. 2 Chronicles. 20.15. The Glory of that
Victory belonged to God, and not to them, when He was pleased to effect it by
their Agency and Ministry. They have all their power from the Lord. What
strength they have, it is God that has given it to them: and their Commissions
are granted to them by the Lord. The Charge that they have, it is God that
gives them that Charge: He shall give his Angels charge. Psalm. 91.11. And
therefore they don't act, till they have order from God. When they have done
one work, that they are set about, before they enter upon another, they must
have a new Commission, and new Instructions, new Orders from that God, who is
the Lord of Angels. Hence, Ezekiel. 1.24. It is said, that the Living Creatures,
When they stood, they let down their Wings. When they had done, what God set
them about, they let down their wings, humbly waiting for a new Commission;
they don't stir, till they have new Orders from the Great God, and then away
they Fly: but till then, their Wings are let down. So that it is God, that does
it by their Hand. It is no dishonor to God, to make use of Instruments in his
Work: and if He sees meet to use a thousand Instruments in one work, it is no
dishonor to him, but rather a Discovery of His Greatness and Glory.

Thus for the clearing of the Truth before us.

For the USE of it.
I. By way of Information.

Inference 1. Hence, although Angelical Apparititions are not to be expected in
these days; nevertheless, the Ministry of Holy Angels, does continue still.
Their Appearings are in a great measure ceased, but their Working is not
ceased, but continues as in former times. Indeed, there is not need now, as in
the Days of the Old Testament, for Angels to appear visibly unto men, because
the Scripture is now perfected, there must be no Addition made unto the Written
Word of God, which now is sufficient to direct men in all cases whatsoever,
that may concern their Salvation and Consolation. There was need for an Angel
to appear to Daniel visibly, to instruct him, concerning what should befall the
People of God: and of an Angel to appear to the last Apostle John, to inform
him, what should befall the Church in all future times. There is no need of that
now: we must look into what Daniel and John have written; and there we may see,
as much as is meet for us to be acquainted with. So that Angelical Apparitions
are not frequent in these Days: Only Evil Angels do appear more often than good
Ones. No wonder, because they are of more Earthly Inclinations, than those
Spirits, that dwell above. Evil Angels do often appear; very true, and
sometimes pretending to be good Angels too. The Apostle says, 2 Cor. 11.14.
That Satan does transform himself into an Angel of Light. He comes to men, and
appears visibly to them, and pretends to be an Angel of Light, and will give
them good counsel, will pretend to be for Truth, and for Holiness, although he
does intend nothing less. I could mention to you instances respecting this.
There was about four and twenty years ago, in a place belonging to the King of
Denmark's Dominions, a Young man, that a Demon appeared to, on a Lord's Day,
in white shining Garments, and gave him excellent good counsel, telling him,
that he must not sin, as formerly he had done; and that he must call upon
others to amend their ways, to leave their Cursing and Swearing, and other
Sins; and that he should pray to God every day three times; and he would join
with him in singing a Psalm too. And yet this Demon did at last appear to be
an Angel of Darkness. There was in Geneva, the Son of a Senator there, that was
miserably imposed upon, by a Demon, pretending to be a good Angel; that would
complain of the Unbelief of some, who would not (though many did) look upon him
as an Angel, that was sent from Heaven. And yet this Demon, that appeared in a
glorious manner, was at last discovered to be an Unclean Devil. I do the rather
mention these things, because I understand, that something of this nature has
lately happened in New England, which I am persuaded, will in the issue appear
to be a Delusion of the Evil One, that pretends to he an Angel of Light.
Wherefore it is an unwarrantable and a very dangerous thing, for men to wish,
that they might see, and that they might converse with Angels. I could tell you
of some, that have done so, and God has been provoked with them for their
curiosity and presumption, and has permitted Devils to come to them,
pretending to be good Angels, whereby they have been deceived and undone. But I
say, although Angelical Apparitions are not to be expected; nevertheless, their
Ministry is still continued, and it shall be so: As long as there shall be any
Fearers of God upon the Earth, so long shall there be Angels of Heaven to
Encamp round about them: That Promise, Psalm. 91.11, 12. does belong unto
Believers, even to the End of the World; that God will send his Angels, and
give them Charge over them, to keep them in all their ways, and to hold them up
in their Arms, that they may not dash themselves against a stone. Yea, as long
as there shall be any of the Elect of God in the World, so long shall there be
the continuation of the Ministry of Holy Angels Heb. 1.14. Are they not sent
forth to be Ministering Spirits, to them that shall be Heirs of Salvation? They
then that are Heirs of Salvation, in all Ages of the World, are privileged
with this Ministry of the Angels.

Inference 2. For men to despise and abuse them that fear the Lord, must needs
be an evil and dangerous thing. For they have Angels to guard them. The Angels
of Heaven are far from despising them. There are no Nurses in the World, that
do so tender the Children Educated by them, as the Angels do the meanest Saint
on Earth committed to their Care: Says Christ, Despise not one of my little
ones: Despise them not, says He, For I say unto you, that in Heaven their
Angels do always behold the Face of my Father, that is in Heaven. Math. 18.10.
God gives His Angels a charge to look after them: and what will you despise
them* Certainly, if the eyes of men were opened, to see who they are, and what
a guard they have, they durst not despise them. As for them that truly Fear
God, it may be said of them, as wa^ said of Gideon's Brethren, Each one of them
resembles the Children of a King. Thus as to those that Fear the Lord, each
one of them resembles a King. There is not a Monarch upon Earth, that has
such a guard about him, as every one that truly fears God, has round about him
continually. The Soldiers of Heaven do attend him, where ever he goes. If the
eyes of wicked men were enlightened (as once the Eyes of the Prophet's Servant)
they would not despise Holy men. When Elisha's Servant was sore afraid, because
of Enemies, that were come to apprehend his Master, the Prophet prayed, and
said, Lord, open his Eyes: and presently he saw the Mountain full of Horses and
Chariots of Fire: his Master's House was all surrounded with Angels. Did men
see this, they would not cast contempt upon those that fear God. To abuse them,
is a dangerous thing: One of those Angels, that they have a whole guard of, is
able to destroy all the Enemies, that they have in the whole World. It is said
concerning the two Witnesses, That Fire goes out of their mouth, and devoureth
their Enemies: If any one will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed.
Rev. 11.5. When they call upon God, he sends Seraphims, yea, Horses and
Chariots of fire against their Enemies. How does fire go out of their mouths?
It alludes to that of Elijah. When a crew of wicked men, came to lay hands on
him, and said to him, Come, thou man of God, the King has sent for thee: He
replied, If I be a man of God, let fire come down from Heaven, and consume thee
and thy fifty: and fire came down from Heaven, and immediately destroyed them
all. 2 King. 1.10, 11. There were Angels at hand, ready to consume the Prophets
Enemies with (...). You may observe sometimes, that persons who are full of
enmi^y, and will be spitting their venom, against one that has a special guard
of Angels to attend him, blasting strokes from Heaven fall upon them. The
Angels of that Holy man, have heard what has been spoken, and know what has
been designed against him; and have taken his part. Take heed then, how you
wrong any man, that is dear to God, and to His Holy Angels.

Inference 3. Hence they that f^^r God, should be above the fears of outward
evils, since they have God and his Angels to take care of them. If God be for
us, who can be against us? Says the Apostle. So if the Angels of God, are by
his appointment for us, we need not fear, though we should be in as eminent
danger, as David was in, when amongst the Philistines in Gath. Angels are able
to defend us, and will do so, so far as a gracious God and Father shall see it
meet for them to do. We have more for us, then are against us, if we have
Angels to be for us, as the Prophet said unto his Servant, when they were
surrounded with enemies: the Servant was afraid; Alas Master, how shall we do?
said he: Fear not, says the Prophet, for there are more with us, than are with
our enemies. And God opened the eyes of the young man, and he saw the mountain
was full of Chariots and Horses of fire, round about Elisha, 2 King. 6.17. viz.
Angels, that did so appear at that time. What though men are in danger; if they
have a strong convoy, they do not fear. This is the case of Gods Children,
whilst in this World: they are in danger; they are like men at Sea, and in the
midst of enemies: the Pirates of Hell are seeking to lay hands on them: But
they have a strong convoy; they have Angels of Heaven to be a guard unto them:
and therefore need not be afraid of what their Enemies can do unto them. They
that fear the Lord, may be above the fear of danger, when they go to Sea; only
let them look to their call; let them look to it, that they are in Gods way;
then He will send his Angels to look after them. So in great and hazardous
Journies by land, they need not fear, but they shall go forth; and return in
safety: If it be good for them to be preserved and protected, it shall be so,
notwithstanding what ever evils may attend them in their way. Angels are more
able to defend them, than all their enemies are able any way to hurt them. It
was said concerning the Egyptians, Isa. 31-3. They are Flesh and not Spirit;
they are poor weak Creatures. But now the Angels are Spirit and not Flesh: why
then should they that fear God, be afraid of what their enemies can do unto
them, who are flesh, and not spirit, when they have those to be their Guardians
and deliverers, that are spirit and not flesh? And they need not fear sickness
and diseases; God will send his Angel to deliver them, if preservation from
such a distemper shall be best for them. Psalm. 91.10. There shall no evil
befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh thy dwelling. How so? It
follows in the next verse, for he shall give His Angels charge over thee. So he
does wonderfully sometimes. I remember a Lea^ned man relates a remarkable
Providence to this purpose, of the Chancellor of Navar, that heard a voice in
the night, calling him by his name, and bidding him go out of that Town,
because within a few days a terrible Plague would be there, and make the Town
desolate: He took the warning, and so escaped the danger. God has strange
ways, by his Angels to deliver his Servants in times of sickness and common
danger, when it shall be most for his glory. And they need not fear, what evil
Angels can do unto them. The Lord for holy ends may suffer you to fall into the
hands of those cruel Creatures: but if you fear God, there are Holy Angels by,
that will not forsake you* that will enable you to endure, whatever God shall
see mo^^, to suffer you to be tempted and afflicted with. And therefore be not
afraid: only fear God, and trust in Him. And then, suppose the worst that can
be supposed; suppose the Lord should give leave to those enemies to kill your
bodies; such a thing may, and sometimes has happened to the dear Servants of
God: nevertheless, their Souls are safe, as being in the hands of Holy Angels.
The Lord will say to his Angels, You Angels of mine, go and look after such a
man, or woman, I commit to you the care and charge of their Immortal Souls, to
bring them safe to Heaven, after they have suffered, what is my pleasure to
have them endure. That the fearers of the Lord may and ought to be above the
fear of outward evils, from the consideration of the Ministry and Guardianship
of the Holy Angels, is evident from several things; which we may take notice of
and consider. For,

1. They are of all Creatures the most powerful: they are wonderful in
strength, Psalm. 103.20. Ye his Angels, that do excel in strength. They are not
only strong, but they excel in strength. Therefore are they styled, Mighty
Angels, 2 These. 1.7. They are stronger than men, greater in power and in might,
as the Apostle speaks concerning them, 2 Pet. 2.11. One Angel is able to
destroy all the men in the World. You have been told, that one Angel has that
might, that power, that i^ God should give him a Commission, he is able to
destroy the whole World before him. It is Luthers assertion, Unus Angelus est
pot entior, quam totus mundus. Put the whole World together, and they have not
the strength of one Angel. We see what powerful Creatures they are, by the
things that have been done by them: Gates of Iron cannot stand before them. When
an Angel came to deliver Peter, the Iron-gate opened of its own accord. Act.
12.10. Nay, an Angel is able to make the very earth to shake, as has formerly
been noted from Math. 28.2. Where we read, that there was a great Earth quake,
for the Angel of the Lord descended from Heaven. All the men in the World cannot
make the earth to quake; but an Angel from Heaven is able to do it: such mighty
Creatures are they. And we see what they can do, by what the Angel did in
Senacheribs Army, and by their destroying Sodom and Gomorrah, by thunder and
lightning, and a terrible earthquake. Those Citys were swallowed up in a
moment, and they were Angels of God th^^ did cause it to be so. Well then, be
not afraid, as long as you have such mighty powerful Spirits as these are, near
unto you, to defend and safe guard you against all your enemies.

2. There are many of them to befriend us. An host, a whole Army of mighty
Angels of the Lord round about them that fear him: Their number is exceeding
great: They are a great Company, Psa. 68.11. There are thousands of them, Verse.
17. The Chariots of God (his Angels, by whom he obtains his Victories over the
World, are the Chariots of God) they are twenty thousand, even thousands of
Angels. Nay, there are Millions of them. Daniel saw Millions of Angels, Chap.
7. v. 10. And so did John, Rev. 5.11. There were many Angels, says he, and the
number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands.
Nay, they are innumerable, Heb. 12.22. We are come unto an innumerable company
of Angels. No man can say, how many Myriads of them there are: Is there any
number of these Armies of God? Job 25.2. Al^ho' the Interpretation of one of
the Ancients is not solid, that by the lost sheep in the parable mankind is
meant, and that by the ninety and nine the Angels are intended, and that
therefore there are ninety and nine Times as many Angels as men; Nevertheless,
it is most certain, that the Angels of Heaven are more in number by far, then
all the men on earth: put all the men on the face of the earth together, they
are but a small number, in comparison of the glorious Angels of the most high
God. Hence Christ said to Peter, Think thou, that I cannot pray to my
Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve Legions of Angels,
Math. 26.53. A Legion is six thousand six hundred and sixty six. Twelve Legions
made the Roman Army* What (says Christ) though all the power of Rome is set
against me, I could have more than that at a words speaking: I could have more
Legions of Angels, than are men in the Emperors Army, to save me, if I would;
or it may be, considering there were Twelve of them together (Christ and the
eleven Apostles) when the Lord spoke these words, He would give them to
understand, that He could obtain a Legion of Angels to defend each one of them.
The Lord has so many Angels, that he can spare multitudes of them; Armies of
them, to attend every one of those that fear him in the World. As for one
David, the Lord can send whole Armies to encamp round about him, and deliver
him Why then should they that fear God, be afraid of evils in the World?

3. The Angels are ready to do any Service for them that Fear God; ready to do
it, as soon as ever God shall but speak the word to them: They hearken to the
Word of God, Psalm. 103.20. Hearken to it; they stand and hearken, when once the
word will go out of the mouth of God, and then they go without any delay.
Indeed, Heaven is their proper Habitation; nevertheless (as before was
intimated) they can fly from Earth to Heaven, and from Heaven to Earth, in a
very little time: They are therefore represented in the Scripture, as Flying,
and that swiftly. Dan. 9.21. The Angel Gabriel (who appeared to the Prophet in
an humane shape) Was caused to fly swiftly. In a little time, they can go from
one end of the World, to the other, even like Lightning. Psalm. 104.4. He makes
His Angels Spirits, and His Ministers a flaming fire. Angels that are the
Ministering Spirits, round about those that fear God, they fly like lightning,
like a flame of fire. You see Lightning go from the West to the East, in the
twinkling of an eye: So do the Angels of Heaven, in a moment of time, go from
one end of the World to the other: and when God sends them on any Errand, they
don't turn back, nor stop by the way, until such time as they have done that
which the Lord has appointed them unto. Ezekiel. 1.12. The Living Creatures, they
went, and turned not, when they went, but went on, till they had dispatched the
Work the Lord had commanded them to perform. These things considered, they that
fear the Lord, may have great comfort, notwithstanding the evils and dangers,
which in this wofu^ World, they are liable unto. It was an express^^on full of
Faith, uttered by a late faithful and laborious Minister of Christ, when some
wondered to see him so cheerful under great Afflictions, I (said he) Have God
for my Father, Christ for my Redeemer, the Holy Spirit for my Sanctifier,
Heaven for my Inheritance, Holy Angels for my Guardians, and shall not I then
rejoice?

Inference 4. We may here see, that the Angels are not to be adored, although
they are to be Loved and Honored. They are Creatures, and therefore not to be
adored. We may love Creatures, but must not worship them; we must not give unto
them, that which is God's due alone: Religious Worship is so. Psalm. 76.11.
Bring Presents unto Him that ought to be feared. God is he, and He only, that
ought to be feared, as to a Religious Fear. And therefore when the Devil
desired to be worshipped* the Lord Jesus Christ said, Get th^e hence, Satan,
for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
Serve, Mat. 4.10. When Manoah would have presented an Offering unto the Angel
that did appear to him, Judge. 13.16. says the Angel, If thou will offer a
^urnt-offering, thou must offer it unto the Lord. Burnt-offerings, and so all
Religious Worship, must be Offered unto God, and not unto an Angel. That which
we make an Object of Divine-Worship, we acknowledge as the chief good. Now God
only is so; Mat. 19.17. There is none good but one, that is God. Angels, yea,
the Holy Angels, compared with God, we cannot say, they are good, they have not
the goodness, as to be an Object of Divine Worship. That which we worship, we
acknowledge to be, The Alpha and Omega, the first Cause, and the last End of
all things: which cannot be affirmed of Angels, but of God only. Rom 11.36. Of
him, through him, and to him are all things, to whom be Glory for ever. The
Glory of Divine Worship is for ever his due, and his due only, for that of him,
and for him are all things. Moreover, the Worshipping of Angels, is expressly
condemned in the Scripture. Col. 2.18. Let no man beguile you ^f your reward,
in a voluntary humility, and Worshipping of Angels. It is Will Worship,
voluntary humility: there is no Command in the Scripture to worship them; and
when men do, as the Platonic Philosophers did, (and as some that call
themselves Christians in these days do) pretend, that they are not worthy to
come to God immediately; but therefore they will go to him by Angels, and
worship them, and desire them to present their Supplications unto God: this i^
voluntary humility. Such do not Own the Head, as the Apostle speaks in the 19
th. verse; they put Christ out of his Office, to whom it belongs to Offer up
the Prayers of his People to God. The Holy Angels themselves have forbid men to
worship them: The Apostle John being amazed at the Glory of the Angel that
appeared to him, fell down at his feet to worship him. Rev 22.9. says the
Angel to him, See thou do it not, for I am of thy Fellow servants. Men may not
worship those that are their Fellow Servants. The highest Angel in Heaven, and
the meanest Saint upon the Earth, are Fellow Servants, they Serve the same God,
and must worship him, and him only. We may not invocate Angels: we may not pray
unto them: There is the same Object of Prayer, that there is of Faith. Romans
10.14. How shall they call on him, on whom they have not believed? We may not
call upon, or pray unto him, that we may not believe on. Now God alone is the
Object of Faith: We may not pray unto any one, but unto him that is Omnipresent
and Omnipotent, unto him that has power to do for us whatever we can desire of
him. We stand in need of many Blessings, which none but God can give unto us;
which no Angel in Heaven can bestow upon us. We need the pardon of sin: and who
can forgive sins, but God only? We need Sanctifying Grace: and who can give us
Grace, but God alone? As for the Angel that Jacob did pray unto, he was not a
Created Angel, but the Son of God, who is called an Angel in respect of his
Office, as being sent by God. Therefore Jacob called the name of the place,
where he wrestled with the Angel, Peniel, Genesis 32.30. which signifies, The Face
of God, for (says he) I have seen God. The Angel he prayed unto, was God; so
the Prophet Hosea declares, Hos. 12.4, 5. He had power over the Angel, even the
Lord of Hosts, that is his Memorial. That Angel is called by the name of
Jehovah; and that glorious Title, Of the Lord of Hosts, is attributed unto him.
All the Hosts of Heaven, all the Angels there, are commanded by that Angel,
whom Jacob did worship: He therefore was no other than the Son of God himself,
who is God. But although we may not pray unto created Angels, who Minister unto
us, and are our Fellow Servants; this notwithstanding, they are to be, though not
adored, yet loved and honored by us: There is an Honor due to the Blessed
Angels, an Honor of Moral Reverence. We are to honor those persons, who are
many ways, and on many accounts, our Superiors: we ought to Reverence them: we
reverence a man, that is known to be Eminent for his Parts, Learning and great
Accomplishments. It was said of Solomon, All Israel feared him, because they
saw the Wisdom of God i^ him. 1 King. 3.28. As for a man, that is full of
wisdom, knowledge, and understanding, reverence is due unto him: So it is much
more to one that excels in Piety and Holiness. It is said of Herod, Mark 6 20.
That He feared John the Bapti^^, knowing that he was an holy man, and a just.
The Image of God is to be reverenced, wherever it does appear: Now the Image
of God does appear in the Angels more than in any Creatures in all the World.
They then are to be honored by us: But it is only a Fraternal, not a Divine
Honor, which is their due: Cultus Fraternae Societatis. And as we are bound to
honor and reverence, so likewise to love those Holy Spirits. They are of the
same Family with us: then we ought to love them: Both they and we are of God's
Family: The Angels and Believers on Christ, have the same Father. They are
Children of the same Father, though on a diverse account: Believers are styled,
The Sons of God, Job. 1.12. And so are the Angels styled, Job 1.6. They join
with us in praising our Lord Redeemer. We ought then to Love them. They rejoice
at the welfare of the Children of men: it is a joy to them, when good happens
to them that fear God, their Lord and ours, Luke 2.11, 13. You see here, how
glad the Angels were, when there was good tidings for us men: The Angel said
unto the Shepherds, I bring you glad tidings of great joy, unto you a Savior,
Christ the Lord, is born. And there was with the Angel a multitude of the
Heavenly host, Praising God and saying, Glory to God in the highest, and on
earth Peace, good will toward men. When God did manifest his good will toward
men, the Angels were glad, and did break forth into holy Praises, because there
is by Christ Peace made between Heaven and Earth. Thus also they rejoice at the
Conversion of the Elect of God. Hence it is said, There is joy in Heaven over a
sinner that does repent, Luke 15.7. And how joy in Heaven? in Verse 10. It is
explained by saying, There is joy among the Angels over a sinner that
repents: They rejoice to see, that there are Souls New born, to fill up those
places, which the Apostate Angels have left Vacant in Heaven. They are glad to
see newborn Souls come there. Again, the Angels do very great Service for God,
and many kind Offices for us, therefore they are to be both loved and honored
by them that fear him.

Inference 5. It is a very Angelical, and therefore an honorable thing to be
Serviceable. This is to be as the Angels of Heaven are. When God does employ
any man in doing Service for his Name, he does put very great honor upon that
man. 1 Samuel 2 30. They that honor me, I will honor. And how does God honor
them? by using them in his Service, that is the Honor there especially
intended. God will employ them in his Service, and in that respect honor them,
just as he honors the Angels of Heaven. The glory of the Saints at the
Resurrection, is expressed by that of their being made like unto the Angels,
Luke 20.36. They shall then be Angels fellows. And so are they that are
employed in Services for the great God, they are like unto the Angels, they are
made Fellow Servants with the Angels of Heaven, for, they are all of them the
Servants of the great God, and are on that account styled his Ministers, Psalm.
103.21. Ye Angels, ye Ministers of his that do his pleasure. And let me say to
you, There are thousands of Millions of those Ministers in the Court of the
great King of Heaven, Dan. 7.10. There are ten thousand times ten thousand that
stand before him, and that Minister unto him. It is then a glorious thing to be
employed in Service for God. It is accounted a great honor and happiness, to
be a Servant to an earthly Prince, as the Queen of Sheba said to Solomon, 1
King. 10.8. Happy are thy men, and happy are these thy Servants, which
continually stand before thee. But then what is it to stand before God and the
Lord Jesus Christ, as a Servant of his? It is a glorious thing. When God would
put honor upon Moses after his death, he calls him his Servant. Josh. 1.2.
Moses my Servant is dead. There are some, unto whom the Scripture gives the
name and title of Men of God. 1 Samuel 9.6. It was said of Samuel, that he was a
Man of God, an Honorable man. He was therefore an Honorable man, because a
Man of God. What can be more honorable than this, that if it be asked
concerning one, Whose man is that? Whose Servant is that man? The Answer must
be, He is God's man, he is a man of God? It is a Title fit for an Angel of
Heaven. Manoah called the Angel that had appeared to his Wife, A Man of God,
Judge. 13.8. So then, to be employed in Service for God, is ^o small mercy: To
be Serviceable to the World is a mavelous happiness; it is to be like the
Angels of Heaven, who do great Service, even for the World: They prevent Evils
from coming on the World. To be serviceable that way, is an honor and
happiness, and indeed Angelical. What a World would this be, did not God use
Holy Angels to prevent the miseries that otherwise would overwhelm it? What
work would the Devils make in the World, did not the Lord by his Holy Angels
prevent them! The Devil has made this World become miserable enough, but he
would make it become more miserable, to be a mere Hell, but that the Blessed
Holy God imployes Angels to prevent him in his Designs. And more especially to
be serviceable to them that fear the Lord* is a glorious Angelical thing indeed
To do Service for the People of God, to promote the Salvation of them, whom the
Son of God has Redeemed with his own Blood; she highest Angel in Heaven, has
not a more glorious employment then that is. Heb. 1.14* Are they not all
ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister for them that shall be the Heirs of
Salvation? So that none of them all, not the best or greatest of them, has a
more honorable Employment, than that of promoting the Welfare of them* that
shall be Heirs of Salvation.

Inference 6. If the Angels of the Lord Incamp round about them that fear him,
here is uncomfortable news for such as do not fear God. They may not pretend
unto this glorious privilege of the Guardianship of Holy Angels. They cannot
say, that the Angel of the Lord does Encamp round about them, and will deliver
them. Three or four particulars evincing and confirming the Truth o^ this
Inference, may be here mentioned.

1. Until such time as men fear God, they cann^^ know, that the Angels are
concerned for them. It i^ true, that God charge his Angels with his Elect
before they fear him: but they cannot know this, and therefore cannot have the
comfort of it, before they turn to the Lord* A man cannot know his Election
before his Conversion. Hence the Apostle speaks, as 2 Pet. 1.10. Give diligence
^ make your Calling and Election sure. He that would be sure of his Election,
must be sure of his being effectually Called. If he has the true fear of God
in his heart, he may know, that he is appointed an Heir of Salvation, and so
may know, that the Angels have a charge given to them concerning him. For, if
God had not from all Eternity intended that man's Salvation, he would never
have put his fear into his heart. So that when once Grace is wrought in his
Soul, he may be sure, that the Angel of the Lord Encampeth round about him: But
before that, he cannot have the comfort of this Truth.

2. It is certain, that the Angels do not delight in those that fear not God.
They don't care to be in their Company. As God himself delights not in them; By
Nature we were the Children of Wrath: they that are still in their Nature, in
their natural ^nconverted State, are Children of Wrath; The Wrath of God abides
on them that believe not: He is angry with the wicked every day. And as an holy
man cannot delight in the company, and conversation of those that are ungodly:
David says, All my delight is with the Saints on Earth: and again, I am a
Companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy Precepts. So
must it be concluded concerning Holy Angels, that they delight not in communion
with such as do not fear God. If holy men cannot do it, Angels who are holier
than they, can never do it. It is a very offensive thing to an holy man, to see
others do things that are inconsistent with the fear of God, to hear them speak
such words, or (...) them do such deeds, as cannot well stand with the true
Fear of God. It is a grief and vexation to him, that has a righteous Soul
within him, as it was to Lot. Much more then are the Holy Angels offended
thereat: Doves cannot endure to be where there is an ill scent; you know it
drives them away. So when men indulge themselves in the ways of Sin, the
Angels, those Doves of Heaven, fly away and cannot endure their company. It is a
celebrated saying o^ Luthers, Ubi non est gratia* ibi n^^ lo^um habet Angelorum
cust^dia. Graceless men may not pretend to the Guardianship of holy and
glorious Angels, unto whom they are abominable.

3. Evil Angels have a fearful power over them that fear not God. They are said
to be under Satan's Power. Paul was sent to the Gentiles, that he might turn
them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26.18.
They then that are no^ turned from darkness, turned from sin, but remain still
in their unconverted State, are not turned from the power of Satan: the Devil
does claim a right in ungodly men, as those that are his own; he claims them as
his house that he has power to be in. Thus the unclean spirit, in Mat. 12.43.
says, I will return to my ^ouse. A wicked man is the Devils House, where he
dwells, and where he rules. Sinners are the cursed children of the Devils
Family, and are therefore called, The Seed of the Serpent, Genesis 3.15. The
Devil, he is the Serpent, wicked men are the seed, the children of that
accursed Serpent. And the Apostle says, He that commits Sin, is of the
Devil* for the Devil sins from the beginning. 1 John 3.8. As Children are o^
their Father, so are they that commit sin, of the Devil; his image they bear,
and him they imitate, as Children their Father. And they are his Slaves, woeful
Slaves in the Kingdom (...), Taken Captive by the Devil at his will, 2 Timothy
2.26. They are his Captives and Slaves: he does even what he will with them: If
the Devil put them upon doing this or that wickedness, they will do it. I^ he
tempt them to Curse and Swear, they will do it: And if the Devil tempts them to
Uncleanness, or to Lying, and such like abominable things, they will do as he
would have them.

4. As for such as shall continue in their Unregene^ate State, that shall live
so, and dye so, the Angels are their Enemies. The Angels of the Lord, that
Encamp round about them that fear him, and deliver them, are Enemies to them
that fear him not. When Balaam persisted in his wicked way, the Angel that met
him, if he had not humbled himself, would have been his death. There have been
thousands of men in the world, concerning whom it is certain, (though they were
not sensible of it, until after their Souls were out of their Bodies) the
Angels have been their death: The Angels of Heaven have secretly smitten them,
and they have dyed. As for such, David's Prayer is made good against them, Psalm.
34 4, 5. Let the Angel of the Lord chase them: let their way be dark and
slippery* and let the Angel of the Lord persecute them. That Prayer will be
remembered against the Enemies of God and his People, to the end of the World:
And when Death comes, the Angels forsake them, and leave them in the hands of
Devils. How should the Soul of a wicked man ever get to Heaven? he must pass
through an Army of Devils, thousands of millio^^ of them that lie in the way.
And the good Angels forsake him; they will not, nor may they take any care of
his Soul: and therefore he can never get to Heaven; and at the Day of Judgment,
the Angels will be the Ministers of Justice, by whom the Wrath of God shall be
Executed on sinful Creatures. In the time of the Harvest the Reapers gather the
Tares into Bundles to bu^n them. Math. 13.30. The Harvest is the end of the
World, the Reapers are the Angels, the Tares are wicked men. The Angels of the
Lord will at that day bundle up wicked men, to cas^ them into the Fire that
never shall be quenched. This is the portion of those that fear no^ God. But
thus by way of Instruction or Inf^^mati^n.

The Last Use is for Exhortation.

II. There is a double Exhortation before us.

1. Let them that Fear the Lord, praise and glorify His Name for this
privilege of the Ministry and Guardianship of His Holy Angels. We ought to
bless God, because he gives his Angels charge to Encamp round about us, and
deliver^us. Alas! we are not sensible as we should be, how much we are beholden
to God, for the Ministry of his Angels. It is a sad thing, that this is no more
thought of by Christians. I remembea a Worthy Divine justly complains of it,
that although Angels are frequently spoken of in the Scriptures, they are
therein expressly mentioned above two hundred and sixty times over; yet it is
rare to hear Ministers Preach on such a Subject, or to instruct and inform
their people, how much we are beholden to God for His Angels: and it is rare to
hear Christians praising the Lord for their Ministry: That which God has
promised to every Believer, all Christians ought to praise him for: But the
Guardianship of Angels is promised to every one that belongs to Christ. Psalm.
91.11. Mat. 18.10. Heb. 1.14. we should praise the Lord for all his benefits.
Psalm. 103.2. Therefore we may not forget to praise him for so great a benefit
as that of his appointing his Angels to Encamp round about us. As long as we
know in general that we have Angelical Aids and Assistances, and that
ordinarily, though we know not in particular when they are more peculiarly
helpful to us, we sin if we express not our Thankfulness to God for so high a
favor. And although men truly pious may be too forgetful of their duty in this,
as well as in other matters; nevertheless, as for the person who is so
Atheistical in his Principles, as to deny this Honor due to God, he has cause
to fear that himself is a Servant in Satan's Kingdom, and one whom the Holy
Angels have no kindness for. Let us consider a few things, which show what
cause they that fear him, have to praise him on this account.

1. The Angels take care of the Elect of God, all their lives long, from the
beginning to the end of their days. Throughout the whole course of their
lives, from the Cradle to the Grave, Angels are charged with them. Not only
after they are adult, and have learned to fear and serve the Lord. but before
that. If they are ministering Spirits, to them that shall be Heirs of Salvation,
then an Heir of Salvation does no sooner come into the World, but the Angels
are charged to look after him. There are many heirs of Salvation, that dye
before they come to adult age, whom nevertheless the Angels have a charge over:
The Scripture speaks Of Little Ones, that have their Angels. Mat. 18.10.
Despise not one of these Little Ones (says Christ) for their Angels do behold
the Face of my Father in Heaven. Although such as are little in their own
esteem, and little perhaps in the esteem of the World, may be intended in the
Scripture, yet a literal Interpretation must not be excluded. Christ took a
little Child into His Arms, and said, These Little Ones have their Angels: As
for them that belong to the Election of God, the Devil is set against them to
destroy them, as soon as they come into the World, only Angels do prevent it:
As one speaks well, The Devil does ramp about the Elect of God, whilst they are
in their swaddling clothes: But they have Holy Angels to protect them against
the rage of Hell: as we read concerning the Man-child, Rev. 12.4. as soon as he
was born, the Dragon would have devoured him. Which words although they are
figurative, they allude to that which is really true. An Elect Child is no
sooner born into the world, but there are Devils that would destroy it; but God
sets his Angels to preserve and deliver it: The Lord Jesus Christ, when in a
state of infancy, had his life secured by the Ministry of Angels. Mat. 2.13.
and so is it with many of those that belong to the Lord Jesus Christ, as the
Heirs of his Salvation: and when they are past their Infancy, in adult age, and
when they come to Old Age, still Angels are with them, Encamping round about
them, and deliv^ring them from many an unseen evil, which otherwise had proved
their destruction: They are with them in all places, where the Hand of God
leads them: When they are in this place, Angels are with them; and when they go
into another Land, Angels are with them there: From Childhood to Old Age it is
so: As the Lord speaks in Isai. 46.3, 4. From the Womb unto Old Age, I will
bear, and I will carry and deliver them. How does the Lord bear his Chosen Ones
from the Womb, and unto their Old Age? Truly, He does it by the Hands of
Angels; He gives Holy Angels a charge that they shall bear them in their Arms,
and hold them in their Hands.

2 Consider, if we fear God, the Angels will not forsake us at death. They will
be with us all our lives long; yea, and at and after death too: when we must
forsake all the World; when our Bodies and Souls must part for a time; when our
Souls forsake our Bodies; the blessed Angels will not leave us, until they have
brought us into the presence of Christ in Glory. The very Heathen Philosophers,
some of them had sentiments concerning this thing: They did not only believe,
that the Souls of men are Immortal, but that at the time of Death, Evil Angels
do carry away the Souls of wicked men, into a place of Torment: and that Good
Angels carry the Souls of good men into a better World than this is: Doubtless,
they had that knowledge from the Jews, as they had many notions (though they
corrupted them) concerning the Invisible World from them, and the Jews from the
Patriarchs and Prophets of old. The blessed Scriptures of God are exceeding
clear concerning this: When Elijah was Translated, there appeared a Chariot of
Fire, and Horses of Fire; that is to say, Angels in that form, to carry him up
to Heaven, 2 King. 2.11. So when Believers leave this World, there is a Chariot
and Horses of Fire prepared to conduct them to Glory: Hence is that Luke 16.9.
Make to your selves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness, that when ye
fail, they may receive you into Everl^^^^ng Habitations: When ye fail, that is,
when you dye, or cease to be in this World; they may receive you, that is to
say, that they whose office it is to receive you, namely, the Holy Angels, that
they may receive your Souls into their Arms, and carry them upon their Wings
into Everlasting Habitations: and therefore in the Parable concerning the Rich
man and Lazarus, it is said of Lazarus, that when he dyed, he was carried by
the Angels into Abraham's Bosom, Luke 16.22. that is, to a place of blessed
rest and repose: for, the words evidently allude, as to the History of Abraham
and his faithful Servant Eleazar, so to the Jews manner of Feasting, who as
they sat at meat, one did lean on the Bosom of anoth^r. Dives, notwithstanding
all his grandeur, never had such Attendants, as poor dying Lazarus had: Dives
never had a guard of Angels to surround him, and to conduct him, where he
should find rest, as we see dying Lazarus had. The Souls of Believers, being
separated from their Bodies, before they can get ^o Heaven, they must go through
the Devils Country: the Air wherein we breathe, is so: A Soul that is carried
to Heaven, passes through the midst of all the Pi^ates of Hell; but then there
is no danger, since they have a glorious convoy of Angels. When the Devils see
that Convoy, they dare not stir or come near the blessed Souls, which they
behold environed with Angels, whom the Lord Christ has sent to be as a convoy,
to bring them safe to be where he is, that they may behold his Glory. And
inasmuch as the Holy Angels are by the Lord commanded to take care of the
departing Souls of them that fear him, it well becomes dying Saints to believe
this; although they do not see Angels, yet to believe, that they are with them,
and that they will conduct them to that Heaven, which is prepared for them. It
was a great act of Faith, in an Viz. Mr. Samuel Newman, Pastor of the Church at
Rehoboth in New England. The same who wrote the Concordance to the Bible.
eminently Faithful Minister of Christ, who Dyed in New England, about thirty
years ago, that when he perceived the Approaches of Death, he was no way
concerned at it; but after he had spoken a few solemn words to those about him,
and now (s^^d he) You Holy Angels come and do your Office. He had no sooner
uttered these words, but he Dyed* Angels were about him, they heard what he
said, and were ready to conduct that Holy Soul into the presence of the Lord
Jesus Christ It is reported of the famous Morney, (who by his Excellent
Writings, did great Service for the Church of God in his Day,) that when dying,
he could say, I am taking my flight to Heaven: here are Angels standing ready
to carry my Soul into the Bosom of my Savior. That Learned and Holy man, Dr.
Holland, He those usual Farewell to his Scholars was, Commendo vos amor^ Dei,
et odio Papae, his last words were, O thou Fiery Chariot which came down to
fetch up Elijah, you Angels that attended the Soul of Lazarus, bear me into the
Bosom of my best Beloved. Another Eminent and Holy Person, when Dying, had
eyes opened to behold Angels, saying to those that were near, Oh! that you had
your eyes opened to see what I see: I see millions of Angels: God has
appointed them to carry my Soul up to Heaven, where I shall behold the Lord
face to face. What cause then have we to Bless God for Holy Angels.

3. Consider what benefit they that fear the Lord, shall receive by the
Ministry of Angels at the Last and Great Day. Those Angels that do accompany
their Souls, to the Mansions prepared for them in their Fathers House that is
above, will come back again with them, at the day when there shall be a joyful
meeting, between their Bodies and Souls, that have been for so long separated
from each other. All the Angels in Heaven will be here at that Day: not an
Angel in Heaven, but will come down into this lower World at that day. Christ
will come, and all the Holy Angels with him. Mat. 25.31. Christ will make use
of them as his Heralds; he will send them forth to Sound the Trumpet, and
Summon all the World to come and stand before the Judgment Seat of the Son of
God. And do we think, that they will then do nothing for the Heirs of
Salvation? yes, surely. For although the Work of Resurrection, like that of
Creation, will (as a great Divine observes) be Effected by the Almighty Power
of God alone, without the interveniency of Angels, or Secondary Finite Agents;
nevertheless, they will then be Employed to the unspeakable comfort and joy of
all the Children of God. The Blessed Angels will go down with them, to the
places where their Dead Bodies shall be revived, and then will carry those
Bodies unto the Right Hand of Jesus Christ, where he shall sit to Judge all the
Earth. Mat. 24.31. He will send his Angels, and they shall gather together his
Elect, from one end of Heaven to the other. They must gather them together, and
must bring them to the Lord Jesus Christ at that day. And then the Angels will
separate all wicked men from them, so that none but Saints shall be together,
which is a wonderful happiness. What a blessed spot of Earth would that be, if
there could be a place found, where there are none but Saints, none but good
men, and those made perfect too. Thus shall it be at that Day; and this will be
effected by the Ministry of the Angels of Heaven: The Son of Man shall send
fort^ his Angels, and they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that
offend, and them that do iniquity. Mat. 13.41. In that Kingdom there will be
none but real Saints of God. The Angels will drive away the Wicked, that none
shall come there, as of old they kept Apostate Adam out of Paradise; And they
will come in as witnesses of the fidelity and piety of them that have feared
and served God in sincerity. It is therefore said, that we are made a spectacle
unto the Angels. 1 Cor. 4.9. Angels do observe us, while we are acting our part
on the Theater of the World: They observe how we acquit our selves in doing and
suffering according to the Will of God: and if we acquit our selves well, they
will come in as witnesses for us at that Day. Therefore did the Apostle charge
Timothy, to behave himself in the Work of his Ministry as became him, because
of the Elect Angels: I charge thee before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the Elect Angels, that thou observe these things, 1 Timothy 5.21. because Angels
are witnesses thereof, and will come and testify for those that have been
faithful to God, and to the Lord Jesus Christ, at that day. Oh! then, let us
bless God for the Ministry of his Angels! Why has God revealed so much in his
Word concerning his Angels, but that he might have praise from us on that
account: Because some have indulged themselves in vain and curious unscriptural
speculations, others say it is dangerous to discourse and think of Angels. But
i^ we keep to the Scripture, we may as safely discourse of Angels, as of the
poorest worm on the Earth. I say again, Why is it, that God has in his written
Word spoken so much concerning his Angels? Is it that we should give glory to
them? They all with one voice say, Do it not. But it is, that we might give
glory to God on the account of what they do for us. Let us not thank Angels,
but let us thank God for his Angels.

2. We proced to the other Brnch of the Exhortation before us. Be we careful to
approve our selves such as that the Lord may cause his Angels to Encamp round
about us. If we have such a Guard, we need fear no Enemies in life or in death.

You will say, But what is to be done by us, that so we may be thus privileged
and safeguarded.

For Answer.

1. We must make sure, that we have an interest in Jesus Christ. For, all the
Angels of Heaven are at His Command, who is their Lord and General. The Man
Christ Jesus commands the living Creatures: He sits on a Throne in the
Firmament, which is above ove^ their heads; and they con^inually receive Orders
from him. Ezekiel. 1.26. The Cherubims were at the two ends of the Mercy's Seat,
to note, that the Angels do continually wait upon Christ: Their Wings were
stretched forth covering the Mercies Seat, signifying their ^^^diness to Serve
the Lord Christ; and their Faces were toward the Mercies Seat, implying the
joint consent and agreement o^ the Angels herein. Exodus 25.19.20. Our Lord
would have his people know, that the Blessed Angels are all at his dispose.
Therefore has He declared it from Heaven, saying, I Jesus have sent mine Angel
to testify unto you these things in the Churches. Rev. 22.16. If the Lord
Jesus, who says the Angels are his, shall say to this or that Angel in Heaven,
Go thy way, there is such a Servant of mine, take thou the care of him, it is
done immediately. And it is by means of the Mediation of Jesus Christ, that we
obtain this privilege of the Ministry of Angels. The Angels of God ascend and
descend on the Son of Man. Joh. 1.51. It is by means of the Son of man, by
means of Jesus Christ, that the Angels of God do ascend and descend for us, as
for Jacob of old* Christ is the Jacobs Ladder which ^oucheth Earth and Heaven,
and joins them both together by his Mediation. If Christ be ours, His Holy
Angels are ours too If ye are Christ's, then all is ^ours Hence the Apostle
speaks of things in Heaven that are by Christ reconciled: There are Souls in
Heaven indeed, that are reconciled to God by means of Jesus Christ; which some
take to be the meaning of that Scripture: But it is moreover true, ^^at there
are Angels in Heaven, who are by Christ reconciled, not to God, whom they have
not offended, but to us. When we had sinned, those Creatures in Heaven, those
Holy Spirits, were offended at us, but Jesus Christ has caused friendship to
be between Angels in Heaven and Saints on Earth: If we belong to Christ, we are
for his sake dear to his Angels: They take pleasure in doing good Turns ^or
them that are by Faith united to Christ, be they never so mean in the World. I^
in Christ, we are the Angels Fellow Servants.

2. Let us be careful to walk in the Fear of God. If his Angels Encamp round
about them that fear Him: let us then keep in his fear. Remember what you have
lately heard from Prove. 23* 17. Be thou in the Fear of the Lord all the day
long: The way to have the Protection of Angels all the day long, is to be in
the Fear of the Lord all the day long. Oh! take heed of going out of God's way:
His Angels have a charge to keep those that keep in his way: Therefore are we
greatly concerned, not to go out of God's way; give not way to sin and
temptation; you will not only offend God, but grieve and offend Holy Angels if
you do. Oh! how the Angels lament it, when they see a man that fears God, doing
that which ill becomes him! When they see a man that fears God, give way to the
corruptions of his own heart, how do the Holy Angels (though we hear it not)
lament over that man! They are grieved to see it. But on the other hand, Oh^
how do the Angels rejoice, when they see a man walking closely with God, always
serving, always doing something or other for God; how do the Angels rejoice
over that man, and delight to be with him! Be therefore much in the exercise o^
the Fear of God. Exercise your selves unto Godliness. Be constant and frequent
in Religious Duties: Angels love to see it. Be much in Prayer to God in Jesus
Christ, that is the way to have Angels with you. It is noted of Cornelius, that
he was a man that feared God, and prayed always. Act. 10.2. Now an Holy Angel
came to him at the time when he was praying: And be much in Mourning for sin*
that also is the way to have the company of Blessed Angels with yo^
continually. This you see in Daniel; he pray^ and mourns for sin, and sets
himself very often by Fasting and Prayer in secret before the Lord, to beg
mercy at his hands; and (says he) while I was speaking and praying and
confessing my sin, and the sins of my people, yea, whilst I was speaking in
Prayer, Gabriel touched me. Dan. 9.20, 21. The Angels of Heaven have a special
charge given to them concerning those that are much in mourning for sin. We
read in the Prophet Ezekiel of six men, that had brought their Weapons with
them, that is to say, six Angels. Angels are called men; as the Angel Gabriel
was called the man Gabriel, so they are called six men, because they appeared
like men; they had slaughter weapons in their hands, they were to make dreadful
destructions and desolations in the World. But the Lord Jesus Christ says to
them, Set a mark on them that sigh and cry and mourn for the abom^nations that
are done in Jerusalem. Says Christ, I have a small company of gracious,
humble, praying Souls in Jerusalem, who mourn for the sins of the times, do you
my Angels have a special care of them, and come not near any of them to hurt
them, when you are destroying all the World before you. Ezekiel. 9.4, 6.

3. Let us imitate the Angels of Heaven. Let us endeavor to be as like them as
may be, to become as Angelical, as our state of Infirmity will permit us to be.
We should imitate Angels in respect of Serviceableness. The Angels are
instruments of good to the World. So ought we* to as many as possibly we can:
we should endeavor, that the World may fare the better for us. The Angels are
in a p^culiar manner serviceable to the Church of God. Let us then in our
several places and stations do all the Service we can, for the Church of God,
in our generation; and we should be like them, in respect of obedience unto the
Will of God. They are Patterns of Obedience unto us Mat. 6.10. We must
ende^vour to do the Will of God on Earth, as it is done in Heaven, namely among
the Angels that are there. They are constant and steady in their Obedience:
they don't only begin to Serve God, but go on. Ezekiel. 1.9 The Living Creatures
went and returned not. An Angel is never weary in doing service for God. They
are never well, but when they are doing some Service or other for the Blessed
God: so should it be with us. The Angels burn in their zeal for God: they are
Seraphims (which signifies, Burners) on that account* So ought we to be,
Fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, and to be zealous in good works: This is
to be like an Angel. If we are like the Angels in respect of Holiness, after
the Resurrection we shall be like them (and that not only as to our Souls, but
our Bodies too) in respect of Glory and Immortality. In the Resurrection they
are like the Angels of God in Heaven, Mat. 22.30.

4. Let us remember, that the Eyes of Angels are upon us. God has his Angels
every where: Those Spirits of God are sent to and fro throughout all the Earth.
Did men remember this, it would by the Blessing of God, be a means to keep them
from much sin, and so of keeping Holy Angels near unto them. Why should thou
sin before the Angel? Eccles. 5.6. If a man when tempted to commit a sin,
should behold an Angel saying to him, Oh! do not this abominable thing which
the Lord hates, would it not restrain him. Such a sight would make as graceless
a man as Balaam was* afraid to go on wi^h his in^ended wickedness. Indeed, the
first and chief motive that should make us careful and watchful ^ver our selves
in all our ways, is the consideration of the Presence of God, and of the Lord
Jesus Christ, that the Eyes of the Eternal God, and of Jesus Christ the Son of
God, whose eyes are as a Flame of Fire, are upon us, but also this of the
Angels is to be improved as a motive to Obedience. So we see the Apostle in the
place before mentioned, does from this consideration incite Timothy* to the
greater circumspection: I charge thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and
the Elect Angels. Not only the remembrance and meditation of the Eye of God and
of Christ, but of the Elect Angels, should move us. The Angels do observe us in
all places; they observe how we Worship God in solemn Assemblies. The Apostle
requires that there should be modesty and decency of behavior in
Church Assemblies, because of the Angels. 1 Cor. 11.10. They come into
Church-assembly: For Christ has his Throne there: He never sits on his Throne,
but there a^e many Angels to attend him. How many Angels are in this Assembly,
I know not, but this I know, there are many to observe how I Preach, and how
you Hear the Word of God. David says, Before the Gods I will sing praise to
thee, Psalm. 138 1. which the seventy express by saying, I will sing unto thee
in the presence of Angels. Yea, and Angels observe us in our Families, and in
our Closets and Retirements also: and without doubt they make report concerning
us before the Great God: They say, Lord, There is such a Servant of thine, we
see that he walks before God with a perfect heart in his House: we see that he
is often at Prayer alone, and that he mourns for sin, we are witnesses of it:
and what shall we do more for that Servant of thine, do the Angels say. Let us
remember these things; and if we act accordingly, it will not be long before we
shall see these Angels, that now you only hear of; but cannot see: It will not
be long before we shall see them. And as the Lord said to his Prophet, Zech.
3.7. If thou will walk in my ways* and if thou will keep my charge, I wi^^
give thee places to walk among these that stand by. Who were they? concerning
whom it is said, These that stand by* They were Holy Angels. Keep my charge,
and walk in my ways, says the Lord, and thou shall (...) shortly in the
Galleries above, among the Angels of God there: So shall it be. There are
Angels (...) by this day. Let us be careful to walk with God now* and within a
little while, we shall walk with Holy Angels in the Galleries of Heaven, where
they will tell us wonderful things, concerning what they have done for us,
which we little think of now; how they delivered us at such a time, how they
were with us at such a place, how they prevented such and such designs from
taking effect against us. And then shall they and we join together in
Ev^^lasting Hallelujahs to God and to Jesus Christ. You see in the fifth
Chapter of the Revelation, how the Twenty four Elders and the Angels all concur
and harmonize in ascribing Praises and Glory unto God in Jesus Christ, saying,
Blessing, Honor and Glory unto Him that sits upon the Throne, and unto the
Lamb for ever and ever. Thus shall it be in that blessed day (which the Lord
hasten) when we shall be in the Heavenly Jerusalem, with the Spirits of Just
men made perfect, and with the Innumerable Company of Angels.

The SIN and MISERY OF THE FALLEN ANGELS.
Explained and Improved according to SCRIPTURE REVELATION.
2 Pet. 2.4. God spared not the Angels that Sinned.


THere were in the Primitive Times (as there are in these days) men, who although
they did call themselves Christians, had apostatized from the great Truths of
the Gospel, embracing Fundamental Errors in Religion. The Apostle in the
beginning of this Chapter, shows, that such cannot Escape the Destroying
Judgments of Heaven, which would unavoidably come upon them. And this he proves
by an Argument taken from the Example of what had befallen other Sinners. There
are three exceeding awful Instances here mentioned. The First is that of the
Sinning Angels. The Second is that, which befell the Apostate Old World:
Notwithstanding, there was a World of them, (the Lord knows how many Thousands,
how many Millions there might be) nevertheless they were all destroyed,
excepting one small Family. The Third Instance, is, that Of Sodom and Gomorrah,
and those Citie^ that were Condemned by an Eternal Overthrow. When they sinned
against God, he punished them with the Vengeance of Eternal Fire. The words at
present before us, fall under the first of these Examples, namely, that Of the
Angels which sinned. I have spoken many things to you concerning the Holy
Angels, who never sinned against God. It may not be unsuitable to discourse
something concerning the Reprobate Angels, who have sinned, and are damned for
it. When it is said, God spared them not, the meaning is, that he did show them
no mercy; that he made them become the Subjects of his Wrathful Judgments; that
he did not forgive their sin, nor did ever make an offer of mercy to them.

The Doctrine therefore to be insisted on, is, That the Holy God has made the
Angels which sinned, Examples of Judgment without mercy.

This Doctrine may be cleared in several Propositions.

PROPOSITION I. That although all the Angels were in their first Creation
without sin, nevertheless, many of them did soon after that, Sin against the
Great God their Glorious Creator.

There are diverse things contained in this Proposition.

1. That all the Angels were once without Sin. As for the Angels that sinned,
there was a time* when They were in the Truth, as it is said of them, Job.
8.44. Their First Estate was a State of Integrity. They were once adorned with
the Glorious Image of God: and on that account they were The Sons of God, Job
38.7. the Sons of God, in respect of their being like unto him, and made after
his Image in their First Estate. They did not come sinful out of Gods Hands:
that could not possibly be, for then God should be the Author of Sin, which
it is impossible that he should, as the Apostle James proves. God cannot be
tempted with evil, neither tempts he any man: Every good and perfect gift is
from above, and comes down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no
variableness nor shadow of turning. Jam. 1.13, 17. All good is from God, says
the Apostle: and therefore evil, moral evil, sin, cannot be from him; for then
he should be variable and subject to change, as Creatures are, which the
Blessed God is not: and therefore He is not the Author of sin. The Angels then
that sinned, were pure and spotless, as they came out of His Hands: Those very
Angels, which are now in Hell, were once in Heaven. Hence it is said, That they
left their own Habitation. Jude 6. Heaven was their proper place and
habitation, their Native Country, as we may so speak. Those Apostate Angels
who are now blaspheming in Hell, there was a time, when they were praising God
in Heaven. When the Foundation of the Earth was laid, All the Sons of God sang
and shouted for joy: all the Angels; those that are now Blasphemers of him,
were then shouting for joy, in admiration at the Wisdom and Power of their
Creator, whom they did then behold laying the foundation of this Earth. Those
Angels that are now evil, were once good, and they continued to be so for a few
days. For on the sixth day God saw every thing that He had made, and behold it
was very good. Genesis 1.31. If all the Works that God had made, were good on the
sixth day after the Creation began, the Angels that have sinned, were then good.

2. The Rebrobate Angels did not continue in their Sinless state, for any long
time. For, although they were most excellent and glorious Creatures, yet they
were but Creatures; and being Creatures, they were Mutable, and because
mutable, therefore Peccable, that is, in a possibility of sinning and falling
from God. Absolute immutability is a Divine Property: it cannot be affirmed of
any, but God alone. Mal. 3.6. I am the Lord, I change not. It cannot be said of
any besides the Lord, that he cannot change. Austin gave a judicious Answer to
that enquiry, How could Angels, that were such excellent and glorious Creatures
in their first estate, not having any one to tempt them as man had, how could
they sin, and loose their happiness? His Answer was, Non sunt Deus, They are
not God: and* therefore were subject unto change, and in a possibility of
falling from Heaven. He charge his Angels with folly, Job 4.18. The Angels
are chargable with folly in this respect. It is a Scripture Expression, Wise as
an Angel of God. Nevertheless* the wise Angels are and always were the
Subjects of a ^^mparative folly: compared with the only wise God, they are
foolish things. And when once they sinned, they were to be charged with
infinite folly. For them to offend and fall out with their Omnipotent Creator,
and by loosing his favor to loose their own happiness, was stupendous folly in
the fallen Angels. As for the particular sin, which the Apostate Angels were
guilty o^, the Scripture is not so clear in revealing what it was; and
therefore it is not for us to be positive in the determination of it.
Nevertheless, it is very probable, that God might try their Obedience unto the
Moral Law, by some positive Precept o^ other. As he tried man's Obedience by
that positive Precept respecting the forbidden fruit on the Tree of knowledge
of good and evil: so we may conceive, that he tried the Obedience of the
Angels, by some positive Precept. It is also a probable conjecture, that the
Lord told them (and Commanded them) that they should all be Ministering Spirits
for man, and that this they would not stoop unto, man being far their
inferior. To be sure there was pride in the sin which the Angels became guilty
of, as indeed there is in every sin. Hence it is said, that a Bishop must not
be a novice, lest being lifted up with pride, he fall into the condemnation of
the Devil. 1 Timothy 3.6. The Devil was condemned to eternal fire, because of the
sin of pride. But how, and in what particular that pride discovered it self,
the Scripture has not declared unto us. This notwithstanding several things
are certain from the Scripture. It is certain, that the Angels, some of them,
did sin against God: So the Apostle expressly declares here. And by the Apostle
Jude, it is said, that they kept not their first estate, but left their own
habitation. And hence the Scripture speaks not only concerning Good Angels, but
concerning Evil Spirits. We read in the Gospel of certain Women, who had been
healed of Evil Spirits and infirmities. Those Spirits had possessed them and
made them sick. In particular and by name ^here was Mary Magdalen, out of whom
went seven Devils. Luke. 8.2. So that there are Angels, who are called Evil
Spirits and Devils. We find in the Scripture, that Christ gave his disciples
power against unclean Spirits. Mat. 10.1. They are said to be unclean Spirits,
not only (though partly on that account) because they excite wretched men unto
unclean lusts, but because they themselves are defiled with sin. They are
polluted, and have made themselves hateful and abominable in the sight of the
holy God, against whom they have sinned. And it is moreover certain, that these
Apostate Angels did early corrupt themselves. It was within a short time after
the world began. John tells us, that the Devil sinned from the beginning, 1 John 3.8. And our Savior Christ has told us, that the Devil is a Liar and a
Murderer from the beginning* Joh. 8 44. That is to say, from the first
beginning of the World, or within a short time after the Creation. The Jewish
Doctors (many of them) ^ave Conjectured that the fallen Angels sinned on the
second day after the Creation began; and they suppose that to be the reason why
there is no divine approbation mentioned concerning the work of that day, as
there is of the other. But there is no solidity in that conjecture. For what is
spoken Genesis 1.10. relates to the work of the second, and not of the third day
only. It seems clear from the Scripture, that there was no sin in the world for
six days after the beginning. Genesis 1.31. Nevertheless, It is evident, that the
Angels fell before man did, for it was the Devil, that did tempt man to disobey
the Commandment of God, which could not have been, if he had not himself sinned
against God before that. It is yet further clear and evident from the
Scripture, that more then a few of the Angels sinned. There were vast
multitudes of them that fell down from Heaven to Hell. No doubt but one was the
Ringleader in that rebellion, whom the Scripture calls by the name of, the
Devil, and by the name of Satan, and whom the Jews were wont by way of contempt
to call by the name of Beelzebub: That Lucifer, (as he uses though not so
properly to be called) who is become the Monarch of Hell, did not fall alone,
nor perish alone in his iniquity, there were mighty numbers of them that did
join with the great Devil, in the conspiracy against the most High. Hence the
Scripture speaks of the Devil and His Angels, Mat. 25.41. His Angels. So that
there were many of them, that were concerned in that first Transgression and
Rebellion against the Lord. It is said, Ephesians. 2.3. That the Devil is the
Prince of the Power of the Air. So that there is a Power, an Host, a vast Army
of those Evil Spirits, that did join with the Devil, in setting themselves
against the Great God. How many, is not for us to say, the Written Word of God
not speaking any thing as to the quantity of their number: only it is manifest
from the Scripture, that there are far more Angels that have sinned, far more
Devils then there are men in all the World. There is not a man in the whole
world, but there are Devils to tempt him continually. And if so, they must
needs be more in number than men are. We read in the Gospel of no less than a
Legion of Devils in one poor miserable man. Luke 8.30. You read there of a
possesed man, and Christ demanded of the Evil Spirit, what his name was: The
chief Devil among them made answer, It is Legion, for we are many. A Legion is
six thousand six hundred and sixty six. Now then, if the Devil has such vast
numbers of Infernal Spirits under him; if he has such troops of them, as that
he can spare no less than a Legion to afflict, and as it were to keep Garrison
in one poor miserable man: what prodigious numbers of Evil Angels must there
needs be.

Thus you have seen the first Proposition confirmed? We proceed to the Second.

PROPOSITION. II. That God has made the Sinning Angels examples of Judgment
without Mercy. Therefore it is here said, God spared them not. He never did
make any one tender of Mercy to them. He did not pardon their offense, nor ever
will do. The truth of this is evident from several things.

1. In that the fallen Angels are for the present i^ a miserable condition.
They are now at this instan^ in a state of misery. They have lost their
happiness for ever, and did so, from the very moment, when they first sinned
against God; they were immediately excluded out of Heaven, and the everlasting
Gates were shut upon them. I do not say, nor do I believe, that the Angels did
sin in the highest Heaven: for it is said of that Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.4. That it
is Undefiled: whereas if the Angels had sinned there, they would have defiled
the very Heavens. But when once they sinned* they were banished from Heaven,
and they never came within the Palace of the great King any more. As soon as
ever they sinned, they were cast away from the Presence of God for ever; and
they are Excommunicated from the Society of those Holy Angels, that once they
had an happy Fellowship with. And they are not only banished out of the
Heavenly Kingdom to Eternity, being confined to the low Regions of the World;
but they are m^reover become the Subjects of positive misery: Therefore are
they said to be in Darkness, which notes misery, as the Apostle expresses it in
this Context, they are delivered into Darkness. Darkness of misery is come upon
them already, they being excluded from the Presence of God, in whose favor is
light and life: they must needs be in darkness. And they are said to be made
Prisoners, and to be Cast into Hell, and to be in Chains there: They are
delivered into Chains of Darkness. Those expressions are Metaphorical, alluding
to what is customary among men. A Malefactor who is a great Criminal, is
committed to Prison, and is there to lie in Chains, until the Sessions comes.
So has the Great God dealt by the Angels that sinned against Him, He has
committed them to Prison, and has ordered them to lie in Chains there, until
the Judgment of the Great Day shall come. They are not only under a Chain in
respect of the restraining Power and Providence of God, which does hamper the
Evil Angels, that they cannot go where they would, nor can they do many things,
that fain they would do, which is a torment to them. But there is the chain of
a guilty Conscience, which is a dark chain indeed, in respect whereof the
Devils carry Hell up and down the World with them.

2. The Angels that sinned, shall ere long be in greater misery then at present
they are subject unto. They are Prisoners, and have been so from the day of
their fall: nevertheless, they are Prisoners at large, and the Devil has a
long chain allowed to him for the present: Therefore when it was said to him,
Whence come thou? says he, I come from going to and fro in the earth, and
from walking up and down in it. Job 1.7. So that he has leave to go from one
end of the earth to the other. He walks about seeking whom he may devour, 1
Pet. 5.8. For the present he is permitted to range up and down the World, to
see if he can prevail over miserable Creatures, and make a prey of the precious
Souls of the children of men. But there is a day a coming, when he shall be
made a close Prisoner. Satan is to be cast into the Bottomless Pit, and shut up
there. Rev. 20.4. He cannot then wander up and down as now he does. Although
the Devils now feel something of torment in their guilty Consciences, and there
are doubtless some Laws which they are under, being (as some have judiciously
observed) awed by a superior power, and which they are as much afraid of
acting against, as a Malefactor is afraid of going against the Laws of men,
lest h^ should be scourged for his so doing: Hence the Devil, though he had a
natural power to hurt Job, was afraid to do it without leave. Yet there is a
time coming, that they will be in more intolerable torment by far, than what
they at present endure. Hence when the Devils saw the Lord Jesus Christ
approaching, they cried out, What have we to do with thee? Art thou come to
torment us before the time. Mat. 8.28. So that there is a time yet to come,
wherein the Devils shall be subject unto greater torment, than as yet they are
made sensible of. And that time will be at the Day of Judgment: Do ye not know,
that the Saints shall Judge the World? Know ye not, that we shall judge Angels,
1 Cor. 6.2, 3. that is to say, the Angels that sinned. At the Great Day, all
reprobate men, and not only so, but all the reprobate Angels shall be brought
into Judgment, and shall then have a sentence of Eternal Condemnation passed
upon them. Therefore it is, that the thought of the Day of Judgment is
exceeding terrible unto all the Devils in Hell; they all tremble, when ever
they think of the Judgment to come. The Devils believe, that there is one God,
and they tremble. Jam. 1.19. So they believe, that there is a Day of Judgment,
that will be here ere long, and they tremble at the fore thought of it. We read
in the Gospel of a Devil in a possessed man, who said to the Lord Jesus Christ,
I adjure thee by God, that thou torment me not. q. d. God has given us leave,
as yet to be out of the place of Torment, where we must at last be. Therefore I
adjure thee by him not to send me thither. So that the Devils have a fearful
expectation of that Day of Wrath. Mar. 5.7.

3. The ruin of the Angels that sinned is irrecoverable and eternal. Therefore
is it said, that God has not spared them, because they are without all hopes
of ever being restored to their blessed State. They are cast down to Hell: they
are not able to recover themselves. They are fallen down so deep into that
Dungeon of Darkness, which Sin has brought them into, that they can never rise
again, by any power of their own. The Chains which they are in, the mighty
Devils cannot break them: and the Holy God will not recover them. He has not
seen meet to do any thing for their being recovered out of the woeful misery,
which they have sinned themselves into; God has not afforded any means for
their Salvation* and therefore their ruin must needs be an Eternal Ruin. The
Chains which the Devils are said to be in, are called, Everlasting Chains, Jude
6. The Fire of the Wrath of God, that they are condemned to endure, is called
an Everlasting Fire. Mat. 25.41. It will be said to the Wicked at the last day,
Depart with the Devil and his Angels into Everlasting Fire. So that the Angels
that sinned are condemned to Everlasting Fire. God then has not spared them,
but has made them Examples of Justice without Mercy.

PROPOSITION III. That the Severity of God, manifested on the Angels that
sinned, is most just and reasonable. For,

1. Their sin was exceeding heinous. The Devils were the first that ever
sinned. And God uses to leave a mark of his indignation on those that are the
first Transgressors in any kind. And they sinned without a Tempter; they sinned
of themselves: They left their own Habitation; left it of themselves: Their
wills were deeply engaged in their sinning against God: and the more of the
will there is in any sin, the more Evil is in it. They sinned, I say, and were
not tempted by any one to do it: As for man, when he sinned, he was tempted,
beguiled and deceived by the Devil: And probably Adam knew nothing of the Fall
of the Angels, but might think when the Devil spoke to him, that it was a good
Angel, and therefore might be the more easily deceived. Man thus sinning
through temptation, was an object of pity, more than the Devils, that had none
to tempt them; also the Angels sinned against clear light and knowledge. Their
Sin was yet further aggravated, in that God had done more for them, than for
any Creature besides. God had advanced them above all the Creatures in the
World: Their sin therefore was e^^^^ding heinous. Now the least sin that can be
thought of, deserves Eternal Punishment: Therefore God in not sparing the
Angels that sinned, is just and righteous.

2. The Apostate Angels are become the most wicked Creatures in all the World:
They are set upon (...) They are called by the name of Shedim. Deuteronomy. 32.17.
which signifies Wasters, or Destroyers. Those hateful and rapacious Birds of
Hell, are always devouring miserable Creatures. 1 Pet. 5.8. for which cause the
Devil has the name of Abaddon and Apollyon given to him. Rev. 9.11. they are
wicked in the highest degree: Therefore are they called Spiritual Wickednesses,
Ephesians. 6.12. because they are most wicked Spirits, wicked with all manner of
wickedness: there is no good in them in the least. It is said of the Devil,
that there is no truth in him. Joh. 8.44. There is no goodness in him: he has
not so much of common goodness, so much of the relics of the Image of God, as
the sinful children of men have: and therefore he does not scruple any manner
of wickedness, let it be never so great. There are some very wicked men in the
World, that as for some sins, they are afraid of them. Natural Conscience has
that power in them, that as for some sins, they seem so atrocious and horrid,
as that they are afraid to commit them. But now the Devil does not stick at any
wickedness, let it be never so great and heinous. The greater any sin is, the
more pleasing it is to the Devil: He is always sinning himself, and
endeavoring to make others sin to the utmost of his power. He is not only a
Tempter, but the Tempter: That is his cursed Trade. Blasphemy is the greatest
sin: now that the Devil is continually guilty of. It was Satan that made Jobs
Wife say, Blaspheme God and dye. And those sins which they cannot commit,
because of their being spiritual natures, yet they stir up others to them: such
as Drunkenness and Uncleanness, they stir up wicked men to live in such
abominations: And all this they do out of despite against Heaven, because they
know that such things do offend and grieve the blessed God. Out of their
desperate hatred of the Glorious and Holy God, against whom they have sinned,
they do all they can to cause His Name to be dishonored: and therefore it is
that the Devils do hate those most, that are most like to God, and who above
others do Service for His Name, the Evil Angels do in a peculiar manner set
themselves against, and are filled with all the rage of Hell against such as
those are. The Devil is full of wrath and rage, but against whom? against those
especially, which Keep the Commandments of God, and the Testimony of Jesus.
Rev. 12.17. against such is his malice, his wrath and rage in a peculiar manner
bent. His malice is greater than his policy, though he is a great Politician.
The Devil has a great wit, he has wonderful parts, as to understanding and
memory: yet his malice is greater than his wisdom. He knows well enough he
shall get nothing, by setting himself to do mischief to those that belong to
God: He knows that he shall but hurt himself, and shall receive the greater
Damnation for it at the last day. He knows this, and yet will go on, because
his malice is greater than his understanding. And the Devil, and so all his
Evil Angels are come to that height of wickedness, that they would not have the
Blessed God to have a Church in the Earth: They would not have Christ to have a
Servant in the World. If they could have their wills, the Glorious God should
not be worshipped. They hate that which is good: they hate Prayer, and
Preaching, and good Books, that have a tendency to promote the Salvation of the
Souls of men. The Devils in a special manner hate such Books as those are: They
hate this blessed Bible, more than any Book in the World: They hate the Lords
day. Because of their malice against Heaven, they tempt the children of men on
the Sabbath Day, more than on any day in the week, because they know, that if
men sin on the Sabbath Day, they will then become doubly guilty in the sight of
God. The Devil is the oldest Sinner, and the most cursed Creature in all the
World. It is said, Isa. 65.20. That the Sinner of an Hundred Years shall be
accursed. But then what shall the Sinner be, that is more than five thousand
years old? The Devil and and all the Angels that sinned with him, are Sinners
of above five thousand years old, and will therefore become the most accursed
and damned Creatures in the whole universe at the Great Day.

We now proceed to the Uses of this Doctrine.

And in the first place by way of Information, or Instruction in several
particulars.

Inference 1. Here we may behold, and let it affect all our hearts, to consider
the wonderful Grace of God toward fallen men, in that God has spared them.
Although he did not spare the Angels that sinned against him, he has spared
the fallen sinful children of men, spared them from Everlasting Destruction. He
has manifested more Grace to them then he did to the Angels that sinned, for
whom he did not provide a Savior. God did not send his Son into the World to
take the Nature of Angels, and unite that Nature unto his own Sacred Eternal
Person. Heb. 2.16. He took not to him the nature of Angels, it is said, but
that of Abraham, and so of other men. The Scripture does therefore call
Redeeming Grace PHILANTHROPY, or the Love of God toward man. Tit. 3.4. The
Blessed Angels that never sinned, are affected with the thought of this, they
do admire the Grace of God toward the fallen children of men, and they praise
his Glorious Name on that account. The Angel said to the Shepherds, Behold I
bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people: for unto yon
is Born a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Luke 2.10, 11. Unto you (says the
Angel) to you sinful children of men, not to Angels that sinned, but to you
men. And a multitude of Holy Angels did then praise God, saying, Glory to God
in the Highest, on Earth peace, good will toward men. Now Christ is (...),
that is come to pass by which God will have glory in the highest, men will have
peace and the good will of God toward the children of men is and will be
manifested: This all the hosts of Heaven that worship God continually, are
affected with; and shall not we who are most conce^ned, have our hearts within
us moved with meditations thereon? God did not send Angels from Heaven to
Preach a Jesus to the Angels that sinned, no, he never did send any such
message from Heaven to them, as unto men he has. Nor did the Lord wait on the
Angels that sinned, to see if they would return to him, and repent, and humble
themselves before him as he has waited on men. 1 Pet. 3.20. The Long suffering
of God waited in the days of Noah. And how long does God wait upon many
Sinners? With what patience does God wait on them, before he casts them down to
Hell; before he send them to be where the Angels that sinned now are. And when
the Angels sinned but once, as soon as ever they had but once transgressed, He
spared them not. But now though men have sinned a million times over, God
spares them; although they continue sinning from one year to another, God not
only spares them out of Hell, but tells them of a Heaven, and sends his Gospel
to them, to assure them, that all their sins shall be pardoned, and their Souls
saved, if they obey the Gospel: Here now is wonderful Grace, that we may be
astonished to consider of. The Angels that sinned, never had one offer of a
Christ: They never had a Jesus Preached to them as a Deliverer from the Wrath
to come. God himself Preached the Gospel, and promised Salvation to fallen man,
on the very day in which he first sinned. Genesis 3.15. What glorious Grace was
this!

Inference 2. We see here a glorious evidence of the holiness and of the
Justice of God. He is an Holy God, He cannot endure sin. He will not suffer
sinners to be in his sight. If they be sinners, tho^ they be Angels, if once
they become sinners, out of Gods sight they must go. Such is the Holiness of
Gods nature. David being a man after Gods own heart, could say, A Liar shall
not dwell in my house, nor tarry in my sight. Psalm. 101.7. But Oh! the Holiness
of the blessed God, that when the reprobate Angels did once become Liars, they
might not dwell in Gods house, nor tarry in his sight one moment longer. Such
is his Holiness, that he cannot look upon sin with approbation of it. Hab.
1.13. He is of purer eyes, than to behold evil: he cannot look upon iniquity
without detestation thereof. It Is not only true that he will not, but that he
cannot. God can no more approve of sin, then he can cease to be God. Thus
glorious is he in Holiness And we see before our eyes a glorious and dreadful
demonstration of the Justice of God, in that he does punish sinners whoever
they be. The truth is, He never spared any sin, there was never any sin
committed in the World, nor never shall be, but God has punished it, or will
punish it. As for the Angels that sinned, they are condemned to eternal fire
and flames: not any one of them all can escape the stroke of Divine Justice.
And as for reprobate men, although God bears with them a long time, and is
pleased to exercise infinite Patience toward them, yet they will at last find,
that all their sins shall be punished with a Vengeance, Romans 9.22. What, if God
willing to show his wrath, and make his power known, endured with much long
suffering the Vessels of wrath fitted to destruction. At last Gods wrath, his
Justice will be made to appear in punishing them for all their Transgressions,
Ay, and he will make known his infinite Power at the same time. The infinite
Power of God is seen in making one that has been a sinner, capable of enduring
such punishment. That a poor Creature should be filled with the wrath of God,
and yet be capable, or in a possibility, to endure it to all eternity, this
makes known his power as well as his wrath. Thus does he show his wrath and
make his Power known. And as for the Elect of God, he has not spared their
sins, as appears in that his own Son was not spared, when he became a surety on
their behalf, Romans 8.32. God spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for
us all. The Son of God who never sinned nor could sin, yet was not spared, when
he became a Mediator undertaking to answer for sinners. That is the highest
demonstration of the Holiness and Justice of God, that can be thought of. As
some Divines have expressed it, If a man would ^ee the Justice of God set forth
to the life, let him go to Golgotha, where Christ was crucified, and behold him
on the Cross, and there hear him crying out, when bleeding and dying, My God,
my God, why have thou forsaken me? And if a man would see the Justice of God
set forth to the life of it, ^et him go unto the Garden, where Jesus Christ was
in his Agony, and let him there behold the Son of God sweating drops of Blood,
because of the wrath of the Father, due for the Sins of men. So that we see
glorious demonstrations of the Justice and Holiness of God, and of his infinite
hatred of Sin.

Inference. 3. Sin makes men to become like unto the Apostate Angels. It turns
men into Devils. There are wicked men who are Devils incarnate. And therefore
sinners are said to be the Children of the Devil, and to be of the Devil, 1 John 3.8. Namely as Children are of their Father. He is called their Father,
Joh. 8.44. Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the lusts of your Father ye
will do, says Christ: Ye do just as the Devil does, and just as the Devil
would have you do, and therefore ye are his Children, and he is your father.
There are Children in respect of Imitation: Sinners imitate the Devil: Yea,
they have his Image, the very same evil nature, the same wicked disposition and
sinful inclinations which are in the heart of the Devil, are in their hearts
and natures. Especially, there are some sins that make men exceeding like the
Devil, and his Children indeed. As now, that sin of Apostasy from good
beginnings: The Devil was the first Apostate. Hence when men have begun to do
well, and after that turn from the good ways of God, they make themselves like
the Devil. As for the Fallen Angels, they have left off all Exercises of
Religion and Piety. There was a time, when the Devil and his Evil Angels did
pray and worship God; when they did join with the Holy Angels in praising the
great Creator of the World. But they have left praying and praising, and
forsaken the Company of Holy Angels. Ah! Lord God, are there not such in this
Assembly this day! are there not such here before the Lord this day, who have
manifested themselves to be the Devils Children? There was a time when they
would pray, and join with others the Fearers of the Lord in serving him: but
they have forsaken him, they serve him not, neither do they pray unto him: And
they have forsaken the Communion of those Fearers of the Lord with whom they
did once join in Religious Exercises. This is to be and to do just like the
Devils: such are his Children, as like him as it is possible for Creatures to
be out of Hell: So Hypocrites and Dissemblers are like the sinful Angels.
Christ said to his Disciples, Have not I chosen you twelve, and one of you is a
Devil. Joh. 6.70. That was Judas. Why was Judas a Devil? but because he was an
Hypocrite, one that pretend to that in Religion and Devotion which was never in
him; one that did seem to be an Angel of light, when he was not so; one that
did betray Christ with a kiss, pretending to be his friend, when he was
treacherous and false to him and to his Interest. Such men there are in the
world, as will out of respect to carnal ends and designs make pretentions to
Religion: They are like the Devil. There is in the Field of Christ, (in his
Church in the World) not only Wheat but Tares, there are not only sincere
Professo^^, but Hypocrites. They are the Children of the Wicked One. Mat.
13.38. and all Liars are so. The Devil is a Liar, and the Father of it, because
he is the Father of them that are so. Liars join with the Devil in sinning, and
as they partake with him in sinning, so shall they have the Devils punishment.
What is the Devils punishment? It is an exclusion out of Heaven: And what is
the punishment of all Liars? They shall in no wise enter into the Heavenly
Jerusalem. They shall ba excluded, as the Devil their Father is. What is the
Devils punishment? It is said, He shall be cast into the Lake of Fire and
Brimstone. Rev. 20.10. and the very same is said concerning all Liars, that
they shall have their part in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone,
which is the Second Death. Rev. 21.8.

Inference. 4. This informs us of the Evil which is in Sinning against God. We
see what an evil sin is, that it is the worst of evils, and that which of all
evils men have the greatest cause to dread. For it does provoke God: Therefore
it is of all evils the most formidable. It was well replied by one of the
Ancients, when the greatest Person in the Empire sent him a threatening message,
Go (said he) carry back this answer, that I am afraid of nothing, but to sin
against God. Sin is a most destructive evil to the Creature. No eminency or
privilege can save sinning Creatures from the strokes or Divine Justice. It
brings remediless ruin on those that shall become guilty of it. Angels are
eminent ones: If I speak with the tongues of Men and Angels (says the Apostle)
intimating, that Angels were of all Creatures the most excellent and glorious,
and yet when they sinned, we see what became of them, of so many of them, as
sinned against God. They are reserved under darkness for the Judgment of the
great day. Then most certainly there is no eminency in men, that can secure
them from the Vengeance of Heaven, if they sin: no eminency of Power. Angels
are greater in power and might than men are, yet when they sinned, they must go
into Everlasting Chains. It is not any Eminency of Parts and Wisdom, that can
save sinful Creatures from the killing strokes of revenging Justice. It was
said of the King of Tyrus, Thou art full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty: thou
have been in Eden the Garden of God. Ezekiel. 28.12. For all this he must down to
the pit. Will thou yet say before him that slays thee, I am God. But thou
shall be a (...) and not God, in the hand of him that slays thee. The Angels
that sinned before their Fall, (...) full of wisdom, and perfect in beauty, and
they had been in Eden in the Heaven of God But they are gone down to Hell. Oh*
th^n what an evil is sin! One sin has destroyed millions of Angels in one
moment: what an Evil is Sin then, do you think? One sin has b^ought Death upon
the whole World of Mankind in one day, so that all mankind must have perished
to Eternity, if the Son of God himself had not stepped in to save them. Romans
5.12. By one man Sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin, and so Death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. What a fearful poison is sin,
that has poisoned all mankind in one moment! Adam did no sooner eat the
forbidden fruit, but he and all his posterity were poisoned to death in that
very moment: such an Evil is it. And therefore if men go on sinning against
God, it is in vain for them to think they shall escape the hand of that Justice
which has not spared the Angels that sinned. Whatever man shall go on in his
Trespasses, will at last find Judgment without Mercy. He that despised Moses's
Law, died without mercy, of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall he be
thought worthy, that has trodden under foot the Son of God. As for Sinners,
especially under the Gospel, oh what will become of them! as the Apostle here
speaks* if God spared not the Angels that sinned, if so, what then? then (says
he) you may be sure, he will not spare men that shall sin, and continue in
their sins* and least of all, men who have had the offer of the Gospel, and yet
have despised it. Men that have the Word of God Preached to them, and who hear
Sermons wherein Christ and Salvation by him, is offered to them, and yet for
all that continue in unbelief, they sin at such a rate, as the Devils never
sinned. Oh! what a Condemnation will they bring upon themselves? Judgment
without Mercy, or any hope of mercy; because they have sinned against the
Redeeming Blood and Bowels of Jesus Christ the Son of God, which the Angels
that sinned have not done.

Wherefore let me conclude with Exhorting you to get your Souls clear of the
guilt of sin. They that desire to experience the sparing, pa^doning mercy of
God, are concerned to get clear of sin, that God may look on them as without
sin: and who is there, whom this Word of the Lord concerns not? There is not
a man in the whole world whom this Word of the Lord concerns not, for that
all men have sinned. Indeed, all the Angels have not sinned; there are
innumerable Holy Angels that never sinned against God; but as for men, they
have all sinned. The Scripture (God in his Word) has concluded all under sin,
Gal. 3.22. without excepting so much as one. The whole world is become guilty
before God: And therefore all men are concerned to consider of this. Know then,
that there is a way for men, though not for Angels, to become clear of sin. If
a man shall by Faith have the Blood of Christ sprinkled on his Soul, he is
clear of sin: They that have that Blood sprinkled upon their Souls, are pure
from sin ^ay, although they have been guilty of never so many, and never so
great sins, if the Blood of Christ is sprinkled on them, the Lord looks on
them, and deals with them, as if they had never sinned against him: They are
then without fault before the Throne of God. Hence David prayed, saying, Purge
me with hysop, and I shall be whiter than the Snow. Psalm. 51.7. David had by
sin made himself blacker than Hell ^ay, but purge me with hysop, and I shall be
clean, yea, whiter than the snow. He means, let the Blood of Christ be
sprinkled upon me, which was typified by the Blood sprinkle^ with hysop, and
then all the sins that my soul has been polluted and made abominable by, shall
be taken away, and I shall become whiter than the Snow it self. When there is
true Repentance toward God, and unfeigned Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, his
Blood is sprinkled on the Soul. You read in the Gospel of one that had been a
notorious infamous Sinner, a vile creature, doubtless an Harlot, a Strumpet,
whose wickedness was known all the Town over. Luke 7.37. This Sinner came to
the Lord Jesus Christ, and did wash his feet in her tears* and (says Christ)
her Sins that were many, are forgiven. Now hear the Gospel. Oh! that sinners
would consider of this: What your sins have been I know not: God knows, and
Jesus Christ knows, what secret sins any of you have been guilty of before the
Lord, he knows. It may be some of you have been guilty of secret scarlet sins,
of crimson abominations, that the Heavens would blush to hear of. Nevertheless,
God has sent me to Preach the Gospel to you. I say then, Go thy ways thou
sinful Creature, and by Faith in Prayer fall down before God in Jesus Christ,
and with a penitent Soul wash the Feet of the Lord Jesus in thy tears: and he
will wash thy Soul in His Blood. Oh! give thy self up to the Lord Jesus in a
perpetual Covenant, Heart, Body and Soul, and all to be his, his only, and his
for ever. Accept of him, as he is offered in the Gospel, and he will accept of
thee. And then suppose thy Sins to have been never so many and great, the Lord
says unto thee, as unto that great Sinner and in (...) Name be it spoken to
thee, Thy Faith has saved the^.

THE END.
A Disquisition Concerning Angelical APPARITIONS, In Answer to a CASE of
Conscience, showing that Demons often appear like Angels of Light, and what is
the best and only way to prevent deception by them.

All considered, according to the Scripture, Reason, Experience and approved
History.

By Increase Mather, Praesident of Harvard College.

2 Cor. 11.3. I fear lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his
Subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in
Christ.

Augurium vanum vani docuere parents,
Cui credens, dignus decipiatur, erit.
Quos pios vidit diabolus, vanis opinionibus illaqu^are studet.

Lactantius. BOSTON. Printed for Samuel Phillips, at the Brick Shop. 1696.

THIS Age has abounded with Atheists, not only in Practice but in Opinion. A
late Author speaks of many thousands of them in one Kingdom, nay in one City in
Europe. Sadducism is a degree of Atheism, and commonly ends therein. The
Learned Dr. Cudworth (in his Intellectual System, p. 703.) Observes that some
who object that the Age wherein we live has n^ Demoniacks, or possessed
persons, do from thence suspect the whole Gospel of Fabulosity or Imposture.
That there are in this age Energumens, late recent Examples amongst our selves,
(and more than a few of them) are an awful Conviction. Some are willing to
phansy all to be a strange natural disease. Plotinus relates that ^^e of the
Heterodoxies of the old Gnostics, was, that they supposed diseases to be
Devils, and that therefore the way to cure them was not by Physic, but by
words and charms. The Opinion of these men who call Devils, diseases, is not
unlike that of the Gnostics. The lamentable objects which our eyes have beheld
are sufficient to Convince the most obdurate Sadduces in the World, that there
are Evil Angels infesting the Earth. Nor is it to be doubted but that one
reason why Providence has permitted such things to be done in the midst of us,
is, that so men may be left without excuse for their Atheism, if they will not
believe a future state, or that there is any World (...) that which is visible,
when such sensible demonstrations thereof have been set before them.

It is by some supposed that there are Angelical as well as Diabolical
possessions. The Jewish Rabbis are of Opinion that the Prophets were acted by
Angels. The divine influx (they say) came by their Ministry, who ordered and
disposed the word in the mouth of the Prophet according to the mind of God. It
is a Celebrated saying amongst them, That every Prophet received his Prophesy
by the Ministry of an Angel, Moses only excepted. So Maimon and other of their
Masters. They suppose the Reason of that expression in Judge. 5.23* to be
because Deborah being a Prophetess spoke according to Angelical Inspiration.
They say that the difference between a divine and a deceitful dream, is, that
the former is by the hand of an Angel, the latter by the hand of an evil
Spirit. So do they reconcile, Numb. 12.6. with Zach. 10.2.

We in New England have lately seen not only miserable Creatures Pinched,
Burnt, Wounded, Tortured by Invisible Agents, but some Ecstatical Persons, who
have strongly imagined that they have been attended with Caelestial Visitants
revealing secret and future things to them which if it should appear to be
Diabolical Imposture, or the effect of an hurt Imagination only, or both, it
may (if not timely prevented) be of dangerous Consequence to themselves and
others; on which Occasion*

THE seasonable Question or Case of Conscience which I am desired to express my
Sentiments concerning, is, Whether Angelical Apparitions may in these Days be
expected; and if so, how they may be discerned from Satanical Illusions?

We shall endeavor a succinct Answer to the Enquiry proposed in the
Conclusions following.

Conclusion I. Although it must be granted, that i^ the Days of the Gospel,
Angelical Apparitions are not so frequent as under the Old Testament,
nevertheless; some such there have been, and still may be* What can he say that
comes after the King? God has been pleased to speak to us in these last days
by his Son, who is the Lord of Angels, by whom he has made a sufficient
Revelation of His Will in all matters, which he has thought meet to have us
acquainted with* Heb. 1.1. As the New Testament Dispensation is more spiritual,
so the Ministry of Angels is less visible than in former times. There were
ANGELOPHANEIAI, many Appearings of Angels, as also a frequency of Miracles,
until such time as the Canon of Scripture was completed, and the Gospel
sufficiently confirmed; but since that, both the one and the other are in great
measure ceased, yet not so ceased as at no time or on no occasion to make
themselves visible. That Learned and Worthy Divine, Dr. Owen does (according to
his wonted manner) in my apprehension express himself very judiciously as to
the Question before us, in his Exposition on Heb. 1.14. p. 148. His words are
these, For as many have pretended unto Revelation by Angels, which have been
mere delusions of Satan, or imaginations of their own Brains, so to say, that
God does not or may not send his Angels unto any of his Saints, to communicate
his mind unto them as to some particulars of their own duty according to his
Word, or to show unto them somewhat of his own approaching work, seems in my
judgment to be unwarrantably to limit the Holy One of Israel. Howbeit, such
things in particular are to be duly weighed with sobriety and Reverence. Thus
the Judicious Doctor. It is true, that the World has been imposed on by
fictitious and fabulous Relations concerning the Appearances of Angels. Some
Writers have made themselves very merry with a comical Story of a Nobleman in
Portugal, who falling into a melancholy despair, phansied his sins were
unpardonable. To care him, some used this Artifice: They privately caused the
Tiles to be taken off from the roof of his House, and having clothed a man in
white, with a Sword in his right, and a lighted Torch in his Left Hand, at
midnight he appeared to him, and bade him be cheerful, for he was an happy man,
and so extinguishing his Torch departed. The melancholy man overjoyed with the
Vision, raised his House, who congratulating his felicity, he from that time
grew well, being thus relieved by an Artificial Angel. See Zacut. Tusit. p. 34.
Many pretenders to a conversation with Angels, and to a Spirit or Gift of
Prophesy, have been great cheats. Some would have us believe, the Nostradamus
(who was Counselor to three of the Kings of France) had Angelical Apparitions.
There are two Learned men* viz. Rensardus, and Monlucius, that have written in
his Defense. But others (and not upon slight grounds) reckon him an Impostor,
and with a little alteration of his name, have given him the Elogy of
Monstradamus. There was one that made this ingenious Distick for him.

Nostra damus cum verba damus, nam fallere nostrum est,
Et cum verba damus, nil nisi nostra damus.
What more frequent in times of Popery then Miracles and Apparitions of Angels?
The Lives of Saints are filled with sables about these things. There were some
that gained by the Fable, tho many were impoverished thereby. A place in
Cornwall bears the name of St. Michael's Mount, where was a Chapel Erected,
because certain Monks affirmed, that Michael the Arch angel did there appear to
them. The same is pretended by the French men concerning their Michael's Mount
in Normandy. The Italians also challenge the like Apparition to have been in
their Hill Garganus. See Cambden's Britannia* p. 188. Innumerable are the
Instances of this kind: It would not only fill a Volumn but be loss of time to
rehearse them. Bishop Hall in his Book of the Invisible World. Sect. 8. has
mentioned some of them. The Relations published by Gregorius Magnus concerning
the Apparitions of Angels to Saints in those times, were either fabulous or
satanical illusions. In my opinion, Mr. Isaac Ambrose has wronged his Treatise
of Angels (which is otherwise a good and useful Book) by quoting so many
passages out of him, which may occasion his Readers to think, that the other
Historical Narrations in his Book, are of no more credit than those of
Gregory's. These things notwithstanding, we may not run into the other extreme,
or conclude, that all reports concerning Appearing Angels have no reality of
truth in them. Luther in his Commentary on Genesis 37. and Genesis 40. declares, that
he was very much moved and offended at the infinite multitude of Satanical
Illusions, with which the World was horribly deceived for a long time under the
Papacy; and that for his own part he did constantly pray to God, that he would
not reveal any thing to him by Dreams or Visions, but by his Written Word; and
that He would not send Angels to appear to him, knowing that when he was
meditating on the Scriptures, God and His Holy Angels were near to him, who
could instill irradiations on his mind without any visible Apparitions. Yet, he
does acknowledge that some may have that which he never did nor desired to
experience. Sint dona sed quae ego nec curo nec desidero, says he. And the
Truth is, that Authors worthy of Credit have given us an account of very
remarkable and memorable Instances hereabout. The Church of Smyrna in an
Epistle directed to the Church in Philomilium, say, that it was revealed to
Polycarp their Pastor by a Dream, that he should be burnt alive for the Name of
Christ, that when he came to Dye, he gave thanks to God, not only for honoring
him with such a Death, but in that he had been pleased before it came to pass
to reveal unto him that he should Dye in that manner. They also say, that when
he was brought before the Proconsul to be tried for his Life, there was a voice
heard from Heaven saying, ISKVE POLUKARPE KA^ ANDRIZOU, Polycarp be of good
courage, and play the man now. What could this be other than the voice of an
Angel, which the Christians who were Members of that Church say that they did
themselves many of them hear it. v. Eusebius. lib. 4^ cap. 15. The young man that
appeared to Babilas, when he was tortured with an Engine for several hours,
pouring cold water on him, which did wonderfully refresh him, (none but himself
seeing the young man) must needs be an Angel. The like is reported concerning
Theodorus, who was put to the torture in the days of Julian the Apostate. What
shall we think of that which our English Historines relate concerning K. Edward
the Confessor, that when he was sick of the sickdess of which he Dyed, after he
had remained speechless two days, lying for a time in a slumber, there
appeared two persons standing by him, who protested they were Messengers of
God, declaring that because the Bishops and other chief Governors in England
were not the Ministers of God but of the Devil, the Kingdom should be delivered
into the Hands of an Enemy. The K. awaking, sighed and prayed, saying, Lord
Almighty, If this be not an Illusion, but a true Vision which I have seen,
grant me ability to utter it to them who are here present, else not. Upon which
he was perfectly restored to his speech, and told what he had seen and heard:
The Archbishop made light of it. But when William the Conqueror within the
space of a year Landed in England, and made dreadful work among the Clergy of
those days, it was believed that K. Edwards Vision was not the mere phansy of
a sick man. Instances of this nature of a far later date may be produced. In
Queen Mary's time, Mr. Robert Samuel, a faithful Minister of Christ, was by
Bloody Bonner, then the Bishop of London, cast into Prison, where he endured
grievous hardships, being allowed but three mor^els of Bread and three
spoonfuls of water in a day, but falling asleep, one seemed to stand before him
clad in a white Garment, saying to him, Be o^ good cheer, for after this day
thou shall hunger and thirst no more, which accordingly came to pass, for the
next day he ascended to Heaven in a Fiery Chariot. It is related concerning one
Mr. Laremouth, who was Chaplain to the Lady Ann of Cleve, that being on account
of the Gospel Committed to Prison, he heard a voice, saying, Arise and go thy
way* To which he gave no heed the first time, until he heard the same words
again, upon which he went to Prayer, half an hour after which he heard the same
voice again, immediately upon which part of the Prison Wall fell down, so that
he went out at the breach, and meeting with a Beggar, changed his coat with
him, and coming to the Sea found a Vessel ready to Sail, by which means he
escaped the hands of his Persecutors. In the year 1629. one Adam Po, a Silesian
in the City of Sprottavia, had his nerves and sinews so shrunk, that he could
make no use of his legs, but for half a year together was confined to his Bed.
But that morning when the Emperors Commissioners came into the City there
appeared by his Bedside, a young man in white clothing, who bid him put on
his Clothes, and make ha^^e from the City, because the day was now come to take
vengeance of them for their ingratitude. He called for his clothes, which he
had not done for half a year before; found that he was able to dress himself
and to walk, and did that day go on foot eight miles Of this Commenius gives
an account in his History of the Bohemian Prophets, or pretended Prophets. In
April 1659. Samuel Wallis of Stamford in Lincolnshire, having been sick
thirteen years, and given over by the Physicians, a person having a venerable
Countenance came to him on a Lord's Day (he not being able to attend the
Public Worship of God, spent his time at home as religiously as he could) told
him the power of God would restore him to health and strength again, charging
him above all things to fear God and serve him: directed him to no other means
for his health, besides the use of Blood wort and Red Sage, steeped in small
Beer. The report of this famous our being noised abroad, several Ministers met
at Stamford to consider and consult about it, and concluded, that it was
effected by the Ministry of a good Angel. But of this I have given a more large
account in my Remarkable Providence p. 205. etc. There is in Mr. Glanvils
Collections p. 208. etc. a Relation like unto these two last mentioned. No
longer since then October 1676. a woman in Amsterdam, whose name was Jesch
Claes, having been ^ame fourteen years, one of her Legs being dead, there
appeared to her a beautiful youth in white Garments, telling her, her Malady
should leave her, and she should be made again to walk* Two days after which
she heard a voice saying, It is given you to walk. Immediately upon which she
went to the door, her Husband meeting her was affrighted, supposing he had seen
a spirit; drew back from he^, and could not believe that it was his Wife, until
his daughter testified, that is was her Mother, and that she had seen her walk
before he came in. Fr. van Helmont being of a genius not apt to believe such
things, made enquiry into the truth of this Relation, and found it to be really
so. Limbergius in a Letter to Dr. More says, that this person was reputed a
very good Woman, and that he believed there was no fraud at all in the matter.
This Apparition then must needs be either of a good or of an evil Angel. I see
no reason to ascribe it to the latter. To proceed. Amyraldus relates a
remarkable passage concerning the Chanceller of Navar, which he had from
Cameron, who received it from the Chancellers own mouth. He being in a Town
belonging to Bern, one night as he was a sleep, heard a voice calling him by
his name Calignon, whereupon awaking, he soon fell asleep again: a little while
after, he heard the same voice, calling to him a second time, which made a
greater impression on him, yet fell asleep again. The voice awakened him the
third time, then advising him to retire speedily out of the Town, saying, that
within a few days the Plague would be there and rage dreadfully: He followed
the advice given him, whereby himself and Family were delivered; for within few
days the Plague began, and a great part of the Town was swept away thereby:
Amyrald concludes that this voce was from a good Angel. A decad of Years are
not past, since invisible Psalmodists have been heard Singing in the Air, and
making most harmonious and ravishing melody there, as has been affirmed by not
a few witnesses, of which M. Jurieu in his Pastoral Letters has given a well
attested account to the World: What ever those voices might be, they put me in
mind of the Targumists Exposition of the still voice, 1 King. 19.12. viz. that
it was the voice of Angels, Praising God in a gentle Harmony. I have elsewhere
(in my Discourse about the Prevalency of Prayer, p. 16, 17.) mentioned a
memorable passage concerning Mr. Patrick Simpson, an Eminent Minister at
Sterling in Scotland, unto whom, after he had spent a day alone in Prayer with
Fasting, Angels came, and gave him an answer concerning the thing which he had
all the day been praying about, of which he never spoke one word to any one,
excepting only to one person, who happened to over-hear something, whom he
solemnly obtested, not to say ought of it, until after his Death, thus
expressing himself, What am I dust and ashes, that the Holy Ministering Spirits
should be sent by the Lord to deliver a Message to me.

All these things considered, I conclude, that it is not impossible, but that
Holy Angels may appear to some persons. And in case it should be really so, it
would be a daring and dangerous boldness to entertain them with contempt. We
should rather say as the Pharisees (who in that had the truth on their side)
Act. 23.9. If a Spirit or an Angel has spoken to him, let us not fight against
God. If this be taken with what follows, our having conceded thus far will do
us no harm.

Conclusion II. Some Circumstances attending extraordinary Apparitions
pretended to be Angelical, have demonstrated them to be Diabolical, others have
rendered them justly suspicious. Let the Appearing Spirits pretend never so much
to be good Angels; if they suggest any thing which is contrary to right reason,
or the light of nature, they are certainly Devils. Hence Mahomet's Angel, from
whom he pretended to receive his new Religion was a Devil: For in the Alcoron
there are contradictions, and therefore falsehoods which cannot proceed from a
good Spirit: No good Angel ever told a lie. Hence that Spirit which shall be
once found in a Lie, comes not from Heaven. If he (...) say, such a thing shall
happen, which yet does not come to pass at the time prefixed, or that he will
do or not do such a thing, and yet shall act contrary, or shall in any thing
falsify, to be sure that is no good Angel. Or, if it does persuade to any
dishonest thing, it is an Evil Spirit. By this it was manifest, that the
Spirits which Dr. Dee and Killet were so familiar with, supposing them to be
good Angels, were unclean Devils: for although those Spirits did for a long
time pretend to great Sanctity, they did at last advise to filthy Nicolaitism.
Or, if the seeming Angels shall endeavor to establish any notions in Religion
not grounded on the Scripture, they are not from Heaven. This shows, that the
Apparitions so frequent and so much boasted of amongst the Papists, were in
truth Diabolical Illusions: For the design of them was to confirm the notion of
Purgatory, the worshipping of Images, praying for the Dead, and such like
Doctrines, which the Scripture condemns: Spirits pretending to be Angels, made
way for the grossest Idolatries, by exhorting men unto a sinful veneration of
the Cross, the Relics of Martyrs, and the like Superstitions. Or, if they
shall speak any thing which is not grave and weighty, it is easy to judge what
Spirits they are. It is beneath the majesty of an Angel to speak or do any
thing which is trivial, mean, or little. Or, if they shall interrupt or divert
the persons unto whom they appear, from a due attendance to the Public Worship
of God: Such things as these are infallible demonstrations, that the Appearing
Angels are Evil Ones. There are other things which render the case very
suspicious: To instance. If the Apparitions are frequent, and the Spirits that
come* use familiar converse, it is much to be feared, that they are not from
Heaven, but from Hell. For if we search the Scriptures, we shall find, that
when Holy Angels appeared, they soon delivered the Message which they were sent
about, and then disappeared, and came no more. The same Angel seldom came more
than two or three times (most commonly but once) to the same person. Twice did
the Angel appear to Manoah's Wife, but the Angel of the Lord did no more appear
to Manoah, and to his Wife. Judge. 13.21. When therefore Angels shall be daily
Visitants* and continue so to be from one week, and from one month to another,
the persons concerned have just cause to suspect, that they are imposed on by
deceitful Demons, pretending to be Angels of light. Where is there an instance
in all the Bible of a good Angel that became a Familiar to any man or woman?
Again, if what the Spirits reveal, does admit of a double and doubtful
interpretation, it is a sign, that they are Spirits of the same nature with
those that spoke in the Oracle at Delphos of old This amongst other things gave
just ground to suspect, that the pious young Woman Christina Poniatovia (of
whom we shall have Occasion to speak more afterward) was deluded by Satan,
when she thought her self favored with Angelical and Divine Revelations. The
Spirit told her, that King F. should be exalted, and F. be made low. But he
would not tell, who was meant by F. whether King Frederic or Ferdinand. What
was this better then, Ajo te Aeacidae Romanos vincere posse? or then, Ibis,
redibis, nunquam, per bella peribis. Good Angels do not hide themselves in the
dark under ambiguities, but declare their messages clearly. If therefore the
Spirits that appear under the notion of Angels from Heaven, shall leave those
that desire a Resolution of their doubts from them, just as wise as they found
them, it is much to be doubted that they are deceiving Spirits. Again,
Ecstasies attended with abreptions of mind, give just cause to suspect the
Apparitions and Revelations. The followers of Montanus, pretended to prophesy,
but when the spirit of Prophesy came upon ehem they would be in Ecstasies. Now
both Jerome and Chrysostom mention that as a sign of their being no Prophets
divinely inspired. It is (says Chrysostom) the property of a Diviner to be
Ecstatical, but its otherwise with a true Prophet, his understanding is awake
and his mind in a sober orderly Temper. No doubt but that some of the false
Prophets amongst the Jews were imposed on by Demons. They thought that they
had Angelical or Divine Revelations, 1 King. 22.24. Jer. 29.8. The Hebrew
Doctors say, it is a profound Question, How the true Spirit of Prophesy may be
certainly known from that which is false? Nor do they give any satisfactory
Resolution concerning it: only they say, that all Prophesy makes it self known
to the Prophet by the strength and vigor of the perception. And that false
Prophesy does proceed from the too great force of the Imaginative power, and
the Imbecility of the rational. The Prophetical Spirit does never alienate the
mind, since it seats it self in the rational as well as in the sensitive power.
Again, If these White Angels appear to Females only, who are the weaker Sex,
and more easy to be imposed on, that renders the case yet the more suspicious.
It was part of the Devils subtilty in the first Temptation, which he assaulted
mankind with, that he began* with the Woman; and he has found such success, as
to hold on in the same course. How many Women have been famous in some former
dark Ages on account of pretended Angelical Apparitions and Revelations? There
was S. Hildegardis, with whose Revelations as wise a man as Bernard was
deceived. There was Lutgardis, whose many Apparitions and Revelations are
Commemorated by Surius. There was Christina Surnamed Admirabilis, of whom
Ferrarirus has written. There were St. Bridget, Elizabetha (a Q of Hungary)
Liduina, Catharina, Raconissa, Agnes, Politiana, and I know not how many more
such, of whose converses with Angels, Possevinus, Sandeus, Delrio, and other
such Authors have Published strange things* If ever an Age for Angelical
Apparitions shall come, no question but men, and not women only, will be
honored with their Vis^^s* of which I hear little or nothing at present. And
this shall bring us to the last particular, which gives ground of suspicion,
that the persons who suppose themselves to be attended with Angelical
Apparitions, are only so imaginarily, or imposed on with Diabolical illusions,
so. if they be diseased Persons. If they have been lately sick, and the disease
wherewith they have been attended, has had any influence on the brain, that and
Satan together will make them phansy very wonderful matters Dr Casaubon in his
Treatise of Enthusiasme as an effect of nature, (which Sir Will Temple in his
Miscellanies p. 308. is pleased to call a Curious and Useful Treatise) has some
memorable Instances to confirm this p. 73. He says that in September 1655.
there was in the Parish where he then dwelt, one John Carpenter, who related to
him what Visions and Raptures he had experienced the night before: how he had
been carried to hell, and what fearful things he had seen there; and also to
Heaven, and what glorious things he had seen there. He was in transports of
joy, not doubting but that thousands would be Converted by his Revelations. Nor
could he bear it, that any should call his Revelations into question, which he
was certain (as he thought) that they were of Divine Inspiration. But within a
while all appeared to be the effect of a natural disease. That Learned man
observes that some persons in the World by reason of an Unaccountable Epileptic
humor, have been strangely disposed to Enthusiastical raptures and phancies.
Paulus Eberus (a Lutheran Divine of great fame in Misnia) writes of a Maid in
Friburg, who had strange Ecstasies and Visions. After her fits she was full of
Religious Discourse, so that she was generally thought to be inspired, and her
Speeches were Printed under the name of Divine Prophesies and Warnings: but
Eberus was much against the Publication of them, judging her Ecstasies to be a
more gentle kind of Epilepsy, and that her pious discourses were a natural
effect of her Religious Education, frequent hearing the Word, and having used
her self to the exercises of Godlines^ Joh. Coboldus (a Learned Physician
gives an account concerning a Youth in Alterburg (a Town in Germany) whom his
Master upon some great provocation did with his fists beat about his head
unmercifully. The Lad fell sick of an Epilepsy, whereof he had diverse terrible
fits, and was twelve days speechless. But then instead of them he had
Ecstasies, in which he would continue without sense or motion for some hours.
As soon as he was out of a fit, he would sing Hymns (though it was not known
that he had learned any) very melodiously. When he had left singing, and was
come to himself again, he would with much confidence maintain, that Angels had
carried his Soul to Heaven, where he had seen things that he could not express.
And when he perceived the fit was coming upon him, he would say, Now the Angels
are come to carry me away. Nevertheless, not a good Angel, but Satan was in all
this. Persons attended with such fits are many times of a Melancholy temper.
And it is wonderful to see what power imagination has in them that are
distempered with Melancholy, in which doubtless evil Angels have a great
operation, that humor being Baelneum diaboli, a water which the Devils love to
be dabling in. A certain man in this Country fourteen years ago, came to me in
great horror and amazement, declaring that as he was walking in the Woods, he
heard a voice say to him, Sword, Famine and Pestilence beginning at New England
will make the Earth desolate. I labored to persuade him, that it was only a
phansy, and that he did not really hear any such words spoken: he told me, he
was as certain of it, as he was sure that he was then speaking to me, and that
they did at the Time when he heard them, put him into a Trembling fit, and that
he came to me, because the first means of good to his Soul (as he said) was a
Sermon which diverse years before that he had heard me Preach in Boston, and
because he thought I would use my best endeavors to prevent those evils, which
it was revealed to him that without Repentance intervening they would shortly
come to pass. The man then lived above an hundred Miles from Boston. What is
since come of him, I know not. But his Trembling fi^ was a sign of Satanocal
Possession Such persons amongst the Gentiles as had a spirit of Diabolical
Divination, would when the Demon came upon them, be put into Shakings and
Tremblings, after the very same manner as has been usual amongst that sort of
People who of later years have been called Quakers, as is well noted by a late
Learned writer. v. Dickinson de origin oraeculor. Cap. 9. p. 96. Men that are
Caetera sani, in all other things well, and as rational as any men in the
world, yet in some one thing are really distracted by reason of their being
under the power of a Melancholy humor. And what will they not then phansy?
Examples confirming this may be seen in Fienus his discourse concerning the
power of Imagination, and in Laurentius, and Sennertus, and in Burton's
Melancholy: some of which are related by Wanley in his wonders of the little
World. Book 2. Chap. 1. That of the noble Argive is an old story mentioned by
the Poets, -- fait haud ignobilis Argis, who strongly phansied, that he saw
Theaetrical delights: but when by the care of his friends he was cured of his
disease, he complained, that they had wronged him by robbing him of the
pleasure, which he had in that sweet error of his mind. This man recovered by
the helps of Art.

And care of friends, used sadly to complain,
Friends, I Am not Saved by this your Love, but slain,
Robbed of that sweet delight I then did find,
In the so grateful error of my mind.
But a more tragical and amazing Instance to the purpose in hand is related by
Acosta (de temporibus novissimis. lib. 2. c. 11.) concerning a very Learned man
in the Kingdom of Peru, in his time the Oracle of that part of the World. But a
certain Muliercula (as Acosta's phrase is) there, pretending to a conversation
with Angels who did frequently visit her, and in her ecstasies would inform her
of some secret things relating to this person, and told her of great future
matters, in which he was to be concerned; he was so bewitched as to believe all
that she said; and at last fancied, that an Angel came to himself also, of whom
he learned whatsoever he desired. It was revealed to him, that he should be a
King and a Pope too; and that the Apostolical See should be translated to
America, and that he should be constituted a new Lawgiver to mankind, with
other things more insolent than these mentioned, which I forbear to relate, for
they would grate upon pious and tender Ears. This man was in all other things
sober and rational: When he was brought upon his Trial, he did plead his cause
before the Judges with that liberty and eloquence, that was to their and all
men's admiration: Only he wondered, that they did not believe his Revelations':
He was condemned to be bur^t to Death. It seems the Angel that appeared to him,
assured him, that when he came to the place intended for his Execution, fire
would come down from Heaven, and consume his Adversaries, whereby he should be
delivered: but he found to his cost, that lying Apparitions had deceived and
ruined him. Whether his Judges would not have done better to have sent him to
Bedlam, and to have administered Hellebore rather than Fire as a more proper
Remedy for his sober distraction, is not my work at present to dispute. To
proceed. It seems Jerome had visions of Spirits and sometimes of Angels as he
thought. One of which did severely chastize him for his delighting to read
Cicero's Works: but another Angel interceded for mercy to him considering his
youth. Now what can we impute this to, but melancholy, and the distempered
imagination of a contemplative man that was always in his cell. The like I
suppose concerning a later Hierom, viz. Savanarola, whom the Papists burnt to
Death at Florence, in the year 1498. for his freedom and faithfulness in
testifying against some of the evils of those times: Several of his Books
discover him to be a man of great Learning; and some of them manifest a pious
Spirit. Gesner says of his Books concerning the simplicity of a Christian
Life, that they are worthy to be read of every Christian man. But he has a
little Book of Prophecies and Revelations, in which there are things
vertiginous and fantastical. The same with this may justly be concluded
concerning diverse Modern Prophets, who were persons piously inclined, but
Satan by reason of their Melancholy tempers had a great advantage over them.
This is the most favorable construction that we can make of Drabiciu^'s being
so imposed on by pretended Revelations, of which we shall under our next
Conclusion speak more. Zeiglerus is an other famous Instance, who was by some
cried up for a person divinely inspired. A strange Impetus coming upon him at
Frankfort, he threw down the Emperors Arms, upon which the Magistrates of the
City sent him to the Hospital, supposing (as well they might) that he was out
of his wits. It was revealed to him that Rome would be destroyed in the year
1627: That Frederic the K. of Bo^emia, should become a King over thirteen
Kingdoms: That the Jews being converted, one of them should be an universal
Monarch over all the World: That a general Council should meet at Constance,
and continue sitting twelve years. It was also revealed to him, that he should
go over into England, and as being sent from God require King James. I. to
assist the Protestant Churches abroad. In obedience to his divine Mission he
came into Holland, but before he could reach England, he heard of K. James's
death. Yet this Zeigler was Caetera vir probus et non indoctus, as V^^tius (in
his Disput de Prophetia p. 1080.) does acknowledge, and does therefore ascribe
these extravagant Phansies and Revelations to the power of Melancholy, with
something of a crazed intellect. I omit to speak of that Fantastical Monk
Campanella, who in his Metaphysics writes, that the Devil once appeared to him,
and held a disputation with him. And ( de sensu rerum and Magia l. 3. cap. 10.)
he says, that when ever any danger did attend him, he heard a voice in the Air
calling to him by his name, which he believed was an Angel, or such a good
Genius as did attend Socrates. It is a dreadful thing, when men and women are
given up to Spiritual Possessions by evil Angels acting in their minds, and a
great mercy to be kept therefrom.

Conclusion III. Men ought to be very cautious of admitting or harkening unto
pretended Angelical Revelations. We have an awful Instance in the Scripture, of
a good man, and a Minister of God also, who was drawn into a snare to the
Loosing of his Life by hearkening to, and being deluded by pretended Angelical
Revelations. 2 King. 13* 18, 21, 22. If the circumstances attending them do not
at present manifest of what nature they are, we ought to wait, until God and
time shall make a discovery. Yea, though the person^ concerned in them should
be of pious inclinations, and the messages brought to them should seem to be
from Heaven, it is a duty rather to suspend a Judgment in the case, than to
give any credit thereunto. And this for several reasons.

1. Because the Written Word of God is sufficient to direct us in all ^ases. If
we do but rightly understand what is contained therein, we know enough. The man
of God may be perfest and thoroughly furnished to all good works by the
Scripture. 2 Timothy 3.17. It was for this reason that Luther never desired
Visions or Angelical Apparitions. Pactus sum cum domino, ne vel visiones, vel
etiam Angelos mihi mittat. Contentus sum hoc dono, quod habeo scripturam
sanctam, quae abunde docet et suppeditat omnia qua sunt necessaria, cum ad hanc
tum ad futuram vitam Thus He. Not to be satisfied with Scripture-Revelation, is
curiosity and inquisitiveness justly to be condemned. Tertullan said well,
nobis curiositate opus non est post Christum Jesum, nec inquisitione post
Evangelium. Advers. Haeres. cap. 4. He has therefore not without cause been
blamed by some for his too much minding the Raptures and Revelation^ of an
Ecstatical person in the Congregation where he was Teacher. When persons once
begin to listen to any thing, as a ground of their Faith, besides the
Scrip^ures, they know not where they shall stop. The blessed God does permit
Satan thus to tempt men, that so an occasion of stumbling may be cast before
some: and that so he may try the fi^^lity and sincerity of others, whether they
will indee^ cleave unto him, according to the Revelation, which he has made of
his will by the written Word: Therefore does he suffer Dreamers of Dreams, and
pretended Prophets to come amongst them. Deuteronomy. ^3.3. Had men no Scriptures to
go unto, their listening after Visions and Voices would be more excusable.

2. Since Satan may transform himself into an Angel of ^ight, men cannot always
at first discern of what nature the spirit or Apparition is. The Schoolmen
(though fond enough of Apparitions) yet acknowledge that an Evil Spirit cannot
always be discerned to be such an one. So Thom. Aquinas who has had the name of
D^^ter Angeli^us given to him. In 22* q. 95. Art. 3. Hence if persons who think
they are visited by Angels, be not very careful and cautious whom they
willingly entertain, they will have woeful communion with evil, when they think
that they are conversing with good Angels. Cor^el a Lapide in 2 Cor. 11.14.
mentions one unto whom Satan showed himself pretending to be Christ: The poor
deceived man thereupon adored him: Thus did he worship Satan, thinking he had
worshipped Christ. And thus were many of the old Eremites miserably deceived.
Hypocrites may be so like unto the Children of God as no man shall be able to
distinguish them. So may Evil Angels so transform themselves, as that no person
not endowed with the extraordinary Gift of discerning Spirits, shall at first
know them to be such. Balduinus in his Cases of Conscience (p. 534.) has these
words, Cum Diabolus se transformare potest in Angel^^^ luci^, nemo pe^ omnia
certus esse potest, an bonus an mal^^s Angelus ipsi apparuerit Voetius (in
disput. de probatione spiritu^m p. 1123) has these words, Apparitiones fictae
aut Diabolicae aut phantasticae, non semper nec per quos^vis per ce^^a et
ordinari^ signa dignoscuntur: and p. 1180. Cert^ et ind^bicata signa assignari
non possunt quibus ap^^^entes vel revelantes spiritus semper aut ordinario
discern^^^ur. qui (...) quales (...) Th^^e have sometimes been strange
intimations from the Invisible World, which whether they were from good or evil
Angels, Wise and Learned men have not been able to determine. I find a very odd
passage related by ^ good Author. There was (says he) a Countryman of
Burgundy, that in his sleep heard a certain verse repeated out of Homer, which
though he could not understand, he remembered very well, he therefore applied
himself to a Learned man still living, who told him that what he recited was a
verse in Homer, signifying that his House would shortly fall, which thing came
to pass accordingly. Now it is disputed what sort of Angel this was. It is
beneath a good Angel to come with a verse out of Homer. And what should make an
Evil Angel give a kind warning to a poor Countryman.

2. Many have been miserably imposed on by deceitful Demons, pretending to be
good Angels. Thus it has been with not a few hererodox persons as a Judgment of
God upon them for their Errors: Strong Delusions have bin sent upon them. 2
These. 2.11. The Montanists and other primitive Heretics were high pretenders
to rare communion with Spirits; and no doubt but that many of them did really
think that Angels had appeared to them, when it was all Diabolical Illusion.
See Eusebius Hist. l 5. cap. 15. When Monkery and Popery crept into the World,
Angels of Darkness clothed like Angels of Light were the cause of that misery
to the World. Sin^^ the Reformation the Devil has played the old game over
again. Balduinus speaks of them in his time, who from the visions and
conferences which they had with Angels, predicted mutations and eversions of
several States and Kingdoms, and that the destruction of Antichrist, and the
seculum spiritus sansti was then at hand. How some in the former Ce^^ury, who
went under the name of Anabaptists, have been after the like manner imposed on,
^ornbeck Spa^^eimius, and Cloppenburgius have given accounts large enough. But
it is awful to consider that persons truly pious have been thus deceived by the
old Serpent. He that crept into Paradise, will creep into Churches. Tertullian
in his Book De Anima (p. mihi. 265) which was written before his lapse into
Montanism, relates, That there was in the Church unto which he did officiate, a
Soror, who had the Gift of Revelations; That in the Church whilst they were
solemnizing the Worship of God, she would be in Ecstasies, et conversatur cum
Angelis, she had conferences with Angels. After the Public Worship was over,
and the Congregation dismissed, she would declare to Tertullian and the other
Officers of the Church what she had seen and heard; who kept an account of what
she declared, that so they might observe whether the things were true or no.
But thus not only a Member, but she Pastor and Officers of the Church suffered
themselves to be imposed on by pretended Angels. Junius his note on this
passage in Tertullian is, Inepta revelatio; phantasma laborantis melancholiae,
non indita a caelis revelatio. It is reported concerning Gertrude, who was
accounted a very religious woman, that she was frequently visited with Angels,
who used to appear to her in a glorious form, and would predict future things,
and reveal some matters that were secret. Nevertheless, these Visitants were
(as Cesarius has noted) Devils transforming them selves into Angels of Light.
But I have not met with any Examples more astonishing than some that have
happened in our days. I pretermit the Revelations which some amongst the
persecuted Protestants in France have lately been attended with, because I do
not understand what those things are come to, so that whether they are
Angelical or Diabolical, sub judice lis ^st, is as yet undetermined.
Nevertheless, there are several things which make me suspect that the French
Prophets are imposed on. e. g. Their Prophesying that the K. of England, and
the K. of France shall come to an agreement, and that the French K shall be
converted; their having sad looks, Fasting four or five days before they
Prophesy: Their being in Torments until the Sinners by them impeached come to
them. Their feeling something come from their ^eet to their throat before the
fit takes them. One of them had his Leg broke by the Spirit which acted him, of
which he felt nothing, till out of his fit. These things seem not to be the
work of Holy Angels: Time will discover what they are* But amongst them of the
Reformed and Persecuted Religion in Bohemia and Germany, there have lately been
no less than sixteen persons who have had Visions and Revelations. See the
General Table of Europe. p. 205, 206. I shall here take notice of only two of
them who have made a great noise in the World, and of whom Commenius has
published a large and true account. One is Nicholas Drabicius, a Protestant
Minister of Moravia. Commenius did at first suspect, that Drabicius's Visions
were either feigned or imaginary, and did with much severity reprove him: Yet
afterward that very learned and pious man inclined to think, that Drabicius
his Spirits were good Angels. And the only wise God saw meet in his Holy
Providence to suffer such things to happen as did both harden Drabicius in his
Errors, and occasion others to give credit to him. For Felinus the Pastor of
the Church of Exiles in Puchow wrote a Book, endeavoring to prove that the
Visions of Drabicius were an Ignis fatuus, no better than Satanical Delusions,
and that therefore the Protestant Churches should be careful how they gave any
heed to them. Hereupon Drabicius had a Revelation, that that Pastor should
speedily dye. Now this sign came to pass; that Pastor dyed suddenly, and so did
one Effron, Sapo^, and other of his Adversaries, and afterward Paul Laurin a
Minister that was young in years, and of a strong constitution of Body, which
induced many to believe, that Drabicius was a real Prophet. Though had they
considered Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2. they would not have taken such accidents for an
infallible demonstration of a Prophet sent from God. Veterinus, another of the
Reformed Pastors was much dissatisfyed about Drabicius's Visions, as Felinus
had been: Nor did any Judgment overtake him, notwithstanding he persisted in
his opposition to them. It was therefore thought necessary, that Drabicius
should by an Oath and Execration clear himself from all suspicion of forgery in
his p^e^ended Revelations, which he did readily comply with, saying, there was
no need for him to deliberate about it. The Oath was most solemnly administered
to him, in the presence of nine or ten Ministers, of whom Veterinus was one.
Considering how fearfully he did in that Oath imprecate himself, they trembled,
and some of them went when the Oath was administered to him: And so did he
himself, when he came to that pass^ge in the Oath, wherein there is an
imprecation against his Adversaries; but as to the Execrations on himself in
case he had feigned any thing, he did pronounce them with a cheerful
countenance. Looking forth at the Window which was at that time open, he said,
Do you not see, Friends, Do you not see! They being astonished, did not then
ask him what he saw, but afterward he told one of the Ministers that enquired
of him concerning it, that He saw Angels. It would be too uncharitable for us
to think, that Drabicius who suffered Persecution for the Gospels sake, and who
was esteemed a pious well-meaning man, did counterfeit Visions and Revelations.
And yet it is now evident, that he was deceived, and that he did very sinfully
give way to Satanical Illusions, supposing them to be Divine Revelations. He
declared that he was commanded to publish his Revelations to all the Nations on
the Earth, as the last will of God, which is contrary to Rev. 22.18, 19 some of
the things which were revealed to him, were lies which never were, nor ever
will be true. Yet he protested and swore, that although Angels appeared to him,
his Revelations were from Christ Himself, who once showed his hand pierced
through with a nail, and made him to see both the Tor^ents of the Damned in
Hell, and the Joys of the Elect (...) Heaven. He promised great Victories to
Prince Rag^tzi, and would have had the Princess been at the charges of Printing
some Books which he pretended a Command from Heaven that it should be done. But
when his demands were not complied with, the mother with the father, the Son
and the Uncle in that great Family being all taken away by death, he said the
reason thereof was, because they had not complied with what he (as being sent
from God) required them to do. These things are to be seen in his Protestation
and Prayer written July 5 1664 Twenty years before that, viz. April 12. 1644.
it was revealed to him that the Lord was about so do to the House of Austria,
as he did to the House of Ahab, and to his Counselors and Prophets as E^ias
did to the Baalites. That the tenth Emperor of the House of Austria should be
the last, whereas the present Leopoldus who has been Reigning above thirty
years, is the eleventh. It was also revealed to him, that Lewis 14 the present
King of France should be Emperor of Germany, and that the Persecuted
Protestants of Bohemia, and Moravia should ^y ^im be delivered Concerning
himself, the Spirit revealed to him, that he should be recalled out of his
Banishment, and that he should not dye until he had seen the Glory of God
spread upon all the Nations of the Earth. In reading the Narrative emi^ted by
Commenius relating to this Drabicius, I could not but take notice of one vanity
in him, which I am unwilling to pass by without a Remark, viz. that he would
snatch up the Bible, resolving that the first place which he light upon, should
be the answer to his doubt. Thus to make a Fortune-Book of the Blessed Bible,
is a very unwarrantable Custom, however practiced by many. It is indeed a
paganish custom: The Heathen did in that way use Divinations. When Septimius
Severus was in doubt concerning his obtaining the Empire, he would know his
Fortune by trying what verse in Virgil he should first light upon, which happened
to be that in Aenead. 6. Tu regere imperio populos Roman memento. Such persons
imitate that sort of Witchcraft which of old was known by the name of
Sortilegium, more than becomes Christians to do. But this is a parenthesis. To
proceed. Ex non eventu cognoscitur non propheta. The Event not answering the
predictions* i^ an indubitable sign, that they were not of a Divine
inspiration. Deuteronomy. 18.21. Isa. 44.26. Jer. 28.9. Nor may the unhappy end of
this poor man be reflected on without trembling at the awful Judgments of God
which are a great deep. In the Oath of Execration which he submitted unto, are
these words, I N. B. agrieved with the suspicion of some, as if I did utter in
the Name of God words not commanded from God, but rashly devised by my self,
etc. If this iniquity be found in my hands, let the Enemy pursue my Soul, and
overtake it, and tread down my life in the Earth, and bring my glory into the
dust. If my heart has declined from God, and the words of his Law to a strange
voice, that my mouth should arrogantly speak in the name of God, the words of
him that is not God, and my hands should w^ite my own Imaginations, let the
Lord give me for a curse and an execration in the midst of my people, making my
tongue to rot in my mouth, and my hand to gangreene and perish in my Body. Now
the end which this well-meaning man, deluded by visions and voices came unto at
last, was very tragical. For his Enemies the Jesuits did pursue his soul and
overtake it, and being charged with Treason against the Imperial Majesty,
because his visions animated the French against Germany, his Life was taken
from him, but first that hand which had written those Prophesies, was cut off,
and that tongue which had uttered them, was cut out of his head. A warning to
all persons hereafter to take he^d, how they believe Visions and Apparitions. I
shall mention but one Instance more here, which likewise happened in our days.
There was Christina Peniatovia, she was the pious Daughter of a pious Minister,
who was of a noble Family in Prussia. This her Father was a (...) and judicious
Divine, and a great opposer of Revelations and Visions, who when he understood,
that his Daughter pretended to them, he did with great solemnity and severity,
lay obtesta^ions on her, that she should not regard them. Nevertheless, he
himself did at last think, that they were Angelical and Divine. Those
super-eminent Divines, Ve^e^ius and Die^l^t, and other learned men in Geneva
had a favorable opinion of them. Commenius who was her Tutor and Spiritual
Father, has related such things of her as are mavelous and unaccountable.
Once when an aged Minister came to visit and comfort her being sick, as soon as
he was gone she said to her Tutor, That good old man little thinks that he must
be the first of all the Pastors that shall go into the Eternal Country. Her
Tutor asked her, how she knew that. To whom she replied, I was with the Lord,
and I saw the Pastors that live here coming one after another, of whom he was
the first. She likewise told him, that she saw Stadius who was a young and a
strong healthy man, come after him: And that because she did not see Comm^nius
with them, she asked the reason. It was told her, that God had work for him to
do on the Earth, and therefore he must not go to Heaven as yet. Th^se things
happened accordingly. That Pastor dyed first, and then the rest; and Stadius
when he was but in the fortieth year of his Age. But Comm^nius lived above
forty years after. An Angel appeared to her, and told her she should speedily
die of an Apoplexy: She was that night smi^ten with that disease. She made her
will, and took her leave of all her friends: was for some time thought to be
really dead: there was no breath perceived in her, but she was grown quite cold
her hands and feet were become stiff like a dead persons; All persons went out
of the Room, leaving only two. Nurses to lay her out: But on a sudden she rose
up in her bed, and called for her Clothes, and was in such perfect health as
before she had not been in, her lame hand and foot being made whole and
perfect, to the astonishment of all about her. The account which she her self
gives of this matter, is, that on the day before, there was a knocking or
striking on the Table, first one stroke, and after that five, whence she
concluded, that the next day she should dye at five a Clock in the afternoon:
That she heard a voice saying, Come, come, come. When that evening came, her
sight and spe^ch failed, and (says she) I felt my self go forth with my Spirit,
and be ca^ried into heaven, where surrounded with a great shining, I saw an
huge company clothed in white: And the Lord stepping forth took me in his
embrace. She added, ^h^t the Lord told her, she should return again, and behold
his goodness in the land of the living, that her disease should leave her. She
then desired to know how many the days of her life should be. But that the
Lord told her, that should be hid from her, commanding her to live righteously,
and that He would no more visit her as formerly. Whereupon she worshipped him,
and was restored to Life, and to full vigor, health, and strength in that very
moment. This surely is a strange Relation; yet reported as credible, by as
grave and learned a man as Comm^nius, who was an eye and ear witness of these
things; Now I must confess, I am not easy to believe, that Christinas death or
her Ascension into Heaven was real, but that they were both Fantastical. Nor
do I know any cogent reason, why the Visions of one diseased with an Apoplexy
should be thought to be of greater weight then the Visions of one diseased with
a Fever or Calenture. Voetius (de Prophetia p. 1080, 1081) concludes that her
Visions could not be Divine, because of some jocose passages attending some of
them, trivial matters, and things inexplicable as to others of them. Besides,
although what she did predict as to her self, usually happened, her Revelations
as to the public and great concerns of the Church and World were never
fulfilled, but the contrary. Our Lord said to his Disciples, You know not what
manner of Spirit you are of. Luke 9.55. Persons truly pious may think they are
acted by a good, when it is by an evil Spirit. When they have Visions, they
know not what manner of spirit it is that does appear to them. For which reason
they ought to be very cautious and careful, how they hearken to them, least
happily they be deceived as Eve was, when she conversed with the Devil in the
Serpent, whom probably (as Dr. Lightfoot, and others have observed) she took to
be a good Angel, and was thence the more easily seduced into Error.

4 All those TEKMERIA or signs to judge by, which are found in the Writings of
some Learned men, are fa^lible. There are many things mentioned by
Carthusianus, Gerson, Tyraeus, Malderus, and others, by which they suppose that
Angelical Apparitions may be discerned from those that are Diabolical. But I
have met with no marks to judge by, either in them or in any other Authors,
that are infallible. To instance here in some particulars.

1. Some say, That the Devil cannot appear without some deformity or other.
That as he could not appear in the shape of a man before man had sinned, and
therefore came to our First Parents in the shape of a Serpent; so now though he
can put on Humane Shape, yet that it must be with some defect or other, a
cloven foot, an ugly countenance, or the like. See Mr. Mede's Works* fol. 282.
Psellus supposes not only that Angels have a^ery or fiery Bodies so subtle as
that they are to us invisible (of which opinion were many of the Ancients) but
moreover, that the Angelical Body sends forth rays and splendors which would
dazzle mortal eyes, but that the Body of an Evil Angel is obscure and squalid.
But the notion of Evil Angels always appearing with some deformity in their
shape is a vulgar error contrary to the Scripture, which says expressly, that
Satan can transform himself into an Angel of light. 2 Cor. 11.14. That he can
appear like a venerable Samuel, who was an honorable man of God. 1 Samuel 9.6.
and 28.12. We may gather from the 13. Verse of that Chapter, that the Devil
seemed both to the Witch of Endor and to Saul, to be a person clothed with a
Divine Majesty and Brightness: he appeared like Elohim. This opinion has been
often confuted by experience. What were those Nymphs that the Gentiles of old
were deceived with, but Devils appearing in a beautiful form? Do not
Ecclesiastical Writers tell us of his appearing to Anatolius, and to St. Martin
in most glorious array? That instance of Mr. Edwards a Mr. of Art of Trin
College in Cambridge is remarkable. He had been a Magician and a Conjurer: But
God gave him repentance, and after he was reclaimed from the error of his way,
he declared* that the Demon whom he had been wont to converse with, always
appeared to him in the form of a man of good fashion: nor did he ^ver require
or propose the making of any Covenant with him. See Glanvils Philosophical
Considerations p. 42.

2. It has been said, that Good Angels are terrible at their first appearance,
but not at their departure, whenas evil Angels do not appear fright fully at
first but at last. This is no infallible rule to judge by; nor does it agree
with the Scripture. When three Angels appeared to Abraham, and two came to Lot,
they were not at first terrifyed with the sight of them. Genesis 18.3. and 19.1,
2. The Angel that visited Manoah and his Wife, was not at his first appearance
terrible, but at his departure he was dreadful to them. Judge. 13.22. The Devils
first appearance to Saul as well as his last was amazing to him. The Scripture
calls the Devil by the name of Seyir, whence the name of Sa^yr seems to be
derived. Lev. 17.7. Isa. 13.21. because Demons have often appeared to men in
that horrid Shape. The Hebrew word which is translated Satyr the Seventy Greek
interpreters express by Daimonia, i. e. Devils: the word in its original
signification notes such an horror as does make the hai^ of a man's head to
stand upright. For the most part there is an horror attending Diabolical
Apparitions: but it is not always so.

3. Some have thought, that the Appa^ition of a good Angel leaves no room for
doubting. That persons visited by holy Angels cannot possibly have any
hesitation in their minds, whether they are such o^ no But this also is a
mistake. Men may converse with Angels, and yet not be aware of it Heb. 13.2.
Neither Abraham, nor Lot, nor Gideon, nor Manoah's Wife, nor he himself did at
first know that the persons who came and discoursed with them, were Angels
Judge. 13.16. When the Angel Gabriel came to the Mother of our Lord, she was at
first at a loss about what was spoken to her: She was troubled at his saying,
and cast in her mind, what manner of Salutation this should be. Luke 1.29. As
for the holy Prophets, they it is true neither did nor could doubt whether they
were divinely inspired. For that Divine light which was implanted in their
understandings, did shine with that power as made them certain that God spoke
to them. There was an IDIOTES ARRETOS, an inexpressible peculiarity in them. No
man that was a subject of that Irradiation, could be ignorant of it: nor could
any persons be deceived besides such as had it not: which is more than can be
affirmed of all Visions or Apparitions of Angels.

4. No infallible Judgment can be made by the words which they speak, or the
counsel which they give, whether the appearing Spirits are good or evil Angels.
Jacobus Vitriacus speaks of one who was frequently visited in his sleep by a
Demon, that did reprehend him for some of his faults, and also excite him to
acts of piety and devotion: but the Demon used this fraud with a design to
instill some poisonous notions into his mind. Delrio writes of a Monk unto whom
the Devil appeared in the likeness of St. Paul, exhorting him to read the
Scriptures. The Demon that acted Robert Churchman (a deluded Quaker at Balsham
in Cambridgeshire, whom the Lord was graciously pleased to Convert from the
error of his way) told him, that the Doctrine of the Trinity was true, and that
God had an Elect People; that those whom the Father had Elected, the Son had
Redeemed, and whom Christ Redeems, the holy Spirit Sanctifies; and directed him
to go to a Minister for further Instruction. Have not cursed Magicians
pretended, that the Caelestial Spirits would communicate their secrets to none
but Sanctified ones? That men who would have a familiar conversation with those
Spirits to reveal secrets to them, must be careful to keep themselves from
enormous sins, and pray daily to the most High, v. Boissard de secretis Magiae
Cap. 1. p. 30. We read in the Scripture of Magicians, who have advised such as
come to them, to give glory to God, and to beware of hardening their hearts as
Pharaoh did. 1 Samuel 6.5, 6. How long did the Demon, which appeared to Dr. D^e
and Killet continue to give them good counsil in many things, before they
advised them to that which was apparently wicked and vile? Carthusianus does
greatly mistake, when he supposes, that those Revelations must needs be
Divine, which incite men to devotion and spirituality. The Devil has often
taken that course, that so he might the more effectually deceive. Fallit
di^bol^s fuadendo bo^^m, propter majus malum inde o^i^^rum. That so he may
insinuate himself into those whom he cannot otherwise prevail with, he will
exhort them unto acts of Piety and Charity. There are some that will give no
credit unto what Bodinus writes, because they say he was a Papist. Yet others
say of him, that he was o^^m Protestanti^m doctrinae addictus, nec ab ea multum
unquam poste^ alienus. v. Thua^. Hist. Tom. 4. l* 94. He was such an other
Papist as Erasmus was, whom the Papists are wont to picture hanging between
heaven and hell. Papists have accused Bodinus for an Heretic, because he makes
an honorable mention of Luther, Calvin, and Melancthon. v. Possevin.
Bibliothec. sell. l. 16.^.9. He was an ingenuous and judicious writer: Now in
his Daemonomania, there are strange instances recorded which confirm what we
assert. Remigius also speaks of a young man whose name was Theodore M^illot
unto whom a Demon appearing, exhorted him not only to abstain from
drunkenness, uncleanness, theft, and the like evils, but to be constant in his
attendance on the Public worship of God* to be very charitable to the poor,
and to be frequent in fasting. Would not any man have taken this counselor for
a good Angel? Let me here take notice of another Example, which many still
alive do remember. In the Islands of Fer^e which are subject to the King of
Denmark, there was in the year 1667. a young man whose name is Jacob Oluffso^:
he on January 7 th. in that year, was afflicted with a disease that made him
keep within doors a fortnight: on January 20 th. being Lords day there appeared
to him one in shining garments, and made the room where he was, full of
splendour. He gave a kind Salutation to the young man, asking him about his
pain, and then stroking him with his hand, the young man was presently healed.
This shining Spirit used those words to him, Be thou whole and si^ no more. He
exhorted him to pray three times every day, and that he should admonish the
people where he lived, that they should pray also, and that they should leave
off their Cursing and Swearing, and desist from all other sins, that so the
anger of God may be appeased: So did the Spirit depart from him. But five days
after he appeared again, and did then sing the 23. Psalm. The young man had a
strong impulse on his Spirit to go abroad, where he saw in the Southwest the
heavens opened, and one coming down thence, who at length came and stood by
him, habited like a Minister, and told him he should not at all doubt, but that
he came from God. The next Lord's Day, being January 27, the glittering spirit
appeared to him the third time, asking whether he had performed, what he was
commanded. He said, Yes, he had. But this Spirit replied, You have not done it
so earnestly as ought to have been. He appeared several times after this. But
at his third appearing, he told the young man that they must change the day of
their keeping the Sabbath, from the first day to the last day of the week,
withal adding, that whereas there had been on Saturday two Suns seen in the
Heavens, that was sent as a sign that Saturday should be kept as an Holy Day.
The news of these Apparitions became public all ^he Country over, and many
ignorant people (notwithstanding they were Protestants) put great faith in
them, especially as to that of the new Holy Day. But the Ministers charging
their people to adhere to the infallible Word of God, and not to regard
visions, in a while all vanished, and every one was satisfied, that this
Shining Spirit was no other than a White Devil. The account of this matter was
published by Lucas Jacobson Provost of the Churches in those Islands. Also R.
B. has inserted ^t in his Book, Entitled, The Kingdom of Darkness, p. ^*11.
etc. It is moreover certain* that Evil Angels may pr^tend a great kindness for
those who are the faithful and eminent Servants of God, that so they may either
draw them into the snares of temptation, or bring a blast o^ their reputation.
There was a Maid possessed with a Spirit, which would discover hidden things,
and yet this Spirit did cry up the most Eminent Ministers in the World, as the
true Servants of God. He said concerning Paul and Silas, These men are the
Servants of the most ^igh God, which show unto us the way of Salvation. Act.
16.17. some have thought, that Evil Spirits cannot exalt Christ. It is true,
that the Blessed Name of Jesus is hateful and dreadful to them. Nevertheless,
to serve a design of their own, they will extol him. Some Authors write of
those who having had familiar Spirits, would speak highly of Christ, whenas
thereby they intended him whom they had devoted themselves unto, who (not
without the highest Blasphemy) called himself Christ, and would be worshipped
above all that is called God. We know from the sacred and infallible Oracle,
that a man who was possessed with many unclean Spirits, when the Master-devil
in him beheld Christ, he fell down before him, and said, Jesus thou Son of God
most high, I beseech thee torment me not. Luke 8.28. Another of them said, Thou
Jesus of Nazareth, art thou come to destroy us, I know thee who thou art, the
ho^y one of God. Mar. 1.24. The Devils know and con^ess that Christ has power
over them. Act. 19.15.

5* In case they predict some future events, which happen to come to pass
accordingly, we may not from that sole consideration conclude them to be good
Angels. Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. Cicero in his Book of divination, relates that the
Oracle of Apollo predicted that Cypsalus the Tyrant should reign at Corinth
hundreds of years before it came to pass. An Augur when Rome was in building,
from the flying of Twelve Vultars, presaged the continuance of that City would
be 1200. years, which some learned men suppose was accomplished A. D* 455. When
Gensericus burnt the City of Room 1200. years after it was first built. What
shall we think of Thomas Lermouth the famous Scotch Wizard, who predicted Bruce
his succession to the Crown, and the union of the two Kingdoms of England and
Scotland in the ninth degree of the Bruces blood? Daemon^ have seldom (though
sometim^s) ventured to foretell events remotely distant: but very often they
have p^ed^cted things near at hand, which they might easily do (...) a greater
insight into the immediate causes of things then men have. It was no difficult
thing for the Demon that appeared in the likeness of Samuel to Prophesy the
ruin of Saul's Family. All these things considered it is evident that when an
Angel appears, the best Saint on earth may easily be mistaken as to some
circumstances attending that Apparition. We see this in the Apostle John who
thought the Angel that came to him, had bin the Lord himself, otherwise he
would not have fallen down at his feet to have worshipped him, for which his
Error that Holy Angel reproved him, Rev. 22.8, 9. Of which see Mr. Phillipot in
his new System of the Revelation. p. 281. etc.

Conclusion IV. The best and the only way to prevent deception in this case, is
to keep close to the Scripture, and when thus tempted, by earnest Prayer with
Fasting to seek unto God, that we may not be imposed on with Satanical
Illusions. The Scripture directs us to fight against Satan with spiritual
weapons; and in so doing we shall at last be too hard for him. 2 Cor. 10.4.
Extraordinary Temptations call for more than ordinary supplications before that
God who has styled himself, The Hearer of Prayer. Because of this thing, we
must beseech the Lord thrice. When the Holy Apostle did so, God would not
permit Satan to have his will over him. 2 Cor. 12.7. Oration est flagellum
Diaboli. The Devil dreads Prayer* and whole Armies of them have fled before the
power of it. When Evil Angels pretending to be good one^, are in respect of
bodily possessions or of Apparitions let loose upon men and women after such a
rate as is truly prodigious, there ought to be Humiliation by Fasting with
Prayer before the Lord; and it may be an happy deliverance from them will be
obtained in no other way. Mat. 17.21. There was in Geneva a Senators Son, whom
a pretended good spirit accosted with strange Visions and Revelations, saying,
that he was the Angel that had showed unto Christina the Virgin of Poland,
things that were to come. Some Divines in that City did at first incline to
think, that it was indeed a good Angel. But after a while one of them saying,
he perceived the ^^ger of Satan in the business, the spirit who acted that
youth, uttered these words, They will not believe that I am a good Angel sent
of God, but I will prove it by a miracle, and snatching some way or other a
knife, thrust i^ into his breast, and drew it out again without hurt, crying*
behold a miracle* Senators with Ministers there (...) by Fa^^ing and Prayer
se^k unto God i^ a case so solemn. They were answered with a speedy
deliverance. Indeed, if persons under such circumstances come before the Lord
with an Idol in their hearts, He does som^times in Judgment answer them
according to that Idol. But when with a true heart they draw nigh^ unto him, he
is not wont, i^ they (...) a fish, to give them a Serpent, but all ends w^ll
(...) ^ast* If we would have God hear us, we must hear him speaking to us in
those bl^ssed Scriptures, which are a mo^^ s^re word of Prophesy than a voice
from Heaven. 2 Pet. 1.13, 19. They that will be hearkening to extraordinary
voices, know not the danger which they expose themselves unto. Jewish Writer^
pretend, that (...) under the Second Temple Prophesy (...), that some of their
Doctors were favored with (...), succeeding the Oracle of Urim and Th^mmim,
b^^ng a more in^eriour sort of Revelation, that they heard* voices from Heaven
which were instructive to them. But Dr. ^ightfoot and others have noted, that
there was Diabolica^ Illusion in those voices which they built their Faith
upon. It was well said by Luther, that in^tead of Visions, Dreams, Voices, or
Appearances of Angels, he did believe and rest sati^fied in his having the
Scriptures, A^ c^rtus sum me posse salii, as long as I keep to them, I am
certain that I cannot be deceived. All Scripture is given by Inspiration of
God. If a^ Angel from Heaven shall speak any thing contrary thereunto, let him
be accursed.

Glory be to God in the Highest.

