Acts made the 5th Assembly, 5th Sessions. Beginning the 25th of March, 1697.
and ending the 22th day of April following, Anno Regni Regis Gulielmi Tertij,
Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Nono.
An ACT for the raising the Sum of Three and Twenty Hundred Pounds to Enable
his Excellency to secure the Fronteers at Albany, and for recruiting his
Majesty's three Companies posted there, with a sufficient Number to complete
Three Hundred effective Men, to remain there from the first of May next, until
the first of May then next following, and to free the Inhabitants during the
said Time, from Detachments.
THe Representatives convened in General Assembly, in humble acknowledgment of
the great and prudent Care that his Excellency has taken for the Security of
the Fronteers of this Province at Albany, as well as that his Excellency may be
the better enabled to secure the said Fronteers, by recruiting his Majesty's
three Companies posted there, with a sufficient Number to complete the said
Companys, three Hundred effective Men, and for their encouragement to remain
there from the first day of May next* to the first day of May then next
following, also during the said Time, to ease the Inhabitants of the said
Province from any further Supplies in Assembly, for that Service, as well as to
free them from Detachments, unless in the case of inevitable Necessity, Do
humbly pray that it may be Enacted, And be it therefore Enacted by his
Excellency the Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in General
Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That the Sum of Three and Twenty
Hundred Pounds current Money of this Province be laid, assessed, levied and
raised upon all and every the the Inhabitants, Residents, Sojourners and
Freeholders of and in this Province, to be employed by his Excellency in manner
and form following, That is to say, The Sum of eighteen Hundred Pounds, part of
the said Sum of three and twenty Hundred Pounds, for the recruiting of his
Majesty's said three Companys posted at Albany for the Security of the
Fronteers of this Province there, with a sufficient Number to complete the said
3 Companys three hundred effective Men, and for their encouragement to remain
there from the aforesaid first Day of May next, to the first Day of May then
next following, as also during the said time to ease the Inhabitants of the
said Province from any further Supplies in Assembly for that Service, as well
as to free them from Detachments (uness in the case of inevitable necessity)
And also the Sum of five Hundred Pounds, the residue of the aforesaid Sum of
230 l. current Money aforesaid, to be judged at Albany and distributed amongst
such as shall be employed to range the Woods, for discovering the motion of the
Enemy, as occasion, and to no other Use, Intent or purpose whatsoever; which
Sum of 230 l. current Money aforesaid, shall be raised, assessed, levied and
paid unto his Majesty's Collector and Receiver General, for the time being, at
the City of New York, in two equal Payments, that is to say, the one moiety or
half part thereof, at or before the 29th Day of September next, and the other
moity or equal half part thereof, at or before the 25th Day of March then next
following, in such manner, and according to the several and respective Quota's
and Proportions following, that is to say,

For the City and County of New York, the Sum of seven hundred and seven Pounds
five Shillings, current Money aforesaid.

For the County of Suffolk, the Sum of four hundred and fourteen Pounds,
current Money aforesaid.

For Kings County, the Sum of three hundred seventy two Pounds twelve
Shillings, current Money aforesaid.

For Queens County, the Sum of three hundred seventy one Pounds nine Shillings,
current Money aforesaid.

For the County of Vlster and Duchess, the Sum of one hundred ninety seven
Pounds sixteen Shillings, current Money aforesaid.

For the County of Westchester, the Sum of one hundred thirty three Pounds
eight Shillings, current Money aforesaid.

For the County of Richmond, the Sum of eighty Pounds ten Shillings, current
Money aforesaid.

For the County of Orange, the Sum of twenty three Pounds, current Money
aforesaid.

And for the due and better assessing, raising, levying and paying the
aforesaid Sum of 230 l. current Money aforesaid, Be it therefore further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of
New York, the Justices of the Peace, the Assessors and Collectors for the time
being, of all and every of the respective Cities and Counties, Towns and
Manors, Liberties and Jurisdictions within this Province, are hereby required,
empowered and authorized to summons and asses, collect and pay the several Sums
of Money herein beforementioned, according to the Quota's and Proportions
before expressed, in such ways and means, and according to such rule, manner
and direction, and under such (...) Penalties (...), enjoined, prescribed,
directed and (...) one (...) of General A^s^mbly, passed in the eighth Year of
his Majest^es (...). An (...) the raising of one Hundred Men, to b^ l^st^d in
(...) Majesty's three (...) posted at Albany for the security of the Fronteers,
and for the (...) Twelve Hundred Pounds for the encouraging such as shall li^t
themselves (...) Companys, and for the d^fraying of contingent Charges at the
(...) Front^^r^. And all and every Article, Rule, Clause, Pains and Penalties
expressed and mention^d (...) the aforesaid Act for and concerning the
summoning, asse^sing, col^ecting and pa^ing of Money, or for refusing and
negle^ting the several and respective (...) required therein, shall be, abide*
continue and remain in (...) and (...) to all intents and purposes, and in as
(...) and ample manner, for the due execution of this Act, until the aforesaid
Sum of Three and Twenty Hundred Pounds, current Money aforesaid (...), fully
and completely assessed, collected and paid, as above d^^^cted, as fully, and
^^ke m^nner as if the same were particularly and at large recited and set down
in the Body of this Act, any thing herein to the contrary hereof in any wa^^
notwithstanding. And the Mayor and Aldermen of the ^^ty of New York, and all
and every of the Justices, Assessors and (...) of the respective Cities and
Counties aforesaid, and all others (...), are hereby Required and Commanded to
take strict (...) accordingly.

(...) C^^firming and Continuing two Acts (...) Seventh Years of his Majesty's
Reign, for the (...), etc. for one year longer after the time mentioned i^
(...) by their Limitation
(...) the Governor and Council, and (...) Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted
by the (...) the same, That an Act of Assembly, passed in the ^th (...) our
Sovereign Lord, WILLIAM the Third, King (...), An Act for confirming and
continuing an A^t for (...) Judicature, for the ease and benefit of each
respective City, (...) within this Province, shall be, abide, continue and
remain in (...) ^o^ce and effect to all intents and purposes whatsoever; and
all and every the ^rticles, Rules and Clauses mentioned in the said Act, as
well as all and every the Articles, Rules and Clauses recited and mentioned in
another Act of Assemb^y made in the fifth year of the Reign of our said
Sovereign Lord the King that now is, entitled, An Act for establishing Courts
of Judicature for the case and benefit of each respective City, Town and County
within this Province, for and during the space and term of one whole year next
and after the expiration of the time limited in the aforesaid Act, and no
longer, in as full and ample manner as if all and every the aforesaid (...)
Articles and Clauses were recited, expressed and mentioned in this Act, any
thing therein to the contrary hereof in any ways notwithstanding.

An Act for the raising a yearly Rate to pay the respective Collectors in each
respective City and County in this Province, for their pains in collecting and
paying the Publibk Rates and Taxes.
WHereas the respective Cities and Counties within this Province have neglected
to make annual Rate for the satisfying the Collectors for their Charge and
Trouble in the collecting and paying the Public Taxes raised in their
respective Cities and Counties, to the great hurt and loss of those Collectors
that have been employed in the said Service, as well as the great delay in the
paying of the said Taxes unto his Majesty's Collector and Receiver General. To
the end therefore that the same may be removed, Be it Enacted by his Excellency
the Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly,
and by the Authority of the same, That there shall be laid and assessed
annually, and once every year, a certain Rate in each respective City and
County within the said Province, for the paying and satisfying the respective
Collectors of the Public Taxes within their respective Limits and Precincts in
their respective Counties, according to such Agreement as the respective
Justices of the respective Cities and Counties within this Province, shall make
with the several Collectors in their respective Cities and Counties aforesaid,
provided the same shall not exceed Nine Pence per Pound, unless Queens County,
who may raise a rate for the satisfying the Arrears due to their respective
Collectors within the said County.

An Act to enable the City and County of Albany to Defray their Necessary
Charge.
WHereas there was an Act of General Assembly made in the seventh Year of his
Majesty's Reign, entitled, An Act to enable the City and County of Albany to
defray their necessary Charge for two years from the Publication thereof: Which
Act does terminate, by its own Limitation, upon the first day of July next. And
the Representatives of the said City and County of Albany humbly praying, That
the said Act may be renewed and continued for two years longer after the
expiration of the said Act, Be it therefore Enacted by his Excellency the
Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly, and it
is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, That the Imposition or Rate of
Two per Cent. shall be raised and levied upon all Indian Goods that are brought
up to that City and County of Albany and there sold and consumed. And also,
that the Impost of Three Pence be raised and levied upon each Gallon of Rum
that is sold and consumed within that City and County. And for the due and
orderly collecting of the respective Imposts and Rates, the Treasurer of the
said City for the time being, or any appointed by him, and the Mayor of the
said City, under the public Seal of the said City, are hereby empowered and
authorized to appoint, constitute and establish a Collector or Receiver of the
Rates and Imposts aforesaid, who shall have Power to receive the same, and to
enter in a fair Book, kept for that purpose, all such Sum and Sums of Money as
shall be so entered and received for the respective Duties aforesaid, the said
Collector or Receiver appointing certain convenient Times and Places for the
keeping of the Office, as shall be directed by the Court of Mayor and Aldermen,
and Assistants of the said City. And all Persons that Trade, and bring up to
the said City and County the aforementioned Indian Goods and Rum, are hereby
required to make a Report of the Quantity and Value of such Goods and Rum they
so bring up and sell in the City and County aforesaid, and pay the Duties and
Imposts hereby established, without being at any further charge than the said
Duty. And in default hereof it shall be lawful for the Mayor, Treasurer, or
any other Officer hereby authorized, to issue out his or their Warrant, under
his or their Hand and Seal, for the seizing all such Goods and Rum as shall be
imbezeled, and not pay the Duties aforesaid, one third to the Informer, one
third to the said City and County of Albany, and one third to his Excellency
the Governor or Commander in chief for the time being. Provided, That all the
Sum and Sums of Money that are hereby received, shall be only appropriated and
applied to the defraying of the necessary Charge of the City and County
aforesaid. And that the Treasurer, Collector or Receiver, for the time being,
shall not pay any of the Money received as aforesaid, but by Warrant from the
Mayor of the said City, and approved by the Justices of the Peace of the said
County. Provided, That this Act shall only remain in force for the space of two
years, and no longer, and to commence upon the expiration of the former Act,
any thing contained herein to the contrary hereof notwithstanding.


