THE Fountain Opened: OR, The Great Gospel Privilege of having CHRIST
exhibited to Sinful Men.

WHEREIN Also is proved that there shall be a National Calling of the JEWS
From Zech. XIII.1.

By Samuel Willard, Teacher of a Church in Boston.

1 Cor. 2.2. I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus Christ,
and him Crucified.

Si Christum discit, satis est si caetera nescis. Boston in New England,
Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Samuel Sewall Junior. 1700.

To the READER.
SVCH is the fullness of Sufficiency in Christ, that no words can enough express
it: for which reason the Holy Scriptures set him forth under the shadow of many
Metaphors, which require a Spiritual improvement; all of which put together
make up but a dark and deficient description of him: and yet every one of them
Commends him to us as an Object worthy of our Love and Trust, inasmuch as they
represent him one every way furnished to answer all our wants, which can no
where else be supplied; and, but for whom we must needs have perished in them.
The following Sermons set him forth as a Fountain, and such an one as is Opened
to miserable men, together with those Virtues which do more eminently flow from
him as such, for the abundant supply of all those that partake in him: and
withal it gives us the comfortable notice of a more peculiar and glorious
Revelation and Application of it, to be made in these last days. If thou have
known, what it is to be in a dry and thirsty land, where no Water is, this will
be good News to thee. If thou hungrest and thirstest after Righteousness, this
will give thee direction. If thou have ever tasted that he is gracious, thou will here find Refreshment. If thou art at a loss about the dark Providence
which are upon the Christian World, thou will here find matter of encouragment,
in prospect of the better Times wherein this Fountain will be wonderfully
exhibited.

Touching the Sermon that is subjoyned to this short Treatise, I need not to
apologize for the Seasonableness of Publishing it, unto such as understand the
Genius of the Age we live in. If any thing in these Papers may serve to win
Souls to CHRIST, and confirm his Redeemed in their Love of Him, and promove
Evangelical Holiness, I have my desire. To his Blessing then I Commend them and
thee, Who am

Thy Servant for Christ's sake, Samuel Willard.

THE Fountain Opened, etc.
ZECH. XIII.1. In that day there shall be a Fountain Opened to the House of
David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for Sin, and for Uncleanness.


ZEchariah was one of those Extraordinary Prophets whom God raised up and sent
to the Jews, after their return from Babylon. He was contemporary with Haggai,
and began his Ministry about two months later, in the Reign of that Darius who
encouraged and set forward the building of the Temple; to the pursuit of which
affair, these two Prophets did jointly stir up and animate the People of God.
Who this Zechariah was, and to what Tribe and Family he belonged, we are at a
loss, his Genealogy being only reckoned up to his Grandfather, of whose Stock
there is no mention made elsewhere in the Old Testament: only this I suppose is
beyond just dispute, that he is the same whom these Jews did barbarously
murder, for his faithful reproofs given them, and denouncing of Gods Righteous
Threatenings against them for their sins; which added to their guilt, and is
articled against their Posterity by Christ himself, in Mat. 23.35. This Book is
partly Doctrinal, partly Visional. In the Visional part of it he gives an
account of all the Changes or Revolutions which were to pass over the Jewish
Nation, till, for their sins, and more particularly, for their despising of
Christ, and the Salvation by him offered to them, they should be laid desolate;
and so abide, till such time as God should again graciously call them: and
there are interwoven the Predictions of the Judgments of God on other Nations,
so far as they concerned his dealings with this people. Diverse of these Visions
are exceeding mysterious, and the harder to be understood by us, not only
because of the depth of the Allegories used, and the intermixing of things fore
signified by way of anticipation; but also because they are not as yet
accomplished: And here we are more especially to observe those Prophesies which
point to the Calling of the Jews to Christ, and the Spiritual Glory of that
time, which is more than once hinted at in this Book: as also the Calling of
the Gentiles, and the wonderful enlarging of the Grace of God to other Nations.
To make the way clear to the words of our Text, let us observe, that at the
beginning of Chap. 12. Our Prophet predicts an happy and glorious Estate which
God will in due time restore Jerusalem unto, and he indigita^es a special
appointed season in which this should eminently be accomplished: and therefore
it is once and again called, That Day, as it were with an Asterism set upon it.
To what day, or article of time this Prophecy particularly points, is matter
of debate, as also whether the Jewish Nation, and literal Jerusalem be at all
aimed at in it. That Gospel Times are pointed to, is very evident by several
passages which might be observed in the Context: or the time after which Christ
had been put to death by this people: and that some notable gracious
dispensat^on toward Gods ancient people is aimed at nextly therein, is, I am
persuaded, without doubt; though others also may be comprised in it. Some
Expositors, not only re^er; but restrain it to those notable Conversions of the
Jews on the Preaching of the Apostles, which are recorded in, Acts 2 and 4. But
though there may be accounted then to have been a Specimen, or an earnest of
it, yet the lo^ty expressions that are here used about it, and al^o the
extensiveness of the work mentioned, say that there has not as yet been a full
performance of it, but that it is to be waited for, when that General Calling
in of the Jews shall Commence, of which we have a satisfying account in Romans
11. In Chap. 12.10. God, by the Prophet, tells us how he will prepare his
people for such great favors, viz he will bring them to a true and cordial
mourning for the affronts which they had offered to the Lord Jesus Christ, in
crucifying of him; and that both universal and particular: and thereupon he
proceeds to enumerate several spiritual benefits which shall ensue; the first
whereof that is mentioned, is this in our Text, and it is a very comprehensive
one. The words then are a gracious New Covenant Promise, of a singular benefit
to be bestowed on the Church of God in Gospel Times, and upon every true
penitent in it; and particularly on the Jews, when he shall come to call them
home to himself. In them we may observe,

1. The benefit it self which is promised: A Fountain.

2. The singular mercy that should be discovered in regard of this benefit, it
shall be Opened.

3. The Subjects to whom this benefit should be applied; to the House of David,
and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem.

4. The design of it, or that wherein the great usefulness of it should (...)
it is for Sin, and for Uncleanness.

5. The time when this should be, in that Day.

Give me leave to make a brief paraphrase on this sweet Text, which comprehends
in it the sum and substance of all Gospel Grace. In that day] i. e. The day
which is once and again mentioned in the foregoing Chapter. The day wherein God
will return to Zion, and have mercy upon her, and build up her waste places. It
is true, this benefit has belonged to the true Church of God, ever since the
Promise of the Seed of the Woman was m^de; but there are special times wherein
there are more eminent manifestations of Divine favors to the people of God,
which God would have remarked by them: and so this has a respect to that happy
time which is expected by the Church of God when all Israel shall be saved. But
that which I would more peculiarly observe, for our own improvement is, it is
the day wherein the Spirit of mourning and Supplication shall be poured upon
them; when God shall bring them to true sorrow for Sin, and penitent addresses
unto him for peace and pardon: and so it shows the order and way of Gods
communicating of this great favor to them. There shall be a Fountain] The
word, fountain comes of a root that signifies, to dig for a spring of water;
and in one Conjugation, to flow over abundantly: and doubtless, Christ himself,
in respect of his blood, or obedience and me^it, is intended by it; as will
afterward be observed. Opened] A thing is said to be opened, that was before
shut or covered; the word is also used for the making of a thing manifest,
which was before hidden, or not known, we therefore read of the opening of
waters, the opening of treasures, or the unlocking of them, the opening of
doors; and a noun from this root, signifies, a door. In sum, a thing is then
opened, when it is exposed, and laid before persons, and they have the free
liberty given them to come and make use of it. We are not here told who will
open it, but it must needs in^^nd a work of the Spirit of God, who is the
revealer and applier of Christ and his benefits unto men. To the House of
David, and to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem] By these we may understand those
that are the people of God, the seed of Christ, for he is the true David, and
the Members of the Mystical Body of Christ, for these are the Inhabitants of
Jerusalem. It may also intend all ranks of men: the House of David, may have
respect to the Rulers and Nobles, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, to the
meaner sort. For Sin, and for Uncleanness] The word, Sin, signifies any Error,
or turning out of the right way: The word Uncleanness, properly signifies
something that is removed, and is used in the Levetical Law, for such things
are were separated, by reason of Ceremonial pollution, and might not be
touched. When he says this fountain is for sin, and for uncleanness, he
intends that it is designed for the taking of them away, and this is done both
in Justification and in Sanctification, as will afterward be observed. And
under these two words are comprehended all sorts and degrees of sin: the least
error stands in need of it; and the greatest Pollution may be cleansed by it.

There are several precious truths contained in this portion of Scripture,
which I shall make some remarks upon.

DOCTRINE I. That Jesus Christ is a Fountain of saving Good.
WHat is nextly intended by this fountain, Commentators do variously guess;
some apply it to the Grace of God, some to the Holy Ghost, some to the Gospel
it self* and some to Baptism, or to both of the Sacraments of the New
Testament. But all agree that it ultimately refers to Christ, as he in whom all
that Grace which is provided for the relief of sinful man, is treasured up as
in a fountain, according to, Col 1.19. It pleased the Father, that in him
should all fullness dwell This then is one of the pr^^ious T^^les of Christ; and
it is Metaphorical or allusive, pointing us to the consideration of an earthly
thing, and such as is well known, for our help in the contemplation of him, and
the great benefit that accrueth by him to his people. In the clearing up of
this Doctrine, three things may be inquired into, viz.

1. In what respect Christ is a fountain?

2. What is that saving good that is fountained in him?

3. How he comes to be such a fountain?

1. In what respect Christ is a fountain?

A. The word, fountain, may be considered in a double sense; either only as a
Metaphor, alluding to the repository in which waters are contained, and from
which they issue; or else with the addition of a Metonymie, with respect unto
the waters that are contained in it; and both these are applicable to the Text:
The former of these belongs to this enquiry, and the latter to the next. As
then a fountain is a repository which God has, in the work of Creation,
provided for the treasuring up of waters in, so is Christ a Storehouse of all
Grace, in whom it is laid up. And there are several respects in which he is
thus compared to a fountain, and has this Title put upon him; more especially,

1. A fountain is so called from the Plenty of waters that are in it. There is
a great fullness in a Fountain. Cisterns have but a little in them; small
Springs, that are but little veins in the earth, do vent but a little water,
because they have not much in them; but a fountain has abundance in it, it is
a vast treasury; there is no want in a fountain, but there may come as many as
will to it, and have a full supply of water from it; and such a fountain of
Grace is Jesus Christ to his people; for this reason is he said to be full of
Grace and Truth, Joh. 1.14. And all the people of God are said to receive out
of his Fullness, verse 16. and because of this abounding sufficiency of his,
those that fear him are said to have no want of any good ^^ing, Psalm 34.9. And
believers are said to receive abundance of grace from him, Romans 5.17. Hence we
are told in Isa. 33.21. The glorious Lord will be to us a place of broad rivers
and streams.

2. A fountain is so called from the Quality of the waters in it. The waters of
a fountain are very much different from those that are in a pool or cistern;
and there are two titles that are put upon them in this regard.

1. They are called living waters. Hence we have such allusive expressions,
Cant. 4 15. A Well of living waters Rev. 7 17. And shall lead them to living
fountains of water. Not that they properly have a principle of life, or a
living Soul in them (for they are not in the order of Animates) but
Metaphorically, in that they have something resembling life* because they run,
and overflow, and purge themselves, and have a continual motion. As also from
the efficacy of them, because they are salubrious, and very serviceable for the
preservation of the life of the Creature. Thus is Christ in respect of his
Graces c^m^^^ed to a fountain, Jer. 2.13 Ye have forsaken me the fountain of
living waters, and the Graces which he communicates from himself to such as
come unto him, have that Epithet given to them, because they do revive, or give
and (...) life to them who partake in them; see for this, Joh. 4 10. He would
have given thee living water; and 7.38. He that believes in me, out of his
belly shall flow rivers of living water; and on this account the Psalmist
asc^ibes that to him, Psalm. 36.9. With thee is the fountain of life.

2. They are called clear and pure waters. And this follows from the former;
for being living, they purge themselves, and always keep clean; A Cistern, or
pond, or Well, are apt to gather filth by standing, and to grow corrupt, and to
be often disturbed; but a Fountain is clean and pure. Accordingly we have the
Spirit of God, in allusion to this, describing the fountain of Grace which God
has provided for his Church, Rev. 22.1. He showed me a pure river of water of
life, clear as crystal. Such is Christ, and such are all his benefits; they are
holy, and there is no defilement in them.

3. A fountain is so called from the Diffusiveness of its waters. The waters in
a Well, or a Pond, are shut up, and they move not; but are confined to one
place; they are standing: but a fountain is ever running over its banks, and
spreading it self far and near, imparting of it self in its streams. Hence we
so often read of running waters in the Scriptures. Such also is Christ in
respect of his Grace. We have an Allegorical description given of this in Ezekiel.
47. begin. in those waters of the Sanctuary, which ran from the south side of
the Altar, and increased as they went along; which point to that we are now
considering of. A fountain may be conveyed in streams to many places, for the
supply of such as want it: and Christ conveys his Grace here and there; and
there is never a street in the City of God but is abundantly refreshed with it.

4. A fountain is so called from the Perennity of it. The waters in a Cistern
or pool, waste with using, and may be emptied in time, if constantly repaired
to, yea and the waters in them will dry up by degrees; but a fountain is ever
full, and has a fresh supply coming in, as fast as any is drawn out of it, or
conveyed from it: if ten thousand should come to it, they may fill all their
vess^ls, and yet there is no want, nor any m^^sing, but ten thousand more may
come after them, and have equal supply. Such is Christ in respect to his Grace;
hence all that are a (...) are invited to him; Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that
thirsts come to the waters; and we are bidden to enlarge our vessels, and yet
we shall be replenished, Psalm. 81.9. Open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it;
and God has assured us, Isa. 45.19. I said not to the Seed of Jacob, Seek ye
me in vain.

2. What is that saving good that is fountained in him?

A. We observed, that a fountain is properly a receptacle of waters, and
therefore is Metonymically put for the waters themselves that are in it; and we
may here keep to the allusion. Water is one of those things that are necessary
for the life of man, and afford a manifold benefit unto it; it quenches the
thirst, it revives the spirits, it comforts the man, it cools and refreshes
the body, it is of use also for cleansing or purifying both the body, and such
things as are for its use and comfort: and indeed such is the usefulness of
this Element, that the want of it makes the man miserable, and if he be not
supplied with it, he will unavoidably perish. It is therefore reckoned for a
singular advantage and happiness to dwell near a fountain of water* as Isa
33.16 His waters shall be sure; and Chap. 32.20. Blessed are ye that sow beside
all waters. Now that which is here alluded to in this comparison is whatsoever
benefit derives from Christ to the Souls of men, for the helping them to obtain
Eternal Life. These waters comprehend under them, Grace, and Glory, and every
good thing, Psalm. 84.11. peculiarly the Graces of his Spirit are here pointed
to, and therefore we have such an expression in, Joh. 1.16. Of his fullness we
have all received, and grace for grace. The benefit of which is excellent, and
manifold: without it we must needs perish; from and by it derives to us all
that is necessary or desirable. There is pardon of Sin, peace with God,
Sonship, Sanctification, and Consolation: the most comprehensive of which will
be particularly considered of under a following Doctrine. But it is certain
that all these are laid up in Christ, and flow from him to his People, as
waters do out of a fountain; and are no where else to be had.

3. How he came to be such a fountain?

A. This flows from his Mediator-ship, and may be traced in these four
particulars.

1. Man's Apostasy had cut him off from God as the fountain of life to him. All
man's happiness is fountained in God, and must derive from him by way of
participation. He was at first, in his state of Integrity, planted by this
fountain, had free access to it, and could refresh himself at all times with
it; the streams of it ran down freely on him: but when he sinned against God,
that made a woeful separation, so God tells them, Isa. 59.2. Your sins have
separated between you and your God; and since then, that is a proper title of
sinful men in their natural state, Psalm 73 27. They that are far from thee. God
is no longer his portion; of a friend he is become his enemy; all those
Glorious Attributes which when for him, would have filled him with
satisfaction, are now armed against him, and become a terror to him, being
ready to destroy him: and if this be not retrieved he cannot escape perdition.

2. Gods free Grace constituted Christ in the Office of a Mediator, that he
might procure life and happiness again for man. Sin had brought man under the
Guilt of Death, binding him over to suffer eternal vengeance. Gods Justice was
now engaged to execute an holy revenge upon him, for the affront which he had
offered to his Law. This Justice must be satisfied; man can no more approach to
God but by a Mediator, for without one, God is a consuming fire. God graciously
resolves to bring some of that unhappy race back again to himself, and be a
fountain of life unto them, and herein to manifest his rich Grace; for this end
he appointed his own Son to become man, and in our nature to bring about an
Atonement, by reconciling God and man one to another and procuring a Redemption
for us; for this he put Christ into his Office, and indented with him in the
Days of Eternity: the counsel of peace is therefore said to be between them
both, Zech. 6.13.

3 Christ, by his satisfactory Obedience, purchased and laid in all that was
needful for the Salvation of man. Had not God put him into Office, and
Commissioned him for this, all his Obedience had been insignificant: for, not
only or merely the value, but the Acceptance of it for us, made it a purchase:
and yet had it not been valuable, it would not have done, because Justice and
Mercy could not otherwise have agreed in our Salvation, as they must, Psalm
85.10. Mercy and Truth are met together, Justice and Peace have kissed each
other. But Christ bought us at a valuable price, 1 Cor. 16.12. Ye are bought
with a Price; and because his death was more eminently concerned in this, hence
it is peculiarly Attributed to his Blood, 1 Pet 1.18, 19. Ye are Redeemed, etc.
with the precious blood of Christ; and as he bought us out of the hand of
Revenging Justice, so he bought all that Inheritance for us, in which our whole
happiness is contained, which is called the purchased Possession. Ephesians. 1, 14.

4 Hence all this good is deposited in him, and the dispensation of it is
committed unto him. As he was at the cost to procure it, so his Father has
betrusted him with the application of it; he is made the Store house or
Treasure of it, it is laid up in him, Col. 2.3. In whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge: We must go to this Heavenly Joseph if we
would obtain it. God put not only a Priestly, but a P^^phetical and Kingly
Office on him; and now he leaves all to his management, and he gives eternal
life according to his pleasure, John 5* 21, 22. The Son quickneth whom he will;
the Father judges no man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son. 17.2.
Thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to
as many as thou have given him.

USE I. For Information in two or three particulars.

1. Learn we hence the happiness of all those that have gotten an interest in
Christ. All the Titles that are put upon him in the Word of God, are to commend
to us some excellent benefit that flows from him to those that participate in
him. Now, as Christ's Office is to convey saving mercies to us, so herein he
appears glorious, in that they are all stored in him as in a fountain, and that
he therefore is a fountain of them. How rich then are all they who are owners
of this fountain, that dwell with him? Such are all true believers: these can
never want; all that they can need is in him; and there is enough and to spare:
this may turn the valley of Baca into a well, Psalm 84.6. Christ himself has
told us what is the privilege of those that believe in him, Joh. 7.38 Out of
his belly shall flow rivers of living water; and hence the^e is such
blessedness pronounced on believers, Jer. 17.8. He shall be as a tree planted
by the waters, and spreads out her root by the river, etc. Rejoice then in
this your lot, and envy not the world their broken cisterns, though they seem
to be never so full.

2. Here is good news to those thirsty Souls, that have sought for living
waters, and found none elsewhere. When God awakens the Consciences of Sinners,
and shows them something of the misery which they labor of, they are
inquisitive where they may get a remedy; and they seek it at home and abroad,
they go from hill to mountain in quest of it; they have gone to every pit,
hoping to draw waters to refresh their Souls out of it, but they have come away
empty and ashamed, and may possibly be ready to sit down and despair of ever
finding any that will quench their thirst, and refresh their Souls: but be of
good cheer, here is a true report made of a fountain of such waters as you
need; there is none in the world, nor is there any in your own power: but there
is enough in Christ; he is an infinite and inexhaustible fountain of it; and if
there was no more to be said, yet here is encouragement to hope: if there were
none at all, your case were then desperate; but if it be any where, and there
be enough of it too, think then, I will not abandon hope, for who knows but
that he may show me the favor, to give me to drink of these waters of life.

3. This may answer their doubt who are afraid to come to Christ, by reason of
the greatness of their sin and misery. When deep convictions of these do make
them, instead of making the greater haste to Christ, to discourage themselves
thereby from daring at all to come to him, their sins are too great to be
forgiven them, their hearts are so hard, that there is no softning of them,
their debts are run up to ten thousand Talents, they have gone beyond the
ordinary sort of Sinners; and sure there is no help in Christ for such as they
are: Look now, he is a fountain, yea he is an immense and an incomprehensible
fountain, whatsoever you want or can desire is to be supplied out of it to the
utmost extent of your cravings, yea, indeed he came for that very end, that
where sin has abounded, Grace might much more abound; Romans 5 20. And is
therefore furnished accordingly. Hence,

USE II. Let it be to exhort and direct miserable Sinners; and such are all the
Children of men in their natural estate, and till they are gotten into Christ,
and interested in his Redemption. Be you then pointed hereby to come to Christ
for all your supplies; make him your object, and address your selves to him.
Many arguments might here be used to press this advice; but I shall only offer
two or three which are fetched from the Doctrine in hand.

1. You must have a supply or you will perish. There is no living in the
condition you are at present in; if you sit still you die unavoidably; your
famishing Souls must have something to live upon, and that can be nothing else
but these living waters, or you will faint and die. The whole Word of God will
assure you of your woeful ^^felicity, which as long as you abide in your natural
state, you labor of, and are perishing in: if therefore there be no supply to
be had, you will sink under this distress, and be undone for ever; and surely
such a thought as this, if duly meditated upon, cannot but stir you up to
enquire, and make you restless in seeking where and how you may obtain the
supply, by which you may escape the woeful misery which is upon you.

2 You will be miserably disappointed if you go any whither else for it. You
will have many solicitours, who will say to you, Turn in hither, and will
promise you fair; but all is a cheat; believe them not; if you will not be
miserably disappointed. If you seek to the world, there is not one drop of the
waters of life to be found in it, it has nothing but poisoned waters, which,
however they may please your carnal appetites, will not satisfy an immortal
Soul. The Worlds Cup may in^oxicate you, but it will never slack your thirst;
man's misery began in his turning to it, Jer 2.13. They have dug to themselves
broken cisterns thar can hold no water. If you seek it in your own
Righteousness, and take much pains in quest of it by that course, it will
deceive you; God expostulates thus with all that will not come to these waters,
Isa. 55.2. Wherefore do ye spend your money for that which is not bread, and
your labor for that which satisfies not?

3. There is enough in Christ to answer all your wants. Let them be never so
many, or never so great, yet know it that fountain has an immense fullness in
it, and can never be drawn dry: Millions of Souls have been satisfied at it,
and it is still as full as ever, Ephesians. 3.20. He is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we ask or think: All other waters will dry up, but
these never will, Isa. 58.11. Thou shall be like a watered Garden, and like a
spring of waters, whose waters fail not. The Psalmist therefore presumes on
this, Psalm. 36.8. Thou shall make them to drink of the River of thy Pleasures.

And for your Direction.

1. Be affected with your own Necessity. The reason why this fountain is no
more repaired unto, why Jesus Christ is so greatly neglected by the Children of
men, is not because they have no need of him, but because they do not rightly
resent their need. Were you in the case of those poor Lepers that sat in the
gate of Samaria, of whom you read, in 2 Kings 7 begin. or of the poor Prodigal
in his far Country, where he was ready to famish, Luke 15. You would soon
bestir your selves. Consider then what Sin has made you; take the Word of God,
and believe it, and there read what a forlorn condition you are in, starving,
fainting, dying.

2. Renounce all trust in broken cisterns, and seek to him alone for Supply. As
long as you look elsewhere, he will not hear you; we are told, in Jon. 2.6.
They that embrace lying vanities, forsake their own mercies. And accordingly we
are acquainted how it shall be, when God comes to be the portion of the Soul,
Hos. 14.8. Ephraim shall say, What have I to do any more with Idols? And hence
we are directed to come with a declared rejection of other objects, verse 2, 3.
Ashur shall not save, etc. And one would think your own experience, how often
you have been defetaed in seeking to them, were enough to make you thus to do.

3. Plead his ability, or sufficiency. Believe it, and let it be your
encouragement, and make use of it in your petitions; argue with your selves, as
the Prodigal did, Luke 15.17. In my fathers house is enough and to spare, and I
perish; and let it make you to arise, and when you come, tell him, your thirsty
Souls are ready to expire, and you can find nothing to refresh them; that he
has enough with him, and that he can afford it to you, and how it will be for
the glory of his Grace thus to do, when he shall so save a perishing Soul, and
make it a monument of his mercy and power to all Eternity.

4. Now resign your selves up to his mercy. Resolve that because you have found
all the pi^s in the World empty, and that here is a full fountain, able to
supply you, you will go no whither else, but wait for the communication of
grace to you; acknowledging of his Supremacy, adventuring on his mercy; and beg
of him his Grace to establish this purpose in you; and fear not: this Fountain
will open unto you: which is the next thing.

DOCTRINE. II. Jesus Christ is an Opened fountain in the days of the Gospel.
OUR Prophet is speaking of, and predicting about Gospel times, and tells us,
that in that day there shall be a fountain Opened. Under the former Doctrine we
had Christ commended to us as a fountain of saving good, whose fullness of all
Grace and Goodness may invite the poor and needy Soul to repair to him, to have
all its wants supplied: In this we have a farther commendation given him by the
Epithet added, viz. That he is a Fountain Opened, which mightily adds to the
encouragement of indigent ones to come to him. Under the former Metaphor he was
exhibited as an All sufficient Savior, and by this he is set forth as a free,
ready and willing Savior; that shows what he is in himself; this tells us what
he is willing to be to us, if we would so make use of him.

In pursuit of this Doctrine we may enquire,

1. What is included in the opening of this Fountain?

2. How it comes to be thus opened?

3. In what respect it is said to be opened in the days of the Gospel?

1. What is included in the opening of this Fountain?

A. Opening and shutting are contraries; and when it is opened, it supposes
that before it was shut: either it was not known, or it was inaccessible. There
is therefore a double opening of this fountain which is here intended, viz

1. By Revelation, or Discovery. A thing that is hidden or secret, is said to
be shut, but when it is published or made known, then it is opened; and it is
to be observed, that the discovery of this fountain is by Revelation: all the
wisdom and understanding of Angels and men, which they had in them by nature,
could never have found this out; natures light afforded not a key to unlock
this mystery: When it lay in the Cabinet of God's Eternal Counsel, it was a
sealed thing, and there was no mere Creature that could open it; but God has
made known this glorious fountain, and set it forth manifestly before us. Now
the things which God has opened to us by it, are;

1. That there is such a fountain provided for man's use. God had fore-appointed
it in the days of Eternity, and made it ready in the fullness of time; but these
things were in themselves secret, nor had man ever known that there is such a
supply laid in for him, if God had not told him of it. Gods counsel about it
was in his own breast, and the way in which he effected it was so obscure, that
man understood it not till he declared it. Who should tell man that God had so
much good will for him, as to provide Salvation for him by a Redeemer, when he
had destroyed himself by sin? God only knew his own thoughts, and none could
have gues'd at them by any rational arguings, if he had not told them. When God
says concerning the sinful creature, as Job 33.24. Deliver him from going down
to the pit, I have found a ransom. He then opens this Fountain.

2. Where it is; and this is a further degree of the opening of it. There is
some support afforded to us, in being told that there is such a thing; but then
the proper enquiry will be, Where is it? Except we be determined about our
Object, we are still at a loss: but God has pointed us here also, and told us
who is the fountain, viz. Jesus Christ. He has assu^^^ us where it is not, and
given us the chara^^^r of all the broken cisterns that we are ready (...) take
up at, and told us where only the waters of life are to be had. Notwithstanding
all the predictions which had been of Christ before, yet (...) came he was not
known; the World were prejudiced at him, yea and his own were at a loss about
him; Isa. 52.14. As many were astonished at thee; his visage was so marred more
than any man, and his form more than the sons of men; and 53.2. He has no form
or comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should
desire him: And Luke 24 21. We trusted that it had been he that should have
redeemed Israel. He has therefore pointed out the very person, and given us
the characters in his Word whereby he may be known, and assured us that all
Salvation is limited to him, Acts 4.12. Neither is there Salvation in any
other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men, whereby we
must be saved.

3. The fullness of sufficiency which there is in this fountain, and how he came
by it. He has declared all the virtues of it, and the efficacy there is in
them: how Jesus Christ came to be a complete Savior, and able to save to the
uttermost, Heb. 7.25. He is for this end laid forth in his Natures, in his
Offices, and the whole work of Redemption which was wrought out by him; in the
Covenant Engagements which there past between his Father and him; and in the
suitableness of what he has done and undergone, for the answering of all that
was requisite in order to our Salvation, and the acceptance which it found with
the Father on this account. These were dark and dubious things to the wisest of
men, but he has opened them clea^ly to us; 1 Cor 1.23* 24 We preach Christ
Crucified, to the Jews a stumbling bl^ck, and to the Greeks foolishness, but to
them which are called, Christ the wisdom of God and the power of God.

4 The way wherein we may come at, and partake in this fountain We must c^m^ to
it, if ever we obtain life from i^; hence that c^mplaint, Joh. 5 40 Ye will not
come to me, that you might have life There is therefore a way in which we may
so come, and this man's reason and light could not have given him any direction
about: it is therefore a great piece of the natural man's misery, Romans 3 17 The
way of peace have they not known This God has opened to us in the New
Covenant, by publishing the terms of it, viz Faith and Repentance, and showing
us the fallacy of all the other ways which vain men have taken to obtain it,
and miss^d in the end; Mic 6.8 He has shown thee, O man, what is good Now the
way in which God has discovered all this is in the Gospel, and by the
O^dinances of it, 2 Timothy 1 10 Has brought life and immortality to light by the
G^spel. So that men need no longer to be at a l^ss, nor wander from mountain to
hill, seeking rest and finding none.

2. By the Offers that are made of it, and the invitations given to men to come
to it, whereby they have a freedom of access. A thing is then said to be shut
up, when it is enclosed, and there is no liberty of coming at it; when
therefore it is exhibited and laid open, and all encouragement is offered to
repair to it, it is then opened: so is this Fountain.

Here let us observe.

1. That God, together with discovering it, makes large and universal offers
of it to men. He not only ha^h told us that there is such a thing, but has
invited men to come to it; has told them what it is designed for, and bidden
every one that hears of it, and is sensible of his own need, to come to it and
partake of it, the offer of it is universal, Isa. 55.1. Ho, every one that
thirsts, come to the waters; he excepteth none that are willing to come; nay,
he has put in to prevent discouragement in such as may be afraid by reason of
aggravated sin and guilt, Isa. 1.18. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall
be as white as snow 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, etc. and turn to the
Lord, for he will have mercy, and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

2 He sends his Ambassadors to plead with men, and that with all urgency, that
they will come to it. He enjoins them to use all arguments with men, to show
them their absolute need of it, that they must needs perish without it; to b^g
and pray them to accept of the Reconciliation; and to follow them from time to
time with utmost importunity, according to, 2 Cor. 5.20. We are Ambassadors
for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead
be ye reconciled to God. Nor are they to be discouraged in the work, but to
renew the Treaty though sinful men do all they can to break it off.

3. He makes the largest Promises to such as do come. How welcome he will make
them, how readily he will entertain them, and that notwithstanding all they
have been and done to provoke him to deal contrary with them; they shall not
lose their labor, but have full satisfaction given them, Mat 11.28. Come unto
me, etc and I will give you rest, Rev. 3.20. I will come in, and sup with him,
and he with me; and he has said, that he will never cast them out, Joh. 6.37.

2. How it comes to be thus opened?

A. We may come at this in the following particulars.

1. This fountain was provided on purpose for the Salvation of undone Sinners.
It was for the advancement of the riches of his Grace that God contrived it
before time; and it was because sin had made man to stand in absolute need of
it that God revealed it to him in time, hence that Rom 5 6. When we were
without strength, in due time Christ died for the ungodly; Gal. 4.4. When the
fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, etc. Had not man plunged
himself into misery, and helplessness in himself, or in the whole Creation,
there had been no occasion for it. Hence we have Christ himself declaring the
design of his coming in our nature, Mat. 9 13. I am not come to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance; and our Prophet acquaints us what the
Blood of the Covenant was for, Zech. 9.11. By the Blood of thy Covenant, I have
sent forth thy prisoners out of the pit, where there is no water; and that
blood was no other than what our Text and Doctrine call a fountain.

2. That Sinners may obtain Salvation by it; they must partake in it. There
must not only be a remedy suitable and sufficient provided, but there must be
an application made of it, if ever the Creatures misery be removed by it. Let
there be never so full a fountain, never so much plenty of living waters, yet
if the man do not drink of them, his thirsty Soul will not be satisfied
therewith, but he must perish for all. It is not enough that there is a Christ
who is able to give eternal life, who is able to save to the uttermost, but we
must have him if we live by him, 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son has life,
and he that has not the Son has not life: Except the man drink of these
waters they will never profit him; what else is the reason why so many perish,
tho there be enough in Christ to save the whole world? Christ himself has told
us a reason of it in regard of such as live under the Gospel, viz. they will
not come to him that they may have life, Joh. 5.40. For it is by participation
in it, that the virtue of Christ's Redemption becomes ours.

3. It is by being united to Christ by faith that they come to partake in him.
Union with Christ is the foundation of Communion with him, and faith is the
bond of that Union on our part: he must dwell in us, in order to his
communicating of his saving benefits to us, and how that is we are told, Ephesians.
3.17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. Hence the Apostle
propounds that solemn case, 2 Cor. 13.5. Know you not your own selves, how that
Christ is in you, except ye are reprobates? It is by faith that we receive
Christ; unbelief shuts him out, and so hinders us of all saving good by him; if
we believe not in him, we shall never receive the waters of life from him.

4. That they may thus believe in him, they must have him Opened to them. Faith
is the act of a reasonable creature, and so it must have a ground for it, Paul
can say. I know whom I have trusted, 2 Timothy 1.12 Hence,

1. He must be opened by Revelation. There must be a discovery made of him to
and in the Soul, by which it may be certified of his fullness and suitableness;
that he is able to answer the Souls wants, and to supply its needs, to fill its
cravings, and remedy its miseries: what else should move it to adventure its
all upon him? it is therefore said, Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy name will
put their trust in thee; and in Rom 10.14. How shall they believe in him of
whom they have not heard?

2. He must also be Opened by Encouragement. Sin has brought Guilt and a Curse
upon the Sinner, the awakened Sinner apprehends the W^^th of God that is out
against him, and how shall he believe that God will show him mercy, or that,
though he be able, yet he is willing to apply this power to him for his
Salvation? Certainly there must be a free offer, an earnest invitation, or else
he w^ll never dare to adventure to come to him, whom he apprehends to be a
consuming fire: here lies the encouragement, Mat. 10.49. Be of good comfort,
rise, he calls thee.

5. That he might accommodate this to their nature;

1. He has revealed these truths to men extraordinarily inspired. As they are
to come to us by Revelation, so God chose such to whom he would make it; and by
whom he would communicate it to others; and on this account we read, 2 Pet. 1
21. Holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, and 2 Timothy 3.16.
All Scripture is given by inspiration of God.

2. He has recorded them in his written Word. In that he has commended his
mind to us, and has bidden us ^o Search the Scriptures, as we h^pe to have
Eternal Life, and has given us this reason why we should thus do, because they
testify of him, Joh. 5.39. And it is evident, that wha^soever God would have
to be known concerning Christ, and the way to life by him, in this life, is
recorded in the Scriptures, and there are we to seek for it, and no where else.

3. He has appointed the Ordinances of the Gospel in which these truths are to
be dispensed. He has instituted the Preaching of the Gospel, and sent his
Ambassadors Commissioned by him for this very end, and that is the great
business which they are to intend, and nothing else but what is in
subordina^ion to this, 1 Cor. 2*2. I determined to know nothing among you, but
Jesus Christ, and him Crucified; and how does Paul glory in this, Ephesians 3.8. Unto
me, who am less than the least of all Saints, is this grace given that I should
preach among the Gentil^s the unsearchable riches of Christ. They are to
d^clare this fountain, and to commend it unto men, and pray them to come to it;
and thus it stands open for all that will repair to it.

3. In what respect it is said to be opened in the days of the Gospel?

A We are by the days of the Gospel to understand all that time from Christ's
having appeared in the Flesh, and accomplished the work of Redemption, till the
day of Judgment: which is called the Gospel day, in opposition to the times of
the dispensation of the Law of Moses: else it is certain that it has been a
Gospel day, ever since the Revelation which was made to our First Par^nts, of
the woman's seed breaking the head of the Serpent, Genesis 3.15. And here we may
observe three things.

1. It is clear from the Word of God, that this fountain was opened to man,
before Christ came in our Flesh. There was a way of Salvation discovered unto
man, presently after he had undone himself by sin; and there were a great many
saved by the virtue of this fountain in the times of the Law: there were then
holy men, who were the Friends of God, men after his own heart, men that
trusted in him, and waited for his Salvation. There were Prophesies and
Predictions about Christ from the beginning, and those that then believed on
him as their Redeemer, they saw his day and were glad, they prayed in his name,
they had an eye to him in all the Types and Figures which were of him: for that
was a truth from the beginning, Acts 4.12. Neither is there Salvation in any
other.

2. There was a peculiar opening of it after such time as Christ had wrought
out the work of Redemption for us. The word of God is wont to make mention of
things as if they were new, when there is a new manner of the Dispensation of
them, or when there are very eminent degrees of the manifestation of them unto
men: Now, with respect to the opening of this fountain, it was thus after
Christ had finished the great affair of satisfying the Justice of God for us,
and went to his glory; and that in two regards;

1. In respect to the Clearness of the discovery. Those manifestations which
were made of Christ under the Law, were very obscure; almost all that was there
spoken about him, was under Types and Figures, and Ceremonies. Every thing then
had a vail upon it, and few were able to see through it; and so they were
exceeding ready to tarry at and take up with the shadows instead of the
substance; and by that Law, which was given to be a Schoolmaster to lead them
to Christ, to fortify themselves against him and his Righteousness, Romans 10.2,
3. They have a zeal of God, but not according to knowledge, for being ignorant
of Gods Righteousness, and going about to establish their own Righteousness,
they have not submitted to the Righteousness of God. So that this fountain was
then in a great measure covered, but now it is discovered gloriously, and every
thing concerning Christ and Salvation by him is spoken plainly; 2 Cor 3.18 We
all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed
into the same Image, from glory to glory.

2. In respect to the Extent of the offer that is made of it. Before the Gospel
times, Christ was in some respects a fountain shut up* and sealed; he was
opened only to the Nation of the Jews, and such as were Proselyted to them; and
that also obscurely: the Law of Ordinances was a partition wall between the
Jews and other people, so that this was their peculiar privilege and
prerogative; Romans 3.2. To them were committed the Oracles of God; Chap. 9.4.5.
Who are Israelites, to whom pertains the Adoption, and the Glory, and the
Covenants, and the giving of the Law, etc. And hence we have that of Christ
himself, in Joh. 4.22. Salvation is of the Jews. Hence the Gospel was to be
first offered to them, and on their rejecting it, to be carried to the
Gentiles. Acts 13.46. But now the partition wall is pulled down, the Law of
Ordinances is removed, and there is a way opened for others to come to him, and
have peace in him, Ephesians. 2.14, 15. He is our peace, having made both one, and
has broken down the middle wall of partition between us, etc. Christ
therefore, when he was to ascend to Heaven, Commissioned his Apostles to go
into all the world, and Preach the Gospel to every Creature, Mark 16.15. The
Apostle therefore tells us, Romans 10.18. Their sound went into all the earth,
and their words into the (...) the world.

3. There is yet a more (...) opening of this ^eserved for the day when the
Jews shall be called. There is such a Calling to be expected; there are
Prophesies in the Word of God concerning some Articles in the Gospel day, which
have not as yet been fulfilled, according to the stately predictions about
them; and this we wait for till God shall bring that Nation back to himself.
The Gentiles were very great Gainers by the cutting off of the Jews, but they
shall be far greater by the graffting of them in again, Romans 11.15. Then shall
the knowledge of God cover the earth; then shall Christ reign gloriously among
his Ancients; then shall his Kingdom be wondrously exalted; then shall that
have an eminent accomplishment, in Psalm. 55.6. When God brings back the
Captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad. But
this will be more insisted on in a following Observation.

USE I. For Information in two particulars

1. Learn hence what reason we have to bless God that we live in times and
places of Gospel light. Out of doubt the great advantage of sinful men is to
have Christ made known to them. The Apostasy had brought us all into a
wilderness, a dry and thirsty land wherein there was no water: and had not this
fountain been broken up to us, we must needs have perished. Had we lived in the
days of the Law? if we had then been of the Nation of Israel, it had been a
great privilege, and a singular favor: however, they were dark times then
compared with ours; but if we had been born of and among the Gentiles, we had
been shut out from that Garden in which this fountain was made to spring up. It
is prophesied concerning the Gentiles, with what resentments they shall receive
the Gospel, Jer. 16.19. The Gentiles shall come unto thee from the ends of the
earth, and shall say, surely our fathers have inherited lies, vanity, and
things wherein there is no profit: How far then is our condition better than
theirs was? let us then be thankful to God, that the Wells of Salvation are
opened to us, and we may draw waters out of them; that Christ is preached and
offered to us, and we are invited to come to him to have our thirsty Souls
satisfied; that these rivers run before our doors: this is not the privilege
of all the world at this day. Think then how highly we are favored hereby, and
let God have the whole glory of it.

2. This tells us how justly and inexcusably they will perish, who come not to
this fountain. It is certain that all men in their natural state, are in a
perishing condition, being cut off from the fountain of living waters; there is
no recovering of it again, and li^e by it, but in and by Christ, in whom it is
stored. Man's ruin had been just if this had never been opened to him; God ows
not to the Fallen creature any hope, nor any provision for its recovery: But
if, when God has not only prepared such a remedy, but has also opened it in
the Gospel, wooed men with all earnestness to come to, and accept of it, used
all eadeavours with them to persuade them to embrace it; and yet they refuse to
hearken to his calls, to accept of his offers, put him away from them, when he
comes to them, will not leave their broken cisterns for this fountain of living
waters; there remains no more hope for these, because there is never another
fountain at which their Souls can find refreshment: they despise Christ,
forsake him, will none of him, and this makes their perdition inevitable, Jer.
17.13. They that depart from me shall be written in the earth, because they
have forsaken the Lord, the foun^^in of living waters; and how righteous a
th^^g i^ i^ that they should thus suffer?

USE II. Let it be to encourage thirsty Souls to come unto Christ for all they
want. God is wont, in order to his revealing of Christ to, and in Sinners, to
awaken in them a deep sense of their misery, and to bring them into sore
distress: they are made to feel themselves perishing in themselves, and
thereupon their craving Souls are inquisitive whether there be no help to be
had for them. Are you then brought into such a strait as this is, let the
following advice be acceptable to you.

1. Let your felt want put you upon asking after him. Before you were under the
impression of these Convictions, you saw no need that you had of him, and that
made you to be so far from seeking after him, that when he came and offered
himself to you, and bad you to accept of him, you put him away from you, and
bad him be gone, made it evident that you had no desire of him; but now let
your enquiry be how you may come at him. Your Wells in which you before put
your trust, are now sensibly dried up, and afford you no supply at all, ask
then after this fountain. Let this be your support under your present distress,
that you have heard of such an one, and now make it your business to enquire
how you may be made to partake in it, how you may get a full draught of these
living waters.

2. Let this fullness of sufficiency be your direction to go to him and no where
else. Every one that would partake in this benefit, and not fail of this Grace
of God, must resolve to forsake all the streams which before they took up
withal, for the sake of the fountain; and the prime motive to this, is the
apprehension they have of the emptiness of every thing else, and his infinite
fullness. Receive then the witness that is born of him in his word, and see how
worthy he is of your trust, who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all
that we ask or think, Ephesians. 3.20. Say, I have tried other objects, and they have
failed me, but I have heard that there is enough for me in him; I will
therefore go to him, and him only for supply.

3. Let his being opened be your encouragement to prevail with you to come to
him, and believe on him. And indeed, here is that which nextly animates poor
thirsty Souls to come to him. It is true, if he were not a fountain of Grace,
he could not answer our necessity, and make us happy; our cravings can be
filled with nothing that is less; but still, if this fountain were shut up and
sealed, and there were no way discoverable by which we might come at it, the
other consideration would afford a poor support to our hope. Goodness indeed is
the object of our desire, but it is the communicableness of this goodness which
nextly excites our hope, and that is it which must carry us forth vigorously in
quest of it: and the more fully this way of participation is manifested to us,
and the more freely it is offered in the exhibition of it, the greater must the
encouragement needs be. Here therefore is the great demur that sensible Souls
are wont to make, viz. Is there any way for me to be made a partaker in all
this good whereof there is such an abundance in the fountain?

Consider then;

1. This fountain was provided on purpose for such as you are. It was Man's
miserable necessity that was the occasion of the providing it; and but for
that, it had never been heard of; we are told who are to be made sharers in the
benefits of Christ, Psalm. 72.12, 13 He shall deliver the needy when he cries:
the poor also, and him that has no helper; he shall spare the poor and needy,
and shall save the Souls of the needy Observe what was the very design of his
being anointed, and you will find that was for such as you, Isa. 61. begin.

2 He stands open before you in the offer of the Gospel and Ordinances. There
is an offer made of him there to some, and who are they but such whose
condition is that which you complain of? the offer indeed is general, and has
no exception put into it, as to the persons who hear it, provided they comply
with the terms propounded. You are not exempted; why then should you exempt
your selves? the Invitation says, Whosoever will, let him come and take of the
waters of life freely, Rev^ 22.17. The greatest Sinners are not excluded from,
but included in it; Jer. 3.2. Thou have played the harlot with many lovers; yet
return again to me, says the Lord.

3. There is a special and peculiar invitation given to all such as you.
Sensible Sinners, distressed Souls, such as are pinched with thirst, and under
a feeling of their want; Isa. 55.1. Every one that thirsts, Mat. 11.28. All
you that are weary and heavy laden. That which you make your discouragement,
and seek to hinder your selves by, is the very argument of his invitation, viz.
because you are in distress, and despair of finding succor elsewhere; and
concerning such, if they do come upon the call, there are gracious promises of
a kind entertainment. How precious a word is that? Isa. 41.17. When the poor
and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst, I
the Lord will hear them, I the God of Israel will not forsake them.

4. If you stand off by unbelief and despair, you will grieve his Holy Spirit.
And well he may be grieved. For you to say, there is no hope for such a vile
sinful Wretch as I am, is to make him a liar; who again, and again has told
you that his Salvation is laid in for such, and assures you that Sinners must
be brought to this sense in order to the application of it.

5. Know it, that if you now come to him, he will make you very welcome. He
never cast out any comer, nay, when he did but see the poor Prodigal resolving,
and arising to go to his Father, you are told how he carried to him, Luke
15.20. When he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion
on him, and ^an, and fell on his neck and kissed him.

6. The more unworthy you are, the more will his grace be exalted in you.
Proud, insensible Sinners may and do abuse: b^t such as you will rightly
improve that preci^^s word, Romans 5.20. Where sin abounded, grace did much more
abound; if you take heart by it, and betake your selves to him. Come away then
to the fountain, and drink your fill of it.

For Direction,

1. Come now, whiles it stands open, it will not do so always. He says, 2 Cor.
6.2. Now is the accepted time, now is the day of Salvation: Take heed of
delays, they will prove your undoing, if you be not careful, read Luke 13.25.
When once the Master of the house is risen up, and has shut the door, etc.

2. Come as you are, for the fountain is free. Say not, how shall I purchase
these waters of life? You are invited to them without money or price, Isa.
55.1. If you have but a thirsty Soul after his Righteousness, you are suitably
qualified, and have that gracious encouragement given you, Mat. 5.6. Blessed
are they that hunger and thirst after righteousness, for they shall be filled.

3. Come to have all your wants supplied here. Bring them all with you, and
cast them upon him; resolve that here is enough, and you shall be satisfied, be
not doubting but believe, and rely on his word who has said, Psalm. 81.10. Open
thy mouth wide, and I will fill it.

DOCTRINE III. They are the Seed of Christ, and the Church of God, for whose
sakes this fountain is opened.
THE Subjects of this privilege are the House of David, and the Inhabitants of
^erusalem. These are Typical Expressions, and ^here is a spiritual meaning that
is to be sought in them, though the literal meaning is ^ot to be excluded; and
here is a double Type, though the thing aimed at in it is one and the same. How
far this shall be literally accomplished in both the parts of it, when the
Nation of the Jews shall be Converted to the Christian Religion, I shall not
enquire now, but confine my present discourse to the Mystical and Spiritual
meaning of i^. David was a Type of Christ; and in how many things Christ was
repre^ented by him, would be too great a digression now to enq^ire: but it is
certain, that by a frequent Scripture Metonymie, Christ the Antitype, is called
by the name of David the Type, Jer 30.9. They shall serve the Lord their God,
and David their King, whom I will raise up to them. Ezekiel. 34 23. I will set up
one Shepherd over them, and he shall lead them, even my Servant David. and
elsewhere. And there are many things spoken in the Psalms concerning David,
that can be properly applied to none but Christ. By the House of David, we may
literally understand his natural Posterity, or those that descended from him by
Natural Generation, so the word, House, is frequently used; under which is
shadowed Christ's Spiritual Seed, or those who were given him by his Father,
and were to descend from him by a Spiritual Regeneration; such a Seed is
promised him, Psalm 22.30. A Seed shall serve him; it shall be counted to the
Lord for a Generation. And under the Type of David, the Seed of Christ is
eminently set forth, in Psalm. 89. And it comprehends in it all the Elect of
God, whom he tells us that his Father had given to him, and they were in due
time to be born of him by a new birth. Jerusalem was a City which God chose out
of all the Tribes of Israel, to put his Name there: there he settled his
Ordinances, and therefore is said to have a peculiar respect for it, Psalm.
87.2. The Lord loves the gates of Zion, more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
And hence it is usually applied to the Church of God; sometimes to the
Militant, (...) 26. Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us
all; sometimes to the Triumphant, Heb. 12.22. Ye are come to the Heavenly
Jerusalem. And in the former of these respects it is here to be understood; and
then by the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, we are to conceive is meant, those who
are by the Grace of God brought over to him, and privileged with the
immunities of the City of God: and this Typical application of Jerusalem is
peculiarly celebrated in, Psalm. 122. So that these are the same subjects with
the former, represented under a diverse Type. Only we are to observe, that Gods
Elect are comprehended, because, though they are not at present actually the
Seed of Christ, and Members of the Militant Church, yet they are designed to be
so, and given to Christ for that end; and by their being in due time made so,
it is evidenced that they were appointed to this privilege from Eternity. Now
these are they for whom this fountain is opened. And in order to our distinct
taking this up, we may observe;

1. It is certain that this fountain is not in any sense opened to all the
world. There is a twofold opening of it, which might have been observed, viz
there is that which is outward, by the promulgation of the Gospel, and that
which is inward, made by the Illumination of the Spirit. In this latte^ ^ense,
none but the Children of God have this discovery made unto them, Romans 11.7. The
Election has obtained it, the rest were blinded. Hence that awful word of
Christ, Mat. 13.11. It is given to you to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven, but to them it is not given. But we are now considering it in respect
to the former sense, though as it aims especially at the latter. And here it
must be granted, that Christ is not opened unto any, but such to whom there is
some signification made, by which they may be informed concerning him, so as to
discover him to be a fountain of life; and this must be either by Immediate
Revelation, or by the dispensation of the Gospel unto them: The former is not
ordinary, and therefore, whatsoever God will do on prerogative, yet he has
given us no other ground to expect it but in the latter, Romans 10.14. How shall
they believe in him of whom they have not heard? But it is notorious that a
great part of the World are altogether ignorant of this fountain, and there is
none sent to show it to them, and so must remain strangers to it. For men to
think that the light of nature can discover, or that the Sun, Moon and Stars
can preach a Christ to fallen man, is a vain and groundless opinion; the
Apostle is positive in this, 2 Cor. 4.3. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to
them that are lost.

2. That this fountain is opened in the outward discoveries and offers of it,
to those that are not of the Seed of Christ, or of his mystical Body. Christ
has a visible, as well as a spiritual seed: i. e. such as are only so in
outward appearance; there is a Jew that is so outwardly, and one who is so
inwardly. Now it is the visible Church of Christ which is the subject of the
outward Dispensations of the Gospel, and exhibitions of Christ therein. Christ
is preached as well to Reprobates as to Elect; the Gospel is afforded, and the
Grace of it offered, as well to those in whom it is a Savor of death, as to
those to whom it becomes a Savor of life, 2 Cor. 2.15, 16. The Apostle tells
us, in Romans 9.6. All are not Israel that are of Israel. i e. All do not belong
to the true Seed, that have the external denomination: and yet these are they
to whom the Ministration of the letter is equally afforded.

3. This notwithstanding the direct aim, and great design of opening this
fountain, is for the sake of those that are given to Christ. This is a great
truth, though the carnal minds of natural men are prejudiced at it, and engage
in so many earnest cavils against it; and it becomes a stone of stumbling and a
rock of offense to them, yet it is fully ass^rted in the Word of God, and is
nec^ssary to be laid open in the Ministry of the Gospel That then this truth
may be cleared up, let us observe the following Propositions.

1 That there is a select number of Adams ruined Posterity, whom ^od has
appointed to bring to eternl life by Christ. We must begin here, if we would
follow this grace down from the fountain of it. Gods last end in this great
affair was the exaltation of the glory of his Grace; but in the ordering of the
Media by which this was to be brought about, there must be a subject in whom it
is to be exalted; and that can be no other than a Creature that needed it. This
necessity man brought upon himself by his undoing Apostasy, out of the ruins
whereof God would pick up such as should be made the monuments of it: and these
were not intended to be all, but only some, who are called his Chosen, those
whom he has given to Christ, those whose names are written in the Book of
Life, and other like distinguishing notes, differencing them from the rest of
mankind: nor could this appointment be only general and conditional, for then
it were improper to say, that their names were written, or that God knows who
they are, but we are assured that he does, 2 Timothy 2.19.

2. Hence it was for their sakes that Christ was prepared and appointed to be a
fountain of life to them. All mankind died in the first Transgression, Romans
5.12. By one man sin came into the world, and death by sin; so that death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: There must therefore a Well of
Salvation be opened for the man, if ever he be restored to life again. The Son
of God, barely considered as a Divine person, could not be so to Fallen man, as
the case stands between God and him. He was capable of being made so, but there
was a great deal to be done in this affair to bring it about; he must become a
Surety for us; he must, as such, take our nature upon him, and in it put
himself in our room, under the Law, and comport with the Sanctions of it*
accordingly he must do and die for us, and therein fulfill all righteousness; and
in that way he became able to save us to the uttermost: God is therefore said
to have made him all this, 1 Cor. 1.30* Who of God is made to us wisdom, and
righteousness, and Sanctification, and Redemption. Now that which was designed
in this was our Salvation, and therefore it had a peculiar respect to those
whom he was to save; Christ therefore declares the very design of this, Joh
17.19 For their sakes do I Sanctify my self; and it is a thing altogether
unquestionable, that if it had not been for this, the Son of God had never
taken this province upon him, and gone through it, as may be gathered from,
Joh. 3.17. God sent not his Son into the world to condemn the World, but that
the World through him might be saved.

3 That the Gospel, in which this fountain is opened, was appointed to be the
way of the communication of the virtue of it unto these. It is not enough that
there was a fullness of all Grace stored in Christ, but there must be a
derivation of the saving virtue of it, to all those that live by it. Now,
though the spirit of God, to whom the Application of it belongs, ^s he who
derives it to us from Christ, yet he has a way in which he so does; and we are
given to understand that this is by the Gospel: and therefore the virtue of it
is Metonymically assigned to the Gospel, which is called the power of God to
Salvation, Romans 1.16. And the reason is, because as it is to become ours, so
God deals with us in bringing us to this faith, according to our nature, as
Reasonable Creatures, by showing us our object, and the fullness and sufficiency
of it; by discovering the terms of the Covenant* on which we may come to be
interested in it; by setting before us all the incentives to move us to
entertain it; all of which are discovered to us in and by the Gospel; for we
are told, 2 Timothy* 1.10. Life and Immortality are brought to light by the Gospel.
When therefore God intends men Salvation, in the ordinary dispensation of
himself to them, he makes use of the Gospel as a Medium by which he will apply
himself to them.

4. Those to whom it is thus to be dispensed* live mixed among other men. It is
Gods good pleasure, that his Chosen shall be scattered up and down in the
World, and have their dwelling among those that are his Enemies; he therefore
calls them from the Lions dens, and from the mountains of the Leopards, Cant.
4.8. There are indeed some places in the world that are wholly in darkness, and
we know not of any of those that are given to Christ among them; but in other
places they dwell one with another; in some places there are more, in others
there are fewer of these, but there are no places where Christ has a Seed, but
there are wicked men dwelling with the Godly. The Apostle therefore tells us,
that we must go out of the world, if we would be wholly separated from such, 1
Cor. 5.10. And we are acquainted that God has some, whom he will sooner or
later make sharers in th^^ benefit, in every Nation; Rev. 5.9. Thou have
redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred and tongue, and people,
and nation. The tares and the wheat must grow together till the end of the
world; then will a separation be made between the one and the other, and not
till then, Mat. 13.40, 41. And these not only dwell together in one City or
Town, but oftentimes they live in the same house, and ly in the same bed, Luke
13.34. There shall be two men in one bed, the one shall be taken and the other
left.

5. That God has appointed men, who are called by him unto it, to be the
ordinary dispensers of this Gospel. He could indeed have done it immediately by
his Spirit, or he could have employed the Glorious Angels in this Affair, who
would have accounted it an honor thus to minister for the heirs of Salvation:
but he has Chosen this way in his wisdom, as that which is best accommodated
for us, and that wherein he will gain the greater glory to himself, according
to, 2 Cor. 4.7. We have this treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency
of the power may be of God, and not of us. It was for this end that Jesus
Christ gave such gifts to men when he ascended, as Ephesians. 4.10 etc. For the
perfecting of the Saints, etc. And the Apostle gives us to understand, that
ordinarily there is no other way for us to come to faith in Christ, and obtain
Salvation by him, Romans 10.14, 15. How shall they believe in him of whom they
have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher?

6. That these cannot distinguish between those that are given to Christ, and
others. They are not acquainted with the secret counsels of God concerning men
in particular; they find men equally lying in the rubbish of the Apostasy, and
have not been admitted to look into the Lambs Book of Life, and there to read
whose names stand upon record, so as to apply themselves to them and to no
other: Those whom God has purposed to show his special Grace upon, are alike
with others in their natural estate, being children of wrath as they, Ephesians. 2.3.
There is no difference between them in their frame and disposition, Romans 3.9.
They are all under sin. In their natural state they are held under the power
and dominion of their lusts, and are as ill conditioned as the most, and
possibly have run themselves into as great exorbitancies, Tit. 3.3. We our
selves were sometimes disobedient, serving diverse lusts, etc. Nay, they may
have set themselves so prodigiously against God, and Christ, that these may
doubt of them, and object against them, so did Ananias, with respect to Paul,
when God bad him to visit him, Acts 9.13. Lord, I have heard by many of this
man, how much evil he has done to thy Saints at Jerusalem, etc Before God
comes with his power to accompany their ministry to effect, his Servants may
meet with more discouragement, from such whom God will bring home to himself by
their Ministry at last, than from any others.

7. Hence they are to open and offer this Grace to all that hear them. It is
true, those offers are to be made upon Gospel terms; they are to preach it as a
Covenant, and not only to tell Sinners that there is mercy to be had with God,
but to show them in what way alone they may come by it. However they are thus
to exhibit this fountain, and bid all without exception to come to it, they
must endeaour to make all that hear them sensible of their need of it, and then
to give them all encouragement to come to it; they are to repeat their
invitation to the thirsty to come to the waters, Isa 55.1. they are to tell the
weary and heavy laden; that if they do come, Christ will give them rest, Mat.
11.28. They are to invite the most wicked, to set the hopes of mercy before
them, and assure them that if they comply with the proposals of the Gospel,
they shall be welcome, and need not to despair: they are to tell the wicked,
that if he will forsake his way, and return to the Lord, he will abundantly
pardon, Isa. 55.7. To let them know that Christ came to save chief sinners, 1 Timothy 1.15. Nor are there any sins or Sinners exempted but such as have
committed the unpardonable sin, which is hard to know, and ought not easily to
be charged upon any.

8. And there shall a glory redound to God from all those to whom this fountain
is thus opened. It is not to be expected, that all that are invited will come;
we read, Mat. 22.5, 6. They made light of it, and went their mays, one to his
farm, another to his Merchandise: and the remnant took his Servants and
entreated them spitefully, and slew them. There are some that will heartily
accept of the Call, and come to Christ with all their hearts; and there are
others who will bid him depart, and return scorn and contempt to all the
invitations which he gives them. However God will be no loser by these, either
the one or the other. Despisers indeed will lose the benefit which they might
have been made happy by, had they complied with the Treaty; but God will make
his word to obtain its end; Isa. 55.11. My word which goes out of my mouth, it
shall not return unto me void, but shall accomplish that which I please, etc.
Paul longed for the Conversion of all his Hearers, but he found it to fall out
otherwise in many of them, notwithstanding he comforted himself in this* that
his labor should not be lost, but God would be glorified in the issue,
whatever the efficacy were, 2 Cor. 2.15. We are unto God a sweet savor of
Christ, in them that are saved, and in them that perish.

9. But yet if it had not been for this seed of Christ, this fountain had not
been thus opened. Christ was exhibited for the discovery of Gods Grace, and
though they that despise it shall smart for their so doing, yet the prime
design of sending the Gospel, and revealing Christ in it unto any, is man's
Salvation by him; and but for this there had been no Christ, and so no offer of
him. Man's relation to the Covenant of Works, exposed him sufficiently to
Revenging Justice; the New Covenant was for the display of Grace. If God sends
his Gospel to any, it is because he has some there to be made partakers of his
saving mercy, this was the reason why Paul must tarry at Corinth, Acts 18 9,
10. Be not afraid, etc. for I have much people in this City; and we may suppose
the reason why the Spirit forbad him to preach the Word in Asia, and would not
suffer him to go into Bythinia, Chap. 16.6, 7. was because there were none
there to be Converted by his Preaching.

10. Hence these, and only these shall partake in the saving good of it. Others
partake in the outward benefit of it, but through their sin, it turns to their
greater Condemnation: but these are made to enjoy the efficacy of this
fountain, and all the virtue of it derives to them for their everlasting good:
and in this regard it is opened only for them; i. e. for their real good in the
event. It is indeed the others fault that they are not savingly benefited by
it; but the peculiar grace and favor of God appears to these, not only in
affording the fountain to be opened to them, but also in bringing of them to
it, and making them drink of it, and live for ever; and it is certain, that
there must be besides the outward offer of it to men by the Word and the
Ministry of it, the powerful operation of the Spirit of God, to persuade and
enable sinful men thus to forsake their broken cisterns, at which they dwelt
contentedly, and betake themselves to the fountain of living waters. Christ
says, Joh. 6 44. No man can come unto me, except the father which has sent
me, draw him; and they are only those that did thus belong to Christ in the
Covenant of Redemption, to whom he so irresistably and efficaciously applies
himself in bringing them over to Christ by faith; (...) that, Joh 10.26. Ye
believe not, because ye are (...) of my sheep. And without doubt, all that
(...) thus opened for, shall in due time be made happy (...) in it, Joh. 6.37.
All that the father has given me, shall come unto me.

USE I. We may here take notice of the wonderful love of God to his Chosen in
Christ. When the Scripture attributes love to God, it points to his good will
in purposing good to be bestowed on them, and making them that are appointed
thereto to partake therein: and this love is looked upon to be greater or less,
according to the things that are willed in it, and the benefit received by
them: and on this account, God is said to love some of his Creatures more than
others, in that he has done more for them, and prepared greater blessings to
bestow on them. There is a common love of God, in which the whole Creation is a
sha^er, appearing in his benignity in bestowing on them these favors by which
they are preserved, supplied, and comforted; to this is to be referred that,
Acts 14 17 He did good, and gave us rain from heaven, and fruitful seasons,
filling our hearts with food and gladness; and Chap 17 25 He gives to all
life, and breath, and all things. But then there is a special love which God
has for some of his Creatures, and that was in appointing, providing, and
opening this fountain for them, from which they may derive everlasting life.
This therefore is mentioned in the Gospel with an Emphasis, as if it were the
only love, 1 John 4 9. In this was the love of God manifested to us, etc. and
Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world, etc. Certainly then this love of God to
those for whom it was prepared must be great beyond conception: Paul thus
signalizeth the love of Christ to him, Gal. 2.20. Who loved me, and gave
himself for me. Now it is certain that this fountain was ordained for the
saving benefit of those, and only those whom God ordained to eternal life by
Christ; but for whose sake it had never been. And though such to whom this
fountain is opened in the Dispensation of the Gospel, are by virtue of it
privileged singularly above others, as Psalm. 147.20. He has not dealt so by
any Nation, etc. Yet the specialty of it appears in respect of those to whom it
is applied by the Spirit, and they are made to drink of it, and to live by it;
for to these only it becomes effectual in regard of the great design of it: and
these are only the Israel of God, his Chosen and Called. For though it is
Ministerially opened to others, yet spiritually it is to them a sealed
fountain, and they participate not in the virtue of it. How infinitely then are
these beholden to God for Christ? and what praise and thanksgiving ought they
to be ever celebrating their gratiude to him withal, for this benefit?

USE II. Learn hence how vain a thing it is for any to boast and be confident,
in that they enjoy the outward Gospel Dispensations. True, God does favor such
more than he does them that sit in the dark, and have no Gospel light shining
among them; and they owe him great thanks for such a favor, because by it they
are nearer Salvation, as to the means; the fountain is brought to them, and if
they perish for all, it will be their own fault: however this outward
privilege does not give them the security of Salvation. There are multitudes
that die of thirst, notwithstanding the fountain is before them, and they are
invited to drink of it, and live, because they will not make use of it; they
will not come to Christ that they might have life, Joh. 5.40. They leave it for
their broken cisterns, which will not afford one drop of the waters of life to
them; and if they drink never so large draughts thereof, it will no^ quench
their appetites. Boast not then of your privileges, unless God has given you
an heart to improve them Think of that awful observa^ion. Deuteronomy. 29.2, 3, 4. Ye
have seen all, etc yet the Lord has not given you an heart to perceive, and
eyes to see, and ears to hear unto this day Think not that life is secured to
you by this, or that because God has favored you with the Gospel, you are
safe, o^ secure of Salvation by it; you may prove despisers, and then your
guilt and condemnation will be the greater: for none equally suffer Gods wrath,
with those to whom a Christ has been offered, and they neglected him. God will
call those whom he pleases, to receive Christ, and live by him; the Saving
virtue of the Gospel shall not be lost, although you put it from you, and
perish. Be not then high minded, but fear.

USE. III. We here see of what great importance it is for us all to make our
Calling and Election sure. It certainly is a duty incumbent on all, and
therefore we are called upon to use diligence in it, 2 Pet. 1.10. Surely it
infinitely concerns all the Children of fallen Adam to get a title to the
fountain of life, and take care that they be not mistaken about it. It is not
enough to give an Historical credit to the truths of the Gospel, wherein we are
told that Jesus Christ is an Alsufficient Savior, and that all Life and
Salvation is fountained in him; though this credit is also necessary in order
to our coming to, and believing on him: but our concern is to know whether we
are sharers in it, whether it be made ours, and shall assuredly afford us
Salvation. It is evident that we are all perishing in our natural state; that
this world is a thirsty and dry wilderness, where there is no water of life;
that all saving good is laid up in Christ, as in a fountain; that all to whom
he is offered, do not accept of him; that many who pretend to receive him, will
be found Hypocrites and self deceivers; that to be mistaken in this affair
another day, will be the Creatures undoing; that ^one have any claim to this
but the Seed of Christ, and Children of the Church Mystical. See then that this
foundation is laid in you. Christ tells us in Math. 7.22, 23. Many will say
unto (...) in that day, Lord, Lord, etc. and then I will (...) unto them, I
never knew you, depart from (...) workers of Iniquity. Take heed of being sound
in that number, in the day of account^^^ it will be an aggravated misery to
lose (...) hope that you pleased your selves withal here, because it was a
false one.

USE. IV. Here is matter of Encouragment to awakened Sinners that sit under the
Gospel. Are there any whose thirsty Souls, not only crave after happiness, but
find no satisfaction in those objects which sin has diverted men unto (...)
you find your misery, in that you perish without the waters of life, and that
this wilderness will afford none, and are thereupon inquisitive after Christ,
of whom you have heard a report that he is one that can do it for you: to such
this truth speaks seasonably and comfortably. Here is a Well of Salvation
opened in this dry and thirsty land, its waters are healing and satisfying;
there is enough of them, there is a fountain, and it can never fail. And not
only are you comprehended in the general invitation given to all where the
Gospel is Preached, but it is the special direction of it that is given to such
as you, and all encouragment joined with it; the weary and heavy laden are
singled out in it, Math. 11.28. The poor and needy, and such whose eyes fail
them, are remembered with a gracious promise, Isa. 41.17. And indeed, the way in
which God persuades and allures perishing Sinners to come to Christ, is by
touching their Consciences, and making them apprehensive of their woeful misery
in themselves, and their helplessness any where else, that so the revelation of
Christ to them may be very welcome, as showers of rain are to the weary
wilderness, that is parched. You have great reason then to hope in his Grace,
and accordingly to adventure your selves upon it; for if God be opening of your
hearts to receive Christ, it is because he intends to fill them with him; and
the emptying you of every other thing, is a step to that.

USE. V. Let this quicken the Children of God, to make a free and full
Improvement of this fountain for all the ends of it. The usefulness of it
extends to all the necessities of your Souls; there is no relief that you can
need, but here it may be fully supplied: and your occasions are such as call
you every day to come to it. If you go any whither else to get them supplied,
you will return ashamed, God has opened this fountain to you; he has rolled
the stone from the mouth of it; he has planted you by it; and is from time to
time drawing out these waters, and presenting them to you in his holy
Ordinances: why then should you use them sparingly? they are your own, God has
given them you freely, and he bids you to drink of them abundantly. You many
times complain of your pinching want; you thirst, and Oh! that you could have a
satisfying draught; why then do you stand off? What! question your title, doubt
whether you may make use of your own, and live upon it with greatest
contentment? Oh this Unbelief! Pray to God to cure you of it; and endeavor to
improve all the encouragement that he has given you, to make you, with holy
boldness, at all times come to him, and bring your vessels with you, that they
may be filled. The more you thus do, the more you will please him, and the more
happy and delightful will your Pilgrimage be to you, and the more abundantly
will you praise and glorify God for this unspeakable gift.

DOCTRINE IV. The great design of Opening this fountain to Gods People, is for
Sin, and for Uncleanness.
THis is directly expressed in our Text. There are three things mainly included
in this Doctrine: viz.

1. That it was the sin and uncleanness of man, that gave the occasion for the
opening of this Fountain.

2. That the great usefulness of this Fountain, is for the taking away of the
sin and uncleanness that man has contracted.

3. That where this Fountain is savingly applied, it shall take away the Sin
and Uncleanness of the People of God. These then may be briefly, and yet
distinctly taken into consideration.

1. That it was sin and uncleanness of man, that gave the occasion for the
Opening of thss Fountain. We must here distinguish between a cause and an
occasion. They go too far, who assign a Causality in sin to the coming of
Christ in the Flesh, and his working out of Salvation for us: for though, as
will anon be considered, if it had not been for this, he had not so come, yet
there cannot properly be assigned any causality in this to such an effect: and
they who so think, do not rightly consider the order and causes of Gods Works
of Efficiency. They that ascribe a causality to it, reckon it to be an
impulsive cause, or a motive on the mind of God to send his Son into the world
on this Errand; but that it cannot be, because the will of God is the supreme
cause of his purposing the works of Efficiency. And as the Glory of his Grace
was the last end of his purpose of Election, so the fall of man into sin, and
under misery by sin, was a purposed Medium to it, and so could not possibly be
a Medium to that purpose. However in the contrivance of the Media, there was an
allwise concatenation of one with another, and so the sin and uncleanness of
man gave occasion for the Coming of Christ. And we may take this short (...) of
it.

1. That God purposed from Eternity to exalt the glory of his Grace, in some
lasting Monuments of it. If we would take a right account of any of Gods works,
we must begin at the and or Design of them. We are to conceive of God as an
Infinitely Wise Agent, and therefore to have some worthy End in all that he
does: and according to this we are to conceive pf the wisdom appearing in the
means that he uses to bring this end about. Now God has declared or
manifested himself to us in diverse glorious Attributes or Pe^^ections, by which
he will make himself known; two whereof were his Grace, and his Mercy, which
are often used promiscuously for one and the same in the Gospel, when they are
referred to the great design under our present consideration, though there is a
diverse notion which we are to entertain of them; Grace being God inclined
freely to bestow his favor upon a Creature that deserves it not; Mercy
supposing the Subject to be in misery, is God inclined to succor it in that
misery. Grace may exert it self in a subject that is not in misery; yea, all
that God does for any of his Creatures is free; hence that challenge. Rom 11
35. Who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed him again. Mercy
is restrained to a miserable subject; and that mercy also is a fruit of Grace,
because it is free, for the Creatures infelicity cannot make it to deserve the
Succor afforded it. Now God would have some lasting Monuments of these
perfections of his, which should for ever be Mirrours in which it should be
read, how gloriously Gracious and Merciful he is. The Apostle therefore
reduces the great contrivance of man's Salvation to this, Ephesians. 1.6. To the
praise of the glory of his Grace. His people are therefore said to be to him
for a Name, and for a Praise, and for a Glory, Jer. 13.11.

2. In the order of the means to this end, there was nothing wherein God
designed the exaltation of this Grace and Mercy, equally with that of Christ in
respect of his Redemption and Salvation. He that designs an end, must choose and
use means for the bringing of it about; and many times there is an order of
many means for the accomplishment of that which is intended; and in this order
there is a subordination of them one to another, in their serving to the design
of them: and this is very manifest in the wonderful counsel of God, for the
exaltation of the glory of his Grace and Mercy. Now, as the way in which God
chose to glorify these perfections of his, was by the Redemption and Salvation
of man, in and by which man was to be made the monument of them; so he
appointed Jesus Christ to be the Redeemer and Savior, in which he had a regard
to Christ's Mediatorial Glory: Christ therefore tells us, Joh. 5.22, 23. The
Father Judges no man, but has committed all Judgment unto the Son; that all
men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father. The person of
Christ, considered as God and man, was a great Medium in this affair; and for
that reason he is called a Mediator, or a middle person, 1 Timothy 2.5. There is
one Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus. God therefore
constituted him to be such a person, that so in and through him, this rich
Grace of his might shine forth to all eternity; and for that reason we are said
to be chosen in him for this end; Ephesians. 1.4. with 6. According as he has chosen
us in him, etc. To the praise of the glory of his Grace. And that wherein this
Glory was to be illustrated was in the Redemption which he was to work out, by
which our Salvation was to be procured, and the conferring of this purchased
Salvation upon us by him* hence that, Verse 7. In whom we have Redemption
through his blood. And indeed, in nothing could the Grace of God, so
illustriously appear, as in the appointing of his own Son to be a Redeemer for
man, when his case was reduced to that exigence, that in no other way he could
be Saved; Joh. 3.16 God so loved the World, that he gave his only begott^n Son.
Romans 5.6. When we were without strength, in due time Christ dyed for the
ungodly.

3. That way might be made for this, there must be a subject for it to work
upon, which needed this Redemption and Salvation. A Redeemer, and Redeemed are
Correlates, and one cannot be without the other: This is a Relative Title, and
therefore if there had been nothing to Redeem, Christ could never have born
that Title on him: Redemption supposes a forfeiture, or captivity, which the
subject which is to partake in it, is fallen under, and from whence his
necessity of being redeemed does arise, in that he is by this means to be
restored from it. It is true, there are other ways among men, by which such an
one may be delivered, viz. either by a free setting him at liberty without any
satisfaction made, by the bounty of the Creditour, or by a forcible recovery of
him out of the hands of those that hold him; but this is one way, and the only
one in the case before us; viz. by the laying down of an indented price, or by
an exchange of persons, to both of which the case in hand is referred, 1 Cor.
6.20. Ye are bought with a price. 1 Timothy ^.6. Who gave himself a ransom for us.
Gal 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, being made a Curse
for us. Hence God appointing of Christ to be a Redeemer, had a respect to man's
falling into such a condition as made him to stand in need of one; which
necessity was another Medium for the manifestation of this Grace and Mercy.

4. That which was to enhaunce this Mercy was the forlorn state of the subject,
and his helplessness out of it, in any other way. The more there is of Grace
and Mercy in it, the more are these Attributes glorified by it: hence every
circumstance in this affair belongs to the Media. The more of unworthiness
there is in the subject, the greater is the Grace afforded to it; and this
Grace also holds proportion with the greatness of the kindness it self that is
done by it. The more miserable the subject is, the more astonishing is that
mercy which Succors it; and the more ample deliverance it affords, the greater
is its praise: and that which gives a peculiar luster to both of these is when
the subject is brought into such a straight, that there is but one door at
which its help can come in; when there is no other possible way of relief, and
then that affords it; we are therefore acquainted how all these circumstances
concentred in the case before us: how miserable we were become, how unworthy we
had rendered our selves (who indeed never had any meritorious worthiness in us)
may be read in the word of God: and that our condition was helpless, if Christ
had not stepped in for our Succor, is there also witnessed to; we are told, Acts
4.12. Neither is there Salvation in any other, for there is no other name under
heaven, given amongst men, whereby we must be Saved: and we have that remark,
Isa. 59.16. He saw that there was no man, and he wondered (...) there was no
intercessour, therefore his arm brought salvation unto him, etc. This therefore
is given as a great commendation of Christ, Psalm 72.12. He shall deliver the
poor, und him that has no helper. And God himself mentions this as a memorable
thing, Ezekiel. 16.5, 6. None eye pitied thee, and when I passed by thee and saw
thee polluted in thy blood, I said unto thee, live.

5. Way was made unto this by that sin and uncleanness that man had contracted
to himself. It is certain, that the abounding of sin, made the way for the
abounding of this Grace, Romans 5.20. Man indeed, had he kept his primitive
integrity, would have been a subject of Gods Grace; every thing that he
received from God would have been a free favor: but Grace is wonderfully
enlarged in and by the Salvation which is provided for and afforded to fallen
and sinful man: and as to Mercy, in the strict sense of it, man was not a
subject nextly capable of it, till sin had made him so; he was not miserable,
nor was there any distress upon him which called for succor and compassion. It
was sin that hurled him into all his inconveniences, and those mischiefs that
now ly upon him, and have him in pursuit. We are therefore acquainted how this
came about, Romans 5.12. By one man sin came into the world, and death by sin.
And now, when man is brought into such a state, he is a subject fit for Grace
and Mercy to work upon, and erect to themselves trophies of honor and glory,
in doing for him, by raising him out of that forlorn condition, and bestowing
upon him the contrary blessedness. Not as if this miserable estate which man
has by his own folly brought himself into, laid any obligation upon God to
work for him in this way, for it indeed exposed him to his just indignation:
but only that it laid open an Object that needed it, and upon which, if he saw
meet, he might exert those Attributes of his to the highest, and thereby bring
to himself a Tribute of everlasting praise. When therefore Paul had mentioned
how notable a subject he had been of this, he could not but shut up the
discourse of it with that Doxology, 1 Timothy 1.17. Now unto the King Eternal,
^mmortal, Invisible, the only wise God, be honor and glory, for ever and ever,
Amen.

6. There were diverse steps to this, all of which were ordered by the holy
counsel of God. Every thing that bears the consideration of a Medium to this
great end, must needs be acknowledged unto Gods fore appointment; for all
things fall out according to the counsel of his will: and though he is not in
any respect to be accounted the author of sin, yet he is the Supreme Orderer of
it, and that according to his permissive will. Now there were such steps as
these, all of which made way for the introduction of this Grace and Mercy of
his.

1. The Creating of man Upright. That God did so Create him, we are told,
Eccles. 7.29. God made man upright. Adam was Created in a state of integrity,
which consisted in the rectitude of his nature, by virtue of the Con^reated
principle of Holiness and Righteousness which was put into it, and was called
Gods own Image after which man was made, Genesis 1.26. etc. And if he had not been
thus made, he could not have been capable of the following transactions that
were betwixt God and him: for to require that of a Creature which it was never
in a capacity of complying withal, had been unworthy of Gods infinite wisdom,
and altogether inconsistent with that Justice which God laid the foundation
for, in the nature and state that he Created man in.

2. The Covenant of Works, and the Sanctions of it. That there was such a
Covenant plighted with man, the Word of God gives us sufficient intimations of:
and as it was requisite that man should be a cause by Counsel of his own
actions, or else he could not have, been treated with in the way of a Covenant
which supposes a mutual stipulation between the persons Covenanting; so the
works required of him in that Covenant, could not have been performed by him
according to the tenor of it, without the moral rectitude of his nature, which
we have taken notice of. Now in this Covenant there are considerable the
Sanctions of it, but for which man could not have been happy or miserable
according to it, and his carriage of himself toward it. God therefore, besides
a Rule which he gave to man directing him how he might serve him aright,
annexed a promise of life in case of Obedience full and perfect, and threatened
him with death if he should transgress the precept; which is intimated in that,
Genesis 2* 17. In the day that thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die; and thus
man, under the first Covenant, stood a probationer for life or death according
as he should behave himself.

3. The permission of him to fall That man did eventually fall from his Rule
and Happiness, is a thing very notorious. That this fall was a foil on which
God drew the lines, and laid the colors of his Grace and Mercy, is no less
observable in the Word of God: hence that, Rom 5.20 21. The Law entered that sin
might abound; but where sin abounded, Grace did much more abound: that as sin
has reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto
eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord. And that God had a respect unto
this in appointing Christ to be a Redeemer and Savior, is not to be doubted,
inasmuch as this was the very thing from which he was to redeem and save us:
this therefore is said to commend that Grace, Romans 5.8. God commends his love
toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. God
therefore must needs have a foresight of this Apostasy, because the assignation
of Christ to his Mediatorial Offices had a respect to it; and that man had not
fallen but by Divine Permission, is certain: for (...) could have kept him from
it, without offering force to his free will, as he did the glorious Angels that
keep their Station, as he does the perfected Saints in Glory, and as he does
true Believers in this life from final Apostasy; and this Permission must needs
flow from his will, because he is the Supreme Governor of all Creatures, and
all their actions, according to his holy pleasure. Hence, though God does not
approve of, but hates sin, yet he saw it good, for an higher end, that there
should be sin by his Permission.

4 The miserable estate to which he is reduced by the fall, by virtue of the
Curse of the Law. If man had retained his uprightness, he had never been
miserable, and so had not stood in need of Mercy, but all miseries are
contained in that Curse which man is under by reason of sin and uncleanness:
and they are no other than what he must righteously suffer, if there be no way
of delivery from them; in as much as he has procured them to himself by his
sin, Jer. 2.17. Now this misery was a proper result of the threatening
conditionally menaced in the first Covenant, which the man brought himself
under, by transgressing of the Law which was so guarded.

7. Hence, if man had not by his sin and uncleanness involved himself in that
misery, there had been no occasion for this fountains being prepared and
opened. There was no Mediator in the first Covenant, neither needed there any:
God and man were in amity, and this friendship had been confirmed between them
upon man's entire conformity to the will of God, and been sealed up to him, upon
his eating of the tree of life, which was a Sacrament of it. But now when the
Covenant was violated, man was exposed, the Curse was fallen upon him, he was a
man of death, there was an opportunity for Gods showing himself merciful and
gracious; and for the display of it, to send forth his Son to be a Savior; and
for that end to cause all fullness to dwell in him, that might derive from him
to the undone creature, as from a Fountain. And this serves to give us some
light into the stupendous mystery of the Providence of God, in suffering of
poor man to fall upon the Law, and break himself in pieces; but for which the
glorious things of Christ had never been heard of in the world.

2. That the great usefulness of this Fountain, is to take away the Sin and
Uncleanness which man had contracted. It is certain that Christ is a fountain
of all Saving good to sinful man, as has been already observed: but the Spirit
of God does point us here to some peculiar benefit, that it was designed for,
and for that reason do require our particular consideration of. Here then we
may enquire;

1. What we are here to understand by Sin, and Uncleanness?

2. In what respect Sin and Uncleanness may be said to be taken away?

3. What is the usefulness of this Fountain for such an end?

Of these in order.

1. What are we here to understand by Sin and Uncleanness?

A. There are some who take these two words to be Synonymical, and to intend
one and the same thing; only allowing an Emphasis in the ingemination of
things, they suppose them to include all sorts and degrees of Sin. Some, by Sin
understand those errors, or ordinary transgressions which men live in the
Commission of; and by Uncleanness the more enormous and Conscience wasting sins
which they defile themselves withal: some again, by Sin understand Actual Sin;
and by Uncleanness Original Sin, which is the root of defilement in man, and
makes all the actions which he does, polluted. But there is yet another sense
which is more generally entertained, and seems more appositely to belong to the
meaning of the Text, and recommends to us the excellent virtue of this
fountain, and its extensive usefullness, viz that by Sin we are to understand
the Guilt, and by Uncleanness the Defilement that is contracted by Sin. There
are two woeful properties of sin, recorded in the word of God, in which the
misery of sinful man is comprehended.

1. There is a Guilt that is contracted by it; which is properly a respect that
it bears to the Covenant of works, or the Sanction which was added to the Law
which God at first gave unto man, Expressed in, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou
eatest thereof thou shall surely die, Expounded in, Ezekiel. 18.4. The soul that
Sins, it shall Die. This word is therefore used for the punishment of sin, or
rather for the Guilt by which the man lies obnoxious unto punishment, Genesis
4.7. If thou do not well Sin lies at the door. Levit. 20.20. They shall bear
their sin. And in the Levitical Law it is often used for the Sacrifice that was
offered for sin, for the expiation of the Guilt of it, Lev. 4 20.24. And
frequently else where.

2. There is also a defilement which the Sin leaves behind it upon the man: and
that in respect both of Original and Actual Sin. Original sin is the very
pollution of our nature, which makes us unclean things: and hence it is
Allegorically and Emphatically set forth by the condition of a Newborn Infant,
in Ezekiel. 16. begin. And every actual sin leaves a spot, a stain, a filthiness
behind it upon the man that commits it, Ezekiel. 20.43. Ye shall remember your
ways and all your doings, wherein ye have been defiled. And this arises from
the moral respect which sin bears to the Law of God, which is an holy Law, and
men are said to be holy when they observe it; and for this reason sin is said
to be an abominable thing, Jer. 44.4.

2. In what respect this Sin and Uncleanness may be said to be taken away?

A. This will be evident from the former; for in what respect Sin and
Uncleanness cleaves to the man, in the same it must be removed. There is
therefore a double taking away of sin, answerable to the twofold mischief which
it does the man, by its adhesion to him: the former is by Justification, the
latter by Sanctification. And these are two great and comprehensive benefits
which the Gospel tells us do derive from Christ to us. These were in the old
Mosaic Law represented, the one by the Sacrifices of Atonement, in which the
blood of the offering was made use of; hence that, Heb. 9 22. Without the
shedding of blood, there is no remession. The other by the many washings and
purifications that men we^e appointed to make use of. And some think these two
were Emblematized in the blood and water which issued from the body of Christ
when he was pierced: Here then,

1. Sin is taken away by Justification, when the Atonement being accepted for
the Sinner, he is pardoned, and his Guilt removed. As long as the Law makes its
demands of the sinner personally, so long his sin lies upon him, and he is
Guilty; but when this pardon is bestowed, he cease legally to be a Sinner, i.
e. He is not a Guilty one, because he is discharged from the Sentence that was
out against him: his sin is in that regard as if it had never been; we read in,
Jer* 50.20. In those days, and in that time, says the Lord, the iniquity of
Israel shall be sought for, and th^re shall be none, and the sins of Judah, and
they shall not be found; for I will pardon etc. And this is done by Gods
accepting of an Atonement, when he says as, Job 33.24 Deliver him from going
down to the pit, I have found a ransom

2. Sin is taken away by Sanctification, when God, by his Spirit, applies his
Grace to the Soul, by which he mortifyeth sin, and cleanses it of the
defilement which cleaves to it. This is called the purgi^g away of iniquity,
Isa. 27.9. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged. And the purifying of
our hearts, Acts 15.9. And we are allusively told how it is done, Ezekiel. 36.25.
I will sprinkle clean water upon you, and ye shall be cleansed from all your
filthiness. And this is nextly applied to Original sin, by the mortification
whereof we are Sanctified, and as sin decreaseth, so Grace increases, which is
our purity.

3. What is the Usefulness of this Fountain for such an end?

A. There are two things to be considered in the Lord Jesus Christ as a
Fountain, or a Treasury in whom they are laid up, which do suitably and
sufficiently Answer these two occasions of Sinful men, viz. his Merit, and his
Grace: I shall give some general glances at each of these.

1. There is an Infinite Merit fountained in Christ, for the taking away the
Guilt of Sin, and the Justification of ^he Sinner. We observed that this Guilt
is an obligation lying upon the Sinner by reason of the threatening, to suffer
the penalty menaced by the Law. The Removal of this Guilt, with respect to the
Sinner himself, can be only by a free pardon; for he has nothing of his own to
make compensation to the Law withal: But the removal of it with reference to
the Covenant of works, and the Established Rule of Relative Justice in it, must
be by Justification. God, as a Judge, must either Justify or Condemn him, upon
his Trial: and yet, in Justifying him, he must also pardon him. These two are
inconsistent in the procedure of humane Judges, but they are inseparable in
Gods process upon believers. It is called Justifying the Ungodly, Romans 4.5. But
the ungodliness must be forgiven to the person freely, and so Justification is
an act of Grace, Rom 3.24. Being Justified freely by his Grace. And yet it must
be upon a Satisfaction and Merit, else the Law cannot be answered in it, nor
the Justice of God consist with his Grace, and it must so do; Verse 26. That
God may be just, and the Justifier of him that believes. In this Justification
there are two things, viz. the pardon of sin, and the declaring the person
righteous; for which there must be found the Law answered in both parties; the
threatening must be satisfied for, which is to be done by a bearing of the whole
penalty denounced against the Sinner for sin; and the condition of the promise
of life must be complied with, which is by perfect Obedience to the whole Law.
That this may be done for the Sinner by a Surety, the Gospel assures us; and
that Christ was a Surety on this account, we are there informed, Heb. 7.22.
Jesus was made a Surety of a better Covenant. And this is also implied in that,
2 Cor. 5.21. He has made him sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be
made the righteousness of God through him. And those several expressions amount
to as much, Isa. 53.4, 5, 6. He has born our griefs, and carried our sorrows;
he was wounded for our transgressions, etc. Now Christ, by the Redemption that
he wrought out, laid in an infinite treasure of Righteousness for this end, and
on this account it is called, the Righteousness of God, Phil. 3 9. Romans 3.21.
And Everlasting Righteousness, Dan. 9 24. the satisfaction and merit of it is
sufficient to expiate the guilt of all sins, 1 John 5.7. The Blood of Christ
cleanses from all sin. There is a boundless Ocean of virtue in him, so that he
is able to save to the uttermost all that come to him, Heb. 7.25.

2. There is an incomprehensible fullness of Grace in Christ, which he is able
to communicate to us for our Sanctification. Not only had he in him an
unmeasurable fullness of Grace; and hence he is said to be full of Grace, Joh
1.14. to have an universal fullness in him, Col. 1.19. It pleased the Father
that in him should all fullness dwell. Not only to have Grace poured forth on
his lips, Psalm. 45.2. but to be anointed with the oil of gladness above his
fellows, ver. 7. Yea we are told, that God gives not the Spirit by measure to
him, Joh. 3.34 But he received it as a Fountain or Store house, that he might
communicate it; hence that, Joh. 1.16. Of his fullness we all receive, and grace
for Grace. For this reason he is said to be made Sanctification to us, 1 Cor.
1.30. There is no Grace that we can want, but there is enough of it with him to
bestow upon us, and furnish us therewith for New-Obedience, that we may be so
enabled to glorify God in our lives: Nor is there any duty that he calls us
to, so hard but that he can supply us with abundant ability to discharge it,
and carry us through it to his glory. Paul could be confident of this, Phil.
4.13. I can do all things through Christ strengthening of me. It is the work of
his Spirit to convey this Grace from him to us, Joh 16.14. He shall receive of
mine, and show it unto you. And he who is privileged with this indwelling
Spirit, needs not be discouraged at any thing which God lays in his way as
duty, but may confide in this, that Christ can and will be with him, and carry
him through victoriously, over all that would obstruct him in it: and this is
the ground upon which he bids his people, though weak in themselves, not to be
afraid, Isa. 41.14. Fear not thou worm Jacob, and the men of Israel, I will
help thee says the Lord, and thy Redeemer. His Grace has a cleansing virtue
in it; and though we are at present Sanctified but in part, yet this is not
through any defect in his virtue, but because he will carry the work on in his,
gradually, for holy ends, and that he may learn them the experience of the
s^iri^ual warfare, whiles they abide in (...): yet he who carries it on by
degrees, will give us the experience of the fullness of it, when he shall have
purged away all our iniquities, and made us entire and spotless, which we are
assured is the design to which his Redemption leads, Ephesians. 5 25, 26, 27. Christ
loved the Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify, etc. and
present it to himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any
such thing.

3. That where this fountain is savingly applied, it shall take away the sin
and uncleanness of the people of God. This shall be the certain and unfailing
operation of it. If ever the virtue of Christ's Redemption be communicated to
any of the Children of men, it shall certainly have this operation upon them;
it is an inseparable quality of the fountain. This Proposition may be laid open
in the following Conclusions.

1. That the great errand on which Christ was sent into the world, was to take
away the sins of his people. We have before observed that it was our sin that
gave the occasion for the opening of this fountain, and why did Christ take an
occasion from thence to appear in the state of a Redeemer, but that he might
remove it? Joh. 1.29. Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the
world. Mat 1.21. He shall save his people from their sins. It was not to
reconcile God to sin, but to reconcile Sinners to God, 2 Cor. 5.19. God was in
Christ reconciling the world to himself; which reconciliation could be made in
no other way, but by the removal of that which had made the distance, which was
nothing else but sin, Isa. 59.2. Your iniquities have separated between you and
your God. It was because sin had made the world an Hospital, that Christ was
sent into it to come as an healer, a Physician, and so he compares himself, in
Mat. 9.13.

2. That the whole business of his Humiliation was to enable him thus to do.
Christ was not only to be the Physician, but the Physic too; all the sanative
virtue by which Souls whom sin had deadlily wounded, might be cured, must
proceed from him: there must therefore be such a virtue in him; and there must
be an infinite fullness of it, that it might extend to all sin, and completely
heal Sinners of it. He must be able to save to the uttermost, Heb. 7.25. And
for this he must be a Divine person, clothed with an Humane nature, and in
that nature he must accomplish all that which was necessary for the fitting of
him unto this great work. Now this he did in his state of Humiliation; the
application of this belongs especially to his Exalted State, Acts 5.31. Him
has God exalted, etc. to give Repentance to Israel, and remission of sins; but
he laid in for it in his humbled state, which was therefore introductory to the
other, as we are told in Phil. 2.7, 8, 9. In this he made the atonement,
without which Guilt could never have been removed; hitherto belongs that, 2
Cor. 5.21. He was made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of
God through him, in this his blood was made cleansing blood, for the purifying
us from all our iniquities, according to, 1 John 1.7. The Blood of Christ
cleanses from all sin.

3. That the Reason of this was, because there were some that needed it, whom
God purposed to make partakers in the benefits of it. As, if man's sin had not
brought him to that exigency, that without such a fountain he must have
perished for ever, Christ had not come; so, if God had not resolved to impart
the efficacy of it to some such necessitous ones, he would never have been at
the charge of providing it. God did not only intend the provision and
exhibition of this fountain, that so if any would come to, and make use of it,
they might be saved from their Sins by it; if that had been all, Christ had
died in vain; for it is certain that none of fallen men would ever of their own
accord come to him: that is true of all, till Christ draws them, Joh. 5.40. Ye
will not come unto me that ye may have life: The natural man loves his Sin,
and delights to wallow in the mire of his uncleanness; but God chose some
from eternity to be made the monuments of his rich Grace, in taking away all
their iniquities; and he provided Christ for this end; and therefore all such
as he designed this for, shall come to Christ, Jo^ 6.37. All that the father
has given me, shall come unto me; they shall be cleansed, and washed and
healed.

4. That they may partake in this benefit, there must be a saving application
of the virtue of it to them. These waters quench the thirst of the Soul, by
being drank of; they wash off the Guilt and filth which cleaves to the Soul, by
being washed with them; they heal the mortal diseases which Sin had infected us
withal, by the influence of the sanative virtue of them on the Soul. It is not
enough that they have all these good qualities in them: the Gospel therefore
acquaints us with an Application consequent upon the Redemption wrought out by
Christ, whereby he becomes ours, and we are saved by him; and hereupon life is
restrained to our having of Christ, 1 John 5.12. He that has the Son, has
life, and he that has not the Son, has not life.

5. It is savingly applied to those only who come to him by saving faith in him
for it. Faith is the uniting Grace by which we are made one with Christ, and
receive him to be our own for all the ends of his Mediatorship. This therefore
is the great Gospel condition on which Christ is offered to be made ours, and
we are given to understand, that if thus we do not receive him, we shall not
partake in his saving mercies; Mark 16.16. He that believes shall be saved, and
he that believes not shall be damned. And as faith comes to Christ, so it draws
the waters out of this fountain, it fetches in supplies from Christ
continually, Heb. 10.38. The Just shall live by his faith.

6. God himself is the Author of this Faith in order to our participation in
these benefits. Faith is not of our selves, it is the gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8.
God by his Spirit puts this grace into us, and enables us to exert it, and that
which he aims at in this, is to bring us to Christ by it, and so give us a
title to these living waters, that they may be ours, and we may challenge a
property in them, and make use of them for all our occasions continually.

7. Hence all that do thus come to him shall receive this virtue from him.
Whosoever is united unto Christ, the fountain of life, shall live by him: Where
God gives faith, he gives all that is connected in the promise with it. All
saving good is firmly promised to believing; God therefore on our believing,
pardons our sin, the Guilt of it passes off, our persons are freed from
Condemnation: and he sanctifies our hearts, by laying a foundation of holiness
in us, which though imperfect at present, and mixed with defilement, yet shall
in due time aim at entire holiness, without spot or blemish: Hence we have that
title put upon believing, Heb. 10. 39. We are of them that believe, to the
Saving of the Soul.

USE. I. This may serve to Commend Christ to the Sinful Children of men, as a
desirable object. And surely, there is nothing that can more set him forth as a
suitable and necessary one, than this consideration. In nothing could he have
been more accommodable to the condition of fallen man, for his relief. Let then
the contemplation of this draw your eyes and your hearts after him, and render
him in your esteem most precious and desirable. And to this end Consider.

1. You are all by nature under the Guilt and defilement of Sin. This is the
state of all mankind: and indeed, if we look upon Sin in its relations, it will
infer this. As it relates to the Covenant of works, and the Sanctions of that,
so it involves Guilt; Sin is the Transgression of the Law, and that Law has
ordained Death to be the wages of every Transgression of it, Romans 6.23 The
wages of sin is Death. And by virtue of this Ordination, the Sinner is held a
fast Prisoner of the Law, obnoxious to destruction. And if we look upon Sin as
it relates to the Sanctity or purity of the Law of God, so it pollutes the man,
stains him with uncleanness. Now there is none of you but besides the
imputation of the Guilt of the first Transgression, have a corrupt fountain of
Original Sin in you, and innumerable actual pollutions, which you have made
your selves odious withal: hence that, Prove. 20.9. Who can say I have made
mine heart clean, I am pure from my sin?

2. Your misery is unconceivably great whiles you are under the Dominion of
these. Indeed all man's misery began upon his Sinning: and there are two springs
from whence all this infelicity flows, viz. Guilt and Filthiness, nor can it be
taken off but by the removal of these. And one would think the greatness of
your misery, should rouse you up to seek a deliverance from it: and you may
know that it is incomparably great by viewing the effects of it, which are;

1. By Sin you are exposed to the whole Curse of the Law. And that is of the
very nature of Guilt that attends upon Sin, before it is pardoned; for Guilt is
nothing else but the binding of the curse upon the Sinner: And did you but
know, or would you but look over and ponder upon the contents of the Curse, as
it is recorded in the word of God, it would certainly fill you with terrors:
It is contracted in a narrow word, Death, but if that word be spread abroad,
and all the contents of it laid open to view, they will fill a prodigious Roll,
such as that described in Zech. 5.2, 3. All the Evils of Loss and Sense which
the Sinner can undergo, belong to it; all the sorrows that can betide either
the body or the soul, are engrossed in it; all the punishments in this life,
and in another world, relate to it: it has its inc^^^ations in time and the
consummation of it is reserved for an amazing Eternity. This is your portion
because of Sin; for all the wrath of God abides on you, Joh. 3.36.

2 By Sin you are become vain and ^^profitable: and this arises from the
Uncleanness that adheres to it. For such a Creature as man, to live and be in
vain, is an inexpressible misery; hence that complaint, Psalm. 89*47 Wherefore
have thou made all men in vain? It is acknowledged on all hands that man's
formal happiness consists in Eupraxy or well doing; it was therefore his great
privilege that he was made at first every way fitted for it, Eccl. 7.29. God
made man upright David observes that in keeping the Commands of God there is a
great reward, Psalm. 19.11. To glori^^ God is an happy employment; but Sin has
stripped you of this power, and left you utterly unable for it, Romans 3.23. All
have sinned, and fallen short of the glory of God. And this has brought the
title o^ Vain upon man, because by it he has lost the end that he was directed
to, and made for; and thus ha^h Sin put you below the most brutish of bruit
Creatures, who do all in their station and capacity glorify God: and were you
not most stupid, you could not but bitterly bewail this infelici^y of yours.

3. There is no rem^dying of your misery but by removing of these from you. The
man must of necessity be unhappy, so long as there is a Sentence of Death out
against him, pronounced by the mouth of an holy and just God, and he goes every
moment in danger of the execution of it upon him, and the power of the whole
Creation cannot rescue him from it; and so it is with every Unregenerate one,
Isa. 57.21. There is no peace to the wicked says my God. Nor can the sinner
serve to the noble end of his being, so long as he is altogether unclean, and
has nothing on him but wounds, and ulcers, and putrefying sores; whiles he is
a slave to impure lusts, he must needs endure a wretched bondage, and may well
cry out as he in, Romans 7.24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me?

4. This relief is to be had no where else. You may go through the world, and
try every thing in it, and whatsoever other help you may possibly find in it,
yet in this great case, and only distressing exigence, it can afford you none
at all. There is no second being that can take away either the Guilt or the
filth of Sin: the whole world will not make a price equivalent for the buying
off the Sentence that is upon you, and afford you Redemption, this is clearly
intimated in Psalm 49.6, 7. And the reason is given, Verse 8. For their
Redemption is precious, and it cease for ever. All your legal courses, will
not take away the stain and defilement that is upon you by reason of sin; what
says God to them, Jer. 2.22. Though thou wash thee with nitre, and take thee
much soap, yet thine iniquity is marked before me, says the Lord God.

5. This Fountain will answer both these ends completely. The virtue of it
extends hither; and it must needs so do, because Gods Infinite wisdom provided
it on purpose for this design, and he cannot fail of his end. David had
contracted horrible Guilt, and polluted himself by his great sin, yet he
presumes of being clean from both, if God will but apply this to him, Psalm. 51
7 Purge me with hyssope, and I shall be clean: wash me and I shall be whiter
than the snow. The effectual application of this will take away sin so
thoroughly, as if it had never been, for we are told in, Numb. 23.21 God has
seen no iniquity in Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel.

6. And it stands Open to you for this end, and you are invited to come to it
for this purpose God lays before (...) the matter of conviction of your great
Guilt and contamination, to make you see your absolute need of this fountain;
and that this Conviction may not drive you to discouraging distress, he bids
you come to it, and apply your selves to obtain the virtue of it, and tells you
what wonders it shall do for you upon this account, Isa 1.16. with 18. Wash
you, make you clean, etc. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as snow, though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. Bless
God for this discovery, and negle^^ not to make this use of it, if you love the
life of your Souls.

USE. II. We have here a Rule by which we may Try whether we have a true
interest in this Fountain. And it very highly concerns every one to put himself
upon this trial; for Consider;

1. If you have no title to it, your condition is very fearful. That Sin and
Uncleanness under the efficacy whereof every unregenerate man abides, is
certainly destructive to him: either it must be taken away, or it will work
your eternal ruin. This is employed, when God invites them to Repentance under
that encouragement, Ezekiel. 18.30. So iniquity shall not be your ruin. If this
fountain had not been prepared and opened, we had all perished without hope:
and though there is a good hope set before all such as are pointed to it, and
bidden to make use of it, yet if you do not comply with this offer, and receive
Christ according to the tenor of it, you will miss of the benefit, and be
undone for all. Christ expressly told them in, Joh. 8.24. If ye believe not that
I am he, ye shall die in your sins. And I am sure, that man who dies in his sins
is undone to all Eternity.

2. If you think you have a Title, and are deceived in it, your case is (...)
to desperate. Of all men, there are none th^^ stand in greater hazard of
unavoidable rui^^, than such as nourish themselves with a good opinion of their
safe estate, when it is far otherwise. This fosters in them a carnal
confidence, which makes them to neglect that great duty, of giving all
diligence to make their Calling and Election sure, which is required in, 2 Pet.
1 10. This stifles all the Convictions that are offered in the Word and
Ordinances, and they fly over their heads, as things which they reckon
themselves unconcerned in: and this is the reason why Publica^^ and Harlots
(...) receive the Calls of the Gospel than such as these, because these think
that work is over already. And that there will be such self deceivers we are
assured, Luke 13.26, 27 Then shall ye begin to say, we have eaten, and drunk in
thy presence, and thou have taught in our streets: but he shall say, I tell you
I know you not, whence ye are, etc.

3 If indeed you have a Title to Christ, the knowledge of it will afford you
much Consolation. And indeed, what comfort can be comparable to that of one who
knows his Name to be written in Heaven, Luke 10.20. That man who is in such a
case, is happy indeed, beyond all danger of being ever miserable. Surely then,
he who knows this to be his condition, cannot but Rejoy^^ with joy unspeakable,
and full of glory. And for your help in this enquiry; observe;

1. If this Fountain be yours, you have come to it by a living Faith. It is
offered to us in the Promise, and we receive it by believing. No unbeliever can
lay any claim to it, but every true believer can. If you have received Christ,
you have believed in him, and if you have believed in him, you are the Children
of God, and heirs of the springs of Salvation, Joh. 1.12. As many as received
him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe
in his name. Coming to him, and believing on him are equivalent terms in the
Gospel.

2. If you have come to him by faith aright; there are the things that have
attended your so coming, and you must search for them:

1. Have you been acquainted with the proper end and usefulness of this
fountain? True faith is distinguished from false, mainly by the end of it. All
that pretend to come to Christ have something that moves them, and which they
propose to get by coming; but that which true faith looks after is Life; others
possibly have thought they did come to him, but it was only as one who, they
hoped, would Save them from Hell: but if you have come rightly to him, it was
to have your Sin and Uncleanness done away; and then it was your hearty cry,
Hos. 14.3. Take away all iniquity.

2. Have you then felt your need of this Fountain for this end? It is
apprehended want that drives Sinners to Christ; and that which has been their
distressing trouble, will be the discovery of what they went to him for. (...)
you have gone to him to take away your Sin and Uncleanness, that has been your
burden, and you have been made to say, as he, Psalm. 38.4. Mine iniquities are
gone over mine head; as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me. And you
have therefore valued this fountain for the virtue of it.

3. What are the Fruits of your coming? Doubtless that is a great truth which
God has recorded of himself, Isa. 45.19. I said not unto the seed of Jacob,
seek ye me in vain. If you have come in faith, it has had some success. It may
be you value all success according as you experience, comforts and assurances
coming in upon your seeking to God, and if you want them, you fear that you
have come in vain; but this is a mistake in your search. You came to have your
sin purged, and if there be any thing of that done, you are so far answered.
Are you then more beaten off from your own Righteousness, and made more to
depend upon that of Christ alone? Is sin more vile and hateful to you, and do
you more loath your selves for it? If it be thus, then you have your end so far
advanced, and be thankful.

USE. III. Let this serve to direct Sinners in their right coming to Christ, if
they would have him be a fountain of saving good to them. Herein only will
Christ really profit us, if we may obtain Salvation by him; and there is a so
coming to him, if we would have grounded hopes of obtaining this benefit from
him. And it is to be feared that many deceive themselves about this, who
pretend to a great respect for Christ, and talk much of their trusting in him;
but were never rightly informed about him, and that for which he was manifested
to us. Would you then come, and speed, and be happy in your coming to him, take
these Directions.

1. Take heed to your selves, what you come to him for. If you mistake here,
you will put a cheat upon your own Souls. Christ indeed is a Fountain, but of
what? What was he opened for? that is it which you are encouraged by; and your
ends must be the same with his, if you would not be disappointed. Hypocrites
pretend much, but they ever impose upon themselves in this regard. If you come
to Christ for Credit, and Ease, and Prosperity in this World, you will find
your selves mistaken; he has assured you that you shall meet with trouble and
reproach, and many trials in his Service, Joh. 16. ult. In this world you shall
have tribulation; his Kingdom is not of this world. If you come to him only to
have your Sin pardoned, and not purged away, you will miss of your aim; for
though he must apply a pardon to you, if ever you obtain it, yet his
Justification and Sanctification are inseparable; and if you seek not the
destruction as well as the remission of your sins, you will find your selves
disappointed. Be sure then to come for the purging away of your sins; that
being pardoned, you may Serve him in newness of life.

2. Come with an insatiable desire after the obtaining this of him. Labor to
affect your hearts with the burden and bitterness of sin, and come as those
that are weary and heavy laden by it, Mat. 11.28. God directs to such a sense
in order to saving good, Jer. 2.19. Know and see, that it is an evil thing and
bitter, that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God. Resolve that you can never be
well till this virtue derive from him to you, and let your cries be accordingly
earnest, importunate, undeniable. Resolve that you will follow him
indefatigably, that you will never let him alone, nor give him any rest till he
has savingly applied the waters of this fountain to you.

3. Come with a firm Persuasion of his Suitableness and Sufficiency. You have
seen that there is no such virtue to be found in all the worlds waters, now
believe that he can do it for you; come as the Leper did, Mat. 8.2 If thou will, thou can make me clean. Look then upon him in his Person, in his
Offices, and in the great work of Redemption, that was wrought out by him, and
see how every way fit and able he is for this work; and let this make you
fixedly to resolve that you will go no whither else, but that you will wait
upon him, till he shall give you the experience of his love to you in this
regard.

USE IV. For Exhortation to the Children of God, who are already made partakers
of an Interest in this fountain; in two particulars.

1. Acknowledge the rich Grace of God to you, in that he has not only opened
this fountain before you, but in you. The former indeed is a great favor, and
so to be confessed by all that partake in it; those that have it are highly
advantaged, had they but an heart to make a right improvement of it; and if
they do not so, they will bring great Guilt upon themselves by their contempt.
How great a kindness then is this that you share in? and do you endeavor to
entertain it with suitable resentments: and there are among others, these two
considerations which will greatly help you in your gratitude.

1. Had not God thus done for you, you had perished in your Sins. You were
under the efficacy of sin and uncleanne^s in your natural Estate, and that held
you under Guilt and Defilement, and these would have wrought out your certain
destruction, if they had not been remedied. There must be a fountain for this,
else it could never have been taken away, a fountain of blood for the removal
of your Guilt, and a fountain of grace for the purging away of your pollution.
None else but Christ could possibly be such a fountain to you; there is an
infinite value and virtue requisite to be found in that which can do this for
you, which no merely created being could ever attain unto. If this Fountain had
not been revealed to you, you could not have partaken in the saving virtue of
it, because it is applied by faith: they that live out of the reach of the
Gospel Dispensation, die without knowledge; and if it had not been opened in
you, you had still died in your sins; there are multitudes that do so who have
heard of it with the hearing of the ear, because they have not cordially
embraced it: if he had not savingly applied it to you, you had refused it as
well as others, for you had as great a natural malignity in you against it as
any in the world.

2. What are you better than others who are not ^hus favored? The difference
that is put between you and them is very great, but who has made it? When he
brought this grace of his unto you, you were dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians.
2.1. When he offered it to you, you regarded it not, but bad him to depart from
you; you sought it not of him, but he sought you up that he might bestow it
upon you; you gave him all the resistance that an heart full of enmity could
do. It was Almighty power that brought you unto it, ye^ possibly you more
dishonored God, by peculiar wickedness, and scandalous provocations, before
such time as he thus appeared to you, than a great many have done, whom he yet
has not so favored. Can you then sufficiciently celebrate his praise?

2. Be sure to make continual use of it. You will always stand in need of it,
and it ever stands open for you to repair unto, and there is a double
usefulness which it serves unto.

1. Repair constantly to it for renewed pardon. It was not sufficient that you
did so apply to it in your first Conversion; for, though it was then applied to
you for the Justification of your persons, yet.

1. You Sin daily. Though lust be mortified as to the Dominion of it, yet it is
not abolished in you, but has its daily breakings out: there is a contrary
part in you, that is ever and anon bringing you into captivity. We are told, in
Eccles. 7.20. There is not a just man upon earth, that does good, and sins
not; and the reason of it is, because there is a Flesh in us that is always
lusting against the Spirit, Gal. 5.17.

2. Every Sin offers matter of provocatinn to God. It is a Transgression of his
holy Law; it is an abominable thing to him, Jer. 44.4. It is that which he
cannot endure, Hab. 1.13. And though he knows our frame, and will not be always
contending with us, or break out in his severity for every frailty of ours; yet
there is occasion offered him for his anger, and we must confess with him,
Psalm 130.3. If thou Lord, should mark iniquities; Oh Lord, who should stand?

3. Hence it calls on you to seek of him Forgiveness. And this is at least, one
main reason, why we are daily and on all occasions to renew that petition, Mat.
6.12. Forgive us our debts: And hence how often have we David asking pardon of
God, though he was in a state of Justification?

4. Here only can you obtain it. You must come to the fountain for it.
Whenever Gods ancient people fell into any sin, there was a Sacrifice
presently to be offered for Atonement, in order to its being forgiven: and if
we sin, we must go to this Advocate, and make use of him as our Propitiation, 1
John 2.1, 2.

2. Address him continually for the washing of Sanctification. They that are
Sanctified, must be Sanctified again; they were so for whom the Apostle prays,
1 These. 5.23. The very God of peace Sanctify you wholly, etc. There is yet a
body of death in you, a fountain of uncleanness: and there are the eruptions of
it in your actions, which defile you, and you want washing. Hence,

1. Come hither by the Repentance of faith, (...) in every notable def^lement.
Are you (...) with any Temptation which draws (...) the mire? let this drive
you to the fountain for cleansing: and this must be by the renewal of
Repentance: thus did David, Psalm. 51.7. And this is the only way to purify
your selves, which is the care of every believer, 1 John 3.3. He that has this
hope in him, purifieth himself, as he is pure.

2. Wash in it daily for your daily pollution. There is a defilement that
cleaves to every thing we do: when we are never so careful to our selves, Sin
in us will pollute our best Services. Paul complains, Romans 7.21. I find a law,
that when I would do good, evil is present with me. This therefore should bring
you to Christ continually for cleansing.

3. Be evermore fetching from hence all the Grace you need to perfect you in
Holiness. Let the sense of remaining corruption, put you upon the exercise of
renewed and progressive Sanctification; for which you must repair to this
fountain of Grace, and apply the promises by which you partake in it, to this
end, according to, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having th^se promises, let us cleanse our selves
from all fil^hiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of
God. And never cease from the pursuit of this work, till sin be no more in you,
and grace be arrived at its full degree of perfection.

DOCTRINE V. There will be a more peculiar Opening of Christ as a Fountain of
Life, when the JEWS shall be Called.
THat the Prophesy contained in this and the foregoing Chapter, has a special
respect to that Nation, who were the Posterity of Abraham, according to the
Flesh, is generally agreed on by Christians, and acknowledged by their own
Writers; and that whatsoever Earnests there have been, yet the complete
accomplishment of it, is still to come.

There are two Propositions in this Doctrine which may be briefly illustrated,
viz.

1. That there is a great and general Calling of (...) JEWS yet to come

2 That when that time comes, there shall be a more peculiar Opening of this
fountain.

PROPOSITION. I.
That there is a great and general Calling of the JEWS yet to come. As there
was a time when God rejected them, for the horrible contempt which they cast
upon Christ and his Gospel, in which they were made a scorn and a reproach to
the world, and were dispersed from one end of the earth to another; so there
will a time come when there shall be a National return of them to God, and they
shall accept of Christ for their Lord and Savior. The truth of this has been,
and still is denied, and strenuously oppugned by some; and the seemingly long
delay of it, has made many to hesitate about it; and it is not to be wondered
at, for Christ predicted, Luke 18.8. When the Son of Man comes, shall he find
faith on the Earth? Which some have interpreted to have a respect to the belief
of this truth. But there are others who with as great vigor defend it, and
have solidly confuted all the pretended pleadings against it; and although it
be not a Fundamental Article of Salvation, yet there is so much of Consolation
arising from it to the people of God, in these dark days of tribulation upon
the Church of Christ, that it is worth our while a little to refresh our selves
with the speculation of it* And here let me premise, That this truth is purely
of Revelation, and the Credit of it depends entirely on the Divine Testimony;
we must therefore Search the Scriptures, if we would know whether it be so. And
among many Scripture confirmations of it, give me leave to offer a few
Considerations; and to make way to this. Observe,

1. That there are many texts of Scripture which are to be understood of the
Spiritual Israel. The whole mystical body of Christ, made up of both Jews and
Gentiles, are frequently called the Israel of God, and the Seed of Abraham.
This must not be denied; for, as God first Chose that Nation to be a peculiar
people to himself; so he has seen meet to put their Name upon the Church, even
in Gospel times: and there are some places that cannot bear another
interpretation; See, Gal 6.16 Peace be on them, and on the Israel of God. We
are told of a Jew outwardly, and one that is so inwardly, Romans 2.28. And in
Chap. 9.6. All are not Israel that are of Israel. Accordingly there are
Prophesies in which Gospel Ordinances are represented under legal expressions,
but must be spiritually interpreted; such is that, Mal. 1.11. In every place
incense shall be offered unto my Name, and a pure offering. And some think that
the last Eight Chapters in the Prophesies of Ezekiel, are so to be understood.

2. There are Promises made to the Jews which did properly refer to their
return from Babylon. There was such a return afforded them after their
Captivity by Nebuchadnezzar, and God before hand gave them many supports, and
encouraging promises about it, wherein he prefixed the time when, and the
manner how it should be brought about; and there are many discourses in the
Prophets which had a proper and direct aim at it: we are therefore told how
Daniel, by reading of these Prophesies, and making a Calculation from them,
came to know that time to be near its accomplishment, Dan 9.2. I Daniel
understood by books the number of the years, etc that he would accomplish
seventy years in the desolation of Jerusalem.

3. There are Predictions of glorious Things in the Gospel day, that had a
special reference to the Power and Efficacy of the word in the Apostles times.
The bringing in of the Gospel dispensation, and the great changes that were
wrought thereby, was a matter of Admiration, and was therefore often foretold
in the Old Testament: and on this account we are acquainted that these and
those things were the fulfilling of such and such Prophesies: particularly, the
astonishing giving of the Holy Ghost, appearing in the Fiery Tongues given the
Apostles soon after Christ's Ascension, of which Peter gives that account, Acts
2.16. etc. This is that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel, etc.

4. There are Texts of Scripture that have their ^^veral degrees of
accomplishment. Though there (...) but one thing that is ultimately designed in
(...), and till that be brought about, they are (...) ^^mpleatly fulfilled; yet
they shall be (...) in some preludious Providence, that (...) in them a
Specimen of the same (...) and are, as it were, Earnests of what is to (...);
and so one and the same word may be said to have been accomplished more than
once: though that which it mainly intended is still expected; which might be
instanced in diverse particulars

Now from what has been said, we may proceed to the thing in hand: and in
general, observe, That though there be a Mystical sense in some Prophesies
about Israel, yet they go too far, who would restrain all altogether to this,
as those do who deny this Doctrine: yea there is a Compound sense in many of
these things, and they aim both at the one and the other: and though diverse
things did refer to the return from Babylon, yet not all, but some look
farther; yea even those that engross tha^ in them, have a longer reach in them,
many of them: and though some things had their fulfillment in the days of
Christ and his Apostles, yet others had not, but still remain to be brought to
pass; and those which then had a beginning have a greater f^llness behind; and
that the calling of the JEWS is one of these will be evident, if we consider.

1 That there is a Calling of the JEWS men^tioned distributively with that of
the Gentiles* and therefore it must be li^erally understood with respect to
that Nation, and cannot be restrained to the Mystical bod^ of Christ, which
comprehends all of both sorts in it. This is designedly han^led by the Apostle
in, Romans 11. The thing he there aims at, is to show that God has not utte^ly
cast off that Nation, and he argues it from the reason of their being cast off,
Verse 11, 12. Have they stumbled that they should fall? God forbid, etc. He
therefore asserts that there will be a time when they shall be restored again
to a Church state, and return into favor with God; for which he also brings
Scripture evidence, Verse 25, 26. Blindness in part is happened to Israel, until
the fullness of the Gentiles be come in; and so all Israel shall be saved as it
is written, etc. Nor can these things be understood Allegorically, without
violence done to the whole scope of the context.

2. There is a Calling of the JEWS foretold to be in the days of the Gospel.
Their call and return from Babylon was before Christ's coming in our flesh, but
there is another spoken of which is to be after that, and therefore God makes
mention of doing it a second time, Isa. 11.11, 12. The Lord shall set his hand
again the Second time, to recover the remnant of his people, from Assyria, and
from Egypt, etc. And he says that this shall come to pass in that day: which
the whole context assures us, is the day of the Gospel after Christ had
appeared in our nature: and doubtless whatsoever was Prophesied concerning that
People, after their return to their Land must look forward; and many things
cannot be understood of any but the Gospel day: and such is our Text and
Context; inasmuch as Zechariah was one of these Prophets who Prophesied to the
returned Captivity; and the tenor of this particular Vision of his points us
to the day when Christ had been Crucified among them.

3. There is a Calling of the JEWS mentioned, that is to be after they had been
Rejected, and Dissipated, for their Despising of Christ. And therefore the
Casting them off, or unchurching them, and this return of theirs are joined
together; yea the Apostle in the forecited Romans 11. brings this in as a relief
against despondency, with respect unto the former, where he purposely speaks of
their being cut off, and tells us that they shall be grafted in again: See in
particular, Verse 15, 16. and Verse 24. This also is the Call which our Text
points to, as (...) evident from, Chap 12.10 etc Christ therefore so speaks of
their Rejection as that which had a limited time, Luke 21.24. Jerusalem shall
be trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.

4. There is a National Calling of them spoken of. There were indeed many of
them effectually Called by Christ and his Apostles, and many that believed in
those days; Three thousand were added at one time, Acts 2.41. And Five thousand
at another time, Acts 4 4 Besides many more upon other occasions; Acts 2.4. The
Lord added daily to the Church such as should be saved. But all this while the
Nation stood off, and did not embrace Christ; that therefore is yet to come On
this account the Apostle in, Romans 11. having in the beginning of the Chapter
proved that they were not utterly cast off, because there were so many called
already, proceeds from Verse 11. to tell us of a more general return of them,
and assures us that it shall be All Israel, Verse 26. Not as if every
individual shall thus be Saved, but the body of that Nation that shall then be
living.

5. There are such things asserted in the word of God concerning this Call, as
have never yet been accomplished. The happy state of that forlorn Nation, is so
set forth as it never arrived to, after their return from Babylon, till their
being cut off from being a People by the Romans. To this we may refer the
Prophesy in, Isa 65.18. to and. And that, Hos. 3.4, 5. And that, Zech. 12.6, 7,
8. Which must needs refer to times yet unfulfilled, for hitherto they are the
most scattered, contemptible and scorned people in the whole World, and have so
continued for more than Sixteen hundred years.

6. To all let me add, That the Providence of God toward them is to be adored,
in that they remain to be a distinct People to this day. Notwithstanding all
the Calamities that have befallen them, and the horrible Dispersions of them
upon the face of the Earth, yet they keep themselves a Separate People in Life,
manners, and customs, diverse from other Nations; which certainly must be for
some glorious end designed by the all-wise God: and what shall we suppose it to
be, but that which is thus fore-signifyed?

PROPOSITION. II.
That when that time comes, there shall be a more peculiar Opening of this
Fountain. There is something to be done in that day, which was never before
done in this regard; and that must be with regard to the manner and degree of
the manifestation and application of it. We may take a brief account of this
affair in the following Conclusions.

1. That there are happy Times predicted for the Church, after her wilderness
estate shall be over. As there was a time, when after God had brought his
People out of Egypt, they went through the wilderness, in order to their
glorious Settlement in Canaan, so we are told of the Gospel Church, that soon
after its being called it should go into the wilderness, and be there for a
prefixed time, Rev. 12.6. The women fled into the wilderness, where she had a
place prepared of God, that they should f^ed her there a thousand two hundred
and threescore days. But God has promised to it in this world, a more glorious
Conspicuous state after these days are ended; and this is celebrated in the
four last Chapters of that book: and this by some is supposed to be aimed at
in, Cant. 8.5. Who is this that comes up from the wilderness, leaning upon her
beloved? It being a thing that shall be very surprising to all that shall
observe it. Hitherto also may that have a special reference, Psalm. 85.3.
Glorious things are spoken of thee, Oh City of God.

2. That these glorious things have not as yet befallen it in their complete
Accomplishment. I dare not deny, but that there are some things spoken in the
Scriptures concerning the Church of God, that must be referred to the
Triumphant state of it, and it would be a delusion to apply them to its
Militancy. There must also be an allowance made for our supposing the Spirit of
God, who condescends to speak to us in our own Language, to use Hyperbolical
expressions, and set forth the better condition of the Militant Church upon
Earth, with words borrowed from the state of Glory to which it shall at length
arrive: but we must not think that he goes about to delude us with flourishing
Promises, and then put us off with low and little performances. There have
indeed been wonderful accomplishments for the Church in these latter days,
peculiarly since the beginning of the Reformation; but these are little in
comparison with the things foretold to be brought to pass; we are therefore to
look for a transcendently greater Glory behind, and making have to appear. Who
shall read, Isa. 60. throughout, and particularly from Verse 18. to the end.
And Chap 11.6, etc. with many other Prophesies of a like import? he must
confess that there is more yet to be expected.

3. That these days are to be contemporary with the Calling of the Jews, and
the fullness of the Gentiles, and the destruction of Anti Christ. In what order
these shall be brought about, I dispute not; but God will doubtless prepare the
way to the destruction of the Man of Sin who stands in the way, by giving an
enlarged Commission for the Preaching of the Everlasting Gospel, which shall
Call his out of Babylon, and convince the Great Ones of their egregious folly
in giving their power to the Beast, and provoking them to reassume it; which
Preaching shall also Call in the Nations of the World that at present are
Unconverted; by which the JEWS shall likewise be affected, and persuaded to
come in with them unto Christ. These things to be sure will be closely
connected, and one of them follow upon the other. The Apostle tells us, Romans
11.25. Blindness in part is happened to Israel, till the fullness of the Gentiles
be come in; and verse 30, 31. As ye in times past have not believed God, yet
now have obtained mercy through their unbelief, even so have these also now not
believed, that through your mercy, they may also obtain mercy. And now it is
that these blessed days shall Commence: and therefore when the Whore is Judged,
great Salvations come in, and the Jews are brought in, together with the
Gentiles to Celebrate it with their Hallelujah's, Rev. 19.1, 3, 4, 6. And now
shall the Sealed Ones, both of the Jews and Gentiles appear in their luster.

4. That the Happiness of those times will be mainly Spiritual. Not but that
there will be an External Glory then afforded to the Church of God; that is the
time when God will say to Zion, arise and shine, Isa. 6^.1 Then will that
prediction be fulfilled in, Isa. 2.2. The Mountain of the Lords House shall be
established in the top of the Mountains, and shall he Exalted above the Hills,
and all Nations shall flow to it; and that, Psalm. 72.3 The Mountains shall
bring forth peace to the people; and v. 7. In his days shall the Righteous
flourish and abundance of peace, so long as the Moon endures. Then shall Satan
be bound, and the haters of God shall feign Obedience, and his enemies lick the
dust. Then will that be understood and experienced, Ezekiel. 28.24. There shall be
no more a pricking briar unto the House of Israel, nor any grieving thorn, etc.
But the great glory of these times will be, that Grace will then flourish, and
holiness abound. Christ told Pilate, Joh. 18 36. My Kingdom is not of this
world: And Holiness will mainly difference that from all else; it is therefore
said of these times, Zech. 14.20, 21. In that day there shall be upon the bells
of the Horses, Holiness to the Lord, etc.

5. The Spiritual felicity of those days will flow from the more full opening
of Christ the Fountain: For,

1. All Spiritual Good derives from Christ to us. We have none in us naturally;
as he purchased for us all that we have, so he confers it upon us: it is of his
fullness that we receive, Joh. 1.16. What therefore he gives, we derive from
him, and therefore our increases are proportionable to his Communications to
us; if he with holds from us, we wither, and go to decay, but if he shall
influence us liberally, we shall flourish.

2. There have been the gradual Communications of this good to the Church and
People of God in all Generations. This fountain has been and continues opened
to some or other of fallen men from the beginning; and the manifestations and
operations of it have been sometimes more, sometimes less: but there will be
more of it than ever in these days; yea it will then arrive to a fullness, not
of absolute, but comparative perfection.

3. The glory of these days, in regard of the fullness of the opening of this
fountain, will be seen in two things.

1. In respect of Light. This shall be the evening of the Gospel day, of which
we are told, Zech 14 6, 7. It shall come to pass in that day, that the light
shall not be clear, nor dark; but it shall be one day, that shall be known to
the Lord, not day nor night; but it shall come to pass that at evening time it
shall be light. The shadows will fly away, and then shall that word be
accomplished and take place, Hab. 2.14. The Earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the Sea: Then shall all
differences in judgment between Gods People cease, and that be fulfilled, Zeph.
3.9. Then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call
upon the name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent.

2. In respect of Efficacy. The virtue of this fountain shall then appear
abundantly; the pardoning and sanctifying influence of it shall be to
admiration, Ezekiel. 37.9. Every thing that lives, which moves, whithersoever
the rivers shall come, shall live. The Spirit will then mightily accompany the
dispensation of the Gospel, and Conversions will not be so rare and dubious as
now they are, nor the lives of Christians so barren, but then will those
Prophesies have a wonderful accomplishment, Isa. 32.15, etc. Chap. 35.10. etc.
These are some of the precious things to be expected in that day.

USE I. This Doctrine affords matter of great Consolation to the Children of
God under the present evil days. And truly the promise and faith of these days,
have given great light and comfort to Gods Children in former times, under the
darkest distresses that they met with; how much more may it now do so to us in
these times of great Searchings of heart? If we look on the present state of
Christianity in the world, it appears with a black face; and if we stint our
speculations here, it will sink us in despondency; but let us look forward, and
we may gather abundant refreshment. Consider then,

1. There are better times yet to come. It is night at present, and the
terrors of it are apt to affright us; but the Day will break, and let us
refresh our selves with that consideration, Psalm. 30.5. Weeping may endure for
a night, but joy comes in the morning. God has said in, Psalm. 125.3. The rod
of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous. And the Psalmist
resolves, Psalm. 102.13. Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Zion; and 94.14.
The Lord will not cast off his people, neither will he forsake his inheritance.
The whole Creation groans for this day, and we ought to live upon the hope of
it, Romans 8.19, 23, Nor need we to fear whether it shall be accomplished, for
God has engaged in it; and we are told, Isa. 9.7. The zeal of the Lord of
Hosts will perform this.

2. It will not be long before these days Commence. Although we cannot tell the
day, or month, or year when that time shall be, yet we are fully assured that
it is hastening. We are told in the Apostles days, Heb. 10.37. Yet a little
while and he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. How many of the
preliminary predictions, of things that were to intervene and make way to it,
have already received their fulfillment? and we may expect that God will make a
short work of it, when it draws nigh its accomplishment. Nor need the present
face of things, though dismal, affright us; or make us think it afar off, for
how often is the darkest part of the night just before the day breaks? and
therefore the Church acknowledges, Psalm. 126.1. When the Lord turned again the
captivity of Zion, we were like those that dream.

3. Let us then much ponder of the Happiness of those days, and refresh our
weary spirits therewithal. The thing is sure, determined, and cannot fail; let
then our faith give a present subsistence to the things thus hoped for, and our
meditation feed it self comfortably with them: let us for this end consider
with great delight of the things that are then to be expected. Then shall the
JEWS come over to the Lord Jesus Christ, whom they have abjured, Zech. 12.10.
etc. Then will they ask the way to Zion with their faces thitherward; then
their Graves shall be opened, and they shall pay homage to their Lord Redeemer.
Then shall the Gentiles be called in plenty; then will that word take place,
Psalm. 22.27. All the ends of the world shall remember and turn to the Lord, and
all the kindreds of the Nations shall worship before thee; and that, Hos, 1.
10. It shall come to pass that in the place where it was said unto them, ye are
not my people, there it shall be said unto them, ye are the Sons of the Living
G^d. Then will God gloriously accomplish that promise, Psalm. 2.8. Ask thou of
me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost
parts of the earth for thy possession. Then will the Sun of Righteousness
^ppear in his Meridian brightness, and dispel the mists of ignorance, error,
and superstition; then will that prayer of the Church be answered, Psalm. 67.2.
That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health to all Nations. Then
will all the differences in the Church of Christ be adjusted, and their
contentions will cease about the different ways and modes of Worship, which at
present not a little disturb the Churches tranquillity Zech 14.9 In that day
there shall be one Lord, and his name one* Nor any more shall the noise of
hammers and axes be h^ard in the building of Gods Temple: It will be a very
peaceable and flourishing state of the Church, when there shall be neither
adversary nor evil occurrent. And shall not the belief of these things reviv^
our fainting spirits, and make us to wait patiently through the^e driery hours
of trouble?

USE II. We also have here a Rule by which to judge of the times. Every one is
ready to make his remarks on the times that he lives in, and which pass over
him, and to judge of them whether the days are good or evil: The generality of
men take their measures from the observation of outward Providence; if there be
outward peace and plenty, they call them happy days; if outward distress and
trouble, they call them evil: but we have a better Rule, and more safe for
Christians, and that is, to judge according as this fountain is opened amongst
us. The more of Christ that a people enjoy, the happier are they, and the less
he is known and acknowledged in his great design of Mediatorship, the greater
is the infelicity of such a people; and by this Rule I believe the times are
evil in the most places that are called Christian; inasmuch as it is a day
wherein the greatest number of those that should preach the Doctrines of
Christ, of Redemtion, Justification, Sanctification, and Eternal Life to be
obtained by him, and so to be the instruments of opening the Fountain to men;
do rather endeavor to obscure them, by perverting the great Doctrine of
Justification by his Righteousness alone, and confounding New Covenant
Obedience with mere Morality, or a legal Righteousness. How contrary are these
things to those which will be the glory of the Times of refreshment!

USE. III. For Exhortation to the People of God in two particulars.

1. Be Exhorted to Pray much and earnestly for the Conversion of the JEWS. This
duty seems to be too much neglected in these days; and possibly one great
reason of it is, because the belief of this Article runs so low in the
Christian world. Be we then roused up to this duty: and there are these
Considerations which are very profitable for this end.

1. The thing is a matter of Faith, and so it Calls for Prayer. It as a truth
not to be doubted o^, since God has given us the assurance of it in his word,
and we ought to Receive his Testimony, and thereby Set to our Seal that he is
True. Now the things that we believe, because God has promised them, and which
are future, are such things as are proper for us to pray for: they are good in
themselves, and worth the des^^ing; and the strength of Prayer is in this
belief: yea this is the way in which God has said that he will communicate the
good promised to his people, Ezekiel 36.37. I will yet for this be enquired of by
the house of Is^ael, to do it for them.

2. They once Prayed for us, we therefore owe this duty to them. There was a
time when God only kn^w them of all the Families of the earth; the Gentiles
were far off: then they prayed that we might be brought in to Christ's fold; and
among others, Psalm. 67. is a Prayer of the Church of the Jews on this account:
surely then it is but a due requital for us to (...) for them.

3. Their Miserable Condition Calls for it: They are objects of compassion, and
every tender heart cannot but condole them: nor is it like to be better with
them till the happy day of their Conversion comes. And well may we use a like
expostulation which Christ, the Angel of the Covenant once did for them of old
when in distress, Zech. 1.12. O Lord of hosts, how long will thou not have
mercy on Jerusalem; against which thou have had indignation.

4. The Benefit which shall come with their Conversion, to the Gentile
Churches, is our great encouragement to importunity in it. There was no little
advantage by their casting off, but the Apostle assures us that their grafting
in shall be transcendently more, Romans 11.15. If the casting away of them be the
reconciling of the world, what shall the receiving of them be, but life from
the dead? Surely then we pray for our selves, when we pray for them; and one
would think that Interest would not ly.

5. These happy Times are to be ushered in by Prayer. God is well pleased in
our Praying for them, Psalm. 122.6. Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem; they shall
prosper that love thee. And he has told us, that such a spirit shall be
preparatory to that happy day, and help to bring it in; Isa. 62 6, 7. I have
set watchmen upon they walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace
day nor night: ye that make mention of the Lord keep not silence, and give him
no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth.
When therefore God shall pour out such a spirit of Prayer on his people in this
regard* it will be a blessed Prognostic of that glorious time, hastening.

2. Let it encourage all that are Godly to leave their Children behind them
with Faith and Comfort. We are some of us going off the stage, and are very
sollicitous what shall become of ours when we are gone. There are many ^adning
considerations that appear in our view, which do sometimes fill us with
perplexity; but let such as fear God look through and beyond the present
discouragmen^s, and comfort themselves with such thoughts as ^hese: not only do
we leave our Children to a good God, a Covenant keeping God, whose truth and
faithfulness we may sa^ely rely upon; but it is comfort for us to think that
that day is not far off; and though we may not live to see the dawnings of it,
yet our Posterity may see the breaking of it, and partake in the happy benefits
that it shall b^ing to the Church of God: to nourish our faith with the
contemplation of the glorious dispensations which there shall be in that day,
when God will bring his Church out of darkness, into light, and take them out
of the horrible pit, and set their feet upon the rock: and then to remember,
that the Children of the faithful have a special interest in the blessings of
that day, according to the promise, Isa. 54.13. All thy Children shall be
taught of God, and great shall be the Peace of thy Children. Let us then in
faith do our duty to them whiles we live, and when we die, let us rejoice in
this hope, that there are better times coming on, when God shall bring back his
peoples Captivity; when he who cannot ly, will give being to that precious
word, in which he has made us to hope, Psalm. 69.35, 36. God will save Zion,
and will build the Cities of Judah, that they may dwell there, and have it in
possession: the seed also of his Servants shall inherit it, and they that fear
his Name shall dwell therein.

DOCTRINE. VI. When God has brought his Chosen to bewail their Sins,
especially the Affronts which they have Offered to Christ, and to Pray to him
for Mercy, he will then make a gracious Discovery of this Fountain to them.
THE rise of this Doctrine is from the Coherence of the Text with that which
went before. God had promised to pour out such a spirit upon them, Chap. 12.10
etc. And here he tells us that in that day this Fountain shall be Opened. In
the former Doctrine we considered this benefit as it refers to the Church in
general, and particularly to Gods Ancient people, considered as a People: In
this we come to take an account of it as it refers to Persons, and is applied
to men in Conversion; which we are to suppose to be included in the former, as
the spiritual aim of it. And that we may come at the right sense of this
Doctrine, observe these Conclusions.

1. That there are those whom God has chosen in Christ, to be made partakers
in his saving benefits. We before observed that if we would take the
Considera^ion of the great affair of Gods grace appearing in the good will that
he manifests to sinful man, at the rise of it, we must follow it up to the
eternal purpose of God, in which the whole Scheam of it was laid out. Now in
this purpose of his there was a designation of them that should be the subjects
in whom this Grace was to shine forth; and accordingly all was accommoda^ed for
the illustration of it in such a subject. When therefore the Apostle
discourses of these Spiritual Blessings, he runs them up hither, Ephesians. 1.3 4
According as he has chosen us in Christ etc.

2. That Christ must be Opened to these as a Fountain for Sin and Uncleanness,
in order to their being Saved by him. Salvation supposes something that they
are to be Saved from, which is their present misery. He that is under no evil,
needs no Salvation; they are only the distressed that want it, or will be
advantaged by it. And this Salvation must be applied to the removal of that
from which the evil derives: now that which is man's infelicity derives from Sin
and Uncleanness; it is the Guilt and the Pollution of sin that hurts them. As
therefore Christ is appointed for this, so he must be discovered to them as
such a one, how else shall they accept of and entertain him as so? which they
must do, if ever he profit them; for it is by faith that they receive him, and
so are advantaged by him.

3. That there is a time when God will Open and Apply Christ to these. They are
born in their natural estate strangers to Christ, and far from Salvation, Ephesians
2.3. We were Children of wrath, even as others. They may live a great while in
their Alienation from him, and refuse him, though he offers himself unto them:
they ever do so till he comes with power. But because he has chosen them to
obtain Salvation by Christ, he will therefore bring them to this Fountain, and
make them to partake in a title to it, and effectual influences of it upon
them: Our Savior has plumply asserted that in, Joh. 6.37. All that the Father
has given me shall come unto me If Election has pitched upon a person,
Vocation will without fail, sooner or later find him out, and bring him home.

4. That in order to his so Opening this Fountain, he will produce the fore
cited effects in them, by the power of his Spirit, viz. a spirit of Mourning,
and a spirit of Supplication. This is the way in which he makes Christ
Effectual in men, for the ends of his being a fountain to them.

Now for our right taking up of this order, Let us observe in general, That we
are considering of such as are converted to God, under and by the dispensation
of the Gospel and Ordinances, and the effectual application of them. As for
Gods proceeding with Elect Infants, who die before they are capable of being so
treated, we are not now enquiring after that. Here then more particularly let
these things be considered.

1. That we must distinguish between the Opening of the Fountain Doctrinally,
and Savingly. As to the outward discoveries of Christ which are made in the
Gospel and Ordinances, they are made to all promiscuously to whom the means of
Grace are sent, and the great truths which concern Christ and Salvation by him
are urged upon them: but where the Spirit of God does inwardly reveal Christ in
the Souls of any, and makes them sharers in his Salvation, he always b^ings
them to such a frame: such therefore are the only blessed ones, Mat. 5.4
Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

2. That we must distinguish between Passive and Active Conversion This
distinction is generally received among the Orthodox, and by all them who
acknowledge that there are the Habits of Saving Grace infused into us, in order
to our being able to exert Grace in our lives; and the Apostle plainly shows
the difference, Gal. 5.25. If we live in the Spirit, let us walk in the Spirit.
Passive Conversion then is that Change which is made in us in Regeneration, by
the infusion of all saving Graces into us, of which it is said, 2 Cor. 5.17. If
any man be in Christ Jesus, he is a new Creature. Active Conversion consists in
the exerting and exercising of these Graces. The former is done by the Spirit
alone; in the latter he co operates with us. And we may take from hence this
brief account of the present affair.

1. That Gods Elect do many times long despise the offers of Christ that are
made to them in the Gospel. God will have his own to know, that their
Conversion, as well as their Salvation, is of Grace, and that they have a
nature in them as full of obstinacy and enmity as others: ^he therefore leaves
them for a season, to resist his Spirit, and to show the desperate malignity
that is in them; and they neglect the things of their peace, withstand the
offers of a Savior, and quench the motions of the Spirit in them, that
accompany the Calls of the Gospel This Ephraim confesses of himself, Jer.
31.18. Thou have chastized me, and I was chastized, as a bullock unaccustomed
to the yoke. Yea, sometimes violently to oppose and persecute his Church: Such
an one was Paul, when a Pharisee, Phil. 3.6. Touching zeal, persecuting the
Church.

2. That there are some common legal works wrought in the Elect, antecedent to
their Regeneration, or Passive Conversion. The Spirit of God is wont to begin
with men by Convictions and Terrors, by setting the Law home on their
Consciences, which make them afraid: and those are wrought not only in Gods
Children, but in others also; and the Elect themselves do too frequently stifle
these motions, out^grow these awakenings, and return again to their former
security: the time of their new^birth is not yet come, and God hereby lets them
see what enemies they are to their own Salvation, and that if he had not come
with Almighty Efficacy to them, they had refused him to their destruction, as
well as others. How many such common works have some out-grown; and become
worse after them? and yet they have had their months in which God has taken
them, because he had an Immutable love for them. See for this, Isa. 57.17, 18.
I hid me, and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart: I
have seen his ways, and will heal him.

3. That all saving qualifications are wrought in them at once, in Passive
Conversion. When the Spirit of God comes to produce this great Change in the
Sinner, he infuseth into him all his Sanctifying Graces: there is a new man
created in him, Ephesians. 4.24. There is a perfection of parts, though not of
degrees: Sanctification is throughout, 1 These. 5.23. There is therefore no
order in the production of these saving qualities in the Soul, but they come in
all at once. In Conversion whole Christ is put on, it is therefore called a new
birth, Joh. 3.3. And it is the babe of Grace which is born, and it has all its
members entire.

4. That God draws the man to exert these Graces in Active Conversion, after
the manner of a Rational Agent. In the exerting of Grace, the man is not only
active, but voluntary too; he acts as a cause by Counsel. As therefore there is
the Cooperation of God in this, as well as his operation in the former,
according to, Phil. 2.13. It is God which works in you, to will and to do, of
his own good pleasure. So he works upon the Rational Faculties or Powers that
are put into man; and having sanctified them, he draws them forth to p^t the
new nature into act, upon sight, deliberation, and with persuasion. He is not
drawn to it by mere instinct, but he knows what he does, and why he does it: he
has a foundation on which he acts every Grace; he knows whom he believes, in,
and why he so does, 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have believed, and am persuaded
that he is able to keep that which I have committed to him against that day;
and so of the rest. God is therefore said to draw us with the cords of a man,
Hos. 11.4.

5. In this Conversion the Soul betakes it self to Christ by faith, as to a
Fountain opened for Sin and for Uncleanness. The great Grace celebrated in the
Gospel is Faith, by which we close with Christ for life, wherein we comply with
the main Article of the New Covenant; and therefore Salvation is ascertained to
it, Joh. 3.16. Whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have
everlasting life. This Grace is not before the others in being, though it leads
in the exercise, and does indeed influence all the other, being that which
fetches in help from Christ for the acting of them. Now Christ is the
immediate Object on whom Faith fixes; it believes in him for all the good that
it wants, and sees to be stored in him; and that which draws it so to rely on
him, is the discovery it has made of his sufficiency and readiness to answer
its great necessity; which is, to be delivered from the guilt and defilement of
sin; and that because it apprehends all this to be fountained in him, that it
may be communicated by him to all those that stand in need of it; and this it
does upon the invitation given in the Gospel, to all that are oppressed with
the burden of sin, to come to him for succor against it.

6. This Faith is always accompanied with true Repentance. In active Conversion
these two Graces are in conjunction. I shall not here meddle with the disputes,
which of these two Graces is the first: if we speak of their production, they
are together, and so there is no priority of any Grace, they being created in
the same instant: if we speak of the order of nature in their activity, Faith
must have the precedence, because it influenceth all the other; for though
there is a Legal Repentance before Conversion, yet that which is Evangelical
follows upon it, and is no further pleasing to God, than as it is exercised by
faith: but in respect to order of time, the man repents and believes at once,
and so they are together. It is a penitent Faith, and a believing Repentance
that is exerted; they are therefore conjoined, Acts 20.21. Testifying both to
the Jews, and also to the Greeks, Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our
Lord Jesus Christ.

7. For the right exerting of these Graces, there is the exercise of a Spirit
of Mourning, and of Supplication. There is a principle of this, or there is
such a Spirit habitually put into the man when he is new made, but the
improvement of it is in the practicing of Faith and Repentance. Here then,

1. For the exerting of true Repentance, he draws out a Spirit of mourning. In
Repentance we turn from sin to God, in which turning, there is not only an
abstinence from the outward acts, but a cordial renouncing and forsaking of
those sins which we rightly repent of; and for that end we must be made to see
them to be evil and mischievous, and that we have foolishly turned from God to
them; the genuine effect whereof upon the heart, is to bemoan our selves by
reason of them: and hence the Scripture annexeth mourning unto Repentance, as
an inseparable concomitant of it, hence that in, Jer. 31.18. I have surely
heard Ephraim bemoaning of himself, etc. And for the producing of this
mourning, God offers the conviction of the evil and bitterness there is in our
sins, Jer. 2.19. Know and see that it is an evil thing and bitter that thou
have forsaken the Lord thy God, etc. Now there are two passages to be observed
in this mourning.

1. He bewails all his Sins. Godly Sorrow is for Sin: that is the procuring
cause of all the sorrows that poor man is exposed unto, and is therefore that
which peculiarly calls for our mourning; and this belongs to that sorrow which
the Apostle tells us is so serviceable to true Repentance, 2 Cor. 7.10, Godly
sorrow works repentance not to be repented of. It is by this that we embitter
sin to our selves, and stir up in us an hatred of it: for, though sorrow ^e a
mixed Affection, yet it mainly partakes of hatred, which is a separating
affection, and makes us to reject the Object of it. Now if this sorrow be
genuine, it is universal; it bears a respect to all sin; because if it be
right, it is excited by the apprehension of the great evil there is in sin, in
the nature, as well as in the effects of it; which evil being in all sin, it
must needs extend to all: hence that, Psalm 119.104. I hate every false way;
and where this hatred is, there will be Sorrow for our having hurt our selves
by it, and therein dishonored God.

2. He more peculiarly laments the affronts that he has offered to Christ, who
has been set before him in the tenders of Grace. This therefore is peculiarly
remarked in, Zech. 12.10. They shall look upon him whom they have pierced, and
they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for an only Son, and be in bitterness
for him, as one is in bitterness for his first born. Where the Gospel comes,
and Christ is exhibited, together with the need that men have of him by reason
of Sin; the convictions whereof are laid before men to persuade them of the
necessity they stand in of having him to be their Savior; and men have made
light of there invitations which have been given them; they have not been
persuaded of their misery by Sin, and brought to accept of Christ to rescue
them from it, and have accordingly despised him, neglected him, chosen lying
vanities before him, and remained in their unbelief; This is the great
provocation under the Gospel, Joh. 3.19. This is the Condemnation, that light
is come into the world, and men choose darkness rather than light. This Sin
therefore they shall peculiarly mourn for and resent with the greatest sorrow.

2. For the exercising of Faith, this Spirit of mourning is ever accompanied
with a Spirit of Supplication. The first breathings and breakings ^orth of
faith, are in prayer. When once Paul was Converted, that is the next news we
hear of him, Acts 9.11. Behold he prays. This is the first sign by which the
newborn Christian discovers that he has life in him. True Prayer supposes a
principle of faith in the man, for only such a prayer as is spirited with it,
is acceptable to, and prevalent with God, Jam. 5.16. The effectual fervent
prayer of a righteous man avails much; compare, Chap. 1.5, 6. Let him ask of
God, but let him ask in faith. God has therefore made it a medium for our
participation in the blessings engaged in the New Covenant, Ezekiel. 36.37. I will
yet be enquired of for this by the House of Israel to do it for them. In which
prayer,

1. He confesses and bewaileth his sins before God* Confession of sin is, if
not an essential part, yet an inseparable adjunct of prayer, by which sinful
man addresseth God for mercy; hence the promise so runs, Prove. 28.13. He that
confesses and forsakes shall find mercy: And for this reason, when God
invites backsliders to return, and promises them acceptance, he enters that
caution, Jer. 3.13. Only acknowledge thine iniquity. Nor indeed can we rightly
come to Christ for a pardon and cleansing, unless we lay open our malady before
him; so that there is a tacit confession of Sin in the very petitions that are
put up on this account: but God expects that in our solemn addressing of him,
we be explicit in it, Levit. 26.40. If they confess their iniquity, and the
iniquity of their fathers, with their trespass, etc.

2. He requests his Converting Grace. There must be a root of Conversion in the
man, before he can sincerely desire or petition to be Converted; and indeed
gracious mourning, confession, and supplication, do follow after that inward
and transforming work of the Spirit in the man, Jer. 31.19. After that I was
turned, I repented, and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my thigh; I
was ashamed, etc. However, in the actual turning of the Soul to God, the man
finds that it is not in his own power to turn himself, but that he must have it
given him of God; and accordingly he asks it of him: thus did Ephraim, verse
18. Turn thou me, and I shall be turned; and God directs Israel to use such
words, H^s. 14.2. Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously; and these
cries are drawn forth by the efficacy of preventing Grace.

3 He professes his acceptance of, and reliance upon Christ for Salvations He
acknowledges that Christ is an All sufficient Savior, that there is a fullness
of virtue in this fountain to take away all Sin and Uncleanness from him: he
answers the Call of the Spirit in the Word, and embraces the promise annexed
to it, and Echo's back to it with acceptance and gratitude, as, Psalm. 27.8.
When then said, seek ye my face, mine heart said unto thee, thy face* Lord,
will I seek. Jer. 3.22 Return ye backsliding Children, and I will heal your
backslidngs; behold we come unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God: And thus
is the Everlasting Covenant past between God and him; now is he United with the
Fountain of Grace, and all the saving virtue of it is derived to him, and this
is the usual method of Divine Grace, in bringing a Sinner to participate in the
saving Benefits which were purchased by the Lord Jesus Christ for him.

USE I. For Information in two or three particulars.

1 We have here a Rule to judge of the Efficacy of the Gospel in the
dispensacion of it. There is a great deal of reason why the People of God
should observe, not only who enjoys the Gospel in which Christ is opened to
men, and where it is that Christ is most clearly and distinctly declared in his
whole work; but also what fruit or efficacy there is of it; how far the virtue
of this fountain for the ends of its being opened, is made evident by the
effects of it upon men: and though the work of Application, wherein Christ is
made to us Righteousness and Sanctification, for the pardoning and cleansing of
our sin, be a secret work, and no man can certainly know it of another, except
by extraordinary Revelation; and though the things which are the concomitants
of this, and evidence to it, viz. A spirit of mourning and supplication, are
not so obvious, but that men may be mistaken about them, inasmuch as there may
be secret Prayer, and bewailing of sin, that is sincere, and accepted with God,
which makes no noise; and there may be a show of much of this, but whether it
be sincere, and proceeds from such a spirit given to us, can be judged of only
Charitably; yet there is usually so much to be discerned on this account, by
such as observe the times, as may make the hearts of such as fear God, Glad or
Sad, and many times there are too awful evidences of the general prevailing of
the contrary spirit, by the notorious appearance of such things as are
inconsistent with this. If we speak on a public account, when God intends to
pour out much grace upon a People, he will give a spirit of mourning and
prayer; and therefore when there is but a little of this, and much of the
contrary to be observed, when it is as, Isa. 22.12, 13. In that day did the
Lord God of hosts call to weeping, and to mourning, and to baldness, and to
gi^ding with sackcloth; and behold joy, and gladness, slaying of oxen, and
killing of sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine; let us eat and drink, for to
morrow we shall die. When instead of reforming the sins that are among men,
there is nothing mended, but they rather grow worse; it says, that if there
were a spirit of mourning, it would not be so. And when Prayer is neglected;
particularly in Families, and there are so many houses without it, as is
complained, it is to be supposed that secret Prayer is neglected too; and much
more that the spirit of Supplication is greatly wanting. Nay, though there be
many Fasts kept, for the bemoaning of the prevailing sins, making of humble
confessions of them unto God, and asking of his pardon and healing; yet if this
be all, and there is nothing amended, nor is the work of the present day in
this regard pursued; it will bespeak, that the day for the plentiful
accomplishment of this promise that we have under our present consideration,
does not as yet commence. And let serious Christians judge by such Rules, and
say, whether they do not see great occasion for Lamentation on this account.
The same observation is also applicable to particular persons.

2. We may hence learn what little reason the most have to boast of Christ as a
Fountain of Salvation to them. It must needs be a sad sight, to see with what
security and confidence the generality do nourish themselves, as if they
nothing doubted of a title to Christ, and life by him, and take it amiss to
have the reality of it so much as questioned, who yet cannot bear the test of
the truth in hand, but must needs fall before it, and stand condemned by it. If
it be, as it is, a great truth, that where God applies Christ to men, in the
benefits which he has purchased for Sinners, he pours out upon them a spirit
of mourning and supplication, certainly then, all such as are without such a
spirit, must needs be strangers to such an Application: and without doubt,
where such a spirit is put into men, there will be the exerting of it in their
lives and practices. When therefore there is nothing of this, but the quite
contrary notoriously appearing, such men's faith must needs be presumption, and
their boasting is of a false gift. Think of this then, all you who are so far
from mourning for your sins, that you can live in them quietly and contentedly,
nay you Rejoice in iniquity, and take the greatest Satisfaction in gratifying
of your carnal lusts, who are never well, but when you are Devising mischief on
your beds, and putting it in practice as soon as opportunity affords; you that
can make a mock of sin, that can Drink your stolen waters, and eat your bread
in secret, and wipe your mouths, and say, we have done no wickedness. You that
can boast of your lewd pranks, and show your sin as Sodom, and hide it not; you
that join hard in hand with your lewd companions, and encourage one another in
your wicked courses, surely you never had the healing virtue of this fountain
applied to you; and to hope to have your sins pardoned, and yet not cleansed is
a vain hope. Think of this also all you Prayerless ones, who instead of calling
upon Gods name, abuse it, and take it in vain by your profane taking it into
your mouths; who can live days, and months, and years without so much as a
formal addressing of God; whose houses will one day rise up against you, and
testify that you never Prayed in them, either by your selves, or with your
families; who never carried your iniquities to God as a burden too heavy for
you to bear, and with strong cries besought him to take them away by a free
pardon, ^and powerful purging. Let all such know, that how presumptuously
soever you may now cry, Lord, Lord, there is a time coming, if mercy prevent
not, when he will say, I never knew you, depart from me all ye workers of
iniquity. And be not deceived, for God is not mocked.

3. This shows us who they are that are like to enjoy the clearest discoveries,
and most plentiful applications of Christ to them: certainly they are such unto
whom God imparts the largest measure of a spirit of mourning and supplication.
Where God intends to build highest, he will lay the founda^ion lowest. The
greatest spiritual mourners are appointed for the more abundant consolations.
They are the humble and contrite whom God delights to dwell with, and to
revive, Isa. 57.15. Christ's anointing had a special regard for such as these,
and therefore his applications will be eminently made to them, Isa. 61. begin.
The Lord has anointed me, etc. to bind up the broken hearted, to appoint unto
them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for
mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, etc. Does God then
bring you into Godly Sorrow? Does he make Sin bitter to you? Does he fill you
with grief at, and cause you deeply to bewail your Sins before him? be not
discouraged, but take i^ as a good Omen, and wait for the Consolations of his
Spirit; remember what he has said, Psalm. 126.5. They that sow in tears, shall
reap in joy. It is also certain, that when God excites in us an heart to pray
to him, and fills us with ardent desires, and groans unutterable, after him for
his grace, for his pardoning, for his cleansing of us, and we cannot let him
alone; it is a sign that he has great mercies to bestow on us, which in this
way he will communicate to us. God, who has promised that his shall pray unto
him (and it is he who gives prayer to his own) has assured us of a gracious
audience, and a good return to our prayers, Jer. 29.12, 13, 14. Then shall ye
call upon me, and ye shall go and pray unto me, and I will hearken unto you,
and ye shall seek me and find me, etc. Be not then discouraged; and though you
may not at present experience those sensible apprehensions of the efficacy of
the Fountain, for the taking away of your Sin, yet doubt not that God will in
the best way do it for you, and give you the experience of it to your abundant
Consolation. God w^ll exalt his Grace on you in this way, and make it to appear
how great is his kindness to you, in taking off your Guilt, and washing away
your pollution: And when you are suitably prepared so to glorify him, he will
fill you with the discoveries of his love, for which you shall admire him for
ever.

USE II. For Examination, Let us hereby prove whether ever this Fountain were
savingly Opened to us, and it concerns all to put themselves upon this Trial.
For Motive then, Consider,

1. You are all by Nature under the guilt and defilement of Sin. Sin and
Uncleanness are hereditary to all Adams Children, and they derive to them in
the Channel of Natural Generation; for this we are told, Ephesians. 2.3. We are
Children of wrath, even as others; and he demands and resolves, Job 14 4 Who
can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one. This then is the condition
in which every one is born. Adams First Transgression was ours by a legal
Imputation, and his corrupt Image which he contracted, instead of Gods Image
which he lost, is ours by Propagation; and thus we come into the world guilty
and filthy Creatures, Psalm. 51.5. Behold, I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin
did my Mother conceive me. And this Guilt and Defilement are increased by all
the actual sins that we have committed since we came into the World.

2. Except this be done away, it will be your ruin. All Sin in its own nature
and operation is deadly. Sin and Death are closely connected each with the
other, Romans 5.12 By one man sin came into the world, and death by sin. The
guilt that adheres to sin binds the man under the Curse, and that is Death,
Ezekiel. 18.4. The Soul that sins, it shall die. The Law has already past the
Sentence upon the man, and unless it be removed it will without fail take place
on him: and the defilement of sin is it self the very spiritual death of the
Soul: it has deprived the man of the life of Sanctification, and he can no
more perform a gracious action, than a dead man can a life action; hence that
expression, Ephesians. 2 1. Ye were dead in trespasses and sins. So that as long as
it abides on him, he cannot at all answer the end of his Creation.

3. Nothing else can do it for you but this Fountain. There is a sufficiency of
virtue in it for this end; God provided it for this very purpose, and he does
nothing in vain: it therefore never failed of producing this effect, where it
was savingly applied. But except you repair hither, all your other attempts
will prove lost labor: this Salvation is no where else to be had, Acts 4.12.
There is nothing else that can expiate the Guilt of sin, or make atonement to
the Justice of God for the remission of it, but this one Sacrifice of Christ:
thousands of rams will not procure it, God therefore blows upon them with
contempt, Mic. 6.6, 7, 8. Nor will all the waters of Abana and Pharpar cleanse
this Leprosy; it is only the Blood of Christ is cleansing, and that Blood does
cleanse from all sin, 1 John* 1.7.

4. Except it be applied to you it will not have this saving efficacy. Christ
does not profit all; although his virtue be sufficient, yet all are not
pardoned and healed by him: there are multitudes that perish in their sins
notwithstanding; and that not only of those to whom he was never revealed in
the Gospel, but of such also, who have been told of, and invited to come to
him: and whence is this, but because application has not been made of him to
them for this end? Sinners that are outwardly called, perish as well as others,
and the reason is because they do not answer the Call, and come to the waters,
the threatening is therefore declared against such, Prove 1.24, etc. Because I
have called and ye refused, etc. I will also laugh at your calamity, and mock
when your fear comes, etc.

5. Till then you know that he has been thus applied to you, your condition
must needs be dubious. It is from the work of Application that we are to fetch
our evidence of our safe estate. It is not enough that there is a Christ, and
that he is a Fountain of Salvation, but is he ours? for this reason Professors
are put upon it to prove and try themselves; and the enquiry is not, whether
there be such a Fountain, and there be a fullness in it, but whether Christ be
in us, 2 Cor. 13.5. Know ye not your own selves, how that Christ is in you,
except ye be Reprobates? And hence we have such an expression, Col. 1.27.
Christ in you the hope of Glory. And though, if the thing be so, your state is
out of danger, yet till you know that it is so, you cannot enjoy inward quiet
or satisfaction.

6. There are many who cheat themselves with false hopes on this account. The
natural security in sinful man, makes him ready to take easy satisfaction about
his good estate; and the delusions of Satan, and the false reports of a carnal
mind, and the fair shows which there are in a common work of the Spirit, are
snares which they are entangled by: there is upon this account great need to be
cautioned against rash presumption, lest otherwise you labor of a pernicious
mistake; thus the Apostle to them, 1 Cor. 6.9. Be not deceived.

7. The Doctrine in hand affords you a sure Rule of Trial. Whatsoever
difference there may be, in the manner or degree of mourning, or of the
impressions which are made on the Conscience, by the Terrors of the Lord; yet,
when God makes the Gospel effectual for the application of the virtue of this
Fountain to a Sinner, he always gives a Spirit of Mourning and Prayer; i. e. He
gives Grace to mourn and pray after a Godly manner: If therefore you can
discover this to be in you, and are not mistaken about it, you have an evidence
that will not deceive you. Put your selves then upon the trial of them
severally, and that by such R^les as follow.

1. Has God poured upon you a Spirit of mourning for Sin? have you received
the Grace of God by sorrow? And for proof of this,

1. Did you ever mourn at all for Sin? if not, this Trial is resolved at once.
He that never mourned for sin, did never partake in the saving virtue of this
fountain: and it is to be feared that a great many forward Professors will fall
at this first Trial. There are many that build high, but did never dig for a
foundation. The stony ground hearers Religion begins with joy, as, Mat. 13.20.
He hears the word, and anon with joy receives it. It may be you have mourned
for the fruits of sin, for your outward losses, bereavements, reproaches,
pains, etc. but it has not been the Sin that procured them, but the things
themselves that stirred up your sorrow: and if the Sin it self was not bitter
to you, you never repaired to the Grace of Christ to take it away.

2. Have you mourned after a Godly sort? It may be you have been touched with
remorses of Conscience, and Sin has been set home upon you with terror: but
that may be, and yet be only a part of the punishment of Sin in this life:
there is therefore a double sorrow for sin, Godly and Worldly: 2 Cor. 7.10. And
is yours a Godly one? Try it by th^se things.

1. Have you ever felt the bitterness of Sin it self? Many an one finds sorrow
by his sins, and is forced to acknowledge that his Sin has brought it upon
him, who yet is not led by it to see and believe that Sin is in its own nature
so vile and evil as to be odious. It may be he only reads it in the Law, and he
sees that God will maintain his own Law; but mean while he lays the blame, not
on the sin that procured his sorrow, but on the Law that had such a Sanction in
it: and he is therefore sorry for his sin, only because he is sorry that there
is such a Law, that will not suffer him to sin with impunity: this is no Godly
Sorrow: it is not acted by Humility, but by pride and prejudice; and he says
as they, Ezekiel. 33.10. If our transgressions and our sins be upon us, and we
pine away in them, how shall we then live?

2. Have you been deeply oppressed with the burden of sin, so as thereby to be
made weary of it? Though God improves the troubles and mischiefs procured by
Sin, to bring us to see the evil of it, and cry out by reason of the bitterness
there is in it, yet in a kindly mourning, sin it self is made to be a burden
that we cannot tell how to bear, and hereupon we long to be rid of it, and
earnestly seek after a freedom from it; thus it was with Paul, Romans 7 24. Oh
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? We
seek a pardon, for we are undone without it: but we seek the death of Sin too,
nor can we be at quiet, but in the assurance and experience of the beginning of
it in us, and a comfortable persuasion that it will ere long be wholly
destroyed: hence that groan of his, Psalm. 38.4. Mine iniquities are gone over
mine head, as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me.

3. Has your mourning reached to, and fixed upon the sin of your nature? It is
not enough to have bewailed this or that particular actual Sin, although God
usually makes the conviction of, and the sorrow for such, to be leading to the
other: but he that has truly mourned for Sin, has been led up from thence to
the fountain of corruption which is within, and that has driven him to seek
after the Fountain of Grace which is in Christ: and always true mourning
cease not, till it comes hither, and lays out its greatest lamentations
here: thus it did in David, in the forecited, Psalm. 51.5. And in the Church,
Isa. 64.6. We are all as an unclean thing; and in Paul, Romans 7.21. I find a
law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me.

4. Has this sorrow wrought in you unto a true Repentance from Sin? Repentance
is one of the saving works of the Spirit wrought in Application* and wherever
Christ is communicated to any as a fountain of Grace, there will be this effect
of it. Now Godly Sorrow is an ingredient of this Repentance, and therefore if
it be right, it will ever accompany such a thing. Repentance is a cordial
turning from Sin to God: Sorrow for sin is that which helps and promoves this
turning, if it be kindly; for it is a separating Affection, and as it derives
from hatred of that which procures our trouble, so it will express it, in
carrying us away from it; hence that, 2 Cor. 7.9. Ye sorrowed to Repentance,
for ye were made sorry after a godly manner. If then ye have mourned never so
bitterly for Sin, yet if you have not reached to such a Repentance, it has not
been right; nor will it evidence your being in Christ.

5. Has this sorrow kindled in you an universal hatred of Sin? When God
embitters sin to us, it is to make us to loath it; and if this hatred be of the
right stamp, it will not only be against that one sin that has done us the
present sensible harm, but all of the kind, but every thing that bears the
nature of sin on it; we can say as he, Psalm. 119.104. I hate every false way.
And the reason is, because, if we mourned for sin under the consideration of
its being sin, we shall be engaged against every other sin, in which we see the
same grounds of hatred or detestation. He that mourns for one sin, and can in
the mean while hug another in his bosom, and dally with it, does not
mourn-aright for any:

6. Has your sorrow looked back to the sins of Youth? Where God does indeed
give a spirit of mourning, he will make a thorough work of it, he will lead the
Soul into a soaking consideration of all that has been grievous to his holy
spirit; he will bring* to mind old sins, and those that had been forgotten
before, and embitter them to us, and the reason is because those sins also must
be repented of, for which there must be a suitable sorrow. Time will not wear
off the Guilt of any sin, but Christ must cleanse it with his blood, and in
order thereto we must carry it to him for cleansing; and we cannot do so
aright, but by bemoaning our selves before him for it. David therefore in his
address to God runs up hither, Psalm. 25 7. Remember not the sins of my youth,
nor my transgressions.

7. Have you in you an habitual frame of spiritual mourning? Godly sorrow is
not a land-flood, that is raised by some storm, and is dried up again soon
after that is over, but it is a living spring, it is an habitual Grace in the
Soul, and for that reason it is called a Spirit of Grace, Chap. 12.10. And this
appears in a constant promptitude to mourn for sin upon every occasion. Every
sight of sin stirs up this Godly sorrow. When ever you feel any stirrings of
Concupiscence within, it makes you to cry out, Oh wretched man, who shall
deliver me, Romans 7.24. If at any time you are over taken with any sin, it makes
you to groan, and bewail your selves, and say as he, Psalm. 38.18. I will
declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin. Nay, if you see others to
sin, though they commit it without remorse, yet you cannot but mourn for it, as
he, Psalm. 119.136. Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not
thy law. And Verse 158. I beheld the transgressors and was grieved, because
they kept not thy word.

8 Have you been duly affected in particular with the Affronts which you have
offered to Jesus Christ? This is specifyed, Chap. 12.10. They shall look upon
me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for his
only son, and be in bitterness for him, as one that is in bitterness for his
first born. There is nothing more bitter to one that is truly Converted, than
the ill entertainment that he has given to a Savior, who came to him, and
offered himself to be one to him. It may be you have led a sober li^e, and
cannot charge your selves with the immoralities which others have fallen into:
but you have lived under the Calls of the Gospel, and have been many a time
invited, and solicited to come to Christ, to take him for a Savior; but you
have made light of it, neglected him, been content without him; you have often
been inwardly striven with by the motions of the Spirit, but you have quenched
them, and grieved him thereby: You have lived in your unbelief, and been
contented so to do; you have had a low esteem of him, and of his Salvation; you
have relied on your own Righteousness, and not submitted to his; you sought him
not, would not come to him for life; and thus you went on from year to year,
till he came to awaken and bring you home to himself. Now all these things come
to mind, and they carry an emphatical consideration in them to make you vile in
your own eyes, and bewail your impenitence. I^ ever you looked to Christ with
an eye of faith, it has been with a mournful eye.

2. Have you experienced a spirit of Supplication? We observed that it is
inseparable from the former: and would you be rightly informed about this,
prove your selves by these things.

1. Have you found kindled in you a restless desire to be delivered from Sin?
True prayers are the offering up of our real and cordial desires unto God; and
hence by discovering the truth of our desires, we may come to know what our
Prayers are. Now there is none that prays aright against sin, but he that longs
insatiably to be rid of it. There are many that pray to have those miseries
removed which they undergo for sin; but this is but Howling, and not Praying:
that is a right expressing of our request on this account, Hos. 14.2. Take away
all iniquity. But the heart must go with it, which it will never do, till we
are weary of sin, and the presence of it is an heavy burden to us.

2. Have you found that this deliverance is no where else to be had? The right
prayer, which God hears and accepts, is the prayer of the needy, the poor, and
the destitute, Psalm. 102.17. Christ's Office is to Succor him that has no
helper, Psalm. 72.12. As such therefore he expects that we come, saying as, Hos.
14.3. Ashur shall not save us, etc. For in thee the fatherless finds mercy.
And that we may thus pray, it is requisite that we have a deep sense imprinted
on us, that this is our condition. God makes the So^^ to despair of any succor
from any other hand, he is not only in a pit where there is no water* but his
eyes fail him, Isa. 41.17. He finds himself to be engulphed in the waves of
destruction, and cries out as they when just ready to be swallowed up, Math.
8.25. Lord, save us, we perish.

3. Have you been encouraged to go to God in Prayer for this with hope? A
spirit of Supplication is a gracious frame, that is put into the heart by the
spirit of God; and there are the Graces that are used in the exerting of it:
the principal of these is Faith, and the first stirring of it is usually in
Hope; which hope is always at work, and moves in the genui^^e prayers of the
people of God. This hope has not always alike strength in it; but yet it has
that degree of it, whereby we are enabled to look with some expectation of
receiving the good we ask for, at the hands of God. In your distress by reason
of sin, you resolved to go to God for help against it; and what was it that
drew out this resolution? was it not an apprehension that Christ was such a
fountain for sin, and at least a resolve that the thing is not impossible; thus
therefore he argued, Jon. ^.9. Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and
turn away from his fierce anger, that we perish not?

4. Have you freely confessed your sins in the Aggravations of them? Right
confession always flows from a spirit of Prayer. God expects it, Jer. 3.13.
Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have transgressed against the Lord
thy God, etc. David therefore tells us in what way he went for, and how he
obtained a pardon, and the healing of his sins, Psalm. 32.5. I said I will
confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and tho^ forgavest the iniquity of my
sin. And this confession has been full and free, and without any covers; for
he there says, Mine iniquity have I not hid. It is a false heart that
petitions help against sin, and in praying for it pleads excuses and
extenuations: This proceeds from a spirit of bondage, and not from a spirit of
Adoption.

5. Have you humbled your selves to Gods foot in your Prayers to him? A spirit
of Prayer is a Soul humbling, a Soul-abasing spirit; hence that, Psalm. 9.12. He
forgets not the cry of the humble: and 10.17. Lord, thou have heard the
desire of the humble: thou will prepare their heart, thou will cause thine ear
to hear. He that prays as he ought to God, for pardon and acceptance in Christ,
is deeply sensible of his great vileness by reason of sin, and of his utter
unworthiness of mercy; and hence he goes with a rope on his head, and sackcloth
on his loins, i. e. He resigns himself to God, with all the Testimonials of his
acknowledging that he has no dependence on any thing but free Grace; that he
has nothing of his own, nor can he oblige God, he therefore carries that with
him in, Dan. 9.8, 9 To us belongs confusion of face; to the Lord our God belong
mercies and forgivenesses. And his address is in that form, Psalm. 25.11. For
thy name sake O Lord, pardon mine iniquity, for it is great.

6. Have you Prayed for the Purging as well and as earnestly as for Pardon?
Doubtless he that knows what it is to be Guilty before God, will be very
importunate in asking forgiveness, and well he may, ^or who can stand before
Gods anger? But a kindly resentment of Guilt, so as to justify God who
condemns, will be accompanied with an apprehension of the vileness of sin* and
that will make us wea^y of the presence of it, and to loath our selves for it,
(...) will draw out our cries to have it taken away; both these therefore are
included in that, Hos. 14 2. Take away all iniquity.

7. Are your Prayers importunate, or in good earnest? There are many that pray
in good words, and it may be with much of noise too, and yet not from a Spirit
of Supplication: they are not importunate and cordial requests which they put
up. He that is in earnest, will take no denial, but will press with greatest
urgency and resolution: One of the Ancients complains of himself, that when he
prayed against his Lusts, he was afraid lest God should answer him: this was
not from the Spirit of Grace; and if you are in good earnest, you will watch
the answer of your prayers, to see what return there is of them. Psalm. 85.10. I
will hear what God the Lord will say. 130.5. My Soul wai^eth for the Lord, more
than they that watch for the morning*

8. Do you persevere in Prayer? As it is the duty of all Gods People so to do,
Ephesians. 6.18. Praying always, etc. watching thereunto with all perseverance. So it
is one property of the Spirit of Prayer, and there is a double perseverance to
be eyed in this; you are constant and unwearied in your duty, you pray without
ceasing, 1 These. 5.17 You resolve as, Psalm. 116 2* I will call upon him as long
as I live. And you hold on in it against all that would discourage you. If you
have not a present answer according to desire, it does not beat you off, but
quickens your ardour, and you say as, Isa. 8.17. I will wait on the Lord, who
hides his face: If he repulse you, you turn his very repulses into arguments,
as that poor woman did, Mat. 15.25, 26.

9 And does the sense of sin always drive you to Prayer? Do your Consciences at
any time reflect, and charge Guilt on you? Does this always bring you upon your
knees, and cause you to pour out your hearts in supplication? Do you find the
stirrings of inward Concupiscence, and the Law in your members warring against
the law of your mind? What course do you take to get it mortified? Is prayer
now not neglected? These are the motions of ^ Spirit of Supplication in a Child
of God. This course we find David is on all occasions taking in the Psalms.

USE III. For Exhortation, in several partic^^^^s.

(...) this point awakened Sinners in what (...) seek after Christ. Certainly,
when God (...) home upon the Conscience of a Sinn^^ it calls aloud to him to
repair to the fountain. And would you go to it, so as to participate in the
saving efficacy of it? then,

1. Do it mournfully. Dry addresses to God are insignificant things, and will
find no acceptance. Beg of God then to bestow such a Spirit upon you, and
labor to express it with all suitable deportment. Labor therefore to embitter
your Sin to your selves, with all the proper considerations that may make it^
vile, and fill you with the deepest sense of your misery by reason of it. This
is the only way for you to give God his glory both of his Righteousness in
condemning you, and his rich mercy in pardoning and healing you. You will never
come humbly, unless you come mourning: and this is the way to obtain the
blessing from him. God takes distinct notice of this, and he is pleased with
it; see, Jer. 31.18, with 20. I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning himself,
etc. Is Ephraim my dear Son? etc. And we find that Christ was anointed
purposely for the relief of such, Isa. 61. begin.

2. Do it with Supplications. If ever God gives you the experience of the
virtue of the Fountain in you, for the taking away of your Sin and Uncleanness,
he will make you to pray for it; he has said, Ezekiel. 36.37. I will be sought
to, etc. Seek his face and favor, confess your sins, and keep not silence;
seek to him in Christ's name, and present your petition before him: this is the
right returning to God, Joel 2.12 By thus doing you will acknowledge Christ to
be the Fountain of Grace, when you do seek it of him, and call upon him for it.
And for your encouragement, know it, that if you do indeed thus seek him, you
shall find him. If a persecuting Saul prays to him, he observes it, and accepts
it of him, Acts 9.11. Behold he prays. Yea he has said, Psalm. 50.15. Call
upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee and thou shall glorify me.

2. Let this stir up mourners to pray. Are there any, whose sins are made their
burden, and they are in bitterness by reason of them? instead of nourishing
despondent and despairing thoughts in you, and making you to hide away from
God, let it drive you to him, to seek his face and favor, his pity and pardon:
let it draw forth that request from you in Psa. 41.4. Heal my Soul for I have
sinned against thee. This is the fittest posture to pray in, and God is ready
to hear such in their Souls distress, that cry unto him for his help; David
puts both together, Psalm. 6.8, 9. The Lord has heard the voice of my weeping:
the Lord has heard my supplication. It is good to come unto God in such a
case, and make an argument of it, as he did, Isa. 38.14. Oh Lord, I am
oppressed, undertake for me.

3. Let the Children of God nourish this spirit in them. A Spirit of mourning
and of supplication is the proper Evangelical Spirit; it is therefore one of
the properties that belong to them whom Christ has pronounced blessed, Mat.
5.4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. Nor is it only
proper in our first returning to God, but you will have occasion to use it as
long as you live: while you carry about with you a body of death, you will
never be without occasion for bitter mourning and lamentation; you will see
reason to go softly all your days; and as long as Sin stirs in you, and leads
you into Captivity, you will need the pity and help of God, the virtue and
efficacy of the fountain to derive fresh supplies of pardon and healing to you;
and therefore prayer is a duty that you cannot do without; and no prayer is
acceptable to God, but what proceeds from such a spirit.

4. Be we here directed what to pray for, and endeavor to ^romote in others.
We ought to seek and use means for the Salvation of Sinners, and peculiarly for
those to whom we are tied by the bonds of near relation; and if ever they be
saved, they must repair to this fountain for it; and if they so do, and
succeed, it must be with mourning and supplication. Let us then use means to
bring them to this, by showing them their need, and showing them where their
help is, and how it is alone to be obtained; and let us bring them to God, and
ask for them this grace: and if we see them brought into distress, and made to
enquire how they may find redress, let us nourish this in them, and not go
about to suppress or stifle it.

5. This calls all those on whom God has poured such a Spirit, to Thankfulness
to him for it. Has God given us truly to mourn and pray by reason of Sin, he
has done us an unconceivable kindness; there is no greater token of his
Everlasting Love; it says that he has been laying a foundation for eternal
life in us; these tears, and these cries have solid consolation in them; they
are his gift, and he gave them to us that so he might bring us to himself, and
put us into the way of blessedness. Let this then be one thing for which we
praise him, and let this nourish and strengthen such a frame in us, to consider
that eternal joy is secured to it, for we are assured in, Psalm. 126.5, 6. They
that sow in tears, shall reap in joy; he that goes forth and weepeth, bearing
precious seed, shall doubtless come again rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with
him.

FINIS.
Rather than this Page should stand Empty, the Reader may be gratified with the
last Clause of Dr. Thomas Goodwin's Exposition of the Revelation: which is as
follows;
AND for the JEWS Call, which is conjunct with this Killing and Rising of the
Witnesses: As it depends not upon ordinary Means to effect it, so there are
like to be no Preparations at all unto it, until it comes (as there are not for
Things extraordinary) but a Nation shall bring forth in a Day, as the Prophet
speaks. And so, in the very Year before it, there will be no more outward
Appearrances, or Probabilities of it, than there are now, or than there have
been many hundred Years since. And therefore our Faith need not be put off from
this, by the seeing as yet no Stirrings or Motions at all unto it, or toward
it. And the Truth is, both the Killing and Rising of the Witnesses, and also
the Calling of the JEWS, may fall out sooner than we are aware of.

Evangelical Perfection. OR How far the Gospel requires Believers to Aspire
after being completely Perfect. As it was Delivered on a Lecture at Boston, on
June 10 th. 1694.
By Samuel Willard, Teacher of a Church in Boston.
MATH. V.48. Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is
perfect.


IN this Chapter, with the two following an account is given of the substance
or heads of a Sermon which Christ preached to his Disciples, in the audience of
a multitude soon after he had called them, The matters contained in this fifth
Chapter, may be reduced to three heads. [1.] He points the way to true
Blessedness, by describing the subjects of it in several distinguishing
Characters of them, and declaring wherein they appear to be really happy, Verse
3. to 13. [2.] He lays open the Office and Duty of such as would approve
themselves to be faithful and edifying Ministers of the Gospel, to Verse 17.
[3.] He asserts the great usefulness of the Moral Law, under the Gospel,
assuring us that his design was not to Abolish, but Establish it; and thereupon
proceeds to Vindicate the true sense of it from the corrupt and false glosses
of the Jewish Doctors to the end of the Chapter. In which he insists upon
several Articles, which had been more especially depraved by them: and the
words of our Text are an Exhortation which he draws from the whole foregoing
discourse; though I know there are some who needlessly restrain it to the next
foregoing duty of expressing our cordial love to our enemies, in opposition to
the Doctrine of the Scribes, who taught that we should love our neighbor, and
hate our enemy. I know the words are expressed in the Future tense; Ye shall be
perfect; but yet they are not to be understood Promissorily, as some do
interpret them; but Preceptively, as an injunction laid upon us. And we have
several like instances in this Chapter; yea and it is frequent in all languages
to use the Future for the Imperative: You shall do thus or so; intending, I
require or command you so to do.

In the words, besides the Illation, therefore, which refers to the foregoing
discourse, there are two parts;

1. A duty enjoined; Be ye perfect. The subject of this command are Christ's
Disciples, verse 1. The thing required is perfection; which, what it is, will
be afterward considered.

2. The Pattern which is set before us to follow, in our essays after this
perfection; as your Father which is in heaven is perfect. So that here the
Divine perfection is proposed to us for our imitation; and an argument is used
to urge it from the consideration of that relation which he bears to us, he is
our Father in heaven; and Children are apt to take after their Parents. Hence
that, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. As he which has called you is holy, so be ye holy in
all manner of conversation; because it is written, be ye Holy, for I am Holy.
Here is not an equality intended, but a similitude, together with such a
measure as the Creature is capable of attaining unto: for the greatest
perfections of the most excellent Creatures, are imperfections, compared with
God. Nor are all the Divine Perfections here intended: there are those that are
by Divines called Incommunicable, which we are to admire, but not to aspire
after; and there are those which are said to be Communicable: Namely, such
whereof there may be an Image, or dark representation in us; and these are here
aimed at. These perfections consist in that Holiness and Righteousness which
are required in the Moral Law, unto which we are enabled by the Sanctification
of the Spirit, the Graces whereof in us are called, the Image of God; by which
we imitate him in his Holiness, and Righteousness. That the Duty here required
is Evangelical; therein appears, because Christ enjoyneth it on his Disciples,
and such as can call God their Father, by virtue of the Adoption, which we are
told comes in upon believing, Gal. 3.26. For we are the Children of God,
through faith in Jesus Christ.

The only matter of difficulty before us, is to know what is the perfection
intended by Christ in this precept, and which he requires and expects that
all those who approve themselves to be his Disciples, should be always aspiring
after. And that which makes it the more difficult, is because the word is
variously used in the Scriptures, and differently applied by Expositors to this
Text. The word signifies, that which has attained its end; and, because when
a thing has so done, it has reached its perfection according to its capacity,
it is Metonymically used for it: and so, one that is adult, or grown up to his
full Stature, is said to be a perfect man, Ephesians. 4.13. And they whose Grace is
arrived to (...) fullness in Glory, are called Just men made perfect, Heb 12.23.
Divines distinguish perfection into Legal and Evangelical; which is a ^rue
distinction if taken in a sound sense, but is warily to be understood. They
tell us also, that there is a perfection of parts, which is called Integrality;
and so an infant is a perfect man, because he has all the parts which belong
to that Species: and of Degrees, when these parts are completed, and come to
the just measure which nature aspired unto. They speak also of a Relative or
Comparative perfection, when, though a thing be in it self defective, yet when
it is compared with another of its own kind, it does very much exceed or go
beyond it; and that which is Absolute, which is when it is improved to its
utmost capacity; and they observe that perfection is sometimes used for
Sincerity, in opposition to Hypocrisy; when a man not only professes
Godliness, but is the man he pretends to be, such an one is sound or perfect,
whereas the other is unsound, and so imperfect. Now all these distinctions have
their foundation in the word of God: nor, without distinguishing, can we be
able to reconcile those Texts which assert the present perfection of the people
of God, even in this life, with those that do deny any here to be perfect;
which would else be contradictions, whereas we are assured that the spirit of
God does not contradict himself in his word. Now, though it be easily granted
on all hands, that Christ requires Sincerity, or an Upright Heart of us, yea
and Integrity too, or a cordial respect to be expressed to all his Commands;
and he will accept of such sincerity and integrity at the hands of his people
in these duties which they perform in faith, seeking for their acceptance in
Christ: in which respect, I suppose, Evangelical Obedience does mainly differ
from that which is Legal, and God is pleased with it, when he rejects the
other; yet, how far, absolute perfection is comprised in the precept here given
by Christ, is a matter of doubt and debate among many. There are, and those not
a few, who with greatest confidence do assert, that God does not expect or
require of his people, under the Gospel Covenant, that perfection in their
Obedience to him, which he did under the Covenant of Works; but has abated of
the strictness of the Command; and if we do our best, there is no more required
of us. Which assertion, though I believe that many who use it, do mean well,
and intend nothing else in it than is acknowledged by all the Orthodox; yet it
is a very unsafe assertion in the letter of it; and is one foundation on which
the Papists do build their Doctrines of men's merits, and works of
supererogation; yea and many Protestants do also introduce that absurd and
dangerous notion of making our Obedience to be of the matter of our
Justification; because being upon a New Covenant account, we do fulfill the
Obedience that is in it required of us, and so, by that Covenant, it bespeaks
our Justification: Loose Professors also are hurt by this opinion; they think
they are sincere, and because of this indulgence, are too negligent in their
duty, and fail in that true Repentance, which they ought every day to be in the
renewed exercises of; It may then be of present use to discuss this Case, viz.

Quest. Whether that Personal Perfection which God requires of his people under
the Covenant of Grace, be the same for kind and degree with that which was
required in the Covenant of Works, or any thing short of it?

A. For the more distinct opening and resolving this important Case, let these
things be observed.

1. That the question is not concerning Unconverted Ones who are under the
outward Dispensation of the Gospel; but those that are under ^race, i. e. those
that are truly Converted to God. Touching the former of these, it is to be well
observed, that notwithstanding the offer they have made to them, and standing
which they have under the Covenant and Promises exhibited by the Gospel to men,
in which li^e and Salvation is hypothetically promised unto them, and
invitations are urged upon them to entertain it on the terms proposed; yet
before such time as they have actually embraced the offered Grace, they are
truly under the Law as a Covenant of Works: and because they are so, it demands
of them personal perfection both habitual and actual, and that on pain of
death; for we are told in, Gal. 3.10. As many as are of the works of the Law,
are under the Curse: for it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not
in all things which are written in ihe Book of the Law, to do them. Hence, as
of old, God gave the Moral Law a new Sanction, on Mount Sinai with thundrings
and lightnings, and great terrors, as we are informed, Exodus 19. and 20. So to
make way for the veiled Gospel, which was afterward given to Moses, and by him
to Israel, in those Ordinances, or Ceremonial Institutions which were delivered
to him; so, under the Gospel; to those that are partakers of the outward
benefits of it, when he comes to Convert any Sinners among them to Christ, and
make them to accept of him, as a Savior, he lays them under the terrors of the
Law Moral, by showing them what is therein required of them, and what they are
to expect at the hands of a Righteous God, if those demands be not fully
answered; and by this he convinces them of their misery, and self impotency to
deliver themselves from it, thereby making way for their harkening after, and
giving the greatest welcome to a Redeemer. On this account is the Law called
our Schoolmaster unto Christ, Gal. 3.24. Because by it we are acquainted with
our need of him, and excited to seek after him. There is then no doubt to be
made, but that the same perfection is required of them, notwithstanding their
being in the visible Kingdom of Christ. Whereas true Converts or such as have
believed in Christ, are delivered from this Severity, i. e. they are no longer
under the Law as a Covenant pronouncing of them dead men if they fail of their
Obedience in the least punctilio: and the reason is, because they are brought
under the Covenant of Grace, by which they are freed from the former, according
to, Romans 6.14. Sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under the
Law, but under Grace.

2. The question is not with respect to our Justification before God. The
Justification of fallen man has not the least regard to any personal Obedience
of theirs, as having an influence Causall into it; and consequently it can have
no respect to any kind of perfection of it. Gospel Justification comes
altogether by the Imputation of the Righteousness of another to us; viz. that
of Christ, which was for that end provided by God for us, and is called his
Righteousness, Phil. 3 9. The Righteousness that i^ of God by faith; and so it
is not ours Personal or inherent, but by acceptance for us. It is called the
Justification of a Sinner, or of the Ungodly, Romans 4.5. And therefore must
needs have a respect to that Law in relation whereto the man is a Sinner; which
is the Moral Law, under obligation whereto all men do stand as they derive from
the first Adam (...) whom it was given for himself and his pos^erity; and hence
it must have a Righteousness to answer it, every way as perfect as that Law
required, which no fallen man is able in himself to pay; nor can any offer it
for him, but Christ only. They wholly mistake the very nature of Gospel
Justification, who allow any Righteousness short of that, to have any
concernment in it; and since by the fall man is become Guilty, and so subjected
to the Curse of the Law, if he had a personal Righteousness, as b^oad as that
which the Law required of man in integrity, yet that would not satisfy for the
removal of his Guilt, without which he cannot be Justified. So that whether it
be perfect or imperfect, it signifies nothing here.

3. Nor is the question about what Obedience of ours will find acceptance with
God through Christ. It is certain, that no Obedience of ours will be at all
accepted of us out of him; and it is also beyond doubt that the imperfection
which attends the sincere Services of Gods Children, will not procure that
these Services of theirs should be rejected by him, for if so, it were
impossible that any of us, in this imperfect state that abides us, should ever
please God in any thing that we do, which must needs be an invincible
discouragement to us in doing any duties that are required of us: but then it
is through Christ that they find acceptance with him. In this respect it is
that the sincerity which Gods Children do express in their Obedience, is so
often called perfection, in the Scriptures, ( Job is said to be a perfect man,
and upright, Job ^.1.) by Reason that being offered to God with Christ's
incense, it finds favor with him, and he smells a sweet savor in it,
notwithstanding that according to the Law it would have been utterly rejected,
by reason of the concomitant defects. So that the true Believer who serves God
in integrity, is not to be discouraged, because he finds his best to come so
far behind of that perfection which the Law prescribes to men, but is to look
to the gracious encouragement which is given to them who love God in sincerity.

4. But it is with regard to the obligation to New Obedience that lies upon
Justified Believers. It presupposes them to be in a state of Justification,
and looks upon them as under the Government of Christ, and owing a Service to
him. There are indeed those who deny that any such obligation lies upon the
Children of God, and that the Law Moral no longer binds them under duty of
conformity unto it, but that upon their believing in Christ, they are freed
from any such engagement; this is purely Antinomian, and bespeaks all the
precept given to the Children of God under the Gospel, to be wholly in vain; or
only to concern such as are as yet unregenerate, for the awakening them to
betake themselves to Christ, and seek an interest in him by faith, and not at
all to belong to those that are already partakers in the grace of God; but why
then have the Children of God that title of Obedient put upon them, and are
called upon to express it by this conformity? 1 Pet. 1.14. As obedient
children, not fashioning your selves according to the former lusts, etc.
Supposing then such an Obedience as this to be our duty, which prerequires a
principle to be put into us, impowring us to a compliance with it, in order to
our actual performance of it, our enquiry is about the extensiveness of it, or
how far it is our duty to endeavor after perfection in it? and for the
clearing of this Case we may take the following Conclusions into Consideration.

1. That the design of the New Covenant, in which the Grace of it is to appear*
is to bring fallen man back to a state of blessedness. It was because mankind
were become woefully miserable by the Apostasy of Adam, in which they all ^ell,
and there was no room left for any remedy to be afforded to them by the
Covenant of Works, inasmuch as the Law could no longer give life, Gal. 3.21.
And God had a pity for some of that unhappy race and would save them, that he
opened a New Covenant, in which he makes the displays of his rich Grace to
them. Now, as it was the glory of his Grace that God had a regard to ultimately
in this Contrivance; so the way in which he would exalt this Attribute, and
make it illustrious and for ever admirable, was in their Salvation: So that the
Salvation of lost Sinners is inseparably connected with, and nextly
subordinated to this last end of God; because in and by it he will accomplish
it. In which Salvation they are delivered from that misery under which they
were fallen by reason of sin, unto all that felicity which they had so lost;
hence we are told that it is by Grace that we are saved, Ephesians. 2 8. on which
account it is called the Grace of God which brings Salvation, Tit. 2 11. When
therefore the undone Sinner is brought to the enjoyment of perfect felicicity,
then has the Grace of God accomplished its design.

2. That in order to the bringing about of this purpose of God, there are two
things requisite to be done for the man, viz The Justificatio^ of his person,
and the Sanctification of his nature The ground of this, is because there is a
double misery befallen the man by the Apostasy, viz. Guilt, which has rendered
him obnoxious to the wrath of God, yea brought him under a sentence of
Condemnation, binding him over to suffer the whole Curse that is contained in
the threatening of Death, unto the execution whereof the Justice of God stands
engaged in the Covenant of works: And Pollution, by which his nature is
depraved, and fallen under the Dominion of Sin which reigns as a King in him,
and so he is rendered utterly impotent to the doing of that which is good, and
in which his formal happiness did consist, and all his powers are violently
bent to that which is evil: and so long as these two abide upon him he cannot
be happy, but must needs be miserable. As long as the man lies under the Curses
of the Law, a Prisoner of Revenging Justice, doomed to suffer all the wrath
that is contained in the threatenings that are out against Sinners, in which the
quintessence of all evil is contained; and is held ^ettered in Cords of
Iniquity, so as that he can do nothing of that business which he was made for,
but is, by the force of his carnal lusts, hurried and precipitated into
rep^^ted provocations of God, he must needs be a miserable Creature: Nor can he
be recovered to a state of blessedness, but by the removal of both these evils
from him; and i^ either of them remain upon him, he is incapable of being a
blessed man in that condition. The former of these is done by Justification,
and the latter by Sanctification. In the one his Condemnation is removed, his
Guilt is taken away, he is acquitted from the Law, and delivered from all
danger of suffering the direful penalties of it; yea and is adjudged to life,
to partake in the good that is laid up in the promise; in the latter his nature
is restored, and renewed again, and he is rendered able to Serve God in newness
of life; he who before was unprofitable, is now made profitable; and can
glorify God, which was his last end. And for this reason both these benefits of
the new Covenant, are so much celebrated in the Gospel: both of these are
included in that reason of the Name which was put upon Christ at his birth,
Matthew. 1.21. Thou shall call his Name Jesus, for he shall save his people from
their sins. And in Gods taking away all iniquity from them, Hos. 14.2.

3. That the end of this Sanctification, is to make him a fit subject to enjoy
true blessedness. It is true, without Justification of the man's person, and in
it a pardon of his Sins applied to him, he cannot be happy; for how is it
possible that he should be so, as long as the wrath of God abides on him, and
he is every moment liable to the fearful stroke of Divine Vengeance, which is
ready to fall on him, and cut him off! Whereas if once this state of his be
changed, and he is a Justified and Pardoned man, he is forthwith blessed,
according to Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is the man whose transgression is forgiven,
whose sin is covered. Yet this alone is not sufficient for his actual enjoyment
of the felicity promised in the New Covenant; for true blessedness can only
consist in the closure of the faculty with its Object, and resting satisfied in
it; for without satisfaction the man is not happy; and that it may thus do, it
is necessary that there be a suitableness between the faculty and the object,
how else should it either close with, or take real content in it? Now the
blessedness which God has laid in to entertain his people withal, is suited
only to Holiness in the subject of it; so that without it, it is impossible
that the man should ever participate in it, or be delighted with it, Heb.
12.14* Without Holiness no man shall see God. So that the sinful pollution
which is upon the very nature of fallen man, by reason of the sin that dwells
in him, renders him, in the present condition, and so long as he abides under
the prevailing efficacy of it, altogether unmeet for blessedness, yea indeed
incapable of it. He cannot have Communion with God, in which his felicity must
consist, for God alone is an happifying object; nor, if he could can he take
any content to himself in it, because God is Holy, and such is the fellowship
which he holds with the Creature, than which nothing can be more contrary to
the corruption wherewith his nature is defiled. We read of A meetness for the
Inheritance of the Saints, Col. 1.12^ Which meetness implies a suitable
disposition in us thereto, in which it is absolutely requisite that there be in
us such gracious qualifications as render us conformable to the Inheritance it
self; these we have not in us by nature, as we derive it from the unclean
fountain from which we are originated* for, Who can bring a clean thing out of
an unclean? It must then be done by Sanctification, in and by which we are
assimilated to our Inheritance; because hereby we are made holy, and so are
fitted for the enjoyment of the holy place, and of all those holy things which
are there prepared to make us happy in it.

4. That the man can only be truly blessed in the glorifying of God, and
enjoying of him. The blessedness of the Reasonable Creature requires the
concurrence of two things to make it complete, viz. Well doing, and Well being:
nor can either of these be alone. A man is then happy when he fully reaches
the end that he was made for; now man was made for God, not only Ultimately,
but Immediately too; and to lose this end must needs be his misery. Now, Gods
Glory being his own last end in all his works of Efficiency, hence it follows
that the last end of all these works of his must be to Serve to that glory, how
else should he obtain his end by it in the event? And every one of his
Creatures is to Serve to this end agreeably to that nature which God put into
it when he made it; in which he bestowed on it a capacity of so serving his
design by it. Accordingly, man was made capable of doingly this actively,
inasmuch as he was endowed with such powers as enabled him to act as a cause by
counsel, and make choice of his way; and therefore it is only by his so doing
that he can reach the great end of his being: in his missing of this he becomes
Vain, for what else is vanity, but the missing, or falling short of ones end?
That the man may attain this end, it is requisite that he have a power in him
to Serve to it; and what else is that power but Holiness? Created Holiness in
man, is nothing else but that rectitude in his whole nature, and all the powers
of it, whereby he is enabled and inclined to live and be to the Glory of God in
all things. And from the exerting of this principle do proceed all his holy
actions. Man in his lapsed estateis without this principle, having lost it by
his unhappy fall* it must therefore be again restored to him in Sanctification,
else he cannot Serve God. Now man's Well being is consequent upon the former;
God only is an adequate object for him, or a sufficient portion for him, to
make him blessed; he must then enjoy him, if ever it be well with him, for in
this fruition his actual felicity must consist: for could he obtain and have
the full freedom of using all that is in heaven and earth, separate from God,
he were still miserable; the Psalmist could say, Psalm 73.25. Whom have I in
heaven but thee? and there is nothing on earth that I desire with thee: and the
only way for our enjoying of God, is by glorifying of him. It is sin that has
made the woeful separation, which has procured our infelicity, Isa. 59.2. Your
iniquities have separated between you and your God. And what is sin, but a
coming short of the glory of God? Romans 3.23. God therefore has fully declared
that he will bestow this favor upon none but those that honor him, 1 Samuel
2.3^. Them that honor me, I will honor, and they that despise me, shall be
lightly esteemed.

5. That for this Active personal glorifying of God, man must have a Rule. It
is not enough that he have an inward principle of Sanctification put into him,
whereby he is disposed unto this Service, and empowred for the discharging of
it, though without it he must needs fall short of his great end; but he must
also have a directory to show him his way, in which this work is to be done. As
there must be an heart in us enclining of us to Glorify God, else we cannot
move one step toward it, so there must be a way according to which we are to
incline our selves hereunto. It is certain that there are those things whereby
God is dishonored in the lives of the Children of men, as well as those
whereby they do honor him; and how should the man be able either to avoid the
one, or rightly to prosecute the other, except he have something to guide his
steps, and order his Conversation by? for this therefore there must be a Rule
laid before him, hence God tells them, Mic. 6.8 He has shown thee Oh man, what
is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justice* and to love
mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? the promise therefore is made to such
as live conformably to this Rule, Gal. 6 16. As many as walk according to this
Rule, peace be on them, and mercy; and it is the alone prerogative of God, not
only to require Service of his Creature, which it ows to him as he is its
supreme Lord and Owner, but also to prescribe to it how and wherein he will be
Served by it. He who is our Lord and King, is our Law giver too, Isa. 33.22.
And he must some way or other reveal this to them that are concerned in it, how
else should they know how to order their conversation aright, so as to see his
Salvation? It is by this Rule that they are to square all their actions; they
must therefore look upon it, and apply it to every step- David says, Psalm.
119.105. Thy word is a light to my feet, and a lamp to my path; but this it
cannot be except they be acquainted with it; so that they must receive it from
him in order to their practicing of it, 1 These. 4.1. We exhort you by the Lord
Jesus Christ, that as ye have received of us how you ought to walk, and to
please God, so ye would abound more and more.

6. The Moral Law was at first given to man to be this Rule. As there is a
Common Government which God exercises over the Creation, so there is a Special
Government by which he leads Intelligent and Rational Agents to the end they
are appointed to: Now this Law was the Rule of Gods special Government with
respect to mankind. This Law is by some made the same with, and by others
diverse from the law of nature; but if we reckon the law of nature, to be that
which was engraven on the heart of man at the first, it may be well reckoned
for the same. This was every way suited to the nature of man; it was fitted for
the guiding of such a creature to its last end, in all the things in which he
was concerned: The sanctified understanding in man, during his state of
integrity, not only could read the inscriptions of it on his heart, but saw and
approved the reasonableness and equity of it; yea, the convictions of a natural
Conscience in fallen man, do prove that he cannot withstand the righteousness
of it, Romans 2.14, 15. Man was to obey this Law in all things, and to be happy
in that Obedience, Romans 10.5. The man that does these things shall live by
them; and see, Jam. 1.25. The threatening indeed was annexed to the Sacrament of
that Covenant, Genesis 2 17. In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall surely die;
but every Article in it or precept of i^ being ratified by that Seal, it so
sealed up and confirmed the whole of it unto man, and had a reference to every
duty that was contained there^in. This was the same Law which had a new edition
of it at Mount Sinai, where God published it, and registered it on Tables of
Stone, and summed it up in ten Precepts, which comprised in them the sum and
substance of man's duty, and wherein he was bound to Serve and Glorify God in
his whole course, reaching both his heart and his life, the matter, manner and
end of all he did.

7. Though the Sanctions of that Law as a Covenant be removed, in respect to
believers; yet as a Rule, it abides for ever. Under the Covenant of Grace,
neither is the promise of bestowing a reward of life upon men's performing of
perfect personal Obedience, nor the threatening of punishing the least defect in
that Obedience with death, any longer of force in regard of the Children of
God: and the reason is, because the Law of Works has ceased to be a Covenant
to them, upon their accepting the terms of, and being admitted into the
Covenant of Grace. We do now stand upon other terms with God, through Christ in
the New Covenant, whereof we are partakers by faith in him. But still the
Precepts of the Moral Law abide on us as our Duty, there never was any repeal
of the Command; nor indeed can they ever cease to be a Rule to man, for the
guiding of him in the right ordering of his Conversation, inasmuch as they are
every way suited to the nature of man, considered as being made on purpose for
the actual glorifying of God; so that if we would actually glorify him as men,
we must do it in compliance with these precepts. All that is contained in this
rule is reduced to those two heads, Mat. 22.37, 39. Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind; and
thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. And this can never cease to be our
duty, so long as we are men; nothing can discharge us from the obligation of
loving God and our neighbor, inasmuch as the Relation we bear to both cannot
cease, and the duty is inseparable from such a Relation. It is also certain
that all of these Duties are reinforced in the Gospel; or under the
dispensation of the Kingdom of Grace; and may be all of them found on record in
the preceptive part of the New Testament, required of Christians, as they would
walk worthy of the vocation with which they are called; and are therefore
called New Commands, because they are there reinforced with arguments fetched
from the consideration of the Grace of God appearing to us; we have this
summarily commended to us in, Tit. 2.11, 12. The Grace of God which brings
Salvation has appeared to all men; teaching us, that denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
world. Under which three heads, are comprised all those duties which are
required in and by the Moral Law.

8. That all the Commands of the New Covenant, which are purely Evangelical,
are inclusively Comprehended in this Rule. It is to be observed, that there are
some Duties introduced by the New Covenant, and are enjoined on all such unto
whom it is promulgated, which were not Duties incumbent on man whiles he
continued in a state of Integrity, such as Faith in Jesus Christ, Repentance
unto life, and the several things that are contained in these, as they point to
us the way for fallen man to recover Gods favor, and obtain eternal Salvation;
and indeed these Duties were inconsistent with that sta^e. Man had not
forfeited himself to the Law, and so needed not a Redeemer; he stood in his
uprightness, and was defiled with no sin, and had no occasion for Repentance.
These Du^i^s therefore were not immediately comp^iz^d in the law of nature, nor
was man in Innocence able by the improvement of his reason, to gather that
there were any such Duties hypothetically belonging to his Rule. Nor is it to
be supposed, that when God at first i^dented with man in the Covenant of Works,
and warned him aagainst disobedience, by showing him the threatening; that he
made any discovery to him of an hope that in case of his miscarriage he might
be saved, or that he foretold a way of his recovery, in case he ruined himself
by trespassing against the command, and bringing of himself under the
threatening: doubtless he reserved this for the Opening of the Covenant of
Grace: and till he so made it known, man could not possibly so much as guess at
such a thing. However, there is thus much contained in the Moral Law, and the
light of nature clearly discovered to man at first, viz. that the rightful
authority and supremacy that God has over all men, claims a liberty for him at
any time to enjoin man in any thing, and make it his duty by virtue of his
command to do it, if it be within the power which he at first endowed him
withal; and consequently that he ows Obedience to God in whatsoever he shall at
any time declare to be his will; hereupon Positive Commands oblige men by the
light of nature, as well as Natural duties, supposing there be a Revelation of
them made to them. We find therefore that God at first exerted this authority
over our first Parents, when he put them into the Garden, by an arbitrary
exempting the Tree of Knowledge from their eating of it, under pain of death;
nor did they dispute, but acknowledge his Sovereignty over them in that regard,
though afterward the adversary used it as a snare to draw them into Sin. And
how many such positive Precepts did God give to Israel of which he renders no
other reason but this, I am the Lord? Hence there fore, when God once reveals
to fallen men that it is his will that they should repent and believe, in order
to their being made partakers in Pardon and Salvation, it becomes their bounden
du^y, by virtue of that Command, that they so do; and not only will they miss
of Salvation if they neglect to comply with these terms on which it is offered;
but they will thereby Sin against God, and so aggravate their Guilt; and in
this respect the Gospel may well be called the Law of Christ. Hence we are
told, Acts 17 30. Now God commands all men every where to repent. i. e. Now
when the Gospel is promulgated; and 1 John 3 23. This is his Commandment, that
we should believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ.

9 This being a perfect Rule, requires every sort ^f personal perfection in us.
Our perfection must needs consist in our confor^ity to the Rule of it, and if
so, we cannot be entirely perfect, unless our conformity be as large as the
duties which are required by it: and that not only in all the parts of it, by
answering to every precept in it, and having a respect to all the Commandments
of God; but also in the degrees of our compliance with it, which must consist
in such an Holiness, as has not the least mixture of the contrary in it; that
does not only do the thing, but does it with that accuracy that there be
nothing wanting in the matter of it, with that diligence that we never fail
either in omission or commission, with that intenseness of love, that has no
mixture of reluctance, or backwardness, with that singleness of heart that has
no allay or mixture of any sinister aims or ends; and with that constancy that
we hold on without wavering to the end; which though none of the Children of
God ever did or shall, in this life attain unto, yet it is the perfection which
we are called to aspire after, and not to rest in any thing short of it, but to
be in an earnest pursuit of it, as long as we abide here, and till we reach it
in the Kingdom of Glory. And that this is required of us will appear, if we
consider;

1. That every thing short of this Perfection is moral impurity. The Command is
the Rule of our Holiness; and if so, then the perfection of our Holiness must
consist in our being com^^nsura^e to that Rule: and whatsoever is contraty to
Holiness is impurity; and consequently in what degree soever (...) come short
of this measure, it is by reason of a moral deficiency in us with respect to
this Rule; and that can proceed from nothing but sinful imperfection, which
must needs render us so far impure. Now the Holy God who loves Holiness, cannot
be well pleased with any thing that he sees in us, that is of another
tincture. He may and does love our persons in Christ, which love of his is
unchangeable, and nothing in us shall ever be able to separate us from it. He
also loves his Graces which are in us, they being the fruits of his own Holy
Spirit; and so far as they are exercised by us, so far he smells a sweet savor
in the Services that we do. But for all this, so far as we come short by reason
of sin in us, and the mixture of it with any thing that we engage in, so far is
there something in us which is not grateful to him, according to, Heb. 1.13.
Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look on iniquity.
Which must needs intend a look of approbation, for his Infinite Omniscience
cannot but behold it so as to know it. And certainly it co^cerns us not to rest
or be satisfied so long as there remains any thing in us which is ungrateful to
this Holy God, which there will be so long as we abide short of sinless
perfection.

2. That sincere Christians are commanded to grow in Grace. This is a Gospel
precept enjoined us by the Spirit of God, 2 Pet. 3.18. But grow in Grace. Now
this command presumes that there is truth and uprightness in us; that there is
a new principle of Holiness infused into us; for we must have Grace in us,
before we can grow in it. Where there is not life, there cannot be growth:
there must be a beginning in order to a progress; and as this is a duty of all
new Converts, in whom the Seeds of all the Graces of the Spirit are sown, as, 1
Pet. 2.2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may
grow thereby. It is no less expected of all Gods people in this life, to
whatsoever degree they have already attained; and the reason is, because they
are not yet arrived at perfection, so the Apostle argues, Phil. 3.12. Not as
though I had already attained, either were already perfect; but I follow after,
if that I may apprehend that which I am apprehended of Christ Jesus. So that
though sincerity be accepted in Christ, yet we are not to rest in it, but to
labor after more strength, more victory over corruption, more holiness; and
when we have reached to any further degree in this than we had before, we are
not now to sit still, but to aspire after more and more, and not to cease till
it comes to be perfect. This use we are directed to make of the promises, 2
Cor. 7.1. Having these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness
of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God. And if it be
enquired how long we are to pursue this business, we are told, Ephesians. 4.13. Till
we all come unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the Stature of the fullness
of Christ. Now the reason of the imperfection of Grace is the remains of sin in
us, and it is by the decrease of that in us, that our Grace grows.

3. That all the short comings in regard of his people, are displeasing to God.
True, they do not shut them out of his favor; for, as he has accepted them in
Christ as to their persons, so he has cast the robe of his Righteousness over
them, under which he has covered all their obliquities, and therefore, as a
Judge, he sees no iniquity in them, Numb. 23.21. He has seen no iniquity in
Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel. But yet, as they have their failings, by
reason of that sin which remains in them, so by these follies of theirs, they
do sometimes stir up his anger as he is their father, and he discovers it in
some awful effects of it; we read 2 Samuel 11. ult. The thing which David did
displeased the Lord, and we see how severely he treated him, Chap. 12. For
these follies of theirs it is that they are so often corrected, and that
sometimes with severity: for these it is that so many afflictions are brought
upon them in the course of Gods Providence, who has assured us, that he does
not afflict willingly* Lam. 3.33. And on this account holy men have so often
complained of the bitter sense they have had of his anger, Psalm. 38.3, 4. Ther^
is no soundess in my flesh because of thine anger: neither is there any rest in
my bones, because of my sin: For mine iniquities are gone over mine head, as an
heavy burden, they are too heavy for me: And see, Psalm. 32.3, 4.88.7. etc. And
though God does not always chide for every defect that he discovers in his
Children, for then their Spirit would fail; since there is nothing they do
which has not this short coming in it; whereas, he knows our frame, and
remembers we are but dust, Psalm. 103.14. Yet even these unavoidable
infirmities, which attend upon the best duties that ever we do, are things
which he takes no pleasure in: and that he animadverts not upon them, is
because of his pity. Psalm. 103.13. Like as a father pitieth his children, so
the Lord pitieth them that fear him.

4. There is a Sacrifice of Atonement appointed even for these defects. The
Sacrifices of old were Typical, and had a spiritual aim which was to be
apprehended in them: and it is certain, that where there was required by the
Ceremonial Law a Sacrifice of Expiation, it signified that there had been
something which was offensive to God, for which there must be a satisfaction
made to him, there must be something to reconcile him, if ever the person hoped
to have him Atoned to him, but for which there had been no need of such a
Sacrifice. Whatsoever therefore required such a Sacrifice to be offered up for
it, must needs intimate that it had some ill thing adhering to it, that was
offensive to God, and must be removed: Now the very duties that Gods people do,
wherein they do sincerely serve him, and express the greatest endeavor after
holiness in them, must have the virtue of Christ's oblation applied to them, for
the expiation of the defects that accompany them; this was aimed at in that
Levitical Law, Levit. 16.33. He shall make an Atonement for the holy Sanctuary,
and he shall make an Atonement for the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and for
the Altar; and he shall make an Atonement for the Priests, and for all the
People of the Congregation. Intimating that all had defilement cleaving to
them, by reason of imperfections in those who were concerned in them. And for
this reason we are to seek acceptance through Christ for our best duties; and
the very prayers of the Saints, must come through his hands, and be offered
with his incense, Rev. 8.3. There was given him much incense, that he should
offer it with Prayers of all Saints, etc. And why so, but to perfume them, and
take away the unsavouriness that cleaves to them! which would not be needed, if
there were no sin adhering to them.

5. The best of Gods People do profess themselves to be short of perfection,
and engaged in the pursuit of farther degrees of Holiness. If a man has
reached so far as is expected of him by the tenor of the Covenant of Grace,
under which God has taken him, there is no need or occasion for him to aspire
after any more, inasmuch as that is the Covenant which he is to stand to, and
by the terms whereof he is to judge of his duty: Certainly the holy men of old
knew what they did, when they professed their own great defects, and bewailed
them: It was the same Covenant that Old Testament Saints were under, and yet we
find them acknowledging sinful defects in the best, Prove. 20.9. Who can say, I
have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? And Eccl. 7.20. There is not a
just man upon earth, that does good and sins not. Nor have believers in
Christ in Gospel days been otherwise persuaded, or thought that their
New Covenant state took from their imperfect actions the nature and
denomination of sinful; 1 John 1.8. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us; and this apprehension has put them upon
it, earnestly to prosecute more perfection, not being content with the degrees
obtained; of this we have a full instance in Paul, Phil. 3.13, 14. I count not
my self to have apprehended; but this one thing I do, forgetting those things
that are behind, and reaching forth unto those things that are before, I press
toward the mark. Paul when he wrote this Epistle was a Prisoner at Rome, and so
it was not long before his death; he was not only a sincere Christian* but one
that had made a very great progress in Godliness, and arrived to an high pitch
in Grace; and yet he assures us that he was a great way short of that
perfection, which he was in pursuit of, and counted it his duty to use utmost
endeavors after the obtaining it; and it was not a Legal perfection which he
sought, for that he utterly disclaims, but it was Evangelical, or that which,
according to the Rule of the Gospel he was to pursue.

6. The Children of God, when they do their best, do still bitterly bewail
themselves that they can do no better. It must needs be granted that such
imperfection in us, as is a just ground for the sorrow and mourning of the
people of God, and which they do and ought to cry out of as their burden and
bitterness, is a short coming in them which ought not to be, else all those
complaints, and self judgings about it, must needs be superfluous and
unreasonable: Not that the sense of this should drive them to despair of Gods
gracious acceptance of them, since he has provided for that in Christ,
notwithstanding all this: but yet it excites Godly Sorrow in them, and helps to
keep them humble and mournful all their days, and directs them where to fix
their hope, viz. upon Gods free mercy in and through Christ. We find therefore
how Paul amplifieth in his bemoaning of himself on this account in, Romans 7. And
though it hinders not, but helps his thanksgiving, verse 25. I thank God
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Yet he complains of it as a thing that was
grievous to him, verse 15. That which I do, I allow not; for what I would, that
do I not, but what I hate that do I. And verse 23. I see ^^^^her law in my
members, warring against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to
the law of sin, which is in my members. And upon the review of all this he
cries out as one that was in very fore distress, verse 24. Oh wretched man that
I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? And this was not a
representation of his natural state, when under the legal convictions of sin,
and remorses of Conscience by reason of it; but under the conflict between
Grace and Corruption in him, as the whole tenor of his expressions does
evince. Nor was it on the account of bold Transgressions, and more enormous and
scandalous prevarications; for he could make that challenge, 1 These 2.10. Ye
are witnesses, and God also, h^w holily, and justly and unblameably we behaved
our selves among you, that believe. But it was the mixture which he experienced
of sinful corruption with his grace which discovered him not as yet arrived at
full perfection.

7. The best of men do deprecate the rigor of God in his animadverting upon
them; which they would have no occasion to do, if they did not know themselves
to be short of that perfection which they ought to seek after, and that the
want of it belongs to the remaining sin in them. They do indeed hope in his
Grace, and accordingly look to receive free Salvation from it; and they believe
that this failing of theirs shall not hinder their partaking in it, because God
has laid in for their pardon and acceptance in another: but there is a way in
which they come to have a title to this Salvation, and on account whereof they
may claim it, according to, or consistent with the Justice of the first
Covenant, under which they once were: and they dare not to put themselves on
the trial of their own holiness for this, and the reason is, because they know
it to be so short and defective, that if God should take advantage from what
his holy eye sees to be wanting therein, he would have occasion and provocation
offered him, to make severe anim^dversions upon them; on this account David so
pleads, Psalm. 130.3, 4. If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities; O Lord, who
should stand? but there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared.
And makes that deprecation in, Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into Judgment with thy
Servant; for in thy sight shall no man living be Justified. And though they can
plead their interest in his favor, from the evidence of their integrity, and
comfort themselves in it; it being an effect of his distinguishing Grace in
them, and having the promise secured to it; yet they dare not plead any
personal Righteousness of their own, for the procuring of any favor for them,
but renounce it, Dan. 9.18. We do not present our Supplications before thee for
our Righteousnesses, but for thy great mercies. And for this reason the sense
of these defects attending them, makes them oftentimes to tremble at the
thoughts of Gods displeasure, Psalm. 119.120. My flesh trembles for fear of
thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments.

8. It is their duty daily to Pray for Forgiveness. Prayer is One part of
Natural Worship, and it is not appointed for a Complement, but as a necessary
duty for the upholding of Communion between God and men; it being the way in
which we are to seek and obtain the good we need, and give him the due
acknowledgments of it. In the petitionary part of it then, we are to ask him
only for such things as we want: And the apprehension of our want, and his
ability to succcour us, is the motive of our so seeking to him. Now there is
such a Petition which Christ has directed his Disciples, and such as can call
God their Father, to prese^^ daily to him, Math. 6.12. Forgive us our debts. i.
e. Our Sins. And there is ever implied in such a petition, a confession of our
debts, else we cannot in earnest ask the forgiveness of them. We then daily
want forgiveness; not only a further confirmation of the pardon we received in
our Justification, but new forgiveness; and there is none so holy in this life*
as to be discharged from the obligation of making this petition in prayer: And
(...) there are many of Gods Children that are kept from precipitating
themselves into ^^^ocious sins; nor do any truly gracious ones make a daily
trade of it. This therefore plainly intimates, that the very remaining
imperfection, which makes them in their whole lives to fall behind in regard of
that absolute perfection which consists in a complete conformity to the Rule,
has that in it which needs forgiveness t^ be applied to it by the free Grace
of God It therefore has sinfulness in i^, otherwise it could not stand in need
o^ a pardon: and whatsoeever in us stands in need of that, tells us that we
ought to labor indefatigably to get it taken away as a thing which is evil and
bitter.

9. One great design that God aims at, in his Ordinances and Providence which
he dispenses to his people, is to purge away these imperfections, and to lead
them on toward Perfection. The Gospel Ordinances, which Christ has appointed
to be dispensed to his people, were not only designed for the bringing about
the Conversion of Sinners, though that also is purposed in them, we are
therefore said to be begotten by the word of truth, Jam. 1.18. And Paul was
sent to open men's eyes, and turn them from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan to God, Acts 26.18. But God also aimed at the Edification of
Saints by them. They are therefore Christ's Ascension Gifts which he has
bestowed on his Church, to help them forward to a sinless perfection, till when
they are not to cease, Ephesians. 4.10, etc. There are also the many Afflictive
Providence, which God sees meet to exercise his own Children withal in this
world, and among other purposes which he intends to bring about hereby, we are
told that this is one great thing that he aims at by them, Isa. 27.9. By this
shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away
his sin. On this account, the afflictions that the Children of God are visited
withal, are compared to a furnace, and to a refiners fire, in which, remaining
dross is separated from the good metal, to make it yet more pure. This good
effect Job encouraged himself that he should obtain by his afflictions, Job 23
10. When he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold And surely, that which
God uses such courses with us, to take away from us, must needs be a thing,
that we should endeavor the removal of: Job was a perfect man as to integrity,
Chap. 1.1. And yet he needed this trial.

10. They must be fully perfected in order to their perfect Glorification.
Though the body o^ death attends them through the present li^e, and gives them
no little molestation in it, yet it shall be wholly put off with it, and they
shall no more be pestered with it for ever: There shall be perfection of
holiness enjoyed by us, when we come to perfect glory; nor indeed can our glory
be perfect without it: we are told how Christ will present his Church to
himself at last, Ephesians. 5.27. A glorious Church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or
any such thing. None are admitted into the assembly above, but Just men made
perfect, Heb. 12.22 When we come there we shall sin no more, nor have any dregs
of pollution abiding in us, but be entirely conformed to the Image of God; now
that which is the perfection which God will bring us to at last, is that which
we all ought to be aspiring after, and restless in pursuit of, till we come to
obtain it. And truly, Inchoate Holiness make; us capable only of partaking in
Inchoate Blessedness; our vessels are not prepared to be filled with glory, nor
can we have that near Communion with God in Christ, which is requisite to give
us complete and unin^ermixed satisfaction, till we are completely holy in the
highest degree which our natures are able to receive; If then God has
appointed us to Salvation, and there can be none without this, it must needs be
our duty not to take up with any thing short of this: and consequently it must
be that which is promised to us in the Covenant of Grace, and we ought to
pursue it, and endeavor to go from strength to strength in it, till we arrive
at the fullness of it, which is not to be expected till we get to the Eter^nal
Kingdom.

USE.
Be we then Exhorted not to place our hope in God, for the sake of any
Rig^teousness of our own, when we must (...) our best so short of what it o^ght
to be, which needs a pardon, and therefore cannot command his favor; but let
the sense of our duty, and our defect p^t ^s upon (...) on Christ alone, and
his Righteousness a^ the m^ritorious and ma^erial ca^se of our acqui^^^^ce from
the condemnation of the Law, and being made the Owners of a title to eternal
life. Let us look hither for a sure foundation to build our hope upon, to
receive the reward of Eternal Glory; and not to any thing of our own. Let our
dependence be here for the acceptance of our poor imperfect duties,
acknowledging that but for this they could not but be rejected. Let us in sense
of our own imperfection, be ever bewailing of it, and go to Christ to have it
sprinkled with his blood. Let us press hard all our lives after more Holiness,
prosecuting it with utmost reachings; and let every new acquest by Divine help,
make us the more earnest after further degrees of it, and more vigorous in the
use of all means to reach them: Nor let us tire and give in, so long as we are
any whit behind those who are now totally freed from sin, and in whom Grace is
arrived at its full stature in Glory.

THE END.
A Brief Account of principal matters contained in the foregoing Treatise.
DOCTRINE I.
THat Jesus Christ is a Fountain of Saving Good. page 7. How he came to be such
a Fountain? p. 13.
DOCTRINE II.
Jesus Christ is an Opened Fountain in the days of the Gospel. p. 22. How this
fountain comes to be Opened? p. 28. In what peculiar respect it is said to be
Opened in the days of the Gospel. p. 32.
DOCTRINE III.
They are the Seed of Christ, and the Church of God for whose sake this
fountain is Opened. p 44 How the Opening of this Fountain had a peculiar
respect to these? p. 46.
DOCTRINE IV.
The great design of Opening this Fountain to Gods people, is for sin and
uncleanness. p. 64. How man's sin and uncleanness gave occasion for this. p. 65
Of what use this fountain is for the taking it away? p. 77 Trials of our
interest in this fountain. p. 95
DOCTRINE V.
There will be a more peculiar Opening of Christ as a Fountain of life when the
Jews are called. p. 106 That there is such a Calling of the Jews yet to come.
ibid. The glorious state of those times. p 114
DOCTRINE VI.
When God has brought his Chosen to bewail their sins, especially the affronts
which they have offered to Christ, and to pray for his mercy, he will then make
a gracious discovery of this Fountain to them. p. 127 How God produces a
Spirit of mourning and supplication in men, in order to his Opening of this
Fountain to them? p. 130 How to judge of the efficacy of the Gospel. p. 140
Rules of Trial, to know whether this Fountain has been savingly Opened to us.
p. 146
In the Sermon annexed to the former Treatise: This great question is
discussed, viz.

Whether that personal perfection which God requires of his people under the
Covenant of Grace, be the same for kind and degree with that which was required
in the Covenant of Works, or any thing short of it?

ERRATA.
PAge 82. line 17. for parties, r. parts. p. 137. l. 25. dele, and. p. 150. l.
24. f. God by, r. Godly. p. 198. l. 17. add, for.


