CONSCIENCE THE BEST FRIEND UPON EARTH: OR, The Happy Effects Of Keeping A Good
Conscience.

Very Useful for this Age.

By HENRY STUBBES, Minister of the Gospel

Acts 23.1. I have lived in all good Conscience before God until this day.

Boston, Reprinted by B Green, and J. Allen, for Nicholas Buttolph, and are to
be Sold at his Shop at the Corner of (...) Coffee House. 1700.

To the Readers CONSCIENCE.
COnscience; how thou will take it I know not* however I have adventured to
write a few lines unto thee, because I know thou art well acquainted with my
Reader, and can do much with him if thou will; and if thou be good C^nscience
thou will. Naturally good I know thou art. I would hope that thou art
Spiritually good, purged from dead works by the Blood of Christ, Heb. 9.14. and
made good by the power o^ the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 3 21. and
art able to give a reason by thy hope to be sa^ed, 1 Pet. 3.1^, 16. and that
thou stand upon thy watch and ward against Sin, Satan, and the World, 1 Timothy
1.18, 19. However thou art naturally good, something thou have retained since
the Fall, all is not lost: Reason, Knowledge, and the power of reflection thou
have; and to speak according to thy Knowledge, and to tell every one with whom
thou have to do, the truth how it is with them is thy essential property. Even
those (John 8.6.9) that tempted Christ, ^^at they might have something to
accuse him of, were convicted of their Consciences; their Consciences dealt
plainly with them, and told them the truth, that they were not without sin

Conscience, thou art the Candle of the Lord searching the inward parts, the
most secret thoughts, desires and intents of the heart, Prove. 20.27. according
to that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 2.11. What man knows the things of a man, save
the spirit of a man within him? Thou did tell Pharaoh that he was wicked,
Exodus 9.27. and Jos^phs Brethere^, that they were guilty, Genesis 42 21. and Judas
that he had sinned in betraying innocent blood, Mat. 27.3, 4 I pray thee do as
much for my Reader if thou see cause for it. It may be thou art a wel^ read
Conscience in the Law of God enlightened and rightly informed, If thou be so,
thou know my Readers estate Godward, whether good or bad, in the state of
Grace or Nature. Thou must needs know, for thou art always at home with him,
and there is not a thought in his Heart but thou art privy to it, nor a word in
his tongue but thou hear it, nor a work of his hand but thou see it. God
has made thee his Spy and Overseer, that so thou may be a true Witness for
or against him.

Conscience, thou can tell whether my Reader be a Child of wrath, as he was
born, Ephesians. 2.3. or whether he be born again, and so be a Child of God by Faith
in Jesus Christ, Gal. 3 26

Thou can tell whether he be as yet to this day in the gall of bitterness and
bond of iniquity, as he, Acts 8.23.

Thou can tell whether he be in the flesh, and do live after the flesh or no.

Whether he be the same that ever he was, or whether he be a new creature, the
workmanship of God by a second creation, born of God and of the Spirit,
sanctified throughout, cleansed from filthiness of flesh and spirit.

Whether he Worship God in spirit and truth.

Whether he have only the form of godliness, or the power also

Whether he be a Christian outwardly only, or inwardly also.

Whether a hearer only, or a doer also

Whether he have only a name to live, or* be alive indeed.

Whether he be barren and unfruitful, or fruitful in every good work.

Whether his Knowledge be affective and operative, and so saving.

Whether his Faith be unfeigned, the Faith of Gods Elect, working, purifying,
conquering.

Whether his Repentance be Repentance unto life, bearing the fruits of
Carefulness, Clearing, Indignation, Fear, Vehement Desire, Zeal, Revenge, 2
Cor. 7.11.

Whether his Obedience be universal.

Whether he esteem all Gods Precepts concerning all things to be right, and
whether he hate every false way, Psalm. 119.128.

Conscience, thou eanst tell whether my Reader have laid aside all malice and
all guile, and hypocrisies, and envies, and evil speakings, as he is required,
1 Pet. 2 1.

Whether he desires the sincere milk of the word, that he may grow thereby,
verse 2

And whether he do grow or not.

Whether he be contented with what he has attained, or whether he press
forward after Paul's example, Phil. 3.13, 14.

Whether he make Religion the greatest business he has to do in the world.

Whether Gods Word be his Rule in all.

Whether Gods glory be his end in all.

Whether he seek his own things, or the things of Christ, most.

Whether his Heart be Godward, Christward, Heavenward.

Whether his Conversation be in Heaven, and his affections upon things above.

Whether he have Oil in his Vessel as well as in his lamp.

Whether he can prove his Union with Christ.

Whether he has made his Calling and Election sure.

Whether he be yet made meet for the inheritance of the Saints in light.

Whether he love the appearing of Christ.

And Conscience thou can tell whether my Reader does live by the Faith of the
Son of God, as Paul did, Gal. 2 20.

Whether he show out of a good conversation his works with m^^kness of wisdom,
James 3.13.

What work and labor of love he has showed toward the Name of Christ,
whether he have ministered to the Saints, and do minister, Heb. 6.10.

Whether he fulfill all the Will of God, as David did, Acts 13.22.

Whether he follow God fully, as Caleb did.

Whether he be righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of the Lord blameless, as Zechary and Elizabeth, Luke 1.6.

Whether he be holy in all manner of conversation, as he is required to be, 1
Pet 1.15.

Whether his Conversation in this World be in simplicity and godly sincerity, 2
Cor. 1.12.

Whether he be zealous of good works, ^it. 2.14.

Whether the zeal of Gods House do eat him up.

Whether he be contented to be nothing that God may be all, and to be accounted
vile, so God may be honored.

Whether he deny himself, and take up his Cross and follow Christ, Mat. 1^.24.

Whether he rejoice in hope, and be patient in tribulation, and continue
insta^^ in prayer, Rom 12.12.

N^w Conscience, I have an earnest request to thee; and seeing thou always
lodgest in the bosom of my Reader, thou can not want an oppor^^nity to do
what I shall request of thee. My Request (...) this, That thou would deal
honestly (...) my Reader, and tell him the truth of his estate what it is.

If he be a child of wrath, and in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity,
tell him so, and say to him as Peter to Simon Magus, Acts 8.23. I percive thou
art in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, a child of wrath, and the
wrath of God will come upon thee if thou continue so, Ephesians. 5.6

If my Reader do live after the flesh, ( and sure thou can tell whether he do
(...) or no) Good Conscience tell him that he does so, and that if he shall
continue so to do, he shall dye; and show him, Romans 8.13. and bid him read it.

If my Reader do the work of the Lord negligently, deceitfully? if he offer to
God a corrupt thing when he has a male to offer, tell him of the curse which
hangs over his head, and make him read, Jer. 48.10. Mat 1.14

If he have no prayer in his Family, cause him to read, Jer. 10.25.

If he remember not the Sabbath day to keep it holy, give him no rest, till
thou have gotten him to read and ponder upon what is written, Jer. 17.27.

If he be an idle, slothful, unprofitable servant in the Lords work, show him,
Mat. 25.30.

If he be an unfruitful tree in the Lords vineyard, prevail with him (for thou
can do it) to read again and again the words of Christ, Luk 13.7, 8, 9. show
him also, Mat. 7.17. and Heb 6.7, 8. Say to him, why do thou not take the
Bible and read it?

Conscience, if my Reader believe not in Jesus Christ, if he do not
obedientially rest upon him alone for salvation, tell him that if he do not
believe the sooner he must be damned, Mark 16.16.

If he have not repented, if he have not confess^d his sin, and mourned for it,
and turned from it unto God; tell him he must do it or perish, and show him,
Luke 13.3, 5.

If he be unrighteous, good Conscience tell him, that if he continue such, he
shall never inherit the Kingdom of God* Compel him to read, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.

If he be unholy, tell him, that he shall never see the Lord; and let him not
be quiet till he has taken the Bible and read it in Heb. 12 14.

If he be unregenerate, tell him, he cannot (if he continue so) see the Kingdom
of God. Put the Bible into his hand, and bid him read, John 3.3, 5.

Conscience, if my Reader be a neglecter of that great Salvation proffered in
the Gospel, and continue so, tell him that he cannot escape Damnation, and show
him, Heb. 2 3.

If he turn away from him that speaks from Heaven to him, tell him that he
cannot escape the wrath of God; and show him, Heb. 12.15. and Acts ^3.23. and
ask him whether he be not afraid of destruction?

And if he shall still refuse to hearken, and still pull away the shoulder, and
stop his ears, and make his heart like an Adamant stone, tell him that great
wrath will come upon him, Zech. 7.1^, 12.

Conscience, if my Reader be one of that black catalogue, 1 Cor* 6.9, 10. or a
doer of the works of the flesh, Gal. ^^19, 20, 21. tell him, that he shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. And if he ask thee what warrant thou have to say so
refer him to the forecited Scriptures.

Conscience, if my Reader should be fearful, unbelieving, abominable; if he
should be a Murderer, a Whoremonger, a Sorcerer, an Idolater, a Liar; tell him
that if he continue such, he must have his part in the lake that burns with
fire and brimstone; and make him read, Rev. 21.8.

Conscience, if my Reader be a proud person, tell him from God, that God is
able to abase him, Dan. 4.37. and will be above him, Exodus 18.1* and bring him
down, Psalm. 18.27. and low, Prove. 29.23. even to destruction, Prove. 16.18. and
15.25. Get him also to read Isaiah 2.11. to 18. and Isaiah 3.16. to the end.

If my Reader be a covetous person, good Conscience, let him know from the Word
of God,

1. That he is a troubler of his own house, Prove. 15.27

2 That he is in Gods account an Idolater, Col. 3.5 Ephesians. 5 5

3 That he is hated and abhorred of God, Psalm. 10 3.

4 That he i^ sorely threatened, Isa. 5. 1. Isa. 10 1, 2. Job 20.15, 19, 20. and
27.16, 17, 18 1 Cor. 16.10. And get him to read, 1 Timothy 6 9.19.

And Conscience, if my Reader be a voluptuous person, an adulterous unclean
person, I must entreat thee to send him to the Bible, and to see that he read
and consider these following Scriptures of the Old and New Testament; Prove.
2.18, 19. Prove. 5 3, 4, 5, 6. to 14. Prove. 6.26, 32, 33. Prove. 7.21. to the end
of the chap Prove 22.14 Prove. 23.27. Prove. 29.3. Eccles. 7* 26. 1 Cor 5.9. 1 Cor
6 9, 10. Ephesians. 5.5, 6. Heb. 13.4. Rev. 21.8. and 22, 15.

Good Conscience, be at him again and again, and never leave him till thou have
gotten him to go into his Closet, and there to spend one quarter or half an
hour in pondering on those Scriptures.

Conscience, do thy Office; thou art Gods D^puty, fail not to be faithful.

Possibly thou may say, That thou have done it again and again, but they will
not hear, they are deaf to me as well as to you. But Conscience; if thou be a
good Conscience, speak louder, speak not with so low a voice, lift up thy voice
like a trumpet, for thou art ordained a Preacher to show my Readers their
transgressions and sins.

Be not silent whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, yet speak
unto them. I know my Readers, many of them will endeavor to silence and stop
thy mouth; they do not love to be ^old of their faults, or what their estat^
is: but Conscience be not thou rebellious, but do that which is thine Office to
do I know thou have much to charge my Readers with.

Some of them (thou know) do neither read the Scriptures, nor pray in their
Families, nor Catechize them that are committed to their charge.

Others pray not in their Closets, nor do they commune with their own hearts
about their spiritual estates; they examine not themselves, whether they be in
the Faith, or whether Christ be in them; they compare not themselves with the
Word of God, to know how it is with them.

Some spend their time and strength, and Estates in Rioting and Drunkenness, in
Chambering and Wantonness in Strife and Envying.

Some trifle away their precious time in Taverns, Alehouses, Play Houses,
Coffee-houses.

Some embrace this present world with Demas.

Some are lovers of Pleasure more than lovers of God.

Some acknowledge God in their words, and in their works deny him.

Some have left their first love.

Some are lukewarm, neither hot nor cold.

Some say, Lord, Lord, but will not do the things that he says unto them.

Some believe not with their Hearts what with their Mouths they say they do
believe.

Some confess sin with their lips, but do neither mourn for it, nor hate it,
nor turn from it with their Hearts

Some pray for that they would not have.

Some hear the Word, but will not do it.

Some love in word and tongue, but not in deed and truth.

Some fashion themselves according to this world, yet would not be thought to
be of the world.

Some Dedicate and Devote their Children to (...) to the service of that one
God, who^^ Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and when they have so done, they
alienate (...) from his service, to the service of the World, Flesh, and Devil,
breeding them up in Idleness, Pride, and Wantonness. Never, or never to any
purpose, minding them of their Baptismal Covenant and Engagement, to be wholly
and only the Lords.

Some neglect relative Duty, (as thou Conscience know very well.)

Are not some Husbands bitter to their Wives, and some Wives disobedient to
their Husbands?

Do not some Parents provoke their Children to wrath? and do not some Children
dishonor their Parents?

Do not some Masters deny that which is just and equal to their Servants? and
are not some Servants unfaithful to their Masters? D^st ^hou not know all this
to be true, Consci^nce? Doubtless thou do, and doubtless thou do often
nip and twinge them for it. But good Conscience make them feel, make them
smart, let them not go on in peace, disturb them, haunt them continually, tell
them their own, and take a fit time and season for it.

My Reader does frequently, or sometimes at least, hear Sermons, Sermons of the
necessity of the New Birth, Faith, Repentance, Holiness. Take this opportunity,
Conscience, of telling him the truth. Say to him, hear thou what the
Preacher says? has he not clearly proved the necessity of New Birth, Faith,
Repentance, Holiness unto life Eternal? What will thou do, Man, Woman? Thou art
not Newborn, thou have not believed nor repented, thou art no^ Holy. Sure thou
can not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Joh. 3.3. Sure thou must be damned,
Mat. 16 16. Sure thou must perish, Luk 13.3. thou can not see the Lord to thy
comfort in that unholy state thou art now in, Heb. 12.14.

My Reader prays constantly, or sometimes at least, and says, Lord give me a
better Heart, a new Heart, a clean Heart, a soft Heart, a single Heart Lord,
write thy Law in my Heart, plant thy Fear in my Heart, put thy Spirit into me,
cause me to walk in thy (...). Now Conscience, tell him the truth; say to him,
Thou drawest nigh to God with thy lips, but thy heart is far from him. Thy Lip
does ask these things of God, but thy heart does not desire them; thou art well
enough satisfied and contented, though thou be denied.

My Reader is sometimes busy in his Calling: Conscience go to him and say, Oh
how busy thou art for back and belly! what provision make thou for thy soul?

My Reader is sometimes at a Feast, or at his own Table: go to him Conscience,
and say, O how sweet this meat is to thy taste! when shall the Word of God, and
the meat indeed, and the drink indeed, be as sweet.

My Reader is sometimes in a Tavern, Ale House, or Coffee-house; Conscience,
when he has done his necessary business there, go to him and say, Is not thy
Family or Closet a fitter place for thee to be in?

Sometimes he is walking in the fields; Conscience go to him and ask him what
he is meditating on, and put him in mind of Isaac's practice. Gen 24.6.

My Reader is sometimes sick: go to him, Conscience, and say, This is the just
hand of God upon thee: and bid him take (...) Bible and read Jer. 4.18

Sometimes my Reader takes Physic, go to him Conscience, and say to him, when
will thou be at so much cost for thy soul? when will thou space so much time
from thy business for thy soul? when will thou keep thy Chamber a day or two
for thy souls health?

Possibly my Reader has lately been recovered out of a dangerous fit of
sickness: go to him Conscience, and put him in mind of his sickbed prayers and
purposes, and say to him, Sin no more, least a worse thing come unto thee.

Conscience, have but a very little patience more, and I have done. Some of my
Readers, thou know, have lain under the means of Grace a long time
Unconverted; would I could persuade thee to force them to read, Heb. 6.7, 8.
Jer. 6 29. Ezekiel. 24.13, 14. Mat. 23.37, 38. Luke 19* 41, 42. 2 Cor. 13.5. and
not let them be quiet until they have mused a while on each: Conscience, I am
in care and fear about my Readers, lest that dreadful Message be sent to them,
that once was sent to Israel of old, Isaiah 6.9, 10. with Romans 11.18. I beseech
thee, Conscience, suffer them not to eat, drink, or sleep in quiet, until they
have fixed their thoughts a while on this Message (...) reading of it*
Conscience, I am out of hopes of my Readers welfare, unless thou be the more
vigilant, diligent, and faithful in doing thy office. Wherefore I beseech thee,
nay* I charge thee, as once Paul charged Timothy, 2 Timothy 4.1. Before God and
the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and the dead (...) ^ppearing
and his Kingdom; preach the (...) to my Reader, be instant in season, out of
season; Reprove, Rebuke, Exhort him, and continue thy speech to him, (as once
Paul did to his Hearers, Acts 20.7.) until midnight rather than fail of
prevailing with him. There are a few other Scriptures, which I desire my Reader
might peruse, viz. 1 Samuel 2.25. 2 Chronicles. 25.16 Prove. 29.1. But Conscience, if
thou will not by earnest and continual urging compel him, he will not bestow
the time, nor take the pains to do it. In hope thou will be faithful to my
Reader, I shall add no more, save only the promise of my prayers that thou
may be so.

SERMON I.
JOB XXVII.6. My Righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my Heart
shall not reproach me so long as I live


MY Righteousness I hold fast. His Friends would have robbed him of it, would
have persuaded him out of it, would have argued and disputed him out of it, but
you shall not do it says Job; I stand up in the defense of it, I hold it fast,
I will not let it go: Say what you will, do what you can, I will maintain my
integrity, I am not an Hypocrite as you would have me think I am, I am not an
unrighteous man as you would speak me to be, and as you would have me take my
self to be; no, my Righteousness I will hold fast, I will not let it go; pull
while you will. I will hold it fast. Take we up the like Resolution: there are
some that pretend to be friends, pretend friendship and kindness, but act the
part of Job's friends here. Oh how many are there that would spoil us of ou^
Righteousness! the World, the F^^sh, and the Devil, pull to take it awa^; Hold
we our Resolution not to let it go. Should I let it go, (says Job) my Heart
would reproach me, would upbraid me; my Conscience would accuse me of wrong
done to my self, which is worse than doing wrong to others. It is bad to wrong
others, much worse to wrong our selves: therefore he is resolved, My Heart
shall not reproach me, no not so long as I live. In which words you have Job's
holy resolution, My Heart shall not reproach me. My Heart, that is my
Conscience, for so Heart is to be understood, 1 John 3.20, 21. If our heart
condemn us, God is greater than our heart: And if our heart condemn us not,
etc. that is our Conscience. So that by Heart you must here understand
Conscience. Conscience! Is there any such thing in the World? Sure one would
think that Conscience had been dead long ago, and that there wa^ no Conscience
now alive in the World. But (Sirs) it will have a Resurrection assure your
selves, for it is of an Immortal Nature; and though it may seem to die, it will
have a real Resurrection* Sleep is the image of Death, and Conscience may for a
while be asleep, but as sure as ever thou did awake when thou wast asleep,
Conscience will awake ere long: and when it shall awake, it will make you look
about. My Conscience shall not reproach me, shall not upbraid, shall not acc^se
me of any wrong done to my self, nor of any omission of what is my Duty, nor of
any commission of what is Transgression, it shall not accuse me, either for
omitting what God has commanded, (and God has commanded me to preserve my own
Integrity, and to seek my own peace and quiet; or accuse me for committing what
God has forbidden, God has forbidden me the wronging of my self, and
Conscience shall not ^^cuse me for doing what God has forbidden, so long as I
live* Hitherto hi^ Conscience accused him not, O Excellent Job! A man more
righteous then his Neighbor. Indeed he was one that had the Commendation of
God himself; no wonder he does stand up in his own justification, being a
person that had Gods so great Commendation. Job 1.1. There was a man in the
Land of Uz, whole name was Job, and that man was perfect and upright, one that
feared God, and eschewed evil. And a further Commendation the Lord gave him,
ver 8. Have thou not considered my Servant Job, that there is none like him in
the earth* etc. No wonder that he stands upon his own Justification. Hitherto I
have so lived that my Conscience cannot accuse me, and he was resolved so to
live. I will have a care (whatever I suffer) to have Conscience on my side: I
will have Conscience to be my Friend, I will not do any thing that shall
occasion Conscience to be my Foe: For I were better to have all the World, yea,
if there were ten thousand Worlds, it were better for me to have them all to be
my mortal enemies, then to have Conscience to be my enemy.

Now it will be needful to consider what Conscience is that is so great a
Friend or Foe: it will be the best Friend or the worst enemy, according as your
carriage toward God and Man shall be, I shall show, 1. What Conscience is. 2.
About what it is employed. 3. How it is employed


And then when I have so done, I shall tell you and prove it, that it should be
your greatest care so to live, that Conscience, may not reproach you whilst
you live; and then give you reasons of it, and then Apply it.

I. General. What Conscience is.

Briefly. Conscience is a man's Judgment of himself, i. e. Of his Estate and
Actions: Or thus, if you will; Conscience is a Power of the Soul; for the Soul
is endowed with N^ble Powers and Faculties, Understanding, Conscience, Memory,
Will and Affections: and Conscience is not the least of them. I say, Conscience
is a Power of the Soul taking notice and bearing witness of all a man's
Thoughts, Words and Actions; and as it finds them, either to agree or not agree
with the Rule, it accuses or excuses, absolves or condemns, comforts or
torments. This is Con^c^ence. Do you think there is any such Inhabitant in you?
It may be some have taken no notice of any such Inhabitant in the House of
their Soul, whether there be any such Power of the Soul or no. I say it again,
Conscience is a Power of the Soul, taking notice, and bea^ing witness, (it
takes notice that it may bear witness) of all a man^ Thoughts, Words, and
Actions; and a^ it finds his Thoughts, Words, or Actions, to be either agreeing
or not agreeing with the Rule, so it does excuse or accuse, absolve or condemn,
comfort or torment. This is Conscience.

1 It is a Power of the Soul; it is called Heart, 1 John 3.^0. For if our heart
condemn us, etc. and Ecc^es 7.22. For oftentimes als^ thine own heart knows,
etc. It is called likewise the Spirit o^ a man, Prove 18 14* The Spirit of ^ man
will sustain his infirmities, but ^ wound^^ Spirit who can bear?

2 Conscience is a Power of the Sou^ taking no^ice; it is a most curi^us
Observer. C^n^cie^ce is very q^ick sighted. It is con^i^ually p^ying, though we
(...) not observe and take notice of it; yet so it is. What is said of God,
Psa^m^ 132.3, 4. is true of his D^pu^y: Who is that? It is Conscience.
Conscience is no mean thing, it is Gods Deputy, and what is said of God in that
place is true of Conscience: Thou compassest my path and my lying down, and
thou art acquainted with all my ways, for there is not a word in my mouth, but
lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether: Thou have beset me behind and before.
So that a man cannot stir but God sees, and Conscience sees; and knows and
takes notice of it; and one would wonder how Conscience will revive what was
done seven years, and three times seven years ago. Conscience will whisper in
your ear, this was in your heart, and this was in your tongue, and this was in
your hands, this was thought by you, that was sp^ken by you, and that was done
by you; that which we had utterly forgotten, how fresh many years after does
Conscience bring it to mind? Conscience took notice of it, and did well observe
it. Thus Conscience is a Power of the Soul taking notice.

3. And bearing witness, it takes notice that it may bear witness, if it
should not take notice it could not bear witness. Can a man bear witness of
that which he never knew, which he never saw, nor heard? Romans 2.14. The Apostle
speaking of the Gentiles, says, Having not the Law, they do by nature the
things contained in the Law: these having not the Law, are a Law unto
themselves, which show the work of the Law written in their hearts, their
Conscience also bearing witness. It is an old proverbial speech, Conscience is
a thousand Witnesses; nay it is more than a thousand or ten thousand Witnesses;
that one Witness is enough to cast us. If Conscience be a Witness, there is no
need of any further Witness. As they said of Christ, What need we any further
witness, we have it from his own mouth? So will the Lord say to the Sinner,
What need any further Witness his own Conscience is witness? You read of the
Testimony of Conscience, sometimes it is for, and sometimes against.

1 It is sometimes for us, as 2 Cor. 1.12. This is our re^oycing (says the
Apostle) the testimony of our Conscience, that in all simplicity and godly
sincerity, not with fl^shly wisd^m, but by the grace of God (...) our
conversation in the World.

2. And sometimes against us, and then, it is a Hell above ground, a Hell on
this side Hell.

3. It further follows, that Conscience is a Power of the Soul taking notice
of, and bearing witness of a man's Thoughts, Words, and Actions, so that the
Thoughts shall not escape Consciences Observation, nor shall a Word escape
Consciences hearing, nor a Work Consciences recording. And as Conscience find
the Th^ughts, Words or Actions, either agreeing or not agreeing with the Rule,
it will excuse or accuse. Conscience cannot be a Wi^ness of our Thoughts, Word^
and Actions, whether they be acco^ding to the Ru^^, or contrary to it, whether
they agree with the Rule or warp from it, unless it be a strict Observer: And
if it find our Thoughts, Words and Actions to agree wi^h the Rule, it excuses;
if not to agree with the Rule, it a^cuseth: Rom 2 1^. Their thoughts in the
mean while accusing or excusi^g one another.

4. And th^n it follow, a^s^^^ving or condemning. For the truth is Cons^ience
is a Judge, a Deputy Judge, which God has set up and given Power to, that
according as it finds Thoughts, Words and Actions, to be according to Rule, or
not according to Rule, it may either acquit or condemn.

5. And then it comfort or tormenteth also, as it finds Thoughts, Words
and Actions, either to agree or not to agree with the Rule, 2 Cor. 1 12. This
is rejoicing in the Testimony of our Conscience; there is the comfort of
Conscience. And Mark 9.44. It is a worm that never dies; there is the torment
of it. Thus you see Conscience is a Power of the Soul, taking notice and
bearing witness of all a man's thoughts, words and actions; and as it finds them
either agreeing or not agreeing wi^h the Rule, it excuses or accuses,
absolveth or condemns, comforeth or tormenteth. This is called Conscience. It
is called Conscience some think because it is a Knowledge with others. Pray
observe, God knows, Angels know, Devils know, Men know, and all these witness,
and Conscience knows and witnesses with them. God knows. Job 16.19. My
witness is in Heaven, my record is on high. There is one in Heaven that knows,
and one in Heaven that can witness; though the Husband does not know, though
the wife does not know, and father and friend does not know, yet God knows, and
there is one on earth knows, and that is Conscience. God is my witness, says
Paul, Romans 1 9. God does know it, and can witness it. All things are naked and
open to him with whom we have to do, Heb. 4.13. It is a notable Scripture, Hos.
7.2. And they consider not in their hearts, that I remember all their
wickedness. Whosoever forgets it, and though they themselves forget it, yet I
remember it well enough They do not consider that I remember all their
wickedness, their own doings have beset them about, they are all before my
face, even what is not before the Husbands face and the Wifes face. God knows
what things are acted behind one another backs; all is before Gods face, He
knows it, and takes notice of it. Psalm. 139 begin. 2. Angels know it too; the
Angels are Ministering Spirits about some: they are employed here on Earth,
though we take no notice of it They are in our Congregations and Meetings, and
they observe how we carry our selves there. For this cause ought the woman to
have power on her head, because of the Angels, says the Apostle. 1 Cor. 11.10.
i. e. the Woman is to be modest in the Congregation because of the Angels. The
Lord return Modesty home again, for Modesty seems to be banished from among us.
But do Angels know? Do the good Angels know? Yes, when we do well the good
Angels rejoice: if a Sinner be converted, if the lost Sheep be found, there is
joy among the Angels; therefore they know it. Luke 27.10. 3. The bad Angels
know too, they go about as Observers. You cannot go to the Congregation, but
the Devil makes one there. The Sower goes out ^o sow the good seed, then comes
the Enemy, the Devil, and steals it away. Mat. 13 19. He also goes about as a
roaring Li^n every where. 1 Pet. 5.8 He goes to and fro in the earth, and walks
up and down in it Job 1 7. observing what People do; for he is the Accuser of
the Brethren, and he will when time serves remember people of what they have
done, though dons by his instigation and temptation: see Zech. 3.1. Poor
Creatures are tempted to destroy themselves; well, God delivers them, and now
they are ashamed. O what a shame is this (says the Devil) that thou have
attempted to destroy thy self? how can thou look any body in the face without
shame? go and destroy thy self. This was the case of a poor creature that I
have twice spoken with; once she attempted to drown her self; I spoke with her
and gave her the best counsel I could: she answered me, I am ashamed, I am
ashamed, I cannot go about any thing. Not many days after she went into a wood
to cut her own Throat, but God delivered her: But this poor Creature is still
under discontent, the D^vil does remember her. I beseech you consider how many
Witnesses there are of all that you do; you think to sin in the dark, and to do
it so that no eye shall see you; you think to draw the Curtains and then none
can see you; but you deceive your selves, it is Noon Day with God still, and so
it is with Angels, and with the Devil too; there is nothing hid from them. 4.
Men know, they are our Observers. Some have their eyes in their heads, and see
that which should make their eyes weep and trickle down with tears, and if they
have any Zeal for God the sight of their Eyes will affect their Hearts. And
besides this, Conscience also knows, and therefore called Conscience (as some
think) because it knows with others, It knows with God, with Angels, with
Devils, and knows it to be all true, which God lays to our charge, and what the
Devil lays to our charge; so that Conscience is a Knowledge together with
others. Rom 1.9. My Conscience bearing me witness My Conscience co-witnessing
my Conscience witnessing togeth^r with God; God knows i^, and does witness
(...); and my Conscience (...) i^, and does witness it; and my Conscience
together with me knows i^.

There is a double Act of the Understanding; there is a Direct Act whereby we
know a thing, and there is a R^fl^ct Act whereby w^ know that we know it. And
this is the Action of Conscience* Isa. 59 12. For our transgressions are
multip^ied before thee, and our sins they testify against us; for our
transgressions are with us, and as for our iniquities we know them, we know
that we have sinned. So that Conscience is a recoiling or a reflection of the
Soul upon it self; according to that of Paul, 1 Cor. 4.4

II. General. I come in the next place to show about what Conscience is
employed. It is employed about the whole man and all his actions. It has a
Commission thus to employ it self about the understanding, how that does Act,
about the m^mory to observe how that does act, about the will, how that does
act, and the affections how they do act, it is employed to observe whether the
man be sanctified or not, and it is employed about his Actions whether they be
good or bad, about our actions toward God or Man, toward our selves or
others. And it is employed about every thing that is either a Sin or a Du^^*
Conscience is employed to observed how you eat, and drink, it is employed to
observe how you dress and habit your s^lv^s, how you buy and s^ll, and de^l and
tr^de in the World; it is implo^ed to observe how you read the Scripture, pray
in your Family, in your Closet, and i^ the Congregation, how you Sa^ctifi^^ ^he
Sabbath, receive Sacraments, how you spend your time, how long you ly a Bed in
a morning, how late you set up a^ night, and about what; to observe^ how you
carry your selves alone, and how you carry your selves in Company, to observe
what you do in the Streets, or in the Field, in this place or in the other
place, in this Company or in the other Company; it goes along with you, and it
will never leave you. God help m^ to mind this. I hope you will make the same
prayer for your selves, that I mak^ for my self.

III. General How Conscience is im^ployed. From the Description of Conscience
which I have given you, yo^ may unde^stand that Conscience has several
Offices, the Office of a Notary or Register, the Office of a Witness o^
Accus^r, the Office of a Judge or a Con^demner, the Office of a Comforter o^ a
Tormenter; Conscience is imploye^ in such Offices as these are, and Consci^ence
will first or last be faithful in the executing of them, and it will do its
O^^fice to purpose.

1. It is in (...) as a Notary or Re^gister to wri^^ down all we do; to wri^^
it down as with the point of a Diamond, to Book it down and Seal it up, that it
may come to light again.

2. It is employed as an Accuser, when we do amiss, when we warp from the Rule.

3. It is employed as a Judge, to pass sentence of life or death* Oh, Sirs, how
many poor souls are condemned by their own hearts? Their own Consciences tell
them, Thou art a Damned Creature, thou art an undone soul: It may be Conscience
as yet does not ^it in Judgment, it is not Sessions or Assizes time wi^h you,
it may be it is adjourned and put off to a longer time. But assure your selves
the time will come, the time is at hand.

4. Conscience is also employed as a Comforter, as an Acquitter an Absolver if
we do well, 2 Cor. 1.12. This is our rejoicing, the testim^ny of our
Conscience, that in simplicity and god^y sincerity, etc. we have had our
conversation in the world. What greater rej^^cing than this? when Conscience
shall acquit me in the pres^nce of G^d, when Conscience shall be able to say as
Hezekiah, Remember, O Lord, how I have walked before thee in truth and with a
perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. Oh what a comfort
will it be when Conscience shall reflect upon its believing in Christ, upon its
confession of sin, repentance and tears, sighs and groans for sin. This is my
rejoicing, the testimony of my Conscience; that I have been alone in a corner
in my Closet with tears in mine eyes, and sorrow in my heart, that I have
rolled my self on Christ and cast all my care upon Christ.

5. Then as a Tormenter Conscience is employed. When Conscience shall recoil,
and thus refl^ct upon a man. When thou shou^^st have be^n in thy Closet thou
wast here or there in the Street or in the Field, in the Coffee-House or
Taverns: when thou should ^a^e be^n with God alone, thou have been elsewhere.
Thou could ly down and rise up without having God before thine eyes: thou
could eat and drink without ^^ar and without rule, and buy and sell, and
habit thy self without fear. There is as much danger in habiting and dressing
ou^ selves, as in eating and drinking; O what if this dress should be a snare,
what if this should occasion the committing of Adultery; He that looks upon a
Woman to lus^ after her (says Christ) has committed Adultery with her already
in his heart. Says one, There is a fine clea^ skin, and so says a second, and
a third; but do you know what temptation may lie in a n^ked skin: the Lord help
us to take heed of it. I would commend you a little Bo^k, it is but threepence
price, it is called, The Hairy Comet, very fit for an Hairy Age. This is indeed
an Hairy Age; God deliver us from false Hearts, for we can see almost nothing
but false Heads every where. Assure your selves, Conscience will have a Bou^
with m^n for this another day.

Conscience will not let this go unobserved: Conscience does write down this,
and will hereafter find a time to read it to you: It may be the Wife will say I
must please my Husband, and the Husband will say I must please my Wife. But
have a care I beseech you to please Conscience, that it may not be against you
another day. See that Conscience be for you, and that Conscience may have no
cause to upbraid you, and torment you another day. Let Jobs care be your care;
let not Conscience reproach you so long as you live. I beseech you earnestly,
let it be your great care to have A Conscience void of offense toward God and
toward Man; toward your selves and others. And if you so do, you will have no
cause to repent your being here to hear this Lesson.

SERMON II.
JOB XXVII.6. My Righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my Heart
shall not reproach me so long as I live.


THis was Job's resolution, why should it not be ours? Those that have felt the
Reproaches of Conscience once, would be ^oth to feel them a second time. The
very bruit Beasts, when once they have been either in the mire, or in the fire,
will take heed how they come there again. You can hardly force them into a Bog
wherein they have been mired, they will turn this way, and that way, and run
back again upon you, rather than run into the mire wherein they have been
already. A wound^d Conscience who can bear? They that have felt that wound, and
have gotten it healed will take heed how they make another.

The PROPOSITlON I gave you was this; It should he our greatest care so to
live, that our Consciences may have no occasion to accuse or reproach us while
we live.

Some do so live that their neighbors can have no occasion to reproach them;
some there are that so live, that the very worst have a good word for them; I
have known some that have been so unblameable, of such a sweet disposition, so
kind and courteous to all, and have lived so inoffensively, that the worst have
had a good word for them. But where are they that have or do carry themselves
so, that their Consciences have no occasion to accuse them, or to reproach
them? Commend me to that person if you can. I have already showed you what
Conscience is, and about what it is employed, and how it is employed.

I come now to the Proof of the Doctrine. This was Jobs care you see; he was
resolved upon it, that he would so walk and so watch that Conscience might have
no occasion to reproach him. And has Job no Fellows? yea many; the Scripture
speaks of such that have made it their care so to walk, that Conscience might
have no just occasion to reproach them. David was one of them, as appears by
what he says, Psalm. 16.8. Psalm. 119.3, 112, 113. although there was a time
when he gave Conscience too great occasion to reproach him, and his Conscience
did reproach him to purpose at last. Ah poor David! what broken bones had he?
This was Hezekiah's care, else he could not have had the testimony of his
Conscience for him as he had; Remember (says he* Isa. 38 3.) O Lord how I have
walked before thee in truth and with a perfect heart, and have done that which
is good in thy sight. Perfect heart, that is an upright heart; perfection, not
of degrees, but of parts; is there to be understood. There are many such other
places in Scripture, as in the Book of Psalms, Mark the perfect man, and behold
the upright; where you find one word to explain the other. This also was Paul's
care, else could not he have had the testimony of his Conscience as he had.
This is our rejoicing, (says he) the testimony of our Conscience, etc. 2 Cor.
1.12. it was Paul's exercise, Acts 24.16. And herein do I exercise my self, to
have always a Conscience void of offense, toward God and toward Man.

Reason I.
The grounds and reasons of it follow. One reason why we should take all
possible care that Conscience may have no occasion to reproach us, is because
if occasion be given, these reproaches are unavoidable, I say these reproaches,
vexations and accusations of Conscience will be unavoidable; there is no
escaping from them: we may give occasion to others, and possibly there may be
some avoiding that which we give occasion of; but here is no avoiding or
escaping in this case. Conscience may be asleep, and Conscience may say nothing
a great while, but at last it will awake, and (...) office, in accusing and in
judging, condemning and tormenting* David's Conscience was asleep for a great
while, but afterward Nathan comes to him from the Lord, and ro^seth
Conscience, and then Conscience set most violently upon him; as appears by
Psalm. 51. where he complains of broken bones, and prays that the bones
which were broken might rejoice. So Joseph's Brethren, they heard nothing of
Conscience a great while, but at last Conscience twinges them, at last
Conscience put on his envenomed sting; (no such sting as the sting of
Conscience) at last Conscience takes them by the throat, Gen 42.21 And they
said one to another, we are verily guilty concerning [the Blood of] our
Brother, etc. though men do with the Harlot for a great while wipe their
mouths, and say, What evil have we done? As Joseph's Brethren, they sold their
Brother Joseph. Conscience said never a word to them, let them alone a great
while: they came and told their Father a lie, and Conscience said never a word
to them, when they told their Father that Joseph was slain: they saw their
Father mourning as if he were going down into the Grave, Conscience says
nothing all the while: a Famine comes upon the Land, Conscience yet says
nothing to them: at last they come down into Egypt, there they meet with hard
usage, and are in danger of Imprisonment. Now Conscience begins to rouse up
it self like a Lion, to tear and devour, then they cry our, Verily we are
guilty concerning the blood of our Brother. You see Conscience had an awakening
time, though it had been asl^ep; the Morning came for its awakening. So Judas's
Conscience was asleep for a great while ^ and one would wonder that it should
ever be so last asl^ep as it was, Mat. 26*15* You may read there some passages
o^ it. He go^th to the Chief Pri^sts and makes a Bargain: What will y^u give
me, and I will deliver Jesus to you? and they covenanted with him for thirty
pieces of Silver: there he makes a bargain for a little Silver to Sell his
Lord and Master, and to betray innocent blood: Conscience says never a word to
him. Further, he sought for opportunity to betray Christ, yet Conscience says
nothing to him, v. 21. when he was come into the presence of his Master, he
came with the Disciples to the Passover, yet Conscience says nothing to him
all the while: when he was at the Passover and eating, Christ tells his
Disciples that one of them should betray him, yet Judas's Conscience says
never a word to him, but lets him alone all this while. Nay further, when
the Disciples at these words were exceeding sorrowful, and began to say every
one of them, Lord, i^ it I? yet Judas's Conscienoe says nothing to him. And
Christ said, He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish, the same shall
betray me: yet his Conscience was asleep all this while. Further, ver. 24
Christ pronounces a Woe to that man by whom he should be betrayed; yet the
denunciation of that Woe did not awaken Judas's Conscience; Woe to him; it had
been g^od for that man he had never been born. It is ma^ter of admiration and
amazement, that his Conscience should be so fast asl^^p; the Devil entered into
him, and ^ock^d Conscience asl^ep till he might be sure to do him mischief
enough; ver. 25. Then Judas which betrayed him, put the question and said,
Master, is it I? Methinks his Conscience should have flown in his face like a
Mastiff Nay further says Christ, Thou have said; thou art the man: and yet for
all this Judas's Conscience was not awake. This is indeed matter of admiration,
that a man's Conscience should be so ^ast asleep. But how many Instances of such
sleepy Consciences do this very Age afford? But does Judas's Conscience sleep
always? No, Then Judas which betrayed him, when he saw that Jesus was
condemned, he brought again the Thirty pieces of Silver to the Chief Priests,
and said, I have sinned in that I have betrayed innocent blood. But miserable
Comforters were those Christ-Buyers, they bought him to be Crucified; they did
reply to him when he said, I have sinned; What is that to us? see thou to that.
And he cast down the thirty pieces of Silver in the Temple, and went and hanged
himself And now his Conscience was so awake that it would not suffer him to
live. I assure you, h^wsoever Conscience will be asl^ep for a great while, yet
the time will come that Conscience will do its Office; and therefore it does
greatly concern us to take great care that Conscience may have no occasion to
reproach us. O happy Judas if thou had never made a bargain to sell thy
Master, and had never sought opportunity to betray him! O happy, if thou
had never accompanied the Band of Soldiers, that came to apprehend him: But
he came along with the Band of Soldiers, and gave them the Sign, The Man whom
I shall kiss is the Man, ^^old him fast: Yet Conscience did not reproach him.
But let men do what they can to stop the mouth of Conscience, it will speak at
last, and they will be biting words. Carnal Reasonings cannot stop it, carnal
Pleasures cannot bribe it, nor any variety of diversions silence it. Cain you
know he was quiet a while, Gen 4.13. But after a while Cain's Conscience did
reproach him, would not let him alone. B^^s^azzar, he is merry a while with his
Courtiers and Companions in drinking Wine in Bowls, but after he falls a
trembling and his knees smote one against ^he other, and he grew pale when he
saw the hand wri^ing on the wall. Conscience will s^e an hand w^iting not on
the w^ll, but in this book. I have spok^n with some poor Souls, that could say,
this Word is against me, and that Word is against me, there are words enough in
this Book against you. Conscience will one day awake and reproach and will not
be bribed, will not have its mouth stopped. This is one great reason why we
should be careful to live that Conscience may not reproach us while we live,
for the reproaches of Conscience are unavoidable.

Reason II.
Another reason why we should take all possible care that Conscience may have
no occasion to reproach us, is because the reproaches of Conscience are
Intolerable, there will be no bearing of them. A wounded Spirit who can bear?
None are able to bear it. Many instances might be given; you may read Job 7.13,
14* 15. When I say my Bed shall comfort me, my couch shall ease my complaint;
then thou scarest me with dream^, and terri^i^st me with visions, so that my
(...) strangling, and death rather than life. Oh Sir^, what a case will the
terrors and accus^^ions of Conscience b^ing the p^^or c^^ature into? Job 10 ^.
My soul is weary of my life? I will leave my Complaint upon my self, etc. Psalm
32.3, 4 When I kept si^ence, my bones waxed old through my roaring all the day,
etc. All this was occasioned through the reproaches of Conscience. I might add,
Prove. 12.25. Heaviness in the heart of a man makes a man to stoop. I have
known those that have been bowed together by reason of the agonies of
Conscience. I knew one, at whose Eyes and Ears Blood has gushed forth by
reason of the Agonies of Conscience. Prove. 17 22. A merry heart does good like
a medicine, but a broken spirit dries the bones. You know Judas did choose
rather to die than endure it. Bilney and Baynham (after they had abjured) felt
such pangs, such a Hell in their Consciences, till they had openly professed
their sorrow for it, as they would not have felt again for all the world.
Daniel chose rather to be cast into the Lions Den, then to carry a Lion in his
bosom, viz. an enraged Conscience. Richard the Third was a terror to himself
after he had murdered his two innocent Nephews. Charles the Ninth of France,
after that bloody Massacre by which his Conscience was enraged, could not
endure to be awakened in the night, without Music or some other diversion,
Thus much for the Reasons of the Point. I proceed to the

APPLICATION. USE I. Of Reproof.
The first Use sh^l^ be for Reproof of ^^ose that take no such care to avoid
the Reproaches of Conscience, but do that which will be cast by Conscience as a
Reproach upon them another day. How do some for many years together heap up
Fuel to keep a Fire burning within them? No soon^^ is (...) Fuel spent, but
there is more Fu^l (...) on again; fresh sins are committed, and after a while
these sins come to remembrance, and set the Fire a burning. It may be a man may
weather it out a little, but then more sins come to light, and that sets the
Fire a burning again, and so there is no end. Conscience has not forgotten any
thing done many years ago, but remembers it as if it had been done yesterday.
You that cannot endure to be reproached, that cannot endure to hear others
reproached, that cannot bear the reproaches of M^n, when as it may be they
reproach wrongfully; how will you bear (not the false, but) true Accusations of
Conscience? Men may reproach falsely, but Conscience will reproach truly. Men
may reproach thee, and yet thine own Conscience may clear thee when they accuse
thee; but i^ Conscience reproach thee, then who shall clear thee? Men may grow
weary or ashamed of reproaching thee, but if Conscience reproach thee, will
that grow weary or ashamed? No, never. If some men reproach us, others may
clear us: but if Con^cience reproach us* who then can clear us? This should
humble us that we (...) Consci^nce occasion to repro^ch u^, 2 Samuel 24.1. If you
have not taken this (...) ^o avoid the Reproaches of Con^c^^^^e, it will
reproach you as it did David, whose Heart smot^ him after he had (...) the
People; and David said unto the Lord, (...) he thus complains; Thus my heart
was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins: so foolish was I and ignorant; I
was as a Beast before thee. If you neglect Conscience when it points with the
Finger, and gives direction; assure your selves, Conscience will have a time to
smite with the fist, and to give correction, and then there will be no enduring
of it: as it was with David when his Heart smote him, Psalm. 69 7. if shame
covered David's face when men reproached him. Oh what a shame will cover our
Faces when Conscience shall reproach us! Reproach has broken my heart, (says
he) and I am fu^l of heaviness. I looked for some to take pity, but there was
n^ne, and for comf^rters, but I found none. Verse 20. This will be your case
and your complaint when Conscience shall reproach you. Reproach has broken my
heart They gave me Gall for meat, and Vinegar to drink; says he, Ver. 21.
Conscience will give Gall and Vinegar to us, unless some course be taken for
the quieting of it; if you make it not your ca^e (...) to live, tha^ Conscience
may not reproach you To be able to say, For Gods sake I have born reproach.
Psalm. 69.7. will be a comfort: but if for our Lusts sake we bear reproach, what
a Torment will that be? When Conscience shall say, This is for the sake of that
proud Lust, this is for the sake of that drunken Lust, that wanton Lust of
thine* this is for that Passion of thine, that ^^oward and fretful Spirit of
thine: when Conscience shall say, This is for the sake of such a Lust which
thou did indulge, and kept as a sweet morsel under thy tongue,
notwithstanding the persuasions of all Gods Ministers to the contrary: how will thou be able to bear it?

USE II Of Exhortation.
Take care that Conscience may not have occasion to reproach you while you
live. The Reasons before mentioned may serve as Motives. The unavoidableness
and intolerableness of these reproaches of Conscience, these are Motives enough
to engage us to take all care that Conscience may not reproach us. Let it be
your care to have a Conscience void of offense, (Prove 15.1^ 2 Cor 1.12) and
then Conscience inst^^^ of accusing will excuse, instead of condemning it will
acquit you. If you hearken to the voice of Conscience, informed and guided by
the Word of God, it will be a continual feast unto you, Prove. 15.15. and your
daily rejoicing. This is our rejoicing, (says the Apostle) the testimony of
our Conscience that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God, we have had our conversation in the world. When a man
has Conscience on his side, this will be a cordial in any condition
whatsoever, in a Prison, a cordial in a Dungeon, a cordial in a strange
Country, and a cordial in the worst of suff^^ings that we can meet with. Keep
Conscience void of offense, and so live tha^ Conscience may not reproach you,
and all will be well. How may we so live, you will say, that Conscience may not
reproach us while we live? or if we have so (...)* that Conscience has had
cause to (...) us, how may we get those (...) wiped off, and (...) Conscience
(...) That I shall reserve for (...).

SERMON III.
JOB XXVII.6. My Righteousness I hold fast, and will not let it go: my Heart
shall not reproach me so long as I live.


HAving already showed you what Conscience is, and about what it is employed,
and how it is employed, and given you several reasons why we should make it our
great care so to live, that Conscience may not reproach us while we live: and
having made some Use of the Doctrine, I now come to resolve two questions or
cases.

1. The first is, how we may so live, walk and act, and carry our selves, that
Conscience may have no cause to reproach us another day?

2. If we have so lived, so Walked, so acted, and so carried our selves, that
Conscience has had just cause to reproach us, and does reproach us; what is to
be done that the reproaches of Conscience may be wiped off, that Conscience may
be quiet and cease to accuse and condemn, cease to vex and torment? These are
the two cases I am to answer.

Case 1. How may we so live, walk, act and carry our selves, that Conscience
may have no cause to reproach us? You see that Job did so live and carry
himself, that though his friends did reproach him, his Conscience did not
reproach him; though his friends did charge him, yet his Conscience did
discharge him, though his friends did condemn him, yet his Conscience did
acquit him. He did so live, that he was able to maintain his integrity and
Uprigh^ness; and doubtless it is not a thing impossible, but we do not set to
it, we do not se^ about it in earnest. If we be Christians indeed, and not
almost Christians, we might so live as Conscience might have no just cause to
reproach us. O Sirs, Relations may reproach us Wives may reproach Husbands, and
Husbands reproach Wives, Children may reproach Parents, and Servants reproach
their Masters, and one Neighbor reproach another; but it is possible so to
live, that Conscience all this while may be at peace, and not reproach us.
Possibly you may be ready to think and say within your selves, Would we could
tell how we might so live, pray let us have some directions how we may so live
that Conscience may not reproach us. But before I give counsel should not I
know of you whether you will follow it? And in case you will not follow it, why
should I give it? Ask your selves therefore, if the Minister shall give us no
other counsel than what God himself gives us, should not I follow it? Sirs, if
I give you any other counsel than what God in his holy Word does give you, I
would entreat you not to follow it: nay, if you set it at naught I shall not be
offended. Consider what Jethro said to Moses, Exodus 18.23. If thou shall do
this thing and God command thee so; so say I. Therefore consider, whether God
say as I say, whether God command you so; if so, pray take heed how you do set
at naught the Counsel of God. Now the first Direction which I shall give you is
this.

Direction I.
Set God always before you. And this will be a means so to live, that
Conscience may not reproach you. Assure your selves there is no time wherein
Gods Back is turned, no time wherein Gods Eye is not upon you: if you can find
a time when God is absent, you may take your liberty and do what you list. You
know of what force the Masters presence is among the servants; of what force
the Parents presence is among the Children to restrain them; of what force the
presence of a Minister, or a grave, serious and holy Christian, is to restrain
People from what otherwise they would take liberty to do. Sure Gods Presence
should be of greater force to restrain us, if we do not live in the
Apprehension thereof. O if we could but set God always before us, what manner
of persons should we be in all holy Conversation, all holy cogitation, and in
all holy Communicati^n too! David did s^t God alwa^s before him, and why should
not we do so too? Psalm 16 8. I have set the Lord always before me. O then it
was that David was a man after Gods own heart; then it was that David was such
a Praying man, and such a Praising man, and such an holy and heavenly man, when
he did set the Lord always before him. You know how persons will carry
themselves in the sight of Men, if they have any thing to do in the sight of
others, how they will do it; O that we could do all we do as in the sight of
God. This was the charge that was given to Abraham by God himself, Gen 17.1.
Walk before me and be thou perfect; that is, upright. There is no such way to
be upright, as to live in the Apprehension of the Presence of God, and to have
this always run in our thoughts, God hears, God sees, and God knows. O that
this were written upon your Desks and Shop Boards, God sees; O that this were
written upon your Tables, God sees; O that this were written upon your Looking
Glass^s, God sees; O that this were written upon all your Attire and Dress^s,
God see,; and O that this were written upon your Naked Breasts and Shoulders,
God sees, and upon your Faces and Foreheads too. I do assure you (Sirs) that
God does see you; O that you would live in the continual Apprehension of it.
God sees thee, God knows what all your thoughts are, what all your designs are,
what all your sayings and doings are. Be ever thinking, God knows, God hears,
God sees. In all thy ways acknowledge him, and he shall direct thy paths, Prove
3.6. This will make you careful to keep Gods Precepts, if in all your ways you
look upon God as your Observer and Overseer. This was that which made David
careful to observe Gods Precepts, Psalm. 119.168. I have kept thy Precepts and
thy Testimonies. O blessed David, how did thou do this! He tells you in the
next words, For all my ways are before thee. I could heartily wish that you
would often and seriously read and consider these three or four Scriptures; Job
34.21, 22. For his eyes are upon the ways of man, and he sees all his goings.
There is no darkness or shadow of death, where the Workers of iniquity may bide
themselves. There is no hiding from God, he sees all our goings: we cannot set
one foot before another, but God sees it. Alas, alas, if a man do but go out of
doors, God sees it, if he goes into the Field God sees it, if he goes to other
Houses God sees it, if he goes to his own house, God sees it too. Prove. 15.3.
The eyes of the Lord are in every place, beho^ding the evil and the good. Prove.
5.2. The ways of a man are before the eyes of the Lord, and he pondereth all
his goings. I desire you once a week to read over the former part of the 139
Psalm. If I should desire you to read it once a day, it would not be lost
labor. You will see there is no going out of the sight and presence of God.
Verily (Sirs) to set God always before us, and to live in the Sight and
Apprehension of the Presence of God, this would have such an influence upon our
thoughts, words and works, that it would make them pleasing to God; and if so,
Conscience would never reproach us for them; for Conscience will not reproach
us for doing that which is pleasing to God. Thus much for the first Direction.

Direction II.
Set up Gods will revealed in his Word as the Rule of all your thoughts, words,
and actions; as the rule of all you do in your general calling, and of all you
do in your particular calling; as a rule of all your natural, civil, and
religious actions; set up the Will of God revealed in his Word, as the rule of
your all. Let it be the rule of your carriage toward God, of your carriage
toward men, toward your selves, and toward others. This is Scripture direction,
the Counsel which the Holy Ghost gives; therefore I beseech you seriously
consider of it and follow it, Psalm. 119.6. Then shall not I be ashamed, when I
have respect unto all thy Commandments: and in the 9^h. verse a Question is
put; Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? (the answer follows) By
taking heed thereto according to thy Word; doing all according to Rule. What
has a child a copy for, but to write after it? and what has the Mason a Line
and a Plummet for, but to build by it? Let the Word of God be thy Lamp and thy
Light, Psalm. 119 105. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my
pa^h. Order your steps according to the Word of God, as David prayed, Psalm. 119
133. and then you will not stumble; nor give Conscience any occasion of
reproaching you. You are careful when you walk in the Street, to keep out of
the Chanal, to keep out of the way that may pollute and defile you: Oh Sirs,
Why do we not order our steps according to the Word of God? Why do we not keep
the path? why go we out of the path? Poor David did so sometimes; therefore he
prays, Psalm. 119 176 I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek thy Servant for
I do not forget thy Commandment. Would you not be willing that Mercy and Peace
might be upon you? Gal. 6.16. As many as walk according to this rule, peace be
upon them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. Beware, my friends of setting
up false rules to your selves and I beseech you, let not these directions which
I have given you be out of mind when I am out of sight. I pray beware of
setting up false rules; I shall name four, which we are very prone to walk by.

1. Beware of setting up the practice of others whether great or good for your
rule; the practices of good men are not always agreeable to the rule as they
should be; Ministers and others may step aside, and too often do; therefore
beware of setting up the p^actice of others, wheth^^ great or good, to be your
rule. Remember you are to follow others as they follow Christ. You will say,
this was the practice of such a Minister, this is the practice of such a
Professor; but do they walk as Christ walked? if they follow Christ, thou may
follow them; but if they do not follow Christ, we must not follow them, be they
who they will.

2. Beware of setting up the opinions of others, be they never so learned, for
your rule, though they be the greatest Doctors in the World, and called Rabbi
never so much. Set not up the Opinion of any for your rule, any further than
they have the Word of God for their opinion. When God speaks we must consider
who, but when Man speaks we must consider what; I say, when God speaks we must
not consider what but who, but when Man speaks, we must not consider who but
what. We know God cannot err, but we know that man may err.

3. Beware of setting up the Customs of the times and places you live in for
your rule. Oh this is the Custom of the time, and this is the Custom of the
place, and what shall I be like no body? Do not make this your rule. Tell me
where in all the Bible does God allow this for a rule, to walk according to the
Custom of the times and places wherein we live?

4. Beware of setting up the Multitude for your example, follow not a multitude
to do evil. Let not this satisfy you, nor serve your turn, to say, Why, every
one does so; it is general and common, the Multitude does it; what shall I be
singular, like no body in the World? Assure your selves that a Multitude is not
a Law and Rule for you to walk by. I appeal to you Sirs, whether this be not
good counsel, whether it would not be a great help to, and furtherance of the
peace and quiet of your Consciences, to set up the Will of God revealed in his
Word for the rule of your all.

Direction III.
Set up Gods Glory as the end of all. If you would not have Conscience to
reproach you another day, set up Gods glory as the end of all that you do.
Often say to thine own soul. How does this tend to the glory of God? will God
be honored by this? Will God be glorified by this? When you are upon any
undertaking, o^ when you are about any natural, civil, or religious action,
think seriously with your selves, what do I aim at? what is my design in doing
this or that? Is it the glory of God? O Sirs, if it be the pleasing of
yourselves, Conscience will be displeased: if it be the pleasing of the flesh,
Conscience will be displeased to purpose: if it be the pleasing of the World,
the pleasing of one another, and not the pleasing of God, Conscience will be
displeased another day, for Conscience is never pleased when the glory of God
is not designed. 1 Cor. 10.31. that Scripture should be considered by my self
and you, Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the Glory of
God; do all that God may be honored. Sirs, You are not your own, for you are
bought with a price: glorify God with your bodies, and with your spirits,
which are Gods. I appeal unto your Consciences, whether this would not be the
way to keep Conscience quiet, that it should have no cause to reproach you, if
you did but set up the glory of God as the end of all. Certainly all we do will
be n^^er the less profitable or pleasureable, contentful or satisfactory to us
for making Gods glory the end of all; but a thousand to one, it would make
every thing by so much ^he more profitable, pleasureable and satisfactory to
us, by how much more we make the glory of God the end thereof. O Sirs, how
sweetly will that meat go down that is eaten with an eye to the glory of God?
How comfortable will those dealings and tradings in the World be, that are done
with an eye to the glory of God?

Direction IV.
If you would so live, that Conscience may have no occasion to reproach you.
Set up an Inquisition Court in your own Souls. You have heard talk of an
Inquisition in Spain, and in other Popish Countries; Oh that you would set up
an Inquisition Court in your own Souls, We have Courts of Inquiry among us; O
keep a weekly, nay a daily, Court-Inquiry in your own hearts. Commune with your
own hearts every day, according to the example of David, Psalm. 4 4. Examine
your selves often, be not seldom in the work of self-examination, 2 Cor. 13.5.
Examine your selves, prove your own selves, whether you be in the faith: know
you not that Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates or unapproved? whether
you be reprobate Silver, that is, not current. Examine you^ selves, prove your
own selves, Psalm. 119.59 I thought on my ways (says David) and turned my feet
unto thy testimonies. Oh think on your ways, say often to thine own Soul, What
am I? what do I? how live I? whether go I? what will be my condition through
all Eternity? will such questions do you any harm? I appeal to your selves that
are able to judge. O that I could get you to reckon often with your selves, and
to keep a Petty Sessions in your own Souls, and sit as Judges in a Court of
Inquiry upon all your thoughts, words and actions, saying to them, come hither
my thoughts, come hither my words, come hither my works, come let me examine
you, come let me compare you with the rule; would not this prevent the
accusations of Conscience, if you did but reckon with your selves once every
day, if it were but one quarter of an hour ^n the day? See Jer. 8.6.

Direction V.
Set open your ears to the voice of Conscience, when it is enlightened and
directed by the Word of God. When Conscience has information from the Word of
God, set open your ears to its voice, hearken to the voice of Conscience; as
Abraham once by Gods command hearkened to the voice of Sarah, Genesis 21.12 And
God said unto Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight because of the Lad,
and because of the Bondwoman: In all Sarah has said unto thee, hearken unto
her voice. Why so say I to you: In all that Conscience, informed by the Word,
shall say unto you, hearken unto its voice. Be subject for Conscience sake, is
the command, Romans 13.5. This Subjection for Conscience sake to those that are
in Authority God has commanded; Conscience will clamor, upbraid and reproach,
if Gods Commands be not obeyed. Hearken to the voice of Conscience, hearken to
the directing voice, and the reproving voice of Conscience, Psalm. 16.7. My
reins instruct me, etc. that is, my inmost thoughts and secret motions do
instruct me. Hearken to its directing voice, when it says, This is the way;
wa^k in it, Isai. 30.21. When thou hear a voice behind thee, saying, This is
the way, walk in it; hearken also to its reproving voice, to its correcting
voice. Thus David expostulates, Psalm. 42. and 43 Why art thou cast down, O my
Soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? Trust still in God. Why art thou
thus diffident? why art thou thus distrustful? Thus David reproves himself, and
chides himself, Psalm 77.10. And I said, this is my infirmity. But I will
remember the years of the right hand of the most high. And I said, this is my
infirmity, this is my frailty; I am to blame. Thus he checks himself, and
hearkens to the voice of Conscience.

Direction VI.
Set your selves against all sin; both great and small. Fight against all sin,
oppose all sin; allow not your selves in the practice of any known sin, nor in
the omission of any known Duty. Paul was very careful herein, Acts 8 23. And
Paul earnestly beholding the Council said, Men and Brethren, I have lived in
all good Conscience before God unto this day. And how came he to live in all
good Conscience? It was before God. If we could well remember the first
Direction, we should the better live in all good Conscience. And herein (says
the Apostle) do I exercise my self. to have always a Conscience void of offense
toward God and toward Men, Act. 24.16. Pray for us, (says the Apostle) for we
trust we have a good Conscience, in all things willing to live honestly Mark,
in all things: So Psalm. 119.101. I have refrained my feet from every evil way,
etc. Verse 128. I esteem all thy Precepts concerning all things to be right,
and I hate every false way. Pray observe, here are three Universals: if you
would not have Conscience reproach you, set your selves against Sin, against
the commission of all Sin, and against the omission of all Duties both great
and small. If you be not faithful in the least, you will not b^ trusted in the
greatest, Luke 16 12. Make Conscience of evi^ th^ughts, of idle and unsav^ury
words and ^e^ming Oaths: and according to the Rule, abstain from all appearance
of evil, from all semblance of evil, 1 These 5 22 Take heed of D^ceit, and every
thing that has the show and semblance of evil. Take heed of wanton D^^ss^s:
take heed of ensnaring Attire: I am confident that many poor creatures have
been caught as it were in a Snare and Trap by the Habit and dresses of the
Professors of our Age. Alas, what Inventions have we to draw eyes, both behind
and before, to this part of the Body? and to the other part of the Body? The
Lord be merciful to us, is this the way to escape the reproaches of Conscience?
O Friends, take heed o^ deceit in your dealings; take heed of Lying for
advantage; take heed of the Husk and Kernel of the Grape; though we drink not
the Wine, may we not eat the Grape? if not the Grape, may we not eat the Husk
of the Grape? And if not the Husk, yet may we not eat the Kernel of the Grape?
No, Numb. 6.4. This is the Law of the Nazarite, All the days of his Separation
he shall eat nothing that is made of the Vine-Tree, from the Kernels even to
the Husk He must not drink Wine, that was the Law of the Nazarite, That he
might not be ensnared, not under a temptation to drink Wine, he must not meddle
with any thing coming of the Vine, not the very Husk or the Kernel, lest he be
ensnared. Our first Mother Eve was drawn to Eating by Seeing: O take heed of
Temptations and Snares and be not a Snare or Temptation unto others; but make
Conscience of all sin, whether great or small. Nay further, if there be any
question or doubt about any thing, whether it be a sin or no, what shall we do
then? Some say it is a sin, and some say it is not a sin; and possibly some
good men may say it is not a sin, and some good men may say it is a sin; what
shall we do in such a doubtful matter? I shall quickly resolve you; Take the
surest side. In such a case when the matter is doubtful, the surest way now is
not to make or meddle at all with it.

Was there not Meat enough for them to eat in the Primitive Times, besides that
which did give offense? Some doubt whether it was lawful to eat of this or that
meat; what need we eat of it? Paul says in such a case, I will never eat flesh
while the world stands, rather than offend a weak brother. It is not lawful,
says one; I will do do it for all that, says another. They are not of Paul's
Spirit. And as for Dresses and Habits, are there not enough besides those which
are questionable, and which both Ancient and Modern Divines have all condemned
as sinful? Possibly some will assume a greater Liberty, and we are now
generally grown to a greater Latitude; but tell me, is there not enough of
other sorts, but we must use such habits and dresses as are doubtful,
questionable, and offensive* God help us to consider of it In all matters
doubtful and questionable, still take the surest side. If you do that which is
questionable, and doubtful, you may sin, and possibly it may be found to be a
sin at the Day of Judgment: and if so, what will you do then? It was the speech
of Mr. Bolton concerning long hair: You say the wearing of long Hair is not a
sin, but what if it be found at the Day of Judgment to be a sin? You will then
wish, O that I had left it off, or never used it Men are not infallible,
Ministers are not infallible, no not the best of them; you are not to ground on
them as if they could not be mistaken: therefore in all doubtful cases choose
the surest side. There is Meat enough to eat besides that which is doubtful;
and there is Apparel enough to wear besides that which is off^nsive and
questionable. If you would so live that Conscience may have no cause to
reproach you, my Counsel to you is, Take always in doubtful matters ^he surest
side, which is not to meddle or make with it at all: for if you do it, you may
sin, and at Judgment it may be found to be sin. But if you do it not, you are
safe and sure*

Direction VII.
Set up Christ as your Pattern. If you would have Conscience not to reproach
you another day, take Christ for your example. 1 Pet. 2.21, 23. For even
hereunto were ye called, because Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an
example, that ye should follow his steps, etc. We should pace after him, we
ought to walk as Christ walked. If you would have Conscience not to reproach
you, make Christ your pattern; think, speak and do, as you are persuaded Christ
would, were be in your case, were he in your place on earth: speak, think and
do, as you think he would; ask your selves, would Christ neglect his Fathers
business as I do? Would he mispend his time, and tri^^e it away, that whent
about continually doing good? Would Christ have served one Lust, and another
Lust, as I do, and have made provision for the flesh, to fulfill the Lusts
thereof? would he give himself to rioting and drunkenness, to chambering and
wantonness as I do? as you would not have Conscience to reproach you, make
Christ your Pattern and Exemplar.

Direction VIII.
Sit under a powerful Ministry. If you would prevent the reproaches of
Conscience, love and like that Minister best that speaks to Conscience most: do
not hate him that rebukes, as they, Amos 3, 10. but say as David, (Psalm 14.15.)
Let the righteous smite me, it shall be a kindness; and let him reprove me, it
shall be an excellent oil that shall not break my head. Let him smite me, I
will not be offended with him, I will not smite again; when he smites me, it
shall be as a precious Ointment. The meaning is, Let him smite me with
Reproofs, let him reprove me, deal faithfully and plainly with me. And (Sirs) I
fear that my self and many of my Brethren in the Ministry may have much to
answe^ for another day, for that we do not deal more faithfully, more plainly
and downrightly with Souls. Ministers are under a Temptation to please their
Hearers as well as others and are loath to offend them; but God forbid that
Christ's Ministers should be servants of men, or men pleasers, or Women
pleasers. Let them look to it, that they please their Lord and Master Christ.

Direction IX.
Set upon nothing on which you cannot, on which you dare not pray for a
blessing. NeNever undertake any thing, never be employed about any thing, upon
which thou do not dare to pray for a blessing ^ Tim. 4 4, 5. Every thing is
sanctified by the Word and Prayer. I must have a Word to be my Rule for it, and
I must make a prayer for a Blessing on it, else I cannot expect that it should
be sanctified and blessed to me. Now (Sirs) how many things are there that we
do, that we dare not pray to God for a Blessing on? It may be you spend two or
three hours at the Looking-Glass, can you pray for a Blessing upon the time so
spent? can you pray for a Blessing upon your dressing and attiring your selves,
and habiting your selves in the way and manner that you do? can you pray, O
Lord, let this way of habiting and dressing my self be for thy glory, and for
my good, and for the example of others? Dare any of you go and make a prayer to
God for this? Adventure not upon any thing upon which you dare not pray for a
Blessing.

Direction X.
If you would not have Conscience to reproach you, Set about all in the name
and strength of Christ. For that is the Rule which the Apostle gives, Col.
3.17 And whatsoever you do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord
Jesus Christ* Do all according to the will and the command of Christ, do all by
the strength and help of Christ, and do all to the glory of Christ.

1 Do all according to the will and command of Christ. In Mat. 18 20. the name
of Christ signifies his command.

2. Do all by the strength and help of Christ. In this sense also is the name
of Christ used, Luke 10.17. and Psalm. 44.5. Luke 17.

3. Do all to the glory of Christ, which is sometimes to be understood by his
name, as Psalm. 31.3. Oh that People would ask themselves, is this according to
the will and command of Christ that I am now a doing? can I expect the strength
and help of Christ, in that I am now a doing? is this for the glory of Christ
which I am now a doing? when thou art about any Duty, say to Christ all our
sufficiency is of thee, we have none of our own, 2 Cor. 3.5. Joh. 15 5. Say as
Paul, I can do all things through Christ which strengthens me, Phil 4.13. And
thus I have given you ten Directions how you may so live that Conscience may
not reproach you.

Case II.
I come now to speak a little to the second case. What if we have neglected
these rules and directions which have been laid before us. If you have
neglected to walk according to rule, and have given Conscience just cause to
rep^oach you, and if Conscience does reproach you, and if you ask me, How may
we get the reproaches of Conscience wiped off, and get Conscience quiet again?
I answer in two words, Repent and Believe.

1. Repent of tha^ before the Lord which Conscience reproacheth you for, mourn
for it, be ashamed of it, judge and condemn your selves for what is past,
resolve against it for the time to come; this is a good course. If we confess
our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and cleans^ us from
all unrighte^usness, 1 Cor. 11.31 For if we would judge our selves, we should
not be judged; and if we acknowledge our transgressions, and accept of the
punishment of our iniquity. Read Lev 26 40.41, 42. There is not a better way to
wipe off the reproaches of Conscience, than by the tears of repentance. Follow
the example of that Woman that came behind our Lord and Savior, and washed his
feet with her tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head A service
perhaps that you would be loath to put your hair to; but Sirs, if you would have
Conscience to be quiet, then seriously set upon the work of repentance.

2 Believe. By Faith set Christ's blood on work, to wipe off the aspersions and
reproaches of Conscience, to purify and pacify Conscience, get Conscience
sp^^nkled with the blood of Christ, Heb 9.14. You read of one, Mat. 15.28. that
set the Pity and Power of Christ on work to make her Daughter whole, Jesus
answered and said unto her, O Woman, great is thy Faith! Be it to thee even as
thou will. Christ seemed not to regard her a while, but she followed him, and
set his Pity and Power on work. Faith will set the blood of Christ on work, to
wipe off the reproaches of Conscience. The Centurions Faith set Christ on work
to heal his Servant, Lord, (says he) My Servant lies at home sick of the
Palsy, grievously tormented. And Jesus says unto him, I will come and heal
him. The Centurion answered and said, Lord, I am not worthy that thou should
come under my Roof, but speak the word only, and my Servant shall be healed.
And Jesus said unto the Centurion, Go thy way, and as thou have believed so be
it done unto thee* And his servant was healed in the self same hour, Mat. 8.13.
The Lepers Faith did set Christ on work, Mat. 8.2, 3 And there came a Leper and
worshipped him, saying, Lord, if thou will thou can make me clean. And Jesus
put forth his hand and touched him, saying, I will be thou clean: and
immediately his Leprosy was cleansed. The Father of the Child that had a deaf
and a dumb Spirit, his Faith set Christ on work, Mark 6.23, 24, 25. Jesus says
unto him, if thou can believe, all things are possible to him that believes.
And straightway the Father of the Child cried out with tears, Lord, I believe,
help thou my unbelief. The Faith of the Woman diseased wi^h an Issue of blood
set Christ on work, Mat 9 21. For she said within her self, if I may but touch
the Hem of his Garment, I shall be whole. And it follows, the Woman was made
whole from that hour. The Faith of the poor Leper set Christ on work, Luk
17.19. And Jesus says unto him, Thy faith has made thee whole.

And likewise the Woman's faith, (Luk 7* 48.) set Christ on work for the pardon
of her sins; he said unto her, Thy sins are forgiven thee. And v. 50. Christ
tells her, Thy faith has saved thee, go in peace.

And likewise the Faith of blind Bartimeus, Mark 10.51, 52. sets Christ's Power
and Pity on work, and obtained Healing. And the Faith of the two blind men in
Mat. 9 27, 28* 29, 30* Christ touched their eyes and said, According to your
Faith, so be it unto you* And their eyes were opened* O if you could, but
(according to these Examples) set Faith on work for the healing of your Souls,
Conscience would be quiet. Thus bespeak and expostulate with thine own
Conscience, and say, it is true (Conscience) I have sinned, and deserved to be
reproached and condemned, but I fly to the Blood of Christ, for cleansing, and
I apply that by Faith. Nay (says Conscience) if thou fly to that City of
Refuge, I can then no longer pursue after thee; thou art safe enough from me.
If thou make the Blood of Christ thy Refuge, thou art then secured from all
the Storms and Terrors, and Reproaches of Conscience. If you would not have
Conscience upbraid you, accuse and condemn you, set about the work of
Repentance and Faith, and then whatsoever cause you have given Conscience to
reproach you, it will reproach you no more, it will be qu^et and at peace with
you; always provided that you set about this work of Fa^^h and Repentanc^
seriously and in good earnest, Consider what has been said, and the Lord give
you understanding in all things

FINIS.

