Decennium Luctuosum.

AN HISTORY OF Remarkable Occurrences, In the Long WAR, WHICH NEW ENGLAND has
had with the Indian Salvages, From the Year, 1688. To the Year, School.
Faithfully Composed and Improved.

Infandum, -- Jubes Renovare Dolorem. BOSTON in New England. Printed by B
Green, and J. Allen, for Samuel Phillips, at the Brick Shop near the
Old-Meeting-House. 1699

The Dedication. TO THE PEOPLE OF NEW ENGLAND.
SIRS,
YOU are Welcome unto the History of a Tedious War, and unto a Period of that
War so far in prospect, as to render its History Seasonable.

Every Reasonable man will readily allow that it is a Duty to God, and a
Service to the World, for to preserve the Memory of such matters, as have been
the more Memorable Occurrences in the War, that has for Ten Years together,
been multiplying Changes and Sorrows upon us. And the Author, in whose
Historical Writings, the most Inquis^^ive Envy, has never to this Hour
detected, so much as one Voluntary and Material Mistake, or one ^art^ing paid
unto the Readers in the Co^^ of Candia, has now chosen to preserve the Memory
of ^^ese matters, while they are Fresh and New, and one has not Fifty years,
which is the Channel of the River of Oblivion, to pass over unto them. This
Expedition is used in the publication of our Decennium Luct^os^m* in hope that
if any mistake, worth Noting, do appear in these Writings, it may, (...) and
perhaps With, a Second Edition, be Corrected and Amended.

He Expects no Thanks for his Essays to Do Good, in this way, or any other,
unto any part of his Country to whom he would gladly devote all his Talents, if
he were a Thousand Times better Talented than he is; and though the most
Ungrateful Treats Imaginable (which are too well known by the Name of
Country-pay) should be given him, he would still be of that Opinion, Recte
fecisse Merces est, If a man may Do Good, it is enough.

All the Favor he desires of you, is, That you would not Enquire after him; or
a^k, who he is? but that, as he is at best, but an Obscure Person, he may
continue in yet more Obscurity: which will be a greater pleasure to him than to
be placed among the Great men of Achaia.

For indeed, He has often thought on a passage written by Holy Mr. Row, to his
Excellent S^n, I pray, That God would make use of my self and you, in such a
way, as that God only may be seen, and we not be ^^ken notice of at all; that
He may have the Glory and we may not be seen

Could (...) have ^^^ited His EXCELLENCY, (...) ^lorious ^able, as that in a
certain (...) Florence, which is furnished with Birds and Flow^^s, (...)
consisting of Neatly polished Jewels (...) Work Fifteen years in making, and
wo^th an Hundred Thousand Crowns: or could (...) a Book, worthy to be (...) of
Darius: the Author might have been under a Temptation to have had his Name
Engraved upon his Work. But a little Build Indian Corn in a Tray, is as much as
our Best History of an Indian War, composed perhaps in fewer Days, than there
were Years in the War, may presume to be compared unto. And since our History
will not afford such a Diversion unto His Excellency, under the Indispositions
of His Health* as those of Livy and Curtius did unto the Princes that Recovered
their lost Health by Reading them; nor can any passage here be so happy, as
That which cured Laurentius Medices of a Malady, by having it Read unto him: it
will require no more than a Nameless Writer, to Assure that Great Person on
this Occasion, That all the Good People of New England, make their Fervent Vows
unto the Almighty, For His Excellencies Prosperity, and the Welfare of His
Excellent Lady, and of His Noble and Hopeful Offspring.

And the Naming of the Author, is as little Necessary to Qualify him, that he
may pay public Acknowledgments unto the Honorable, the Lieutenant Governor;
not only for his Cares about the Public, while it was Tempestuated, with the
Indian War, which now makes an History; but chiefly for his more than ordinary
Tenderness of that Society, which has been the very, Decus ac Tutamen, of New
England. The Nameless Writer of this History, may Report, that with a Greater
Expense, than that of the First-Founder, this Hono^^ble Person proves, that he
Loves our Nation, (...) Building us another Edifice, for the Supply of (...)
our Synagogu^s, and STOUGHTON-HALL, (...) shines HARVARD-COLLEDGE: and he (...)
Language, as well as Better Latin, than that Eminent Statesman in Flanders,
whose (...) to a Petition for the privileges of an (...) there to be restored,
was, Non (...) privilegi^s. This Report may he give, (...) being obliged for to
Confess any other (...) than this, which he Readily Confesses; (...) tha^ was
(...) a Member of Harvard-Colledge.

(...) Ask no further; Let this Writing (...) the Wall to (...), wh^re the Hand
only was to be seen, and not who is it was. The History is compiled with
Incontestable* Veracity; and since there is no Ingenuity in it, but less than
what many Pens in the Land might Command, he knows not why his Writing
Anonymously may not (...) him, from the Inconveniences of having any Notice,
one way or other, taken of him Though among his other small Furniture, he has
not le^t himself unfurnished with skill in the Spanish Language, yet he never
could bring himself to the Belief of the Spanish Proverb, Quien no parece,
perece; i. e. He that appears not, peri^hes; He that Shows not himself to the
world, (...) ^ndone. At Milain, there is an Academy o^ Sensible Persons, called
The Nascosti, or, Hidden men; At Venice, there is one of such persons called,
The Incogniti; and at Parma, there is one of them, called, The Innominati. If
there were nothing else Disagreeable in them, the Author of this History, would
be glad of an Admission into such an Academy.

The History is indeed of no very Fine Thread; and the Readers, who every where
Fish for nothing but Carps, and who Love, like Augustus to Tax all the World,
may find Fault enough with it. Nevertheless, while the Fault of an Untruth
cannot be found in it, the Author pretends, that the famous History of the
Trojan War it self, comes behind our little History of the Indian War; For the
best Antiquaries, have now confuted Homer; the Walls of Troy were it seems, all
made of Poets Paper; and the Siege of the Town with the Tragedies of the Wooden
Horse, were all but a piece of Poetry.

And if a War between Us, and an Handful of Indians, do appear no more than a
Batrachomyomachie, to the World abroad yet unto us at home, it has been
considerable enough, to make an History. Nor is the Author afraid of promising,
that of all the Thirty Articles which make up this History, there shall not be
One, without something in it, that may by our selves be justly thought
Considerable.

Should any Petit Monsieur complain (as the Captain, that found no^ himself in
the Tapestry Hangings, which Exhibited the Story of the Spanish Invasion in
1588.) that he don't find himself mentioned in this History, the Author has his
Apology. He has done as well and as much as he could, that whatever was worthy
of a mention, might have it; and i^ this Collection of Matters be not complete,
yet he supposes it may be more complete, than any one else has made; and now
he has done, he has not pulled up the Ladder after him; others may go on, as
they please, with a compleater Composure.

If the Author has taken Delight, in this History, and at all Times, to
Celebrate the Merits, of such as have Deserved well of his Country, [which he
has here done it may be, for some that never could afford him a good word!]
Especially, if he do Erect Statues for Dead Worthies, when there is no Room
Left for Flattery, [for who will bestow paint upon a Dead Face!] And if he do
all this, with all possible concern, to avoid casting Aspersions upon others:
Why should any betray such (...) Nature, as to be angry at it? My Good Country,
forgive him this Injury!

Hui^ Uni forfan poteram Succumbere culpae.

But, whatever this History be, it aims at the Doing of Good, as well as the
Telling of Truth; and i^ its Aim shall be attained, That will be a sufficient
Reward for all the Trouble of Writing it. When he Desires any more, he will give
you his Name; In the mean Time, as a far greater man once was called, Ludovicus
Nihili, which you may make, Lewis of Nothingham; so the Author will count
himself not a little favored, if he may pass for one of no more Account, than
a^ No body; which would certainly make a very Blameless person of him.

However, that the History may not altogether want a Subscription; the Author,
finding it a Custom among the Christian Writers of the Orient, when they have
written a Treatise, to Subscribe it after this manner; Scriptum per Servum
vilem pauperem, omnibus Justitiis privatum, peccatorem magis quam omnis Caro;
Or, Scripsit hoc pauper N. N. Or, Est Scriptura servi pauperis, et qui
Benevolentia Dei indiget, et miserationibus; he will accordingly Subscribe
himself The Chief of Sinners. Nevertheless, he will humbly Lay claim to the
Words, used by the Nameless Author of a Treatise, Entitled, The Faithful
Steward: Though I am worse then they speak of me, who cast Disgrace upon me, and
I can Espy Ten Faults in my self, where they can discern One, yet I can, through
Grace, Appeal to Thee, O Lord, with some Comfort, that I am Displeased with my
self for my Sins, and would fain please Thee, in all Things, at all Times, in
all places, and in every Condition.

Decennium Luc^uosum. OR, The Remarkables of a long WAR WITH Indian-Salvages.
INTRODUCTION.
TWenty Three Years have Rolled away since the Nations of Indians within the
Confines of New England, generally began a Fierce War, upon the English
Inhabitants of that Country. The Flame of War then Raged through a great part of
the Country, whereby many whole Towns were Laid in Ashes, and many Lives were
Sacrificed. But in little more than one years Time, the United Colonies of
Plymouth, Massachuset, and (...)* with their United Endeavors, bravely
C^^q^^red the Salvage. The Evi^ent Hand of Heaven appearing on the Side of a
people who^e H^pe and He^p was alone in the Almighty Lord of Hosts,
Extinguished whole Nations of the Salvages at such a rare, that there can
hardly any of them, now be found under any Distin^tion upon the face of the
Earth. Only, the Fa^e of our Northern and Eastern Regions in that War, was
very dist^^ent from that of the rest. The Desolations of the War had
overwhelmed all the S^ttlements to the North-East of Wells. And when the Time
arrived, that all hands were weary of the War, a sort (...) Peace was patched
up, which Left a Bod^ of Indians, not only with Horrible Murders Unrevenged,
but also, in the possession of no little part of the Country, with
circumstances which the English might think, not very Honorable. Upon this
Peace, the Engli^^ returned unto their Plantations; their Number increased;
they Stocked their Farms, and So^'d their Fields; they found the Air as
Healthful, as the Earth was Fru^tful; their Lumber and their Fishery became a
considerable Merchandise; continual Accessions were made unto them, until Ten
or a Dozen Towns, in the Province of Main, and the County of Cornwall, were
suddenly Started up into something of Observation.

But in the Year, 1588. the Indians which dwelt after the Indian manner among
them, Commenced another War upon these Plantations, which has broke them up,
and strangely held us in play for Ten Years together. In these Ten Years, there
has been a variety of Remarkable Occurrences; and because I have supposed*
that a Relation of those Occurrences may be Acceptable and Profitable to some
of my Country men, I shall now with all Faithfulness Endeavor it. With all
Faithfulness, I say; because though there should happen any Circumstantial
Mistake in our Story, (for it is a rare thing for any Two men, concerned in the
same Action* to give the Story of it, without some Circumstantial Difference,)
yet even this also* I shall be willing to Retract and Correct, if there be
found any just occasion: But for any one Material Error, in the whole
Composure, I challenge the most Sagacious Malice, upon Earth to detect it,
while ma^^er^ are yet to fresh, as to allow the Detection of it. I disdain to
make the Apology, once made by the Roman Hi^torian; Nemo Historicus non aliquid
mentitus, et habiturus sum mendaciorum Comites, quos Historiae et eloquentiae
miramur Authors. No, I will write with an Irreproachable and Incontestable
Veracity; and I will write not one Thing, but what I am furnished with so good
Authority for, that any Reasonable man, who will please to Examine it, shall
say, I do well to insert it as I do: And I will hope, that my Reader has not
been Studying of Godefridus de Valle's Book, De Art nihil Credendi; About, The
Art of Believing nothing. Wherefore, having at the very Beginning thus given
such a Knock upon thy Head, O malice; that thou can never with Reason Hiss at
our History, we will proceed unto the several Articles of it.

ARTICLE. I. The Occasion and Beginning of the WAR.
IF Diodorus Siculus had never given it as a great Rule of History, Historiae
primum Studium, primariaque consideratio esse videtur, insoliti gravisque Casus
principio causas investigare, Yet my Reader would have expected, that I should
Begin the History of our War, with an History of the Occurrences and Occasions
which did Begin the War. Now, Reader, I am at the very f^^st fallen upon a
Difficult Point; and I am in danger of pulling a War upon my self, by
Endeavoring of thy Satisfaction. In Truth, I had rather be called a Coward,
than undertake my self to Determine the Truth in this matter: but having Armed
my self with some good Authority, for it, I will Transcribe Two or Three
Reports of (...) matter, now in my Hands, and Leave it (...) thy own
Determination.

One Account, I have now lying by me, Written by a Gentleman of Dover; in these
Terms.

The Eastern Indians, and especially those of Saco, and Ammonos^^ggin, pretend
many Reasons, for the late Quarrel against the English, which began this long
and bloody War.

1. Because the English refused to pay that yearly Tribute of Corn, agreed
upon, in the Articles of Peace* formerly concluded with them, by the English
Commissioners.

2. Because they were Invaded in their Fishery, at Saco River, by certain
Gentlemen, who stopped the Fish, from coming up the River, with, their Nets, and
Sains. This they were greatly Affronted at; saying, They thought (though the
English had got away their Lands as they had, yet) the Fishery of the Rivers
had been a privilege Reserved Entire unto themselves.

3. Because they were Abused by the English, in Suffering, if not Turning,
their Cattle over to a c^rtain Island to destroy their Corn.

4. But the Fourth, and Main, provocation was, the Granting, or Pattenting of
their Lands, to (...) English; at which they were greatly Enraged; threatening
the Surveyor, to knock him on the Head, if he came to lay out any Lands there.

5. To these may be added, the Common Abuses, in Trading; viz. Drunkenness,
meaning, etc. which such as Trade much with (...) are seldom Innocent of.

Doubtless, these Indian Allegations may be answered with many English
Vindications. But I shall at present Intermeddle no further (...) to offer
another Account, which also I have in my Hands, written by a Gentleman of (...).

It runs in such Terms as these.

Many were the Outrages and Insultings of the Indians upon the English, while
Sir E. A. was Governor. At North Yarmouth, and other places at the Eastward,
the Indians killed sundry Cattle, came into Houses, and threatened to knock the
people on the Head; and at several Times gave out Reports, that they would make
a War upon the English, and that they were animated to do so, by the French.
The Indians behaving themselves so insultingly, gave just occasion of great
suspicion. In order for the finding out the Truth, and to Endeavor the
preventing of a War, Capt. Blackman, a Justice of Peace, with some of the
Neighborhood, of Saco River, Seized several Indians that had been bloody
murderous Rogues, in the first Indian War; being the chief Ring Leaders, and
most capable to do mischief. The said Capt. Blackman Seized to the Number of
between Sixteen and Twenty, in order for their Examination, and to bring in the
rest to a Treaty. The said Blackman soon sent the said Indians, with a Good
Guard, to Falmouth, in Casco bay, there to be Secured, until orders could come
from Boston, concerning them. And in the mean Time, the said Indians, were well
provided with Provisions, and Suitable Necessaries The rest of the Indians
Robbed the English, and took some English Prisoners: Whereupon Post was sent to
Boston. Sir Edmond Andross being at New York, the Gentlemen of Boston sent to
Falmouth, some Soldiers for the Defense of the Country, and also the
Worshipful Mr. Stoughton, with others, to Treat with the Indians, in order for
the Settling of a Peace, and getting in of our English Captives. As soon as the
said Gentlemen arrived at the Eastward, they sent away one of the Indian
Prisoners, to the rest of the Indians, to Summon them, to bring in the English
they had taken; Also, that their Sachims should come in, to treat with the
English, in ^rder that a Just Satisfaction should be made on ^oth sides. The
Gentlemen waited the Return of the Indian Messenger; and when he Returned, he
brought Answer, That they would meet our English at a place, called, Macquoit,
and there they would bring in the English Captives, and Treat with the English.
And although the place appointed by the Indians, for the Meeting, was some
Leagues distant from Falmouth, yet our English Gentlemen did condescend to it,
in hope of getting in our Captives, and putting a stop to further Trouble. They
Dispatched away to the place, and carried the Indian Prisoners with them, and
staid at the place appointed, expecting the coming of the Indians, that had
promised a Meeting. But they like false perfidious Rogues did not appear.
Without doubt they had been counseled what to do, by the French, and their
Abettors; as the Indians did declare a^terwards; and that they were near the
place, and saw our English, that were to Treat with them, but would not show
themselves, but did Endeavor to take an Opportunity to Destroy our English,
that were to Treat them. Such was their Treachery! Our Gentlemen staid days to
wait their coming; but seeing they did not appear at the place appointed, they
Returned to Falmouth, and brought the Indian Prisoners; expecting that the
other Indians would have sent down some Reason, why they did not appear at the
place appointed, and to make some excuse for themselves. But instead of any
compliance, they fell upon North Yarmouth, and there killed several of our
English. Whereupon the Eastern parts were ordered to get into Garrisons, and to
be upon their Guard, until further Orders from Sir Edmond Andros; and that the
Indian Prisoners should be sent to Boston; which was done with great care, and
not one of them hurt; and care taken daily for provision. But Sir E. A.
Returning from New York, set them all at Liberty; not so much as taking care to
Redeem those of our English for them, that were in their hands. I had kept one
at Falmouth, a Prisoner to be a Guide into the Woods, for our English, to find
out the Haunts of our Heathen Enemies. But Sir E. A. sent an Express to me,
that upon my utmost peril, I should set the said Indian at Liberty, and take
care that all the Arms, that were taken from him, and all the rest of those
Capt. Blackman had Seized, should be delivered up to them, without any Orders
to Receive the like of ours from them.

It will be readily Acknowledged, that here was enough done, to render the
Indians Inexcusable, for not coming in, upon the Proclamation, which Sir Edmond
Andros, then Governor of New England, immediately Emitted thereupon, requiring
them, to Surrender the Murderers, now among them. A Spaniard, that was a
Soldier, would say, That if we have a Good Cause, the smell of Gunpowder in
the Field is as sweet as the ^ncense at the Altar. Let the Reader judge after
these things, what scent there was in the Gunpowder spent for Nine or Ten years
together in our War with the Indian Salvages.

Now, that while we are upon this Head, we may at once dispatch it, I will unto
these Two Accounts, add certain passages of one more; which was published in
September 1689.

Such were the Obscure Measures taken at that Time of Day, that the Rise of
this War, has been as dark as that of the River Nilus; only the Generality of
Thinking People through the Country, can Remember When, and Why, every one did
foretell, A War. If any Wild English (for there are such as well as of another
Nation,) did then, Begin to Provoke and Affront the Indians, yet those Indians
had a fairer way to come by Right, than that of Blood shed; nothing worthy of,
or calling for, any Such Revenge was done unto them. The most Injured of them
all, (if there were any Such) were afterward dismissed by the English, with
Favors, that were then Admirable even to Our selves; and These too, instead of
Surrendering the Persons, did increase the Numbers, of the Murderers* But upon
the REVOLUTION of the Government [ April 1689.] the State of the War, became
wholly New: and we are more arrived unto Righteousness as the Light, and
Justice as the Noon day. A great Sachim of the East, we the^ immediatel^
Applied ou^ selves unto, and with no small Expenses to our selves* we Engaged
Him, to Employ his Interest for a Good Understanding between us, and the party
of Indians then in Hostility against us* This was the Likely, the Only way, of
coming at those Wandering Salvages: But That very Sachim now treacherously, of
an Ambassador became a Traitor, and annexed himself, with his People, to the
Heard of our Enemies, which have since been Ravaging, Pillaging, and Murdering
at a rate, which we ought to count, Intolerable. The Penacook Indians, of whom
we were Jealous, we likewise Treated with; and while we were, by our Kindnesses
and Courtesies Endeavoring to render them utterly Inexcusable, if ever they
sought our Harm: Even Then did These also, by some Evil Instigation (the
Devils, no doubt!) quickly Surprise a Plantation, where they had been Civilly
treated a Day or Two before, and Commit at once, more Plunder and Murder, than
can be heard with any patience.

Reader, Having so placed these Three Accounts as to defend my Teeth, I think,
I may safely proceed with our Story. But because Tacitus teaches us, to
distinguish between, the mere Occasions, and the real Causes, of a War, it may
be some will go a little Higher up in their Enquiries: They will Enquire,
whether no body Seized a parcel of Wines, that were Landed at a French
Plantation to the East ward? Whether an Order were not obtained from the King
of England, at the Instance of the French Ambassador, to Restore these Wines?
Whether upon the Vexation of this Order, we none of us (...) New Line for the
Bounds of the Province? Whether we did not contrive our New Line, so as to take
in the Country of Monsieur St. Casteen? Whether Monsieur St. Caste^n flying
from our Encroachments, we did not Seize upon his Arms, and Goods, and bring
them away to Pemmaquid? And, Who, were the We, which did these things? And
whether, the Indians, who were Extremely under the Influence of St. Casteen,
that had Married a Sagamores Daughter among them, did not from this very Moment
begin to be obstreperous? And, whether all the Sober English in the Country,
did not from this very Moment, foretell a War? But for any Answer to all these
Enquiries, I will be my self a Tacitus.

ARTICLE. II. The first Acts of Hostility, between the Indians, and the English.
WHen one Capt. Sargeant had Seized some of the principal Indians about Saco,
by order of Justice Blackman, presently the Indians fell to Seizing as many of
the English, as they could catch. Capt. Rowden, with many more, in one place,
and Capt. Gendal, with sundry more, in another place, particularly fell into
the Hands of these desperate Man catchers. Rowden, with many of his Folks,
never got out of their Cruel Hands: but Gendal with his, got a Release, one can
scarce tell, How, upon the Return of those which had been detained in Boston.
Hitherto there was no Spilling of Blood! But some Time in September following,
this Capt. Gendal, went up, with Soldiers and others, to a place above Casco,
called, North Yarmouth; having Orders to build Stookado^s, on both sides the
River, for Defense of the place, in case of any Sudden Invasion. While they
were at work, an English Captive came to 'em, with Information, that Seventy or
Eighty of the Enemy were just coming upon 'em: and he advised 'em, To yield
quietly, that they might Save their Lives. The Soldiers that went thither from
the Southward, being terrifyed at this Report, Ran with an Hasty Terror to get
over the River; but with more Have, than Good Speed; for they ran directly into
the Hands of the Indians. The Indians dragging along these their Prisoners with
'em, came up toward the Casconians; who, having but a very Little Time to
Consult, yet in this Time Resolved; First, That they would not be Seized by the
Salvages; Next, That they would free their Friends out of the Hands of the
Salvages, if it were possible; Thirdly, That if it were possible, they would
use all other Force upon the Salvages, without coming to down right Fight.
Accordingly, They laid hold on their Neighbors, whom the Salvages had Seized,
and this with so much Dexterity, that they cleared them all, Except one or Two;
whereof the whole Number was about a Dozen. But in the Scuffle, one Sturdy and
Surly Indian, held his prey so fast, that one Benedict Pulcifer, gave the
Mastiff a Blow, with the Edge of his Broad Ax upon the Shoulder, upon which
they fell to it with a Vengeance, and Fired their Guns, on both sides, till some
on both sides were Slain. These were, as one may call them, The Scower-pit, of
a long War to follow. At last, the English, Victoriously chased away the
Salvages, and Returned safely unto the other side of the River. And Thus was
the Vein of New England first opened, that afterward Bled for Ten years
together! The Skirmish being over, Capt. Gendal, in the Evening, passed over
the River, in a Canoo, with none but a Servant; but Landing where the Enemy lay
hid in the Bushes, they were both Slain immediately. And the same Evening, one
Ryal, with another man, fell unawares into the Hands of the Enemy; Ryal was
afterward Ransomed, by Monsieur St. Casteen, but the other man, was
barbarously Butchered. Soon after this, the Enemy went Eastward, unto a place
called, Merry Meeting, (from the Concourse of diverse Rivers there,) where
several English had a Sad Meeting with them; for they were killed, several of
them even in Cold Blood, after the Indians had Seized upon their Houses and
their Persons. And about this Time, the Town called Sheepsc^te, was entered by
these Rapacious Wolves; who burnt all the Houses of the Town, save Two or
Three. The People saved themselves by getting into the Fort, all but one Man,
who going out of the Fort, for to Treat with 'em, was Treacherously
Assassinated. Thus the place, which was counted, The Garden of the East, was
infested by Serpents; and a Sword Expelled the poor Inhabitants. Little more
Spoil was done by the Salvages before Winter, Except only, that at a place
called Kennebunk, near Winter harbor, they cut off Two Families, to wit,
Barrows, and Bussies; but Winter coming on, the Serpents retired into their
Holes. When Summer comes, Reader, look for Tornadoes enough to over-set a
greater Vessel, than little New England.

ARTICLE. III. The First Expedition of the English, against the Indians.
WHen the Keeper of the Wild Beasts, at Florence, has entertained the
Spectators, with their Encounters on the Stage, he has this Device to make 'em
Retire into the several Dens of their Seraglio. He has a fearful Machin of
Wood, made like a Great Green Dragon, which a man within it roules upon Wheels,
and holding out a Couple of Lighted Torches at the Eyes of it, frights the
fiercest Beast of them all, into the C^ll that belongs unto him. Sir Edmond
Andros, the Governor of New England, that he might Express his Resolutions, to
force the Wild Beasts of the East into order, in the Winter now comeing on,
turned upon them as Effectual a Machin, as the Green Dragon of Florence; that
is to say, An Army of near a Thousand men. With this Army, he marched himself
in Person, into the Caucasaean Regions, where he built a Fort at Pemmaquid, and
another Fort at Pechypscot Falls, besides the Fort at Sheepscot^e. He, and his
Army, underwent no little Hard ship, thus in the Depth of Winter to Expose
themselves unto the Circumstances of a Campaign, in all the Bleak Winds and
Thick Snows of that Northern Country. But it was Hoped, That Good Forts, being
thus Garrisoned with Stout Hearts, in several Convenient places, the Indians
might be kept from their usual Retreats, both for Planting, and for Fishing,
and lie open also to perpetual Incursions from the English, in the fittest
seasons thereof: And it was Thought by the most sensible, this method would in
a little while compel the Enemy to Submit unto any Terms: albeit others
considering the Vast Woods of the Wilderness, and the French on the back of
these Woods, fancied that this was but a project to Hedge in the Cuckoo.
However, partly the Army, and partly the Winter, frighted the Salvages, into
their Inaccessible Dens: and yet not one of the Indians was killed; but
Sickness, and Service, killed it may be more of our English, than there were
Indians then in Hostility against them. The News of matters approaching toward
a REVOLUTION in England, caused the Governor to Return unto Boston in the
Spring; and upon his Return, there fell out several odd Events, with Rumors,
whereof I have now nothing to say, but, That I love my Eyes too well, to
mention them. Some of the Soldiers, took Advantage, from the Absence of the
Governor, to desert their Stations in the Army; and though this Action, was by
Good men generally condemned, as an Evil Action, yet their Friends began to
gather together here and there in Little Bodies, to protect them from the
Governor, concerning whom, abundance of odd Stories then buzzed about the
Country made 'em to imagine, that he had carried 'em out, only to Sacrifice
'em. Some of the principal Gentlemen in Boston, consulting what was to be done,
in this Extraordinary Juncture, They Agreed, that although New England had as
much to Justify a Revolution as old, yet they would, if it were possible,
extinguish all Essays in the people, toward an Insurrection; in daily hopes
of Orders from England for our Safety: but that if the Country people, by any
unrestrainable Violences pushed the business on so far, as to make a Revolution
unavoidable, Then, to prevent the Shedding of Blood by an ungoverned Mobile,
some of the Gentlemen present, should appear at the Head of it, with a
Declaration accordingly prepared. He that Reads the Narrative of Grievances
under the Male Administrations of the Government then Tyrannizing, Written and
Signed by the Chief Gentlemen of the Governors Council, will not wonder at it,
that a Revolution was now rendered indeed unavoidable. It was a Government
whereof Ned Randolph a Bird of their own Feather, confessed, as we find in one
of his published Letters, That they were as Arbitrary as the Great Turk. And
for such a Government, a better Similitude cannot perhaps be thought on, than
that of Monsr Souligne; It Is like the Condition of persons possessed with Evil
Spirits, which will go an Hundred Leagues in less time than others can Ten; but
at the Journies End find themselves to be so Bruised that they never can
Recover it. The Revolution, (and, ye Tories, a Just one) was accordingly Made,
on the Eighteenth of April; which Their Majesty's, then happily Seated on the
British Throne, kindly Accepted and Approved. The Governor and Magistrates of
the Massachusetts Colony, which were in power Three years and Half before, [a
period often observed!] did some Time after this Resume their places, and apply
themselves to such Acts of Government, as Emergencies made necessary for them,
Fortifyed with a Letter from the King, to Authorize and Empower them in their
Administrations. Thus they waited for further Directions from the Authority of
England, and such a Settlement, as would most Conduce (which were the words of
the Kings Letter, bearing Date, Aug. 12* 1689.) to the Security and
Satisfaction of the Subjects in that Colony.

ARTICLE. IV. A Flame Spreading, upon the best Endeavors to Quench it.
IT was hoped, the War would now come to an Immediate End; but the Great God,
who Creates that Evil, had further Intentions to Chastise a Sinful People, by
those who are not a People. The Government sent Capt. Greenleaf, to treat with
the Indians at Penacook, who answered him with fair pretenses and Promises of
Amity. They procured an Interview, with some of the more Eastern Sagamores, who
not only promised Friendship themselves, but also undertook to make our Enemies
become our Friends. They sent unto the Soldiers, yet remaining at Pemmaquid,
for to keep their Post, Engaging to them that they should not want their Pay.
But all this care, was defeated by Methods of Mischiefs, too deep for our
present penetration. The Salvages, began to Renew their Hostilities, at Saco
Falls, in the Beginning of April, on a Lords day morning, some while before the
Revolution. The Penacook Indians, were all this while peaceably Conversant at
Quochecho; and so long as that Conversa^^^^ (...) the Inhabitants were very
Secure, of any Danger, no^ only from those Cu^ throats, bu^ ^lso from their
Brethren. Happy had it been for th^se Honest People, i^ their Fear, had made so
much (...), as my Pe^ has done, to call 'em Cut throats! For, the Penacookian
joining with the Saconian Indians, hovered about Quochecho, where one
Mesandowit, a Sagamore, being that Night kindly Entertained by Major Richard
Waldein, horribly betrayed his kind Host, with the Neighbors into the hands of
Murderers. Above an Hundred, some say Five Hundred of the Indians, about break
of Day, having Surprised the Secure and Silent English, they particularly
rushed into the Garrison of the Generous Major, which was by Sinon Mesandowit
(for, bestowing a Heathen Name upon him, we will now call him so,) opened for
them, and having first barbarously Murdered the Old Gentleman, who was
Aequivalent unto Two and Twenty, they then Murdered Two and Twenty more, and
Captived Nine and Twenty of the People; burned four or five of the best Houses,
took much Plunder, and so drew off* but killed Mr. John Broughton in their
drawing off: while Mr. John Emmerson, a worthy Preacher at Barwick, by
declining to lodge at the Hospitable Majors, that Night, when strongly Invited,
received a remarkable Deliverance. Hereupon, Forces were dispatched for the
Relief of what Remained in Quochecho; Capt. Noyes also with more Forces,
visited Penacook, where though the Men escaped him, he destroyed the Corn of
our New Enemies: but the Skulking Enemies, at the same Time Slew several
Persons at an out-farm, on the North-side of Mer^imack River. A party of men,
were soon after ^ent out of Piscataqua, under the Command of Capt. Wincal, who
went up to Winnopisseag ponds, (upon Advice of one John Church, who ran from
them, that the Indians were there:) where they killed One or Two of the
Monsters they Hunted for, and cut down their Corn. Four young men of Saco,
desirous to join with them, went into ^he woods to Seek their Horses, and Found
their Deaths, by an Ambush of Indians. Twenty Four Armed men, going forth from
Saco Falls, to bury ^he Slain, had a brisk Encounter with the Indians, whom
they pursued into a Vast Swamp, until a Greater Number of Indians pouring in
upon them, obliged 'em with the loss of about Five or Six more, to Retire from
any further Action. But before the Dog days were out, there was more Bleeding
still, that proved fatal to us. On Aug. 2. One Starky, going early in the
Morning, from the Fort at Pemmaquid, unto New Harbor, ^ell into the Hands of
the Indians, who to obtain his own Liberty, informed Them, That the Fort had at
that Instant, but Few men in it: and that one Mr. Giles, with Fourteen men, was
gone up to his Farm, and the rest Scattered abroad, about their Occasions The
Indians hereupon divided their Army; Part going up to the Falls, killed Mr.
Giles, and others; Part, upon the Advantage of the Tide, Snapt the rest, before
they could Recover the Fort. From a Rock near the Fort, which inconv^niently
over looked it, the Assailants now over looked it, as over Lincoln, and
grievously galled the Defendents. Capt. Weems, had but ^ew with him, that were
able to Fight; and his own Face, was in the Fight by an Accident, horribly
Scorched with Gun Powder. Wherefore, the day following, they Surrendered the
Fort, upon Capitulation ^or Life and Liberty; which yet the Indians broke, by
Butchering and Captiving many of them. Capt. Skynner and Capt. Farnham,
repairing to the Fort, from an Island about half a Mile distant from it, were
both Slain, as they Landed on the Rocks; and Mr. Patishal, as he lay with his
Sloop in the Barbican, was also taken and Slain. This, together with more Spoil
done by the Indians on the English, at Sheepscote, and Rennebeck, and other
places Eastward, caused the Inhabitants to draw off unto Falmouth as fast as
they could: and, Well if they could have made Good their Standing there!

MANTISSA.
THE Foregoing Article of our Tragaedies, has Related the Taking of Quochecho!
The Condition of Two persons, under and after the F^^e of Quochecho, may have
in it, an Entertainment Acceptable for some sort of Readers. It shall be in
this place Reported, from the Communications of Mr. John Pike, the worthy
Minister of Dover; to whom I have been beholden, for Communicating to me, many
other passages also, which occur in this our History.

I. Mrs. Elizabeth Heard, a Widow of a Good Estate, a Mother of many Children,
and a Daughter of Mr. Hull, a Reverend Minister formerly Living at Piscataqua,
now Lived at Quochecho. Happening to be at Portsmouth, on the Day before
Quochecho was cut off, She Returned thither in the Night, with one Daughter,
and Three Sons, all masters of Families. When they came near Quochecho, they
were astonished, with a prodigious Noise of Indians, Howling, Shooting,
Shouting, and Roaring, according to their manner in making an Assault. Their
Distress for their Families carried them still further up the River, till they
Secretly and Silently passed by some Numbers of the Raging Salvages. They
Landed about an Hundred Rods from Major Walderns Ga^rison; and running up the
Hill, they saw many Lights in the Windows of the Garrison, which they
concluded, the English within had set up, for the Direction of those who might
seek a Refuge there. Coming to the Gate, they desired entrance; which not being
readily g^anted, they called Earnestly and bounced, and knocked, and cried out
of their unkindness within, that they would ^ot open to them in this Extremity
No Answe^ being yet made, they began to doubt, whether all was well; and one of
the young men then climbing up the Wall, saw a horrible Tawny in the Entry,
with a Gun in his Hand. A grievous Consternation Siez'd now upon them; and Mrs.
Heard, sitting ^own without the Gate, through Despair and Faintness, unable to
Stir any further, char^^d her Children to Shi^t for themselves, for She must
unavoidably There End her Days. They finding it impossible to carry her with
them, with heavy hearts forsook her; but then coming better to her self, she
fled and hid among the Barberry Bushes in the Garden: and then hastening from
thence, because the Daylight advanced, She sheltred her self (though seen by
Two of the Indians,) in a Thicket of other Bushes. about Thirty Rods from the
House. Here she had not been long, before an Indian came t^wards her, with a
Pistol in his Hand: The Fellow came up to her, and Stared her in the Face, but
said nothing to her, nor she to him. He went a little way back, and came again,
and Stared upon her as before, but said nothing; whereupon she asked him, What
he would have? He still said nothing, but went away to the House, Co hooping,
and Returned unto her no more. Being thus unaccountably preserved, She made
several Essays to pass the River; but found her self unable to do it; and
findin^ all places on that side the River, filled with blood and Fire, and
hideous Out cries, thereupon she Returned to her old Bush, and there poured out
her ardent Prayers to God, for help in this Distress. She continued in the
Bush, until the Garrison was Burnt, and the Enemy was gone; and then she Stole
along by the River side, until she came to a Boom, where she passed over. Many
sad Effects of Cruelty, she Saw left by the Indians, in her way; until arriving
at Captain Gerrishes Garrison, she there found a Refuge from the Storm; and
here she soon had the Satisfaction, to understand, that her own Garrison,
though one of the first that was assaulted, had been bravely Defended and
mentained, against the Adversary. This Gentlewomans Garrison, was the most
Extreme Frontier of the Province, and more Obnoxious than any other, and more
incapable of Relief; nevertheless, by (...) and courage, it held out all the
War, (...) for Ten Years together; and the Person in it, have Enjoyed very
Eminent (...) The Garrison had been dese^^^d (...) Offers that were made (...)
living in more safety at (...) have been a Damage (...) Land: but by her
Encouragement this (...) was thus kept; and She is yet Living in much Esteem
among her Neighbors.

II. Mrs. Sarah Gerish, Daughter to Captain John Gerish (...) Quochecho, a very
Beautiful and Ingenious Dams^l a^^ut Seven years of Age, lodged at the Garrison
o^ her affectionate Grand father, Major Waldern, when the Indians brought an
horrible Destruction upon it. She was always very Fearful of the Indians; but
what Fear may we think now Surprised her, when they fiercely bid her go into
such a Chamber, and call the People out? Finding only a little Child in the
Chamber, she got into the Bed unto the Child, and hid her self in the Clothes,
as well as she could. The Fell Salvages quickly pulled her out, and made her
Dress for a March, but led her away with no more than one Stockin upon her, a
ter^ible March, through the Thick Woods, and a thousand other Miseries, till
they came to the Norway Plains. From thence they made her go to the end of
Winnopisseag Lake, and from thence to the Eastward, through horrid Swamps,
where sometimes they must Scramble over huge Trees fallen by Storm or Age, for
a va^^ way together, and some times they must Climb up long, steep, tiresome,
and almost Inaccessible Mountains. Her First Master was one Sebundowit, a Dull
^ort of a Fellow, and not such a Devil as many of 'em were; but he Sold her, to
a Fellow that was a more harsh, and mad, sort of a Dragon; and he carried her
away to Canada.

A long and a sad Journey she ^ad of it, through ^he midst of an hideous Desert,
in the midst of (...) dreadful Winter: And who can enumerate the Frights, that
she endured, before the End of her ^ourney? Once her Master commanded her ^o
loosen some of her upper-Garments, and stand against a Tree, while he charged
his Gun; whereat the poor Child Shrieked out, He Is going ^o kill me! God knows
what he was going to do; but the Villian having charged his Gun, he called her
from the Tree, and forbore doing her any Damage. Another Time, her Master
ordered her to run along the Shore with some Indian Girls, while he paddled up
the River in his Canoo. As they were upon a praecipice, a Tawny Wench violently
pushed her Head long into the River: But it so fell out, that in that very
place, the Bushes hung over the Water; so that getting Hold of them, she
Recovered her self. The Indians asked her. How she became so wet? but she durst
not say, How; through Dread of the young Indians, who were always very Abusive
to her, when they had her alone. Moreover, once being spent with Traveling all
Day, and lying down Spent and Wet at Night, She fell into into so profound a
Sleep, that in the Morning she waked not. The Barbarous Indians left her
Asleep, and covered with Snow; but at length waking, what Agonies may you
imagine she was in, to find her self left a prey for Bears and Wolves, and
without any Sust^nance, in an howling Wilderness many Scores of Leagues, from
any Plantation? She Ran crying after them; and Providence having ordered a Snow
to fall, by means thereof, she Track'd them until she overtook them. Now the
young Indians began to Terrify her, with daily Intimations, That she was
quickly to be Roasted unto Death; and one Evening, much Fuel was prepared,
between Two Logs, which they told her, was for her. A mighty Fire being made,
her Master called her to him, and told her, that she should presently be Burnt
alive. At first, she stood Amazed; afterward she burst into Tears; and then
she hung about the Tygre, and begged of him, with an inexpressible Anguish,
that he would Save her from the Fire. Hereupon the Monster so Relented, as to
tell her, That if she would be a Good Girl, she should not be Burnt.

At last, they arrived at Canada, and she was carried unto the Lord Intendants
House, where many Persons of Quality took much notice of her. It was a Week
after this, that she remained in the Indian Hands, before the price of her
Ransom could be agreed on. But then the Lady Inten^ant sent her to the
Nunnery, where she was com^ortably provided for; and it was the Design, as was
said, for to have brought her up, in the Ro^ish Religion, and then have Married
her unto ^he Son of the Lord Intendant. She was kindly ^sed there, until Sir
William Phipps lying before Quebeck, did upon Exchange of Prisoners, obtain ^er
Liberty. After Sixteen Months Captivity, ^he was Restored unto her Friends; who
had the Consolation of having this their Desirable Daughter again with them,
Returned from the Dead; But coming to be Sixteen years old, in the Month of
July 1697. Death, by a malignant Feavour, more Irrecoverably took her from them.

ARTICLE. V. New Forces Raised, and New Actions done.
ON Aug. 28 1689. Major Swayn with Seven or Eight Companies raised by the
Massachusett Colony, marched Eastward; and soon after, Major Church with a
party of English, and Christian-Indians, raised in Plymouth Colony, followed
them. While these were on their March, the Indians, that lay Skulking after the
Indian-fashion in the Thick Woods, took notice how many men, belonged unto
Lieut. Huckins's Garrison* and seeing 'em all go out unto their daily work,
nimbly ^an so between them and the Garrison, as to kill 'em all (about
Eighteen) but one, who being accidentally gone over the River, escaped them.
They then Attacqued the Garrison, in which there n^w were only Two Boys, (and
one of them Lame) with some Women and Children; but these Two Boys, very
Manfully held 'em in play a Considerable while, and wounded several of them,
and kept 'em off, till the Assailants had found a way to set the House on a
Light Fire over their Heads. They then urging 'em to Surrender, for the sake of
the Goods, the Boys, [Brave Boys, truly!] would not, until they had Solemnly
promised 'em their Lives: but the perfidious Wretches broke their promise, for
they presently killed Three or Four of the Children: however one of these
Minutius's, the Day after, very happily got out of their Clutches. It was by a
particular Accident, that these Indians, were delivered from falling into the
Hands of Capt. Garner, who pursued 'em Vigorously. But while the Forces now
gone into the East, were Settling of Garrisons in convenient places, a huge
Body of Indians, fell upon Casco, where one of their first Exploits, was their
killing of Capt. Bracket. Nevertheless, Capt. Hall, (a valiant Soldier in the
Former War, and a valiant Commander in This) with his Vigorous Lieutenant
Dawes, just then arriving with his Company, the English hotly Engaged them for
several Hours; and after a deal of true English Valor discovered in this
Engagement, and the loss of Ten or a Dozen men, the Indians Ran for it, with
What loss on their part, we do not know: that with Some we Do. Presently after
this, Major Swayn, passing through Extreme Difficulties to get at it, gave some
Relief to a Garrison at Blue point, which was beset by the Indians; who still
Fled into their Inaccessible Swamps, when our Bullets began to be Hailed upon
them. It was judged, That here one or Two Opportunities, of bringing the War
unto an End, were strangely mist, and lost: but where the mismanagement lay, I
cannot Remember: nor what were the Faux Pas of the Actors. Our Honest Major
will clear himself, who Returning then to his Head Quarters at Berwick, sent
abroad Scouts, to Learn, if it were possible, where they might have the best
Game, at the Chasse a La Beat noire, then to be followed. Capt. Wiswel having
with him, a party of Indian Auxiliaries, they were sent out, under the Conduct
of Lieu. Flag: but coming to Winnopisseag, these Indians, had a Consult in
their own Language, and Sending back their Lieutenant, with Two Indians,
Nineteen of them Stayed in that Country Eleven Days, not having any English
with them: at which the Major was justly, and greatly offended. It was then
Suspected, and afterward (by Escaped Captives) Asserted that these Wretches,
found the Enemy, and Lodged with 'em Two Nights, and told 'em what they knew of
the English Numbers and Motions. The Enemy then Retired into the howling
Deserts, where there was no Coming at them: and no Endeavors being able to
reach them, the Army, in the Month of November following was Dismissed: only
some Soldiers were left in Garrison at Wells, at York, at Barwick, and at
Quechecho, for the Assistence of the poor Inhabitants, against any more
Invasions There has been little Doubt, That our Northern Indians are
Originally Scythians, and it is become less a Doubt, since it appears from
later Discoveries, That the pretended Straits of Anian are a Sham; for Asia and
America, it seems, are there Contiguous. Now of these our Scythians in America,
we have still found, what Julius Caesar does report concerning Them of Asia;
Difficilius Invenire quam Interficere:
It is harder to Find them, than to Foil them.


A Digression, Relating some Wonderful Judgments of God.
BEfore we pass to another year, Stand still, Reader, and Behold some Wonderful
Events, proper here to be Introduced. The Relation thereof shall be given, as I
have Received it.

Portsmouth Feb. 27, School, 9.
MOnsieur Vincelotte of Quebeck, arrived here, the 25 th. of the last Month,
and since Embarked for France, by way of Bilboa, as Agent to Represent the
Affairs of Canada.

He says, That about Nine or Ten years since, the Earl of Frontenac, Governor
of that place (who dyed last November,) did personally Attempt to Subdue, the
Maquas, etc. having no less than Fifteen Hundred Soldiers in his Army.

After a few Days March, they (being much Wearied and very Thirsty) came unto
a certain small Well, of which they drank very plentifully. But in a few Hours
after, sundry complained of much Illness, and according to their various
Constitutions fell Sick (as it seemed) of different Distempers; which
occasioned so great Disorder and Confusion in the Army, that no less than Four
well men, for a while, were Engaged in taking care of every one that was Sick*
About Three Days after, the Maqua Scout, narrowly observing the Motions of the
French, rallyed together, as many as possible, to give a Check unto their
Undertaking; which they soon accomplished, with very considerable Advantage.
But the French appearing so Numerous, forced them to Retreat, and in pursuit of
them, took and ransackt a Small Town.

The Sickne^^ by this Time increased unto so great an Height, as to occasion a
Council of War, which ordered their speedy Return; and in a short Time, no Less
than Eight Hundred persons Dyed out of the Army.

Now about Three Years ago, a certain Soldier, who belonged at that Time to
the Army, went into France. In a short Time after his Arrival, he Robbed one of
the Churches, of a considerable value of Plate; but being soon discovered, he
was Sentenced to be Burnt: He then sent unto sundry Father Confessors, unto
whom he acknowledged his many Sins; particularly* the Fact for which he was
Condemned. But he therewithal said, That he had something else of more
considerable moment to Impart, which did much afflict his Conscience; Namely,
an Action of his, about Seven Years before committed, when Listed under the
Conduct of the Earl of Frontenac, in an Enterprise against the Sennakers and
Maquas'; For, said he) I was the only person at that Time Instrumental to the
Death of near Eight Hundred Soul's. Having Received some Affront, from some of
the Officer^ I was prompted to seek some speedy Revenge, which my own corrupt
Nature with the Instigation of Satan, did instantly accomplish; for being
plentifully stored with some Rank poison upon another account, I threw it all
into a Well, of which the Thirsty Army drank freely, and in the Event it proved
so fatal unto them.

For the further Confirmation of this Report Monsieur Vincelotte at the same
Time told me, That he was himself Wounded in the Engagment, and should continue
Lame to his Dying Day.

Reverend Sir, Your must Humble Servant, S. Penhallow.


ARTICLE VI. New Assaults from the Indians, with some Remarkables of Captives
taken in those Assaults.
THE Sun, and the War, be again Returning! The year 1690. must begin, very
Inauspiciously. In February, the French, with Indians, made a Descent from
Canada, upon a Dutch Town called Sch^nectada, Twenty Miles above Albany under
the Government of New York; and ^n that Surprising Incursion, they killed about
Sixty Persons, whereof one was their Minister, and carried about Half as many
into Captivity; but the People there, assisted by the Maqua's, pursued them,
and Recovered some of their Captives from them. Upon the Advice of this
Mischief in the West, order was dispatched unto Major Frost, in the East, that
the Towns there should stand upon their Guard. The Major did his Duty; but they
did not Theirs: They Dreamed that while the Deep Snow of the Winter continued,
they were Safe enough; but this proved as Vain as a Dream of a Dry Summer. On
March 18 th the French, with Indians, being Half one, Half the other, Half
Indianized French and Half Frenchisied Indians, commanded by Monsieur Artel,
and Hope-hood, fell Suddenly upon Salmon Fal^s, destroying the best part of the
Town, with Fire and Sword. Near Thirty Persons were Slain, and more than Fifty
were led into what the Reader will by'nd by call, The worst Captivity in the
World. It would be a Long Story to tell, what a particular Share in this
Calamity, fell to the Family of One Clement Short: This Honest Man, with his
Pious Wife, and Three Children, were killed; and Six or Seven of their
Children, were made Prisoners: the most of which arrived Safe to Canada,
through a thousand Hardships; and the most of these were with more than a
Thousand Mercies afterward Redeemed from Canada, unto their English Friends
again. But my Readers, will be so Reasonable, as to Excuse me, if I do not
mention the Fate of every Family, that has Suffered a Share in the Calamity of
this grievous War; for it is impossible that I should Know All that has
happened; and it would be improper for me to Write All that I know: And very
little is the Advantage of having a Name Standing upon Record, only among
unhappy Sufferers. About Seven Score English went out after 'em, and came up
with ^em: nevertheless, through the Disadvantages of their F^^t by the Snow,
they could make no Hand on it. Four or Five of ours were killed, and as many of
the Enemy; but the Night put an End unto the Action. Ours took one Prisoner, a
French man, who Confessed, that they came from Canada, where both French and
Indians, were in Pay, at Ten Livers Per Month, and he particularly Declared the
State of Canada* This Prisoner met with such kind usage from us, that he became
a Freeman of Christ, and Embraced and Professed the Protestant Religion. But of
the Prisoners, which the Enemy took from us, there were Two which immediately
met with a very Different Fate. Three Indians hotly pursued one Thomas Toogood,
and One of them overtaking him, while the rest perceiving it, staid behind the
Hill, he yielded himself a Prisoner. While the Salvage was getting Strings to
bind him, he held his Gun under his Arm; which Toogood Observing, Suddenly
^luck't it from his Friend Stark Naught, Threatening and Protesting, that he
would Shoot him down, if he made any Noise; and so, Away he ran with it, unto
Quochecho. If my Reader be inclined now to Smile, when he thinks, ^ow Simply
poor Isgrim looked, returning to his Mates behind the Hill, without either Gun,
or Prey, or any thing but Strings, to Remember him of his own Deserts; the
Smiles will all be present^y turned into Tears. The Indians had now made a
Prisoner of one Robert Rogers, and being on their Journey, they came to an
Hill, where this man, being through his Corpulency, (for which he was usually
Nicknamed, Robin Pork^ and an Insupportable and Intolerable Burden laid upon
his Back, not so able to Travel as the rest, he Absconded. The Wretches missing
him, immediately went in pursuit of him; and it was not long before they found
his Burden cast in the way, and the Track of his going out of the way, which
they followed, until they found him hidden in an Hollow Tr^^. They Took him out
they Stripped him, they b^at him, and pricked him, and pushed him forward with
their Swords, until they were: got back to the Hill; and it being almost Night,
they fastened him to a Tree, with his Hands behind him, and made themselves a
Supper, Singing, Dancing, Roaring, and Uttering many Signs of Joy, but with Joy
little enough to the poor Creature, who foresaw, what all this Tended unto.
They then cut a parcel of Wood, and bringing it into a plain ^^ace, they cut
off the Top of a small Red Oak Tree, Leaving the Trunk for a Stake, whereto
they bound their Sacrifice. They first made a Great Fire near this Tree of
Death, and bringing him unto it, they bid him ^ake his Leave of his Friends;
which he did in a doleful manner; no Pen, though made of an Harpies Quill, were
able to describe the Dolor of it! They then allowed him a little Time, to make
his Prayers, unto Heaven; which he did with an Extreme Fervency and Agony:
Where-upon they bound him to the Stake, and brought the rest of the Prisoners,
with their Arms tied each to other, so setting them round the Fire. This being
done, they went behind the Fire, and thrust it forwards upon the man, with much
Laughter and Shouting; and when the Fire had burnt some while upon him, even
till he was near Stiffled, they pulled it again from him. They Danced about
him, and at every Turn, they did with their knives, cut collops of his Flesh,
from his Naked Limbs, and throw them with his Blood into his Face. When he was
Dead, they set his Body down upon the Glowing Coals, and left him Tied with his
Back to the Stake; where the English Army soon after found him. He was left for
Us, to put out the Fire with our Tears!

Reader, Who should be the Father of these Myrmidons?

ARTICLE. VII. The Condition of the Captives, that from time to time fell into
the Hands of the Indians: with some very Remarkable Accidents.
WE have had Some Occasion, and shall have More, to mention Captives, falling
into the Hands of the Indians. We will here, without any thing worthy to be
called A Digression, a little Stand Still, and will mournful Hearts, look upon
the Condition of the Captives in those cruel Hands. Their Condi^ion (...) might
be Expressed in the Terms of the ancient Lamentations, (thus by some
Translate^*) ^am 4 3 The Daughter of my People, is in the Hands of the Cruel,
that are like the Ostrich in the Wilderness. Truly, the Dark places of New
England* where the Indians had their Unapproach^^bl^ K^nnels, were Habitations
of Cruelty: and no words can Sufficiently describe the Cruelty undergone by our
Captives in those Habitations. The Cold, and Heat, and Hunger, and Weariness,
and Mockings, and Scourgings, and ^nsolencies, Encured by the Captives, would
enough deserve the Name of Cruelty; but there was this also added unto the
rest, that they must ever now and then have their Friends made a Sacrifice of
Devils before their Eyes, but be afraid of droppin^ a Tear from those Eyes,
lest it should, upon that p^ovocation, be next their own Turn, to be so
B^^barously Sacrificed. Indeed some few of the ^^^tives, did very happily
Escape from their Barbarous Oppressors, by a Flight wisely managed: and many
more of them, were Bought by the French, who treated them with a Civility ever
to be acknowledged, until care was taken to fetch ^em home. Nevertheless, many
Scores of them Dyed among the Indians; and what usage they had, may be gathered
from the following Relations, which I have obtained from Credible Witnesses.

RELATION. I.
JAmes Key, Son to John Key of Qu^checho, was a Child of about Five years of
Age, taken Captive by the Indians at Salmon Falls; and that Hellish Fellow,
Hope-Hood, once a Servant of a Christian Master in Boston, was become the
Master of this Little Christian. This Child, Lamenting with Tears the want of
his Parents, his Master Threatened him with Death, if he did not Refrain his
Tears; but these Threatenings could not Extinguish the Natural Affections of a
Child. Wherefore, upon his Next Lamentations, this Monster Stripped him Stark
Naked, and lashed both his Hands round a Tree, and Scourged him, so that from
the Crown of his Head unto the Sole of his Foot, he was all over Bloody and
Swollen: and when he was Tired with laying on his Blows, on the Forlorn Infant,
he would lay him on the Ground, with Taunts remembering him of his Parents. In
this misery, the poor Creature ^ay horribly Roaring for diverse Days together,
while his Master, gratifyed with the Music, lay contriving of New Torments,
wherewith to Martyr him. It was not long, before the Child had a Sore Eye,
which his Master said, proceeded from his Weeping on the Forbidden Accounts:
Whereupon, laying Hold on the Head of the Child with his Left Hand, with the
Thumb of his Right, he forced the Ball of his Eye quite out; there withal
telling him, That when he heard him Cry again* he would Serve the other so too,
and leave him never an Eye to Weep withal. About Nine or Ten Days After, this
Wretch had Occasion to Remove, with his Family, about Thirty Miles further; and
when they had gone about Six Miles of the Thirty, the Child being Tired and
Faint, sat him down to rest, at which, this Horrid Fellow, being provoked, he
Buried the Blade of his Hatchet, in the Brains of the Child, and then chopped the
Breathless Body to pieces before the rest of the Company, and threw it into the
River. But for the sake of these and other such Truculent Things, done by
Hope-Hood, I am Resolved, that in the course of our Story, I will watch to see
what becomes of that hideous Loup garou, if he come to his End, as I am apt to
think he will, before the Story.

RELATION. II.
MEhetahel Goodwin, being a Captive among the Indians, had with her a Child
about Five Months old; which through Hunger and Hardship, she being unable to
nourish, it often made most grievous Ejulations. Her Indian Master told her,
that if the Child were not quiet, he would soon dispose of it; which caused her
to use all possible means, that his Netop ship might not be offended; and
sometimes carry it from the Fire, out of his Hearing, where she sat up to the
was^, in Snow and Frost, for several Hours, until ^t was Lulled asleep. She
thus for several (...) preserved the Life of her Babe until he saw cause to
Travel, with his own Cubs* farther afield; and then, lest he should be Retarded
in his Travel, he violently Snatched the Babe out of it is Mothers Arms, and
before her Face knocked out its Brains, and stripped it of the Few Rag^ it had
hitherto Enjoyed, and ordered her the Task, to go wash the Bloody Clothes.
Returning from this Melancholy Task, She found the Infant hanging by the Neck,
in a Forked Bough of a Tree. She desired leave to lay it in the Earth; out he
said, It was better as it was, for now the Wild Beasts would not come at it, [I
am sure, they had been at it!] and she might have the Comfort of seeing it
again, if ever they came that way. The Journey now before them, was like to be
very long, even as far as Canada, where his purpose was to make Merchandise of
his Captive, and glad was the Captive of such happy Tidings. But the Desperate
length of the way, and want of Food, and grief of Mind, wherewith she now
encountered, caused her within a few Days to faint under her Difficulties. When
at length, she sat down for some Repose, with many Prayers, and Tears unto God,
for the Salvation of her Soul, she found her self unable to Rise, until she
espied her Furious Executioner coming toward her, with Fire in his Eyes, the
Devil in his Heart, and his Hatchet in his Hand, ready to bestow a Mercy-Stroke
of Death upon her. But then, this miserable Creature, got on her Knees, and
with Weeping and Wailing and all Expressions of Agony and Entreaty, prevailed
on him, to spare her Life a little, and she did not question but God would
enable her to Walk a little faster. The merciless Tyrant was prevailed withal,
to spare her this Time; nevertheless her former Weakness quickly Returning upon
her, he was just going to Murder her; but a Couple of Indians, just at that
Instant, coming in, suddenly called upon him to Hold his Hand; whereat such an
Horror Surprised his Guilty Soul, that he ran away. But hearing them call his
Name, he Returned, and then permitted these his Friends, to Ransom his
prisoner from him. After this, being Seated by a River side, they heard several
Guns go off, on the other side; which they concluded, was from a party of
Albany Indians, who were Enemies unto these: whereupon this Bold Blade, would
needs go in a Canoo, to discover what they were. They Fired upon him, and shot
through him, and seve^al of his Friends, before the Discovery could be made
unto Satisfaction. But some Days after this, diverse of his Friends, (...) a
party to Revenge his Death, on their ^^^posed Enemies; with whom they joined
Battle, and sought several Hours, until their Supposed Enemies, did Really put
'em to the Rout. Among the Captives, which they left in their Figh^* one was
this poor Goodwin, who was Over joyed in seeing her self thus at Liberty; but
the Joy did not last long, for these Indians were of the Same Sort with the
other, and had been by their own Friends, thus through a strange Mistake sat
upon. However, this crew, proved more Favorable to her, than the former, and
went away Silently with their Booty, being loath to have any Noise, made of
their foul Mistake. And yet, a few Days after, such an other Mistake happened;
for, meeting with another party of Indians, which they imagined in the English
Interests, they furiously engaged each other, and many were killed and wounded
on either side: but they proved a party of the French Indians, who took this
poor Goodwin, and presented her to the French Captain, by whom she was carried
unto Canada; where she continued Five years, and then was brought safe Back
into New England.

RELATION. III.
MAry Plaisted, the Wife of Mr. James Plaisted, was made a Captive by the
Indians, about Three Weeks, after her Delivery of a Male Child. They then Took
her, with her Infant, off her Bed, and forced her to Travel in this her
Weakness, the best part of a Day, without any Respect or Pity. At Night, the
Cold Ground, in the Open Air, was her Lodging; and for many a Day, she had no
Nourishment, but a little Water, with a little Bears^flesh: which rendered her
so feeble, that she, with her Infant, were not far from totally Starved. Upon
her Cries to God, there was at length, some Supply sent in, by her Masters
taking a Moose, the Broth whereof Recovered her. But she must now Travel, many
Days, through Woods, and Swamps, and Rocks, and over Mountains, and Frost and
Snow, until she could stir no farther. Sitting down to Rest, she was not able
to Rise, until her Diabolical Master helped her up; which when he did, he took
her Child from her, and carried it unto a River, where stripping it of the few
Rags it had, he took it by the Heels, and against a Tree dashed out its Brains,
and then flang it into the River. So he Returned unto the miserable Mother,
telling her, She was now eased of her Burden, and must walk faster than she did
before!

RELATION. IV.
MAry Ferguson, taken Captive by the Indians at Sa^mon Falls, declares, that
another Maid, of about Fifteen or Sixteen years of Age, taken at the same Time,
had a Great Burden Imposed on her. Being over born with her Burden, she burst
out into Tears, telling her Indian Master, That she could go no further.
Whereupon he immediately took off her Burden, and leading her aside into the
Bushes, he cut off her Head, and Scalping it, he ran about Laughing and
Bragging, what an Act he had now done, and showing the Scalp unto the ^oo^, he
told them, They should all be Se^ved so, if they were not patient.

In fine, when the Children of the English Captives Cried at any Time, so that
they were not presently quieted* the manner of the Indians was, to dash out
their Brains against a Tree.

And very often, when the Indians were on, or near the Water, they took the
Small Children, and held 'em under Water, till they had near Drowned them; and
then gave 'em unto their Distressed Mothers to quiet 'em.

And the Indians in their ^rolicks, would Whip and Beat the Small Children,
until they set 'em into grievous out cries, and then throw 'em to their Amazed
Mothers, for them to quiet 'em again, as well as they could.

This was Indian Captivity!

Reader, A Modern Traveller assures us, that at the Villa Ludovisia, not far
from Rome, the^e is to be seen the Body of a Petrified Man; and that he himself
saw, by a piece of the man's Leg, Broken for Satisfaction, both the Bone, and
the Stone Crusted over it. All that I will say, is, That if thou can Read
these passages without Relenting Bowels, thou thy self art as really Petrified,
as the man at Villa Ludovisia.

Nescio tu quibus es, Lector, Lecturus Ocellis;
Hoc Scio quod Si^cis Scribere non potui.
ARTICLE VIII. A Little Account of the Greatest Action, that ever New England
Attempted.
I have Read or Heard, That when the Insufferable Abuses, which the English
Nation suffered from the Abbeys, were in the Parliament complained of, the
Total Dissolution of those Abbeys, was much forwarded, by a Speech of a
Gentleman in the House of Commons, to this purpose; That his own House had been
much annoyed by Rooks building in a Tree, near unto it, and that he had used
many ineffectual way^ to disturb, and difroost these mischievous Rooks until at
Last, he found out an infallible way to be delivered from the Rooks, and that
was to cut down the Tree that Lodged 'em. The Di^stresses into which
New England was now fallen made this very comparison to be thought of* The
Indian Rooks grievously infested the Country; and while the Country was only
on the Defensive Part, their Men were Thinned, their Towns were Broken, add
their Treasures consumed, without any Hope of seeing an End of these
Trou^lesome Tragedies. The French Colonies to the Northward, were the Tree, in
which those Rooks had their Nests; and the French having in person first fallen
upon the English of New England, it was thought that the New-Englanders might
very justly take this Occasion, to Reduce those French Colonies under the
English Government, and so at once take away from all the Rooks for ever, all
that gave 'em any Advantage to Infest us. Accordingly, a Naval Force, with
about Seven Hundred men, under the Conduct of Sr. William Phips, was dispatched
away to L'accady, and Nova Scotia. This Fleet, setting Sail from New England,
April 28. 1690. in a Fortnight Arrived at Port Royal, and Sir William having
the Fort Surrendered unto him, took Possession of that Province, for the Crown
of England. But this was only a step toward a far greater Action! There was no
Speech about the Methods of Safety made, which did not conclude, with, a,
Delenda est Carth^g^. It was become the concurring Resolution, of all
New England, with New York that a vigorous Attack should be made upon (...), at
once, both by Sea, and Land. A Three of Thirty Two Sail, under the Command of
Sr. William Phips, was Equipped at Boston, and began their Voyage, Aug. 9. and
the whose Matter was put into Form, with so much Contrivance and Caution, and
Courage, that nothing but an Evident Hand of Heaven, was likely to have given
such a Defeat unto it, as has been indeed generally and Remarkably given unto
all the Colonies of America, when they have Invaded one another. If this
Expedition did miscarry, and if Canada proved unto New England, what it proved
unto the Spaniards, when at their Deserting it, they called it, Il Capo de
Nada, or, The Cape of Nothing (whence the Name Canada) there is no New
Englander, but what will mentain, that it was with a loss Disgraceful
miscarriage, than what baffled, every one of those, that were made in this War,
against the French Islands, by more powerful Fleets of those, who were forward
Enough to Reproach New England. I am sure, he that Reads the Account of what
was done at Martineco, in the Relation of the Voyage of M. de Gennes, lately
published, must be very easy in his Reflections upon what was done at Canada.
And I will add, That if the New England men returned re infecta from Canada,
yet they did not leave Two Hundred men behind them to the mercy of the French,
as they who most Reproached New England, soon after did at Guadalupa.

The fuller Narrative of these memorable Things, the Reader may find written,
in, The Life of Sir William Phipps, lately published; of which I must here give
this Attestation, That as my Acquaintance with the Author, gives me Assurance,
of his being as Willing to Retract a Mistake, as unwilling to Commit one, and
of his Care in whatever he writes, to be able to make the p^ofession of
Oecolampadius, Nolui aliquid Scribere, quod improbaturum putem Christum: So I
have Compared this Narrative with the Journals of the Expedition, and I find
the most Contested passages of the Story (nor did I ever hear of any more than
one or two little circumstantial passages contested, as carrying a sound a
little too Rhetorical; but, I say, I find them) to be the very Express Words
thereof, contained in those Journals; and more than so, that very credible
Persons, concerned therein, have readily offered their Depositions upon Oath,
to the Truth of what is Written. So I take my leave of that History, and of Sir
William Phipps, the Memorable Subject of that History, whom I leave under this

EPITAPH. Bonus non est, qui non ad Invidiam usque Bonus est. [A Digression.]
REader, since we can give no better an Account, of the Last English Expedition
to Canada, why may we not for a Minute or Two, Refresh our selves, with a Story
of an Old one.

In the very year, when the Massachuset^ Colony began, the English Attempted
the Conquest of Canada, and though the First Attempt miscarried, the Second
prospered. The Story of it, makes a Chapter, in Father Hennepins Account of the
Va^^ Country lately discovered, betwixt Canada* and Mexico: and this is the Sum
of it.

While a Colony was forming it self at Canada, an English Fleet was Equipped,
in the year, 1628. under the Command of Admiral Kirk, with a Design to take
Possession of that Country. In their Vogage, having taken a French Ship, at the
Isle Percee, they Sailed up the River, as far as Tadousac, where they found a
Bark, in which they set ashore some Soldiers, to Seize on Cape Tourment. And
here a Couple of Salvages discovering them, ran away to advise the people of
Quebeck, that the English were approaching. When the Fleet arrived, the Admiral
Summoned the Town to Surrender by a Letter to Monsieur Champelin, the
Governor: But the Governor notwithstanding his being so Surprised with the
Invasion, made such a Resolute Answer, that the English, (though as the
Historian says, they are a People that wilt sooner Die than quit what they once
undertake) did conclude the Fort Quebeck, was in a much better Condition for
Defense than it really was; and therefore desisting from any further Attempt at
this Time, they returned into England, with Resolution further to pursue their
Design at a more favorable Opportunity.

Accordingly, on July 19. 1629. in the Morning, the English Fleet appeared
again, over against the Great Bay of Quebeck, at the point of the Isle of
Or^eans; which Fleet Consisted of Three men of War, and Six other Vessels.
Admiral Kirk sending a Summons formed in very Civil Expressions, for the
Surrender of the Place, the miserable State of the Country, which had been by
the English Interceptions, hindered of Supplies from France, for Two years
together, obliged the Sieur Champelin to make a softer Answer, than he did
before* He sent Father Joseph Le Caron, aboard the Admir^l to treat about the
Surrender, and none of his Demands for Fifteen Days, and then for Five Days,
Time to Consider on it, could obtain any longer Time, than till the Evening, to
prepare their Articles. Upon the Delivery of this Message, a Council was held,
wherein some urged, that the English had no more than Two Hundred men, of
Regular Troops aboard, and some others which had not much of the Air of
Soldiers; and that the Courage of the Inhabitants was much to be relied upon,
and therefore it was best for to run the risk of a Siege: But Monsieur
Champelin, apprehending the Bravery of the English, remonstrated unto the
Council, that it was better to make a Surrender on Good Terms, than be all cut
in pieces by an unreasonable Endeavor to Defend themselves. Upon this, the
Articles regulating all matters, were got ready, and Father Joseph had his
Commission, to carry them aboard the English Admiral, where the Signing of them
was de^e^r'd until To Morrow. On July 20. the Articles of Capitulation were
Signed, on both sides, and the English being Landed, were put in possession of
Canada, by the Governor of it. The French Inhabitants, who were then in the
Country, had twenty Crowns a piece given them, the rest of their Effects
remained unto the Conquerers, but those who were willing to stay, were favored
by the English (...) Advantages. The Fleet set Sail again for England Sept. 14
and arrived at Plymouth, Octo. 18. in that year.

ARTICLE. IX. Casco Lost.
WHen the Indians at last perceived that the New Englanders were upon a Likely
Design to Swallow up the French Territories, the Prospect of it began to have
the same Operation upon them, that the Success of the Design, would have made
Perpetual; that is, to Dispirit them, for giving the New Englanders any further
Molestations. Nevertheless, Before and Until, they were thoroughly Advised of
what was a doing, and likely to be done, they did molest the Country with some
Tragical Efforts of their Fury. Captain James Convers was Marching through the
vast Wilderness, to Albany, with some Forces, which the Massachusetts Colony
were willing to send by Land (besides what they did send by Sea unto Quebeck,)
for the Assistence of the Army, in the West, that was to go from thence over
the Lake, and there fall upon Mount Real* but unhappy Tidings out of the East
required the Diversion of those Forces thither. About the Beginning of May, the
French and Indians, between Four and Five Hundred, were seen at Casco, in a
great Fleet of Canoo's passing over the Bay: but not Seeing or Hearing any more
of them, for Two or Three Weeks together, the Casconians flattered themselves
with Hopes, That they were gone another way. But about May 16. those Hopes were
over; For one Gresson, a Scotchman, then going out Early, fell into the mouths
of these Hungry Salvages. It proved no kindness to Casco, though it proved a
great one to himself, that a Commander so qualified, as Captain Willard, was
called off, Two or Three Days before. But, The Officers of the place, now
concluding, that the whole Army of the Enemy, were watching for an Advantage to
Surprise the Town, Resolved that they would keep a Strict watch* for Two or
Three days, to make some further Discovery, before they ^alley'd forth.
Notwithstanding this, one Lieut. Clark, with near Thirty of their Stoutest
young men, would venture out, as far as the Top of an Hill, in the Entrance of
the Wood, half a mile distant from the Town. The out let from the Town to the
(...), was through a Lane, that had a Fence on each (...), which had a certain
Block house at one End (...): and the English were Suspicious, when (...) came
to Enter the Lane, that the Indians were (...) behind the Fence, because the
Cattle stood staring that way, and would not pass into the Wood as they use to
do. This mettlesome Company, then ran up to the Fence, with an, Huzzah!
thinking thereby to discourage the Enemy, if they should be lurking there: but
the Enemy were so well prepared for them, that they answered them with an
horrible Vengeance, which killed the Lieutenant, with Thirteen more upon the
Spot, and the rest escaped with much ado unto one of the Garrisons. The Enemy
then coming into Town, beset all the Garrisons at once, Except the Fort; Which
were manfully Defended, so long as their Ammunition lasted; but That being
spent, without a prospect of a Recruit, they quitted all the Four Garrisons,
and by the Advantage of the Night, got into the Fort. Upon this, the Enemy
Setting the Town on Fire, bent their whole Force against the Fort, which had
hard by i^, a deep Gully, that contributed not a little unto the Ruin of it:
For, the Besiegers getting into that Gully, lay below the Danger of our Guns.
Here the Enemy began their Mine, which was carried so near the Walls, that the
English, who by Fighting Five Days and Four Nights, had the greatest part of
their men killed and wounded, (Captain Lawrence mortally, among the rest,)
began a parley with them. Articles were Agreed, That they should have liberty
to March unto the Next English Town, and have a Guard for their Safety in their
March; and the French Commander, lifting up his Hand, Swore by the Everlasting
God, for the performance of these Articles. But the Agreement was kept, as
those that are made with Hugonots use to be: The English being first
Admonished, by the French, that they were all Rebels, for proclaming the Prince
of Orange their King, were Captived, and many of them cruelly Murdered by the
Indians: Only some of them (...) and particularly, Major Davis,) were Carried
unto Canada, where the Gentry, very civilly Treated them. The Garrisons at
Papoodack, ^purwink, Black Point, and Blue Point, were so ^isanimated at these
Disasters, that, without Or^ers they drew off immediately, to Saco, Twen^y
miles, within Casco, and from Saco in a few Days also they drew off to Wells,
Twenty miles within the said Saco; and about Half Wells drew ^ff as far as
Lieut. Storers. But the Arrival of ^rders and Soldiers from the Government,
stopped them from Retiring any further, and Hope Hood, with a party that staid
for further mischief, meeting with some Resistance here, turned about, and
having first had a skirmish with Captain Sherborn, they appeared the Next Lords
day at Newichawannick, or, Barwick, where they Burnt some Houses, and Slew a
man. Three Days after, they came upon a Small Hamlet, on the South side of
Piscataqua River, called, Fox Point, and besides the Burning of several Houses,
they Took Half a Dozen, and killed more than a Dozen, of the too Securely
Ungar^isoned People: which it was as easy to do, as to have Spoiled an ordinary
Hen Rooft. But Captain Floyd, and Capt. Greenleaf, coming upon those Indians,
made some Slaughter among them, Recovered some Captives, with much Plunder, and
bestowed a Good wound upon Hope-Hood, who left his Gun, [ Villian! Thou shall
no^ escape so: There must quickly be another stroke upon thee!]
(which was next his Life) in this Action.

All that shall further belong to this Paragraph of our Story, is, That when
the Indians were got into the Woods, they made one Goody Stockford their
messenger* to her Neighbors, whose Charity she so well Solicited, that she
got a Shalop full of it unto Casco, where the Indians permitted us to Redeem
several of the Prisoners.

ARTICLE. X. Harm Watched, and Caught by the Indians, and several Rare
Instances of Mortal wounds upon the English, not proving Mo^tal.
THat memorable Tygre, Hope-Hood, (called also, Wohawa,) finding the Coast
hereabouts too hot for him, went away with his Crew, a great way to the
Westward, with a Design to Bewitch another Crew at Aquadocta in^o his
Assistance. Here a party of French Indians, by a strange Mistake, supposing
Hope Hood, and his Wretches, to have been the Indians, who had lately done some
Spoil upon them at Canada, furiously fell upon them, and in their Blind Fury
slew him, and a considerable part of his Company. So, we have now done with
him! In the mean Time, some other Indians came upon an Helpless place, called,
Spruce Creek, and killed an old man* and carried a Woman into Captivity; but
though Captain Convers pursued 'em Three Days, they were too Nimble for him. On
July, 4 Eight or Nine persons working in a Field, at a place called, Lampereel
River, the Scythe of Death, unhappily mowed them down, in that Field of Blood:
The Indians by Surprise, killed 'em all, and carried a Lad Captive. About this
Time, a Council of War, was called, at Portsmouth, by which it was thought
advisable, to send out Captain Wiswel, with a considerable Scout for to Scour
the Woods, as far as Casco: and it being Resolved, That one of the other
Captains with about Fourscore Stout men should accompany Captain Wiswal in this
Action, they All with such a Generous Emulation offered it, that it was
necessary to determine it by a Lot, which fell upon Captain Floyd. On July 4.
assisted with Lieut. Andrews, and a Detachment of Twenty Two men from Wells,
they took their March from Quochecho, into the Woods. But the Day following,
the Enemy set upon Captain Hiltons Garrison in Exeter, which Lieut. Bancroft,
then posted at Exeter, with the loss of a few of his men, Relieved. At this
Time, there happened a Remarkable Thing. I know not whether the Story told by
Plato be true, That one Herus Armenius (whom Clemens will have to be Zoroaster)
being Slain in War, lay Ten Days among the Dead, and then being brought away,
and on the Twelfth Day laid on the Funeral Pile, he came to Life again. But it
is true, that one Simon Stone being here wounded with Shot, in Nine several
places, lay for Dead, (as it was Time!) among the Dead. The Indians coming to
Strip him, attempted, with Two several Blows of an Hatchet at his Neck, to cut
off his Head, which Blows added, you may be sure, more Enormous wounds unto
those Port ho^^s of Death, at which the Life of the poor man, was already
running out, as fast as it could* Being charged hard by Lieut. Bancroft, they
left the man, without Scalping him; and the English now coming to Bury the
Dead, one of the Soldiers perceived this poor man to fetch a gasp: whereupon
an Irish Fellow then present, advised 'em, to give him another Dab with an
Hatchet, and so Bury him with the rest. The English detesting this Barbarous
Advice, lifted up the wounded man, and poured a little Fair Water into his
Mouth, at which he C^ughed; then they poured a little Strong Water after it, at
which he opened his Eyes. The Irish Fellow was ordered now to hale a Canco
ashore, to carry the wounded men up the River, unto a Cheirurgeon; and as
Teague was foolishly pulling the Canoo ashore, with the Cock of his Gun, while
he held the Muzzle in his Hand, his Gun went off, and broke his Arm, whereof he
remains a Creeple to this Day: But Simon Stone was thoroughly cured, and is at
this Day a very lusty man, and as he was Born with Two Thumbs on one Hand, his
Neighbors have thought him to have at least as many Hearts as Thumbs!

Reader, Let us Leave it now unto the Sons of Aescul^pius, to Dispute out the
Problem, What Wounds are to be Judged Mortal? The Sovereign Arbiter of Life and
Death, seems to have determined it, That no Wounds are Mortal, but such as He
shall in His Holy Providence Actually make so. On the one side, Let it be
Remembered, That a Scratch of a Comb has proved Mortal; That the Incomparable
Anatomist Spige^i^^, at ^he Wedding of his Daughter, gathering up the Relics
of a Broken Glass, a Fragment of it scratched one of his Fingers; and all his
Exquisite Skill in Anatomy, could not prevent its producing an Empyema, that
Killed him: That Colonel Rossiter, cracking a Plumbstone with his Teeth, broke
his Tooth, and Lost his Life; That the Lord Fairfax, cutting a Corn, in his
Foot, Cut asunder the Thread of his Life; That Mr. Fowler, a Vintner, playing
with his Child, received a little scratch of a Pin, which turned unto a
Gangrene, that Cost him his Life. And, Reader, Let the Remembrance of such
Things, cause thee to Live, preparing for Death continually. But then, on the
other side, That nothing may be Despaired of, Remember Simon Stone. And besides
him, I call to Remembrance, That the Indians making an Assault upon Deerfield
in this Present War, they struck an Hatchet some Inches into the Skull of a Boy
there, even so deep, that the Boy felt the Force of a Wrench used by 'em to get
it out. There he lay a long while Welt^ing in his Blood; they found him, they
Dressed him, considerable Quantities of his Brain came out from time to time,
when they opened the Wound; yet the Lad Recovered, and is now a Living Monument
of the Power and Goodness of God. And in our Former War, there was one Jabez
Musgrove, who though he were Shot by the Indians, with a Bullet, that went in at
his Ear, and went out at his Eye, on the other side of his head; and a Brace of
Bullets, that went in to his Right Side, a little above his Hip, and passing
through his Body within the Back Bone, went out at his Left Side; yet he
Recovered, and Lived many years after it.

ARTICLE XI. A Worthy Captain Dying in the Bed of Honor.
ON July 6. Lords Day, Captain Floyd, and Captain Wiswell, sent out their
Scouts, before their Breakfast, who immediately returned, with Tidings of
Breakfast enough provided for those, who had their Stomach sharp set for
Fighting: Tidings of a considerable Track of the Enemy, going to the Westward.
Our Forces vigorously followed the Track, till they came up with the Enemy, at
a place called Wheelrights Pond; where they Engaged 'em in a Bloody Action for
several Hours. The manner of the Fight here, was as it is at all times, with
Indians; namely what your Artists at Fighting do call, A la disbandad: And
here, the Worthy Captain Wiswel, a man worthy to have been Shot (if he must
have been Shot,) with no Gun interior to that at Florence, the Barrel whereof
is all pure Gold, behaving himself with much Bravery, Sold his Life, as dear as
he could; and his Lieutenant Flag, and Sergeant Walker, who were Valiant in
their Lives, in their Death were not divided. Fifteen of ours were Slain, and
more Wounded; but how many of the Enemy, 'twas not exactly known, because of a
singular care used by them in all their Battles, to carry off their Dead, though
they were forced now to Leave a good Number of them on the Spot. Captain Floyd
maintained the Fight, after the Death of Captain Wiswal, several Hours, until
so many of his Tired and Wounded men Drew off, that it was Time for him to Draw
off also; for which he was blamed perhaps, by some that would not have
continued at it so long as he. Hereupon Captain Convers repaired, with about a
score Hands to look after the Wounded men, and finding seven yet Alive, he
brought 'em to the Hospital, by Sunrise the next morning. He then Returned
with more Hands, to Bury the Dead, which was done immediately; and Plunder left
by the Enemy at their going off, was then also taken by them. But the same
Week, these Rovers made their Descent as far as Amesbury, where Captain Foot
being Ensnared by them, they Tortured him to Death; which Disaster of the
Captain, was an Alarm to the Town, and an Effectual Word of Command, causing
'em to Fly out of their Beds into their Garrisons; otherwise they had all
undoubtedly before the next morning Slept their last: their Beds would have
been their Graves. However, the Enemy Killed Three Persons, Burnt Three Houses,
Butchered many Cattle; and so, that Scene of the Tragedy being over, away they
went.

In fine, From the First Mischief done, at Lampereel River, to the Last at
Amesbury, all belonged unto one Indian Expedition, in which, though no English
Places were taken, yet Forty English People were cut off.

ARTICLE XII. An Indian Fort or Two, taken, and some other Actions.
REader, I remember the prolixity of Guicciardine, the Historian, gave such
Offense, that Boccalini, brings in an Offender at Verbosity, Ordered for his
punishment by the Judges at Pernassus, to Read that punctual Historian; but the
poor Fellow begged rather to be Flayed alive, than to be Tortured with Reading
an Historian, who in relating the War between the Florentines and Pisans, made
longer Narrations, about the Taking of a Pigeon House, than there needed of the
most Fortified Castle in the World. For this cause, let me be excused, Reader,
if I make short Work, in our Story, and Leave the Honest Actors themselves to
Run over Circumstances more at large, with their Friends by the Fireside.

The Enemy appearing a Little Numerous and Vexatious, the Government sent more
Forces to break up the Enemies Quarters; and Auxiliaries both of English and
Indians, under the Command of Major Church, assisted the Enterprise. About
Three Hundred Men, were dispatched away upon this Design, in the Beginning of
September, who Landed by Night in Casco Bay, at a place called, Macquoit, and
by Night Marched up to Pechypscot Fort; where, from the Information of some
Escaped Captives, they had an Expectation to meet with the Enemy; but found
that the Wretches were gone farther a field. They then marched away for
Amonoscoggin Fort, which was about Forty Miles up the River, and Wading through
many Difficulties, whereof one was a Branch of the River it self, they met with
Four or Five Salvages, going to their Fort, with two English Prisoners. They
Saved the Prisoners, but could not catch the Salvages; however, on the
Lord's Day they got up to the Fort undiscovered, where to their Sorrowful
Disappointment, they found no more than one and Twenty of the Enemy, whereof
they Took and Slew Twenty. They found some Considerable Store of Plunder, and
Rescued Five English Captives, and laid the Fort in Ashes: but one Disaster
they much Complained of; That the Captain of the Fort, whose Name was Agamcus,
alias, Great Tom, slipped away from the Hands of his too Careless keepers. But if
this piece of Carelessness did any Harm, there was another which did some Good:
For, Great Tom having terribly Scared a party of his Countrymen, with the
Tidings of what had happened; and an English Lad in their Hands also telling
some Truth unto them, they betook themselves to such a Flight, in their Fright,
as gave one Mr. Anthony Bracket, then a Prisoner with 'em, an Opportunity to
^lie Fourscore miles another way. Our Forces returning to Mackquoit, one of our
Vessels was there Carelessly run a ground, and compelled thereby to stay for the
next Tide: and Mr. Bracket, had been miserably a ground, if it had not so fell
out; for he thereby got thither before she was afloat; otherwise he might have
perished, who was afterward much Improved in Service against the Murderers of
his Father. Arriving at Winter Harbor, a party of men were sent up the River,
who coming upon a parcel of the Mankeen Wolves, then hunted for, killed some of
them, and Siezed most of their Arms, and Stores, and Recovered from them an
English man, who told them, that the Enemy were intending to Rendezvouze on
Pechypscot Plain, in order to an Attempt upon the Town of Wells. Upon this,
they Re embarked for Macquoit, and repaired as fast as they could unto
Pechypscot Plain, and being Divided into Three par^es, they there waited for
the Approach of the Enemy. But being tired with one of the Three Italian
miseries, Waiting for those who did not come, they only possessed themselves of
more Plunder there hid by the Enemy, and returned unto Casco-Harbor. The Enemy
it seems dogged their Motions; and in the Night they made a mischievous Assault
upon such of the English Army, as were too Remiss, in providing for their own
Safety, in their going ashore; Killing, Five of our Plymouth Friends, who had
Lodged themselves in an House, without Commanders or Sentinels. The English as
soon as the Light of the Day, (which was the Lord's Day, Sept. 21.) gave 'em
leave, quickly Ran upon the Enemy, and Eased the world of some of them, and
made the rest Scamper from that part of the world, and got many of their
Canoo's, and not a little of their Ammunition, and their best Furniture for the
Winter. The Army was after this Dismissed; only an Hundred men, were left, with
Captain Convers, and Lieutenant Plaisted, who spent their Time, as profitably
as they could, in Scouting about the Frontiers, to prevent Surprizals, from an
Enemy which rarely did Annoy, but when they could Surprise.

ARTICLE. XIII. A Flag of Truce.
New England was now quite out of Breath! A tedious, lingering, expensive
Defense against an Ever Approaching, and Unapproachable Adversary had made it
so. But nothing had made it more so, than the Expedition to Canada, which had
Exhausted its best Spirits, and seemed its Ultimus Conatus. While the Country
was now in too Great Amazements to proceed any farther in the War, the Indians
themselves Entreat them to proceed no farther. The Indians came in to Wells,
with a Flag of Truce: and there Ensued some Overtures, with the English
Commissioners, Major Hutchinson, and Captain Townsend sent from Boston, to join
with some others at Wells. At length a meeting was Appointed and obtained at
Sagadehock, Nov. 23. Where the Redemption of Ten English Captives was
accomplished; one of whom, was one Mrs. Hull, whom the Indians were very loath
to part withal, because being able to Write well, they made her serve them in
the Quality of a Secretary: Another was named Nathanael White, whom the
Barbarous Canibals had already tied unto a Stake, and cut off one of his Ears,
and made him Eat it Raw, and intended for to have Roasted the rest of him
alive: The poor man, being astonished at his own Deliverance! At last, they
Signed Articles, Dated, Nov. 29. 1691. wherein they Engaged, That no Indians,
in those parts of the World, should do any Injury, to the Persons or Estates,
of the English, in any of the English Colonies, until the First of May, next
Ensuing; And that on the said First of May, they would bring in to Storers
Garrison at Wells all the English Captives in their Hands, and there Make, and
Sign, and Seal Articles of Peace with the English; and in the mean time give
seasonable Advice of any Plots, which they might know the French to have
against them. To this Instrument were set the Paws, of Edgeremet, and Five
more of their Sagamores, and Noblemen.

But as it was not upon the Firm Land, but in their Canooes upon the Water,
that they Signed and Sealed this Instrument; so Reader, we will be Jealous*
that it will prove but a Fluctuating, and Unstable sort of a Business; and that
the Indians will Do a Ly, as they use to do. However, we will Dismiss all our
Soldiers to their several Homes, Leaving only Captain Convers to keep Wells in
some Order, until the First of May, do show, whether any more than a mere Flag
of Truce be yet shown unto us.

ARTICLE. XIV. Remarkable Encounters.
AT the Day appointed, there came to the place, Mr. Danforth, Mr. Moodey, Mr.
Vaughan, Mr. Brattle, and several other Gentlemen, guarded with a Troop, to see
how the Frenchified Indians, would keep their Faith with the Heretics of
New England. The Indians being poor Musicians for keeping of Time, came not
according to their Articles, and when Captain Convers had the courage to go
fetch in some of them, they would have made a Lying Excuse, That they did not
know the Time. They brought in Two Captives, and promised. That in Twenty Days
more, they would bring in to Captain Convers all the rest: but finding that in
Two and Twenty Days they came not, with much concern upon his Mind, he got
himself Supplied, as fast as he could, with Five and Thirty men, from the
County of Essex. His men were not come half an Hour to Storers House, on June
9. 1691. nor had they got their Indian Weed fairly lighted into their Mouths,
before Fierce Moxus, with Two Hundred Indians, made an Attacque upon the
Garrison. This Recruit of Men, thus at the very Nick of Time, Saved the place;
For Moxus meetting with a brave Repulse, drew off; and gave Modockawando cause
to say, (as a Captive afterward related it) My Brother Moxus has missed it
now, but I will go my self the next year, and have the Dog Convers out of his
Hole. About this Time, the Enemy Slew Two men at Berwick, Two more at Exeter,
and the biggest part of Nine, loading a Vessel at Cape Nidduck. But about the
latter End of July, we sent out a small Army, under the Command of Captain
March, Captain King, Captain Sherburn, and Captain Walton, (Convers lying Sick
all Summer, had this to make him yet more Sick, that he could have no part in
these Actions,) who landing at Macquoit, Marched up to Pechypscot, but not
finding any signs of the Enemy, Marched down again. While the Commanders were
waiting ashore, till the Soldiers were got aboard, such Great Numbers of
Indians poured in upon them, that though the Commanders wanted not for Courage or
Conduct, yet they found themselves obliged, with much ado, (and not without the
Death of Worthy Captain Sherburn) to retire into the Vessels, which then lay
a^^ound Here they kept pelting at one another all night; but unto little other
purpose, than this, which was indeed Remarkable: That the Enemy was at this
Time Going to Take the Isle of Shoales, and no doubt, had they gone, they would
have Taken it, but having Exhau^^ed all their Ammunition on this Occasion, they
desisted from what they designed. For the Rest of the Year, the Compassion of
Heaven toward Distressed New England, kept the Indians under a Strange
Inactivity; only, on Sept. 28. Seven persons were Murdered and Captived, at
Berwick; and the Day following, Thrice Seven, of Sandy-Beach: On October. 23. One
Goodridge, and his Wife, were Murdered at Newberry, and his Children Captived:
and the Day following, the like Fate befell a Family at Haverhil. And this year,
a very Good Strong Fort, at Cape Nidduck, owned by a Widow, was unhappily
Deserted; after which, the Enemy came, and burnt the Houses in it.

ARTICLE. XV. The Martyrdom of Mr. Shubael Dummer, with the Fate of York.
BUt the Winter must not pass over, without a Storm of Blood! The Popish
Indians, after long Silence and Repose, in their Inaccessible Kennels, which
made our Frontier Towns, a little Remit their Tired Vigilance, did, Janu. 25.
1691. Set upon the Town of York, where the Inhabitants were in their unguarded
Houses, here and there Scattered, Quiet and Secure Upon the Firing of ^ Gun by
the Indians, which was their Signal, the Inhabitants looked out, but unto their
Amazement, found their Houses to be Invested wi^h ^orrid Salvages, who
immediately killed many of those unprovided Inhabitants, and more they took
Prisoners. This Body of Indians, Consisting of diverse Hundreds, then sent in
their Summons, to some of the Garrisoned Houses; and those Garrisons whereof
some had no more than Two or Three Men in them, yet being so well Manned as to
Reply, That they would Spend their Blood unto the last Drop, e're they would
Surrender; these Cowardly Miscreants had not mettle enough to meddle with 'em.
So they Retired into their Howling Thickets, having first Murdered about Fifty,
and Captived near an Hundred, of that unhappy People. In this Calamity, great
was the Share, that fell to the Family of Mr. SHUBAE^ DUMMER, the Pastor of the
Little Flock thus preyed upon* Those Bloodhounds, being se^ on by some Romish
Missionaries, had long been wishing, that they might Embrue their Hands* in the
Blood of some New-English MINISTER* and in this Action, they had their
Diabolical Satisfaction. Our Dummer, the Minister of York was One, of whom, for
his Exemplary Holines^, Humbleness, Modesty, Industry, and Fidelity The World
was not Worthy. He was a Gentleman Well-Descended, Well-Tempered,
Well-Educated; and now short of Sixty years of Age. He might have taken for his
Coat of Arms, the same that the Holy Martyr Hooper Prophetically did, A Lamb in
a Flaming Bush, with Rays from Heaven shining ^n it. He had been Solicited
with many Temptations, to Leave his Place, when the Clouds grew Thick and
Black, in the Indian Hostilities, and were like to break upon it; but he chose
rather, with a paternal Affection, to stay amongst those, who had been, so many
of them, Converted and Edified by his Ministry; and he spent very much of his
own Patramony to Subsist among them, when their Distresses made them unable to
support him, as otherwise they would have done. In a word, He was one that
might, by way of Eminency, be called, A Good Man This Good Man was just g^ing
to Take Horse, at his own Door, upon a Journey in the Service of God when the
Tygres, that were making their Depredations upon the Sheep of York, Siez'd upon
this their Shepherd; and they shot him so, that they left him Dead, among the
Tribe of Abel, on the Ground* Thus was he, as Ambrose in his Elegant Oration,
De obitu Fratris, Expresses it, Non nobis ereptus, sed periculis. His Wife they
carried into Captivity, where through Sorrows and Hardships among those Dragons
of the Desert, she also quickly Dyed; and his Church, as many of them, as were
in that Captivity, Endured This, among other Anguishes, that on the Next Lord
Day, one of the Tawnies, chose to Exhibit himself unto them, [ A Devil as an
Angel of Light!] in the Clothes, whereof they had Stripped the Dead Body of this
their Father. Many were the Tears, that were dropped throughout New England, on
this Occasion; and These among the rest: for, though we do not, as Tradition
tells us, the Antediluvians did use to do, By the Blood of Abel, yet we cannot
but mournfully, Sing of the Blood of such an Abel.

EPITAPH.
DVmmer, The Shepherd Sacrificed,
By Wolves, because the Sheep he prized.
The Orphans Father, Churches Light,
The Love of Heaven, of Hell the Spite.
The Countries Gapman, and the Face,
That Shone, but knew it not, with Grace.
Hunted by Devils, but Relieved
By Angels, and on High Received.
The Martyred Pelican, who Bled
Rather than leave his Charge Unfed.
A proper Bird of Paradise,
Shot, and Flow'n thither in a Trice.
Lord, Hear the Cry of Righteous Dummers wounds
Ascending still against the Salvage Hounds,
That Worry thy dear Flocks; and let the Cry
Add Force to Theirs, that at thine Altar ly.
To Complete the Epitaph of this Good man, there now needs no more, than the
famous old Chancers Motto, Mors mihi aerumnarum Requies.

ARTICLE. XVI. The Memorable Action at Wells.
A Vessel, the Name whereof I know not, [Reader, Let it be, The Charity,] being
immediately dispatched unto Sagadehock* by the Charitable Compassions of the
more Southward Neighbors, with Effects to accomplish it, happily Effected the
Redemption of many that were taken Captives at York. But the rest of the People
in that Broken Town, talking of Drawing off, the Government sent Captain
Convers and Captain Greenleaf, with such Encouragements unto them, to keep
their Station, as prevailed with 'em still to Stand their Ground. In February
Major Hutchinson, was made Commander in Chief, and Forces under the Command of
Captain Convers, Captain Floyd, and Captain Thaxter, were by him so prudently
posted, on the Frontiers, that by mentaining a continual Communication, it
became a Difficult Thing for the Enemy to make any more Approaches. Lieutenant
Wilson particularly hearing of a man Shot at, in Quochecho-Woods, went out with
a Scout of about Eighteen men, who came upon the Indians that had shot at the
man; and killed and wounded all but one, of the whole Company. But now, Reader,
the Longest Day in tne Year is come on, and, if I mistake not, the Bravest Act
in the War, fell out upon it. Modockawando is now come, according to his
Promise a Twelvemonth ago. Captain Convers, was lodged in Storers Garrison at
Wells, with but Fifteen men; and there came into Wells, Two Sloops, with a
Shallop, which had aboard Supplies of Ammunition for the Soldiers, and
Contribution for the Needy. The Cattle this Day came Frighted, and Bleeding out
of the Woods, which was a more certain Omen of Indians a coming, than all the
Prodigies that Livy reports of the Sacrificed Oxen. Convers immediately issued
out his Commands unto all Quarters, but especially to the Sloops just then
arrived. The Sloops were Commanded by Samuel Storer, and James Gouge, and
Gouges being Two miles up the River, he wisely brought her down undiscovered,
unto Storers, by the advantage of a Mist then prevailing. A careful Night, they
had on it! The next Morning, before Daylight, one John Diamond, a Stranger that
came in the Shallop on a Visit, came to Captain Conver's Garrison, where the
Watch invited him in; but he chose rather to go aboard the Sloops, which were
little more than a Gunshot off; and, alas, the Enemy issuing out from their
Lurking places, immediately Siez'd him, and haled him away by the Hair of the
Head, (in spite of all Attempts used by the Garrison, to Recover him) for an
horrible Story, to be told by'nd by concerning him. The General of the Enemies
Army was Monsieur Burniff; and one Monsieur Labrocree was a principal
Commander; (the Enemy said, he was Lieutenant General:) There were also Diverse
other Frenchmen of Quality; Accompanied with Modockawando, and Moxus, and
Egeremet, and Warumbo, and several more Indian Sagamores; The Army made up in
all, about ^ive Hundred Men, or Fierce Things in the Shape of Men; all, to
Encounter Fifteen Men, in one little Garrison, and about Fifteen more Men,
[worthily called Such!] in a Couple of open Sloops* Diamond having informed
'em, How it was, in all points, (only that for Fifteen, by a mistake he said,
Thirty,) they fell to Dividing the Persons and Plunder, and Agreeing, that such
an English Captain, should be Slave to such a one, and such a Gentleman in the
Town should serve such a one, and his Wife be a Maid of Honor, to such or such
a Squaw proposed, and Mr. Wheelright (instead of being a Worthy Counselor of
the Province, which he Now is!) was to be the Servant of such a Netop; and the
Sloops, with their Stores, to be so and so parted among them. There wanted but
One Thing to Consummate the whole matter, even, the Chief Thing of all* which I
suppose they had not thought of; That was, For Heaven to Deliver all this prize
into their Hands: But, Aliter Statutum est in Caelo! A man Habited, like a
Gentleman, made a Speech to them in English; Exhorting 'em to Courage, and
Assuring 'em, that if they would Courageously fall upon the English, all was
their own. The Speech being Ended, they fell to the Work, and with an horrid
Shout and Shot, made their Assault, upon the Feeble Garrison: but the English
answered with a brisk Volley, and sent such a Leaden Shower among them, that
they retired from the Garrison to spend the Storm of their Fury upon the
Sloops. You must know, That Wells-Harbour is rather a Creek than a River, for
it is very Narrow, and at low water, in many places Dry: nevertheless, where the
Vessels ride, it is Deep enough, and so far off the Bank, that there is from
thence no Leaping aboard. But our Sloops were sorely incommoded, by a Turn of
the Creek, where the Enemy could ly out of danger, so near 'em, as to throw Mud
aboard with their Hands. The Enemy was also privileged with a Great Heap of
Plank, lying on the Bank and with an Hay^Stock, which they Strengthened with
Posts, and Rayles; and from all these places, they poured in their Vengeance
upon the (...) while they so placed Smaller parties of their Salvages, as to
make it impossible for any of the Garrisons, to afford 'em any relief. Lying
thus, within a Dozen yards of the Sloops, they did with their Fire Arrows,
diverse times desperately set the Sloops on Fire: but the brave Defendents,
with a Swab, at the End of a Rope, tied unto a Pole, and so dip't into the
Water, happily put the Fire out. In brief the Sloop^ gave the Enemy so brave a
Repulse, that at Night they Retreated: when they Renewed their Assault, finding
that their Fortitude would not assure the Success of the Assault unto them,
they had recourse unto their Policy. First, an Indian comes on, with a Slab,
for a Shield, before him; when a Shot from one of the Sloops, pierced the Slab,
which fell down, instead of a Tombstone with the Dead Indian under it: on
which, as little a Fellow as he was, I know not whether some will not reckon it
proper to inscribe the Epitaph, which the Italians use to bestow upon their
Dead Popes; When the Dog is Dead, all his Malice is Dead with him. Their next
Stratagem was This: They brought out of the Woods, a kind of a Cart, which they
Trimmed, and Rigged, and Fitted up into a Thing, that might be called, A
Chariot: whereon they built a platform, shot-proof in the Front, and placed
many men upon that platform. Such an Engine they understood how to Shape,
without having Read, (I suppose) the Description of the Pluteus in Vegetius!
This Chariot they pushed on, toward the Sloops, till they were got, it may be,
within Fifteen yards of them; when, lo, one of the Wheels to their Admiration
Sunk into the Ground. A Frenchman Stepping to heave the Wheel, with an Helpful
Shoulder, Storer Shot him down; Another Stepping to the Wheel, Storer with a
well placed Shot, sent him after his Mate: So the Rest thought, it was best let
it stand as it was. The Enemy kept Galling the Sloops, from their Several
Batteries, and calling 'em to Surrender, with many fine promises to make them
Happy, which ours answered with a just Laughter, that had now and then a
mortiferous Bullet at the End of it. The Tide Rising, the Chariot overset, so
that the men behind it lay open to the Sloops, which immediately Dispensed an
horrible Slaughter among them; and they that could get away, got as fast, and
as far off, as they could. In the Night, the Enemy had much Discourse with the
Sloops; they Enquired. Who were their Commanders? and the English gave an
Answer, which in some other Cases, and Places, would have been too true, That
they had a great many Commanders: but the Indians Replied, You ly, you have
none but Convers, and we will have him too before Morning! They also knowing,
that the Magazine was in the Garrison, lay under an Hill-Side, Pelting at That,
by Times; but Captain Convers, once in the Night, sent out Three or Four of his
men, into a Field of Wheat, for a Shot, if they could get one. There seeing a
Black Heap lying together, Ours all at once let Fly upon them, a Shot, that
Slew several of them that were thus Caught in the Corn, and made the rest glad,
that they found themselves Able to Run for it. Captain Convers was this while
in much Distress, about a Scout of Six men, which he had sent forth to
Newichawannick, the Morning before the Arrival of the Enemy, ordering them to
Return the Day following. The Scout Returned, into the very Mouth of the Enemy,
that lay before the Garrison; but the Corporal, having his Wits about him,
called out aloud, (as if he had seen Captain Convers making a Salley forth upon
'em,) Captain, Wheel about your men round the Hill, and we shall Catch 'em,
there are but a Few Rogues of 'em! Upon which the Indians imagining, that
Captain Convers had been at their Heels, betook themselves to their Heels; and
our Folks got safe into another Garrison. On the Lords Day Morning, there was
for a while, a Deep Silence among the Assailants; but at length getting into a
Body, they marched with great Formality toward the Garrison, where the Captain
ordered his Handful of men to ly Snug, and not make a Shot, until every Shot
might be likely to do some Execution. While they thus beheld a Formidable Crew
of Dragons, coming with open mouth upon them, to Swallow them up at a Mouthful,
one of the Soldiers began to speak of Surrendering; upon which the Captain
Vehemently protested, That he would lay the man Dead, who should so much as
matter that base word any more! and so they heard no more on it: But the Valiant
Storer was put upon the like protestation, to keep 'em in good Fighting ^^im, a
board the Sloops also. The Enemy now Approaching very near, gave Three Shouts,
that made the Earth ring again; and Crying out, in English, Fire, and Fall on,
Brave Boys! the whole Body, drawn into Three Ranks, Fired at once* Captain
Convers immediately ran into the several Flankers, and made their Best Gun Fire
at such a rate, that several of the Enemy fell, and the rest of 'em disappeared
almost as Nimbly, as if they had been so many Specter. Particularly, a parcel
of them got into a small Deserted House; which having but a Board-Wall to it,
the Captain sent in after them, those Bullets of Twelve to the Pound, that made
the House too hot, for them that could get out of it. The Women in the
Garrison, on this occasion took up the Amazonian Stroke, and not only brought
Ammunition to the Men, but also with a Manly Resolution fired several Times
upon the Enemy. The Enemy finding that Things would not yet go to their minds,
at the Garrison, drew off, to Try their Skill upon the Sloops, which lay still
a breast in the Creek, lashed fast one to another. They built a Great Fire Work,
about Eighteen or Twenty Foot Square, and filled it up with Combustible matter,
which they Fired; and then they set it in the way, for the Tide now to Flote it
up, unto the Sloops, which had now nothing but an horrible Death before them.
Nevertheless, their Demands, of both the Garrison, and the Sloops, to yield
themselves, were answered no otherwise than with Death upon many of them, Spit
from the Guns of the Beseiged. Having towed their Fire-Work, as far as they
durst, they committed it unto the Tide; but the Distressed Christians that had
this Deadly Fire, Swimming along upon the Water toward 'em, committed it unto
God: and God looked from Heaven upon them, in this prodigious Article of their
Distress. These poor men Cried, and the Lord, heard them, and saved them out of
their Troubles; The Wind, unto their Astonishment, immediately Turned about,
and with a Fresh Gale drove the Machin ashore on the other side, and Split it
so, that the Water being let in upon it, the Fire went out. So, the Godly men,
that Saw God from Heaven thus Fighting for them, Cried out, with an Astonishing
Joy, If it had not been the Lord, who was on our Side, they had Swallowed us up
quick; Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us a prey to their Teeth; our
Soul is Escaped, as a Bird out of the Snare of the Fowlers! The Enemy were now
in a pitiful pickle, with Toyling, and Moyling in the Mud, and black'ned with
it, if Mud could add Blackness to such Miscreants: and their Ammunition was
pretty well Exhausted: ^o that now they began to Draw off, in all parts* and
with Rafts get over the River; some whereof breaking, there did not a few Cool
their (...) Heat by falling into it. But first, they made all the Spoil they
could, upon the Cattle about the Town; and giving one Shot more at the Sloops,
they killed the only Man, of ours, that was killed aboard 'em. Then, after
about Half an Hours Consultation, they send a Flag of Truce to the Garrison,
advising 'em with much Flattery, to Surrender; but the Captain sent 'em word,
That he wanted for nothing, but for men to come, and Fight him. The Indian
replied unto Captain Convers, Being you are so Stout, why don't you come, and
Fight in the open Field, like a Man, and not Fight in a Garrison, like a Squaw?
The Captain rejoyned; What a Fool, are you? Do you think, Thirty men a Match
for Five Hundred? No, (says the Captain, counting as well he might, each of
his Fifteen men, to be as Good as Two!) Come with your Thirty men upon the
Plain, and I Will meet you with my Thirty, as soon as you will. Upon this, the
Indian answered; Nay, me own, English Fashion is all one Fool; you kill me,
me kill you! No, better ly some where, and Shoot a man, and he no see! That
the best Soldier! Then they fell to Coaksing the Captain, with as many Fine
Words, as the Fox in the Fable had for the Allurement of his Prey unto him; and
urged mightily that Ensign Hill, who stood with the Flag of Truce, might stand
a little nearer their Army. The Captain, for a Good Reason, to be presently
discerned, would not allow Tha^: wh^^^upon they fell to Threatening, and Raging,
like so many Defeated Devils, using these Words, Damn ye, we'll cut you as
small as Tobacco, before to morrow Morning. The Captain, bid 'em to make Have,
for, he wanted work; So, the Indian throwing his Flag on the Ground, ran away,
and Ensign Hiil nimbly Stripping his Flag ran into the Valley, but the Salvages
presently Fired, from an Ambushment behind an Hill, near the place, where they
had urged for a Parley.

And now for poor John Diamond! The Enemy Retreating (which opportunity the
Sloops took, to Burn down the Dangerous Hay-Stock,) into the plain, out of
Gunshot, they ^ell to Torturing their Captive John Diamond, after a manner
very Diabolical. They Stripped him, they Scalped him alive, and after a
Castration, they Finished that Article in the Punishment of Traitors upon him;
They Slit him with Knives, between his Fingers and his Toes; They made cruel
Gashes in the most Fleshy parts of his Body, and stuck the Gashes with
Firebrarnds, which were afterward found Sticking in the wounds. Thus they
Butchered One poor Englishman, with all the Fury that they would have spent
upon them all; and performed an Exploit, for Five Hundred Furies to brag of, at
their coming home Ghastly to Express! what was it then to Suffer? They Return^^
then unto the Garrison, and kept Firing at it now and then, till nea^ Ten a
Clock at Night; when they all marched off, leaving behind 'em some of their
Dead; whereof one was Monsieur Labocree, who had about his Neck, a Pouch with
about a Dozen Relics ingeniously made up, and a Printed Paper of Indulgences,
and several other Implements: but it seems, none of the Amulets about his Neck,
would save him from a Mortal Shot in the Head. Thus in Forty Eight Hours, was
Finished an Action as Worthy to be Related, as perhaps any that occurs in our
Story. And it was not long before the Valiant Gouge, who bore his part in this
Action, did another that was not much inferior to it, when he suddenly
Recovered from the French a valuable prey, which they had ^^wly taken upon our
Coast.

I doubt, Reader we have made this Article of our History a little too long. We
will finish it, when we have Remarked, That albeit there were too much
Feebleness discovered by my Countrymen, in some of their Actions, during this
War, at Sea, as well as on Shore, yet several of their Actions, especially a^
Sea, deserve to be Remembered. And I cannot but particularly bespeak a
Remembrance, for the Exploi^ performed by some of my Neighbors, in a Vessel
going into Barbados* They were in sight of Barbados assaulted by a French
Vessel, which had a good number of Guns, and ^etween Sixty and Seventy Hands.
Our Vessel had Four Guns, and Eight Fighting Men. [Truly such!] with two Tawny
Servants. The Names of these Men, were Barret, Sunderland, Knoles, Nash,
Morgan, Fosdyke, and Two more, that I now forget. A desperate Engagement
ensued: wherein our Eight Mariners managed the matter with such Bravery, that
by the Help of Heaven, they killed between Thirty and Forty of the French
Assailants, without loosing one of their own little Number: And they sank the
French Vessel, which lay by their side, out of which they took Twenty Seven
prisoners, whereof some were wounded, and all crying for Quarter. In the Fight
the French Pennant, being by the wind fastened about the Top Mast of the English
V^ssel, it was torn off by the sinking of the French Vessel, and left
pleasently flying there. So they Sailed into Barbados* where the Assembly
voted them one Public Acknowledgement, of their Courage and Conduct, in this
Brave Action, and our History now gives them Another.

ARTICLE. XVII. The Fort at Pemmaquid.
HIs Excellency Sir William Phipps, being arrived now the Governor of New
England, applied himself, with all possible Vigor, (...) on the War: and the
Advice of a New Slaughter some time in July made by the Indians, on certain
poor Husbandmen, in their Meadows, at the North Side of Merrimack River, put
an Accent upon the Zeal of the Designs, which he was now vigorously
prosecuting. He Raised about Four hundred and Fifty Men, and in pursuance of
his Instructions from Whitehall, he laid the Foundations of a Fort at
Pemmaquid, which was the Finest Thing that had been seen in these parts of
America. Captain Wing, assisted with Captain Bancroft, went through the former
part of the Work; and the latter part of it was Finished by Captain March. His
Excellency, attended in this matter, with these worthy Captains, did, in a few
Months, dispatch a Service for the King, with a Prudence, and Industry, and
Thirftiness, Greater than any Reward they ever had for it. The Fort, called,
The William Henry, was built of Stone, in a Quadrangular Figure; being about
Seven hundred and thirty seven Foot in Compass, without the Outer Walls, and an
Hundred and Eight Foot Square, within the Inner ones. Twenty Eight Ports it
had; and Fourteen (if not Eighteen) Guns mounted whereof Six were
Eighteen-Pounders. The Wall on the South Line, fronting to the Sea, wa^ Twenty
Two Foot High, and more than Six Foo^ Thick at the Ports, which were Eight Foot
from the Ground. The Great Flanker, or Round Tower, at the Western End of this
Line, was Twenty Nine Foot High. The Wall on the East line, was Twelve Foot
High, on the North it was Ten, on the West it was Eighteen. It was Computed,
That in the whole, there were laid above Two Thousand Cart-Loads of Stone. It
stood about a Score of Rods from High Water Mark; and it had generally at least
Sixty men posted in it, for its Defense, which if they were Men, might easily
have maintained it against more than Twice Six Hundred Assailants. Yea, we were
almost Ready to flatter our selves, that we might have writ on the Gates of
this Fort, as the French did over that of Namur, (yet afterward taken by K.
William) Redds, non Vinci potest. Now, as the Architect, that built the Strong
Fortress at Narne in Poland, had, for his Recompense, his Eyes put out, lest he
should build such another; Sir William Phipps was almost as hardly Recompensed,
for the Building of This at Pemmaquid. Although this Fort thus Erected in the
Heart of the Enemies Country, did so Break the Heart of the Enemy, that indeed
they might have called it, as the French did theirs upon the River of the
Illinois, The Fort of Crevecoeur; and the Tranquillity After Enjoyed by the
Country, (which was very much more than Before,) was, under God, much owing
thereunto: yet the Expense of maintaining it, when we were so much impoverished
otherwise, made it continually complained of, as one of the Countries
Grievances. The Murmurings about this Fort, were so Epidemical, that, if we may
speak in the Foolish cant of Astrology, and, Prognosticate from the Aspect of
Saturn upon Mars, at its Nativity, Fort William-Henry, Thou have not long to
Live! Before the year Ninety Six Expire, thou shall be demolished. In the mean
Time, let us accompany Major Church going with a Company to Penobscot, where he
took Five Indians; and afterward, to Taconet, where the Indians discovering
his Approach* set their own Fort on fire themselves, and flying from it, left
only their Corn to be destroyed by him. And so we come to the End of 1692. Only
we are stopped a little* with a very strange Parenthesis.

ARTICLE. XVIII. A Surprising Thing, laid before the Reader, for him to Judge,
(if he can) what to make of it.
REader, I must now address thee, with the Words of a Poet: Dicam Insigne
Recens, adhuc
Indictum ore alio.
Horat.

But with Truths more confirmed, than what uses to come from the Pen of a Poet.
The Story of the Prodigious War, made by the Spirits of the Invisible World,
upon the People of New England, in the year, 1692. has Entertained a great
part of the English World, with a just Astonishment: and I have met with some
Strange Things, not here to be mentioned, which have made me often think, that
this inexplicable War, might have some of its Original among the Indians, whose
chief Sagamores are well known unto some of our Captives, to have been horrid
Sorcerers, and hellish Conjurers, and such as Conversed with Demons. The Sum
of that Story is, Written in, The Life of Sir William Phipps; with such
Irreproachable Truth, as to Defy the utmost Malice and Cunning of all our
Sadducees, to Confute it, in so much as one Material Article: And that the
Balant, and Latrant Noises of that sort of People, may be forever Silenced, the
Story will be abundantly Justified, when the further Account written of it, by
Mr. John Hale shall be published: For none can suspect a Gentleman, so full of
Dissatisfaction, at the proceedings then used against the Supposed Witchcraft,
as Now that Reverend Person is, to be a Superstitious Writer upon that Subject.

Now in the Time of that matchless War, there fell out a Thing at Gloucester,
which falls in here most properly to be related: a Town so Situated,
Surrounded, and Neighboured, in the County of Essex, that no man in his Wits,
will imagine, that a Dozen French men and Indians, would come, and alarm the
Inhabitants for Three weeks together, and Engage 'em in several Skirmishes,
while there were two Regiments Raised, and a Detachment of Th^eescore men sent
unto their Succor, and not one man Hurt in all the Actions, and all End
unaccountably. And because the Relation will be Extraordinary, I will not be my
self the Author of any one clause in it; but I will Transcribe the words of a
Minister of the Gospel, who did me the Favor, with much critical Caution to
Examine Witnesses, not long after the Thing happened, and then sent me the
Following Account.

A Faithful Account of many Wonderful and Surprising Things, which happened in
the Town of Gloucester, in the Year, 1692.
EBenezer Bapson, about midsummer, in the Year, 1692. with the rest of his
Family, almost every Night heard a Noise, as if persons were going and running
about his House. But one Night being abroad late, at his Return home, he saw
Two men come out of his Door, and run from the end of the House into the Corn.
But those of the Family told him, there had been no person at all there; where
upon he got his Gun, and went out in pursuit after them, and coming a little
Distance from the House, he saw the Two men start up from behind a Log, and run
into a little Swamp, saying to each other, The man of the House is Come, now
Else we might have taken the House. So, he heard, nor saw, no more of them.

Upon this, the whole Family got up, and went with all speed, to a Garrison
near by; and being just got into the Garrison, they heard men Stamping round
the Garrison. Whereupon Bapson took his Gun, and ran out, and saw Two men again
Running down an Hill into a Swamp. The next Night but one, the said Bapson going
toward a fresh Meadow, saw Two men, which looked like French men, one of them
having a Bright Gun upon his Back, and both running a great pace toward him,
which caused him to make the best of his way to the Garrison, where being come
several heard a Noise, as if men were Stamping and Running, not far from the
Garrison. Within a Night or two after this, the persons in the Garrison, heard
a Noise, as if men were throwing Stones against the Barn. Not long after this,
Bapson, with John (...), saw Three men, about a Gunshot off the Garrison, which
they endeavored to Shoot at, but were disappointed by their Running to and
fro, from the Corn into the Bushes. They were seen Two or Three Nights
together; but though the abovesaid strove to shoot at them, they could never
attain it. On July. 14. Bapson, and Bro^^, with the rest of the men in the
Garrison, saw within Gunshot, half a dozen men wher^^pon all the men, but one,
made Have out of the Garrison, marching toward them* Bapson presently overtook
two of them, which run out of the Bushes, and coming close to them, he
presented his Gun at them, and his Gun missing Fire, the Two men Returned into
the Bushes. Bapson then called unto the other persons, which were on the other
side of the Swamp, and upon his call, they made Answer, Here they are! Here
they are! Bapson then running to meet them, Saw Three men walk softly out of
the Swamp by each others Side; the middlemost having on a white Wast coat. So,
being within Two or Three Rod of them, he Shot, and as soon as his Gun was off,
they all fell down. Bapson then running to his supposed prey, cried out unto
his Companions, whom he heard on the other side of the Swamp, and said, He had
killed Three! He had killed Three! But coming almost unto them, they all rose
up, and one of them Shot at him, and hearing the Bullet whyss by him, he ran
behind a Tree, and Loaded his Gun; and seeing them lie behind a Log, he crept
toward them again, telling his Companions, they were here! So, his Companions
came up to him, and they all Ran directly to the Log, with all speed; but
before they got thither, they saw them start up, and run every man his way; One
of them run into the Corn, whom they pursued, and hemmed in; and Bapson seeing
him coming toward himself, Shot at him, as he was getting over the Fence, and
saw him fall off the Fence on the Ground, but when he came to the Spot, he
could no^ find him. So they all searched the Corn; and as they were searching;
they heard a great Discoursing in the Swamp, but could not understand what they
said; for they spoke in an unknown Tongue. Afterward, looking out from the
Garrison, they saw several men Skulking among the Corn, and Bushes, but could
not have a Shot at them.

The next morning, just at Day break, they saw one man come out of the Swamp,
not far from the Garrison, and stand close up against the Fence, within
Gunshot. Whereupon Isaac Prince, with a long Gun, shot at him with Swan-shot,
and in a moment he was gone out of sight, they saw him no more. Upon this,
Bapson went, to carry News to the Harbor; and being about Half a mile in his
way thither, he heard a Gun go off, and heard a Bullet whyss close by his Ear,
which Cut off a Pine bush just by him, and the Bullet lodged in an Hemlock
Tree. Then looking about, he saw Four men Running toward him, one with a Gun
in his Hand, and the other with Guns on their Shoulders. So he ran into the
Bushes, and turning about, shot at them, and then ran away, and saw them no
more. About Six men returned from the Harbor with him, searching the woods as
they went; and they saw, where the Bullet had cut off the Pine-bush, and where
it was lodged in the Hemlock Tree, and they took the Bullet out, which is still
to be seen. When they were come to the Garrison, they went to look for the
Tracks of the Strange men, that had been seen, and saw several Tracks; and
whilst they were looking on them, they saw one, which looked like an Indian,
having on a Blue coat, and his Hair Tied up behind, Standing by a Tree, and
looking on them. But as soon as they spoke to each other, he ran into a Swamp,
and they after him, and one of them shot at him; but to no purpose. One of them
also saw another, which looked like a French man, but they quickly lost the
sight of him.

July 15. Ezekiel Day, being in Company with several others, who were ordered
to Scout the woods, when they came to a certain Fresh Meadow, two miles from
any House, at some Distance from the said Meadow, he saw a man, which he
apprehended to be an Indian, clothed in Blue; and as soon as he saw him start
up and run away, he shot at him; whereupon he saw another rise up a little way
off, who also run with speed; which together with the former, were quickly out
of sight; and though himself, together with his Companions, diligently sought
after them, they could not find them. The same Day, John Hammond, with several
other persons, Scouting in the woods, saw another of these Strange men, having
on a blue Shirt, and white Breeches, and something about his Head; but could
not overtake him.

July 17. Three or Four of these Unaccountable Troublers, came near the
Garrison; but they could not get a shot at them. Richard Dolliver, also, and
Benjamin Ellary, creeping down an Hill, upon Discovery, saw several men come
out of an Orchard, walking backward and forward, and stricking with a flick
upon John Row's Deserted House, (the Noise of which, was heard by others at a
Considerable Distance;) Ell^ry counting them, to be Eleven in all; Dolliver
Shot at the midst of them, where they stood Thickest, and immediately they
dispersed themselves, and were quickly gone out of sight.

July 18. Which was the Time, that Major Appleton sent about Sixty men, from
Ipswich, for the Towns Assistance, under these inexplicable Alarms, which they
had suffered Night and Day, for about a Fortnight together; John Day testifies,
that he went in Company with Ipswich and Gloucester Forces, to a Garrison, about
Two miles and an Half, from the Town; and News being brought in, that Guns went
off, in a Swamp not far from the Garrison, some of the men, with himself, ran
to discover what they could; and when he came to the Head of the Swamp, he saw
a man with a Blue Shirt, and bushy black Hair, run out of the Swamp, and into
the Woods; he ran after him, with all speed, and came several Times within shot
of him; but the woods being Thick, he could not obtain his Design of Shooting
him; at length, he was at once gone out of sight, and when afterward, he went
to look for his Track, he could find none, though it were a low miry place,
that he ran over.

About July 25. Bapson went into the Woods, after his Cattle, and saw Three men
stand upon a point of Rocks, which looked toward the Sea. So he crept among the
Bushes, till he came within Forty yards of them; and then presented his Gun at
them, and S^ap't, but his Gun missed Fire; and so it did above a Dozen Times,
till they all Three came up toward him, walking a slow pace, one of them
having a Gun upon his Back. Nor did they take any more Notice of him, than just
to give him a Look; though he snap'd his Gun at them, all the while they walked
toward him, and by him; neither did they quicken their pace at all, but went
into a p^^cel of Bushes* and he saw them no more. When he came home, he snap'd
his Gun several Times, sometimes with but a few Corns of Powder and yet it did
not once miss Fire. After this, there occurred several Strange Things; but now
concluding they were but Specter, they took little further Notice of them.

[Several other Testimonies, all to the same Effect, with the Foregoing, my
Friend has added, which for brevity I omit; and only add, The most considerable
of these passages, were afterward Sworn, before one of Their Majesty's Council.]

Reverend and truly Honored Sir, According to your Request, I have Collected a
brief Account of the Occurrences, remarked in our Town, the last year. Some of
them are very Admirable Things, and yet no less True than Strange, if we may
Believe the Assertions of Credible persons. Though because of Great Have, it is a
rough Draught, yet there is nothing written, but what the persons mentioned,
would, if duly called, confirm the Truth of, by Oath.

I might have given you a larger Account; only several who Saw and Heard some
of the most Remarkable things, are now beyond Sea. However, I hope, the
Substance of what is written, will be enough to Satisfy all Rational Persons,
that Gloucester was not Alarumed last Summer, for above a Fortnight together, by
real French and Indians, but that the Devil and his Agents, were the cause of
all the Molestation, which at this Time befell the Town; in the Name of whose
Inhabitants, I would take upon me, to Entreat your Earnest Prayers to the
Father of Mercies, that those Apparitions may not prove, the sad Omens of some
future, and more horrible Molestations to them.

May 19. 1693. SIR, Your very Humble Servant, J. E.


NOW, Reader, albeit that passage of the Sacred Story, 2 Chronicles. 20.22. The Lord
set Ambushments against the Children of Ammon, Moa^, and Mount Seir, and they
were Smitten: is by the best Expositors thus understood; That there was the
Ministry of the Holy Angels wondrously Employed in this matter; the Angels in
the Shape of Mo^bites and Ammonites, fell upon them of Mount Seir, and upon
this apprehended provocation they then all fell upon one another, until the
whole Army was destroyed: Nevertheless, I entirely refer it unto thy Judgment
(without the least offer of my own,) whether, Satan did not now Set Ambushments
against the Good People of Gloucester, with Demons, in the Shape of Armed
Indians and Frenchmen appearing to considerable Numbers of the Inhabitants,
and mutually Firing upon them, for the best part of a Month together. I know,
the most Considerate Gentlemen in the Neighborhood, unto this Day, Believe
this whole matter to have been a Prodigious piece of the Strange Descent from
the Invisible World, then made upon other parts of the Country. And the
publication of this Prodigy among other Wonders of the Invisible World among
us, has been Delayed until Now, that so the Opinion of our most considerate
Gentl^men about it, might have Time for a thorough ^^^coction: and that the
Gentlemen of the Or^er of St. Thomas, may have no (...) against it. But, be it
what it will, they are not a few profane Squibs from the Sons of the
Extravagant Bekker, that will be a fit Explication, for Things thus Attested,
and so very Mavelous.

ARTICLE. XIX. PACEM, Te Poscimus Omnes.
IN the year, 1693. His Excellency sent away Captain Convers, to draw off the
fittest of the Officers and Soldiers, quartered in the East, for a March, and
causing about Three Hundred and Fifty more to be Levied, gave him, what he had
merited above a year ago; even a Commission of Major and Commander in Chief
over these Forces. While Major Convers was at Wells, hearing of some Indians,
that were seen in the Woods, he Surprised them all, and finding that they had
cut off a poor Family at Oyster River, he gave the chief of them, something of
what they also had merited. Going to Pemmaquid, after some service there, they
Sailed up Sheepscote River, and then marched through the Woods to Taconet*
which being Deserted by the Indians, they ranged through many other Woods; but
could meet with none of their Enemies. Repairing then to Saco, they began
another Fort, which was carried on by that worthy Gentleman Major Hook, and the
truly commendable Captain Hill, and proved a matter of Good Consequence unto
the Province. While these Things were doing, some time in July, the Straggling
Indians did some Spoil, upon Quaboag, a remote Village, in the Road unto
Connecticut; but Advice being dispatched unto the Towns upon Connecticut-River,
a party immediately Salley'd out after the Spoilers, and leaving their Horses
at the Entrance of a Swamp, whither by their Track they had followed them, they
come upon the Secure Adversary, and killed the most of them, and Recovered the
Captives, with their Plunder; and Returning home, had some Reward for so brisk
an Action.

But now, the Indians in the East, probably Disheartened by the Forts Erecting
that were like to prove a sore Annoyance to them, in their Enterprises; and by
the Fear of wanting Ammunition, with other Provisions, which the French were
not so Able just now to dispense unto them; and by a presumption that an Army
of Maqua's, [part of those Terrible Cannibals to the Westward, whereof it is
affirmed by those who have published the Stories of their Travels among them,
That they have destroyed no less than Two Mi^^ion Salvages of other Nations
about them* through their being Supplied with Firearms ^^^ore Hundreds of
other Nations, lying between them, and the River Meschasippi^] was come into
their Country, because they found some of their Squa's killed upon a Whortle
berry Plain; and all the Charms of the French Friar then Resident among them,
could not hinder them, from Suing to the English for Peace. And the English,
being so involved in Debts, that they Scarce knew how to prosecute the War any
further; took some Notice of their Suit. Accordingly, a Peace was made, upon
the Ensuing Articles.

Province of the Massachusetts^Bay in New England. The Submission and Agreement
of the Eastern Indians, at Fort William Henry in Pemmaquid the 11th. day of
August, in the Fifth year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, William
and Mary, by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King
and Queen, Defenders of the Faith, etc. 1693.
WHereas a Bloody War has for some years now past been made and carried on by
the Indians within the Eastern parts of the said Province, against Their
Majesty's Subjects the English, through the Instigation and Influences of the
French; and being sensible of the Miseries which we and our People are reduced
unto, by adhearing to their ill Council^* We whose names are hereunto
Subscribed, being Sagamores and Chief Captains of all the Indians belonging to
the several Rivers of Penobscote and Kennebeck, Amanascogin, and Sac^, parts of
the said Province of the Massachusetts Bay, within Their said Majesty's
Sovereignty: Having made Application unto his Excellency Sir William Phipps,
Captain General and Governor in Chief in and over the said Province, that the
War may be put to an end; Do lay down our Arms, and cast our selves upon Their
said Majesty's Grace and Favor. And each of us respectively for our selves,
and in the Name and with the free consent of all the Indians belonging unto the
several Rivers aforesaid, and of all other Indians within the said Province of
and from Merrimack River, unto the most Easterly Bounds of the said Province;
hereby acknowledging our hearty Subjection and Obedience unto the Crown of
England: and do solemnly Covenant, Promise and Agree to and with the said Sir
William Phipps, and his Successors in the place of Captain General and
Governor in Chief, of the aforesaid Province or Territory, on Their said
Majesty's behalf, in manner following, viz.

That at all time and times for ever, from and after the date of these
Presents, we will cease and forbear all acts of Hostility toward the Subjects
of the Crown of England, and not offer the least hurt or violence to them or
any of them in their Persons or Estate: But will henceforward hold and maintain
a firm and constant Amity and Friendship with all the English.

Item. We abandon and forsake the French Interest, and will not in any wise
adhere to, join with, aid or assist them in their Wars, or Designs against the
English, nor countenance, succor, or conceal any of the Enemy Indians of
Canada or other places, that shall happen to come to any of our Plantations
within the English Territory, but secure them if in our power, and deliver them
up unto the English.

That all English Captives in the hands or power of any of the Indians within
the Limits aforesaid, shall with all possible speed be set at liberty, and
returned home without any Ransom or Payment to be made or given for them or
any of them.

That Their Majesty's Subjects the English, shall and may peaceably and quietly
enter upon, improve, and for ever enjoy, all and singular their Rights of
Lands, and former Settlements and possessions within the Eastern parts of the
said Province of the Massachusetts Bay, without any pretentions or clai^s by us
or any other Indians, and be in no wise molested, interrupted, o^ disturbed
therein.

That all Trade and Commerce which her^^after may be allowed between the
English an^ Indians, shall be, under such Management an^ Regulation as may be
stated by an Act o^ the General Assembly, or as the Governou^ of the said
Province for the time being, wi^^ the Advice and Consent of the Council sha^^
see cause to Direct and Limit.

If any controversy, or difference, at an^ time hereafter happen to arise
between any (...) the English and Indians for any real or suppose^ wrong or
injury done on one side or the other no private Revenge shall be taken by the
Indian^ for the same, but proper Application be made to Their Majesty's
Government, upon the place for Remedy thereof in a due course (...) Justice, we
hereby submitting our selves to (...) ruled and governed by Their Majesty's
Law, and desire to have the benefit of the same.

For the more full manifestation of our since^rity and integrity in all that
which we have herein before Covenanted and Promised, we (...) deliver unto Sir
William Phipps, Their Majestie^ Governor as aforesaid, Ahassombame^t Brother
to Edgeremett; Wenongahewitt Cousin to Ma^^ckawando, and Edgeremett, and
Bagatawawongo^^ also Sheepscoat John, to abide and remain in the Custody of the
English, where the Governor shall direct as Hostages or Pledges, for our
Fidelity, and true performance of all and every the foregoing Articles,
reserving Liberty to exchange them in some reasonable time for a like number,
to the acceptance of the Governor and Council of the said Province, so they be
persons of as good account, and esteem amongst the Indians, as those which are
to be exchanged. In Testimony whereof, we have hereunto set our several Marks
and Seals, the Day and Year first above written.

The above written Instrument was deliberately read over, and the several
Articles and Clauses thereof Interpreted unto the Indians, who said they well
understood, and consented thereto, and was then Signed, Sealed, and Delivered
in the Presence of us,

John Wing. Nicholas Manning. Benjamin Jackson. Egereme^t Madockawando.
Wessambomett of Navidgw^^k. Weno^son of Teconnet in behalf of Mo^^is.
Ketterramogis of Narridgwock. Ahanquit of Penobscot. Bomaseen. Nitamemet.
Webenes. Awansomeck. Robin Doney. Madaumbis. Paquaharet, alias Nathaniel. John
Hornybrook, Interpreter. John Bagatawawongo alias Sheepscoat John. Interpreter.
Phill. Ounsakis Squaw. Interpreter.


ARTICLE. XX. Bloody Fishing at Oyster-River. And Sad work at Groton.
A Years Breathing Time, was a great Favor of Heaven to a Country, quite out
of Breath, with Numberless Calamities: But the Favor was not so Thankfully
Enjoyed, as it should have been And now, The Clouds Return after the Rain. The
Spectre that with Burning Tongs drove Xerxes to his War upon the Graecians, had
not lost his Influence upon our Indians. The Perfidy of the Indians appeared
first, in their not Restoring the English Captives, according to their
Covenant; but the perfidious Wretches Excused this, with many Protestations.
That which added unto our Jealousies about them, was, their Insolent carriage
toward a Sloop, commanded by Captain Wing; and the Information of a Fellow
called Hector, That the Indians intended most certainly to break the Peace, and
had promised the French Priests, taking the Sacrament thereupon, to destroy the
first English Town they could Surprise. Rumors of Indians Lurking about some
of the Frontier-Plantations, now began to put the poor people into
Consternation; but upon an Imagination, that they were only certain Bever
Hunters the Consternation of the people went off into Security. It Is affirmed
by English Captives, which were then at Canada, that the Desolation of
Oyster-River was commonly talked in the Streets of Quebeck, Two months before
it was Effected; for the Spies had found no Town so Secure as That. And now,
what was Talked at Quebeck in the month of May, must be Done at Oyster-River in
the month of July; for on Wednesday, July 18. 1694. the Treachearous Enemy,
with a great Army fell upon that place, about break of Day, and Killed and
Captived, Ninety Four, (or, an Hundred) persons; about a Score of whom, were
men belonging to the Trained Band, of the Town. Several persons Remarkably
Escaped this Bloody Deluge, but none, with more Bravery, than one Thomas
Bickford, who had an House, a Little Pallisado'd, by the River Side; but no man
in it besides himself. He dexterously put his Wife, and Mother, and Children
aboard a Canoo, and Sending them down the River, he Alone, betook himself to
the Defense of his House, against many Indians, that made an Assault upon him.
They first would have persuaded him, with many fair Promises, and then,
terrified him with as many Fierce Threatenings, to yield himself* but he flouted
and fired at them, daring 'em, to come if they durst. His main Stratagem was,
to Change his Livery as frequently as he could* appearing Sometimes in one
Coat, Sometimes in another, Sometimes in an Hat, and Sometimes in a Cap; which
caused his Beseigers, to mistake this One for Many Defendents. In fine, The
pitiful Wretches, despairing to Beat him out of his House, even left him in
it; whereas many that opened unto them, upon their Solemn Engagements of giving
them Life and Good Quarter, were barborously butchered by them; and the Wife of
one Adams, then with Child, was with horrible Barbarity Ripped up. And thus
there was an End of the Peace, made at Pemmaquid! Upon this, the Friends of Mrs
Ursula Cut, (Widow of Mr John Cut, formerly President of New Hampshire,)
desired her, to leave her Farm, which was about a Mile above the Bank Exposed
unto the Enemy, on the South side of Piscataqua River. She Thanked them for
their Care, but added, that she believed, the Enemy had now done their Do for
this Time; and however, by the End of the Week, her Business at the Farm would
be all dispatched, and on Saturday, she would Repair to her Friends at the
Bank. But, alas, before the End of the week, she saw the End of her Life: On
Saturday, about one or two a Clock, in the Afternoon, the Business at the Farm
was Dispatched, sure enough! The Indians Then Killed this Gentlewoman, and
Three other People, a little before they had Finished a point of Husbandry,
then in their Hand. Nor did the Storm go over so: Some Drops of it fell upon
the Town of Groton, a Town that lay, one would think, far enough off, the
place, where was the last Scene of the Tragedy. On July 27. About break of Day,
Groton felt, some Surprising Blows, from the Indian Hatchets. They began their
Atta^ques, at the House of one Lieutenant Lakin, in the out skirts of the Town:
but met with a Repulse there, and lost one of their Crew. Nevertheless, in
other parts of that Plantation, (when the Good People had been so tired out, as
to lay down their Military Watch,) there were more than Twenty persons killed,
and more than a Dozen carried away. Mr. Gershom Hobart, the Minister of the
place, with part of his Family, was Remarkably preserved, from falling into
their Hands, when they made themselves the Masters of his House* though they
Took Two of his Children, whereof the one was killed, and the other some Time
after happily Rescued out of his Captivity.

I remember, The Jews, in their Book Taanith, tell us, The Elders Proclaimed a
Fast in their Cities, on this Occasion, because the Wolves had Devoured two
Little Children beyond Jordan. Truly, The Elders of New England, were not a
little concerned at it, when they saw the Wolves thus devouring their Children,
even on this side of Merrimack!

ARTICLE. XXI. More English Blood, Swallowed, but Revenged.
REader, We must after This, ever Now and Then, Expect, the happening of some
unhappy Accident. The Blood-thirsty Salvages, not content with quaffing the
Blood of Two or Three persons, found at work, in a Field at Spruce creek, on
Aug. 20. and of another person at York, the same Day, (Captivating also a Lad,
which they found with him;) They did on Aug. 24. Kill and Take, Eight persons
at Kittery. Here, a little Girl, about Seven years old, the Daughter of one Mr.
Downing, fell into their Barbarous Hands; They knocked her of the Head, and
barbarously Scalped her, leaving her on the Cold Ground, (and it was then very
Cold, beyond what use to be,) where she lay all the Night Ensuing: Yet she was
found Alive the Next Morning, and Recovering, she is to this Day Alive, and
well: only the place broke in her skull, will not endure to be closed up. He
had another Daughter, which at the same Time, almost miraculously Escaped their
Hands. But so could not at another Time, Joseph Pike, of Newbury, the Deputy
Sheriff of Essex, who, on Sept. 4. Traveling between Amesbury and Haverhil, in
the Execution of his Office, with one Long, they both had an Arrest of Death
Served upon them, from an Indian Ambascado. Bommaseen, a Commander of prime
Quality among the Indians, who had set his Hand unto the late Articles of
Submission, came Nov. 19. with Two other Indians, to Pemmaquid, as Loving as
Bears, and as Harmless as Tygres, pretending to be just Arrived from Canada,
and much Afflicted for the late mischiefs, (whereof there was witness, that he
was a principal Actor,) but Captain March, with a Sufficient Activity Siezed
them; as Robin Doney, another famous Villain among them, with Three more, had
been Siez'd at Saco Fort, a little before. Bommaseen, was Conveyed unto Boston,
that he might in a close Imprisonment there, have Time to consider of his
Treacheries, and his Cruelties, for which, the Justice of Heaven, had thus
Delivered him up. When he was going to Pemmaquid, he left his Company, with a
Strange Reluctance and Formality, as if he had presaged the Event; and when at
Pemmaquid, he found the Event of his coming, he discovered a more than ordinary
Disturbance of mind: his Passions foamed and boiled, like the very Waters at
the Fall of Niagara.

But being thus fallen upon the mention of that Vengeance, wherewith Heaven
pursued the chief of the Salvage Murderers, it may give some Diversion unto the
Reader, in the midst of a long and a sad Story, to insert a Relation of an
Accident that fell out a little after this Time.

The Indians, (as the Captives inform us) being hungry and hardly bestead,
passed through deserted Casco; where they spied several Horses in Captain
Brackets Orchard. Their famished Squa's begged them to Shoot the Horses, that
they might be revived with a little Roast meat; but the young men, were for
having a little Sport before their Supper. Driving the Horses into a Pound,
they took one of them, and furnished him with an Halter, suddenly made of the
Main and the Tail of the Animal, which they cut off. A Son of the famous Hegon,
was ambitious to mount this Pegasaean Steed; but being a pitiful Horseman, he
ordered them, for fear of his Falling, to Ty his Legs fast under the Horses
Belly. No sooner was this Beggar Set on Horse back, and the Spark in his own
opinion thoroughly Equipt, but the Mettlesome Horse furiously and presently ran
with him out of Sight. Neither Horse nor Man, were ever seen any more; the
astonished Tawnies howled after one of their Nobility, disappearing by such an
unexpected Accident. A few Days after they found one of his Legs, (and that
was All,) which they buried in Captain Brackets Cellar, with abundance of
Lamentation.

ARTICLE. XXII. A Conference with an Indian-Sagamore.
BUt now Bommaseen is fallen into our Hands, let us have a little Discourse
with him.

Behold, Reader, the Troubles, and the Troublers of New England! That thou
may a little more Exactly Behold the Spirit of the matter, I Will Recite certain
passages, occurring in a Discourse that passed between this Bommaseen (who was
one of the Indian Princes, or, Chieftanes,) and a Minister of the Gospel, in
the year. 1696.

Bommaseen, was, with some other Indians, now a Prisoner, in Boston. He desired
a Conference with a Minister, of Boston, which was granted him. Bommaseen, with
the other Indians assenting and asserting to it, then told the Minister, That
he prayed his Instruction in the Christian Religion; inasmuch as he was afraid,
that the French, in the Christian Religion, which they taught the Indians, had
Abused them. The Minister Enquired of him, What of the Things taught 'em by the
French, appeared most Suspicious to 'em? He said* The French taught 'em, That
the Lord JESUS CHRIST, was of the French Nation; That His Mother, the Virgin
Mary, was a French Lady; That they were the English who had Murdered him; and,
That whereas He Rose from the Dead, and went up to the Heavens, all that would
Recommend themselves unto His Favor, must Revenge His Quarrel upon the
English, as far as they can. He asked the Minister, whether these Things were
so; and prayed the Minister to Instruct him in the True Christian Religion. The
Minister considering, that the Humor and Manner of the Indians, was to have
their Discourses managed, with much of Similitude in them, Looked about for
some Agreeable object, from whence he might with apt Resemblances Convey the
Idae's of Truth unto the minds of Salvages: and he thought, none would be more
Agreeable to them, than a Tankard of Drink, which happened then to be standing
on the Table. So he proceeded in this Method with 'em.

He told them, [still with proper Actions painting, and pointing out the Signs
unto them,] That our Lord JESUS CHRIST, had given us, a Good Religion, which
might be Resembled unto the Good Drink in the Cup, upon the Table.

That if we Take this Good Religion, (even that Good Drink,) into our Hearts,
it will do us Good, and preserve us from Death.

That Gods Book, the Bible, is the Cup, wherein that Good Drink, of Religion is
offered unto us.

That the French, having the Cup of Good Drink, in their Hands, had put Poison
into it; and then made the Indians to Drink that Poisoned Liquor, whereupon,
they Run mad, and fell to killing of the English, though they could not but
know, it must unavoidably iss^e in their own Destruction at the Last.

That, it was plain, the English had put no Poison, into the Good Drink; for
they set the Cup wide open, and invited all men, to Come and See before they
Taste; even, the very Indians themselves; for we Translated the Bible into
Indian. That they might gather from hence, that the French had put Poison into
the Good Drink; inasmuch, as the French kept the Cup fast Shut, (the Bible in
an Unknown Tongue,) and kept their Hands upon the Eyes of the Indians, when
they put it unto their mouths.

The Indians Expressing themselves to be well-Satisfied, with what the Minister
had hitherto said, prayed him, to go on, with showing 'em, what was the Good
Drink, and what was the Poison, which the French had put into it.

He then set before them distinctly the chief Articles of the Christian
Religion, with all the Simplicity and Sincerity of a Protestant: Adding upon
each, This is the Good Drink, in the Lords Cup of Life: And they still
professed, That they liked it all.

Whereupon, he demonstrated unto them, how the Papists had in their Idolatrous
Popery, some way or other Depraved, and Altered, every one of these Articles;
with Scandalous Ingredients of their own Invention; Adding upon each, This is
the Poison which the French have put into the Cup.

At last, he mentioned this Article.

To obtain the Pardon of your Sins, you must confess your Sins to God; and pray
to God, That He would Pardon your Sins, for the sake of Jesus Christ, who dyed
for the Sins of His People: God Loves Jesus Christ infinitely, and if you place
your Eye on Jesus Christ only, when you beg the Pardon of your Sins, God will
Pardon them. You need confess your Sins to none but God, Except in cases, where
men have known your Sins, or have been Hurt by your Sins; and then those men
should know that you confess your Sins; but after all, none but God can Pardon
them.

He then added; The French have put Poison in to this Good Drink; They tell
you, that you must confess your Sins to a Priest, and carry skins to a Priest,
and Submit unto a Penance enjoined by ^ Priest; and this Priest is to give you
a Pardon. There is no need of all This: It Is nothing but French Poison, all of
it.

The Wretches appearing astonished, to meet with one who would so fairly put
them into a glorious way to obtain the Pardon of their Sins, and yet take no
Bever Skins for it: in a Rapture of Astonishment, they fell down on their
knees, and got his Hand into theirs, and fell to kissing of it with an Extreme
show of Affection.

He shaking them off, with dislike of their posture, Bommaseen with the rest of
them stood up; and first lifting up his Eyes, and Hands, to Heaven; declaring,
That God should be Judge of his Heart in what he said; he then said, Sir, I
thank you for these Things; I Resolve to Spit up all the French Poison; You
shall be my Father; I will be your Son; I beseech you, to continue, to Instruct
me, in that Religion, which may bring me to the Salvation of my Soul! -- Now,
God knows, what Heart this Indian had, when he so Expressed himself: To Him let
us leave it.

But so much for this Digression.

ARTICLE. XXIII. More Mischiefs, in Spite of Treaties.
EXcept it were the Falling of Two Soldiers belonging to Saco Garrison, into
the Hands of the Enemy, who Took the one, and Killed (...) other, some Time in
March. 169^. Many Months passed away, without any Action between Them and Us;
And it is Reported by Returned Captives, That the Hand of God, reached them,
when the Hand of Man could not find them, and a Mortal Sickness, did at a
Strange Rate carry off multitudes of them. At length, upon the Mediation of old
Sheepscoat John, once a Praying Indian, of the Reverend ELIOT's Catechmuens,
but after-wards, a Pagan, and now a Popish-Apostate, a Great Fleet of Canoo's
came, in to an Island, about a League from the Fort at Pemmaquid, May 20. 1695.
and, after they had laid still there, all the Lord's Day, on Monday morning they
sent unto the English, for another Treaty. They Declared, Their Design was to
Exchange Captives, and Renew the Peace, and condemned themselves for their
Violating the Peace made near Two years ago. Eight Captives, they Immediately
Delivered up; and upon a Grant of a Truce for Thirty Days, Colonel John
Phillips, Lieut. Colonel Hawthorn, and Major Convers, were sent Commissioners
unto Pemmaquid, for the management of that affayr. Our Commissioners, with Good
Reason, demanding a Surrender of all the English Captives, according to former
Agreement, before they would allow any New Propositions of Peace to be offered,
the Indians, digusted that their Idol Bommaseen was left at Boston, broke off
the Conference, and went off in Discontent. Advice was immediately dispatched
into all parts of the Eastern Country, to stand well upon their Guard:
notwithstanding which, on July 6. Major Hammond of Kittery, fell into the Hands
of the Lurking Indians; and the next week, Two men at Exeter were killed by
some of the same Dangerous Lurkers. Major Hammond was now aboard a Canoo*
intending to put ashore at Saco; but some of the Garrison-Souldiers there, not
knowing that they had such a good Friend aboard, inadvertently Fired upon the
Canoo; and so, the Indians carried him clear away. They transported him at
length to Canada; where he met with Extraordinary Civilities; Count Frontenach,
the Governor himself, nobly purchased him, of his Tawny-master; and sent him
home to New England, by a Vessel, which also fetched from thence a Considerable
Number, (perhaps near Thirty) of English Prisoners. In August, the House of one
Rogers at Billerica, was plundered, and about Fifteen People Killed and Taken,
by Indians, which, by appearing and Approaching, it is said, on Horseback, were
not Suspected for Indians, [for, Who set them on Horseback?] till they
Surprised the House they came to. And about the same Time, Sergeant Haley,
Venturing out of his Fort, at Saco, Stepped into the Snares of Death. On Sept 9.
Sergeant March, with Three more, were Killed by the Indians, and Six more, at
the same Time wounded at Pemmaquid, Rowing a Gondula, round an high Rocky
point, above the Barbican. On Oct. 7. the Indians entered the House of one John
Brown at Newbury; carrying away Nine Persons with them; whereupon Captain
Greenlief, nimbly pursuing the Murderers, did unhappily so Stumble on them in
the Night, that they wounded the good man, and made their Escape over the
River. The Captain Retook all the Captives; but the Indians, in their going
off, Struck them all so Violently on the Head, with the Clubs, which I remember
a French Historian somewhere calls by the frightful Name of Head-breakers, that
they afterward all of them Dyed, Except a Lad that was only hurt in the
Shoulder* Some of them Lingered out for half a year, and some of them for more
than a whole year; but if the Doctors closed up the wounds of their Heads, they
would grow Light headed, and Faint, and Sick, and could not bear it; So at
last, they Dyed, with their very Brains working out at their Wounds.

But having thus run over a Journal of Deaths, for the year, 1695. Let us
before the year be quite gone, see some Vengeance taken upon the Heads in the
House of the Wicked. Know then* Reader, That Captain March petitioning to be
Dismissed from his Command of the Fort at Pemmaquid, one Chub Succeeded him.
And this Chub, found an Opportunity, in a pretty Chubbed manner, to kill, the
famous Egeremet, and, Ahenquid, a couple of Principal Sagamores, with one o^
Two other Indians; On a Lords day, the Sixteenth of February. Some that well
enough liked the Thing, which was now done, did not altogether like the manner
of doing it, because there was a pretense of Treaty, between Chub, and the
Sagamores, whereof he (...) his Advantage to lay violent Hands on them* If
there were any unfair Dealing (which I know not) in this Action of Chub, there
will be another February, not far off, wherein the Avengers of Blood, will take
their Satisfaction.

ARTICLE. XXIV. Still, Mischief upon Mischief.
THe Next whole year, namely, 1696. had it not been for the Degree of a Famine,
which the Alteration of the course of Nature in these, as well as other parts
of the world, threatened us withal, would have been a Year of Less Trouble, than
some of the rest, in our Troublesome Decad. The most uneasy Accident of this
year, shall be told, when we arrive unto the Month of August; but in the mean
Time, it was a matter of some Uneasiness, that on May. 7. one John Church of
Quochecho who had been a Captive, Escaped from the Hands of the Indians, almost
Seven years before, was now Slain, and Stripped, by their Barbarous Hands: And,
on Jun. 24. one Thomas Cole, of Wells, and his wife, were Slain by the Indians,
returning home with two of his Neighbors, and their Wives, all three Sisters,
from a Visit, of their Friends at York: And, on Jun. 26. at several places
within the Confines of Portsmouth, Several Persons, Twelve or Fourteen, were
Massacred, (with some Houses Burnt,) and Four Taken, which, yet were soon
Retaken; among whom, there was an Ancient Women Scalpt for Dead, and no doubt
the Salvages upon producing her Scalp, received the Price of her Death, from
those that hired them, and yet she so Recovered, as to be still Alive.
Moreover, on July 26. the Lords Day, the People at Quochecho, returning from
the Public Worship of God, Three of them were killed, Three of them were
wounded, and Three of them were carried away Prisoners to Penobscut; which last
Three, were nevertheless in less than Three weeks returned. But now we are got
into fatal August; on the Fifth or Sixth Day of which Month, the French having
Taken one of the English Men of War, called, The New-port, and Landed a few
men, who joined with the Indians, to pursue their Business, Chub, with an
unaccountable Baseness, did Surrender the Brave Fort at Pemmaquid into their
Hands. There were Ninety Five men double Armed, in the Fort, which might have
Defended it against Nine Times as many Assailants; That a Fort now should be so
basely given up! Imitating the Style of Homer and Virgil, I cannot forbear
crying out, O merae Novanglae, neque enim Novangli! And yet if you read the
Story written by the Sieur Froger, how poorly St. Jame^'s Fort, in Africa, was
given up to the French in the year, 1695. You Will say, the Things done in
America, are not so bad, as what have been done in either parts of the World.
The Enemy having Demolished so fair a Citadel, now grown mighty Uppish,
Triumphed, as well they might, Exceedingly; and Threatened, that they would
carry all before them. The Honorable Lieutenant Governor Stoughton, who was
now Commander in Chief, over the Province, immediately did all that could be
done, to put a Stop unto the Fury of the Adversary. By Sea, he sent out Three
Men of War, who, disadvantaged by the Winds, came not soon Enough to engage the
French. By Land, the Indians being so Posted in all quarters, that the People
could hardly Stir out, but about half a Score of the poor People in their
Fields here and there were picked off, he sent Colonel Gidney with Five Hundred
men; who perceiving the Salvages to be drawn off, only Strengthened the
Garrisons, and Returned. The Lieutenant Governor, that he might not in any
other point be wanting, to the Public Safety, hereupon dispatched, Colonel
Hawthorn, with a Suitable Number of Soldiers, and Frigates unto St. John's, with
orders to fetch away some Great Guns that were lying there, and join with Major
Church who was gone with Forces that way, to attack the Fort at St. John's,
which was the Nest of all the Wasps that Stung us: but the Difficulty of the
Cold Season so discouraged our men, that after the making of some few Shot, the
Enterprise found it self under too much Congelation to proceed any further. So
we will afflict our selves no further for this year; Except only with
mentioning the Slaughter of about Five poor Soldiers, belonging to Saco-Fort,
Oct. 13. who had a Discovery of the Enemy, Seasonable Enough, to have made
their Escape; yet, not Agreeing about the way of making it, as if led by some
Fatality to their Destruction, or, as if they had been like the Squirrels, that
must run down the Tree, Squeaking and Crying, into the mouths of the
Rattle-Snakes, that fix their Eyes upon them; they went back in to the very
path, where the Indian Ambush was lying for them.

ARTICLE. XXV. A Notable Exploit; wherein, Dux Faemina Facti.
ON March 15. 1697. the Salvages made a Descent upon the Skirts of Haverhil,
Murdering and Captiving about Thirty Nine Persons, and Burning about Half a
Dozen Houses. In this Broil, one Hannah Dustan, having lain in about a Week,
attended with her Nurse, Mary Neff, a Widow, a Body of Terrible Indians drew
near unto the House, where she lay, with Designs to carry on their Bloody
Devastations. Her Husband, hastened from his Employments a^broad, unto the
Relief of his Distressed Family; and first bidding Seven of his Eight Children
(which were from Two to Seventeen years of Age) to get away as fast as they
could, unto some Garrison in the Town, he went in, to inform his Wife, of the
horrible Distress come upon them. E're she could get up, the fierce Indians
were got so near, that utterly despairing to do her any Service, he ran out
after his Children; Resolving, that on the Horse, which he had with him, he
would Ride away with That* which he should in this Extremity, find his
Affections to pitch most upon, and leave the Rest, unto the care of the Divine
Providence. He overtook his Children about Forty Rod from his Door; but then,
such was the Agony of his Parental Affections, that he found it impossible for
him to Distinguish any one of them from the rest; wherefore he took up a
Courageous Resolution to Live and Die with them all. A party of (...) with him;
and now, though they Fired ^t him, and he Fired at them, yet he manfully kept
at the Rear of his Little Army of Unarmed Children, while they Marched off,
with the pace of a Child of Five years old; until, by the Singular Providence
of God, he arrived safe with them all, unto a place of Safety, about a Mile or
two from his House. But his House must in the mean Time, have more dismal
Tragaedies acted at it. The Nurse trying to Escape, with the Newborn Infant,
fell into the Hands of the Formidable Salvages; and those furious Tawnies
coming into the House, bid poor Dustan, to Rise Immediately. Full of
Astonishment, she did so; and sitting down in the Chimney, with an Heart full
of most fearful Expectation, she saw the Raging Dragons riffle all that they
could carry away, and set the House on Fire. About Nineteen or Twenty Indians,
now led these away, with about Half a Score other English Captives; but e're
they had gone many Steps, they dashed out the Brains of the Infant, against a
Tree; and several of the other Captives, as they began to Tire in their sad
Journey, were soon sent unto their Long Home; the Salvages would presently bury
their Hatchets in their Brains, and leave their Carcases on the Ground, for
Birds and Beasts to feed upon. However, Dustan (with her Nurse) notwithstanding
her present Condition, Traveled that Night, about a Dozen Miles; and then kept
up with their New Masters, in a long Travel of an Hundred and Fifty Miles, more
or less, within a few Days Ensuing, without any sensible Damage, in their
Health, from the Hard-ships, of their Travel their Lodging, their Diet, and
their many other Difficulties. These Two poor Women, were now in the Hands of
those, whose Tender Mercies are Cruelties; but the Good God, who has all
Hearts in His own Hands, heard the Sighs of these Prisoners, and gave them to
find unexpected Favor from the Master, who laid claim unto them. That Indian
Family consisted of Twelve Persons? Two Stout men, Three Women, and Seven
Children; and for the Shame of many an English Family, that has the Character
of, Prayerless, upon it, I must now Publish what these poor Women assure me:
It Is This; In Obedience to the Instructions, which the French have given them,
they would have Prayers in their Family, no less than Thrice Every Day: In the
Morning, at Noon, and in the Evening; nor would they ordinarily let their
Children Eat or Sleep, without first saying their Prayers. Indeed these
Idolaters, were ^ike the rest of their whiter Brethren, Persecutors; and would
not endure, that these poor Women should Retire to their English Prayers, if
they could hinder them. Nevertheless, the poor Women, had nothing but fervent
Prayers, to make their Lives Comfortable, or Tolerable; and by being daily sent
out, upon Business, they had Opportunities together and asunder, to do like
another Hannah, in Pouring out their Souls before the Lord: Nor did their
praying Friends among our selves, forbear to Pour out Supplications for them.
Now, they could not observe it without some wonder, that their Indian Master,
sometimes, when he saw them Dejected, would say unto them; What need you
Trouble your self? If your God will have you delivered, you shall be so! And it
seems, our God would have it so to be. This Indian Family, was now Traveling
with these Two Captive Women, (and an English youth, taken from Worcester, a
year and half before,) unto a Rendezvous of Salvages, which they call, a Town,
somewhere beyond Penacook; and they still told these poor Women, that when they
came to this Town, they must be Stripped, and Scourged, and run the Gantlet
through the whole Army of Indians. They said, This was the Fashion, when the
Captives first came to a Town; and they derided some of the Faint-hearted
English, which, they said, fainted and swooned away under the Torments of this
Discipline. But on April. 30. While they were yet, it may be, about an Hundred
and Fifty Miles from the Indian Town, a little before Break of Day, when the
whole Crew was in a Dead Sleep; (Reader, see if it prove not So!) one of these
Women, took up a Resolution, to Imitate the Action of Ja^l upon Sisera; and
being where she had no^ her own Life secured by any Law unto her, she thought
she was not Forbidden by any Law, to take away the Life of the Murderers, by
whom her Child had been butchered. She heartened the Nurse, and the Youth, to
assist her in this Enterprise; and all furnishing themselves with Hatchets for
the purpose, they struck such Home Blows, upon the Heads of their Sleeping
Oppressors that e're they could any of them Struggle into any Effectual
Resistance, at the Feet of those poor Prisoners, they bowed, they fell, they
lay down ^ at their feet they bowed, they fell; where they bowed, there they
fell down Dead. Only one Squaw escaped sorely wounded from them, in the Dark,
and one Boy, whom they Reserved Asleep, intending to bring him away with them,
suddenly waked, and skuttled away from this Desolation. But cutting off the
Scalps of the Ten Wretches, they came off, and Received Fifty Pounds from the
General Assembly of the Province, as a Recompense of their Action; besides
which they Received many presents of Congratulation from their more private
Friends, but none gave 'em a greater Taste of Bounty, than Colonel Nicholson,
the Governor of Maryland, who hearing of their Action, sent 'em a very
generous Token of (...) Favor.

ARTICLE. XXVI. Remarkable Salvations; and some Remarkable Disasters.
BEsides a man Taken at York, in May, and another man killed at Hatfield, in
June, and a Third killed at Groton; and a Fourth with Two Children carried
Captives: there fell out more Mischief, with no small Mercy, on Jun. 10. at
Exeter. The Day before, some Women and Children, would needs ramble without any
Guard, into the Woods, to gather Straw-berries; but some that were willing to
Chastise them with a Fright, for their presumption, made an Alarm in the Town;
whereupon many came together in their Arms. The Indians it seems, were at this
very Time, unknown to the English, lying on the other side of the Town ready to
make a Destructive Assault upon it; but Supposing this Alarm to be made on
their Account, they therefore supposed themselves to be discovered. Wherefore
they laid aside their purpose of attempting the Destruction of the Town; and
contented themselves, with Killing one man* Taking another, and Wounding a
Third. But on July. 4. Lords Day, Major Charles Frost, who had been a Person of
no little Consequence to our Frontiers, Returning from the Public Worship of
God, in Berwick, (to repair unto which, about Five Miles from his own House, he
had that Morning expressed such an Earnestness, tha^ much Notice was taken of
it,) passed several more Dangerous places, without any Damage; but in a place,
on a little plain by the Turn of a Path, where no Danger was Expected, the
Adder in the path Surprised him; the Indians having Stuck up certain Boughs
upon a Log, there mortally Shot him, with Two more, while his Two Sons, that
were in the Front of the Company, happily escaped: And the Two young men, that
Rode Post unto Wells, with these Tidings, in their going back, had their own
Death added for another Article of such unhappy Tidings. About the latter End
of this Month also, Three Men Mowing the Meadows at Newichawannic, were
themselves Cut down by the Indians; though one of the Mowers bravely Slew one of
the Murderers. But the most Important Action of this Year, was a little
further off. About the beginning of July, Major March was Employed, with about
Five Hundred Soldiers, not only to Defend the Frontiers, but also to seek out,
and Beat up, the Enemies Quarters. In the mean time, the Lieutenant Governor,
apprehending an Invasion from a Formidable French Fleet on the Coast of
Ne^-England, with his accustomed prudence and vigor applied himself to put the
whole Province into a posture of Defense: And the Militia, with the several
Forts, especially that of Boston, (very much through the Contrivance and
Industry of Captain Fairweather,) were brought into so good a posture, that
some could hardly forbear too much Dependence on our Preparations. But, it
being more particularly Apprehended, that in the Intend^d Invasion, the
Indians, assisted by the French, would make a Descent upon our Frontiers by
Land, Major March* was advised therefore to Employ some of his Forces, in
Scouting about the Woods. Before the Major arrived at York, a party of the
Enemy killed a man that stood Sentinel for some of his Neighbo^^^ at Work in
the Marsh at Wells; and catching another A^live, they carried him a mile and
half off, an^ Roasted him to Death: But Captain Brackett^ that followed him
quite as far as Kennebunk, di^ but almost overtake them: For truly, Reader, ou^
Soldiers cannot, as Antiquity Reports, the old Grecian, and Roman Soldiers
could, march at a Running pace or trot, heavily Loaded* five and twenty miles
in four Hours; bu^ rather suspect whether those Reports of Antiquity be not
Romantic. Three Soldiers o^ Saco Fort* after this cutting some Firewood, on
Cow-Island, for the use of the Fort, were by the Indians cut off; while that
Lieutenant Fletcher with his Two Sons, that should have Guarded them, went a
Fowling; and by do^ing so, they likewise fell into the Snare. The Indians
carrying these Three Captives down the River in one of their Canoes, Lieutenant
Larabe, that was abroad with a Scout, way laid them; and Firing on the Foremost
o^ the Canooes, that had Three men in it, they all Three fell and sank in the
River of Death* Several were killed aboard the other Canooes; and the rest ran
their Canooes ashore, and Escaped on the other side of the River: and one of
the F^etchers, when all the Indians with him were killed, was Delivered out of
the Hands which had made a prisoner of him: tho his poor Father afterward Dyed
aamong them. Hereupon Major March, with his Army, took a Voyage farther
Eastward; having several Transport Vessels to accommodate them. Arriving at
Casco-Bay, they did, upon the Ninth of September, come as occult as they could,
further East among the Islands, near a place called, Corbins Sounds; and Landed
before Day, at a place called, Damascotta River: where, before Half of them
were well got ashore, and drawn up, the scarce-yet-expected Enemy, Entertained
them with a Voll^y, and an Huzza! None of ours were Hurt; but Major March,
Repaid 'em in their own Leaden Coin; and it was no sooner Light, but a
Considerable Battle Ensued. The Commanders of the Transport-Vessels, were
persons of such a mettle, that they could not with any patience, forbear going
ashore, to take a part of their Neighbors Fa^e; but the Enemy seeing things
operate this way, fled into their Fleet of Canooes which hitherto Lay out of
sight, and got off as fast, and as well, as they could, leaving some of their
Dead behind them; which they never do, but when under extreme Disadvantages.
Ou^ Army thus beat 'em off, with the Loss of about a Dozen men: whereof One
was, the worthy Captain D^mmock of Barnstable: and about as many Wounded,
whereof one was Captain Phillips of, Charlstown* and in this Action, Captain
Whiting a young Gentleman of much Worth, and Ho^^ Courageously acting his part,
as Commander of the Forces, the Helpers of the War, which the Colony of
Connecticut had Charitably lent unto thi^ Expedition, had his Life remarkably
rescued from a Bullet grazing the Top of his Head. Bu^ there was a Singular
Providence of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the whole of this matter. For by the
seasonable Arrival and Encounter of ou^ Army, an horrible Descent of Indians,
which ^robably might have laid whole Plantations De^solate, was most happily
Defeated* And at the same Time, the Signal Hand of Heaven, gave a Defeat unto
the purposes of the French Squ^^drons at Sea, so that they had something else
to do, than to Visit the Coast of New England.

ARTICLE. XXVII. The End of the Year, and we hope of the War.
O Thou Sword of the Wilderness; When wi^^ thou be quiet? On Sept. 11. A party
of the Enemy came upon the Town of Lancaster, then prepared for Mischief by a
wonderful Security and they did no little Mischief unto it. Ne^^ Twenty were
killed, and among the rest, Mr. John Whiting, the Pastor of the Church there:
Five were carried Captive; Two or Three Houses were burnt, and several Old
People in them. Captain Brown, with Fifty men, pursued them, till the Night
Stopped their pursuit: but it seems, a Str^ng^ Dog or two, unknown to the
Company, did by their Barking, alarm the Enemy, to Rise in the Night, and Strip
and Scalp an English Captive-Woman, and fly so far into the Woods, that after
Two Days Bootless Labor, our men Returned. November arrived, before any
farther Blood shed; and then, it was only of one man, in the Woods, at
Oyster-River. December arrived with the welcome Tidings, of a Peace concluded
between England and France; which made us Hope, that there would be little more
of any Blood shed at all. The Winter was the Severest, that ever was in the
memory of man. And yet February must not pass, without a Stroke upon Pemmaquid
Chub, whom the Government had mercifully permitted after his Examination, to
Retire unto his Habitation in Andover. As much out of the way as to Andover,
there came ^bove Thirty Indians, about the middle of February, as if their
Errand had been for a Vengeance upon Chub, whom (with his Wife) they now
Massacred there. They Took Two or Three House^, and Slew Three or Four Persons;
and Mr. Thomas Barnard, the worthy Minister of the place, very narrowly Escaped
their Fury. But in the midst of their Fury; there was one piece of Mercy, the
like whereof had never been seen before: For, they had got Colonel Dudley
Bradstreet, with his Family into their Hands; but perceiving, the Town
Muste^ing to follow them, their Hearts were so changed, that they dismissed
their Captives without any further Damage unto their Persons. Returning back by
Haverhil, they killed a couple and a couple they Took, with some Remarkable
circumstances, worthy to be made a distinct History. But, Reader, we are now in
Have, for to have our present History come unto an End: and though the end of
this Year did not altogether prove the end of the War; for, on May 9* School. the
Indians Murdered an old man, at Spruce-Creek, and carried away Three Sons, of
that old man; and wounded a man at York: yet we were not without prospect of
our Troubles growing toward a period: and even in that very Murder at
Spruce-creek there fell out one thing that might a little encourage our Hopes
concerning it. The Murderer was a famous kind of a Giant among the Indians; a
Fellow Reputed Seven Foot High: This Fellow killed the poor old man in cold
Blood, after he had Surrendered himself a Prisoner: But behold, Before many
Hours were out, this famous and bloody Fellow accidently Shot himself to Death,
by his Gun going off, when he was foolishly pulling a Canoo to the Shore with
it.

The last Bloody Action, that can have a Room in our Story is This.

The Indians, (though sometimes, it has been much doubted, What Indians!) have
in this War, made several Descents upon some of the upper Towns, that were our
most Northerly Settlements upon Connecticut River. But the Pious, and Honest
People in those Towns, have always given them a brave Repulse, and had a
notable Experience of the Divine Favor to them, in their preservations.
Deerfield has been an Extraordinary Instance of Courage, in keeping their
Station, though they have lived all this while in a very Pihahiroth; and their
worthy Pastor, Mr. John Williams, deserves the Thanks of all this Province, for
his Encouraging them all the ways Imaginable, to Stand their ground. Once the
Enemy was like to have Surprised them into a grievous Desolation; but he, with
his Praying, and Valiant, little Flock, most happily Repelled them. And now,
about the middle of July, School. a little before Sun set, Four Indians, killed a
Man and a Boy, in Hatfield Meadows; and carried away Two Boys, into Captivity.
The Advice coming to Deerfield in the Night, they presently Dispatched away
Twelve men, to way lay the Enemy coming up the River; having first, Looked up
unto the Lord Jesus Christ, that they might find the Enemy, and harm none but
the Enemy, and Rescue the Children which the Enemy had Seized upon. After a
Travel of near Twenty Miles, they perceived the Indians, in their Canooes
coming up the River, but on the other side of it, within a Rod or Two, of the
opposite Shore: Whereupon they so Shot, as to Hitt one of the Indians, and then
they all Jump't out of the Canooes, and one of the Boys with them. The wounded
Salvage crawled unto the Shore; where, his back being broken, he lay in great
Angush, often Endeavoring with his Hatchet, for to knock out his own Brains,
and tear open his own Breast, but could not: and another Indian seeing the Two
Boys getting one to another, designed 'em a Shot, but his Gun would not go
off: Whereupon he followed 'em with his Hatchet, for to have knocked 'em on the
Head; but just as he come at 'em, one of our men sent a Shot into him, that
Spoilt his Enterprise; and so the Boys getting together, into one Canooe,
brought it over to the Friends thus concerned for them. These good men, seeing
their Exploit performed thus far; Two Indians destroyed, and Two Children
delivered, they fell to Praising of God; and one young man particularly, kept
thus Expressing himself; Surely, It Is God, and not we, that have wrought this
Deliverance! But, as we have sometimes been told. That even in the Beating of a
Pulse, the Dilating of the Heart, by a Diastole of Delight, may be turned into
a contracting of it, with a Systole of Sorrow: In the Beating of a few Pulse,
after this, they sent five or six men, with the Canooe, to fetch the other,
which was lodged at an Island not far off, that they might pursue the other
Indians: when those two Indians having hid themselves in the High-grass,
unhappily Shot a quick Death, into the young man, whose Expressions were but
now recited. This Hopeful young man's Brother-in Law, was intending to have gone
out, upon this Action; but the young man himself importuned his Mother to let
him go: which, because he was an only Son, she denied; but then, fearing she
did not well to withold her Son from the Service of the Public, she gave him
leave: saying, See that you do now, and as you go along, Resign, and give up
your self unto the Lord; and I desire to Resign you to Him! So he goes, and so
he dies; And may he be the last, that falls in a Long and Sad War, with Indian
Salvages!

ARTICLE XXVIII. The Epilogue of a Long Tragedy.
FOr the present then, the Indians have Done Murdering; They Will Do so no more
till next Time. Let us then have done Writing; when we have a little informed
our selves what is become of the chief Murderers among those Wretches, for whom
if we would find a Name of a Length like one of their own Indian Longwinded
words, it might be, Bombardo gladio-sun hast-flammi-loquentes.

Major Convers, and Captain Alden, in pursuance of Instructions Received from
the Lieut. Governor and Council, arriving at Penobscot, on Oct. 14. School. were
there informed, That Madockawando, the noted Sagamore, with several other
Sachims of the East, were lately Dead. And six days after this, the chief
Sachims now Living, with a great Body of Indians, Entertained them with a
Friendly Discourse; wherein they said, That the Earl of Frontenac had sent
them, word, there was a Peace concluded between the Kings of France and
England, and that one of the Articles in the Peace was, for Prisoners on both
sides to be Returned, and they were Resolved to obey the Earl of Frontenac as
their Father; and accordingly such Prisoners of ours, as they had now at hand,
might immediately Return, if we could persuade them, for They would not Compel
them. When our English Messengers argued with them, upon the perfidiousness of
their making a New War, after their Submission, the Indians replied, That they
were Instigated by the Erench to do what they did, against their own
Inclinations; adding, That there were two Jesuits, one toward Amo^oscoggin,
the other at Narridgaway, both of which, they desired the Earl of Bellomont,
and the Earl of Frontenac, to procure to be Removed; otherwise it could not be
expected, that any Peace would continue long. The Indians also, and the English
Prisoners, gave them to understand, that the last Winter, many, both Indians,
and English Prisoners, were Starved to Death; and particularly, Nine Indians,
in one company went a Hunting, but met with such hard circumstances, that after
they had Eat up their Dogs, and their Coats, they Dyed horribly Famished: And
since the last Winter, a grievous and unknown Disease is got among them, which
consumed them wonderfully. The Sagamore Saquadock, further told them, That the
Kennebeck Indians, would fain have gone to War again, this last Summer, but the
other Refused, whereupon they likewise Desisted: And they Resolved now, to
Fight no more; but if any Ill Accident or Action, should happen on either side,
he did in the Name of the Indians Desire, That we would not presently make a
War upon it, but in a more amicable way compose the Differences.

That the Indian Affayrs might come to be yet more exactly understood, the
General Assembly of the Province, Employed Colonel John Phillips, and Major
Convers, to Settle them. These Gentlemen, took a Difficult and a Dangerous
Voyage, in the Depth of Winter, unto the Eastern parts, in the Province-Galley,
then under the Command of Captain Cyprian Southack; and the principal Sagamores
of the Indians there coming to them, did again Renew, and Subscribe the
Submission, which they had formerly made in the year 1693. With this Addition
unto it.

And whereas, notwithstanding the aforesaid Submission and Agreement, the said
Indians belonging to the Rivers aforesaid, or some of them, through the ill
counsel and instigation of the F^^nch, have perpetrated sundry Hostilities
against His Majesty's Subjects, the English, and have not Delivered and
Returned home several English Captives in their Hands, as in the said
Submission they Covenanted.

Wherefore, we whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, Sagamores, Captains, and
principal men of the Indians belonging unto the Rivers of Kennebeck,
Ammonoscoggin, and Saco, and parts adjacent, being sensible of our great
Offense and Folly, in not complying with the aforesaid Submission and
Agreement, and also of the Sufferings and Mischiefs, that we have hereby
exposed our selves unto; Do, in all Humble and most Submissive manner, cast our
selves upon His Majesty's Mercy, for the pardon of all our Rebellions,
Hostilities, and Violations of our promises, praying to be Received into His
Majesty's Grace, and protection; And for, and on behalf of our selves, and of
all other the Indians, belonging to the several Rivers and places aforesaid,
within the Sovereignty of His Majesty of Great Britain, do again acknowledge,
and profess our Hearty and Sincere Obedience, unto the Crown of England, and do
solemnly Renew, Ratify, and Confirm all and every of the Articles and
Agreements, contained in the aforesaid Recited Commission. And in Testimimony
thereof, we, the said Sagamores, Captains, and principal men, have hereunto set
our several Marks and Seals, at Casco Bay, near Mares point, the Seventh Day of
January, in the Tenth Year of the Reign of His Majesty, King WILLIAM the Third;
Annoque Domini, School, 9.

Subscribed, by, Moxus, -- and a Great Number more.
In the presencee of James Convers, Cyprian Southack. John Gills, Interpreter,
And Scodook, alias Sampson.


At this Time also, the Indians Restored as many of the English Captives, in
their Hands, as were able to Travel above an Hundred Miles in this terrible
Season of the year, from their Headquarters, down to the Seaside; giving all
possible satisfaction, for the Restoration of the rest, as Early in the Spring,
as there could be any Traveling.

The Condition of these Captives, has afforded many very Remarkable Things,
whereof it is a thousand pitties that so many are lost. But because one of the
Two Gentlemen Employed as Commissioners for the Treaty with the Indians, took
certain Minutes of Remarkable Things from some of the Captives, I am willing to
give the Reader a Taste of them.

At Mares point in Casco-Bay, Jan. 14 School, 9.
THe Captives informed me, That the Indians have Three Forts, at Narridgawog,
and Narrackomagog, and Amassacanty. And at each of these Forts, they have a
Chapel, and have Images in them.

They informed me, That Three Captives in one Wigwam, were Starved to Death
last Winter.

Mary Fairbanks, and Samuel Hutching, and some other Captives, told me, That
Jonathan Hutching, belonging to Spruce-Creek, a Lad fourteen years old; They
met him crying for want of Victuals, for in Two or Three Days he had nothing
to Eat. Afterward, as he was going to fetch some Wood, he felt something hard
in his Bosom. He put in his Hand, and unto his Astonishment, he found there
Two Great* Large Ears of Indian Corn, which were very well Roasted. He Eat
them, and knew not how they came unto him.

Some other of the Captives told me, That one Mary Catter, (which person we now
brought home with us, belonging to Kittery) her Master and many other Indians,
came down to Casco-Bay. There seeing some Sloops, or Shallops, they thought
they were the English coming upon them, and ran away, into the Woods, and left
the said Mary Catter very Sick in the Wigwam, without any thing at all to Eat.
They staid away many days; but left a Fire in the Wigwam. She Lay wishing for
something to Eat, and at length in came a Turtle. She got That, and Eat it; but
afterward began to Despair of out living the Famine, which was Returned upon
her. At length, when she was very Hungry, in came a Partridge; She took a
Stick, and Struck it, and Dressed it, and Eat it. And by that Time she was Hungry
again, her Master came to look after her.

They tell of several of the Indians, that have killed themselves, with their
own Guns, in taking them out of their Canooes.

Assacombuit sent Thomasin Rouse, a Child of about Ten years old, unto the
Waterside, to carry something. The Child cried: He took a Stick, and struck
her down: She lay for Dead: He took her up, and Threw her into the water: Some
Indians, not far off, ran in, and fetched her out. This Child we have now
brought Home with us.

This Assacombuit ha^h killed and Taken this War, (they tell me) an Hundred and
Fifty Men, Women, and Children. A Bloody Devil.

Thus the Paper of Minutes.

The Reader now has nothing but Peace before him. Doubtless he comforts
himself with Hopes, of Times better to Live in, than to Write of!

BUt that which yet more assures a Break of Day after a long and sad Night unto
us, is, That the Best King at this Day upon Earth, and the Greatest Monarch,
that ever Swayed the Scep^er of Great Britain, has Commissioned a Noble
Person, who has in him an Illustrious Image of His own Royal Virtues, to take
the Government of these Provinces; and he is accordingly Arrived now near our
Horizon. When the Schools of the Jews delivered, That there were Three Great
Gifts of the Good God unto the world, The Law, the Rain, and the Light; R.
Zeira added, I pray, let us take in Peace for a Fourth. All these Four Gifts of
God, are now Enjoyed by New England: But I must now ask, That our Hope of a
Fifth may be added unto the Number; which is, A GOVERNOR, of Signalized
Virtues. To the truly Noble Earl of BELLOMONT, the whole English Nation must
own it self Endebted, while it is a Nation, for the most Generous and
Successful Zeal, with which he Labored for those Acts of Parliament; by
Assenting whereunto, the Mighty WILLIAM, has Irradiated England, with
Blessings, that it never saw before His Happy Reign: Blessings richly worth all
the Expenses of a Revolution. England owes no less Immortal Statues, unto the
Earl of Bellomont, than Ireland, unto his Illustrious Ancestors. But the
Continent of America, must now Share in the Influences of that Noble Person,
whose Merits have been Signalized on the most famous Islands of Europe; and the
Greatest Person, that ever set foot, on the English Continent of America, is
now Arrived unto it. We are now satisfying our selves in the Expectations of
the Great and Good Influences, to be derived from the Conduct of a Governor,
in whom there will meet, -- Virtus et Summa potes^as.

And now, Reader, I will conclude our History of the Indian War, in Terms like
those used by the Syrian Writer at the Conclusion of his Book; Finis, per
Auxilium Domini Nostri Jesu Christi, mense Duodecimo, per manus peccatoris
pauperis e^ Errantis.

ARTICLE XXIX. Quakers Encountered.
FOr the present then, we have done with the Indians. But while the Indians
have been thus molesting us, we have suffered Molestations of another sort,
from another sort of Enemies, which may with very good Reason, be cast into the
same History with them. If the Indians have chosen to prey upon the Frontiers,
and Out-Skirts, of the Province, the Quakers have chosen the very same
Frontiers, and Out-Skirts, for their more Spiritual Assaults; and finding
little Success elsewhere, they have been Laboring incessantly and sometimes
not unsuccessfully, to Enchant and Poison the Souls of poor people, in the very
places, where the Bodies and Estates, of the people have presently after been
devoured by the Salvages. But that which makes it the more agreeable, to allow
the Quakers, an Article in our History of the Indians, is, That a certain silly
Scribbler, the very Firstborn of Non-sensicality, (and a Firstborn too, that
one might Salute as the Martyr Polycarp once did the wicked Marcion,) One Tom
Maule, at this Time Living in Salem, has exposed unto the Public, a Volumn of
Nonsensical Blasphemies and Haeresies, wherein he sets himself to Defend the
Indians, in their Bloody Villainies, and Revile the Country for Defending it
self against them. And that the Venom of this Pamphle^ might ^e Improved unto
the Height of Slanderous Wickedness, there has been since added unto it, in
another Pamphlet, a parcel of Ingredients compounded, for mischief, as if by
the Art of the Apothecary. None but he, whom the Jews, in their Talmuds call,
Ben-tamalion could have inspired such a Slanderer! Have the Quakers ever yet
Censured, this their Author, for holding forth in his Alcoran, [pag. 221.] That
the Devil, Sin, Death, and Hell, are but Nothing, they are but a Nonentity:
And, [pag. 183.] (...) all men who have a Body of Sin remaining in them, are
Witches? I have cause to believe, that they never did! Nor that they ever
ad^ised him to pull in his Horns, from goring the sides of New England, with
such passages as those, in [pag. 195.] the same horrible Pamphlet: God ^ath
well Rewarded the Inhabitants of New England, for their Unrighteous Dealings,
toward the Native Indians, whom now the Lord has suffered to Rew^r^ the
Inhabitants, with a double measure of Blood, by Fire and Sword, etc. And those
Unrighteous Dealings, he Explains, to be the Killing of the Indians, (or
Murdering of them) by the Old Planters of these Colonies, in their First
Settlement. Thus are the Ashes of our Fathers vilely staled upon, by one, who
perhaps would not stick at the Villainy of doing as much upon their Baptism it
self. I must tell you, Friends, that if you don't publicly, give forth a
Testimony to Defy, Tom Maule, and his Works, it will be thought by some, who it
may be don't wish you so well, as I do, that you own this Bloody Stuff: which,
doubtless you will not be so ill advised as to do* But, certainly, if the good
people of New England, now make it not a proverb for a Liar of the First
Magnitude, He is as very a Liar as TOM MAULE; they will deprive their Language
of one Significant Expression, which now offers it self unto them.

Let us now Leave our Friend Maules Works, as a fit Volumn to be an Appendix
unto the famous Tartaretus, and worthy of a Room in Pantagruels Library. The
fittest way to answer him, would be to send him to Boston Woods!

In the mean Time, I owe unto the Public, a piece of History, which it may be
for the Safety of our Northern Towns, to be acquainted withal. Know, Sirs, That
once the famous George Keith, undertook to be the Champion of our New-English
Quakers; and bid fair to be the very Dalae, or Prester John, of all the English
Tartars; but a Minister of Boston, upon that occasion, publishing a Book,
Entitled, Little Flocks guarded against grievous Wolves, could not but
complain of it, as a very Scandalous Thing, in George Keith, to maintain the
points of the Foxian Quakerism, while he really differed from them. All this
while, George Keith was admired by our Quakers, as an Apostle, or, an Oracle:
but, he finding it impossible to mentain the gross Tenets of the common
Quakers, preached unto them the Necessity of Believing on a Christ without, as
well as a Christ within. Hereupon, there gre^^ such alienations between him,
and the other Qu^kers, (who had been taught by George Fox, to say, The Devil is
in them, who say, they are Saved by Christ without them:) that he not only has
written diverse Learned Books, to confuse those very Doctrines of the Common
Quakers, which the Pastors of New England had, upon his Provocation, Written
against, but also has therefore undergone a Storm of Persecution, from the
Friends in Pensylvania: Yea, it is verily thought, that poor George would have
been made a Sacrifice to Squire Samael Jennings, and the rest of the
Pensylvanian Dragons, and that, since a crime which their Laws had made
Capital, was mention^d in the Mittimus whereby Keith was committed, they would
have Hanged him, if a R^volution upon their Government had not set him at
liberty. Being by the Fines, and Gaols, and Fierce Usages of the Quakers in
Pensylvania, driven over to England, the Wonderful Hand of God, has made this
very man, I think I may say, incomparably the greatest Plague, that ever came
upon that Sect, of Energumens. Although he do himself still retain the Name of
a Quaker, yet he has in one Treatise after another, Earnestly called upon the
Divines, throughout the Nation, more Vigorously to Employ their T^lants,
against the Quakers, as a more Dangerous Generation of People than they are
well aware; and he did in the year 1696. with the leave of the Lord Mayor,
Challenge the Quakers, to make their Appearance at Turners Hall, in the chief
City of Europe; where he proved unto the Satisfaction of a vast Assembly, that
the chief Writers of the Quakers, assert Christ neither to be God, nor Man; and
that they deny Christ to be prayed unto; and that they had affirmed, Christ's
outward Blood, shed on the Ground, to be no more than the Blood of another
Saint; and that they had charged him with New-Doctrine, for directing to Faith
in Christ without us, as well as within us; and that at their Meetings, they
had censured him, for saying, That Christ's Body came out of the Grave, which
they say, It never did: And many more such horrid matters. To confirm these
things, Besides the grievous Bites which Francis Bugg, one of their late
Friends, has given them, one Daniel Leeds, without wholly casting off the
Profession of a Quaker, has lately Printed a Book, wherein he produces above
Threescore Instances, of the Flat Contradictions, which he has observed in the
Books of the Friends, that have most pretended unto Infallibility; and he
demonstrates from evident matter of Fast, that though they declared unto the
World, That their Sufferings had been greater and more unjust, than the
Sufferings of Jesus, and Hi^ Apos^les; yet they themselves were no sooner
mounted into the Seat of Government, than they fell to Persecuting as bad as
any in the World. Albeit Fox writes, They that cause People to be put in
Prison, and have their Goods taken away, are Disorderly Teachers, and shall be
rooted out: Nevertheless Leeds proves by many Exemples, that the Pensylvanians
did it, even upon their own Friends, for mere Scruples of their Consciences.
It Is reported, The Quakers are so confounded at this Book of Leeds, that they
have been at the charge to buy up the whole Impression of it, and so to Stiffle
and Smother it: If it be so, I hope 'twill but produce a New Impression of so
rare a Book. The Mavelous Providence of our Lord Jesus Christ, having thus
employed, the Pens of the Quakers themselves, to warn you, that you beware of
Quakerism, it will be a mavelous Infatuation in any of you, after this, to be
led away with that Error of the Wicked. Reader, make a Pause, and here Admire
the Mavelous Providence of our Lord Jesus Christ! The first and great Apostle
of the Quakers, even George Fox, the Shoemaker, in his, Great Mystery, Page
94. Excludes from the Church of Christ, Those who are not Infallible, in
Discerning the Hearts of other men. Whereas now in Spite of all their
Infallibility, such Friends as Keith (and Leeds) whom they once admired,
profess that they never in their Hearts Believed, as the Common Foxian Quakers
do; and Quakerism Suffers from none in the world more than these. But that I
may a little Suggest unto you, certain Methods of Encountering those Adversaries
of your Faith, which go about, seeking whom they may deceive, and whom I do
here offer to prove as horrid Idolaters, as even those that worshipped the Rats
of Egypt, if it be fairly demanded of me, I will first Recite unto you, certain
passages, of a Discourse, which a Minister of Boston, had with a very Busy and
Noisy Teacher among the Quakers, (and another of the Friends,) in his Return
from his Visitation unto some of our Northern Towns, where the Giddy People,
had cried him up for Nonesuch.

Quaker. We are come to give thee a Friendly Visit.


Minister. I am glad to see you, at my House; you shall be welcome to the best
Entertainments, my House can afford you.

But will you do me the Favor, to let me understand, the Designs upon which
you visit these parts of the Country?


Quaker. I come to preach Jesus Christ.


Minister. Excuse me -- What Christ, I pray?


Quaker. The same Christ, that appeared unto Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob; and
that appeared unto Moses in the Bush, and that was with Israel in the
Wilderness. --


Minister. I would interrupt you. I perceive, that we shall be drawn into some
Discourse. Matter of Argument will occur, I foresee, in our Discourse. Argument
sometimes does draw forth Words that may have too much Warmth in them. I
purpose none such. But if you are sensible, that I do let fall any one such
word, in our Disputation, do me the favor, to take notice of it unto me, and
I Will immediately correct it. Now, if you please; --


Quaker. Thou speak very well. This is but acco^ding to the Good Report we
have heard of thee.


Minister. Friend, I am sensible, that you are come among us, to preach a
Religion, different from that which is commonly Preached, Professed, and
Practiced in the Country. If you approve the Religion of the Country, I cannot
see, where is the Sense of it, for y^u to take such tedious Journeys for our
Illumination. I pray, be so kind as to let me know, what point in our Holy
Religion, you do not Approve?


Quaker. It Is not my Business here to Enquire into thy Religion. I am come to
preach the Religion of Jesus Christ; the same that the Holy Prophets and
Apostles believed; even the Inward manifestation of Christ in our Hearts, --


Minister. To make short work on it; I perceive you both to be that sort of
people, we call Quakers. Now, there is among the Quakers, that extreme
Uncertainty, Variety, and Contradiction, that no man, can say what you hold,
any further than each Individual Person, will confess his own Tenets. I must
therefore, pray the favor of you, to tell me; Do you own George Foxes Book,
Entitled, The Great Mystery?


Quaker. It Is none of our Business, to tell what Books we own, and what we do
not own: And it is none of thy Business to Ask us. I say, We own Jesus Christ,
and His Inward Manifestation in our Hearts. And that is Enough!


Minister. You Will Excuse me: I do again ask, whether you do own George Foxes
Book, of, The Great Mystery? Because doubtless you have Read it. And if you will
ask me, as much concerning any Book under Heaven, (that I have Read,) Whether I
own it, or, How much I own of it, I Will answer you with all the Freedom in the
world.


Quaker. I say, What have thou to do with George Fox? or, to Examine me?


Minister. Yes, Friend, I do, and must, and will Examine You. For you are come
to Hold Forth unto as many of my Flock, as you can. And the Word of God bids me
to Try you. And, I have to do with George Eox too: because George Fox, in his
Writings, has to do with me. And if you will sincerely tell me, whether you
(...) George Fox, or no, I shall more probably tell, who you are. In short; If
you will say, you Deny and Renounce George Fox, then I must go another way to work
with you. If you will say you own him, then I must endeavor to Save you, from
some of his Damnable Haeresies.


Quaker. What Haer^sies?


Minister. Numberless. But I do at this Time call to mind Three of them.

First. That the Soul of man, is without Beginning, and Infinite. This is, if I
forget not, in the 90th page of that Book.

Secondly. That it is not contrary to the Scripture, That God the Father took
upon Him Human^ Nature. And, That the Scripture does not tell people of a
Trinity, nor Three Persons in God; but that these Three Persons were brought in
by the Pope.

This is in page 246.

Thirdly. That they that are not complete in Sanctification, are not complete
in Justification.

This is in, page 284. Now,

What say ye, Syrs?


Quaker. What have thou to do, to Rake into the Ashes of the Dead? Let George
Fox alone. Have thou any thing to charge upon me?


Minister. I shall know, if you will tell me, whether you own George Fox or no.
And you can tell me, if you will. I would be more civil to you, Syrs.


Quaker. I never saw that Book of George Fox.


[And so said, the other Quaker, that was with him.] Minister. Syrs, you
astonish me! What? Never see George Foxes Book* of, The Great Mystery. It Is
impossible! This Th^^g is to me, a Mystery! Syrs, That Book is the very Bible
of Quakerism. It Is Essential unto a Quaker, at least, unto a Teaching Quaker,
as you are, to be Indoctrinated from that Book. Never see it, man! -- However,
if you say so, I must Believe it.


Quaker. [Fell into an Harangue, Repeating what he had Preached abroad, about
the Country; which, because I would misrecite nothing, I dare not undertake
exactly to Recite in this place.]


Minister. I perceive our Conversation, will be to little Advantage, except we
get a little closer to some certain point, which I have hitherto Endeavored
but ineffectually.

Syrs, There are several points, which I would willingly bring you to. And
there happening to be several of my Honest Neighbors at hand, I have prayed
them (with your leave,) to walk in, that they may be Witnesses of what passes
between us*

First, I Will begin, if you please, with This.

I told you at the Beginning, I would not willingly Treat you, with one Hard
word. There is an Hard word, which will presently occur, by the unavoidable
course of Disputation. I would pray you, to ease me of the Trouble of speaking
it. You shall your self have the speaking of it.


Quaker. What Is that?


Minister. I pray, Friend, what does the Scripture say, of them that say, They
know Jesus Christ, and yet keep not His Commandments?


Quaker. Nay, What do thou say, the Scripture says in that case?


Minister. You will compel me, I see. -- I say then: The Scripture says, He
that says, I know Him, and keeps not His Commandments, is a Liar, and the Truth
is not in him. It Is in 1 John 2.4.


Quaker. And what then?


Minister. Why this then. He that says* I know Jesus Christ, and yet keeps not
the Commandments of Jesus Christ, is a Liar, and the Truth is not in him.

You say, You know Jesus Christ. But you must give me leave to say, That you
Keep not the Commandments of Jesus Christ.

Therefore, -- pray Syrs, do you help out the Conclusion. I am loath to speak
it. You know what it is.


Quaker. Yes, yes. We know well enough what Conclusion, thou would be at:
Thou would say, That we are Liars, and that the Truth is not in us.


Minister. Right! Since it must be so.


Quaker. But what Comandment of Jesus Christ, it there, that we don't keep?


Minister. The Commandment of Jesus Christ, is, For His Disciples to be
Baptized with Water; But you, Quakers, do not keep that Commandment of Jesus
Christ.


Quaker. How do thou prove, that Jesus Christ commanded Baptism with Water?


Minister. I know, you must have the word, Water, or nothing will content you.
Else I would have urged, for a Sufficient proof, our Lords Commanding His
Ministers, to Baptize men, [Matth. 28.19.] This Command Expresses our Duty.
It Is not our Duty to Baptize men with the Holy Spirit. This belongs not unto
Us, but unto Him, who is that Holy Spirit is. You will not say, we Sin, if we
don't Baptize the Disciples in all Nations, with the Holy Spirit. So then, it
must be a Baptism with Water, which is there Commanded by our Lord. But, as I
said, you must have the word, Water; and you shall have it.

The Apostle Peter said, --


Quaker. The Apostle Peter! The Apostle Peter! Thou wast to prove that Jesus
Christ Commanded Baptism with Water. And now, Thou art come to the Apostle
Peter!


Minister. Stay, Friend; not so fast! Will you say then, that the Commandments
brought by the Apostle Peter, as the Commandments of Jesus Christ, are not the
Commandments of Jesus Christ? But however, I Will mend the Expression, --

The Spirit of Jesus Christ in the Apostle Peter, (Now, I hope, it sits you!)
--


Quaker. [J.S.] Thou art a Monster, all Mouth, and no Ears, --


Minister. -- Prithee, talk Civilly, Don't make me Believe, that I am at
Ephesus. If I were in one of your Houses, I would not give you such Language;
you had but now, a greater liberty to use your Mouth, than I have hitherto
taken; and my Ears were patient. But, you foresee my Argument, is going to
pinch you. It Is but Civility to let me Finish it.


Quaker. Thou wast to prove, that Jesus Christ Commanded Baptism with Water.
And thou have not proved it. And therefore thou Speak Falsely.


Minister. What do you mean? These little Shuffles will not help you.

I say, The Spirit of Jesus Christ, in the Apostle Peter, after our Lords
Ascension, when it was Impossible for John's Baptism (which was into the Messiah
Suddenly to come, not, already come,) should have place, did say, in Act. 10
47. Can any man Forbid Water, that these should not be Baptized, which have
Received the Holy Ghost?


Quaker. How does this prove, That Jesus Christ Commanded these to be Baptized
with water?


Minister. Thus; --

If Jesus Christ had not Commanded Baptism with Water, any man might have then
Forbid it.

But, no man could Forbid it.

Therefore Jesus Christ Commanded it.


Quaker. Therefore! Therefore! Argo, Argo! Why, Do thou think, Religion is to
be proved by thy Therefore's, by thy Argo's?


Minister. Friend, I perceive, the word, Therefore, is a very dead doing sort
of a Word to ye. I Will dismiss this Terrible Word. I Will only say, The Reason,
why none could forbid Believers to be Baptized with Water, was merely Because
Jesus Christ Commanded it.


Quaker. BECAUSE; Why, the word, Because is as bad as the word, Therefore.


Minister. [Smiling.] It may be so. But in the mean time, you are wonderfully
unreasonable! I say, why could none forbid Water, for the Faithful to be
Baptized.


Quaker. Who says, None could Forbid Water? It Is only said, Can any man Forbid
Water?


Minister. I pray, Syrs; And is not this, None can.

But I Will bring the matter to bear upon you, without those two Dangerous words,
THEREFORE, and BECAUSE; at which you are so terrified.

I will put the matter into the Form of a Question: And your Answer to this
Question, shall put an End, to our present Velitations.


Quaker, What have we to do to Answer thy Questions?


Minister. My Question is,

Whether a man might not forbid in the Worship of Jesus Christ, what Jesus
Christ Himself has no way Commanded?

You can Answer this Question, if you will; and I desire, I demand your Answer.


Quaker. What? For us to answer thy Questions! That would be, to Ensnare our
selves.


Minister. I am very sensible of That. Therefore, take Notice, You are
Ensnared, in the Toyls of your own miserable Delusions. But still, I say,
Answer my Question*


Quaker. Do you see, Neighbors? Friend M. was to prove, that Jesus Christ
commanded Baptism, and now, he is come to a Question!


Minister. So I am Truly. And* I see it is a Question, that puts you into a
Sweat. I beseech you to Answer it. I Require you to Answer it. What shall I
say? I Defy you to Answer it. Pardon my Cogency; You Force me to 't!


Quaker. I say, How does a Question prove, That Jesus Christ commanded Baptism
with Water? And why do thou Baptize Infants?


Minister. Nay, I Will keep you to the Question. You Answer to the Question, will
prove it; I am designing to make you your selves prove it. And, Sirs, I do here
offer to you, That I will give the best Answer I can, to any Question in the
world, that you shall put unto me: why are you so loath to Answer one short
Question of mine?


Quaker. I be not obliged to Answer thy Question?


Minister. I must contrive some fair way, to Compel some Answer unto this one
Question. Give me leave therefore to tell you, That if you do not Answer this
Question, you go away conquered and confounded. Yea, Sirs, I must in
Faithfulness tell you. That you carry away, the dreadful Mark of Heretics,
upon you, Even, To be Condemned in your own Conscience. You go away,
Self-Condemned, That you don't keep the Commandments of Jesus Christ; and
Therefore, That you are, -- what, you Remember, the Apostle John said
concerning you.


Quaker. I don't condemn Thee, for using Baptism with Water.


Minister. This is no Answer to the Question still: For you don't observe it
your self; neither you, nor any Quakers under Heaven. Wherefore I still urge
for an Answer.


Quaker. Thou art not Civil to us. Is this thy Civility to Strangers? We have
heard a Great Fame of thee, for thy Civil* and obliging carriage, toward
others that are not of thy persuasion. But now thou are uncivil to us. That
which I have to say, is, I will keep to that Book, the Bible, and I will preach
what is in that Book.


Minister. [Taking up the Bible,] Friend, you pretend then to understand this
Book. I do here make you this offer; That I will immediately Turn you to Ten
several places, in one Book of this Holy Bible, [the Chronicles,] And if you
can give me a Tolerable Solution of any one of them, I Will acknowledge that you
are worthy to preach out of it.


Quaker. Can thou do it thy self?


Minister. I Humbly Hope, I can*


Quaker. How do thou know that I cannot?


Minister. I say, you cannot. Now do you Accept my offer: If you can, I Will own,
that I have wronged you.


Quaker. What Is that to thee, what I can do?


Minister. Look you, Neighbors: I think, it is to no purpose, to proceed unto
any other points, with such unreasonable Folks as these. You see, how It Is. If
you desire it, I Will proceed.


Neighbors. No, Sir, It Is to no purpose, they are a people of no Reason.


Quaker. Nay, Friend M. I would not have thee to be so Hard upon us. I mean
Thee no Harm. I hear, thou take a great deal of pains for the good of thy
people. And they will do well, to Hearken to Thee. I have Rebuked some of them
for speaking Evil of thee. Yea, It is my Judgment, That thou, and other such
Ministers as Thou art, ought Honorably to be maintained by the people.


Minister. You differ from all your Friends, methinks* What? Would ^ou have us
to be Hirelings? It Is very strange to hear a Quaker plead for the Maintenance
of our Ministry. But for your satisfaction. I Will tell you, The people whom I
Serve, I never once in all my Life Asked for any Maintenance or Salary; and I
never made any Agreement with them about any Salary, in all my Life.


Quaker. I say, I would not have Thee too Hard upon us. New England has
Persecuted our Friend at a grievous Rate.


Minister. Nay, Friends, Be not you too Har^* upon me about that matter. I
Approve Perse^cution, as Little as any of you all. I abhor it; have Preached
against it, I have Writ against i^* I have Bewailed the mistakes that some Good
men have committed in it. I would have you Treated with all the Civility,
imaginable. I would not have the Civil Magistrate inflict up on you, the Damage
of one Farthing for you Consciences.


Quaker. But now, you may see, how the Judgments of God, are come upon the East
Country, by the Indians for your Persecution.


Minister. I cannot tell That neither. For tho I am sorry at my Heart, that ever
you were Persecuted* Yet, I cannot say, That because Boston was guilty of
Persecution, therefore New^^chawanni^, and Casc^ Bay, (places in other
Provinces,) that never had any such thing in it must be cut off.


Quaker. Yes, they Persecuted at the East ward There were Two Women, of our
Friends, (...) Scour^ed there.


Minister. I suppose, your refer to a Story* published by one George Bishop, a
Quaker: He Complains bitterly, of the New England Persecution, because there
came Two Quaker women Stark Naked, into our Public Assemblies, and they were
carried unto the Whipping post for it. This was in the Northern parts of the
Country, as I have been told. These Baggages, I believe, were the persecuted
women, you talk of!


Quaker. Well, and what if they did appear Naked, to show the People the
Nakedness of their Sins?


Minister. For Shame, Sirs, let us have no more of This Talk.


Quaker. Why did thou treat George Keith so hardly?


Minister. He deserved it, when I so Treated him. And you Quakers, have since
Treated him Ten Times worse than ever I did. You write whole Books of Railing
against him. I never got him into Goals, and under Fines. I should have been
Troubled at any that would have done so. But you have done it. Therefore, I
believe, it is best for you to leave that Subject.


And so, after a few other small Pulls, the Saw stood still: The Conference
ended.

There are Five or Six witnesses, which I have to attest unto the Truth of this
Relation, which I have here given, of a Conference, with a Quaker, which had
all the Friends far and near wondering (as well as wandering) after him, And yet
these Cretians boasted among their Friends, how much they had confounded the
Minister in this Conference.

All that I would presume now to Commend unto those Towns, which have such
Quakers annoying of them, is This Brethren carry it well, even with all
convenient Civility and Humanity, toward this Poor Deluded People; while you
Charge your Children and Servants, that they do not go unto their Meetings: and
cast not our selves also into Temptation, by needlessly being There. But after
all, yea, before all, make an Experiment, which the Good People at Lyn made a
little while ago, with a Success truly observable and memorable.

The Quakers made a more than ordinary Descent upon the Town of Lyn, and
Quakerism suddenly spread there, at such a rate as to Alarm the Neighborhood.
The Pastor of the Church there, Indicted a Day, for Prayer with Fasting, to
Implore the Help of Heaven* against the unaccountable Enchantment; and the Good
People presented accordingly, on July 19. 1694. their servent Supplications,
unto the Lord, that the Spiritual Plague might proceed no further, The Spirit
of our Lord Jesus Christ gave a Remarkable Effect, unto this Holy Method of
Encounting the Charms of Quakerism: It proved a Better method, than any
Coercion of the Civil Magistrate: Quakerism in Lyn received (as I am informed)
a Death-Wound, from that very Day; The Number of Quakers, in that place has
been so far from Increasing, that I am told, it has since rather Decreased
notably. Now let other Endangered Plantations; Go, and do likewise.

The Quakers, are such Enemies, to the Holy Religion, which is the Life of New
England, That you must Excuse my concern to have you Fortified against their
Attempts also, while I am giving you an History of your other Enemies. What all
of them would be at, methinks, was a little intimated by what One of them once
Declared. The Globe^Tavern was near our Public and Spacious Meeting^House at
Salem: and a Noted Quaker there caused a paper to be set up on the Door of that
Meeting^House, which had such Stuff as this written in it.

Beware, Beware, and Enter not:
But rather to the Globe, and spend a Pot.
This is but like a passage mentioned in the Life, of that Excellent man Mr. P.
Henry, lately published. A Debauched Gentleman, in his Revels, Drinking and
Swearing, at Malpas, was Reproved by a Quaker, then in his Company. Why, said
the Gentleman, I Will ask thee one Question; Whether it is better for me to
follow Drinking and Swearing, or to go and Hear Henry? The Quaker answered;
Nay, of the Two, rather follow thy Drinking and Swearing. Behold, the Spirit of
Quakerism! When I once compelled a Quaker to confess, that the Body of Jesus of
Nazareth rose from the Grave, and went up into the Heavens, he begged me that I
would not improve his confession, as if made on the behalf of all his Friends.
And another of them, as, I hear, publicly Held Forth by one of his late
Stercorations, That the Husks of the Swine, on which the Prodigal fed in the
Parable, were, The Bread and Wine, in that which People call, The Sacrament.

But what will become of those Forlorn Villages, that shall Resign themselves
to the conduct of that Light within; which our Sacred Scriptures indeed never
expressly mention but once or twice, and then call it, Real Darkness; and which
may lead men to all this wickedness? There was among the Mahometans in the
Eastern parts of the World, a Sect called Batenists, from the Arabic, Baten,
which signifies within:) who were Enthusiasts that followed, The Light within,
like our Quakers; and on this principle, they did such Numberless Villainies,
that the World was not able to bear them. None of all their Diabolical Raveries
which I know I am now pulling on my self, and which I value no more, than if
they came from the P^m^iats of Ma^abar, shall frighten me from soliciting your
Christian Cares and Prayers, That you be not overrun with English Batenists.
And I must sollicitously make the Observation, That although such a Number of
Quakers in our Nation, be a dreadful Judgment of God upon men, smiting them
with Spiritual^ Plagues for their Unfruitfulness and Unthankfulness under the
Gospel; nevertheless, it is a special Favor of God, that the Number of Quakers
is no Greater; for if they should multiply, not only would Christianity be
utterly Extinguished, but Humanity it self Exterminated. It is well known, That
when a Quaker had Stolen an Hourglass, their Mahomet, George Fox (of whom
Sol. Eccles, in a Sheet called, The Quakers Challenge, page 6. sales, He was
the Christ,) thus vindicated it [ Great Mist. page 77.] As for any being moved
of the Lord, to take away your Hour glass from you, by the Eternal Power it is
owned. Reader, Do not thou even Tremble to think, what a Dark Land, we should
have, if it should ever be filled with these pretended followers of the Light;
who wear the Name of Tremblers? In Truth, I know not unto what better one might
compare them, than unto the Macheveliers growing upon St. Lucia; Trees which
bear Apples of such an Odor and Color as invites people to Eat thereof; but
it is horribly Dangerous to do so; for there is no Antidote that can secure a
man from speedy Death, who has once tasted of them. The Leaf of the Trees,
makes an Ulcer on any place touched with it; the Dew that falls from them
fetches off the Skin; the very Shadow swells a man, so as to kill him, if he be
not speedily helped.

ARTICLE XXX. Things to Come.
FRom Relating of Things past, it would no doubt, be very Acceptable to the
Reader if we could pass to Foretelling of Things to come Our Curiosity in this
point may easily come to a Degree Culpable, and Criminal. We must be Humbly
content, with what the God (...) whose Hands are our Times, has Revealed unto
us.

Two Things we will venture to Insert.

First, For our selves, at home, Let us Remember an awful Saying of our
Goodwin, quoted by my Reverend Friend, Mr. Noyes, in his late Excellent Sermon
at our Anniversary Election.

As you Look for Storms in Autumn, and Frosts in Winter, so Expect Judgments,
where the Gospel has been Preached; for the Quarrel of the Covenant must be
Avenged.

Secondly. For the Church abroad, I am far from deserting, what was Asserted,
in the Sermon Preached at our Anniversary Election, in the year, 1696. The
Tidings which I bring unto you, are, That there is a Revolution, and a
Reformation, at the very Door, which will be vastly more wonderful, than any of
the Deliverances yet seen by the Church of God, from the Beginning of the
World, I do not say, That the Next year will bring on this Happy Period: but
this I do say, The Bigger part of this Assembly, may, in the course of Nature,
Live to see it. These Things will come on, with horrible Commotions, and
Concussions, and Confusions: The mighty Angels of the Lord Jesus Christ, will
make their Descent, and set the World a Trembling at the Approaches of their
Almighty Lord: They will Shake Nations, and Shake Churches, and Shake mighty
Kingdoms, and Shake once more, not Earth only, but Heaven also.

Unto these Two Things, my Reader will not misimprove it, I hope, if I add a
Third, lately fallen into my Hands; and never yet so Exposed unto the Public.

A Wonderful Matter Incontestably Demonstrated, and much Desired by some Good
men, to be in this place Communicated.
MR. John Sadler, a very Learned and a very Pious man, and a most Exemplary
Christian, Lay Sick in his Bed, at his Manor, of Warmwell in Dorset Shire: In
the year, 1663. In the Time of his Illness, he was visited by Mr. Cuthbert
Bound, the Minister of Warmwell.

Mr. Sadler then desired his man, (one Thomas Gray,) to see that there should
be no body else in the Room, and Lock the Door, and give him the Key.

He then Sat up in his Bed, and asked Mr Bound and the Attendent Gray; Whether
they Saw no body? and, whether they did no^ hear, what a person said, that
stood at the cor^ner of the Chamber? They Replied, No. H^ wondered at it, and
said, The man spoke so loud that the whole Parish might hear him.

Hereupon, calling for a Pen and Ink, He wrote what was told him, and made Them
set their Hands to it; For he told them, the man would not be gone, till he had
seen that done.

The Articles written down, were;

I. That there would, after so many months, be a Plague in London, whereof so
many would Dye: [Naming the Number.]

II. That the greatest part of the City would be Burnt, and Paul's, he
particularly showed him, Tumbled down into Romes, as if Beaten down with Great
Guns.

III. That there would be Three Se^ Fights, between the English and the Dutch.

IV. That there would appear Three Blazing Stars; the Last of which, would be
terrible to behold. [He said, The man showed him the Star.]

V. That afterward, there would come Three small Ships, to Land in the West of
Weymouth, which would put all England in an uproar, but it would come to
nothing.

VI. That in the year 1688. there would come to pass such a Thing in the
Kingdom as all the world would take notice of.

VII That after this, and after some further Disturbance, there would be Happy
Times: And a Wonderful Thing would come to pass, which he was not now to
Declare.

VIII. That he, and his man ( Gray) should Dye, before, the Accomplishment of
these things; but Mr. Bound should Live ^o see it.

IX. For the confirmation of the whole, the man thus appearing, told him, That
he should be well the next Day; and the^e would come Three men to visit him,
One from Ireland, One from Guernsey, and his Brother Bingham.

Accordingly, The Day following Mr. Sadler went abroad: And this Day, there
accidentally met at his House, and so Dined with him, first, the Lord Steel,
who had been Lord Chancellor of Ireland, and now returning from thence, in his
way to London, came to see Mr. Sadler: Secondly, Monsieur de la Marsh, a French
Minister from Guernsey, and Lastly, his Brother Bingham.

Mr. Bound, and Gray, within Three Days, after this, made Affidavit of it,
before Colonel Giles Strangewayes, and Colonel Cocker, who is yet alive.

Mr. Daniel Sadler, and Mr. John Sadler, the Sons of this old Mr. Sadler, very
serious and worthy Christians, are at this Time Living in Rotterdam; one of
them, is His Majesty's Agent for Transportation.

Mr. Daniel Sadler, making his Applications to Mr. Bound, for his Testimony
about this matter, the said Old Mr. Bound, in a Letter, dated, Warmwell, Aug.
30 th. O. S. 1697 asserts the matter at large unto him; and Subscribes, This I
shall testify before the King himself, if occasion ^e, when he comes into
England.

Yours, Cuthbert Bound, yet Minister of Warmwell.

Mr. Daniel Sadler, has this Testimony further fortifyed, by a Letter from One
Mr Robert Loder, telling him, That he had met with an Old Copy of the
Depositions aforesaid; which accordingly he transcribes for him* and several
yet living in Dorchester affirmed unto him, the Truth of the Story.

The Copies of these Letters are now in Boston in New England.

Mr. John Sadler, adds his Testimony, That his Father told unto his Mother, and
himself, That he had been told of Remarkable Things to come to pass,
particularly, the Burning of London, and Paul's. But that they were not
acquainted with all the mat^ers, he foretold unto Mr. Bound, and Gray. Only he
Remembers well, They Two were with him in his Chamber alone; and his Father
went abroad within a day or two; and that, (according to the Sign he had given
to them,) the Three Person^ aforesaid visited him. He adds, That his Father
spoke of leaving in Writing, the things that had been Shown to him; and that a
little after, he saw once a Thin Octavo Manuscript in his Fathers Study, which
he believed had those things in it: but after that, he could never find it.
This Testimony, is Dated, in October. 1697.

A Worthy and a Godly Gentleman, at this Time, Living in Roterdam, and
well-acquainted, with both Mr. Daniel, and Mr. John Sadler, Sends this to Mr.
Increase Mather, in New England* with a Letter Dated, 26. March. School.

REader, I am not Ignorant, that many Cheat^ and Shams, have been Imposed upon
the World, under the Notion of Communications from the Invisible World; and, I
hope, I am not becoming a Visionary. But Fancies, and Juggles, have their
Foundation laid in Realities: there would never have been Impostures of
Apparitions, and of Communications from the Invisible World, if there never had
been Really some such things, to be Counterfeited and Imitated. Wise men
therefore, will count it a Folly in its Exaltation and Extremity, to Deride all
Instances, of Strange Things ^^^iving to us, from the Invisible World* because
that Some Things have been Delusions* No, it is a Wisdom, that is pleasing to
God, and useful to the World, for a due Notice to be taken, of Rare Things,
wherein we have Incon^estable Proofs, of an Invisible World, and of the
Interest it has in Humane Affayrs. The Narrative of Mr. Sadler, is advantaged
with such Incontestable Proofs, and contains in it such* Notable passages,
that, I believe, I do well to lay it before Serious Men; and, I believe, no
Serious Men, will play the Buffoon upon it. By no means pretend I ^o passany
Judgment upon this Remarkable. Narrative; by no means do I presume to tell what
I think of it, any more than this, that it is Remarkable. Nevertheless, for the
Caution of unwary Readers, I will annex the words of an Excellent Writer upon
Divine Providence.

W^^ch against an Unmortified Heb, after Ex^^^^c^ical, or Extraordinary
Dispensations of Providence. Luther: said, The Martyrs, without the apparition
of Angels* being confirmed by the word of (...) alone, dyed for the Name of
Christ; and why should not we (...)? And he observes, how ^he Devil ^hath
greatly deluded parties (...) ^^ve been gaping after Vision^*

Nor will it be unprofitable, to Recite the words of another Author, whom I
must quote* as R. David Kimchi, did use to quote R. Joseph Kimchi, under the
Title of, Adoni Av^.

Evil Angels do now appear, more often than Good Ones. It Is an unwarrantable,
and a very Dangerous Thing, for men to wish, that they might see Angels, and
converse with them. Some have done so; and God has been provoked with them for
their Curiosity and Presumption, and has permitted Devils to come unto them,
whereby they have been Deceived and Undone.

More Particular Prognostications, upon the Future State of NEW ENGLAND.
BUt, Oh, my dear NEW ENGLAND, Give one of thy Friends Leave, to utter the
Fears of thy best Friends concerning thee; and consider, what Fearful cause
there may be for thee to expect sad Things to Come? If every Wise man be a
Prophet, there are some yet in thee, that can Prophesy. Praedictions, may be
formed out of these

Reasonable Expectations.

I. Where Schools are not Vigorously and Honorably Encouraged, whole Colonies
will sink apace into a Degenerate and Contemptible Condition, and at last
become horribly Barbarous: And the first Instance of their Barbarity will be
that they will be undone for want of Men, bu^ not see and own, what it was that
undid them*

II. Where Faithful Ministers, are Cheated and Grieved, by the Sacrilege of
people that Rebe^ against the Express Word of Christ, Let him that is Taught in
the Word, Communicate unto hi^ that Teaches in all Good Things, the Righteou^
Judgments of God will Impoverish that people* The Gospel will be made
Lamentably Unsucces^ful unto the Souls of such a people; The Min^^sters will
either be fetched away to Heaven, o^ have their Ministry made woefully Insipid
by their Encumbrances on Earth.

III. Where the Pastors of Churches in a Vicinity, despise or neglect Formed
Associations for mutual Assistence in their Evangelical Services, Woe to him
that is alone. It Is a sign, either that some of the Pastors want Love to one
another* or that others may be conscious to some Faith, which may dispose them
to avoid Inspection, but fatal to the Churches will be the Tendency of either.

IV. Where Churches, have some Hundreds of Souls under their Discipline; but
the single Pastors, are not strengthened, with Consistories of Elders, or, an
Agreeable Number of wise and good and grave men chosen to join with the Pastor,
as their Praesident, in that part of his Work, which concerns the Well-Ruling
of the Flock, there Discipline will by Degrees be utterly Lost; The Grossest
Offenders, will by degrees, and through parties, be scarce to be dealt withal.

V. Where Pastors, do not Quicken Orderly Private Meetings of both Elder and
Younger Christians, for Exercises of Religion, in their Neighborhood, the
Power of Religion will observably Decay, among those Christians; the Seed sown
in the Public, will not so much prosper, for want of being watered in private:
And when the Pastor shall fall sick, there will not be so much as one company
of Christians in all his Flock, that can come together, to pray for his Life.

VI. Where Churches professing a Great Reformation, shall in their Constitution
cease to Represent unto the World, the Holiness of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
of His Heavenly Kingdom; they will become Loathsome to that Holy Lord; their
Glory is gone, and their Defense goes with it: the dreadful Wrath of Heaven,
will Astonish the World, with the Things which it will do unto them.

VII. Where Churches are Loath to give unto Councils regularly upon Complaints
Enquiring into their Administrations, an Account thereof, it is much to be
suspected, that they are Chargeable with Male-Administrations; and if the
Advice of Regular Councils come once to be ^rod under foot, by any Particular
Churches, all serious men will be afraid of joining to such Unaccountable
Societies.

VIII. Where a mighty Body of people in ^ Country, are violently set upon
running dow^ the ancient Church State in that Country, and are violent for the
Hedge about the Communion at the Lords-Table to be broken down, and for those
who are not Admitted unto the Communi^on, to stand on equal Terms in all Votes
with them that are; the Churches there are not (...) from a tremendous
Convulsion, and they ha^ need use a mavelous Temper of Resolution with
Circumspection to keep it off.

IX. Where Churches are bent upon Backsliding* and carried away with a strong
Spirit of Apostasy, whatever Minister shall set himself to withstand their Evil
Bents, will pull upon himself an inexpressible contempt and hatred; Be his
merits never so Great, a Thousand Arts will be used for to make him Little; He
had need be a man of Great Faith and Great Prayer; But God will at length
Honor such a man, with wonderful Recompenses.

X. Where a Fountain shall become Corrupt* there the Streams will no longer
Make Glad the City of God.

XI. The Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, we have with much expense, lately
sent unto several of our Southern Plantations: If it be Rejected, there are
Terrible Things to come upon them; 'twere better to have Lived in Sodom, than
in one of those Plantations.

XII. God prepare our dear Brethren, in Connectecut, for certain Changes that
are Impending over them.

Finally; There was a Town called, Amyclae, which was Ruined by Silence. The
Rulers, because there had been some false Alarms, forbad all people under pain
of Death to speak of any Enemies approaching them: So, when the Enemies came
indeed, no man durst speak of it, and the Town was Lost. Corruptions will grow
upon the Land; and they will gain by Silence: 'Twill be so Invidious to do it,
No man will dare to speak of the Corruptions; and the Fate of Amyclae will come
upon the Land.

Reader, I ^^ll'd these things Prophecy, But, I wish, I be not all this while
Writing History.

Now, if any Discerning persons, apprehend any Dangers to In^pend over
New England, from any of the Symptom^s mentioned, it is to be (...), they will
Employ their best Thoughts, how to Anticipate those Dangers. And whereas, it is
the sense of all men, who discern any thing, that it is in vain to hope for any
Good, until a Spirit of Grace, be poured out from Heaven, to dispose men unto
it, I beg them to consider, whether the only way to obtain that Spirit of
Grace, be not, Humbly to Ask it, by Prayer with Fasting before the God of
Heaven.

It was therefore an Article in an Advice agreed, by some of the principal
Ministers in this Province; and with the mention of that Advice, (which
doubtless, all but the Sleeping will follow) I Will conclude; Solemn Days of
Prayer with Fasting, celebrated in our Churches, to Implore the Grace of God,
for the Rising Generation, would probably be of blessed consequence, for the
Turning of our Young people, unto the God of our Fathers. The more there is
this way ascribed unto Grace, the more the Grace of God is like to be
communicated; and there is in this way, a natural and a plentiful Tendency to
Awaken our Unconverted Youth, unto a sense of their Everlasting Interests;
Which were it generally accomplished, a Remarkable Reformation where therein
Effected.

Observable Things.

THE HISTORY OF Ten Years Rolled away under the great Calamities of A WAR, WITH
Indian-Salvages: Repeated and Improved, in a SERMON, at Boston-Lecture. 27 d. 7
m. School.

Judge. VI. 3, 5, 6. The Children of the EAST came up against them; and they
Entered into the Land, to Destroy it; and Israel was greatly Impoverished.

Boston, Printed for Samuel Phillips, at the Brick Shop. 1699.

PREFACE.
WHen the Israelites were Engaged in a WAR, they made choice of a Priest among
them, to Serve some of their greatest Occasions in it, and after a Sacred
Unction bestowed upon him, we are told by Maimonides, he was called Mashuach
Milchamah, that is to say, Unctus Belli; which was as much as to say, The
Priest of the War.

To bring unto a People profitable Advices and Reflections upon a WAR, wherein
they are Engaged, and sound the Silver Trumpet, of the Gospel, with agreeable
Notes unto them in it, is to do in some sort, the Office of the Mashuach
Milchamah* and this Office the Ensuing Discourse presumes to do, with
Endeavors that the Voice of Heaven by the Trumpet of our late War, may he
heard giving a certain Sound, in these Echo's of it.

The History of a long War, has, with all possible care of Truth, been given
you. The Author Earnestly prays, that if the least material Mistake have
happened in the History, He may be Advised, and It may be corrected. The Noise
that may be made, by a few Sordid People, here and there, in a Room Tophetized
with Smoke, and Rhum, and Spittle, and Malice, and Lies, crying out concerning
the most Conscientious Essays, to preserve Memorable Truths, They are a parcel
of Lies! He values not. But he now tenders to the Acceptance of the more
Civilized Readers, an Improvement of Memorable Truths, which it was His Duty to
make, and it will be Theirs to mind.

THE REMARKEABLES of a long WAR, Collected and Improved.
Boston-Lecture, 27 d. 7 m. School.
IF a Book of some Consequence, be laid open before one that cannot Read, he
may Look, and Gaze upon it; but unto what purpose, as long as he cannot
understand it? This very Comparison, is by the Great Austin well applied unto,
The Judgments of God. And I will therefore so far Improve the Comparison, as to
observe, That the Judgments of God, under which we have been Languishing for
Ten years together, are a sort of a Book put into our Hands; a Book indeed all
written in Blood; a Book yet full of Divine Lessons for us. But can every man
Read this Terrible Books? No, Methinks, I see the Book managed like the Book
brought unto the Blessed Prophet of old, in Isa. 29.12. The Book is delivered
unto him that is not Learned, Saying, Read this, I pray thee; and he says, I
am not Learned. It will certainly Be a work, well becoming a Minister of the
Gospel, and every Serious Christian will be glad of seeing the Work done; To
take this Book, and help you, as well as we can to Spell the Divine Lessons
contained in it.

Christians, Let us now do a work, for which the Great God has given us, that
Warrant, and that Command, in PSALM. CVII.43. Who is Wise, and will observe
these Things?



THe various and mavelous Dispensations of the Divine Providence, toward the
Children of men, are in this Elegant Psalm admirably set before us. Among those
Dispensations, there is a particular mark set upon this, That the God of Heaven
Turns a Fruitful Land into Barrenness, for the Wickedness of them which dwell
therein; and though men have Sown Fields there and have multiplied greatly, yet
they are again Diminished, and brought Low through Oppression, Affliction, and
Sorrow. Of such Dispensations, is this passage to be understood, as a
Quaestion, Who is wise, and will observe these things? But if you will rather
take it as a Sentence, it still comes to the same sense, Whose is wise, will
oserv^ these Things. And the French Version very Expressively intimates the
Design, as well as the Event of this Observation; That so they may consider the
Favors of the Lord. No Less than Ten years have Rolled away, since we have
been plunged into the Distresses of a WAR, with a Barbarous Enemy. In this WAR,
we have seen the Fruitful Land of almost one whole Province, and another whole
County turned into Barrenness; doubtless, not without provocations of
Wickedness in them, who dwelt therein; Men had Sown Fields there along the
Shore in Settlements for an Hundred miles together, and had Multiplied Greatly
into a Cluster of Towns (besides Lesser Villages,) that might Challenge the
Name of a^ Decapolis; but in this WAR, we have seen them Diminished again and
brought Law, through Oppression, Affliction, and Sorrow. I am to Lead you this
day through a Spacious Country, which has been on many Accounts, the most
Charming part of New England; and I must herewithal say, Come, Behold the works
of the Lord, what Desolations He has made in that Land. Syrs, It Is time for us,
to Observe these Things; and this, not with a mere Athenian, but with a more
profitable Observation. I must not be Discouraged from this Holy Service, by
the vain Scoffs of those that Blaspheme all Attempts to Consider the Wondrous
Works of God, as if it were nothing but a Telling of News in the Pulpit* The
Biggest part of the Holy Bible, which i^ but a Rela^ion of such Wondrous Works,
would be Scoffed by such profane men, if they might not thereby become
Obnoxious. No: If Whosoever is wise, will observe these things; Then let no man call
it Folly to make the Observation. A Long WAR, is the Text, which I am now to
insist upon: And, if we would approve our selves Wise, after all the Stripes,
that have in this WAR been given us, these things will occur to our Observation
in it..

I. In the WAR that has been upon us, Whosoever is Wise, may observe the
Consequence of Entertaining the Gospel of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and Obtaining
and Mentaining the Ordinances of that Glorious Gospel. The Gada^ens of old,
were loath to have any thing of CHRIST in their Coast: And anon comes a Roman
War which distressed all the Land: But the woeful Town of Gadara was the very
first place besieged in that War, and Sad Things were done unto it. Alas, How
little of an Evangelical Church State, was there to be seen among all our
Eastern Settlements! It has been for the want of this, that the Judgments of
God, have more than once forbidden them to be called Settlements. The Towns
were generally without Preachers of CHRIST, and much more generally without
Churches of CHRIST, for to Irradiate 'em: Yea, not one of the Towns, that are
utterly broken up, had any Minister in it, for a long while before their Final
Darkness came upon them. Such a Way of Living did content many of them, that it
were horrible to Tell, what Ignorance of CHRIST they were thereby sunk into. I
would never have told you, That some young men, twenty years old, in this Land,
never so much as once heard the Name of CHRIST, in all their Lives, if I did
not think, that the God of Heaven required us, all to mourn before Him, for
such an Horrible Thing in the Land. Indeed the Strange Disasters which attended
the First Essays, to Settle that Good Country, made many people, Imagine the
Indian Sorcerers had Enchanted the Ground so that no English could Thrive on
such an Enchanted Soil. But had they carried the Gospel of the Lord Jesus
Christ with them, doubtless they had confuted that vain Imagination; all the
Spells of Hell would have been insignificant; there would not have prevailed
any Enchantment against a Gods-Spel which we have in our Gospel. The Original
Design of NEW ENGLAND, was to Settle Congregations, wherein the Lord Jesus
Christ, should be known and served according to His Gospel; and Instruct
Families, that should be the Nurseries of those Congregations. The Plantations
of the East, had little of this Illustrious Design in their Eye; The Enjoyments
of Gadarens did seem too much to Satis^y too many of them. For This cause, we
may Believe it is, that our Lord JESUS CHRIST looking down from Heaven upon
these Unchristian an Undertakings, Thunderstruck them with His Indignation: He
saw the Foolish taking Root, but suddenly He Cursed their Habitation. When some
of our Eastern People have been Pining away under the Fatigues of their
Captivity among the Indians, who had Stripped them of all they had, Then they
cried out, Now, Now the Lord* is punishing of us, for our Leaving of His
Ordinances, and removing to a place of no Gospel for larger Accommodations in
the World, and Exposing our Children to be bred up like the very Indians, into
whose Hands we are fallen! That which Invites one to think, it may be For this
Cause, is the Singular Distinction and Protection, which the CHURCHES of our
Lord, have Enjoyed, throughout the whole progress of our Calamity. No places
that have had CHURCHES gathered in them, have all this whi^s been broken up,
however some of them have had much Bread of Adversity, and Water of Affliction.
The Enemy that have come in upon our Land Like a Flood, carried all before them
as an Irresistible Torrent, until they came to places that have CHURCHES as it
were to Garrison them. There the Almighty Lord has checked the Proud Waves,
and said, Hitherto ye shall come, and no further! But here let me add a very
observable Thing: The Lord had some of His Elect among our Eastern People; but
He has brought those Elect Home unto Himself, by burning them out of their
Homes and Habitations. The Indians have driven 'em hither, and here they have
met with the Gospel of Christ, and been effectually Called unto the Lord, and
Joined unto our Churches, and Blessed the Name of God for bringing them unto
these Churches. Periissent nisi Periissent! Now, Whosoever is Wise, and will
observe these things, cannot but wish, That the Folly of Erecting Plantations,
without the worship of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, may be no more committed among
us. It was wholesome Counsil, Given, and usually Taken, in the Beginning of
New England; Let Christians no where sit down without Good Ministers, but let
them rather tarry where they are, as Ezra tarryed by the River Ahava, till he
had got some Levites to go with them. And it was even Then observed, That
places which made Beginnings any long while without Ministers, were with
miserable Unsettlements broken all to pieces. I suppose, our Eastern Country,
will shortly again be peopled: But let the people which intend there to Settle
themselves, in the Fear of God Remember this Admonition; Don't venture to form
Towns without the Gospel in them any more. If the Lamentable Experience which
you have more than once had, of a Blast from Heaven upon Enterprises to Live
without the Gospel of the Son of God, will not inspire you with more of Wisdom
for the future, I will foretell your Fate, in those awful words, Psalm. 28.5.
Because they regard not the Works of the Lord, nor the Operation of His Hands,
He shall destroy them, and not Build them up. Yea, But let all New England at
the same Time Learn, what the Welfare or the Ruin, of all, will Turn upon. The
whole World was made for our Lord-Messiah, and the Curse of God will more or
less plague the World, according to the Respects, which that Second Adam, our
Lord-Messiah finds in it. But New England, is by a more Eminent Profession that
Immanuels Land. Let the Interests of the Christian Religion in Reformed
Churches, be pursued and preserved among us; Then, All will go well! Our
Acknowledgment of our Lord JESUS CHRIST in CHURCHES, that shall be so ordered,
as to Represent Him, and His Kingdom, unto the World; This will be our Glory;
and this Glory will be our Defense; or, as it is promised, in Isa. 4.5. Upon all
the Glory shall be a Defense. But if once the Spirit of this World, Eat out the
Spirit and Power of Religion, and the Order of our Churches, and men's value for
a Room in the Churches, be lost, Then, write, Ichabod, upon all our Glory; and
let us expect, that our Holy Lord will Spue us out of His Mouth.

II. In the WAR that has been upon us whosoever is wise, may observe, in the very
Instruments of our Calamity, shrowed Intimations of the provoking Evils, for
which the Righteous God has Chastised us, by such Instruments.

When the Miseries of the Sword are inflicted on a people, it becomes them to
consider what Provocations they have given to the Almighty God, who makes
peace, and creates Evil; for it is He, the Lord, who does all these things. The
Sword by which we have been so grievously harassed, has been in the Hands of
God: and if our Father had not been very Angry, would He have taken a Sword
into His Hands? We are Blind before Lightning, we are Deaf unto Thunder, if we
do not sensibly perceive the Anger of God, in the Tremendous Rebukes that we
have suffered: And we are unaccountably, and inexcusably stupid, if we do not
E^quire, What means the Heat of this Anger? It was once the Com^ination of God,
in Ezekiel. 7.24, 27. I will bring the worst of the Heathen, and they shall
possess their Houses, and the Hands of the people of the Land shall be
Troubled: Such Trouble has come upon us, from the worst of the Heathen! But
what was the cause of all? It follows, I will do unto them after their way, and
I will judge them according to their Deserts, and they shall know that I am the
Lord. It is but seasonable for us now to Look back upon our own way, and see
how much we have Deserved all this Vengeance, by going out of the way. Two
persons in their Travels beholding the horrid Ruins of Germany, one of them
said, Hic fuit Hostilitas; Behold the Fruit of Hostility! his Friend answered,
Hic fuit Iniquitas; Behold the Fruit of Iniquity! If you will Travel over our
East Country, how frequent, how dismal occasions will you see, to Sigh, See
what has been done by Hostility! But there will be as many occasions for a
sadder Sigh than that; Namely, See the sad Effects of Iniquity! Now, in this
Contemplation, I do not go to charge them that were once Inhabitants of the Now
Ruined Plantations, with any Sins, but what are more or less to be found in all
our Colonies. I ask no more from our Brethren who yet Survive the Desolations
that have come upon their Estates and Neighbors in those Plantations, but that
they join with the rest of us all, in Searching and Trying of our ways, and in
Judging of our selves. For, alas, Every mouth must be stopped, and all the Land
is become Guilty before God! Let us all then Enquire, What may have been those
provoking Evils, for which the Holy and Blessed God, has given the Sword a
Commission so dreadfully to devour us? But then, Let us be sure to Enquire
wisely concerning that matter. And here, I will not Enquire, whether those that
went before us, might never be too forward in any Unjustifyable Encroachments,
to possess and command those Lands, which have since proved so Expensive unto
us? Older men then I, are best able to manage that Enquiry, though I also have
heard it made. But that whereupon I rather bespeak your Thoughts, is This: Will
you please to Enquire into the Properties and Qualities, of our Adversaries?
It Is possible, that in their Properties and Qualities, we may read something of
those Miscarriages, for which our God, has Raised them up to be our
Adversaries. It has been commonly seen, That when the people of God have
sinfully come to Imitate the Evil manners of other Nations, God has made those
very Nations to be a sore scourge unto them. And the sense of This was that
which long ago caused many sensible persons, to foretell, which of the Neighbor
Nations, would bring our dear England Low. Now, since the INDIANS have been
made by our God, The Rod of His Anger, it is proper for us to Enquire, whether
we have not in some Instances too far Imitated the evil manners of the Indians?
The Indians are Infamous especially for Three Scandalous Vices. First, They are
Liars of the first magnitude; One cannot believe a word they speak. Secondly,
They are Sluggards to a proverb; they are for any way of Living rather than
work. Thirdly, They are abominably Indulgent unto their Children; there is no
Fami^ly Government among them. Will you now En^quire, Sirs, how far we have
Indianized in every one, but especially, the last of these Evil Manners* If we
find these Indian-Vices to grow Epidemica^ among us, Oh! don't wonder, that our
God has been, with Indian Hatchets cutting down the Tre^* that brings forth
Fruits thus disagreeable to Him that Planted it.

Now, Whosoever is wise, will Observe these thing* And yet the Observation may
Extend it self a little further. Sometimes, the Sovereign God chooses a Nation
Remarkably laudable, for some Good Thing, to punish His own people, for the
want o^ that Thing. Thus, when the Christian Churches fell into Idolatry, God
sent the Mahometans upon them, to Torment them with one Wo^ after another
horribly; and the Mahometans are very Remarkable for this, That they are Great
Haters of Idolatry, and wherever they come, they destroy those Idols, and works
of men's Hands, which are Adored in the Antichristian Apostasy. Well, But can
any Good Thing be reported of our Indian Invaders? Yes, there is one Good Thing
which the French have taught them; There is Family Prayer among them, a daily
Family Worship uphold among them. I Fear, I Fear, this is more than can be said
of many English Sufferers, that have been annoyed by those Indian-Invaders. It
may be, the Wretched Indians have cut off multitudes of Families, to whom they
might have said, These Families never Prayed unto God once in a Month, and we
have done it every Day! And many of our poor Folk^, never heard any Family
Prayer in their Lives, till they were dragged into the forlorn and howling
Wigwams, of those wretched Salvages. I have heard it said, That in a Town o^ it
may be more than Seventy Families, there have not been Twice Seven Families,
that have had any constant Invocation of God in them. If it be so, then hear
the Voice of God in it, when He sent those Monstrous and Furious Barbarians, to
burn down such Prayerless Houses: The Voice of Heaven in it, is, If Indians
will pray in their Families more than English, then let Indians destroy those
English Families. It was once the direful Imprecation* in Jer. 10.25. Pour out
thy Great Wrath upon the Heathen that know thee not, and upon the Families that
call not on thy Name. Truly, God has used a Sort of Heathen, to Pour out His
Great Wrath upon Families, which in this one point, were worse than those
Heathen, that they did not call on His Name. For Gods Sake, be so Wise as to
Observe these things, and let Family Prayer be no where neglected throughout
the Land, lest while God is punishing us by the Pagans, we become worse than
Pagans. Let me faithfully and solemnly advise you, Sirs; A Prayerless Family is
a Pagan Family. Do not now imagine, That it is only the more Strict and Severe
Doctrine of a Nonconformist that now Smites your Consciences; it is the
Doctrine of a Christian; and it may be it will have the more Force upon some of
you, i^ I tell you, that the ^ate Archbishop of Canterbury, in a Book on that
Subject, has this passage; That (...) Family Worship is so Necessary to keep
alive a sense of God and Religion, in the minds of men, that he sees not, how
any Family that Neglects it can in Reason be Esteemed a Family of Christians,
or indeed to have any Religion at all. I will add but this word unto all the
rest: If after this there be a Prayerless Family, among us, I would, if I
could, Write upon their Door, Lord Have Mercy upon us; for there is a Plague in
that Pagan Family.

III. In the WAR that has been upon us, Whose is Wise, may observe, That the
very Objects, of our Sins, have been made the very Engines of our Plagues. It
is a thing Extraordinarily Observable, though it ordinarily happens; That, In
quo quis peccat, in eo punitur; Men are Plagued by those very Things, with
which they have Sinned. If an Eli omit his Duty toward his Children, it
follows, in 1 Samuel 2.33. Those very Children, shall consume thine Eyes, and
grieve thine Hear^. I am very much mistaken, if our Eyes have not been
consumed, and if our Hearts not grieved, by those, to whom we have omitted our
Duty Exceedingly. The Grand crime of the Jews, was in relation to the Romans,
and God made the Romans the Destroyers of the Jews. You will now demand of me,
Whether I think, that we are chargeable, with any Crime, relating to the
Indians, which have been so bloodily Destroying of us. I must freely tell you,
I Think, we are. The old Britons, did not what they should have lone, to
Convert the Saxons unto Christianity; and when the Britons were afterward
fearfully Destroyed by the Saxons, their famous Countreyman Gildas told them,
This is the Vengeance of God upon you, because you did no more, for the
Conversion of those Miserable Heathen. And I admire, that the English
Protestants in Ireland, after such Massacres from the Irish Papists, do no more
Effectually make this Reflection. But that which I am now to Reflect upon, is
This: Had we done, but half so much as the French Papists have done, to
Proselyte the Indians of our East, unto the Christian Faith, instead of being,
Snares and Traps unto us, and Scourges in our Sides, and Thorns in our Eyes
they would have been, A wall unto us, both by Night and Day. What a Sting was
there in those words, which the Indians have used unto some of our Captives,
Had the English been as careful to Instruct us, as the French, we had been of
your Religion! Indeed, it can Scarce, without an harsh Catechresis, be called,
The Christian Faith, which the French Papists have made the Salvages to
Swallow: But if the Salvages had been Enlightened with The Christian Faith,
from us, the French Papists could never have instilled into them those French
Poisons, that have made such Raging Devils of them. Through the Blessing of
God, upon the Endeavou^s of Good men, in this one Massachuset-Province, the
Indians have mostly Embraced the Christian Religion. [* Of that matter see a
Printed Account, at the end of Mr. Noyes's Election-Sermon; whereto I have here
this to add, That an Hopeful and Worthy Young man, Mr. Experience Mayhew,
omitted in that Printed Journal, merely because he was more largely mentioned
in the annexed Proposals of the Gentlemen that made it, which are not Printed
with it, must now have the Justice done him, of this Character, That in the
Evangelical Service of the Lord Jesus Christ, among the Indians, there is no
man that Exceeds that Mr. Mayhew, if there be any that Equals him. So I am
informed concerning him.]
There are, I suppose, more than Thirty Congregations of Indians, and many more
than Thirty Hundred Indians, in this one Province, calling on God in Christ,
and Hearing of His Glorious Word. Whosoever is wise, will observe a Notable Smile
of God upon those that have Worthily Encouraged and prosecuted this Evangelical
Work. But shall we not, at the same Time Observe, how Signally the Wrath of God
has fallen upon the Persons, or Estates, of them that have Debauched the
Indians, by Selling of Drink unto them. The Trading Houses, where the Indians
of the East, had so much, of their Drink and Bane, what is become of them,
Every one of them? The Sword has been Drunk with the Blood, of the English, in
the Hands of those very Indians, which have been so often Drunk among them. And
these Bloody Merchants of the Souls of the Indians, when they have Summed up
all their Gains, the Foot of the Account has been this, Woe to him that gives
his Neighbor Drink, that puts the Bottel to him, to make him Drunk. Those Men,
are not Wise but Mad, who can Observe these things, and now dare to Repeat this
Iniquity, or dream that any Gains are to be got by feeding the Indian Lust of
Drunkenness.

IV. In the WAR that has been upon us, Whosoever is wise, may observe the Loud
Calls of Heaven to All Ranks of men, in the sharp Strokes of Heaven on All
Ranks of men. As it was said, in Mic. 6 9. The Lords voice cries unto the
City, and the man of Wisdom shall see thy Name; Hear ye the Rod: So I say,
There has been a voice of God unto all the Country in that Indian Rod, which
has been used upon us: and Men of Wisdom, in all Ranks of men, will Observe,
and See, and Hear, the meaning of this Rod; inasmuch as all Ranks of men have
smarted under it; yea, it has fetched Blood from all Ranks of men among us. We
will a little particularize 'em. And first of all, You that are our Honored
Shepherds; Will you Observe how many of our Shepherds have been worried unto
Death, by the Scythian Wolves of our Wilderness? Two of our MAGISTRATES, have
been Treacherously and Barbarously Killed by the Indian Murderers: They whom
God Entrusted with the Sword of Justice have had their Lives taken away by the
Sword of the Wicked. I persuade my self, that the rest will be so wise as to
Observe these things, and Observe how to answer the just Expectation of God, in
their Administrations. After this, Oh! Why should not our Civil Rulers, with
more zeal than ever set themselves to ponder, How may I most Glorify God, and
Christ, and Serve his dear people with my Opportunities!

Two of our MINISTERS* have been Struck down into the Earth by the Indian
Dragons. They that have used nothing but the Sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God, for the Saving of all about them, have had the Destroyers coming
upon them, and have been Waited for of the Sword. I assure my self, that the
rest will be so wise, as to Observe these things, and Observe how to fulfill our
Ministry, with a very Excited Watchfulness. May all our Settled Pastors, upon
such a thing befalling our Brethren, Resolve with themselves; Am unworthy I
spared? I will do more for my Lord, and more for my Flock, and more for all the
Churches, than ever I did.

We will pass on, There have been some Rich men, that were finely Situated,
and had all things Richly to Enjoy: But this War has reduced them to such
Necessity, that within Less than One year, they have come to Beg their Bread:
All their Treasures have been Treasures of Snow; One Summer has melted all away
to Nothing. I Remember, the Jewish Talmuds tell us, of a Gentlewoman, who had a
Thousand Thousand pieces of Gold* given with her, at her Marriage, by her
Father Nicodemus, for her Portion; and yet she was reduced unto such penury,
that she picked Barley-Corns out of the Cattles Dung for her Food. Have not we
seen almost such Vicissitudes? Rich men, If you are Wise, (which the Rich are
not always!) You will Observe these things, and upon the Observation say,
Well, What man in his Right Wits, will now set his Heart upon such Transitory,
as all Sublunary Vanities! Oh! my Soul, Do thou make sure of a Better and a
Lasting Substance in Heaven; for Earthly Riches, take themselves Wings, and
flee away toward Heaven.

Again, There have been abundance of Poor men, who have been by this War
plunged still into deeper Poverty: They have gone without a Bit of Bread, for
many days together. The Straits, the Wants, the Cares of Widows, and Orphans,
or of those that have had many mouths to Feed, especially in our Exposed
Frontiers; None can Express them, None can Conceive them, but They, (Nor They!)
who did Endure them all. Poor men, If you are wise, (which the Poor may be!)
You will Observe these things, and upon the Observation, say, Well, I had need
make sure that my Soul may not be Starved by wanting the Bread of Life, and
that my Soul may not be Naked without the Garments of Righteousness; How
dolefully am I circumstanced, if I go down from one Hell unto another at the
Last!

Once more; How many Women have been made a prey to those Brutish men, that
are Skilful to Destroy? How many a Fearful Thing has been suffered by the
Fearful Sex, from those men, that one would Fear as Devils rather than men? Let
the Daughters of our Zion think with themselves, what it would be, for fierce
Indians to break into their Houses, and brain their Husbands and their Chi^dren
before their Eyes, and Lead them away a Long Journey into the Woods; and if
they began to fail and faint in the Journey, then for a Tawny Salvage to come
with Hell fire in his Eyes, and cut 'em down with his Hatchet; or, if they
could miraculously hold out, then for some Filthy and ugly Squaw's to become
their insolent Mistresses, and insolently to abuse 'em at their pleasure a
thousand inexpressible ways; and, if they had any of their Sucking Infants with
them, then to see those Tender Infants handled at such a rate, that they should
beg of the Tygres, to dispatch 'em out of hand. Such things as these, I tell
you, have often happened in this Lamentable War. And now, O ye Handmaids of the
Lord; will you not be so wise, as to Observe these things? But upon the
Observation, say, Well, I will Bless God, for my Enjoyments; my Afflictions, be
they never so many, are not such as my Neighbors have seen: My Enjoyments are
more than my Afflictions. But, Oh! Let me Love and Serve the Good God, that has
distinguished me with His Mercies.

It is to be added; We have had our Old men whose Gray Hairs have not come down
to the Grave in peace. Young Indians have with grievous Flouts and Wounds,
Butchered many of our Old English men. The Gray Hairs of our Old men, have been
Dyed Red with their own Blood; and their Carcases have been thrown unto the
Swine, to mangle them. Old men, If you are Wise men, you will Observe these
things; but Observing of them, say, Oh! Let my Hoary Head be found in the way
of Righteousness!

But our Young men are they whom the Fury of War, has been chiefly poured out
upon. Alas, Alas, for our Young men! They are the persons, with whom, it seems
to have been the very Errand of this War, to manage the terrible Controversy of
God. New England sets a peculiar Accent of Grief upon this, among all her
Lamentations; The Lord has trodden under foot my mighty men in the midst of me,
He has called an Assembly against me, to crush my young men. Come then, My
Young men; Be so Wise, as to Observe these things; and upon the Observation,
say, Lord, Let not me, and the rest of my Generation, continue among the
Generation of thy Wrath. Yea, to have done; Children also have not been Excused
from a share in the Blows of this hideous War. Little Boys and Girls, even
these Little Chickens, have been Siezed by the Indian Vultures. Our Little
Birds have been Spirited away by the Indian Devourers, and brought up, in a
vile Slavery, till some of them have quite forgot their English Tongue, and
their Christian Name, and their whole Relation. Yea, Those Babylonians, have
Dashed out the Brains of our Little Ones against the Stones. And our Little
Ones have been hideously whipped unto Death, by those Merciless Tygres, whose
Tender Mercies are Cruelty. Children, God make you so wise, as to Observe these
things; and upon the Observation, Oh! See that you become Serious, Pious,
Orderly Children; Obedient unto your Parents, Conscientious to keep the Lords
Day, and afraid of committing any Wickedness.

Upon the whole; when a Dead man was thrown into the Grave of Elisha, a Touch
from the Bones of the Prophet in the Grave Raised him from the Dead. I am
desiring, that Religion may be Revived out of the Death which has too much
Enfeebled it among us* Behold, Syrs, I have now cast you into the Graves of our
Dead Friends; It may be, by wisely observing of them, and the things that have
befallen them, we may be somewhat Raised out of our Deadly Security. Let our
Observation of these things, give some Life to the practice of Religion among
us.

V. In the WAR that has been upon us, Whosoever is Wise, may Observe, those
Tragical Things undergone by many in Captivity, that are full of Admonition
unto us, that have never felt the Tragaedies of such a Captivity. Several
Hundreds of our Neighbors, first and last, have been carried into Captivity,
by the most Beastly and Bloody things that ever wore the Shape of men, in the
World. New England makes that moan, in Lam. 1.18. Hear, I pray you, all people,
and behold my Sorrow; my Virgins and my Young men are gone into Captivity. But
Oh! the prodigious, and stupendous Things, that they have undergone in this
Captivity! What weary Days and Nights have rolled over the miserable Captives,
while they have not had a Bit of Meat allowed 'em, Except what a Dog would
hardly meddle with! While they have sometimes been pinched with the Bitter
Frost, without Rags to cover their Nakedness, and sometimes been Parched with
the Burning Heat, without any Cordial or Shelter to Refresh them: While they
have seen their nearest Relations torn in pieces alive before their Eyes, and
yet those Eyes afraid of dropping a Tear at the mournful Sight: Yea, while they
have every Hour, looked when they should be themselves Roasted alive to make a
Feast, and a Sport for the horrid Cannibals! Need I tell you, That those Devils
Incarnate, have Tied their Captives unto Trees, and first cutting off their
Ears, have made them to Eat their own Ears, and then have broyled their whole
Bodies, with slow Fires, dancing the mean while about them, and cutting out
Collops of their Flesh, till with lingering Tortures they have Martyred them to
Death! Such Things have been done, by the Inhumane Salvages upon our Captives,
that it is a sort of Inhumanity barely to mention them. Now, shall we be Wise,
to Observe these things? The Observation must be made, with that Admonition, in
Luke 13.4, 5. Think ye, that these were Sinners above all men? I tell you, Nay;
but Except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise perish. Wherefore, let us
penitently Confess, That we have All deserved those Miserable Things, wherewith
Some have been so marked out, by the Sovereignty of Heaven In the Things that
have been done to our Captives, the Great Lord of Hosts has dealt with us as
Generals use to do, upon the Sedition and Mutiny of Military Legions: He makes
a sort of Decimation among the Offenders, and by what He does to some, He
declares what He might justly do to all the rest. We must all ascribe it unto
the mere Sovereign mercy of God, that we are not every one of us, broken in the
place of Dragons, as these desolate Captives were. That which the Scripture
calls, The place of Dragons, I Remember one of the Jewish Rabbi's Expounds, A
Wilderness. Truly our Wilderness has been, The place of Dragons. But, while we
Observe these things, we shall not be Wise, if we do not Learn, Oh! what an
Evil and a bitter thing is our Sin! And what horrendous miseries must we Expect
among the Devils, if we die with our Sin unpardoned!

VI. In the WAR that has been upon us, Whosoever is wise, may observe, a Work, a
Strange Work of Heaven, as it were Devising of ways, very strangely to
Distress all sorts of people, in all sorts of Interests. Truly the very
Character of our Calamity, has all along been This; The Great God has written
still upon it, we may Read upon it in a very Legible Character, those words, in
Jer. 18.11. Thus says the Lord, Behold, I Frame Evil against you, I devise a
Device against you. It has been, as if ways had been deliberately, and
exquisitely Studied, and as if with much Contrivance plotted for to bring us
all within the Reach of the general Calamity. We have now Languished through Ten
Years, which have been the Saddest, and the Darkest, and the Stormiest Years,
that ever we saw. If the History of these Ten Years were to be written, I am
thinking, What should be the Title; Truly, It might be Entitled, as Ezekiels
Roll was, Lamentation, and Mourning, and Woe. Yea, you shall now have the
History of these Ten Years written for you; I Will give it you, in as Expressive
words as can be; even in those words, 2 Chronicles. 15.5, 6. In those Times, there
was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came in, but great Vexations
were upon all the Inhabitants of the Countries, for God did vex them with all
Adversity. There is a Variety of Adversity, with which the tedious War it self
has vexed us. The General Fate of the War, has involved Numberless Families
in several circumstances of Adversity; and the Expensive part of the War has
been an heavy Scourge of Adversity upon those that could not be reached by the
Destructive part of it. You could not but Observe these things: But then, have
you not observed, what a further variety of Adversity has been Contemporary
with this Vexatious War. Alas, There has been such a Complication of other
Distresses added unto the War, in the Time of it,, that nobody, No, I say,
Nobody has been left free from those Dolorous Ejulations, I am one that has
been Afflicted by the Rod of the Wrath of God.

A Great King of Persia, having by Death lost the nearest Relation he had in
the world, and being too passionate a Mourner for his Loss, an Ingenious man
undertook, to Raise the Dead Relation, unto Life again, if the King would but
furnish him in one point, that he apprehended necessary; It was demanded, What
that was? and it was replied, Furnish me but with the Names of Three persons,
who have never met with any Sadness and Sorrow, and by Writing those Names on
the Monument of the Dead, I Will bring the Dead person to Life. Truly, The Ten
Years of our War have set many Ten Hundreds of persons a Mourning over their
Dead Friends; we have seen every where, The Mourners go about the Streets: Now,
I durst make you this offer; that if you can find Three persons, who have met
with no matter of Sadness and Sorrow in these Ten Years, with the Names of
them, we will fetch your Dead Friends to Life again. It was said, in Job 21.17.
God Distributeth Sorrows in His Anger. You may Observe a mavelous
Distribution of Sorrows made among us, by the Anger of God.

And here, first, I say nothing of that Amazing Time, when the Evil Angels in a
praeternatural and in an unparalled manner being Let Loose among us; God cast
upon us the Fierceness of His Anger, and Wrath and Indignation and Trouble. It
was the Threatening of God against a people, which He had called His Children;
in Deuteronomy. 32.23, 24. I will Heap Mischiefs upon them, I will Spend my Arrows
upon them, they shall be Devoured with a Bitter Destruction; What was the
Bitter Destruction thus Threatened unto an Apostatizing People? I remember, the
famous Jew Onkelos renders it, They shall be vexed with Evil Spirits; and
indeed, that Sense well agrees with what follows, I will send upon them the
poison of the Serpents of the Dust. Syrs, For our Apostasy (which is the very
Sin of the Evil Spirits!) the God of Heaven, a while ago turned in the Armies
of Hell upon us; and in that matchless Dispensation of God, we underwent a
Bitter Destruction, from the poison of the Serpents of the Dust.

But there are other points, not a few, wherein the Great God has Heaped
Mischiefs upon us; and fulfill^d unto us that Holy Commination, Ezekiel. 7.26
Mischief shall come upon mischief. What shall I say? While the Lord of Hosts
has been against us, the Hosts of Lord have been so too; All the Elements have
as it were been up in Arms against us.

Particularly; You may Observe, That Epidemical Sicknesses, have in these
years, been once and again upon us; wherein (...) Angels of Death, have Shot
the Arrows of Death, into such as could not be reached by the Bullets of the
Indian Enemy. This one Town, did in one year, loose, I suppose, at least Six or
Seven Hundred of its People, by one conragious Mortality. And though of about
Three and Twenty Hundred men, that we Employed in one Action, we did, in that
Action, loose hardly Thirty men, yet how many Hundreds did afterward miserably
perish?

Again; You may Observe, That the Harvest, has once and again grievously
failed in these years; and we have been Struck through with the Terrible Famine,
almost as much as if the Indian Enemy had been all the while Skulking about our
Fields. The very Course of Nature has been altered among us; A Lamentable cry
for, Bread, Bread! has been heard in our Streets: The Towns that formerly
Supplied other places with Grain, had now been Famished, if other places had
not sent in a Supply to Them, and had a black prospect of being Famished,
notwithstanding that Supply.

Once more; You may Observe, That the Sea has in these years been Swallowing
up our Neighbors, and their Estates, far more than the Sword of the
Wilderness. Alas, The Devouring Displeasure of God, has said concerning us,
Though they go to hide themselves from my Sight afar off upon the Sea, Thence
will I command the Serpent, and he shall bite them. And here, has it been
Enough, that our Vessels, enough to make an huge Fleet, have been taken by the
French Enemy? A certain Writer has computed it, That in only the First Two or
Three years of the War, the English Nation lost unto the French, more than
Fifteen Millions or Pounds Sterling. But no part of the English Nation has
been more frequently or sensibly preyed upon, by the French, than what has
gone out of New England, eversince the War began. I say, Has this been Enough?
No, The wrath of God said, This is not Enough! I appeal to you, that have been
Owners of Vessels, or Sailors in them, whether horrible Shipwracks have not
been multiplied since the War began, very much more than ever they were before?
Ah, Lord! How many of us, have Shed Rivers of Tears, over our dear Friends that
have been Buried in the Ocean!

Moreover; You may Observe, That in these years, those very Things which were
intended for our Defense, have oftentimes been so much Improved for our Damage,
that it was hard for us to say, which was the Greater, the Defense, or the
Damage, which we had from them. It was a Lamentable Time with the Jews, when
that Curse came upon them, That which should have been for their Welfare, Let
it become a Trap, and pour out thine Indignation upon them. Truly, The
Indignation of God has been poured out upon us, in this Fruit of the Curse, no
^ess frequently then sensibly, that some things which should have been for our
Welfare, have at the same time, served also to Entrap the Persons, and
Interests of many people, into sore Inconveniences. There is no need of
Explaining this Article; They that have been under this Indignation of God,
know the Explaining of it!

Finally, You may Observe, What Untimely Ends, and what Surprising Fates, have
come upon our Sons, in these Years of the Wrath of the Right Hand of the Most
High. When Craesus was in War taken by Cyrus, this Captive made unto the
Conqueror, this Remark upon the Difference between Peace and War; O Sir, I see,
that in a time of Peace, the Sons Bury their Fathers, but in a Time of War, the
Fathers Bury their Sons. Truly, Sirs, our Time of War has in Various Ways of
Mortality, been Embittered with this Remark, The Fathers have been Burying
their Sons, all the Country over! Many of us, have had our Sons, even those
very Sons, of whom we said, This same shall Comfort us! We have had them
violently snatched away from us, and Cropped in the very Flower of their Youth;
and they have Lest us deploring, Oh, my Son, with all my Heart could I have
Dyed for thee, my Son, my Son! But in the midst of these Deplorable Things, God
has given up several of our Sons, into the Hands of the Fierce Monsters of
Africa. Mohammedan Turks and Moors, and Devils, are at this Day oppressing many
of our Sons, with a Slavery, wherein they Wish for Death, and cannot find it; a
Slavery, from whence they cry and write unto us, It had been Good for us, that
we had never been Born.

-- Quis talia fando
Temperet a Lacrymis? --
Thus, as Job sometimes complained, Chap. 10.17. Thou Renewest thy Witnesses
against me, and increasest thine Indignation upon me; Changes and War are
against me: Thus, in our Long War, we have seen those Changes on all Hands, and
in all Kinds, which have witnessed against us, the Dreadful Indignation of God.
God Threatened His people, (so I read it,) Amos 2.13. Behold, I will press your
place as a full Cart presses the Sheaf: ['Tis an Allusion to the old way of
Threshing the Corn, by drawing a Laden Cart with Wheels, over the Corn. q. d..
You shall undergo Tribulation.] Ah, New^England, Thou have been under such a
Tribulation.

Syrs, Have you not Observed these things? But you must wisely Observe them.
And a wise Observation of these things, will cause you to see, That the War
which has been upon us, has been a War of GOD. The Indians have been but a
small part of those Armies, which the Great GOD, has been bringing out against
us, for Ten Years together; and we may conclude, that all the Land have been
more or less concerned in those Crimes, for which the Almighty GOD, has been
with these Armies managing His Controvesy with us* Our Confession must be,
Peccavimus omnes; We have all gone astray! But shall we not upon this
Observation, take up some Resolution? If we are Wise, we shall thus Resolve;
It Is Time, It Is Time, It Is High-Time for us, to make our Peaee with God, Oh,
Let us not go on to Harden our selves against God; we are not Stronger than He:
But let us all Fly to the Lord Jesus Christ, who is our Peace, and so lay down
the Arms of Rebellion, that God may be Reconciled unto us.

VII. In the WAR that has been upon us, Whosoever is wise, may Observe those
Dispensations of Heaven toward us, that have carried more than Ordinary
Humiliations in them. It was said concerning Miriam, (the Type of the Now
Leprous and outcast Church of Israel; The Lord hasten that Seventh Day,
wherein it shall be Restored!) Numb. 12.14. ^f her Father had Spit in her Face,
should she not be Ashamed? Ah New England, Thy Father has been Spitting in thy
Face* with most Humbling Dispensations; God has been bringing of thee down to
Sit in the Dust. When the War commenced, New England might say, My God will
Humble me!

For, First; Shall our Heavenly Father put a Rod into the Hands of base
Indians, and bid Them to Scourge His Children! Oh! the Humiliation of such
Rebellious Children! Oh! the Provocation that certainly such Sons and such
Daughters have given Him! It was a very Humbling thing, tha^ the Lord Threatened
unto His Provoking Sons and Daughters, in Deuteronomy. 32.21. I will move them to
Jealousy, with those which are not a People; I will provoke them to Anger with
a Foolish Nation* Should a Child of yours be Refractory, and you, Sir, should
bid a Negro or an Indian Slave in your House, Go, Take that Child, and Scourge
him till you fetch Blood of him! Surely, this would be to Humble him unto the
Uttermost. Thus does thy God Humble thee, O New England, by putting thee over,
into the Vile Hands of those which are not a People, but a Foolish Nation.

Again; Who are they, by whose means we are now crying out, We are Brought very
Low? When the most High God, was determined Effectually to Humble, His People,
He said, in Jer. 37.10. Though ye had Smitten the whole Army of the Caldeans,
that fight against you, and there remained but wounded men among them, yet
should they Rise up every man in his Tent; and burn this City with Fire. Truly,
we had Smitten the whole Army, of the Indians that Fought against us Three and
Twenty years ago, from one end of the Land unto the other; only there were left
a few Wounded men among them in the East; and now, they have Risen up every
man, and have set the whole Country on Fire. Certainly, A more Humbling matter
cannot be Related!

Moreover; Is it not a very Humbling Thing, That when about an Hundred Indians
durst Begin a War, upon all these Populous Colonies, an Army of a Thousand
English raised, must not kill one of them all; but instead thereof, more of our
Soldiers perish by Sickness and Hardship than we had Enemies then in the
world? Our God has Humbled us!

Is it not a very Humbling Thing, That when the Number of our Enemies
afterward Increased, yet an Handful of them should, for so many Summers
together continue our Unconquered Spoilers, and put us to such Vast Charges,
that if we could have Bought them, for an Hundred Pound an Head, we should have
made a Saving Bargain of it? Our God has Humbled us!

Is it not a very Humbling Thing, That we should have had several fair
Opportunities, to have brought this War unto a Final Period, but we should
still by some fatal Oversight let Slip those Opportunities? Our God has
Humbled us.

Is it not a very Humling Thing, That whatever Expeditions we have undertaken,
for the most part we have come off Loosers, and indeed but plunged our selves
into deeper Straits, by our Undertakings? Our God has Humbled us!

Is it not a very Humbling Thing, That more than One or Two of our Forts have
been Surrendered, and one of them that was almost Impregnable, given away with a
most Shameful Surrender, by one that has since Received Something of what he
Deserved? Thus, Our God has Humbled us.

Is it not a very Humbling Thing, That we should have Evil pursuing of us at
such a rate, that in other Lands afar off, and on the Exchange in London,
Strangers have made this Reflection, Doubtless, New England is a Country in
Ill Terms with Heaven? But so, Our God has Humbled us.

What shall I say? Is it not a very Humbling Thing, That when Peace is Restored
unto the whole English Nation, and when Peace is Enjoyed by all America, poor
New England should be the Only Land still Embroiled in War? But thus, Our God,
Thou have Humbled us, and shown us great and sore Troubles, and brought us down
into the Depths of the Earth.

O my dear People; How can I Observe these Things, and not like Joshua now fall
to the Earth on my Face before the Lord, and say, What shall I say? But if you
will wisely observe these Things, you will now get up, and Sanctify your
selves, and put away the accursed thing from among you, O New-English Israel!

Certainly, The High and Lofty One, who dwells in the High and Holy place,
Expects that we should be a very Humbled People. I beseech you, Sirs, Observing
these Things, let us in all the Methods of Repentance Humble our selves under
the Mighty Hand of God. After such Humbling Things, as have befallen us, God
forbid, that it should be said of us, as in Jer. 44.10. They are not Humbled,
even unto this Day!

VIII. In the WAR that has been upon us, Whosoever is Wise, may Observe the
Compassions of God, wonderfully Exercised, and Manifested, and Magnified, in
the midst of our Confusions. There was a Time, when a Bush Burned with Fire,
and yet the Bush was not consumed: whereupon said Moses, in Exodus 3.3. I will
now Turn aside and see this Great Sight! Sirs, I am now to call upon you, O
Turn aside, and see such a Great Sight as that!

Indeed, in the midst of all our Lamentations, we must own, with the Church, in
Lam. 3:22. It is of the Lords Mercies, that we are not Consumed, because His
Compassions fail not. But there are many Particular and Astonishing Articles of
Mercy, which, we have seen in this Tedious War. Sirs, Come now to Observe some
of those Things, with prepared Hallelujahs!

It was the Petition, in Hab. 3.2. O Lord, In Wrath Remember Mercy.
New England, Thy God has heard this Petition for thee, in very wonderful
Instances!

For, First, After a very Amazing manner has Mercy been Remembered in the midst
of Wrath, when we have been Rescued by the Mercy of God, at the very point of
our being else Ruined by His Wrath. Lord, Thou have showed thy People hard
Things, and made us Drink the Wine of Astonishment. But our Extremity has been
Gods Opportunity, to Relieve us. Several Times in the late years of our
Affliction, we have been brought unto a dismal Nonplus in our Affayrs, and we
would scarce imagine i^ possible for us to subsist any longer. But just Then!
the Bowels of our Compassionate God have been moved for us; He has said, How
shall I give thee up, O New England? How shall I give thee up, O Massachusetts?
And so, He would not Execute upon us the Fierceness of His Anger, but with some
unexpected Succors from the Machin of Heaven He has Relieved us. We have
several times been, Like a Little Vessel in a Storm; the Swelling Waves have
Dashed, and Raged, and Roared; the Rude Billows have been going over us, and we
have been ready to Sink. But just Then! Our Compassionate Lord Jesus Christ,
has Awaked for our Safety, and marvellously calmed our Circumstances. O thou
Land, strangely Saved by the Lord, say now, as in Psalm. 136.23. O Give thanks
unto the Lord, who Remembered us in our Low Estate, because His Mercy Endures
for ever. When our Debts have become Insupportable, God has then Remembered us
in our Low Estate, because His Mercy Endures for ever, and strangely
Extricated us. When our Foes have been as an Overflowing Scourge, like to carry
all before them, God has then Remembered us in our Low Estate, because His Mercy
Endures for ever, and strangely Lifted up a Standard against them. When
fearful Divisions have arisen among us, and horrid Convulsions have been ready
to pull all to pieces, -- I don't care to Remem^er them, any farther than to
say, God has then, Remembered us in our Low Estate, because His Mer^^ Endures
for ever, and strangely healed those ^reaches, that set the Land a Trembling.

Moreover; It has been a very Strange Thing, and a Wondrous Remembrance of
Mercy in the midst of Wrath; That the Indians have been ^naccountably
Restrained, from giving us, an Hundredth part of the Trouble, which the^ might
have done, had they but known, (...) their own Advantages. This One Thing,
Whosoever does wisely Observe it, must needs ascribe it unto a Special
Operation of that God, who Forms the Spirit of man within him. It was the
promise of God, unto His people, Exodus 34.24. No man shall Desire thy Land,
when thou shall go up to appear before the Lord thy God. The Faithful God
strangely Fulfilled this promise, for many Hundreds of years together; No Enemy
desired the Land of that people, at the Time of their going up to Worship the
Lord in His Temple. And whereas, the Roman Enemy, did at length Desire their
Land, at the Time of their going up to the Passover, this one bring, was enough
to prove, that the Messiah was come, and the Passover no longer commanded. It
shows, That there is a Strange Operation of God, upon the minds of men, to curb
and check, and blind the Evil-minded. Well; We have had our Frontier Towns, in
many of which, the Lord Jesus Christ has been Worshipped, and Sought, and
Served continually. Had the Lurking Enemy done as they might have done, how
easily might one dozen of them, have kept the Towns in such perpetual and
perplexing Alarms, as would have caused them, even to have broken up! And what
unknown mischiefs might a few more of 'em, have brought upon our Scattered
Plantations. I do again, and again say, This is from the Strange Operation of
God, upon the Minds of the Enemy, that they have no more Disturbed our Land.
For my own part, I will observe it, and Admire it, in such Terms as Austin used
upon a Remarkable Providence; Quisquis non videt, Caecus; Quisquis videt, nec
Laudat, Ingratus; Quisquis Laudanti reluctatur, Insanus: They are Blind, and
Mad, that are Insensible of it!

Yet again, Have not our English Prisoners been favored with such a
Remembrance of Mercy, in the midst of Wrath, as ought never to be Forgotten?
The Mercy of God, inclined the French to Buy 'em out of the Hands of the
Indians, and use them with an Exemplary Humanity and Civility. The Mercy of God
preserved many of them alive, under prodigious and incredible Hardships, and at
length Returned many scores of them Home. And may not our English Women, that
were Prisoners, take Notice of one Singular Mercy shown by God unto them, in
preserving them from Violations by the Outrageous Lusts of the Salvages? This
One Thing will be thought by some, almost as Great and Strange an Instance of
an Immediate Interposition of the Angels of God, as the muzzling of the Lions
in the Den of Daniel! O ye Redeemed of the Lord, you, whom He has Redeemed
from the Hand of the Enemy; Give Thanks, to the Lord, for He is Good? Charge
your own Souls, That you never forget His Benefits; Ask your own Souls, What
you shall render to the Lord for all His Benefits: and Remember that Admonition
of the Lord Jesus Christ unto you, Sin no more, Lest a worse thing do come unto
thee.

Furthermore; Who could not see Mercy Remembered, in the midst of Wrath, when
God has put it into the Hearts of His people in the Southern parts of the
Country, to make Liberal Contributions of Money, and Corn, and Men, for the
Relief of the Northern parts? More than once, has the Noble Charity, of our
Brethren in Plymouth, and in Connecticut, as well as of this Town, been
Expressed in such Contributions. Their Alms are Gone up for a Memorial before
the Lord! The Blessing of many that have been Ready to perish, has come upon
you, O ye Merciful Children of God, and you shall obtain mercy from Him.

Once more: Was ever Mercy Remembered in the midst of Wrath, more conspicuously
than when powerful Adversaries Designing Inroads upon us, have been Diverted
wonderfully. Advice has been seasonably Dispatched unto us, of the Intentions
in our Enemies to fall upon our Frontiers, and this Advice has proved our
Safety. Yea, sometimes when we have had no Advice, a Strange Direction from
Heaven has Led us to those Actions, which have as much defeated the Intentions
of our Enemies, as if we had Received the fullest Advice in the world. Besides
this, Boston, and Salem, and Portsmouth especially: Will they ever forget the
Last year? It was a Year of Salvations; yea, It was a Year of Miracles! Never,
Never such a Year passed over us. The Almighty showed that Favor to His people
of old, Zech. 9.8. I will Encamp about my House, because of the Army, because
of him that passes by, and because of him that Returns. Alexander in an
Expedition to the Southward did pass by the Land of Israel, and he did Return
again to the Northward, without Hurting that Land, that had the House of God in
it. Formidable French Squadrons, have more than once passed by, to the
Southward, and have Returned again to the Northward, intending doubtless a
Destroying Visit into this Land by the way; but Our Lord Jesus Christ has
Encamped about His House here, because of the Navy. Yea, once, O New England,
the Lord thy God, He that would be the Holy One of New England, gave Carthagena
for thy Ransom, He gave men for thee, and Spaniards for thy Life. Another
Time, when a Force likely enough to have carried all before them, were almost
arrived unto us, we are advised, that God sent such a sudden, and such a
wasting Sickness among them, as to make them for want of Hands, to desist from
their Attempt. These were Illustrious Deliverances! And yet give me leave to
say, We did the last year, see another Deliverance, that for ought I know, may
be aequal to any of the rest. There was an English Fleet of our Good Friends
with a di^eful Plague aboard 'em, intending Hither. Had they Come, as they
intended, what an horrible Desolation had cut us off, Let the Desolate places
that some of you have seen in the Colonies of the South, declare unto us; And
that they did not come, it was the Signal Hand of Heaven, by which the Goings
of men are ordered.

In Fine; Because God, being full of Compassion, would not Stir up all His
Wrath, He has Remembered Mercy to us, in the midst of Wrath, by Raising us up
Generous Benefactors, who have been able and willing to oblige us, with their
Benefits. It must be with shame acknowledged, Our Usage of our Public Servants
has commonly been such, that for any Thinking man, to be willing at all to
Serve the Public, seems to be a Mark and Fruit of no little Generosity.
Nevertheless, we have had persons of Exemplary Patience, and Prudence, and Self
denial* Sitting at the Helm of our Government, all this while that the Horrible
Tempest has been enough to make any man living Sick of being there. We have
had persons, who have Disbursed and Expended of their Estates, and considerably
Damnified their Interests for us, in our Distresses, when yet they foreknew
what pay they should have after all. Yea, we have had, and still have, [I can
at this moment fasten my Eye upon some of them, in the Assembly where I am now
speaking,] Brave men, who have Bravely Jeoparded their Lives in the High places
of the Field, for our Defense. O Treat 'em not with vile Ingratitude, after all
the Service they have done* Prefer them on all sit occasions, while they Live,
Embalm their Memories, and Requite their Families, when they are Dead. But
while we are Thankful to Them, Let us much more give Thanks to God for Them,
even, for such Gifts of Heaven as we have Enjoyed in them.

Well; Will you Wisely Observe these Things? Wisely! That is to say,
Thankfully, and Fruitfully. It may be, If more Distinct and Solemn
THANKSGIVINGS, were made unto God our Savior, for these things, the Relics
of our Enemies would quickly feel the Rebukes of God upon them; not unlike
those, in 2 Chronicles. 20.22. When they began to Sing and to Praise, the Lord set
Ambushments against their Enemies, and they were Smitten.

IX. In the WAR that has been upon us, Whosoever is Wise, may Observe those
things, that may Mightily Encourage our Prayer, and our Faith, for a Total
Ruin, to be hastened on the Remainders of our Enemies.

There yet Remains a Knot of our Enemies, in those Inaccessible Thickets, where
we Despair ever to Find 'em out; but I will Read their Doom, from Psalm. 21.8,
9, 10 Thine Hand, O Lord, shall Find out all thine Enemies, Thy Right Hand
shall Find out th^se that Hate thee; The Lord shall Swallow them up in His
Wrath, and the Fire shall Devour them; Their Fruit shall thou Destroy from the
Earth, and their Seed from among the Children of men. What Remains for Us, is,
That we do by Prayer and Faith, put our Enemies over, into those Omnipotent
Hands, that can Find them out, and cut them off. Oh! Let us keep our Hands
Lifted up in Prayer, for a Total Dissipation of those Amalekites, which have
thus long and thy far prevailed against us! We have already ha^ many Notable
Answers of Prayer in this our War Every one of our Deliverances have been very
No^tably Such! We cannot say, How many particula^ Persons, have Received
Answers of Prayer, in the particular Troubles, which this Evil Time has
Ensnared them withal. Doubtless, many (...) Christian, has in this Time, had
opportunity to say, This poor man cried, and the Lord Heard him and Saved him
out of all his Troubles! And several Towns, that have had a Remarkable
Protection of God upon them, in this long Time of Danger, they have had a
Praying People in them, and that Praying People have been the Chariots and the
Horse men thereof. Why else does Deerfield Stand? How should our Prayer be
Quickened by such Experiences! But there is this further Quickening for it,
That with the Cry of our Prayer, there will go up unto the Lord, the Cry of
Blood; much Innocent, and Righteous, and Precious Blood, Cries to Heaven, from
the Ground against those Bloody and Crafty men, that have Treacherously shed
it. Certainly, They must not Live out all their Days! And we have this
prevailing ple^ against them, in the Court of Heaven! That they have most
Falsely Broken their Covenants, in their Outrages. We may venture, to present
our Memorials, in the Court of Heaven, against these Covenant Breake^s, who are
Implacable and Unmerciful; and we may use the words of Jephtah, against his
Heathen Adversaries, The Lord the Judge, be Judge between us and them! We may
use the words of Jehoshaphat against his Heathen Adversaries, O our God, will thou not Judge them? Vladislaus, the King of Hungary, Scandalously breaking his
League, with Amurath the Turkish Emperor, brought an Army into the Field
against him. The Turkish Army being horribly Broke, and Slain, and almost
Vanquished by the Hungarian, Amurath in his Anguish, took out of his Bosom,
the written League, that Vladislaus had made with him, and holding it up in his
Hands, with his Eyes to Heaven, he Cried out, Behold, O Crucified Christ, the
League which thy Christians in thy Name have made with me, and now without
cause do Violate; If thou be a God, Revenge the Wrong that is now done unto thy
Name, and show thy power upon a Perjurious People, who in their Deeds Deny
their G^d! Immediately the Course of the Battle turned; the Perjurious King was
killed; and the Turks w^n a most unexpected Victory. Truly we may in like
manner now take the Instrument of the Submission and Agreement of the Eastern
Indians, which Thirteen of their Chief Commanders did Sign more than Five years
ago; and holding it up to Heaven, we may Cry out, Ah, Lord God of Truth, will thou not be Revenged upon the False Wretches that have broken this League!
Doubtless, our God will Exec^^e a dreadful Vengeance upon them, if we Humbly
make our Suit unto Him for it; and He has ways for His Vengeance to come at
them, which We cannot Imagine. It Is affirmed, That several Times in this War,
our Enemies, have in the Woods met with Parties of Indians, which were their
own Friends, but by a mistake apprehending each to be Enemies unto each other,
they have hotly fallen upon one another, and many have been killed on both
Sides before the mistake was discovered. Yea, It Is affirmed, th^^ not a few of
the Chief Murderers among our Enemies, have accidentally killed hemselves; the
most Murderous Indians, have in a little while been their own Executioners. Who
can tell, what Strange Ways, the God unto whom Vengeance belongs, has to
inflict it, on a Generation of His Curse?

Only, Let us Remember to plead the Sacrifice of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, in our
Prayer, with our Faith, for the Perfection of our Deliverance. Our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, has been a Sin-Offering for the Congregation, and a Sacrifice
pleadeable, not only for Persons, but also for Peoples that belong unto Him. We
read in 1 Samuel 7.9, 10. Samuel Offered a Burnt-Offering wholly unto the Lord,
and Samuel Cried unto the Lord of Israel, and the Lord heard him; and the Lord
Thundered with a Great Thunder on that Day upon the Philistines, and discomfited
them. When we Cry to the Lord, Let us plead the Burnt-Offering of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and plead, That God has more Glorified His Justice in the
Sufferings of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, than if our Houses were all Filled with
the Cries of our People Massacred by Indian Salvages. Then will our God Thunder
with a Great Thunder of His Consuming Wrath upon our Indian Philistines! That
Note, which the Great Calvin has above an Hundred Times over, in his
Commentaries on the Psalms, Nunquam Irritas fore preces, Or, Prayers will never
be lost! Prayers will never be lost! It will much oftener be Repeated in our
Blessed Experience, if our Prayers do present before God that Blessed
Sacrifice, of which He says, It Is a Sweet odor o^ Me!

X. In the WAR that has been upon us, Whosoever is Wise, may Observe those Loud
Calls to a Reformation o^ our Miscarriages, which it is a Dangero^s and a
Desperate thing to neglect any longer. It was the Voice of the Blessed God, in
Psalm. 81.13, 14. O That my People had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked
in my ^ayes! I should soon have Subdued their Enemies, and turned my Hand
against their Adversaries. Ah, New England; Thy God has not soon Subdued thine
Enemies, nor soon turned His Hand against thine Adversaries: but let 'em Vex
thee for Ten years together. Surely, Thou have not hearkened unto Him, nor
Walked in His Ways! In that which was called, The Holy War, the Ambassadors of
a Saracen Prince, demanded of a Famous Christian General, How he came to have,
Manus tam Doctas ad Praeliandum, Hands that were so Able to Fight? The
Christian General replied, Quia Manus Semper habui puras, Because I never
defiled my Hands, with any Notorious Wickedness. Alas, our Hands have made but
poor work at Fighting. It Is Time for us, then to Reform all the Notorious
Wickedness in our Hands! Do we Dream that the Almighty has spent all His
Arrows? No, after all that for ^en years together have been spent upon us,
there are yet more Arrows, and Judgment left in the Quiver of God: And Except
we Turn unto Him, who can say, What Arrows He may next ordain against us? The
Roman Emperor Upbraided his General Terentius, for Loosing a Battle; but the
General, having too much occasion to say so much, replied, Sir, I must tell
you, that it is you that L^st the Day for us, by your open Fighting against the
God of Heaven as you do. If it be asked, How it is come to pass, that we have
Sped so Ill in many a Battle, since this War began? Some will blame one, and
some will blame another: but I will take Leave to tell all them that Lead an
Ungodly Life, Syrs, It Is to you, that we owe all our Ill Success! I need not
quote one of the Ancients, namely, Ambrose, for that Observation, Graviores
Inimici sunt mores pravi, quam Hosts Infensi: We have had enough in our own
Experiments to convince us, That our worst Enemies are our Vices, which provoke
Heaven to Chastise us with all our other Enemies: And indeed, If our Ways did
please the Lord, our Enemies would be at peace with us. Observe wisely, and you
cannot but Observe, the Language of Heaven, in the Circumstances through which we
have passed for a whole Decad of years together, to be That, in Lev. 26.23, 24.
If ye will not be Reformed by me, by these things, but will walk contrary unto
me, Then will I also walk contrary unto you, and I will punish you yet seven
Times for your Sins. And that the Demand of REFORMATION may be Loud enough, it
arrives to us now with a more than Ordinary Accent of Authority upon it. We
have seen, and, Blessed be God, that we have seen, the Greatest Monarch that
eve^ Sat upon the British Throne, Issuing Out His Royal Proclamation, upon the
Pious Address of the Commons of England, assemble in Parliament; a
Proclamation, wherein that Illustrious Prince declares His Royal Resolution to
Discountenance all Vice whatsoever, and requires all Officers whatsoever to be
vigilant, in the Discovery, Prosecution, and Punishment thereof. We have seen a
most Excellent GOVERNOR, who is the Greatest Person that ever set Foot on the
English Continent of America, beginning His Government, with proclaiming for
the Suppression of all Vice in One of His Provinces: That Noble Person has
therein done, Like a Vicegerent of GOD! His very Honorable Lieutenant, has
worthily done His part, with the Advice of His Council, in another of His
Provinces. If these things prove but mere Formalities, among a people, Hating
to be Reformed after all, what will they be, but more Terrible Prognostics of
Tremendous and Amazing Desolations at hand, than so many Blazing Stars on Fire,
in Heaven over us. It is to be hoped, the Ministers of the Gospel, will do what
belongs to Them, for the Assistence of all Holy Essays about Reformation; and
their Churches, if called upon, will join with them, in the Methods of
Covenant, and of Discipline, for the promoting of it. Yea, It is to be Hoped,
That we shall all Zealously in our several Stations, do all that we can, for
the pleasing of God, and for the Correction, and Suppression, and Reformation
of the Sin that may be displeasing to Him. It is a Thing very notorious unto
us, That Idleness, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Cheating, Lying, Profane Swearing,
and above all, that which is the Root of all, the Profanation of the Lord's Day,
gains ground upon us. Let all that have any Power in their Hands, unto the
utmost of their power, Endeavor to keep under those Enormities. But Last of
all, Nay, I should rather say, First of all, O let every man set upon
Self-Reformation, with all his might! I Remember, that passage, in Prove. 18.17
He that is first in his own Cause, seems right, is translated by the Vulgar
Latin, so as to carry a further, and an useful Admonition in it; Justus primus
est A^^usator sui, A Just man, before he meddles with the Reproof of others,
will first Accuse himself, and search the State of his own Soul, and Life, and
faithfully Reform it. Oh! That very much of This might be done among us! How
does an Army of Thrice Ten Thousand men, presently Turn from East to West,
because Every One Turns One? Syrs, We have Wisely Observed the Things that have
in our Afflicted years befallen us, and we have now to good purpose heard a
Sermon of Observations upon those things, if we will now Retire, and ponder
seriously with our selves, What is there amis^, in my own Heart, and in my own
Life, and in my own Family and by what Reformation of my self ^ay I best answer
the Expectation of the God, who has Chastised us all?

We have been under the Lamentable Punishments of our Sins, for two Lustres of
years together; It Is time for every man, and for all of us, as one man, to say,
as in Lam. 3.40. Let us Search and Try our Ways, and Turn again unto the Lord.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
REader, Carthagena was of the mind, that unto those Three Things, which the
Ancients held impossible, there should be added this Fourth; To find a Book
Printed without Errata's. It seems the Hands of Bri^reus, and the Eyes of Argus
will not prevent them. I take Notice of a few in this Book; and those few are
Scarce worth having any Notice taken of them. e. g.

Page 45. l. 4. f. must, r. most. p. 60. l. 9. f. Il. r. El. p. 68. l. 18. f.
le^t. r. lost. p. 83. l. 7. f. Newberry* r. Rowley. p. 128. l. 12. r. Idaea's.
p. 146. l. 4. f. him. r. them. p. 167. l. 1. f. Fast. r. Fact. p. 184 l. 6. f.
by. r. in. p. 198. l. 22. f. where. r. were. p. 200. (...). f. he. r. be.

Advertisement.
THere will speedily be Published, a Little Book, much desired and Expected;
whereof the Title is, A Family well-ordered. Or, A brief Essay, to render
Parents and Children, Happy in one another. Being two Sermons Preached, at
Boston Lecture, by Mr. Cotton Mather.

Printed for and Sold by Michael Perry, at his Shop over against the
Townhouse, and Benjamin Eliot, at his Shop under the West End of the
Townhouse. 1699.


