The Great Physician, INVITING Them that are Sensible of their Internal
MALADIES, To Repair Unto HIM for His Heavenly REMEDIES.

A Brief Discourse, Meditated by ONE under Bodily Illness, and Profitable for
all that are under Spiritual.

In ^em Medicum, qui in Caelis habitat, et in Terris s^arg^ Meditamenta.

Ambros Boston, in N. E. Printed and Sold by Timothy Green, near the
North-Meeting-House. 1700.

Reader.
THe obscure Author of this Feeble Discourse, having been One Lord's Day
Confined from the Service of his Flock, by Sickness, reckoned it not amiss on
the next Lord's Day, to entertain them, with some of the broken, and shattered
Thoughts, which he had in the Sickness. He had no Intention of publishing them
any further; but some of the Hearers, to whom the Sovereign Grace of Heaven,
had made this poor Sermon more Awakening, than many that were more Elaborate,
solicited his Leave to give it unto the public. Being at all Times Loath to
Discourage attempts to do Good, he was willing to hope, that Composures which
are not the most Elaborate, may do Good: and therefore he permits This to come
into thy Hands.

The Great PHYSICIAN.
[29 d. 7 m. 1700.]
MAT. IX.12. They that be Whole, need not a Physician, but they that are Sick.


AND then, I am sure, there is not a man upon Earth, but what stands in
Infinite Need of a CHRIST. Now to Proclaim a CHRIST, as the Healer of a Dying
Soul, and therefore the One thing Needful for every Soul, is the Work to be
done this day among you.

THE Self-Righteous but the most Unrighteous Pharisees, conceived no little
Malice and Scandal against our Lord Jesus Christ, upon His Admitting of (...)
into His company. They Cavilled our Lord, as if He had been Himself the Chief
of Sinners, because He allowed those, whom the more Superstitious and
Ceremonious Jews, distinguished by the Name of Sinners, to have Communion with
Him. Our Text contains the Vindication of our Lord; The Whole have no need of a
Physician, but they that are Sick. The plain Sense, and Scope, and Sum of the
Text is This; A Physician must be among the Sick: it is his Calling and his
Duty to be so. The Messiah is the Physician of Souls, and all Sinners are the
Sick. You Pharisees, that are insensible of your Sinfulness, and Sickliness,
cannot expect, that I should Converse with none but you. The Publicans feel and
own themselves to be Sinful, and you must not wonder, if then I visit them.

The Doctrine of God our Savior, which we are now to insist upon, is This; The
Lord JESUS CHRIST is the Physician of Souls, that are Diseased with Sin, and
sensible of their Diseases.

They are the Thoughts of a Sick man which are now to entertain you* A Few
Thoughts, and Faint ones, are all that must Compose the present Entertainment.

Three Propositions ly before us*

I. Sin is the Sickness of the Soul* Sin brings Many, Loathsome, Deadly
Diseases on the Soul. There cleaves to every man in the world, a Corruption,
which (after Austin,) we call, Original Sin: or, a Principle Rebelling against
the Holy God, and Transgressing of His Holy, and Just, and Good Commandments.
This our Original Sin, is the Original of all the Sickness on our Body. Hence,
when our Lord bore our Sins, it is said, He bare our Sicknesses* Our Moral
Distempers are the Cause of our Natural ones. And Original Sin is it self the
Sickness of our Soul. In regard of Original Sin, it may be said of us, as in
Isa. 1.5, 6. The whole Head is Sick, and the whole Heart Faint; from the sole
of the foot, even unto the Head, there is no Soundness; but wounds, and
bruises, and putrefying sores. The man of God once mentioned those two things
together, Psalm. 103.3. He forgiveth all thine Iniquities, He heals all thy
Diseases: And indeed those two things may meet in one; for our Iniquities are
our Diseases. For this cause, Deliverance from Sin, is called by the Name of
Healing: when it is said, Isa. 6, 10. They Convert and be Healed, it is as much
as if it had been said, By Conversion they be Saved from their Sin.

Sin does to the Soul, the same that Sickness does to the Body. There is a
lamentable Weakness brought upon the Soul, by that Sickness. By reason of Sin,
it comes to pass, that a Sinner is, as it is Expressed, Romans 5.6. Without
strength. It Is a Sickness that has taken the Sinner quite off his Legs: he is
not able to Run the way of Gods Commandments, or, to Walk with God, or, to Come
unto the Lord Jesus Christ, though his very Life do ly upon it. Yea, Sin is a
Sickness, by which all the Faculties of our Souls, are woefully Disordered,
grievously Disabled. Our Understandings are Enfeebled by Sin: they do not now
Receive the things of the Spirit of God, which are Spiritually discerned. It is
said of a Sinner, 1. Tim. 6.4. He knews nothing. Our Consciences are also
Weakened by Sin; and being Weak, they do not aright perform their Offices. It is
said of a Sinner, 1 Cor. 8.7. He has a weak Conscience. Above all, Our Wills
are Depraved by Sin. We are Sick at Heart. What a desperate sickness is an
Heart that is desperately wicked? An Heart that has the Stone in it? A Sinner
will not do, what God requires: Thus we read of some, Jer. 44.16. They said, We
will not Hearken. And he will do what God forbids: Thus it is said of some, Joh.
8.44. The Lusts of your Father ye will do. And his Will makes a most perverse
and froward Choice: It Chooses that which is Evil, and Refuses that which is
Good. All the Affections of his Will are out of order. His Grief is what should
be his Joy; his Fear is what should be his Hope; he Hates what he should Love;
and his Joy and Hope and Love are all misplaced. And as the Diseases of the
Soul use to come under this Distribution, Oblivio Dei, and Angor Conscientiae,
so Sin having at this rate Sickned the Soul, at last it brings an horrible Pain
upon the Soul: Even that Pain, whereof the wise man says, Prove. 18.14. The
Spirit of a man will sustain his Infirmity, but a wounded Spirit who can hear?
And that Pain, wherein some have kept Crying out, O Torture! Torture! and
wished but for this mitigation of their miserable Anguish, To ly in the Fire on
the Hearth before them!

Now the Diseases that are by Sin thus brought upon the Soul, have especially
Three sad Characters upon them.

First, They are Many Diseases. As it is said, Jam, 3.2. In many things we all
offend: thus it may be said, In many things we are all Diseased. Every Lust is
a several Disease in the Soul: And there is many a Lust, wherewith a Sinner is
distempered. It is a deplorable thing to be Troubled with many Diseases
together, a Complication of Diseases: to have it said of One, as it was of that
Great Reformer, That one man has Diseases enough perhaps for an Hospital. But
every sinner has many Diseases. He has the Palsy of an unsteady Mind; He has
the Feavour of Unchastity* He has the Dropsy of Covetousness; He has the
Erisypelas of A^ger; He has the Cancer of Envy* He has the Tympany of Pride; He
has the Apoplexy of Slothfulness: And what not?

Secondly, They are Loathsome Diseases. What shall we say of them? They are as
bad as the Plague. Sin is called, 1 King. 8.38. The Plague of the Heart. All
the out-breakings of Sin, are but the filthy and nasty runnings of so many
Plague-sores. Indeed, Sin is a Leprosy; and there can be nothing more Loathsome
than such a Leprosy. Sin is called Filthyness: 2 Cor. 7.1. Filthiness of Flesh
and Spirit. And the Sinner, is called, An Abominable man: How should it be
otherwise? For Sin is an Abomination.

Thirdly, They are Deadly Diseases. Hence it is said, Ezekiel. 18.4. The Soul that
sins shall Die. Men are, Dead in Trespasses and Sins. There is a Death comes
upon all men: Whence In that all have Sinned. Every Sin is in it self a Mortal
sickness: If it be not in the Event so, it is owing to the wonderful Grace of
God. Sin, if it be not seasonably and effectually Remedied, will prove Deadly
to the Soul: we are forewarned, Romans 6.21. The End is Death. What is the
Sinner? It may be said unto every such one, as the Lord said once unto such a
one; Thou are a Dead man.

But, what shall now be done for us, in this our Sickness? I Remember the
pathetical words of the Despairing Spirae; Its neither Plaster, nor Drugs,
that can cure a fainting Soul, cast down with the sense of sin, and the wrath
of God: ^^s Christ only that must be the Physician. Prepare now, O my Hearers,
to Hear of a Physician.

II. The Lord JESUS CHRIST is the Physician of the Sin-sick Soul. There are
several Elegant and Endearing Terms, whereby our Savior describes Himself unto
us, as our Savior. One of those Terms is, that Honorable one of, A Physician.
When our Lord Jesus Christ Saves us from our sin, He Saves us from the worst
sickness in the world. It is fit therefore, that our Lord Jesus Christ should
be called, A Physician, when He appears for our Salvation from our Sin. His
Name is that, Exodus 15.26. The Lord, thy Healer. His work is that, Psalm. 147.3.
He Heals the Broken in heart, and binds up their wounds. Of Him it is said, Mal.
4.2. The Sun of Righteousness [Our true Phoebus!] shall arise, with Healing in
His wings.

The Miracles wrought by our Lord Jesus Christ, when He was Conversant among
us, were for the most part, Healing Miracles. It Is said of Him, Mat. 4.23. He
Cured all manner of Diseases. In that Quality of the Miracles wrought by our
Lord, there was this Instruction taught unto us; That the Lord Jesus Christ, is
the Physician from whom our Souls may expect the Healing of all their Maladies.

Our Lord Jesus Christ is Appointed and Anointed by God, for the Mediator
between God and man: And it is as our Mediator, that our Lord Jesus Christ is
our Physician. In well-ordered Commonwealths, every man may not presume to
take upon himself, the Character of a Physician: it is a Character for none but
such, as after a due Trial, are Licensed for it. Our Lord Jesus Christ comes to
us, as a Physician, under the License and Broad-S^^l of the Eternal GOD. Hence
our Lord could say, Luke 4.18. He has sent me, to Heal the brokenhearted.
There is no Malady of our Souls, but our Lord Jesus Christ, as our Mediator,
has now a Medicine for that Malady. That Glorious Priest, has a Cure for our
Guiltiness; That Glorious Prophet, has a Cure for our Ignorance: That Glorious
King, has a Cure for our Pollution, and our Slavery.

But let us Enquire a little more particularly.

Question I. What are the Means, whereby our Lord Jesus Christ, as the
Physician of our Souls, does Heal our Soul-Diseases?

It is thus Answered.

First, The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the Grand Medicine of our Souls.
Oh! the admirable, astonishing Riddle of the Gospel! Fusus est sanguis Medici,
et factum est Medicamentum phrenetici, was the ancient Admiration! The Blood of
our Physician, is the Great Medicine for all our Diseases. It was the Song of
his praise, Rev. 1.5. He has Loved us, and Washed us, (and so Healed us) from
our Sins, in His own Blood. The Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, is a
Sin-pardoning Blood, and a Sin-subduing Blood, and all the Help that we have
against our Sin lies in the Blood of our Lord Jesus Christ shed for our Sin. We
are told, 1 John 1.7. The Blood of Jesus Christ Cleanses, (and so Heals)
from all Sin. Our Sin has made fearful Wounds in our Souls: but from the
Wounded side of our Lord Jesus Christ, there has dropped that Blood, which is a
Sovereign Balsame for all our Wounds. Hence it is said, Isa. 53.5. He was wounded
for our Transgressions, He was bruised for our Iniquities, and with His stripes
we are Healed. Thus, Vulneribus Christ's fit Medicina meis.

But, Secondly; The Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, Applies the Medicine to
our Souls. Our Soul is Healed of Sin, by that Grace, which the Blood of the
Lord Jesus Christ has purchased. But now, it is the Spirit of Grace, who does
Apply that Grace. The Soul that had been Sick unto Death, is Revived; and is
Restored, and brought unto Life again, when the Spirit of Life operates upon
it. A Soul is Healed in its Conversion unto God: Says the prophet, If they
Convert, they be Healed Now a Conversion is wrought by the Holy Spirit upon the
Soul. It was said of some, Act. 11.21. The Hand of the Lord [that is to say,
The Spirit of the Lord,] was with them, and a Great Number Believed, and Turned
unto the Lord. Men will never Turn unto the Lord, until the Spirit of the Lord
shall Turn them. The (...) of the Lord Jesus Christ, is, (...) Sanctifier; and
The Comforter, and that is as much as to say, The Physician. (...) was said, 1
Cor. 6.11. Ye are Washed (and so, ye are Healed) by the Spirit of our God.

And, Thirdly; The Ordinances, and the Providence of the Lord Jesus Christ,
are the Vehicles of the Medicine. The Word of the Lord Jesus Christ, That is a
Soul-healing Word, and a Soul-quickning Word. We read, Rev. 22.2. of a Tree,
and the Leaves of the Tres were for (...) ^ealing of the Nations. Methinks,
while I turn the Leaves of this Book, I have in my Hands the Leaves of the
Tree, that are for the Healing of the Nation. Of this Word, we are by the Word
it self (...), It Converts the Soul, it makes Wild the Simple, it Rejoices the
Heart, it Enlightens the E^es. What a Catholicon have we before us? And the
Sacraments of the New Testament, have an Healing virtue in them. When the Word
of the Lord Jesus Christ, has first hopefully begun the Cure of a Soul, the
Sacraments are then to carry on the Cure. Hence it was said, Ezekiel. 47.9. The
waters of the Sanctuary are for Healing. Indeed, it is a preposterous Thing, to
give the Eucharist unto them, that are altogether Uncured. That I had almost
called, Quack-Divinity. But when the Word of the Lord Jesus Christ has in a
measure disposed the Soul for it, then the Bread and Wine of the Eucharist are
seasonable. Christian, Though thou have a very Sick Soul in thee, yet thou
may venture to come. The Providence of the Lord Jesus Christ, have also
their subserviency to the Healing of our Souls. The Lord said, Hos. 7.1* I
would have Healed Ephraim. How? By Providential Dispensations. The Comforts
bestowed upon us; These are to bring our Souls into Frame, and Lead us unto
Repentance. The Sorrows inflicted upon us; These are to make our Souls Better,
and hereby our Iniquity is purged.

But more Light will come in, by the opening of another Window.

Question II. What is that Healing which the Physician of our Souls, does by
these Means Convey unto us?

To this the Answer is;

This Healing is the whole Salvation of our Lord Jesus Christ: It contalus all
the Benefits that flow to us, from His Alsufficient Mediation.

Very particularly;

Justification is one thing, in the Healing of a Soul. When the Good Lord
Pardoned the people, it is said, 2 Chronicles. 30.20. The Lord Healed the people.
When Sin is Forgiven, it is Covered by a Divine Plaster, and so the Soul is
Healed. When the Prophet says, Lest they Convert and be Healed, the Evangelist
renders it, Lest they should be Converted, and their Sins should be Forgiven
them. We read, Isa. 33.24. The Inhabitant shall not say I am Sick, the people
shall be Forgiven their Iniquity. Truly, a Soul says, I am no more so sick, as
once I was, when a man is Forgiven his Iniquity.

Sanctification is another thing in the Healing of the Soul. A Soul is made
Healthy when it is made Holy. In Sanctifying a Soul, the Lord fulfils what is
written, Jer. 30.17. I will Restore Health unto thee, and I will heal thee of
thy Wounds. The Soul is Viciated by Sin. To Extinguish, and Extirpate the Vices
of the Soul, is to Heal the Soul. A Sanctified Soul is an Healed one, because
the Vic^^ of it are taken away. By Holiness the lost Image of God is Renewed in
the Soul; and all the powers of the Soul are brought into a better Temper, and
Order.

And then, in the Healing of the Soul, there is Consolation also. This is the
Healing of the Broken in Heart; and a making of Broken Bones to Rejoice. Thus
it is said, Isa. 57.18. I will Heal him, and Restore Comforts unto him. A Sad
Soul is a Sick Soul. A Grieved Spirit, a Fearful Spirit, is a Wounded Spirit.
The Oil of Gladness poured into the Soul, by the Promises of the New Covenant,
is the Healing of the Soul.

Well, but who shall be partakers of this Healing?

III. The Blessed Healer of Souls, will not Heal the Diseases in the Souls of
men, until He has made them Sensible of their Diseases. Men must be Sick,
before the Lord will Heal them; that is to say, Sensibly Sick. It is not every
Sick man that shall be Healed by the Lord, but they who are so Sick, as to see
and feel that they need a Physician. There must be a Conviction of Sin, to
prepare men for their Deliverance from Sin.

The Reason of this, is plain* It Is, Because none but the Sensible Sick, will
come unto the Lord Jesus Christ for Healing. It is not fit that the Lord Jesus
Christ should Heal the Souls of men, till they look unto Him, that they may be
Healed: No, it is inconsistent with the Glory of God, and the Method of Grace.
Indeed, the Healing of Souls, does most properly and suitably Commence in this
point. When a Soul is made Sensible of its being Sick, it begins to be Healed
of the Sickness; The very Sense is part of the Cure. Until a man be Sensible of
his own Sinfulness and wretchedness, it is very certain, he will never come unto
the Lord Jesus Christ, for the Healing of it. Unto the Insensible our Lord will
still have cause to say, Joh. 5.40. Ye will not come to me, that ye may have
Life. No, while a man is ^nsensible of the Sick state that Sin has brought him
into, he will despise the Great Savior, and neglect the Great Salvation; he
will trample under foot the Son of God, and count His Blood a Thing of no
Account: he will prefer Sin and (...) all the Heavenly Happiness, that the Lord
Jesus Christ has to bestow upon him. And it is (...) That a Sinner should be
Healed of his Diseases while he continues under the Reign of such Malignity;
Yea, it is as Unpossible as it is Unreasonable; for this Malignity is it self,
as they use to say of the Plague, The Queen of all Diseases.

But let us Enquire, who are the Sensibly Sick?

First. A man must be Sensible of his own Sinfulness. A Sensible Sick Sinner,
is One that sees himself a Sinner, and bemoans himself like him, Luke 18.13.
God be merciful to me a Sinner. He sees himself a Sinner by Nature. He says
with the Sensible Psalmist, Behold, I was shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my
Mother Conceive me. He sees himself a Sinner by Practice. He says with the
Sensible People, My Transgressions are multiplied before God, and my Sins
testify against me. Yea, he sees himself Distempered and Endangered, by
Innumerable Sins: he says with him, Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable Evils have
compassed me about, mine Iniquities have taken hold upon me. A Soul Sensibly
Sick is no Self-Justiciary. He Cries out, Lord, I am Vile: I am a Sinful
Wretch; my best, my fairest and finest Works, are but splendid Sins* my Holy
Things are Iniquities, I am a mere Lump of Sin; there dwells no Good thing in
me.

Secondly. A man must be Sensible, that Sin has Exposed him to Every sort of
Evil. He must say, in Lam. 5.16. Woe is unto me, that I have Sinned. He is a
Sick man indeed, that sees Death, and nothing but Death before him. A Soul
Sensibly Sick, sees the Death, whereto he is by Sin become obnoxious. There is
a Terror struck into such a Soul, by such a Thought as That, Romans 6.23. The
wages of Sin is Death. Such a Soul, is cast into an Agony of Consternation and
Astonishment at the Condition, which it is by Sin brought into. It sees itself
Siezed by the dreadful Wrath and Curse of God, and shrieks, Oh! Wretched One
that I am! These, These are the Soliloques of a Sin Sick Soul; Alas, What shall
I do? Where shall I go? I am Condemned by the Law of God; All the Threatenings
and Thunders of it, are directed against me. The Chains of Hell are upon me,
and I am held fast in the Bond of Iniquity; and I am a Captive of the Mighty:
And if I Die in this Condition, what, what will become of me throughout Eternal
Ages?

Thirdly; A man must be Sensible, that Sin is indeed the Worst sort of Evil. He
must call it, as it is called, Jer. 44.4. The Abominable thing. That man is
indeed Sick, who feels it a worse thing to be Sick, than to be Poor, and Mean*
and labor under ten thousand other Inconveniences. A Soul Sensibly Sick, looks
upon Sin as the worst misery imaginable: There appears nothing so miserable
unto such a Soul, as to ly under Sin. As it is said of one, Heb. 11.25. He Chose
rather to suffer Affliction, with the People of God, than to enjoy the
Pleasures of Sin; So, such a Soul counts the most Pleasant Sin, more bitter,
than the most bitter Affliction. Yea, the Sin which was once the chief Pleasure
of such a Soul, now becomes more Bitter than Death. A Sin-Sick Soul, makes
Ejulations and Exclamations of this Importance; What a forlorn Creature am I!
Better work it for my Body to be Blind, than for my Soul to ly under this
Blindness; Better for my Body to be Lame, than for my Soul to ly under this
Lameness, that my Sin has brought upon me. Better were it for me to ly under
any pining Sickness, than to have a Soul pining away in its Iniquities.

Fourthly. A man must be Sensible, that he cannot be his own Savior from Sin,
or the Healer of his own Soul. A Soul Sensibly Sick, is that in Luke 19.10.
That which is Lost; a Soul at an utter Loss, about its own Recovery. Then is a
man Sick to purpose, when he sees that he cannot heal or help himself. A
Sin-sick Soul, is one that utterly despairs of Healing his own Sickness: but
says with the Psalmist, Psalm. 65.12. The Lord only is my Salvation. A Soul
Sensibly Sick, feels an infinite load of Sin lying upon it self, and sees it
self utterly unable to remove the least part of that load. Such a Soul Cries
out, I am nothing, I can deserve nothing, I can perform nothing! Yea, all
Humane Reliefs, do fail such a Soul; all Creatures appear insufficient, and
insignificant, and Physicians of no value unto it. These are the Sick, to whom
the Lord Himself will be the Physician!

Let us Apply these Faithful sayings.

APPLICATION.
I. Repair, O Sick Souls, Repair unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST, for the Healing of
your Sickness, your Sinful Sickness. We are a Congregation of Sick Souls: Where
am I Preaching, Sirs, but in an Hospital? If there be any One Soul in the
Congregation, so Whole, as to need no Physician, Be gone, O Soul, be gone: Why
do thou tarry here? Heaven is the only place for such a Soul. But indeed, if
any Soul be so Conceited of it self, that it need no Physician, there is rather
good to say, That there is no (...) likely to miss of Heaven at the (...) and
there is no Soul under more desperate Symptoms of a Sickness, that will End in
Hell, and bring to Hell, at the last!

Wherefore, Let every Soul now, be found lying at the feet of the Lord Jesus
Christ, with that Cry, Psalm 41.4. Lord, be Merciful unto me, Heal my Soul, for
I have Sinned against thee. And with that Cry, Psalm. 116.4. The Sorrows of
Death compass me -- O Lord, I beseech thee, Deliver my Soul.

I call to mind, the words used unto the Lord-General of Syria, laboring under
a Leprosy, 2 King. 5.3. I would my Lord were with the Prophet, that is in
Samaria, for he would recover him of his Leprosy. Even so would I say; I would
thy Soul were applying it self unto the Lord Jesus Christ, the Savior that is
in the Heavens; for He would Recover thy Soul of all its Maladies.

Yea, Let us go to the Lord Jesus Christ, for the Sick Souls, that Cannot, and
Will not (their Cannot, is indeed a Will not!) go for themselves. We read, Mat.
9.3. Behold, They brought unto Him, a man Sick, and Jesus seeing THEIR Faith,
said unto the Sick, Son be of Good Cheer. Thus, let us go to the Lord Jesus
Christ, for our Sick Neighbors, and especially for our Sick Children, and
other such Relatives, who may be, by Sin indisposed unto the Thing that is
Good; and plead, Lord, I have such Friends that are yet Strangers to thy Fear,
and that follow these and those Evil Courses; Oh, Take them into thy Healing
Hands, and Heal them, and Help them, and Change them, and put thy Fear into
their Hearts, I pray thee, I pray thee! Who can tell, what the Lord will do for
them, when He sees YOUR Faith so concerned for them?

Consider, What a Physician, O Perishing Souls, what a Glorious Physician you
are invited unto.

You have a Physician, and He is an Able Physician. It is said of Him, He is
^^ghty to Save; yea, Heb. 7.25. Able to Save unto the uttermost. There are
mischiefs which are Ludibria Medicorum, Incurable by those that profess the Art
of Curing. Yea, but there are no mischiefs too hard for the Healing Hand of the
Lord Jesus Christ. Be thy Soul never so Undone, and never so Forlorn, and never
so Dead, yet may thou come to the Lord Jesus Christ, with such terms as
those, Matthew. 8.2. Lord, if thou will, thou can help me!

Again;

You have a Physician, and He is a Gracious Physician. All may Come unto Him,
and Welcome: He says, Joh. 6.37. Him that Comes unto me, I will in no wise
Cast out. Here is a Physician, that calls upon All to Look unto Him, and be
Healed, yea, and that will Heal them for a Look. He Offers His Kindnesses to
every One of us all; even to the Poor as well as the Rich: and all upon
Free-Cost. How obligingly does He speak, Isa. 55.2. Come without Money, and
without Price! He not only says, No Cure, no Pay; But He says, You shall be
sure of a Cure, and then all the Pay shall be to Love and Thank the Lord your
Healer.

Once more;

You have a Physician, and He is the Only Physician. There is no other
Physician, that can do you any Good. We are told, Act. 4.12. There is not
Salvation in any other. All other Addresses, will but leave your Souls, as
Helpless as they were before: There is no Help, except in the Name of this
Lord! As the Dying Martyr Cried out, so may the Dying Sinner, None but Christ!
None but Christ! Men may try to lick their Souls whole, with their own
Repentances, and Reformations, or may Stupify their Souls, with the Opiates of
worldly Diversions; but, O man, if thou keep at a Distance from the Lord Jesus
Christ, thy Fate will be that, Jer. 46.11. In vain shall thou use many
Medicines, for thou shall not be Cured.

Well then; Repair to the Lord Jesus Christ, with all the Diseases of your
Souls: And spread them all before Him; Conceal none of them, Smother none of
them. He demands of you, as in Mar. 10.51. What will thou, that I shall do unto
thee? Now, as that Blind man answered, Lord, That I might Receive my Sight? So
do you answer, Lord, That my Sin may be Pardoned, Lord, That my Sin may be
Conquered, Lord, That my Soul may be brought into a Right Frame, and that thy
Image may be Renewed in my Soul; and that my Healed, and Strengthened Soul, may
walk in thy ways, and serve thee in Holiness and Righteousness before thee,
all my Days!

But, Let it be done Seasonably, Let it be done Immediately; Let it be done
before it be too Late. An Israelite Stung by a Fiery-Serpent, would not put off
his Looking unto the Brasen-Serpent, that was lifted up for the Healing of the
poisoned, and say, To morrow will be Time enough! The Lord Jesus Christ is
lifted up, on His Cross, in His Gospel, that the Souls of men, Stung to Death,
by the Old Serpent, may be Healed by their Looking unto Him. Oh, Do not say, To
morrow I Will do this! For thou have no Assurance of a To morrow; Boast not of
it! But of this thou may be Assured, That thy Diseases will not be To morrow
so likely to be Healed, as they are To Day; The longer thy Diseases be upon
thee, the harder will they be to be Healed. Oh, Don't slight the merciful
Tenders of thy Physician, lest the issue be as to them of Old, 2 Chronicles. 36.16.
The wrath of the Lord arose, till there was no Remedy. Behold, Now is the Day
of Salvation!

II. Cherish in your Souls, a Sensible Conviction of the Sickness, the Sinful
Sickness that is upon your Souls. You are Sinfully sick; Oh, become Sensibly
sick. None, alas, None are so Sick, as they that are Sick, and know not that
they are Sick: There is a Madness in their Sickness, and it is well, if with
that Madness in their Hearts, they don't go down to the Dead. None so Wretched,
as they, to whom it may be said, Rev. 3.17. Thou know not that thou art
Wretched and Miserable.

Wherefore;

First; Meditate, Meditate, upon your Diseases, till Meditation do produce
Conviction. There was a Convinced man, who thus came to be so; Psalm. 119.59. I
thought upon my ways.

Meditate on the Vileness of all Sin; as it not only Wrongs your own Souls, but
as it is a Denying, and a Defying of the Infinite God, and as it procures and
incurs, provokes and invokes, His infinite Wrath.

Meditate on the Number of your own Sin; and set before your selves a Catalogue
of what is Forbidden and what is Required in the Commandments of God; and see
how much you fall into what is Forbidden, and fall short of what is Required.

Meditate on the Circumstances that aggravate your Sin; the Light and Love, and
Vows, against which you have Sinned. Muse, till the Fire Burns!

And,

Secondly; If some Conviction of Sin be now produced in you, Don't Sin it away.
It is the Holy Spirit of God, of whom it is said, Joh. 16.9. He shall Convince
the world of Sin. Wherefore, Don't Grieve, don't Vex, don't Resist the Holy
Spirit of God* Hearken, Listen to His motions. And having been by Him Convinced
of Sin, don't fall to Sinning again, but, Oh! fall to Praying unto Him, who
Saves His People from their Sins.

But,

Finally; Don't stay away from the Lord Jesus Christ, on a pretense, that you
have not Convictions enough to Prepare you for Him. You must not come unto the
Lord Jesus Christ, as Recommended by your Preparations. It Is not under the
notion of Prepared Sinners, but of Perishing Sinners, that you are to come unto
Him: though it be also true, That you will not Come, till you are Prepared, by
seeing that you are Perishing. If you are so far Con^i^ced of Sin, that you
dare not stay away from the Lord Jesus Christ, Then, Come! It Is said, Mat 9.13.
I am not Come to call the Righteous, but Sinners unto Repentance. Is thy sight
of thy being a Sinner such, that nothing but a Savior can content thee? Do
thou see, That thou art a Sinner, whom nothing will relieve but such a Savior?
Come to Him, without any more ado: Arise, the Savior Calls thee! Yea, though
thou art the Chief of Sinners, yet thou art Called unto Him.

FINIS.

