THE Man of WAR.

A Sermon Preached to the Artillery Company at Boston, on June 5. 1699.

Being the Anniversary day for their ELECTION Of Officers.

By Samuel Willard, Teacher of a Church in Boston.

Psalm. 18.34. He teaches my hands to War.

Pugnabo pro Sacris and legibus, pro aris and focis

Melanch. Boston, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Benjamin Eliot, and
are to be Sold at his Shop under the West End of the Townhouse. 1699.

The Man OF WAR
I Kings IX.22. -- These were Men of War. --


THE one half at least of the inspired writings is Historical: not as if the
Spirit of God had no farther aim therein, than to acquaint us with ancient
Chronology, or to reserve for us the monuments of antiquity, and those renowned
names, which else would have been lost in the rubbish of their Sepulchers: but
as part of that Canon by which he furnishes us with a perfect Rule of Faith,
and Manners, whereby we are directed in the way to the glorifying of God, and
obtaining of eternal blessedness: and to rest in any thing short of this
improvement of it, is to lose the Principal design for which it is commended to
us.

For a Gospel Minister, in the Execution of his Function, to accommodate any
portion of Sacred Writ, merely to establish points purely Ethical, Oeconomical,
Civil or Military, would be to play the Philosopher, and not act the part of a
Divine, who, as such, has no farther to do with those things than as they are
tributary to the Christian Religion.

As to the Histories of the Old Testament, besides that they are Exemplary and
Written for our Admonition, there are many persons and things recorded in them,
which are also Typical, referring to Christ, and to spiritual things; and
though it would undermine the Authority of Holy Writ, to allow two distinct
senses to one Text; yet there must be a compound one observed in those that are
Typical: and things are to be distinctly considered, as they are applicable to
the Type, and as they refer to the Antitype

That Solomon, to whose History our Text belongs, was a Type of Christ, is too
manifest to need any digression for the proof of it: though all things written
in his Life cannot with reason be reckoned Typical. That wherein God more
peculiarly chose Solomon to represent Christ, was his Kingly Office: for which
end he furnished him with Wealth, Honor, and Wisdom surpassing all the
Monarchs, which ever had been, or should be. And this Wisdom of his, though it
grasped in its comprehension, a knowledge universal of things natural, civil
and divine, yet is more eminently celebrated in the well-ordering and settling
the Affairs of his Kingdom; in which, his first care was about the House of
God, and his Instituted Worship, in which he exactly followed the Divine
Prescript, and the Patterns left him by his Father Davd, which he receved from
God by Immediate Revelation: Nextly, and subordinately, for the well-ordering
and settling of the Outward Affairs of his Kingdom in matters Civil and
Military; and this last is the thing about which we are at present concerned.

Solomon's peculiar Style or Tide was, King of Israel; though all the
circumjacent Nations were his Tributaries, or some way or other did him Homage.
Thus is Christ more especially King of his Church, though all Principality,
Power, Might and Dominion are put under his feet for the Church, as Ephesians. 1.21,
22.

The Holy Land, which God gave for an Inheritance to his People of Israel the
bounds whereof were assigned to them by God himself, Numb. 34. was peopled, not
only by the genuine Posterity of Jacob, but also by the remains of those
Devoted Nations, who after long Hostility, were subdued and subjugated by
David, and made Subjects of the Government, though in a more inferior and
servile estate than the Israelites ^ere; which may semblably be applied to the
Visible Church, in regard of the diverse Subjects of it, according to, Romans 9.5.
all are not Israel, that are of Israel.

From verse 20, to 24. of this Chapter, we have an account of Solomon's
Prudence, in assigning unto these two sorts of men, the services most proper
for them, and wherein they might most sutably serve for the good of the whole,
they were both employed. Christ will make use of all within his visible
Kingdom, some way or other for his Glory, whether they be willing or no. Of the
former of these, we read, verse 22. that he Levied of them a tribute of
Bond-Service: they were put to the drudgery work, and the more Servile
Employments of the State; as most proper for them. Whereas in this verse 22. we
are told, that he found out a more honorable Service for them that were true
born Israelites; they were not excused from business, but they were employed in
such as was worthy of free Subjects. I shall not insist on the several Services
that are here mentioned; it may suffice to observe that the thing is expressed,
both negatively, he made no Bond men of them; and of this God himself had given
an express prohibition, Lev. 25.39. And Affirmatively, where the first thing
which is instanced in, is the subject that we have now under consideration;
they were men of War, i. e. they were men Listed among the Soldiers, and
Exercised or Trained in the Art Military. The word used for men, is not that
noble word [ Ish] which signifies Virtue, and Valor, and is wont to be
applied to persons of Renown; but that more contemptible word, Enosh, which
signifies Sorrowful, Sickly and Mortal; not with any design to reproach the
Calling, but possibly to put Soldiers in mind of their frailty, to humble
them, who, when in their Plumes, are too apt to be lifted up over much in their
minds: the word [ War] comes of a root that signifies to Eat or Devour;
intimating the unhappy fruits of War; The Sword is therefore said to devour, 2 Samuel 2.26. giving us to understand that War is in its own nature an evil thing.

We may here, in the first place, take notice of these words, as they are put
with the former distributively, and so they will afford us this

DOCTRINE. The Employment of a Soldier is very Honorable.
It is too good for a Canaanite to be admitted to, or for a Slave to have his
name Enrolled in this Muster: but is only fit for a freeborn Israelite. God
has therefore put Honor on this Calling, by assuming that as one of his
Titles, Exodus 15.3. The Lord is a Man of War, the Lord is his Name; but the
word [ Ish] is there used.

It is true, had man retained his primitive Integrity, there had been no
occasion for the Art Military; because he would have had no Enemy to Encounter;
no Fortresses to be Built, and Garrisoned; no Instruments of War to be
invented, no Tackticks to be learned. He was in a great Error, who asserted,
That the State of Nature is a State of War, if he referred it to the Condition
of the Creation, as it was at first disposed by God. But when once sin had
depraved Humane Nature, it filled man with jarring principles, and sowed in him
the seeds of dissension; so that now he is no farther in safety, than as he
puts himself in a posture of Defense against the assaults, and of Offense for
the suppression of his molesting adversary; which, though it has not taken
away the evil nature of War in it self, yet it has made it occasionally both
good and necessary; and it must needs therefore be Honorable, when undertaken,
not for its own sake, but for the securing or recovering of the public peace
and tranquillity: and though some are of the mind that there will be a time
come, when that Prophecy shall have a complete literal accomplishment, Isa.
2.4. they shall beat their Swords into Plowshears, and their Spears into
pruning hooks. Yet till this, will this Employment retain its dignity. These
are they whom under God, we are beholden for our peace and liberty; who are not
afraid to speak with the Enemy in the Gates; who secure our Religion and Civil
Privileges from foreign Usurpation; and through whom we Sit under our vine
and fig tree. As for the Invidious dispute about the precedence between the
Gown and the Sword, I purposely wave it: only I may safely assert, that without
both no people can be happy; nor can either Order be free from contempt, except
furnished with men of Courage.

USE.
And is Chivalry a thing of such Renown? Let it bespeak all that profess it, to
walk worthy of their Vocation. If our Calling has put honor upon us, we ought
to endeavor to be an honor unto it; otherwise, the more honorable it is, the
greater reproach we shall be to it. There are none that shall need to be
ashamed of this Employment, but such as are a shame to it. I confess it is but
an old Rule, but how it will be Rectified, I see not; men will readily judge of
things by the example of those that profess them. Is then a Soldier a name of
Credit? Let all that bear this Name, study to gain the desert of being called,
Good Soldiers.

We may in the next place observe, who they were whom Solomon put to this
Service, to be Men of War; they were the men of Israel; the only people in the
World, who at that day were owned by God for his people, and had the true
Religion and Worship among them: Whence observe this

DOCTRINE. Christianity is no Enemy to Soldiery.
The Religion revealed by God to fallen man forbids it not to him, but
approves of it. Nor let it be supposed, that I use the word, Christianity,
precariously; as if it were not applicable hither, or as if the people of God
in former times, before Christ came in Flesh, might lawfully make War, and
consequently study and practice Military Skill; but that Christ, upon his
Coming, had brought in a new Law, which forbids it; and that because he thought
it to be a great Christian Duty, to bear injuries, and not to revenge
themselves; therefore War is now unlawful for them; and if so, to what purpose
should they be Soldiers? Whereas Religion has been the same in all the
Essentials of it, ever since the Fall, and has received no alteration but in
Positives. The Gospel was Preached to our First Parents presently upon their
Apostasy; there has been but one way for the Salvation of Sinners, and that is
by Christ, Acts 4.22. there is Salvation in no other. The Moral Law was renewed
upon Mount Sinai, and given in the hand of a Mediator, to be a Rule of
Obedsence to the Worlds End unchangeably: nor did Christ come to destroy it;
nay, he has assured us, that he will not suffer one jot or tittle of it to
fail, Mat. 5.17, 18. If then the Moral Law does not condemn War, but prescribe
to it; and that Law be a Rule for Christians, as it certainly is, Christ did
not prohibit it, though he forbad private revenge for personal injuries: which
yet was no addition to the Law of Nature, or Law Moral, but only an
interpretation of it, and a vindicating it from the false glosses of corrupt
men.

Nor indeed can the Christian Religion be otherwise defended or secured against
the invaders and oppressors of it, who are unreasonable men, and can be no
other way disputed, but at the Swords point, and Canons mouth; and if at any
time War proves detrimental to the Interest of Christ, the fault is in the men,
not in the Profession. When the Soldiers came to the Babtist for advice, he
does not cashier them, nor advise them to disband, but directs them how to
manage their Calling becomingly, Luke 3.14 Do violence to no man, neither
accuse any falsely, and be content with your Wages; and that Calling which the
Word of God undertakes to regulate, must needs have its approbation. Nor would
Christ have warned us in the Gospel of Wars to be expected, if he had not
reckoned it our duty to prepare for them; nor have advised us rather to Sell
our Coat than not to have a Sword, if he had thought it unlawful to use it when
we have it; as he does. Luke 22.36. He that has no Sword, let him Sell his
garment and buy one. This expense would be altotogether superfluous, if
Christianity taught us to hold up our throats to every one that offers to cut
them.

Self Preservation is a principle stamped on the nature of Second beings.
Inanimates have it by an innate quality put into them; Sensitive Creatures have
it by instinct, and their very natures are furnished for it: and that reason
should not fortify this principle in men; or that Religion should contradict
any maxim of the Law of nature is unintelligible. Certainly then, they who
pretend to make it a sin in a Christian to use Arms, do it in policy, seeking
to bind men's hands, or, which is as bad, their Consciences, that they may
enslave or slay them without resistance. And we need to look no further for an
instance to confirm this, than the German Anababtists at Munster.

USE.
Let Soldiers then be advised to approve themselves friends, and not enemies
to Christianity. Let not the old Scandalous observation be verified in men at
arms, Nulla fides pietas que viris, qui castra sequuntur. Let us do nothing
against the truth, but for the truth. Has God given us leave to fight, let us
not be fighters against God. Beware of embracing that cursed Matchiavellian
principle, That too much of Religion will make a man Pusillanimous; as if there
could be excess in the true Religion; or, as if Atheism, and Irreligion, were
the best course to render a man truly valorous: whereas the holy Oracle has
taught us the quite contrary. Prove 28.1. The wicked flees when no man
pursues, but the righteous is bold as a Lion. Cornelius was an honorable
Commander in a noble Regiment; and yet how is he Commended for his Piety? Acts
10.1, 2. A devout man, and one that feared God, etc. And he sought to instill
devotion, as well as the Rules, of Military Discipline into his Soldiers;
whence that Character given of one of them. Verse 7. A devout Soldier of them
that waited on him continually. And, though profaness and debauchery may
possibly stupify men's Consciences, and so render them foolhardy and desperate:
yet, out of doubt, that man who dwells in peace with God, who enjoys the inward
serenity of a good Conscience, and is always in his heart pressed for the Glory
of God* is best armed against the fear of death, when called to run into the
mouth of danger, and stand in the midst of Confused noises, and garments rolled
in blood; when he sees, a thousand fall at his fide, and ten thousand at his
right hand.

But I proceed.

We may then in the third place remark the time in which Solomon appointed the
Israelites to be men of War. Had it been in the days of David his Father, who
was so often called into the Field; who was environed with enemies on all
sides, and against whom he fought many a bloody Battle, it had not been so
much; nay, it had been necessary. But that Solomon, whose very name imports
Peace, and who was, in his reign, to be a Type of Christ, who is called the
Prince of Peace, Isa. 9.6. Of whose reign it was predicted, that the mountains
should bring forth Peace to the People. Psalm. 72.3. And that in his days there
should be abundance of Peace. Verse. 7. And who could himself say in his Letter
to Hiram. 1 King. 5.4. There is neither adversity, nor evil occurrent. That he
should be so careful to have his Subjects trained up in arms, is a thing very
remarkable, and it will instruct us in this,

DOCTRINE. It is a great point of Prudence, in times of Peace, to make
Provision for War.
Prudence is a natural foresight of future Contingencies, and providing our
selves accordingly against the danger of them. Prove. 27.12. The Prudent fore
sees the evil, and hides himself. Although the Providence of God Governs,
and infallibly determines all Contingencies; yet they do not, for that, cease
to be Contingencies, as to the order of Second causes; among which Peace and
War have their Revolutions, though known to God, yet casual to us. Eccl. 3.8. A
time of War, and a time of Peace. So that Peace is never so settled, but that
War may on a sudden arise: and security, which is the mother of negligence,
always exposes a people unto danger. It is an ill time, when the Trumpet of
War is sounded, and Hannibal is at the gates, for a people then to have their
Forts to build, their Arms, Ammunition and Provision to seek, and their
Soldiers Untrained. Nor is it less hazardous, when once Peace is proclaimed,
for men to let their Fortifications fall, hang up their Arms, and let them grow
rusty and useless, and lay aside their Military exercises, as things
superfluous. Arms, are for the maintaining of Peace, as well as the suppressing
of War, for its preservation as well as recovery. Nor will any thing strike
more of terror into our ill willers, than to see us always ready for the
worst: hence such an expression. Cant. 6.10. Terrible as an army with Banners.
Whereas, if they who watch for an advantage, find us, Laish like secure, and no
way provided, nor expecting evil, they will be ready to serve us, as the Tribe
of Dan did them. Judge. 18.27. They came unto Laish, unto a People that were
quiet and secure; and they smote them with the edge of the Sword, and burnt the
City with fire. It was an argument used by Asa, that because all was quiet
before them, and God had given them rest, it was their wisdom to take the
Opportunity to build Cities, and make walls, and towers about them, as if they
had expected an attack from enemies. 2 Chronicles. 14. 6, 7. He did not think it to
be an evidence of a strong faith for men to neglect the means, on pretense of
trusting in God. The best way to prevent the occasion of using the sword in
earnest, is to keep it always bright and furbished.

USE.
Which Consideration might be improved both for Rebuke and Caution. It has
doubtless been a fault among us, that this Rule of Prudence has been so poorly
attended. Peace has bred Security, and times of Trouble have found us unready;
and the most of our Surprises and Defeatments by the Enemies, have deserved to
be imputed to this. I spare to enumerate the many instances that are at hand;
Of how many of our surprised Garrisons, in which our people have been miserably
butchered, may that of the Poet be asserted, Invadunt urbem, somno -- Sepultam.

And there have been complaints made, that our very Trainings have been too
often idle Complements, of at least, that there has been in them too much
neglect of, and too little proficiency in the things that are properly designed
by them.

And be we warned not to fall asleep, because the Sword of War is at present
sheathed; remembering that the Book of the Histories of the Wars of the Lord, is
not yet completed, nor will be till the great Battle of Armageddon is fought.
Babylon is not yet fallen. The Churches Adversaries are still in their
strength. God will call out his Armies e're long; and then Cursed will he be
who comes not forth to the help of the Lord against the mighty.

Nor are we our selves secure: and though it is but a little that we can do for
our own safety; and if God be not on our side, we are an easy prey to any
potent Devourer; yet the Faith that nourishes negligence, is not indeed Faith,
but Presumption.

There is yet one farther Improvement of this Text, which I would make, and it
will comprize the whole Auditory under it, and give to every one their portion;
and that is the Mystical aim of this Typical Scripture; in which I am
satisfied, that I shall not go beyond the mind of the Spirit of God in this
part of the Scripture History. Israel, over whom Solomon Reigned, were the then
Visible Church, of God; and although not a Type of the Gospel Church, in the
strict sense of the word; yet Gods treating with them in the Ceremonial and
Judicial Law, was in a more large, and true sense Typical; having under it a
dark representation of Spiritual Things, which were more fully to be revealed
afterward: and so they have a more peculiar respect to the Church of Gods
Chosen and Elected.

As Solomon was in a more peculiar respect the King of the Nation of Israel, he
so represented Christ, as King of Gods true Israel: and we are here given to
understand, what order he takes about them, or what business he assigns for
them, as they were the Subjects of this Kingdom. Here then Observe this

DOCTRINE. Every true Israelite in the Kingdom of Grace, is a Man of War.
The true Christian is a Soldier. In the Visible Gospel Kingdom there are two
sorts of men, Israelites only in name, and Israelites indeed. The former are in
truth Canaanites, and Slaves, mancipated to Sin and Satan; but the latter are
emancipated by Christ, and Enrolled in his Army.

There are two States of Christ's Spiritual Kingdom, which give it a double
denomination; the one is called the Kingdom of Grace, the other the Kingdom of
Glory: according to which States, the Church, which is the Subject of them,
has the Titles of Militant and Triumphant assigned to it. To the former of
these our Doctrine refers. The Church under the Kingdom of Grace is Militant;
and every Regenerate one is born a man of Contention* Jer. 15.10. but when once
they pass over to the Church Triumphant, they shall be discharged. Jerusalem
which is above is free.

Time forbids my gi^ing any more than a cursory view of this Affair; I shall
therefore only offer a few rude (...) of a Christian, under the Character of a
Soldier.

Angels and men were at first made Subjects of the Divine Government, and had
Sworn Allegiance to their Lord Creator: which had they retained, they had
enjoyed perpetual, uninterrupted peace; nor had they ever heard the sound of
the Trumpet, or alarm of War. But there were many Legions of those Caelestial
Inhabitants, who, not contented with their Post, contrived and consented in a
revolt from their Sovereign: and by a malicious wile, drew poor man into the
Rebellion with them; whereupon they are proclaimed Rebels, and Gods Holiness,
Justice, and Omnipotency are armed to take Vengeance on them. Thus were briars
and thorns set in battle array against a consuming fire.

God resolving to have War for ever with these Apostate Spirits, did yet
graciously offer a Treaty of Peace and Reconciliation to miserable man; which
he has maintained, where and as he sees meet, with some of the Race, ever
since. So that, though Satan be the God of this World, and Sways the Scepter
over all the Children of Disobedience; yet God has set up a Kingdom of Grace
in the midst of the other, and draws over Subjects from it to himself, whom he
persuades to desert the Colors of Hell, and put themselves under the banners
of Christ, the Captain of our Salvation. Of this number is every true
Israelite, who by the Efficacious operation of the Spirit in him, is turned
from darkness to light; and from the power of Satan to God; and now, though he
is, by this great Change, made an Heir of Glory, and Entitled to an
Everlasting Crown; yet there is a Race to be run, in which he must Fight a good
Fight, and keep the Faith, in despite of all that Would rob him of it. He must
press through Armies of Aliens, who would stop up his way, and will make him to
dispute for every inch of Ground that he gains. The Kingdom is his, but if he
will possess it, he must take it by force. He has furious adversaries, enraged
with malice against him, and with united Conspiracy and Force attempt his
ruin, if possible.

There is the Flesh within, burning with rage against his Grace, and ever lying
entrenched about, and beleaguaring of it, us the word translated, contrary. Gal
5.17. intimates; a Law in his Members, continually warring against the Law in
his mind, and using all its Stratagems to make a Captive of him, Romans 7.23. the
lusts of the flesh, which we are assured, do ever Fight against the Soul, 1
Pet. 2.11.

There is Satan his sworn Adversary, whose ancient and inveterate enmity makes
him always furiously to attempt his destruction, and he is unweariedly going
about seeking to devour, 1 Pet. 5.8. He no sooner forsook the Devils quarters,
but Hell was Alarumed with it; and from that very moment, bends all its forces
to do him all the mischief it can; the Devil is for that reason emphatically
called The Enemy.

And there is the World, which therefore hates him, because he is not of it The
Seed of the Serpent is full of enmity against the Seed of the Woman: and as it
was of old, he that was born after the Flesh, persecuted him that born after
the Spirit: so it is now.

If he will overcome these Enemies, he must resist them steadfastly in the
Faith, 1 Pet. 5.9. we have the whole adverse party represented in their
Colors, Ephesians. 6.12 we wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, i. e. not them
singly, and alone; but against principalities against powers, against the (...)
of the (...) world, against spiritual (...) places. These must all be
vanq^^^hed, (...) we expect to Triumph, for the promise still runs, to him that
overcomes Rev. 2. and 3. and though all our hope of success depends on our
great General, Jesus Christ, who must bruise these enemies under our feet; yet
he requires us to stand our ground, and to fight under him.

For this end he has provided us with the whole armor of God, and requires
us to put it on, and exercise our selves in it, Ephesians. 6.13. There is the Helmet
of Salvation, the Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Shield of Faith, the Sword
of the Spirit, and the rest. There are the holy Tackticks, or the Rules given
us in the Scriptures, by which we may be taught how to use these in the Holy
War, that so we may strive lawfully, and receive the Prize. There are the
Military Virtues which we are advised to inure our selves unto: Temperance and
Vigilance, 1 Pet. 5.8. be sober, be vigilant. Hardiness, 2 Timothy 2.3. as a good
Soldier of Christ, endure hardness. Circumspection, Ephesians. 5.15 see that you
walk circumspect^y* Fidelity, Rev. 2.10. be thou faithful unto death; Skill in
all the enemies stratagems, 2 Cor. 2.11 ye are not ignorant of his devices.
Courage and Constancy, Ephesians. 6.14. Stand; and there is the premium or prize hung
up in the promise, to animate our resolution, and recruit our fainting spirits,
when at any time we find them beginning to droop.

USE. I.
Let this serve to warn and caution such as pretend to be listed among God's
Israel: such as covet to bear the style and title of Christians. It is indeed
worthy name, and no small honor to those that bear it, and carry themselves
worthy of it; nor indeed can there be a greater dignity conferred on the
Children of men. Christ's Servants are his Freemen, yea his friends, yea they
are privileged to be the Children of God. Joh. 1.12. But he would have you to
fit down and compute the cost. If you would be his Servants, you must be his
Soldiers: and be not deceived in your expectations and reckonings, lest you
repent when you see War, as there is hazard you should do if not prepared.
Exodus 13.17. Lest when you meet with hardships and difficulties, you do as the
mixed multitude in the Wilderness did. Numb. 11.4. Weep and fell on lusting.
And as the Congregation of Israel did, when the Spies told them of Cities
walled to heaven, and Giants to encounter. Chap. 14.4 They said one to another,
let us make us a Captain, and let us return into Egypt. Dulce bellum
inexpertis. Inconsiderate persons account it a fine thing to be a Soldier,
whiles they look only upon the bravery, liberty, ease, and plunder which they
promise themselves in it; and how readily do they list themselves for
Volunteers? but when they come to meet with the hard Services of long Marches
through thick and thin, short fare, difficult lodging, watchings and wardings,
and cruel battles, these unexpected things affright them, and now they wish
themselves at home again. Know it, if you will be of Christ's Camp, you must put
on your whole Armor, and put it off no more till death disbands you, but March
in it, and Lodge in it: you must stand continually in your ward all day, and be
set in your watch whole nights: you must fight with the most powerful and
malicious adversaries; and that not at a distance, but in the closest battles.
You must, after one fight is over, be prepared to engage in another, nor may
you, in the greatest distress, ever cry quarter. If these conditions may
content you, come and welcome.

USE. II.
Let it invite all to come in to Christ, and give up their names to him, and be
listed in the Muster-Roll of Saints. The foregoing warning was not designed to
discourage any but white Livered and slothful persons: nor properly to
discourage them from coming, but to instruct all in the manner of the Kingdom.

In other Musters care is had, or ought so to be, that none but men, and those
also able of body, be entered: but Christ in the Gospel gives order to beat up
for all that will, Men, Women, Children, Young and Old; none are exempted. Why
then are you so backward? Why so small an appearance? Do you not know that
whether you will or no, you must be Soldiers? There are two Camps in the
World, Christ's and the Devils; and to one of these you must: belong. There are
no neuters in this War. Nay, till you do come over to Christ, you belong to
some of Satan's Regiments. We are all of us either fighting for God, or against
Him. Now think which is best, to abide where you are, or to fly over unto
Christ. You serve under a cruel Commander, who hates you, and pursues your
destruction: whiles he flattereth you with fair promises, he will put you upon
the hardest Services, and most desperate engagments, and will leave you there
to fall, as Joab did Uriah. And the more daringly you have served him here, the
more cruelly will he torment you hereafter. You are engaged in a cursed cause,
which will certainly fall at last, and all that have stood by it, will be sent,
with their Leader, to be with him in blackness of darkness for ever. None ever
resisted God, and prospered. But if you will give your selves up to Christ, he
will treat you honorably; he will conduct you safely; He is a tender and
compassionate General; He will be with you in every Battle, to protect you, and
give you an assured Victory at the last. He will bind up the Wounds, which you
receive in fight, and that with his own Robes, as Alexander once did by one of
his Soldiers. You will be on the surest side; and if you should be worsted in
any single fight, yet you shall be Conquerours in the Warfare. He will revive
you if you faint, and commend you if you be faithful and resolute, and say to
you, Well done. Yea, and he will provide for you a Triumphal Chariot, in which
you shall ride gloriously into the great City; and there will he Erect for you
Trophies and Arches for everlasting remembrance. This Honor have all His
Saints.

USE. III.
Let it be to excite all that belong to the Camp of Gods Israel to approve
themselves good Soldiers of Jesus Christ. Whatsoever is among men justly
accounted Commendable in a man of War, apply it Spiritually, and do likewise.
Remember, your great General is called, Faithful and True; and be you like Him,
following upon white Horses, and Clothed in fine Linen, white and clean, as it
is represented in, Rev. 18.12, 14. Study much the Holy Scriptures, by which you
may be furnished with the whole Discipline in which Christ's Militia is to be
trained. Be much in the Exercise of all the Graces of the Spirit, which are
your Panoply, and with which you must fight, if you hope ever to overcome.
Entangle not your selves with the Affairs of this Life, least you thereby unfit
your selves for the Service of him, who has chosen you to be Soldiers, 2 Timothy
2.4. Get your hearts fortified with an heroic resolution never to flinch in
your Service, to desert your Post, much less to fly from your Colors, nor to
love your lives unto the death, so you may discharge the trust reposed in you.
Be not discouraged if you get a foil, but reinforce the battle, calling aloud
for aid from heaven: Nor be secure when you win the Field, but be always ready
for a new onslaught. Remember, you must have no discharge in this War for age
or infirmity: there are no Milites emeriti, or rude donati, in Christ's Army,
till the War ends. Remember, you have potent enemies, and very cruel, to cope
withal, who are never wearied, but ever engaged to do you the greatest harm.
Consider, you are not fighting for Counters and Goats hair; not for
contemptible Crowns, and fading Laurels; but it is for your lives, and for your
Souls, for an incorruptible Crown, an eternal weight of Glory. Remember, your
Cause is good, and the issue is secured. Consider, That God, and Christ, and
Angels look on, and the voice from Heaven is, Courage brave Soldiers; yet a
few skirmishes, yet a battle or two more, and the War is at an end; and you
shall rest from your labors, and your works shall follow you: You shall lodge
your Colors, and hang up your Shields in Heavens Capitol; and exchange your
purple and crimson Garments, for the white Robes of Glory. It is your faithful
Leader who is thus animating of you; be thou faithful unto the death, and I
will give thee a Crown of Life; and makes that Proclamation to you; To him that
overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my Throne; even as I also overcame,
and am sat down with my Father on his Throne.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THERE is now ready for the Press, and may speedily be Published, a Treatise
concerning Spiritual Desertions, from Psalm. 30.7. By the Reverend Mr. Samuel
Willard.

Printed for and Sold by Benjamin Eliot, at his Shop under the West End of the
Town House. 1699.


