A VINDICATION OF THE Divine Authority OF RULING ELDERS IN THE Churches of
Christ: Asserted by the Ministers and Elders, met together in a Provincial
Assembly, November. 2 d. 1649. And Printed in London, 1650. Beginning at Page 34.
to 48. Transcribed out of the same Book.

Whereunto is added, An Answer to the Question, Whether are not the Brethren,
and not the Elders of the Church only, to Judge concerning the Qualifications,
and Fitness, of those who are Admitted into their Communion? By the Reverend
Mr. Increase Mather, in his Book Entitled, The Order of the Gospel: Printed in
the year, 1700. Beginning at Page 23. to 29.

Reprinted for Public Good.

A VINDICATION OF THE Divine Authority of Ruling Elders, etc. In Answer to an
Objection.
Object. BEcause it sets up a new Officer in the Church, which is a mere humane
Creature, having no authority from the Word of GOD, nor was ever heard of in
the Church of Christ, till Calvin 's time, and that is the LAY-ELDER.

Answer. WE do here freely confess, that we were of opinion, as some are, that
the Ruling-Elder has no foundation in the Word of God, but is a mere humane
Ordinance brought into the Church only in a prudential way; we should heartily
desire the utter abolition of him: For we are not ignorant, that the Ruling
Prelate was brought into the Church upon the same account, for the avoiding of
Schism and Division, and afterward proved the great Author and Fomenter of
Schism and Division. And if we would decline the Ruling Prelate, and take in
the Ruling Elder upon the same prudential grounds, it were just with God to
make him as mischievous to the Church, as ever the Ruling Prelate was: And
therefore let us consider what may be said out of the Word of God, for the
Justification of this so much decryed Officer: Yet first we cannot but take
notice that the name of Lay-Elder was affixed to this Officer by way of
reproach and scorn, by the adversaries of him, and that it ought not to be
continued. For though it be evident by Scripture, [ Heb. 13.17, 24.] that there
is a great difference betwixt the Ministry, usually called the Clergy, and the
people commonly called the Laity: Yet its also as manifest, that the Scripture
distinguishes them not by the names of Clergy and Laity: forasmuch as all Gods
people are therein styled the Lords Clergy or Inheritance, [1 Pet. 5.3. Jer.
10.16.] and the Lord is called their Inheritance. And when persons are duly
chosen from amongst the people to be Governors in the Church, as such, they
are no longer Laymen, but Ecclesiastical persons. And therefore we profess a
dislike of the name Lay-Elder, and conceive they ought to be called either
Governors in the Church, 1 Cor. 12.23. or Ruling-Elders: as 1 Timothy 5.17. not
because their Office is to rule alone (for the Teaching-Elder is a Ruler also,)
Heb. 13.17. 1 These. 5.12. but because their Office is only to rule. Now
concerning these Ruling-Elders, we confess, Non quia soli, sed quia solum
praesunt.
that they are Officers somewhat new and strange to the Church of England; yet
not new nor strange to the Word of God, nor to the Primitive Times, nor (as all
know) to the Reformed Churches.

First, They are not new nor strange to the Word of God, neither in the
Old Testament, nor in the New. The Jews in the Old Testament, had two sorts of
Elders, Elders of the Priests, and Elders of the People; suitable to our
Teaching and Ruling Elders, as appears, Jer. 19.1. And these Elders of the
people did sit and vote with the Priests and Levites in all their
Ecclesiastical Consistories, and that by divine appointment. That they were
constituent members of the great Sanhedrim, appears, 2 Chronicles. 19.8. where we
read, that some of the chief of the Fathers were joined with the Priests, to
judge in the matters of the Lord. And howsoever, many things among the Jews
after the Captivity, did decline to disorder and confusion; yet we find even in
the days of Christ, and his Apostles, That the Elders of the people still sat
and voiced in the Council with the Priests, according to the ancient form, as
is clear from Matthew. 26.57, 59. Matthew. 27.1, 12. Matthew. 16.21. Mat. 21.23. Mark
14.43. Luke 22.66. and Saravia himself, De diverse. grad. Minist. Evang. cap.
11. p. 108.
who disputes so much against Ruling Elders, acknowledges thus much: I find
indeed, (says he) Elders in the Assembly of the Priests of the old Synagogue,
which were not Priests; and their suffrages and authority in all judgments,
were equal with the suffrages of the Priests. But he adds, That these Elders of
the people, were Civil Magistrates; which is a poor shift, directly against
many Scriptures, which contradistinguish these Elders from the Civil
Magistrate; as appears, Acts 4.5. Judge. 8.14. Deuteronomy. 5.23. Josh. 8.33. 2 King.
10.15. Ezra. 10.14. And though it were possible, that some of them might be
Civil Magistrates, as some Elders among us, are Justices of the Peace; Yet they
did not sit under that capacity, in the Ecclesiastical Sanhedrim, but as
Ecclesiastical Elders.

And that the Jews also had Elders of the people, sitting and voting in their
inferior Consistories, appears (as we humbly conceive) from Acts 13.15. Acts
18.8, 17. Mar. 5.22. In which places, we read of the Rulers of the Synagogue,
who were neither Priests nor Levites, and yet were Rulers in Church Matters,
and had power, together with the Priests, of casting men out of the Synagogue,
and of ordering Synagogue-worship, Joh. 12.42. Acts 13.15.

Now this Association of the Elders of the people, with the Priest, in the
Jewish Church Government, was by Divine Appointment; for Moses first instituted
it, and afterward Jehosaphat restored it, according as they were directed by
God, Numb. 11.16. 2 Chronicles. 19.8. And it did belong to the Jewish Church, not as
it was Jewish, but as it was a Church, and therefore belongs to the Christian
Church, as well as Jewish. For whatsoever agrees to a Church, as a Church;
agrees to every Church. There was nothing Judaical or typical in this
institution, but it was founded upon the light of nature, and right reason,
which is alike in all ages.

But leaving the Old Testament, let us consider what may be said for the Divine
Right of the Ruling-Elder, out of the New Testament. For this purpose, we have
already produced three places, which we shall now briefly open; and show how
the Ruling-Elder is proved out of them. The places are, 1 Cor. 12.28. Romans
12.7, 8. 1 Timothy 5.17.

The first place is, 1 Cor. 12.28. And God has set some in the Church, first,
Apostles; secondarily, Prophets, thirdly, Teachers; After that, Miracles; then
gifts of healing, helps, governments, diversities of tongues; where we have an
enumeration of sundry Officers of the Church; and amongst others, Calvin in
locum Chrysostom upon 1 Cor. 12.28. Estius upon 1 Cor. 12.28.
there are Helps, Governments. By Helps, are meant Deacons; (as not only our
Reformed Divines, but Chrysostom and Estius, and others observe) and by
Governments, are meant the Ruling-Elder; which that it may the better appear,
we will propound, and prove these six things.

1. That by Governments, are meant men exercising Government, the Abstract put
for the Concrete. The intent of the Apostle, is not to speak of Offices
distinct from Persons, but of Persons exercising Offices. This appears first,
by the beginning of the verse, God has set some in his Church; this relates to
persons, not unto Offices. Secondly, by the 29. and 30. verses, where the
Apostle speaks concretively, of those things which he had spoken before
abstractively. Are all workers of miracles? have all the gifts of healing? do
all speak with tongues, etc? and so by consequence, Are all helpers, are all
Governors? And therefore it is, that the Syriack instead of helps,
Governments, reads it helpers, Governors.

2. That the Governor here meant, must needs be a Church-Governour; for it is
expressly said, that he is seated in the Church, and therefore the Civil
Magistrate cannot be meant by this Governor, as some would have it; partly,
because this is quite besides the whole intent and scope of the Chapter,
treating merely upon spiritual Church Matters, not at all of secular civil
matters; and partly, because the Magistrate, as such, is not placed by God in
the Church, but in the Commonwealth: and partly, because the Apostle writes of
such Governors, that had at that time actual existence in the Church; and
neither then, nor diverse hundred years after, were there any Christian
Magistrates.

3. That this Church-Governour is seated by God in his Church; It is a plant of
Gods own planting, and therefore shall stand firm, maugre all opposition. For
it is expressly said, God has set some in his Church, first Apostles, etc. then
helps, then Governments.

4. That this Church-Governour thus seated by God in his Church, is not only a
Churchmember, but a Church Officer. For though it be a question amongst the
Learned, whether some of the persons here named, as the workers of miracles,
and those that had the gift of healing and of tongues, were seated by God, as
Officers in the Church, and not rather, only as eminent members endued with
these eminent gifts; yet it is most certain, that whosoever is seated by God in
his Church, as a Church-Governour, must needs be a Church Officer; for the
nature of the gift, does necessarily imply an Office. The Greek word for
Governments, (...).
is a metaphor from Pilots, or Ship-Masters, governing their Ships; (hence the
Master of a Ship is called (...), a Governor, Jam. 3.4.) and it notes such
Officers as sit at the stern of the Vessel of the Church, to govern and guide
it in spirituals, according to the will and mind of Christ, which is the direct
Office of our Ruling-Elder.

5. This Church-Governour thus seated by God in his Church as a Church Officer,
is an ordinary and perpetual Officer in his Church. Indeed, here is mention
made of Officers extraordinary, as Apostles, Prophets; and of gifts
extraordinary, as the gift of miracles, healing and of tongues; but here is
also mention made of ordinary Officers, perpetually to abide, as Teachers,
Helpers, and the Church-Governour, or Ruling-Elder. And that this Officer is
ordinary and perpetual, appears from the perpetual necessity of him in the
Church; for a Church without Government, is as a Ship without a Pilot, as a
Kingdom without a Magistrate, and a world without a Sun.

6. That this Church-Governour thus seated by God in his Church, as a perpetual
Officer, is an Officer contra-distinguished in the Text from the Apostles,
Prophets, Teachers, and all other Officers in the Church. This appears,

1. By the Apostles manner of expressing these Officers in an enumerative form;
First, Apostles; Secondarily, Prophets; Thirdly, Teachers; After that,
Miracles, then gifts of healing, etc.

2. By the recapitulation, verse. 29, 30. Are all Apostles? Are all Prophets?
Are all Teachers? Are all workers of miracles? etc.

3. By the scope of the whole Chapter, which is to set down different gifts and
offices in different subjects; It is said, verse. 8, 9. To one is given by the
Spirit, the word of wisdom; to another, the word of knowledge by the same
Spirit; to another, faith, etc. And for this purpose, the Apostle draws a
simile from the members of man's body: As there are different members in man's
body, and every member has its different office, and every member stands in
need one of another; the Eye cannot say to the Hand, I have no need of thee;
nor again, the head to the foot, I have no need of thee, etc. So it is in the
Church Ministerial, which is the Body of Christ. God has set different
Officers in his Church* some ordinary and perpetual; some extraordinary and
temporary: And these different Officers, have different Offices; some to teach,
others to distribute to the poor Saints, others to govern. Are all Teachers?
are all Deacons? are all Church Governors? and these have all need one of
another. The Teacher cannot say to the Deacon, I have no need of thee; nor to
the Church-Governour, I have no need of thee: But if all these Officers were in
the Pastor alone, and only, then might he truly say to the Deacon and
Ruling-Elder, I have no need of thee. But now God has so set the Members in
his Body, which is his Church, that every member stands in need one of another
help and support.

Object. If it be objected, that the Apostles had all these offices and gifts
here mentioned, eminently seated in them; for they were Prophets, Teachers,
Workers of Miracles, and therefore why may not all these be understood of one
and the same person?

Answ. Though it be true, that the Apostles had eminently all these; yet it is
as true, that there are many here named, which had but one of these gifts
formally seated in them: And it is also apparent, that some of the persons here
named were distinct Officers in the Church, as the Prophet, and the Teacher.
Though the Apostles were Prophets and Teachers, yet the Prophet and the Teacher
were Officers distinct from the Apostles; and by a parity of Reason, so were
the Governors from the Apostle, Prophet, and Teacher; the scope of the Apostle
being (as has been said) to set out distinct Offices in distinct Officers: are
all Apostles? are all Prophets? are all Teachers? The sum of what we have said
from this Scripture, then is this, That God has seated some men in his Church
which have a gift and office to govern, which are neither Apostles, Prophets,
Teachers, nor Pastors; and therefore they are Ruling-Elders, which is the
Officer we are enquiring after.

Now this interpretation which we have given, is not only the interpretation of
Reformed Divines, both Lutherane and Calvinists, but of the ancient Fathers,
and even the Papists themselves, as appears by the quotations in the Margent.
Gerhardus de Ministeri^ Ecclesiastico Calvin in locum, P. Martyr. in locum.
Beza in locum. Piscator in locum. Ambros. in locum. Chrysostom. in locum. Salmer. in
locum, Septimo loco ponit gubernatores, id est, eos qui praesunt aliis, and
gubernant, plebemque in officio continent. Et Ecclesia Christi habet suam
politiam, and cum Pastor per se omnia praestare non posset, adjungebantur illi
duo Presbyteri, de quibus dixit, Qui been praesunt, Presbyteri, duplici honor
digni habeantur maxim qui laborant in verbo and doctrina; Qui una cum Pastore
deliberabant de Ecclesiae cura, and instauratione: qui etiam fidei atque h^ ne
staevitae consortes erant.


The second Text is, Romans 12.6, 7, 8. Having then gifts differing according to
the grace given, whether Prophecy, let us prophecy according to the
proportion of Faith; or Ministry, Let us wait on our ministering; or he that
teaches on teaching; or he that exhorts, on exhortation. He that gives, let
him do it with simplicity. He that rules, with diligence. He that shows
mercy with cheerfulness. In which words, we have a perfect enumeration of all
the ordinary Offices of the Church. These Offices are reduced, first, to two
general heads, Prophecy and Ministry, and are therefore set down in the
Abstract. By Prophecy is meant the faculty of right understanding,
interpreting, and expounding the Scriptures. Ministry comprehends all other
employments, in the Church. Then these generals are subdivided into the special
offices contained under them, and are therefore put down in the cancrete. Under
Prophecy are contained, 1. He that teaches, that is, the Doctor or Teacher.
2. He that exhorts, i. e. the Pastor. Under Ministry are comprised. 1. He
that gives, that is the Deacon. 2. He that rules, that is, the Ruling-Elder.
3. He that shows mercy, which Estius in Romans 12. Aliis placet etiam hac part
speciale quoddam charisma sive officium significari, and misereri dicaturi^s
qui ab Ecclesia curandis miseris, potissimum aegrotis, praefectus est, iisque
praebet obsequia velut etiam hodie fit in nesocomiis; qui sensus haud quaquam
improbabilis est.
Office pertained unto them, who in those days had care of the sick: So that in
these words; we have the Ruling-Elder plainly set down, and
contra-distinguished from the teaching and exhorting Elder (as appears by the
distributive particles, (...), Whether he that teaches; whether he that
exhorts; whether he that rules, etc.) And here likewise we have the divine
institution of the Ruling Elder, for so the words hold forth. Having then gifts
differing according to the grace that is given unto us; and thus also in the
third verse, according as God has dealt to every man, etc. This Officer is the
gift of Gods free grace to the Church, for the good of it.

Against this Exposition of the Text it is objected by those that oppose the
Divine Right of the Ruling-Elder, that the Apostle speaks in these words, not
of several offices in several persons, but of several Gifs in one and the same
person; for he says, having then Gifts differing according, etc. But we answer:

1. That the word Gift is often in Scripture taken for Office; as Ephesians. 4.8.11.
When he ascended on high, he led captivity captive, and gave Gifts unto men,
and v.11. He shows what these Gifts were, some to be Apostles, some
Evangelists, etc.

2. That the Apostle in the Protasis speaks not of several Gifts, but of
several Offices, and these not in the same, but in several members, ver. 4. As
we have many members in one body, and all members have not the same office. And
therefore the apodosis must also be understood not only of several gifts, but
of several Offices, and these in several subjects. And this further appears by
the very similitude which the Apostle here uses, which is the same he used. 1
Cor. 12. from the body natural, wherein there are many distinct members, and
every member has its distinct Office; and so it is in the Church of Christ.

3. These gifts here mentioned, and the waiting upon them, do necessarily imply
an Office in whomsoever they are; and therefore they are set down emphatically
with an Article, (...). He that has the gift of teaching, and exhorting, and
ruling, and waits upon this gift, what is he but a Teacher, Pastor, and
Ruling-Elder? And this must either be granted, or else we must open a door for
all members of the Church, even women, not only to preach and teach, but to
rule also, and to wait upon preaching and ruling: This truth is so clear, as
that the Papists themselves being convinced of it, do say upon this Text, that
the Apostle here first speaks of gifts in general; and secondly, applies these
gifts to Ecclesiastical Officers, Cornelius a lapide, in Romans 12.6, 7, 8.
v. 6. and afterward directs his exhortation to all Christians in general.

The third Text for the Divine Right of the Ruling-Elder, is, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let
the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honor, especially they
who labor in the Word and Doctrine. For the understanding of which words, we
will lay down this rule, That every Text of Scripture is to be interpreted
according to the literal and grammatical construction; unless it be contrary to
the analogy of Faith, or the rule of Life, or the circumstances of the Text:
otherwise, we shall make a nose of wax of the Scriptures, and draw quidlibet ex
quolibet. Now according to the Grammatical construction, here are plainly held
forth two sorts of Elders; the one, only Ruling; and the other, also laboring
in Word and Doctrine. Give us leave to give you the true analysis of the words.

1. Here is a Genus, a general, and that is Elders.

2. Two distinct species, or kinds of Elders, Those that rule well, and those
that labor in Word and Doctrine; as Pastor and Doctor.

3. Here we have two participles, expressing these two kinds of Elders, Ruling,
Laboring; the first do only rule, the second do also labor in Word and
Doctrine.

4. Here are two distinct Articles, distinctly annexed to these two
participles, (...). They that rule, They that labor.

5. Here is an eminent discretive particle, set betwixt these two kind of
Elders; these two participles; these two Articles evidently distinguishing one
from the other, viz. (...), especially they that labor, etc. And wheresoever
this word (...) is used in the New Testament, it is used to distinguish thing
from thing, or person from person; as Gal. 6.10. Phil. 4.22. 1 Timothy 5.8. 1 Timothy
4.10. Tit. 1.10. 2 Timothy 4.13. 2 Pet. 2.20. Acts 20.38. In all which places, the
word [ especially] is used as a discretive particle, to distinguish one thing
from another, or one person from another* and therefore being applied here to
persons, must necessarily distinguish person from person, Officer from Officer.
It is absurd to say, Whitak. in praelectionibus suis* ut refert in refutatione
Dounami* Sheervodius* cited by the Author of Altar^ Damascen. cap. 12. page
925, 926.
(says Dr. Whitaker,) that this Text is to be understood of one and the same
Elder. If a man should say, All the Students in the University are worthy of
double honor, especially, They that are Professors of Divinity; He must
necessarily understand it of two sorts of Students. Or if a man should say, All
Gentlemen that do Service for the Kingdom in their Counties, are worthy of
double honor, especially they that do Service in the Parliament; this must
needs be understood of different persons. We are not ignorant, that Archbishop
Whitgift, Bishop King, Bishop Bilson, Bishop Downame, and others, labor to
fasten diverse other interpretations upon these words, which would be
over-tedious here to rehearse. Only thus much we crave leave to say, which we
desire may be seriously weighed; That all other senses that are given of these
words, are either such as are disagreeing from the literal and Grammatical
construction, or such as fall into one of these two absurdities, either to
maintain a non-preaching Ministry, or a lazy-preaching Ministry to deserve
double honor* Archbishop Whitgift by the Elder that rules well, understands a
Reader that is not a Preacher. Whitgift against Carthwright.
Dr. King, De perpetua Eccl. gubernat.
a Bishop ruling, and not preaching, which is to say, that a non-preaching
Minister deserves double honor. In a Sermon of his in print
Dr. Bilson says, that the words are to be understood of two sorts of Elders,
and that the meaning is, That the Elder that rules well, and preaches, is
worthy of double honor, especially they that labor, that is, that preach
abundantly, that do (...)* labor as a Waterman at his Oar, which is as much as
if he had said, that a lazy Minister, or a seldom-preaching Minister, deserves
double honor. For all Preachers are in Scripture required (...), to labor
abundantly, 1 These. 5.11. 1 Cor. 3.8. where the same word is used that is here
expressed. If the Apostle had meant to have distinguished them by their
extraordinary labor, he would rather have said, (...), then (...), for
other-where he uses (...), as a degree of painful labor, [2 Cor. 11.27. 1
These. 2.9.] above (...), which is put for common labor, Romans 16.12. Dr Downame
and others, interpret the words of one and the same Elder thus, The Elders that
rule well, are worthy of double honor, especially they that labor; that is,
(say they) especially they laboring, or especially because they labor. And so
they make their laboring, to be the chief cause of their double honor. But
this interpretation is against the literal meaning, for the Greek is not (...),
if they labor, but (...), especially they that labor. Here is a participle
with an Article, and a discretive particle, which can never be rightly and
literally translated causatively. And therefore we conclude, Beza in 1 Timothy
5.17. Piscator in locum. Calv. in loc.
together with our Reformed Divines, that this Text according to the proper and
Grammatical construction of it, does hold forth unto all unprejudiced
Christians, a Ruling-Elder, distinct from a Teaching-Elder, which is the thing
we undertook to prove.

An Article, Agreed upon by the ELDERS and MESSENGERS of the Churches,
Assembled in the SYNOD, at Boston in New England, Sept. 10th. 1679. In Page 10,
11.
IT is requisite that utmost endeavors should be used, in order to a full
supply of Officers in the Churches, according to Christ's Institution. The
defect of these Churches on this account is very lamentable, there being in
most of the Churches only one Teaching Officer, for the burden of the whole
Congregation to lie upon. The Lord Christ would not have instituted Pastors,
Teachers, Ruling Elders (nor the Apostles have ordained Elders in every Church,
Act. 14.23. Tit. 1.5.) if he had not seen there was need of them for the good
of his People; and therefore for men to think they can do well enough without
them, is both to break the second Commandment, and to reflect upon the wisdom
of Christ, as if he did appoint unnecessary Officers in his Church. Experience
has evinced, that Personal Instruction and Discipline, has been an happy
means to Reform degenerated Congregations; yea, and owned by the Lord for the
Conversion of many Souls: but where there are Great Congregations, it is
impossible for one man, besides his labors in Public, fully to attend these
other things of great importance; and necessary to be done in order to an
effectual Reformation of Families and Congregations.

QUESTION.
WHether are not the Brethren, and not the Elders of the Church only, to Judge
concerning the Qualifications and Fitness, of those who are Admitted into their
Communion?
ANSWER.
There is some difference of Apprehension, and yet no breach of Amity or Union,
as to this Question between the Brethren of the Presbyterian, and the
Congregational way, the former giving this power only to the Eldership, the
latter joining the Fraternity with them. In Resp. ad Apollon. p. 13.
Mr. Cotton, and from him Mr. Norton has Judiciously stated and discussed this
Controversy. Let their and some other Arguments be duly weighed in the
Balance of the Sanctuary.

1. They that have power in Admission have power to Judge whether the Persons
to be Admitted are duly qualified for Admission. But this is true of the
Fraternity as well as of the Presbytery. No one can be Admitted into the Church
by the Elders without the Consent of the Brethren. The Community is concerned
in who are Admitted, and therefore should concur therein. Its a received maxim,
Quod tangit omnes, debet ab omnibus approbari. And reason says, They that have
power to Admit, have power to Judge whether the Persons who desire it, are fit
for that Admittance.

2. They that have power to Judge whether a Person is fit to be cast out of
Communion, have power to Judge whether he is fit to be received into Communion.
The Key [the power] of Opening and Shutting belongs to the same Persons. But it
is clear from the Scripture, that the Brethren and not the Elders only have
power to Judge whether an Offender is fit to be Excommunicated, Matt. 18.17. 1
Cor. 5.12. All Orthodox Divines agree that Church Discipline should be
Exercised, Consentiente plebe. So amongst the Ancients, Cyprian, Ambrose,
Austin, Jerome, Chrysostom, Nazianzene, Theodoret, Theophylact. And amongst our
Modren Divines, Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Melancton, Junius, Pareus, Rivet,
Trelcatius. If their consent is necessary, than they have power to Judge
whether they ought to consent or no.

3. They that have power to Judge whether a Person Excommunicated, is fit to be
restored to the Communion of the Church, have power to Judge whether Persons
never yet received into the Communion of the Church are duly qualified for
that Communion. But the Apostle writes to the Brethren, as well as to the
Elders, of the Church in Corinth, to restore a Penitent, whom they had
according to the Discipline of Christ laid under a Church censure, 2 Cor. 2.6.
If the Brethren are competent Judges concerning the Repentance of a Lapsed
Communicant, they are not incompetent Judges of the Repentance of other Persons
that may offer themselves to their Communion.

4. When Saul desired to join to the Church at Jerusalem, he was not admitted
until the Brethren were by the Testimony of Barnabas, together with his own
Declaration, satisfied concerning the reality of his Faith and Repentance, Act.
9.26, 27.

5. If only Elders have power to Judge who are fit to come to the Sacrament or
to join to the Churches, then in case there is but one Elder in a Church (as
there are very few Churches in New-Englnd that have more Elders than one) the
Sole power will reside in that one man's hands. Then by a parity of reason one
alone would have power to suspend from Communion, which Judicious Presbyterians
do not allow of. For the London Ministers in their Vindication of the
Presbyterian Government, ( p. 70, 71.) have these Words. It is (say they) as
warrantable by the Word of God, for one Minister to assume unto himself alone
the power of Suspending from the Sacrament, as it is to assume the whole power
of admitting to the Sacrament, for contrariorum eadem est ratio: For one
Minister alone to assume this power to himself, is to make himself a
Congregational Pope. It is a bringing into the Church a power that would have
some resemblance to Auricular Confession. Thus said the Presbyterians Fifty
years ago.

6. The way to keep Popery out of the World, is for the Fraternity in Churches
to assert and maintain that power and privilege, which does of right belong
unto them. Certain it is, that in the first Ages of Christianity this power
which we plead for, was not taken out of the hands of the Brotherhood. One of
the Ancients, whose writings give us the greatest in-sight, into what was the
general practice of the Churches, in the Third Century, makes this past
dispute. In Cyprian. Epist. 40.
one of his Epistles, he has these words, Examinabuntur Singela Prusentibus et
judicantibus vobis. And in another, Vix plebi persuadeo et tales patiantur
admitti. That he had much ado to persuade the People to be satisfied with the.
Repentance and Qualifications of some that desired a Reception or Restoration
to their Communion. When in after times Church Members thought with themselves,
our Ministers understand Church Affairs better than we do, therefore we will
unconcern our selves, and leave all to their Conscience and Prudence: this very
thing (as some Learned men have observed) was that which made way for the rise
of Popery. It may be it will be for the Edification of some Readers, if we
recite some passages out of our famous Dr. Owen. In his Judicious Part 1. Page
295, 296.
Treatise of Evangelical Churches. He has these Words. Dr. Stilling fleet
denies unto the People all Liberty or Ability to choose their own Pastors, to
judge what is meet for their own Edification, what is Heresy, or a pernicious
Error, and what is not, or any thing of the like nature. This is almost the
same with that of the Pharisees, concerning them who admired and followed the
Doctrine of our Savior, Joh. 7.49. This People which know not the Low: yet was
it this People, whom the Apostle directed to choose out from among themselves,
Persons meet for an Evangelical Office, Act. 6. The same People who joined with
the Apostles and Elders in the consideration of the Grand Case concerning the
continuation of the Legal Ceremonies, and were Associates with them in the
determination of it, Act. 15. The same to whom all the Apostolical Epistles,
Excepting some to particular persons, were written. And unto whom such
directions were given and duties Enjoined in them, as suppose not only Liberty
and Ability to judge for themselves in all matters of Faith and Obedience, but
also an especial Interest in the Order and Discipline of the Church, those who
were to say to Archippus their Bishop, take heed to the Ministry which thou
have received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it, Col. 4.17. Unto whom of all
sorts it is Commanded that they should Examine and Try Antichrists, Spirits,
and false Teachers, that is all sorts of Heretics, Heresies, and Errors, 1 John chap. 2, 3. etc. That people who even in following Ages adhered unto the
Faith and the Orthodox profession of it, when almost all the Bishops were
became Arian Heretics. This principle of the Reformation in Vindication of the
Rights, Liberties, and Privileges of the Christian People to judge and choose
for themselves in matters of Religion, to join freely in those Church-Duties
which are required of them, without which the work of it had never been carried
on, we do abide by, and maintain. Yea, we meet with no Opposition more fierce,
than upon the account of our asserting the Liberties and Rights of the People,
in reference unto Church Order and Worship. But I shall not be afraid to say,
that as the Reformation was begun and carried on, on this principle: So when
this People shall through an apprehension of their Ignorance, Weakness, and
Unmeetness to judge in matters of Religion, for themselves, and their own duty,
be kept and debarred from it; or when through their own sloth, negligence and
viciousness they shall be really incapable to manage their own Interest in
Church Affairs, as being fit only to be Governed if not as Bruit Creatures, yet
as Mute Persons, and that these things are improved by the Ambition of the
Clergy, engrossing all things in the Church to themselves, as they did in
former Ages, if the old Popedom do not return, a New One will be Erected as
bad as the other. Thus far Dr. Owen.

THE END.

