A Pillar of Gratitude.

OR, A brief Recapitulation, of the Matchless Favors, with which the God of
Heaven has obliged the HEARTY PRAISES, of His New-English ISRAEL.

A SERMON deliverd in the Audience of His EXCELLENCY, the Earl of BELLOMONT,
Captain General, and GOVERNOR in Chief, and of the COUNCIL and
Representatives, of the GENERAL ASSEMBLY of the Province of the Massachusetts
Bay Convened at Boston, in New England.

On May 29 1700 the Day, for Election of Counselors, in that Province.

By COTTON MATHER.

Whereto there is Appendixed, an Extract of some Accounts, concerning the
Wonderful Success of the Glorious Gospel, in the East Indies

Nemo non haec vera dicit. Boston, Printed by B Green, and J Allen. 1700.

A Pillar of Gratitude. At the Opening of the Great and General Assembly, of
the Province of Massachuset-Bay, New England. 29 d. 3 m. 1700.
Psalm. CXLVII.20. He has not so dealt with any Nation!


THere was a people, of whom the God of Heaven said, This people have I formed
for my self, they shall show forth my praise* And i^ there be such a people any
where under the Cope of Heaven at this Day, it is in the English Nation. But of
the English Nation, certainly there is no Colony or Plantation that has more
cause it Show forth the praise of the Almighty, than that which is now and here
Convened What more agreeable or profitable Address, can be made, unto a Great
and General Assembly of this Province, than an Invitation to the Praises of our
Good God* who as He is worthy to be praised, so, Desires to Inhabit our
Praises, and reckons Himself Glorified, when we Offer them? The Royal Charter
of our King, has made this, A Day of Election, for no small part of our
Government: And though the Civil Affairs now to be attended, will not al^ow
this to be, A Day of Thank^giving, Yet no Thoughts were mo^e proper for a
people rejoicing under the Protecti^n of such a Government, than those which
would well become, A Day of Thanksgiving. Indeed, that Angel, who Flew through the
midst of Heaven, say^ng, with a loud voice, Fear God, and give Glory to him,
would not be able fully to ^et off the Glory due to our God, for His matchless
Favors unto us: But instead hereof a poor, shallow, sinful Mortal, must come
to you, with this Message, Praise God, and Give Glory to Him! And ^et it will
be a Melody unto the very Angels or Heaven, to hear Mortals on Earth, Singing
and Shouting forth, Glory to God in the Highest, for His Good Will toward men!

A people there has been, of whom that Account may be given, O Lord, Thou have
brought a Vine, thou have cast out the Heathen, and planted it: Thou did
cause it to take deep Root, and it filled the Land* She sent out her Hou^^^
unto the Sea, and her Branches unto the River. My Hearers all this while know
not, whether I am giving an Account of Old Israel, or of New England: So
Surprising has been the Parallel!

The Matchless Favors of God unto Old Israel, are here C^l^brated in one of
the Ha^lelujatic Psalms; and a Psalm on such a Subject, very fitly, both begins
and concludes with; Hallelujah! The Epiphonema which crowns all, is this, He
has not so dealt with any Nation; Praise ye the Lord. It gives us this
Instruction, That when the Blessed God Endows a people with Matchless Favors,
it b^comes that people to bless Him with Hearty Praises. This is an
Instruction, so plain, so evident, and so practical, there needs no operation
thereupon, to prepare it, for its Application unto our selves. The Matchless
Favors of God unto New England are now to be set before you, in a Sh^re
Catalogue of them: I say, a Short one, for who can in a piece of an Hour,
Compose a Full one, or one that shall not fall short in many Instances?
Beholding so much of New England, from every Quarter, under such Characters,
here come together, I shall take this opportunity, to bespeak your Hearty
Praises to the Almighty God, for So Dealing with New England as not with any
Nation. And I have now chosen a Subject, that one, would think should be of
all, the least liable to Cavilling Objections, and Exceptions. For, if any man
shall object unto any one Article, in all my Catalogue, We owe no Hearty
Praises to God upon that Article, give me leave to say it, It shall be an
Hyperb^le of Ingrati^ude; and, That man shall be a prodigy of Profanity, and
Stupidity.

But I cannot introduce the Catalogue of the Matchless Favors, wherein our God
has so dealt with us, as not with any Nation. Until you have had some Remarks
upon the Nature, and Meaning, and Ingredients of those Hearty Praises, which we
are to render unto the Almighty for His Matchless Favors.

You will Remember then, That in our Hearty Praises o^ God, for His Matchless
Favors, we are to Confess, to Admire, to Adore those Glories of God which are
Conspicuous and Illustrious in His Favors. The Power, the Wisdom, the Mercy,
and the Faithfulness of the Great God, gloriously Shine forth in His Dealing so
with us, as not with any Nation. The Glories of God, that His Dealings, do
testify and certify, and signalize unto us, These we must very distinctly
Sound forth, with His High Praises in our mouth.

But then, you will also Remember, that we are utterly unworthy of these
Matchless Favors, for which we offer up unto God our Hearty Praises. When we
Reflect on ^he Dealings of our God with us, we fearfully add unto our own
unworthiness, if we don't sensibly* say with our Father Jacob* Lord, we are not
worthy of the Least of all these Mercies. Truly, it is not because we are better
than any other Nation, that our God has so dealt with us, as not with any
Nation. We are more vile than every other Nation, if we don't own our selves as
vile, as any Nation* When God had so dealt with His people of old, as not with
any Nation, He, to re^und and confound the vain Thoughts of pride in them, told
them, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. The Lord did not set his Love upon you, because ye were
more in Number than any people, (for ye were the fewest of all people) but
because the Lord Loved you. Such in Idem per Idem, is very good sense, in he
Language of Sovereign Grace; The Lord Loved you, merely because He Loved ^ou!
Even so; It Is the mere Sovereign Grace of the God, who does all things
ac^ording to the Coun^^l of his own Will, that has so Dealt with the English
Nation as not with any Na^ion. O^r Ancestors were ^s fo^lo^n, wretched, rue^ul
Pagans, as ^ur Indians; and there are now the same (...) in our Nation* that
there are in the ^hore Enslaved Neighbors, that are under ^he Houses of
Bourbon, or of Austria* Why as the Lord so Dealt with thee, O New-^ngland, as
not with any Nation! The very Iottantots of Africa, and Ca^^iba's on Flo^^da
are a Nation as worthy of the Divine ties as thou art; and thou have Sins
enough to bring upon thee as many plagues and woes as the Greek Churches
themselves are Languishing under. But, It is even so, O our Heavenly Father,
merely because it pleases thee!

Finally; You will Remember, That we don't offer up Hearty Praises unto God,
for His Matchless Favors, if they be not Active Praises. When we Reflect on
the Dealings of our God, with us, there is that ingenuous Question to be
thought upon; Psalm. 116.12. What shall we render to the Lord* for all His
Benefits! Has our God so dealt with us, as not with any Nation? We are then to
study fit Returns of Gratitude, and Obedience, wherein we shall exceed every
other Nation It Is not a formal saying, Thanks be to God! that will serve to
Express our Thanks unto Him, for so dealing with us, as not with any Nation.
It Is Thanks doing, and Thanks living, that must Express our Thanks. Without
some agreeable Fruitfulness in our Conversations, we have no True Thankfulness.
We are then to think, What are the Fruits now Expected from a Nation, with whom
God has so dealt as, not with any Nation? What must be our Fruitfulness, that
we may still Enjoy, and not Forfeit the Bounties of God?

But let us now proceed unto the Mat^hless Favors of the God unto thee, O New
England, which call for such Hearty Praises.

And here, concerning the Constitution, of the Country it self, where the Most
High has divided, unto us our Inheritance, I will not say, God has so dealt
with us, as not with any Nation; But this If may say, There is many a Nation
that is not near so well accommodated. Of the Land where our Lot falls unto
us, our Good God may say, as in Ezekiel. 20.6. It is a Land that I had Espied for
them. And though it be not, The Glory of (...) Lands, yet Englishmen could not
have met with many be^^er Lands. Deservedly is it called, New England; ^or
England, that bravest Lady of Europe, has no where in America, a Daughter that
so much Resembles her. The Comforts of the Climate, abundantly outweigh the
Hardships of it. The Poor find a more comfortable Subsistence in i^, than
alm^st in any other. Almost ^very where else the Poor do rather Endure Life,
than Enjoy it. But, the Poor of this Land, may say, God has not so dealt with
the rest of the poor in our Nation, or scarce in any Nation. And where the
Inhabitants of it use Discretion and Industry, they mos^ly furnish themsel^es,
not only with Necessaries, but also with Conveniences Indeed New England is
not Heaven: That we are sure old. But for my part, I do not ask to Remove out
of New England, except for a Removal into Heaven. It Is (...), some Troubles,
but those rather in the Mora^, than the Natural Circumstances of the Country,
have often caused our most E^^^^ent. Elijahs, to wish, Oh! If they had the
wings of a Dove, whither would they flee away! And, Whither, Syrs, I beseech
you? I doubt, you don't know the World* Certainly, you will find it Old Adams
World, go w^ere you will. There grow Briars and Thorns, in other parts of the
World, as well as New England. But, O Good people of New England, Though you are
by the Royal Charter, delivered from the Ex^o^^ions of those* that once
demanded of you, Quitrents for all the Good Land unto the possession whereof
your Titles are now Confirmed, yet Hear now thy Great Landlord, calling for His
Quitrents, in those terms. Deuteronomy. 8 10, 11. When thou have eaten and art full,
then thou shall bless the Lord thy God, for the Good Land, which he has given
thee; Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God in not keeping His
Commandments.

But let us pass on to those Favors of Heaven, that are more Distinguishing,
and Considerable, and without which, the best Countries in the World, would be
as undesitable as Italy it self: A Country that is the Garden of the World, and
yet an Hell upon Earth.

Now, First, Let not the Method be charged with any Rudeness, if Religion take
the first place, in our Enumeration of those Matchless Favors, wherewith our
God has obliged us infinitely This, This was the grand point wherein the
Israelites of old, were the Favorites of Heaven The Lord showed his words, [i
e. the Ten Commandments of the Moral Law] unto Jacob, his Statutes (or the
Ceremonial Law) and His Judgments (or the Judicial Law) unto Israel: And Then
it follows, He has not so dealt with any Nation; Praise ye the Lord. God in
^avouring us (and the English Nation,) with the Knowledge of the Christian, and
the Protestant Religion, (...) so dealt with us as not with any Nation. As it
was said, Psalm. 148.14. He Ex^^teth the Horn of His People, even of the
Children of Israel, a people near unto Him. When God makes a forlorn Race of
Gentiles, to become his Israel, and by His Holy Religion brings them near unto
Him, it becomes them to Exalt the Horn, that is to say, to utter His Praises
with Higher Notes than ordinary. It Is done for the English Nation, and very
singularly done for thee, O New English Israel How much ought we to Praise the
Lord, for that Religion, which alone teaches us how to Praise the Lord! When
the Herald of the King of Spain, proclaimed the Greatness of his Master, by
more than Forty several Titles, the Herald of the King of France, as often
repeated that one Title, The King of France, France, France! In^im^ting, that
this One, was more than all the other This I will say, Tell me not of more than
Forty B^^ssings and Stapl^s and Pleasures of other Countries. My New England
has one Thing that will weigh down more than Forty of the best things that
other Countries on brag of; That is, Religion, Religion, Religion! The
Christian Religion, is indeed a Matchless Favor of Heaven to them that have it
Revealed, and published among them. By this Religion men are Lifted up to
Heaven, and have Heaven coming down to them. We have the Gospel of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST, which is most justly called, The Glorious Gospel of God: And this
Gospel will make a Glorious People: But, O Gospellized People, then Glorify
God! They are most Noble Mysteries that the Gospel of the Christian Religion,
does Enrich us withal, and they are most Noble Directions with which it
counsils us. O New-Englanders, While you have a Bible in your Habitations you
Eat Angels Food! A man that Feeds and Lives upon the principles of this
Religion, is a Noble Creature, and a Candidate of the Angelical Life. The
Regions that have not our Gospel, are the Regions that Sit in Darkness, and in
the Valley of the Shadow of Death* If we receive this Gospel of the Christian
Religion, in the Love of it, it will infallibly bring us to Everlasting
Blessedness. If this our Gospel be Hid, it is Hid unto them that be lost. The
Strangers to this Religion, are Without God in the World, and without Hope of
Blessedness in another World. The Lands that have not our Gospel, what are
they, but the Habitations of Devils, and all the year long, in a more
lamentable plight, than the furthest and frozen Regions of the North, which
have all Night for many months together? In the Gospel of our Christian
Religion, we have, in one word, A CHRIST, A CHRIST, in whom our Hungry Souls
have the Bread of Life, and in whom our Thirsty Souls have the Water of Life:
and our Naked Souls, the Splendid Garments of Salvation. Out of Heaven, has,
God, the perfection of Beauty shone upon us. Our CHRIST, He is the Way; without
Him, we were Vagabonds, and going astray in the greatness of (...) Folly; He is
the Truth; without Him, we are a prey to the Father of Lies, and our Deceived
Heart cannot be Saved from a Lie in our Right Hand: He is the Life; without Him,
we are Dead in Trespasses and Sins Blessed JESUS, 'Twere better we should not
be at all, than be without Thee! But, that bright Sun of Righteousness, has
dart^d His Healing Beams down upon thee, O New England; when so many millions
of m^n, are left unenlightened. Above hal^ the Children of men, I suppose, are
Idolaters to this Day; and almost a Quarter, if I mistake not, are Mahometans*

Astonished at the Matchless Favor of God, that has made us Christians, Let us
Employ our Pity, and Prayer, and Care, for those that are Exposed unto
D^struction every day, by their* Lack of our Knowledge. Blessed be God, that
has Crowned the Labors of His Dutch Ministers in the East Indies of late
years, with such rare Successes, that Hundreds of Thousands of the Na^ives, are
Converted from their Idolatry, and their Mahometanism, and are Baptis^d into
the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Strike on, O Arm of the Lord! What we have
done, for the Evangelizing of our Indians, has been as great an Honor to New
England, as any that ever befell it. The like H^nour in some regards has not
befall^n any, Nation; Praise ye the Lord! I veh^m^ntly beseech you, Let not
that Evangelical Work now come to nothing. Rescue it from the Decays, and
Choke weeds which do Threaten it; and see whether we cannot extend it even unto
the Five Nations of the West, as well as that in the East. If they be not by
our mea^s made Christians, we can tell who will use all means to make them,
twofold more Children of Hell, than they are already.

Well, but when our God has granted us the Christian Religion, there is a
Second Flight that our Thou^hts are to m^ke, into the State of the Case which
renders it a Matchless Favor of God; And this is, That it is Truly Christian.
Two Hundred years ago, were the Dark Times of the Romish Ap^stasy. Wherein
Satan, by his Vicar and Viceroy at Rome rendered a very Gehinnom, that which was
called Christend^me. The Unsearchable Judgments of God, gave up all Europe,
unto the Chains of Darkness, which Popery, that is but a Disguised, and Revived
Paganism laid upon it: Except here an^ there some Witn^ss^s in Sackl^th, which
by barbarous Crusades, and Cru^l^i^s against them, were made Sheep for the
slau^hter all the day long. But about one hundred and f^urscore years ago, God
Showred a Spirit of Reformation, upon the Nations of Europe; and Antichrist
Lost Half his Empire. God in some things then dealt with our English Nation, as
not with any Nation: For the Mystical Jericho being then demolished before the
Evangelical Shouts of the Reformation in England, the Curse of our Blessed
JESUS, has ever since in a stupendous manner fallen on the Heads of all that
have gone to Rebuild it, and blasted all their Enterprises. And God has Raised
up a Golden Generation of men in the English Nation, who notwithstanding many
discouragements and disadvantages, from the Masqueraded Adversaries of the
Reformation, as they have kept the Lords Day more strictly, so, for all the
other strictness of Manly Christianity, and for the Power of Godliness, and for
mighty Elevations of Holiness, have none to equal them* (or not many, I am
sure) among the Sons of Adam.

It Is no Small Thing that God has done for our English Nation, in delivering it
from, the Political Mischiefs of Popery, under which the Nations yet
Intoxicated with the Popish Abominations are ^ining away. The Protestant
Religi^n has not been set up scarce in any Nation, but it has made them, even
in Temporals, within a very little while, twice as Rich and as Great as they
were before; And one, somewhat curious in his Calcula^ions, has demonstrated,
That the Abolishing of Popery in the English Nation, is worth at least Eight
Millions of Pounds Sterling, yearly profit unto it. But this is a Small Thing,
in comparison of what has been done by God for the English Nation, in its
Deliverance, from the Spiritual Mischiefs of Popery For it is peculiarly
concerning the Roman Catholics, that the Spirit of God uttered that Oracle in
2* These. 2.11, 12. God shall send them strong Delusion, that they should
Believe a lie, that they all might be Damned, who Believed not the Truth*
Praises, where are you? Let Heaven ring wi^h our Praises unto our God, for the
Religion of England. Praised be God, That the Treasures of His Blessed Word are
not locked up from us! That we are not Priest ridden by the Janissaries of
Antichrist! That we have not Non sensical Figments, thrust down our Throats
with Burning Fire brands* That we may use our own Descretion in the concerns of
our own Salvation! That we are not by bloody Inquisitions, or Drag^u^ings, or
Faggots, and Gibbets, driven to worship the Works of men's Hands! Truly, There
are many Nations, that are not so Dealt withal. But you, O dear People of
New England, have your Share in this amazing Deliverance.

Astonished a^ the Matchless Favor of God, which has made us Protestants* Let
us put on all Bowels of Charity, for our Brethren, that are Confessors, and
Refugees, for the cause of God. Let us annex the Cries of our Prayers, unto the
Cries of the Souls under the Altar, for a speedy and rapi^ Thunder storm, upon
those, who have the Cry of all the Righteous Bl^od that has been Shed from to
the Blood of Abel, to the Blood of Bro^ss^n, whom they lately broke upon the
Wheel, going up to God against them: Ut convert^n^ar, (...) percan^, aut
confundantur ^t noce (...). Yea, Bu^ more than all (...); Let us (...) the
Efficacy of our Holy Religion* upon our own Hearts, and L^ves, Let us Live up
to the Maxims of our Holy Religion, and Live under the awful and joyful Force
thereof. Otherwise a prov^ked God, may put us upon Severe Trials, to preserve
it: but if we have not had the Holy Relish of it, we shall, when we are Tried,
soon give it away.

But are there no Specialties of Religion, in which New England* has received
the Matchless Favors of God, even beyond the rest of the English Nation. This
is a Third Flight, that we are now to take in the Praises of God. I am not
indeed so inconsiderate, as to boast of my Country: and, Ah, New England, thou
have enough and enough to Humble thee. Yea, I will readily grant, That in one
City of the English Nation (I mean, the Capital) there is a greater Number of
Pious People, than in all this whole Province. And I am no^ so Absurd and
M^rose and Little, as to dream, that there are no Pious People, bu^ what are in
lesser points of my own persuasion. But the Favors of God must not be d^n^e^.

Our Degeneracies are horrible: they Expose us to the Dreadful Wrath of the
L^r^, who when Churches Leave their first Love, does Quickly come sorth against
them, with Horrible Desolations. Nevertheless, As they tell me, That the
Peasants in most other Countries are mere Bruits to what they are in England:
I suppose, Ours are not worse than Englands. Yea, I have heard unprejudiced
strangers own, That there is yet left proportionably more of Piety in this
Land, and the Common people are for the most part, better instructed, than in
any that they know of under Heaven. And I hope they will have cause to say,
that they see more Honesty too; or Else the Piety is worth nothing at all. He
that is but a Publican at the Second Table, is but a Pharisee, as to the First.
Modesty forbids me, to say much of This; though I wish I could say More; and,
Comparisons are Odious.

But there are some further Specialities.

The Doctrinal Articles of the Church of England, through the Matchless Favor
of God, are more universally Hold, and Preached in the Churches of New England,
than in any Nation, and far more than in our own It is more than I know, That
there is One Socinia^ in all the Cou^^^ey; And among all the Pastors of our
Churches, I do not know that there is one Arminian The pure Doctrines of Grace,
which are a Matchless Favor of God unto the Churches that have them, are the
p^ssant, and public Doctrines of the Country. Yea, The Neonomian, and the
Antinomian Errors, about that Great Point* of, A Sinners Justification before
God, which have bred such a Scandalous Contention, among the Non Conformists
beyond Sea, have not yet Straggled over the Atlantic, among this people of God.
The two Covenants, that of Works, and that of Grace, are not here so
confounded, as in many other places. The Everlasting Gospel, is here Preached
with Purity, more universally, than in any Nation. God has not so dealt with
any Nation; Praise ye the Lord! We don't pretend here, that we have taught our
Neighbors, The whole Duty of man when we have Lest out the Main Dut^ of all.
And give me leave to say, There is CHRIST Preached in thy Churches, O New
England; and the Shout of that King is heard in the midst of thee. I hope,
there is nothing of Religion among us, but ordinarily you shall hear something
of CHRIST in it, before you have done and you have the Truth as it is in Jesus
Our Preachers don't value their Sermons, upon being as Austin complained, the
Writings of Tully were, Without so much as the Name of CHRIST in them: and
would not have you be like those whom the writings of the Ancients do brand,
sine Christo Christians. A Nation full of Preachers, that will contrive to make
Hara^gues upon Moral Virtues, but banish CHRIST as much as they can out of all
their Treatising, must needs be very obn^xious to the R^sen^men^s of Heaven: I
will say with Luther, Quicquid Oratur, Docetur, Vivitur extra Christum, est
Idolo^atria coram Deo, et peccatum. Yea, to use the Expression of an Excellent
person, If I were in a Church full of Kings, I would say so! But God has not so
dealt with this our little Nation. How will you now Praise God for this
Matchless Favor? How? But by prizing of His CHRIST, and loving of His CHRIST,
and yielding a^l possible Obedience to the CHRIST who is the Author of Eternal
Salvation, to as many as Obey Him. I Will drive that Nail, with one stroke of
History. There had been much of CHRIST, at Capernaum of old: A CHRIST was a
Resident at Capernaum Yea, but our CHRIST was grievously undervalued there; and
therefore our Lord foretold, Mat. 11.23. Thou shall be brought down to Hell.
Now I find in the Jewish Talmuds that Capernaum after this given up to the most
Hellish Wickedness that ever was: The Town of Capernaum, was a mere Sodom, and
Hell above ground. There was not a more Hellish place for Filthiness, and
Sorcery, on the Face of the Earth. Oh, Consider of it!

Moreover, Is it not a Matchless Favor to Sit under the Wings of Churches,
wherein the Primitive Discipline is Restored: Even the Discipline, that
Cranmer, and Hooper, and other Great Lights of the Church of England, wished
for, and wrote for, and would gladly have Died for? A Discipline wherein all
Things are Conformed, as well as we can understand, unto the Word of the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, and wherein the Elders have their Authority upheld, the Brethren
have not their Liberties over laid, and all things Conspire to Represent the
Holiness of the Kingdom of Heaven unto the World; it is a Matchless Favor of
Heaven, to the Nation that is Illuminated with it. In whatsoever we may want of
this, may the Great Shepherd of the Sheep ^ead us, and make our Works perfect
before Him. In whatsoever we have attained of i^, it will be a very sad
unhappiness, for any man to be so Left of God, as to be the Instrument of
Discomposing it: it were better to Die, than come under that unhappiness. God
grant we may hear that, which they tell us, was one of the Songs, at the Feast
of Tabernacles, Blessed be our Youth, that have not made our Old men Ashamed.

But is it not a Matchless Favor of our God unto us, that for the Propagation
of Religion and Civility among us, there has been a COLLEGE Erected in these
Ends of the Earth? Truly, God has not so dealt with any Outgoings of our
Nation! Had it not been for such Ministers as have Shone in most of our Towns,
the Wild Beasts of the Desert, in a little while would have Lien there, the
Houses would mostly have been full of doleful Creatures, and Owls would have
dwelt there. A Learned and a Godly Ministry, has been the Matchless Favor of
God unto New England: Men of whom that Account might be given, which the Great
Cranmer, in his M^m^irs gave of one, for whom he des^gn'd prese^ment, Nihil
appetit, nihil ardet, (...) ^^mniat, ^is^ Je^um (...); Men, of whom it might be
said, as it was of a certain Scotch Divine, That he di^ Eat and Drink, and
Sleep the Kingdom of Heaven: Men that have been Timothies in their Houses,
Chrysostomes in their Pulpits, and Augustines in their Disputations. Impostors
have but seldom got in, and set up among us; and when they have done so, they
have made but a Short Blaze, and Gone out in a Snuff; and some Hand or other,
has done such a Service for the Lord Jesus Christ, as to Scourge the Thieves
out of the Temple But Ministers that have been Pastors after the Heart of God,
these have still Flourished like a Green Olive tree in the House of God, and
have been the means for their people to (...) with them. If any undervalue this
Matchless Favor of God, I will mind them of a Speech used by the Lord
Burleigh, when he heard some undervaluing the Ministers of the Gospel; Well,
God Bless them, by whom God Blesses us* This could not easily have been, if it
had not been for the Seminary of Good Letters and of Good Manners; for which
our God may say unto us, as unto His Israel, I Raised up of your Sons for
Prophets, and of your young men for Nazarites: Is it not even thus, O ye
Children of New England? The Reverend Chauncey, once Prae^dent of our College,
published a Sermon on those words of the Prophet, wherein he has a line or two,
not improper now to be Repeated. Says he, This Great Blessing is not regarded
by Covetous Earthworms, and many make wicked Returns for the Blessing, and seek
to pull down Schools of Learning. How hateful unto the Lord is this
Unthankfulness? Do ye thus requite the Lord, ye foolish people and unwise? Thus
the Renowned Old man Exclaimed in his Day. All that I shall add this Day upon
it is, That except we do immediately ask and take the Advice of our Excellent
GOVERNOR, for the obtaining of a Good Establishment of this our College, it
is much to be feared it will presently be broken up; Without his Direction and
Countenance we can do nothing to purpose; and it is a Matchless Favor of God
that we may have it. If merely through our Neglect, an Ominous Ruin come now
upon our College, monstrous, and shameful, and senseless will be our
Unthankfulness unto God, who has so Dealt with us, as not with Every Nation;
and they that wish well unto New England will say, Surely no other Nation would
have been such Felones de se, or have dealt so by its own greatest Interest!

But, if we now make our Transition in the Second place, unto our Civil State,
We shall therein see much of That which has secured unto us, the Enjoyment of
our Holy Re^igion, and find our selves further followed with the Matchless
Favors of our God. When we look either upon our Subsistence heretofore and
hitherto, or upon the Government under which* we do now Subsist, New England
may be (...) by the Angels, whom the most High God has used in conveying these
His (...) unto us, as in Luk 1.28 Hail (...) ar^ Highly Favored, the Lord is
(...)!

Though I am no^, (...) has our Province any one that is. He, who in the (...)
Common wealth is called, The Divine of the Star^; Yet I may so far take notice
of what Occurs in our Civil State, as to say:

First, Our Subsistence, ^t has been almost by Miracle: Our God has not so
(...) with any Nation. How strangely was the Settlement of New England at first
brought forward, and at last brought about; When God brought a Nation out of
the midst of a Nation! There were some Occurrences in that Thing, which would
make that Challenge not unreasonable, Deuteronomy. 4.32 Ask now of the Days that are
past, which were before thee, since the Day that God Created man upon the
Earth, and ask from the one side of Heaven unto the other, whether there have
been any such thing as this great thing is, or has been heard like it? And
ever since the Settlement, how strangely have we been Relieved, Supported,
Supplied in our frequent, and frightful Exigencies? We have often been in very
sore Distresses; but being Distressed, This poor people has cried unto the
Lord, who has heard and saved, with most seasonable and unexpected Salvations.
Has God so dealt with every Nation? Truly No! I must say unto you, as in Deuteronomy
4 7. What Nation is there, that has God so Nigh unto them, as the Lord our God
is in all things, that we call upon him for? There have been formidable
Attempts of Satan and his Sons, to Unsettle us: But what an overwhelming Blast
from Heaven has, defeated all those Attempts? And very particularly, When the
Carel^^ Persecution so raged against our Brethren in the English Nation, That a
late Writer affirms, More were then Starved, or otherwise Died in noisome
Prisons th^^ what I care to mention; We felt nothing of it; but were so dealt
withal, as not at that very Time our Brethren in our Nation. Besides, and
after, a vast number of Ebenezers, Erected by New England upon all its various
Interests, whole Nations of Salvages from one end of the Land unto the other,
took up Arms against us. But the Sword of God, in one years time, cut off those
Nations: for, O New England, Thou did not get the Land in possession, by thy
own Sword, neither did thine own Arm Save thee At length it was proposed, That
a Colony of Irish might be sent ^ver, to ch^ck the growth of this Country: An
Happy Revolution spoiled that Plot: and many an one of more general consequence
than That! But the Tribulation for Ten Days, which we then had, in a variety
of Calamities, afforded us a vast variety of Experiences, upon which we might
set up our further Ebenezers. Escaped New England, may with exceeding
Wonderment, cry out, Having obtained Help from God, I continue to this Day! The
Ancient Historian could say, Nunquam majori Triumpho vicimus, quam cum December
Annorum strage vinci non potuimus: Thus may we say, 'Twas a Matchless Favo^^ of
our God unto us, that when this Little Vessel was in a direful Storm for Ten
years together, it has after all out lived the Storm. And I may add hereupon,
though we drank Deep of the Cup of Trembling, which the Hand of God carried
about unto the Nations in the Late War; yet there were several Merciful
Dispensations of Heaven, wherein God so dealt with us, as not with any Nation.

But then, Secondly, In the Government ^et over us, we may and must say it, Our
God has done Great Things for us!

It is no Little Blessing of God, that we are a part of the English Nation. Our
Dependence on, and Relation to, that brave Nation, that man deserves not the
Name of an English man, who despises it. There is no English man but what has
for his Birthright those Liberties, which are a rich Inheritance: When all the
Nations of the Northern Europe, of late years foolishly Lost their Liberties,
the brave English, (though with st^uggle enough, against the Unnatural
Conspiracies of the Late Reigns) have still preserved Theirs: They are none but
the Sons of Edom, that undervalue those Liberties: and who do not see, that God
has not so dealt with any Nation.

And if it be a Matchless Favor of our God unto us, that we have our claim to
English Liberties, (though our Task masters Twelve years ago, told us we had
None!) Let us not be insensible of His Matchless Favor unto us, (for it is Now
so!) that we have a claim to the KING of England, as having these Dominions
also under His Auspicious Influences.

GOD, by a wondrous Revolution has brought unto the Throne of Three Kingdoms,
by the Voice of all the good people therein, a KING, whose Royal Virtues are
such, that we may truly say, God has not so dealt with any Nation: As the
English Nation is the most Glorious of any under Heaven, so there is no Nation,
that can boast of such a KING, as ours! A KING Raised by Heaven, to save Three
Kingdoms from the Chains of Popery and Slavery that were Treacherously prepared
for them, and break those that were apace putting upon all Europe also: A KING
used by Heaven, to put an Hook in the Nostrils of a Leviathan, and make him
disgorge at the Peace of Ryswick, Cities and Countries, which contain as much
in Bigness, as all the Kingdom of England: A KING, whose Royal Assent unto
sundry Acts of Parliament, has advanced the English Nation, unto Privileges,
richly worth all the millions of Money, that have been spent since the
Revolution; and the Scotch Nation is likewise Restored unto its Desired
Faelicity. As New England, was the Earliest of all the Plantations in Declaring
for this Illustrious PRINCE, thus from New England also there go up as Lively
Acclamations, as from any whatsoever, Long, Long may we have such a KING to
Reign over us!

When the KING, Resolving to Favor us, with a most Exact Image of His own
Royal Virtues, in a GOVERNOR, gave His Commission unto the truly Noble Earl of
BELLOMONT for the Government of these Plantations, we were from almost every
Quarter told, That the Nobility of Three Kingdoms could not have afforded a
person more charmingly Agreeable: But since His Excellency's Happy Arrival, we
now find, That the One half was never told us. You will pardon me, My Lord, if
I call upon my people to Bless God, and Thank the King, for Your EXCELLENCY,
when I am reckoning up the Things, wherein we are so Dealt withal, as not any
Nation. I do not forget that I am standing in a place, very near Heaven, in
which, more than in any under Heaven, Flatter^ would be offensive: to My Maker.
Yea, I do Believe, our* GOVERNOR Himself, has so much of the Great
Constantine in him, that I could not more Offend Him, than by going to El^ter
him. Nevertheless, I Judge, it would be no less than a Sinful Omission in me,
if I should not reckon our GOVERNOR, among the Matchless Favors of our God
unto us. I am not Praising of Him; for in the Langua^^ of a Divine, I must call
to mind, that he is Nothing, but what GOD makes him to be: But I am urging you,
to the Praising of GOD for Him. Yea I will say [ And I wish I could so speak
it, that all New England might Hear it!] That as we made our GOVERNOR, a Great
Article of our Prayers to GOD, before we Received Him, So, now we see our
Prayers thus remarkably answered, if we don't make him an Article of our
Praises to GOD, not only in public, but also in private, every where
throughout the Land, we deserve the Disaster which the Enemies of the Kings
Interests desire to see befalling us; that is to say, to be Deprived of so
great a Blessing* But I am the more Excused from insisting on this Matchless
favor of God unto us, because I perceive, our people Generally have some
affectionate Resentments of it. It was of old said, Psalm. 144.14, 15. Let there
be no Complaining in our Streets; Happy is that people that is in such a case.
Now, though I must freely own it, That no people has been more prone to Complain
than we, yet I have heard persons that converse among all sorts of people, say,
That they never yet could see the man, who uttered, or muttered, the least
Complaint against His EXCELLENCY'S Government. Say, O New England; Has the Lord
so dealt with any Nation? The only People, that Complain of Him, so far as I
can Learn, are those worst of People, the mortal Enemies of all People, the
Pirates, and their Abettors. The Inflexible Justice of our GOVERNOR,
perpetually and successfully, pursues those Horrid Sea Monsters; But for those
Bloody Harpi^s, and those that are in Confederacy with them, to Complain of the
Vengeance that follows them, is Music in the Ears of all that would not see
these Plan^ations Ruined. All Honest men, Rejoice when such are Grieved, That
there is come a Man, that seeks the Welfare of this Little Israel.

What shall we now Petition His EXCELLENCY to do for this his people I Shall we
petition Him, to Look with a Gracious, and Fatherly Compassion, upon our
Weaknesses? To Improve his Interest in the Court of England, so that His Great
Friends, may for his sake be ours? To Defend us from Injuries, to Direct us in
Difficulties, to Countenance our just Liberties, and the best Friends of them?

EXCELLENT SIR, You prevent us, in all our Petitions: You Do for us, whatever
we would Ask for: You leave us, nothing to Do, but to Study how we may Show all
Thankfulness, for the Great Quietness we Enjoy by You, and the Worthy Deeds
which are done to this Nation by your Providence.

The ELECTIONS, for which the Province this Day sends in a General Assembly,
Exemplify to us those our Liberties, wherein God has so dealt with us, as
hardly with any Nation. Indeed considering what New England had from the
Beginning done, to deserve singular Liberties, and considering what precious
Liberties had been ravished from New England, it was a fruit of the Royal
Justice, as well as Goodness in His Majesty, ^o Endue New England with a
Charter of Liberties, above the rest of the Plantations. We have a Royal
Charter, which Effectually Secures unto us, all Christian Liberties, and all
English Liberties, for which, I may say with the Rabbi; If the Heavens were
Parchment, and the Seas were Ink, they would not suffice to write the Just
Praises of God. We have a Royal Charter* so Shel^ering us, That no Counsel^ors,
nor Judges, nor Justices, can hereafter (...) Arbitrarily Imposed upon us. Yea,
we have some Advantages not only above any other Nation, but also above any
part of our own Nation.

Syrs, I cannot more Emphatically tell you, What Praises are due to the God of
Heaven, for these His Matchless Favors, than in those words, Gal. 5 13
Brethren, ye have been called unto Liberty, only use not your Liberty for an
occasion to the flesh. God forbid. That in the use of our Liberties and
Elections, we should be acted by any Spirit, but that of Respect unto the
Public Welfare. I hope, we are a people of more understanding, than to think,
That the Saving a little Money, is New-England's greatest Interest. God will
soon convince us, That this evil principle will be the Root of all Evil. And
almost all our Losing, has usually been by improper Saving. I will humbly take
leave to add, Let us Beware of Narrow, and Little, and Selfish Designs; Beware
of unjust Censures, and Slanders, upon Persons of Merit; Beware of all
Self-undoing prejudices, in our Elections. And especially Beware of counting
those persons our Adversaries, that are of all the most Able, and the most
Willing to be our Benefactors. I am not afraid of telling You, That I am very
much persuaded, the Factious Dispositions with which our Elections were
sometimes managed, were not the Least of those Provocations, against which,
Heaven testified by taking away our Charter from us. It is possible, That at
this very Time, there may be peculiar cause for some caution; That our
Elections may be so managed, as to demonstrate, that we are not a Contemptible,
but a Wise, and a Good people, and that we are not Ignorant of our true
Interest.

But You that have hitherto been the Elected RULERS of this Province, will bear
with me, i^ La^t of all, I mention You, as not the Last, nor the Least of those
Matchless Favors, which our God has given us. In your Piety, in your
Faithfulness, in your Zeal to D^ Good, w^ have seen in some Good measure Judges
as at the First, and Counselors as at the Beginning. If you should meet with
any Ostracisms, You will resent it no otherwise than the Heroic Lacademonian,
who rejoiced, That Sparta had so many men more worthy than himself: Though for my
own part, I know not where we can mend our selves. If God continue your
Opportunities, we make no Doubt, that He will continue your Inclinations: and
if a Pagan Cicero, much more will a Christian Magistrate, Look upon his place
in the Government, Velut Tutela, ad Utilitatem Eorum qui Commissi sunt. Nor
will you Lay aside those two Remembrances, wherein the Great Lord Chancellor of
England once observed, all ^he precepts for the Duties of Rulers to be summed
up; Remember that you are Gods, and, Remember that you are men. But it will
remain to be wished for you, That you may be fortified with an Exemplary
Patience. To contribute whereunto, I will at this Time only Remember, a
memorable passage in the Jewish Records. There was a public Officer, at whose
House many people every day gratis received Reliefs and Soccours. One Day he
asked, Well, what do our people say to day? They told him, Why, the people
partook of your Kindnesses, and Services, and then they Blessed you very
fervently Did they so? Said he: Then I shall have no great Reward for this Day.
Another Day, he asked, Well, and what say our people now? They told him, Alas,
Good Sir, the people Enjoyed your Kindnesses and Services to day, and when all
was done, they did nothing but Rail at you. Indeed! said he; Now for this Day,
I am sure that God will give me a great and a good Reward. Much Honored; May
the Lord hear you joyfully going before Him with that Request, Neh. 5.19. Think
upon me, for Good, O my God, according to all that I have done for this people.
And may you think, upon the words of that Eminent person; who was rewarded with
Banishment by the Ungrateful Genevians, after he had been among them, the most
Serviceable man, that ever they saw, Certe si hominibus servivissem, Certainly,
If I had served ^one but men, in what I have done, I were very ill Rewarded;
but it is well, that I have Served Him, who always well requites those that
Serve Him.

Enough and Enough has now been said, for to bespeak our Hearty Praises unto
God. If these Matchless Favors of God unto us, will not, what will bespeak our
Hearty Praises? Truly, since our God has so Dealt with us, as rarely with any
Nation, it becomes us, in Choosing those things that please Him, to Exceed
Every Nation. Has more been done for us, than for others? Common Ingenuity
will make this Inference; Then, in all Godliness, and Honesty, and in all those
things that may Adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior, Let us Do more than
others.

But, as I find both Basil and Austin, declining to speak, What they could not
Finish within the space of an Hour, I am sensible, the Occasions before the
Great and General Assembly this day* do forbid me to Speak what I cannot Finish
in an Hour, and Command me to Finish what I Speak with the Hour. My Discourse
is now therefore to be concluded, Lest you should have the Inconvenience that
Nazianzen would complain of, namely, Satiety in a Sermon. But I must conclude,
with an earnest protestation, that we are a people, under more than Ordinary
Occasions, to Tremble at that word of God: Amos 3.2. You only have I known of
all the Families of the Earth: therefore I will punish you for all your
Iniquities.

An Appendix. Giving a more particular Account of the Glorious and Wonderful
Succes^ which the Gospel has had in the East Indies. [Touched in the foregoing
Sermon]
THE Praesident of Harvard College in New England, having written to the
Learned Dr. Leusden, the Hebrew Professor at Utrecht, a true and brief account,
of what has been done toward the Gospellizing our American Indians; that
Letter was published not only in the Latin Tongue, wherein it was written, but
also in the French, the High Dutch, the Hungarian, and other Tongues; and gave
much sa^isfaction to the Churches of the Reformation, in many Nations.

On this Occasion, (and because that Letter had requested satisfaction, in this
point,) the Professor of Utrecht, has published an Extract of diverse Letters
from Credible and Reverend Persons in the East Indies, relating the Success of
the Gospel, with which the Dutch Protestant Ministers in, those remote Regions,
have seen their Holy Labors Rewarded. A Seminary (or, College) erected at
Malabar, for the Education of Young men, to be made Proponents, and Pastors, is
it seems of no little Consequence to the Evangelical Interests. But more
particularly.

D. Hermanuus Specht, Minister in Colombo, Writes,

In the Kingdom of Jaffanapatnam, There were found in the year, 1684. One
hundred and forty one thousand, four hundred and fifty six, of the Natives,
Converted unto the Christian Religion. And within four years mo^e, there were
Forty thousand more added unto the Number.

D. Adrianus de Mey, Minister of the Gospel, and Praesident of the College
here Erected; Writes;

The Young men of Malabar, in the College there Erected, are diligent, and
make notable progress in the Dutch Tongue: In one years time, they Learnt to
Read and Write. They know how to Pray, as the Christians do: and they can
recite by Heart, the Questions in Borstius's little Book, and translate them
out of the Dutch Tongue, into that of Malabar. They also Sing Psalms in our
Church I hope God will bestow His Grace upon them, and fill them with His
Spirit, that so these Young men, may in Time prove blessed Instruments, to
Pr^pagate the Kingdom of Christ among these Heathens. Jaffanapatnam, Jan. 22.
1692.

D. Franciscus Valentinus, Minister of the Gospel at Amboina, writes.

It has pleased the most High God, to send me, unto the Service of the East
India Churches in Amboina; in the Chief City whereof the Reverend Cornelius
Vander Sluys of Utrecht, fed about Thirty Thousand Souls, preaching the Word of
God, with singular Alacrity, and invincible Labor, among the Pagans. God ha^h
given him to Convert both Pagans and Mahometans (for here are many Mahometans,)
and bring into subjection unto Christ, those that were miserably perishing in
their Errors. An Hundred Infants at a Time are sometimes here Baptized; who as
they grow up, give notable proofs of their Diligence, and Ingenuity, and Piety.
Religion flourishes here, the Colleges also flourish: God is known, and by the
Pagans Worshipped; and abandoning the Gods, which their Ancestors Worshipped,
and taught them to do so, these once most Superstitious Ambomians, not only
Embrace the Worship of the True God, but even the Mahometans also (which is
wonderful!) desiring to be Baptized, most gladly give themselves up unto the
Lord Jesus Christ, and obey his Laws.

Amboina W. Id. Jun. 1686.

Monsieur Jurieu adds hereupon, Omnino nostrorum interest, ut haec omnibus
patefi^nt, et in publicum evulgentur.

FINIS.

