By the PROPRIETARY of the Province of PENSILVANIA, and Counties annexed With
the ADVICE of the COUNCIL: A PROCLAMATION
WHereas several Piracies and Robberies at Sea and on Seacoasts have of late
years been committed in Many parts of the World, to the great Injury of Trade,
the Terror and Ruin of many peaceable honest People under Governments in
Amity with the Crown of England, and to the horrid Scandal of the English
Nation: And whereas diverse Persons justly suspected to be guilty of having
practiced the Aforesaid Crimes, as well by the Nature and Quantity of the
Treasure about them, as by their being unable to give any good Account of
themselves, their Residence or Commerce, have for some time been observed to
land on, and scatter themselves through these Northern English Colonies of
America, with a manifest Design of enjoying with Impunity and Safety their ill
gotten Riches.

Now to the End that All such Persons may be effectually discouraged from
taking shelter (...) this Province, and They that attempt it may be speedily
detected, and no longer escape the hand of Justice; I have thought fit, and do
hereby strictly Charge and Command all Magistrates and Officers within this
Province and Counties annexed, as they will answer the Contrary at their Peril,
to use their utmost Diligence vigorously to Pursue, Apprehend and Secure every
such Person, that may be thus suspected; and not only such Persons, but also to
prosecute all Others, who shall knowingly Harbor any of Them or their Goods,
or by any means directly or indirectly Protect them, or shall be Aiding or
Assisting to Them to make their Escape or to withdraw themselves from Justice.
And more Especially I do hereby Require and Command All the Kings Loving
Subjects the Inhabitants of this Province and Territories, and particularly all
Keepers of Public Houses, to have a watchful Eye over, and strictly to Observe
all Strangers coming among them, and such to Apprehend, or cause to be
Apprehended and Secured, as they find unable to give a Reasonable and Credible
Account of their former Abode and Conversation, and about whom is found any
such Quantity of East India, Arabian or other Foreign Goods or Coins, as may
render them justly suspected as aforesaid: Whether they pretend to have got
their wealth by Privateering against Ships under French Commissions, which for
some time past has been happily at an End, or by an open Trade to Madagascar,
known to be the Magazine of Spoils and Plunders committed on the
East-India-Seas: And to take care that the said Persons in safe Custody be
kept, till upon due Information thereof given to me, they shall receive my
further Orders. And the better to Encourage a due Prosecution of these my
Commands; It is hereby Promised that whosoever shall Discover, Secure and
Deliver into the Hands of Justice, any such suspected Person, who shall be
afterward Convicted of the aforesaid Crime, shall receive the Sum of Ten
Pounds, as a Reward of their good Service. Given under my Hand and Seal at
Philadelphia the 23d. day of the Tenth Month, in the Eleventh Year of the Reign
of WILLIAM the Third of Great Britain, France and Ireland King etc. And the
Nineteenth of This Government. Annoque Domini. 1699.

W. Penn.

Philadelphia Printed by Reinier Jansen 1699.


