Acts 17.18. Then certain Philosophers of the Epicurians encountered him, and
some said, What (...) ^his Babbler say? Others-some, He seems to be a setter
forth of strange Gods, because he preached unto them Jesus and the Resurrection.

Mat. 10.25. If they have called the Master of the House Beelzebub, how much
more they of the Household?

Acts 24.14. But this I confess unto thee, that after the way that they call
Heresy, ^o worship I the God of my Fathers, believing all things which are
written in the Law and Prophets.

2 Timothy 4.3. For the time will come when they will not endure sound Doctrine,
etc.

2 Pet. 2.1. False Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
Herisies, even denying the Lord that bought them.

JESUS The Crucified Man, THE Eternal Son of God, OR, AN ANSWER TO An Anathema
or Paper of Excommunication, of John Wats, entitled, Points of Doctrine
preached and asserted by William Davis.

Wherein the Mystry of Christ's Descention, Incarnation and Crucifixion is
Unfolded.

By William Davis.

JESUS the Crucified Man The Eternal Son of God. OR, An Answer to an Anathema
or Paper of Excommunication, of John Wats, entitled, Points of Doctrine
preached and asserted by William Davis.
Wherein the Mystry of Christ's Descention, Incarnation and Crucifixion is
Unfolded. As also, it is made appear by plain Scripture proof, by Testimonies
of the holy Trinity, Angels and Men (and also of the very Devils) Acts of
Worship done to him, and Miracles that he wrought; and Plain Arguments and
Reasons drawn from thence, That the outward and visible Person or Man Jesus of
Nazareth, the Son of the Virgin Mary, who suffered Death, and dyed upon the
Cross, was (when he did so dye) and so does still remain the proper natural and
eternal Son of the living God, and second Person in the sacred Trinity, and
consequently true G^d, (though not the Father) And the Objections answered that
are commonly brought against this Doctrine. In which Answers are explained
diverse Scriptures relating to the Person, Office, Body, Flesh and Blood of
Christ. As also, what is to be understood by that adorable Expression [
Godhead] with several other useful and pertinent things for such a Work.

To which is added, A Corollary, showing John Wat's Contradictions, Errors and
and Blasphemies. As also, George Keith Dis^^obed.

As also, the Testimonies of the Primitive and Apostolical Churches, with the
Churches of the succeeding Ages; and also the Testimonies of the Protestant
Churches since the Reformation, all bearing witness to this Truth.

By William Davis.

Printed for the Author, in the Year 1700.

THE Preface to the Reader:
Friendly Reader;
IT is a Maxim that is granted, not only by all Reformed Christians, but also
by the very Heathen Philosophers themselves, That Truth is the brightest Gem in
the Regal Diodem, and that she sets her self off in her own Attire, with a far
more shining Luster than all the Praises of Poets, or the extravagant and
mis-applyed Commendations of dissembling and hypocritical Parasites. And I
could heartily wish it was the Genius of every man's Disposition to thirst after
Truth and Knowledge more and more, and to place a more than ordinary felicity
in the enjoyment of it. It is indeed a noble Prize, and always rewards its
adorers with lasting and inestimable blessings. And although so few are found
to be Possessors hereof, yet the want of it stains and sullies the Dignity of
humane Nature, but in whomsoever it does predominate it restrains all evil
Passions of the Soul, that promp him to unreasonable actions, bridles and curbs
those Appetites that solicit (...) ^njustice, banishes all that inordinate
fear that enslaves the Soul: It encourages all those noble Seeds of Justice and
Fortitude that lead a man on to an entire conquest over his Lusts and
distempered Affections; and it instructs a man to discharge his Function, and
exercise his Power in a due and regular way. It is that that dignifies man's
Nature, and enables to a degree of Honor much above the inferior Creatures.
This does illustrate a man's Name more than the Trophies of his Ancestors, or
the Success of his indisputable Courage and Bravery, or what ever other brave
Qualifications in famous humane Arts and Sciences, as well as Tongues and
Languages he may or has attained unto.

The Introduction.
NOw this ( viz. Truth) being the subject of the following Discourse, that also
by virtue thereof the contrary to it may clearly appear, so by that means the
Truth may shine forth in its own luster, is the end of this my writing. And to
that end I may make an orderly Introduction, I shall briefly give the Reader an
account of the Reason of it.

Through Grace, from my Youth, my Studies have been bent that way, viz. to seek
after Truth, since that time that God in his infinite Love was pleased to
restrain me from my youthful Vanities, several sorts of which I was naturally
^rone unto, being by nature a Child of Wrath as well as others. But these in
^reat measure God gave me Victory over when I was about 18 or 20 years of Age.
Having formerly had my Conversation in the Church of England, being trained up
according to the Rules of the fame, and being a diligent hearer of their
Ministers, having at that time but a weak capacity to judge in matters of
Doctrine, whether or no in that case they were right or wrong; I observed the
looseness and prophanity both of Priests and People too general amongst them.
This drove me from them. And the Quakers in that time, that exceeded in Life
and Conversation, being much more civilized, and given to Sobriety; this their
good Conversation prevailed upon me, wherefore I joined my self with them. And
having walked with them in that way about 13 or 14 years, in which space of
time I did consider of some Principles in Religion. And those which came most
particularly under my Consideration, was the Eternal Judgment and the
Resurrection of the Dead; which things, by my most diligent search in (...)
Quakers Books, and attentiveness to (...) Preachings, I could no^ get
satis^^^^ion in, clearly at last perceiving (...) they turned these things
merely to ^^^^gories, and to be witnessed within, (...) notwithstanding the
holy Scrip^^^^s did seem to hold forth the contrary. (...) then when it pleased
God to cast (...) here in Pennsilvania, which was (...) year 1681. I having met
with (...) help from George Keith, I farther that the Quakers were in the wrong
^^^^erning fundamental Principles. (...) which ground I left them again, (...)
a hearer of G. Keith. Now (...) God was graciously pleased (...) my
Understanding, and that (...) relating to Christ's Ordinances; ^^^^eupon I
(through infinite Grace (...) Love) became not only a Professor, ^lso publicly
preached the necessity (...) performance of them. And after (...), having an
opportunity, I put ^^actise the sacred Ordinance of (...) By this means, to
wit, by my and practicing these sacred Ordinance^ I incured the Malignity and
hatred (...) those among whom I walked, to (...) the Keithian Quakers; and
also, becau^^ I did preach and assert, that the Scri^^tures were the Word of
God. For the things at last they did utterly debar (...) and several others
from their society, (...) for which also they hate us to this (...) day; for
they perceiving that there (...) several of us, some at German Town, ^^^gether
with my Friend Tho. Rutter, (...) my self, that were weaned quite off (...) the
Quakers Principles, which ^hey (...) retained, therefore they supposed (...) be
unsound in the faith. And to that (...) they might try us, Jo. Heart, for (...)
draws up certain propositions of (...) and invites us all out of the Countr^^ a
Monthly Meeting held at Ph. Jan^^ in Philadelphia, to answer to ^ea or (...)
The Propositions* in part, I will (...) here recite, that the Reader may (...)
upon what Ground the Keithian Qua^^^^ have rejected us.

Proposi^ions of Faith that John Heart, as the chief of the Monthly Meeting of
the Keithian Quakers held at Phillp James's in Philadelphia the 4th day of the
3d Month, 1694. pressed to some of their fellow Members to answer to Yea or Nay.
1. WHether any are saved without the Scriptures, and outward Preaching, Yea or
Nay?

2. Whether the Quakers were wrong from the beginning, yea or nay?

3. Whether we can own a man a Member that does not marry according to our
Church Order, yea or nay?

4. Whether Women can preach by the Spirit, yea or nay?

5. Whether we do own Women's preaching, yea or nay?

6. Whether we shall put Water Baptism in practice, yea or nay?

7. Whether we have the Spirit of Discerning, that we can know a man without
words and works, yea or nay?

8. Whether we can own the Scriptures in any other sense to be the Wor^ of God,
than the wrirten Word, yea o^ nay?

From all which let the Reader Note* if I had answered in the Affirmative Yea*
to the 2 d, 3 d, 6 th and 8 th, and in the Negative, Nay, to the 1 st, 4 th, 5
th and 7 th Propositions, this had been a sufficient Proof to them that we were
unsound in the Faith. For they did not then believe, nor now neither (as I know
of) that Water Baptism must be put in practice; and they thought also, that the
Light within, or Word in the heart, was to be preferred before the written
Word. Note further, their profound Mystic or Doctor John Heart did pretend to
know men's hearts without words or works.

But to proceed, I still continued diligent in the search of sacred Scriptures,
in which search God was pleased to enlighten my Understanding so far, (and
principally from two particular places, Joh. 6.51. 1 Cor. 15.47. with
respective the Person of the Son of God, that I and my Friend Tho. Rutter
especially (with whom I did often converse, and he with me, being helpful to
one another) did clearly perceive, that not only the Quakers were wrong from
the beginning, with respect to their Principle relating to the Son of God, in
W. Penn's asserting, That the outward Person was not Gods proper Son, and
calling him an Impoten^ Creature, and others agreeing with him; but also Geo.
Keith, and many others before him, that had opposed the Quakers, were not right
themselves. And this gave us yet further occasion to search yet more narrowly,
not only the sacred Scriptures, for our Instruction, but also the Quakers Books
for our satisfaction, wherein we found that the Quakers did absolutely deny
that the outward Person, Jesus, was Gods proper Son, calling him, a Body, a
Garment, a Vail. And because G. K. did use the same Distinctions and Terms,
both in preaching and writing, at last, notwithstanding his Difference with the
Quakers, we could in reason, no otherwise conclude, but that in the ma^n point,
about the Person of Christ, and the Resurrection, he was one with the Quakers
(as afterward will appear.) Now because that we pressed in Discourse, and
sometimes in preaching, the contrary Doctrine, viz. That the outward Person,
Jesus of Nazereth, was so far from being an Impotent Creature, that he was Gods
proper and eternal Son, and consequently he that the Prophet calls the mighty
God. Which being asserted by T. Rutter in one of the Keithian Quakers Yearly
Meetings, they called him a Blasphemer, and rendered it Heresy; And my self
they compared, in one of their yearly Meeting Papers to Simon Magus the witch,
because I continued to preach Christ (in imitation of G. K. as they rendered
it) as Simon Magus did in imitation of the Apostles.

But they object against us, Have all those wise and learned Men, and
especially such as G. K. been deceived, and should the Truth be discovered to a
Turner and a Smith. And they brand us of pretending to Immediate Revelation in
the point, because we say, God has revealed the Truth unto us by his Word, to
wit, the holy Scriptures, wistth the gracious assiance of his good Spirit, in
the enlightening of our Understandings in the same. But thus it is, as the
Apostle says, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27, 2^. For you see your calling Brethren, how that
not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many Noble are called;
but God has chosen the foolish things of the World to confound the wise; and
God has chosen the weak things of the World to confound the things that are
mighty; and base things of the World, and things which are despised has God
chosen, yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are.

Now after all these things I being very desirous to be a Partaker in the
blessed Ordinance of the Supper, as I had p^rform'd the blessed Ordinance of
Baptism. I hearing of a Bapt^zed People, to whom John Wats, as Pastor, preached
and administered the Ordinances. I sought to come acquainted with them, and
going amongst them, was not only well received as a hearer, but also as a
Preacher, first and last for the space of three years, and upwards, before I
joined my se^f with them in Communion, which afterward, through my own
inclination to perform the Ordinance of Christ, and their importunity, I did
it. Now after I had thus joyne^ my self in Communion with them, I continued, as
I had formerly done, to illustrate and set forth the excellency of Christ's
Sufferings, and the Nobility and Majesty of his Person, alleging and proving,
That he who suffered and dyed on the Cross, was Gods proper Son, who came from
Heaven; having a zeal against the contrary Doctrine of W. P. who affirmed, That
the outward Person was not Gods proper Son. And that also, as I insisted upon
this Doctrine, I did testify and declare, That the outward Person was not any
weak and impotent Creature, as W. P. affirmed he was, but a mighty Savior, a
potent Redeemer, and that also the Scripture did declare of him, That he was a
God, and yet not the Father, according to these places, Isa. 9.6. Joh. 1.1.
John 20.28. Romans 9.^. Heb. 1.8. 1 Timothy 2.3. cap. 3.16. cap. 4 10. cap. 1.1.
Tit. 1.3. 1 John 3.16. cap. 5.20. I thus in sincerity of heart endeavoring to
demonstrate the danger of the Quakers Doctrine, which I had a great experience
of by a careful and diligent search in their most principal Authors, that by
understanding their Errors, I might be able to show the Truth, according to
Scripture (as God had been graciously pleased to make it known unto me) even to
those People who under a pretense or cloak did pretend to be at great odds with
the Quakers about these Points, accounting them very erroneous for holding such
things; but although they did so pretend, yet I perceived soon after, that they
were on^ with the Quakers about the outward Person and his Sufferings, and
therefore I labored the more with them to prove by Scripture, That the outward
Person was Gods proper Son, bringing these for Reasons, 1 st. Because he came
down from Heaven, and, 2 d. Because he humbled himself unto his Father, by way
of subjection as a Son. And this I did, as a Brother, to inform them, that they
might not fall into that Error themselves which they looked upon in the Quakers
to be a dangerous Heresy.

Now long before this, and before I joined my self with them in Communion J. W.
had writ something in opposition to this Doctrine, affirming, That the outward
Person Jesus, that suffered upon the Cross, was a weak, impotent and finite
Creature, exactly imitating W. P. as before.

This, I and my Friend T. Rutter having a sight of, we accounted it
Blasphemous, and reproachful to Christ Jesus. But however, we labored to
inform J. W. in meekness, of his dangerous Error, as well as Blasphemy, while
at last he complyes with us, and acknowledges his fault: This we hoped was
real in him. Upon which supposition that he saw his Error, and had really
recanted it, by his importunity I joined my self in Church fellowship with him,
and the rest belonging to that Meeting. But to return, I still continuing to
preach and assert among them, That he that dyed and suffered upon the Cross for
the sins of the World, was no impotent, weak nor finite Creature, but one that
was a mighty God (as the Prophet styled him when he was a Child, Isa. 9.7.) and
yet not God the Father.

And now, to requite me for all my love and labor amongst them, J. Wats he
sets his wits on work (because he perceived this Doctrine reflected much upon
his Ignorance, and because also he could not endure to be outdone by another,
he being the Pastor) to lay a foundation for Opposition (that he might have
occasion to rid me out of the Church) he confidently calls back again what
before he had acknowledged to be Error, and justifies it again for Truth,
affirming a new (in a second Manuscript) That Christ was an impotent weak and
finite Creature! as though he was resolved to be the Quakers Advocate herein. And
now he begins to seek an occasion against me, that if possible he might
alienate the ^^fections of the People from me, and so to put me to silence,
lest I should further discover his Ign^rance. And that he might bring to pass
this his malicious Design, he charges me of preaching ^eresie, ^n two respects,
1 st. Because I alleged from John 6.38. That the outward and visible Person
Jesus came down (...) Heaven* (...)* And in that respect that he did des^en^
and come upon his Fathers (...), he was in subordination or subje^^i^^ (...)
him, Joh. 14.^^. These things he condemned for Heresy, but he would (...) them
to be ^o by the Scriptures of (...) permit me to demonstrate them to be Truth
by the same* although I wa^ willing to submit i^ I failed to do it. But this
Tyrannical man would yield to no Christian Moderation nor Reason, being like to
those that would neither enter the Kingdom of Heaven themselves, nor suffer
those that would; and like to the Tyrant Procrust^s, that would fit every one
to his own Bed, by either stretching them out, or chopping them off. But J. W.
perceiving that I would not desist from preaching against that erroneous
Doctrine of Christ's being an impotent Creature, and proving the contrary to be
a great Gospel Truth, he proceeds to frame a Paper of Excommunication, an
Anathem^ or Curse against me, to push me out of the Church (as before)
(consisting of these seven Charges, as you have in the beginning ^f this
Treatise) which in like manner (...) did; but would never give me leave (...)
answer to them, either public or (...), neither did I know what those (...)
were they had against me (only (...) two mentioned before (till after (...) had
thus unchristianly acted by their An^thema or Curse. And then they post up and
send out their Papers throughout the Country of Pennsilvania and some into
Europe, making a hideous and doleful Noise, terrifying and fearing the Ignorant
wherever they come, and all on purpose to hinder Worship done to the Man
Christ Jesus, and to defame me his poor Servant, who pleads for it. But this is
my comfort, and that which bears up my head over all these swelling and
turbulent Waves of humane Malignity, because Christ has promised unto such a
great Reward, that suffer for his Names sake.

After all this I sought for justice, by making a Christian Appeal to a yearly
Meeting of Baptists, held in Philadelphia the 25th of Sept. School. but because
Jo. Wats was chief Doctor and Ruler in that Meeting also, I could have no
hearing at all, but (they being favored by the Quaker Magistrates) they
treated me with threats of Imprisonment, etc.

After this, April 13. 1699. Jo. Wats and some of his Friends gave me a meeting
at R. Wansells, to ^^eat of terms of agreement, where, instead of agreeing upon
terms of a general meeting* he made the difference yet greater (if possible)
betwixt us, where, in the hearing of diverse Witnesses there present, he
justified this saying of Evan Morgan (which he gave under his hand, That
Christ, as Man, must not be worshipped. And as for coming to agreement about a
general Meeting, he would have none but such as were according to his own mind
and framing, without any regard had to justice and equity relating to me his
Antagonist. For because he would by no means yield that I should have my
liberty at such a general Meeting to answer for my self to the supposed Crimes
he had laid to my charge; but on the contrary, he would first bring his
Evidences to prove what he had charged against me, to be true (although his
evidences were not legal, being partial men, and parties on his side) and to
judge and condemn me by bare evidence, and af^^^wards hear me. Hence we did
yield to refer the decision of the management of such a Meeting, to the
judgment of 4 or 6 impartial Men indifferently chosen out of the baptized
People; but J. W. would have no Baptis^s concerned herein, nor none else, say
^he Church of England, Presbyterian and Independent, alleging, that he knew
not whether any were sound in the Christian faith but these three Societies. We
granted him his liberty to choose out of what Society he pl^ased, provided he
would give us the same liberty; but he would not, but confine us to his own
choice. We at last yielded to be content, if he would give us liberty to choose
one society more, out of which four we would be bound to choose our men; we
nom^nated the Lutherain, that we m^^h make choice of the Sweeds Minister; but
they alleged against it, that the S^eeds were as bad as Indians or Heathens.
Wherefore the Meeting broke up and nothing was concluded. Now after this I made
my application to another Baptized Church, according to the method prescribed
in such a case by an Assembly of Elders, etc. of those Churches, held in
London, 1692. Now this Church to whom I made my application, sent Messengers to
J. Wats to desire him to (...) justice; but he refused, alleging he durst not
grant me a Meeting for his Soul, bringing this for a reason, for what was bound
on Earth was bound in Heaven; then they themselves by a messenger of theirs)
sent up to our Meeting, did appoint a Meeting for me at German-Town, the (...)
of May, 169^. where I might have my liberty to answer publicly to the charges
^ W. had laid against me; and to that and that all things m^gh^ be fairly done,
^ sent timely notice to J W. and his friends, desiring him to be there; but
here used, and appointed a Meeting himself, with ^ design to frustrateours, on
the morrow ^t Philadelphia. But nevertheless, we had a Meeting, to which a
considerable company of People of most sorts, did resort, whereby ( by Gods
Grace) I gave general satisfaction concerning the things in Controversy. Now
J. W. and his Church of England men, Presbyterians and Independents, being met
at Philadelphia, on the m^rrow, to judge and condemn me yet once again. We went
down to see if they would admit o^ a hea^ing before them, but it was refused
again. However J. W. proceeds to bring his Evidence against me without a
hearing, That I had preached and asserted those seven points, as they had
^^a^ed them notwithstanding at the Meeting beforementioned, at R Wansels, he
told in the hearing (...) many witnesses, That he could not be atteste^ to the
points as they had stated them; whence it appears that their evidence^ are all
perjured men.

Now that they might ratify and con^firm this their unchristian Judgment* tha^
I was an Heretic, and the Doctrine Here^tical* they get together on the
morrow, in a ^ipling ^ouse in Philadelphia and send for the Priest, T. Clayton,
with his Presbyterians and Independents, together with a certain Quaker* Rob
Turner, and combine together, as Herod and Pilate did* ^o crucify Christ, so
did they to deny Christ, judging me to be an Heretic, because I affirmed, he
was God, to wit, the outward and visible Person Jesus.

Now let the Reader take notice how many Enemies Christ has* that not only J.
Wats and his party, but ^ho Clayton Priest of the Church of En^land*
Presbyterian, Independent, Quaker, as also the shattering Keithian Quaker do
all mightily combine together against the outward and visible Person Jesus
Christ as the old Heretics in former Ages have done, as the Reader may see in
the latter end of this Treatise. For indeed the outward Person Jesus has been
the But-mark of the old Serpent in all Ages, at which his Archers have shot
their Arrows, as these beforementioned have done. But is it not strange, that
in this our Age of professed ^hristianity, there is not to be found such
moderate, wise and judicious Men as amongst the Heathen and Jews! No Gamaliels
to advise to moderation, no Festus^s to enjoin Justice, no Agrippa's to desire
a hearing, no ^elixes to enquire into the utmost of our matter! But thus we are
traduced, being destitute of all he^p and succor from men; we are shot at on
every hand by their malicious darts and poisonous Arrows, pierced with the
Spears of their bit^er Tongues, cut with the knives of their Jaw T^e^h; but
blessed be God it is for his own Sons sake, which is our joy.

But is it not matter of Admiration that J Wats and his party* Presbyterian,
Independent, Th. Clayton, Priest of the Church of England, and Keithian Quaker,
should not only cavil and quarrel with me and others, but condemn us for
Heretics, and the Doctrine we hold for Heresy. Whereas whenever they con^end
against the Quaker, and would prove the Quakers to be Heretics, they are
forced to e^p^use that Doctrine themselves for a great Truth (which in us they
condemn for a great Heresy) that they may find matter for Opposition against
the Quaker.

As for Example:
1. When the Quaker affirms. That the outward Person is not the proper Son of
God. This Doctrine the Church of England condemn for Heresy, as the Reader may
see in ^rim. Heresies revived p. 3. where they tell, This Heresy was broached
in the days of the Apostles, directing the Reader for a more larger proof, to
the Snake in the Grass,. 10. citing in that place beforementioned, for a proof
(that this Doctrine of W* P's ^erious Apology, p 146. was a prim^tive Heresy) a
passage out of Sacrates Hist. Eccl. lib 7. cap. 22. wh^re he tells, that it was
writ in the ancient Copies, Every Spirit that seperateth Jesus from God, is not
of God. And the said Author observes that this Text, and other parts of this
Epistle, were altered by those who would separate the D^vinit^ of christ from
his Humanity, as J. Wats, and all those beforementioned do.

But when I affirm, in opposition to W. Penn, That the outward and visible
Person Jesus was the proper Son of God, this T. Clayton, Priest of the Church
of England, Presb. Independ. J. Wats, with his party, do condemn for Heresy.

Example 2. When the Quaker affirms, That Christ did only take flesh as a vail
or Garment. The Church of England condemns this in the Quaker for a Heresy, in
the Treatise aforementioned, p. 2. and their Reasons are, as they say* 1.
Because it (...) a denial of the Incar^ation of Christ: 2. ^ denial of the
Hypostatical Union. 3. It implies two Person^ in Christ.

But when affirm, that Christ or the Word was made flesh p^operly, this they
condem as a Heresy. And yet when Dr. Lancaster propounds this Query to the
Quakers, Whether the Word was made flesh in such ^ise, that he was as truly Man
as he was God? or whether he took it upon him as a Garment or vail? The
Keithian Quaker (as a ch^at put upon the World) answers to this effect, That
the Word was really mad^ flesh, so that the Word was as truly Man as he was
^^od, and that he did not take it upon him as a Garment or Vail: But this they
do not believe, otherwise why should they condemn me and my Friend T. R. for
Heretics, for believing the same? And besides, their Leader G. K. does affirm,
That Christ or the Word did take flesh upon him as a vail or garment, as the
Reader may see further in chap. 9.. 4. of this Treatise.

Example 3. When the Quaker affirms, That Jesus Christ is the most high God,
and there is but one G^d, and that the outward and visible Person was not God.
This the Church of England condemns for Heresy in the Quakers, Snake in the
grass, p. 118. Their Reasons are, 1 st. Because this must needs be Socinism,
which is to deny the outward Person to be God. 2 ly. If Christ be God, and yet
but one single and individed Essence in the Godhead, it must necessarily
follow* that God the Father was incarnate, and dyed, and Christ was his own
Father, to whom he prayed upon the Cross. But when we affi^^, That Jesus
Christ, the outwa^d and visible Person is God, but not the Father, and that
there are three Persons, which are each one of them God. This also J. W.
condemns for Heresy. Their Reasons are, 1 st. Because although Christ they grant
to be God, yet as such he is a Spirit, and has not flesh and bones, and
c^nsequently not blood, and so not outward and visible; see J. W 's Manuscript,
entit. A brief Answer, etc. 2 dly, This would make two Gods, a greater and a
lesser God, if God the Father has a Son which is God and yet not himself, as
in their Bull, 7 th charge.

Example 4. The Quakers are blamed for denying three Persons before Christ was
born* Snake in the grass* p. 119. I am also condemned for a Heretic, for
affirming, God the Father and God the Son were distinct Persons from ^ternity

Exam. 5. The Q^akers cannot endure to hear tell of God being Co-creator with
the Father, or that God had a Father. Their Reasons are, 1 Because this implies
two Gods; 2. Because this implies God had a Father. And for this they are
condemned as no Christians, Contest for Christianity, because, as is therein
alleged, This is to deny the Son of God as a second Person in the Trinity, to
have any hand in the Creation of the Worlds, if two Gods are not allowed. 2.
And that God the Son had a Father. But when we affirm that God the Son was
Co-creator with God, even his Father personally distinct, for this we are
condemned as Heretics, because they say, This is to hold forth two Gods (as
the Quakers before objected, and for which they are condemned.

Examp. 6. The Quakers believe, that Father, Son and holy Ghost are but Names
to signify the holy One, W. P 's Sandy foundation. And for this they are
accounted no Christians, Contest for Christianity: The Reason there rendered,
is, because at that rate Christ could not be God as a second Person in the
Trinity, but that only God is God, which neither Socinus nor Sabellius ever
denied, But when we affirm* That Father, Son and holy ^host are three distinct
personal beings, This is condemned for Heresy.

Examp. 7. G. Keith in his 3 d N^rrative p. 37. accuses W Penn, G. Whitehead,
and S. Crisp of odd Notions and Erro^, because they will not allow the B^ood of
the Man Christ to be the Blood of God.

The Keithian Quaker, Quaker, Presb. Independ. Church men, John Wa^s and his
party, accuse T. Rutter and me of Heresy, because we oppose them and the
Quakers in this, alleging, That he that dyed upon the Cross, was as truly God
as Man, and therefore the Blood that that Man shed was the Blood of God, and
consequently God shed his Blood as such*

Examp. 8. G. K. accuses some of the Quakers, in the same place* of Error,
because they will not allow the Man Christ to be God The Keithian Quaker,
Quaker, Presb. Independ Churchmen* J. Watts and his party accu^e us of
Heresy, because we asser^ he is God.

Examp 9. G. K. in the same place accuses these Quakers of Error, that the
Word was made flesh, and that the Man Christ, the virgins Son, was the mighty
God. But when we assert. The Word was made flesh, The Keithian Quaker, Quaker,
Presb. Independ Church men, J. Wats and his party, they oppose us, and say. He
took Flesh, and was no otherwise made flesh than he was made sin. And when ^ R.
asserted in the Keithian Quakers yearly Meeting, That that Man Child was the
mighty Go^* (using the words of the Prophet) for this they sentence him for a
Blasphemer and Heretic.

Examp. 10. G K. blames G W. because he disowns the Term God-man* ^as Popish I
am condemned for a Heretic for using the Term God-man

A Parrabel.
VV Penn says, in the Name of the Quakers, That the outward Person is properly
the Son of God, we ut^erly deny, Apol. p. 146. George Eaglesfield, a Nominal
Baptist Teacher says, The Jews never saw the second Person in the Trinity,
like unto this, another Quaker saving, The Jews never saw the Worlds Savior.

I hope by this time, the Readers Understanding may be a little opened, that he
may be able to ken a little into the Mystery of this Iniquity. What grand
Hypocrisy! What Partiality is this! What! let a man hold never so sound a
Truth, if they affect not his Person, this by them shall be rendered a ^eresie.
And again, if another hold never so gross a Heresy, if they in any sort affect
his Person, and also by reason thereof, they may take an advantage (seemingly)
against another whom they greatly disaffect this by them shall be rendered for
a Truth. Is this Christianity? No sure, far from it: This is far from loving
Enemies, when they hate their own Friends: This is far from understanding the
Truth, when they condemn Truth for Error, call good evil, and evil good; put
light for darkness, and darkness for light. What a mingle-mangle is this of
Religion! What! make Religion a Stage Play or Comedy of it! What! toss the
great Points of Christian Faith to and ^ro, like a Tennis-ball, at their will.
This is playing and trifling with things of Eternity: This is condemning others
for that thing which they do themselves. This is ^^tempting to cast a Moat out
of another's Eye, when in the mean while a Beam lies in their own.

But I pray God, even the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, his Son, to make
these my poor Labors effectual, to the opening of their Understandings, and
the convincing them of their fol^y (that they may repent thereof) as well as to
the converting of their Souls, to the end they may receive the Truth as it is
in Jesus, in the love of it, and be saved. Amen.

Which is the Prayer of him who is a Despised Worm, but a constant VVitness
to Jesus Christ, William Davis.

The Contents.
COncerning the seven Points charged and owned, pag^ ^^ Chap. 1. 1. Containing
an answer (...) first Point* proving Chris^^ Resurrection, p 4. 2 Containing an
answer to an Objection relating to this point, ^. 5.. 3. That monstrous
Principle of Gods ^^ing every where present alike, re^^^ed, ^. 8. Chap. 2. The
other six points reduced an methodized under three Propositions, p. 10 Chap. 3.
3. The scruple removed co^cern^^g the phrase outward Person, p 11.. 2. The word
or term Person explained, p. 14.. 3 The Objection answered about Angels
assu^ning Bodies, and the absurdities shown, p. 14. Chap. 4.. 1. The first
Proposition, Christ is Gods Eternal Son, with the Argument, p 18.. 2. Proved by
Testimonies (...), Father, Son and holy Ghost, p. 19.. 3. Angelical
Testimonies, p. ^1.. 4. Humane Testimonies, p. 21.. 5. Diabolical Testimonies,
p. 2^.. 6. The Son of God was Co-creator his Father. 7. The Son has
pre-existed from Eternity, p. 26.. 8. A Quibble answered concerning the word
^ody, p. 27. Chap. 5.. 1. Containing the second Proposition, with the
Introduction, and the Argument to ^rove Christ's Descention and Incarnation, p.
32.. 2. The Descention of Christ, the first branch, p. 35.. 3. Christ did not
bring flesh from Heaven, p. 36.. 4. In what sense Christ was in Heaven and
(...) Earth at the same time, p. 42.
The Incarnation of Christ, 2d Branch, p. 43.. 1. Proved out o^ the Prophets,
p. 43.. 2. Out o^ the New Testament, p. 45.. 3. The Objection answered, that
Christ was not made flesh properly, p. 48. ^. 4. Another Objection answered,
that the Word was turned (...) flesh, ^^ 48.. 5. Another Objection answered
about the Union of the Natures, p. 51. Chap. 6.. 1. Containing the third
Pr^positions, with the Argument, to prove, that he that dyed on the Cross was
God, p. 52.. 2. Proved from express Testimonies of Scripture, p. 53.. 3. From
acts of Worship done to him, p 56. 4 From the Works and Miracles that he
wrought, p. 57.. 5. Containing eight Arguments for further proof, p. 58. Chap.
7. Containing twelve Objections, brought against the Doctrine of Christ's dying
as he was God, as well as Man, and their answers, p. 61.
Five Reasons added, that do further confirm this Truth, p. 90. Chap. 8.. 1.
The seven points charged for Heresy, are proved to be Gospel Truths, p. 97..
2. Some Observations on some of G. Keith's false Doctrines, p. 101.. 3 Some
Notice taken of some of G. K's Mystical Doctrines, p. 110. Chap. 9. Containing
an abstract of Humane A^thorities, p. 115.. 1. Of the Apostolical Churches, p.
116.. 2. Of the succeeding Ages, p. 117.. 3. Of the Protestant Churches since
the Reformation, p. 118.
A Postscript, p. 129. The Conclusion, p. 131.
JESUS the Cru^ified Man, The Eternal Son of God.
The 7 Points charged.
1. THat God has a divine Body and Soul in (...) form and likeness of a Man.

2. That that very visible Body of our Lord Jesus Christ which the Jews saw
with their natural Eyes and crucified, was in heaven, and came down from thence
into the virgin Marys womb, and lay there 9 months.

3. That the Word or divine Nature of Christ did incorporate it self with flesh
and blood, or with the humane nature, as wine is mixed with water, by which
means the Word was made flesh, and so became capable to dye, which before it
could not.

4. That the divine Nature of Christ, as well as his humane, was nailed to the
Cross, and lay enclosed, bounded and limited within the Sepulcher.

5 That our Lord Jesus Christ was inferior to his Father before his
Incarnation, and is no otherwise equal with God the Father than Joseph was to
Pharaoh, or a man's Son can be to his Father.

6. That we cannot distinguish betwixt the two Natures in Christ, except we
divide them; and that it is an Error in Christians to say, he is God and Man,
but that he is God-Man, and not humane and divine, but Human-divine, or
Divine-humane.

7. That there are two Gods in Heaven, a greater and an inferior God, and that
the greater God sent the inferior or lesser God to dye, and the inferior God
dyed.

The 7 Points owned.
1. THat God (the Son) has a divine Body and Soul in the form and likeness of
a Man.

2. He that was conceived of the virgin Mary, whom the Jews saw with their
natural eyes, and crucified, even that outward and visible Person of our Lord
Jesus Christ (before he was thus conceived, seen and crucified) was in heaven,
and came down from thence into the virgin Marys womb and in the same measure of
time, as other ^nfants are, was brought forth into the world.

3. That the Word (or Son of God) did incarnate himself with humane nature, in
such wise that the union of the natures was beyond all natural mixtures, either
of wine and water or any thing else, by which means the Word was made ^lesh,
and so became capable to dye, which before he could not.

4. That the proper Son of God (who was as truly divine as humane, both in body
and soul) was nailed to the Cross, and his body laid enclosed, bounded and
limited within the Sepulcher.

5. That our Lord Jesus Christ was in all things subject to his Father; and
(...) by Pharoahs appointment was made Sovereign over all the Kingdom of Egypt,
yet he acknowledges Pharaoh to be his Sovereign, or as a King sets his Son in
the same degree of honor with himself, yet every such Son, (if dutiful) pays a
filial subjection and respect to his Father. So likewise, although God has made
his Son both Lord and Christ, and sovereign Ruler over all Worlds, having
committed all Power into his hands, both in Heaven and in Earth, yet Christ
does pay subjection to his Father.

6. That we cannot distinguish betwixt the two Natures in Christ (no more than
we can divide them) and that it is an error in Christians, when Christ is said
to be God and Man, thereby to conceive two Beings or Persons, for one Person is
God and Man (or Theantrophos) and both is one Christ.

7. That there is in heaven God the Father and God the Son (as also God the
holy Ghost) and that God the Father is greater than God the Son, and that the
Father sent the Son into the world, and God the Son dyed.

CHAP. I. The seven Points answered to, and proved.
THat God (the Son) etc.

Answ. This being laid down for a Heresy, I shall, by Gods assistance,
endeavor to prove it to be a Truth.

. 1. To deny this point, is to deny the Resurrection of Christ. But now is
Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept, 1
Cor. 15 20. And (...) in, and found not the Body of the Lord Jesus, Luke 24.3.
and v. 6. The Angel said, he is not here, but is risen^ And he bodily ascended
up to heaven in the sight of the Gallileans, Acts 1.9, 10, 11. Hence the
Apostle tells, Phil. 3.21. That our vile Body shall be made like unto his
glorious Body. Now if Christ's Body be risen from the dead, it is united again
unto his Soul, and both are ascended into heaven. And forasmuch as he is the
Mediator, his Body and Soul is as truly Divine as Humane; and further, that he
retains the same form in which he rose and ascended, is evident from the
Scriptures, which was in the form and likeness of himself, to wit, the Man
Christ Jesus, the Mediator, God-man; therefore God has a divine Body and Soul
in the form and likeness of a Man.

. 2. Object. But my Adversaries do object, If a man should so preach and
assert, without distinction, the people would necessarily understand it of God
the Father.

Answ. 1. I did never so preach and assert to my knowledge, in such a frame of
words as ^s is there laid down, without either more or ^ess. But if I had, yet
the Objection has no weight against it to prove the Father must ^ecessarily be
understood; but does rather ^iscover the great ignorance of the Objector,
(which was T. Clayton, Priest of the Church of England, advocating for J. Wats
at the Meeting at Philadelphia, May 23. 1699.) in the phrase and language of
holy Writ; for according to this we should necessarily understand the Apostles,
Paul and John, that God the Father shed his Blood for the Church, and that God
the Father laid down his Life, Acts 20.28. 1 John 3.16. because both places are
spoken without distinction; but this would not only be absurd, but blasphemous.

2. But what reason have my Adversaries to bring this as an Objection against
me, concerning the Father, for if they grant the former to be a truth, (which
they cannot well do, seeing they have condemned it for a Heresy) That God the
Son has a Body and Soul, and the Father has not, then this make^ two Gods,
according to them, and yet this they condemn for Heresy. And, 2 dly, i^ the
Father and Son* (as they affirm) are one individed Essence, it will follow that
they are but one individed Person, and consequently* either the Son must be the
Father, and the^ the Father has a Body and Soul, or else the^ must deny the
Son to have such, or else the^^ is no Father at all, according to this absur^
Opinion.

3. They maliciously accuse me and my Friend T. ^utter of holding, That God
sits in Heaven in the shape of a little old Man (as they phrase it.)

Answ. This charge is most abominably false and wicked, and it is grounded from
this, because we have brought that place of Daniel, cap. 7.9. to prove there
the Ancient of Days is intended the Father, and not the Son, because the Son
afterward is mentioned by the Title of The Son of Man, verse. 13. And because
the Prophet thus sets forth and describes the Ancient of Days sitting upon a
Throne, with the Hair of his Head like pure Wool, and his Garments as white as
Snow, they have cast it upon us as though we had been the first authors or
promulgators of it, and so for it we are rendered Heretics. But me thinks they
are very partial, they should have placed the Saddle upon the right Horse (as
the Proverb is) to wit, upon the Prophet himself, seeing he is the Author of
that they call Heresy, to wit, That God the Father sits in heaven in a most
glorious Throne, pointing out his Eternity under the similitude of white hairs,
and his Holiness, Justice and Righteousness under the figure of white Garments.

. 3. But that which makes our Adversaries to rave as they do, not only at us,
but i^ effect at the Prophet himself, is because thi^ Principle of Gods sitting
on a glorious thron^ in heaven, having there his chief Residence contradicts a
great, but prodigious Principl^ of their own, viz. That God is every where
present alike.

I shall endeavor to refute this monstrou^ Principle by Scripture; 2 dly, show
the absurdities that do arise from it.

The Scriptures affirm, God is in Heaven, and we are on Earth, Eccles. 5.2.
Therefore says the wise man, Let your words be few. This phrase denotes, that
Gods chief abode and residence, with respect to his glorious Personal Being, is
no where else but in Heaven. Therefore Solomon in his Prayer, he prays, That
the Lord would hear in heaven, his dwelling place, 1 Kings 18 20. And again,
the Prophet cries out, Heaven is thy Throne, etc. Isa. 66.1. Our Savior says,
pray, Our Father which art in Heaven, Mat. 6.9. Hence it appea^s that Gods
glorious and personal Presence, is only in Heaven, and not every where alike.
It is said, The Lord was not in the Wind, nor in the Earthquake, nor in the
Fire, 1 Kings 19. 11, 12. Then not every where alike.

2 dly, The Absurdities that do arise from it.

If it were so that God is every where alike, and yet his dwelling place in
Heaven, then Heaven must be every where alike also, and Christ must sit at Gods
right hand every where, and consequently the holy Angels must be every where,
yea, and we were all in Heaven, and there would be no difference betwixt
Heaven, Earth and Hell; nay, further, this would destroy the very being of God,
according to the saying of the Rodian Poet, Quisquis ubique habitat maxim
nusquam habitat, viz.
He that every where can be,
In no place never found is he.
For if God be every where alike, then either every thing is God, and then
every thing must be worshipped, or else nothing is God, and so nothing must be
worshipped. If we grant the first, that promotes Idolatry in the highest degree
of it: If the second, it introduces Atheism in the utmost extreme of it: What a
mad piece of absurd and jumbled Divinity would this be! But that God is every
where present by his sacred Attributes, Psalm. 139.7. is in no wise denied by
us, but owned and believed, to wit, by his all-seeing Eye, Psalm. 139 8. by his
omnipotent Power, v. 10. by his infinite Wisdom, etc. Psalm. 147.5.

CHAP. II. The other six points reduced to, and methodized under three
Propositions.
Proposition I.
THat visible or outward Person of our Lord Jesus Christ, which the Jews saw
with their natural Eyes and crucified, was Gods proper and eternal Son, and
second Person in the Trinity, whose eternal dwelling place was in heaven.

Proposition II.
That Christ, the very visible, outward and eternal Person, or Logos, and
proper Son of God, did in the fullness of time, descend from Heaven, according
to the Predictions of the Prophets, and was incarnate or made Man in the
Virgins Womb.

Proposition III.
That Christ the eternal Logos, or proper Son of God, after his Incarnation,
conjunctively in both Natures, in an inseparable Union, as he was the Son of
God, and the Son of Man, even God incarnate, the second Person in the Trinity,
did pay the Ransom of our sins, by humbling himself unto the Death, even the
Death of the Cross.

1. Observe, That the first Proposition contains the first part of the second
point of Doctrine, which, in short, is the Eternity of Christ.

2. The second Proposition contains the third point of Doctrine, and the latter
part of the second, which, in short, is the Descention and Incarnation of
Christ.

3. The third Proposition contains the 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th points of
Doctrine; which, in short, is the filial Subjection and Crucifixion of Christ.

CHAP. III.
. 1. BEfore I begin to prove my Propositions, I shall endeavor to remove one
scruple, which possibly may remain upon the Readers mind, and that is this,
which I will bring in by way of an Objection, Why I use those Terms Visible and
Outward Person, and apply them to Christ, seeing we find them not in the
Scriptures?

I Answer, I presume if they were not expressly found in the Scripture, yet I
might as lawfully use them as G. K. frequently and often, both in preaching and
writing, as an opposite to the Quakers Light within (which they call Christ)
uses this phrase, [ Christ without] which indeed is the true Christ of God,
and none but he, and for this he is not blamed by any, except his Opponents,
but rather commended. So then, if when the Quakers cry up their Light within to
be Christ it shall be lawful for G. K. to oppose this false and absurd Notion,
by alleging the contrary, Christ without, although that phrase is not to be
found in the Scripture, yet it is Scriptural. So then it may be lawful for me,
when the outward and visible Person is denied to be the proper Son of God (by
W. P. expressly, and J. W. effectively, as also G. K. in holding and believing
the eternal Word, (which was the outward Person^ to be the Light within, 3 d
Narrative, p. 6.) to oppose this Heresy, which the Apostle calls damnable, by
the same expressions in which he is denied, to ^e^^ifie the contrary, viz. That
the outward (...) is the proper Son of God.

But this is not all, for it is not only Scrip^ural, but plain Scripture, viz.
That he has ^een visible before he was made flesh. Genesis ^8.1. And the Lord
appeared to Abraham, and Abraham saw him. Genesis 32.25. And he ^^^ched the hollow
of his Thigh, etc. From whence it appears, he was also Tangible; ^osh. 5.13.
And Joshua saw a man, etc. Dan. ^.25. And he answered and said, lo, I see four
(...) loose, etc. Exodus 24.10. And they saw ^he God of Israel, (viz. the Son of
God) Isa. ^.5. Mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord of ^osts. From all which
it appears, he was ^oth visible and tangible, before he was made ^^esh, and
these respect our outward Senses of ^eing and feeling; then surely an outward
^erson. Again, John the Divine confirms his further, by adding also the use of
another (...) our outward Senses, as exercised upon the ^ternal Word, to wit,
of Hearing, affirming ^ost emphatically, That which was from the ^^ginning
[Then not only humane Nature] which we have heard, which we have seen with
(...) Eyes [note that] which we have looked upon (...) doubles it over, because
some did deny it ^^en, as some do now) and our hands have ^^ndled of the Word
of Life.

. 2. Next, as to the word Person, because that is scrupled by some: what (say
they) must we understand by Person? Answ. Indeed at this rate men will scruple
sound and wholesome words and terms of holy Scripture. For so he Apostle sets
forth our Savior, under the Title of Person; telling that he did forgive in
the Person of Christ, 2 Cor. 2.10. He is called this just Person by Pilate,
Mat. 27.24. But if any should desire to know what the signification of Person
is, I shall give them the Definition thereof from Goldman; A Person (says he)
is an Individed substance of a Rational Nature. From hence we may conclude,
every Substance that is Rational is a Person; and they are of three kinds,
Divine, Angelical and Humane; and every Substance that is Irrational, is not a
Person; such are Annimals, Vegetables, Minerals and Insensible Creatures. Hence
it is that Christ i^ a Person, because he is an individed Substanc^ of a
rational Nature, as also, God the Father; therefore the Apostle says, That the
Son is the express Image of his Person, Heb. 1.3.

. 3. Object. But although Christ did Personally appear in the form and likeness
of a Man before his Incarnation, yet that does not argue, that he was such an
outward Person as he appeared to be, or had such a form and likeness properly,
because Angels have frequently appeared in such forms, and yet none do believe
that they have such forms properly of their own, but that they borrow or assume
Bodies in which they do appear after this manner.

Answ. This being laid down for a Principle, it ought to be proved by express
Testimony of Scripture, or else no man is bound to believe it, viz. That Angels
do assume Bodies in which they appear, and that they do not appear in their own
proper Bodies. But seeing there is no Scripture to prove this thing, or any
thing like it, I shall presume to prove the contrary by Scripture, to wit, That
Angels do appear in their own proper Bodies, and not in borrowed or assumed
ones. It is said, Dan. 10.6. concerning the Angel that appeared to Daniel, That
his Body also was like the Beryl, and his Face as the appearance of Lightning,
etc. Where note, it is said [ His Body] meaning the Angel; it is not said a
borrowed or assumed Body. So then I conclude from hence, it was the Angels own
proper Body; from whence also it appears that Angels do appear in their own
proper forms, and consequently our Savior himself, when he did so appear, who
was and is the head of the Angels,

The Absurdities that do follow at the (...) of this foolish Opinion, are many,
whereof I will give some few. 1st. Then if they do borrow Bodies, it must be
some ones Body, that belongs either to the quick or dead. If to the quick, the
Person whose Body the Angel does occupy, would be sensible of the said
occupation, and then it would not only be a borrowing or assuming the Body, but
the Soul also, and consequently the Person would give a relation of it, to some
of his Friends or others, by which means we might have more certain knowledge
of such a thing. But of such a thing we never heard. 2. If to the Dead, it must
be a Body that has been newly Dead, or one that has laid some time in the
Grave. As to the first, one newly Dead, this would be a Miracle seen and beheld
of men, because the dead Bodies of men are never cast out of the sight of the
living, until they are entoombed in the Grave, and then we should have more
knowledge of it. But this is ridiculous, as well as absurd, and contrary to
reason. As to the second, If one that has been some time in the grave, Then
this would be a Resurrection to that Body without its own proper Soul, which is
absurd, and against the Ana^ogy of Scripture, 2d. Or else it must be a Body
create^ for that purpose, and then every time an Angel appears to men he must
have a new creation, in order to his appearance. But enough of this. I hope the
Reader by this time may see the folly of such an idle Opinion.

Thus having led the Reader through the Introduction, and answered to, and
proved the first point of Doctrine, and also removed the Scruple ^I hope)
concerning the phrase outward and visible Person, having thus made way for what
follows, I now shall proceed to prove the Three Propositions before laid down,
both by Scripture, Reasons and Arguments drawn from thence; the which I shall
illustrate by the Authority of ^u^hors.

Note, Under these three Propositions are contained the other six points of
Doctrine, and what points belong to this or the other Proposition, are
nominated before.

CHAP. IV.
^roposition I. THat visible or outward Person of our Lord Jesus Christ, which
the Jews saw with their natural Eyes and crucified, was Gods proper and eternal
Son, and second Person in the Trinity, whose eternal dwelling place was in
heaven.
. 1. The Proposition is an affirmative which I am to prove, to wit, That the
outward and visible Person was Gods proper and eternal Son, and none but he.
The Negative i^ avouched by J. Watts, my Antagonist, and his adherents, in the
Antithesis, who have borrowed it from W. P. as W. P. has from other humane
Authors.

The Argument.
Major. Now that Person that the holy Scriptures do clearly set forth unto us
to be Gods Son, must needs be him, and none else.

Minor. But the holy Scriptures do clearly set forth unto us this outward and
visible Person. Jesus, to be God^ Son.

Conclusion. Therefore that outward and visible Person, Jesus, must needs be
Gods Son, and none but he.

The major Proposition is grounded upon the Authority of Gods Word, which none
dare to scruple the truth of. The minor or assumption rem^ins to be proved from
the same, which when it is ^one, the conclusion will naturally follow.

And (...) Proofs or Testimonies are of four sorts, 1. Divine. 2. Angelical. 3.
Humane. 4. Diabolical.

. 2. 1. Divine. God the Father himself testifies to this Truth most
emphatically and expressly, with an audible Voic^ from Heaven, first, at the
Baptism of his own Son in the River of Jordan, by John the Baptist, to
establish and confirm him, as well as others then present, that he was the true
Messiah that was expected and looked for by the Jews, (whom they di^ believe to
be Gods Son, but this was their sad ^^te, to miss of be^i^ving in him when he
di^ come, John 5.40.) And lo a Voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved
Sone in w^om I am w^ll pleas^d, Mat. 3.17. Mark 1.11.

This also the Father confirms again by the same celestial Oracle, spe^king
himself from Heaven, at Christ's T^a^^^igu^ation on the Mount, with an addition,
enjoining our diligence, and audience to hearken to him, Mat. 17 5. This also
Peter testifies to the truth of, that himself was an ear Witness of this
Paternal and Celestial Oracle, 2 Pet. ^.

Now then, if God the Father speaks properly, when he declare^ this from
Heaven, That that outward and visible Person was Gods proper Son^ (for it was
him the Oracle did rerespect* ^hen the outward Person is Gods proper Son. But
when God speaks, he speaks properly. Ergo.

2. The holy Ghost testifies this to be a Truth, when he descends upon him in
the shape of a Dove, at his Baptism, Mat. 3.16. Joh. 1.32. Mark 1.10.

3. The outward Person Jesus, acknowledges to thi^ truth his own self, 1 st.
when the Question is propounded to him by the high-Pri^st, Art thou Christ, the
Son of the blessed? Mark 14.61, 62 he answered, an^ said, I am. ^o be sure the
question do^^ respect the outward and visible Person. 2^^^ He declares this to
the Man that was bo^^ blind, whose Eyes he had opened, answeri^^ to the ma^s
Qu^stion. Who is he Lor^^ meaning the Son of God; he answered, (...) have both
seen him, and it is he that talks with thee, Joh. 9.37. meaning himself; and
he worshipped him, to wit, the outward Person. 3 dly, he says, God so loved
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son into the world, etc to w^t, his
own self. Thus all the three Persons in the glorious Trinity do all avouch this
truth, to wit, That the outward Person Jesus, is the second Person in the
Trinity, and proper Son of God. And surely this three fold cord will not easily
be broken.

Having finished my Testimonies Divine, I proceed to Angelical.

. 3. 2. Angelical. The Archangel Gabril was sent to the Virgin Mary to
signify to her, That she should bring forth a Son, which should be called the
Son of God, Luke 1.35. and 3^* which was Jesus the outward and visible Person,
verse. 31.

. 4. 3. Humane. Next, Humane Testimonies are diverse, but I shall instance a few
for brevity.

I call them Humane to distinguish them from the former, and it relates to the
Persons, rather than to the Testimony themselves, for they are Divine also,
being dictated by the holy Ghost.

The first is the Apostle Peter, when his Master would prove his Disciples by a
Question respecting himself, saying unto them, Whom say ye that I am? Peter
answered, and said, Thou art Christ the Son of the living God, Mat 16.16. This
answer our Savior did much commend and approve, declaring, That upon him (to
wit, upon himself, upon whom Peter had ^o^nded his faith^ he would found and
b^ild his Church, and the Gates of Hell should not prevail against it. 2 dly,
John the Baptist (...) and ^e^^eth Record to the same, John 1.34. saying (when
he saw him) I saw and bear R^cord that this is the Son of God. Then visible to
be sure, and consequently outward. 3 dly, Nathaniel also in verse 49.
confesses, he was the Son of God 4 thly, Martha acknowledges him to be the
Son of God, John 11.27. Reader, for brevity's sake I shall only set down the
places of Scripture for the following Testimonies, desiring thee to search them
in thy Bible, and consider whether or no they do not all relate to the outward
Person.

Dan. 3.25. Mat. 4.3. chap. 8.29. chap. 14.33. chap. 26.63. chap. 27.43, 54.
Mark 1.1. chap. 3.11. Luke r. 35. chap. 3.38. chap. 4.41. chap. 22.70. John
1.34. chap. 3.18. chap. 5.25. cha^ 9.^^ chap. 10.36. chap 11.4. ch^p. 19.7.
chap. 20.31. Acts 8.37. chap 9 20. Romans 1.4. 2 Cor. 1.19. Gal. 2 20. Ephesians
4.13. Heb. 4.14. chap. 6 6. chap. 7.3. chap. 10 29. 1 John 3.8. chap. 4. 15.
chap. 5. 5 10, 13, 20. Rev. 2.18.

. 5. 4 thly, Testimonies Diabolical. Now although the Devils have no saving
Belief in Jesus Christ^ the Son of God, yet as the Apostle James tells, They do
believe and tremble, James 2.19. and this Truth we see confirmed by Testimonies
and Confessions of the very Devils, who tremble at his presence, Mark 3.11. And
unclean Spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him, and cried saying,
Thou art the Son of God, Mat. 8.2^. Luke 4.41. Mark 1.24.

Note, what a Wonde^ful Person he was! well might the Prophet style him The
Wonderful Consellor, The mighty G^d, The Everlasting Father, The Prince of
^^ace Wonderful! that he is not (...) admired by Saints and Angels, but also
feared and dreaded by the very Devils: The mighty God, so that not only Saints
and Angels worship him, but also the Infernal Spirits fall down before him. The
beloved of God, yea, chosen of God precious, as Peter says: He is a fountain
to wash us, as well as a Sun to enlighten us: He is to us both Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. He is the Antitype of all Types,
and Substance of all Shadows: The second Adam, public Person, and great
covenanting Head, and blessed Representative of all his Followers: The true
Noah and Heir of the World: The real and proper Melchizedeck; the true and
Anti-typical Isaac; the Evangelical Joseph; our Gospel Moses; the heavenly
Joshua; the strong and mighty Sampson; our Gospel David; the true peaceable
Solomon; the Evangelical Elisha, that cures all leprous Naama^s; the divine
Elijah, that went to heaven; the Gospel ^onah, that was cast into the Sea of
Gods Wrath to make a calm; the Anti-typical Aaron; the Mercy Seat, from whence
God com^unes with us; the Al^ar of Perfume. that presents all our Persons and
Prayers accep^^ble unto God the Father; the Antitype of the Sl^in and Escape
Goat; the true spiritual Ro^^ smitten in the Wilderness; the Passover that was
sacrificed for us; the true Sin-offering, yea, both Priest and Sacrifice; the
true Manna that comes down from Heaven; the Jacobal and Celestial Ladder, by
which we ascend to Heaven; In him Justice and Mercy do meet (as the Psalmist
praises it) Mercy and Truth are met together, Righteousness and Peace have
kissed each other, Psalm. 85.10.

. 6. Having now gone through my several sorts of Testimonies, by which I
presume I have effectually proved the minor of my Argument, which being done,
the conclusion (as I said) does naturally follow, viz.

Therefore that outward and visible Person, JESUS, must needs be Gods Son, and
none but he.

Now then Christ being proved to be Gods proper Son, by the sacred Scriptures,
this does bespeak him to be of his Fathers Nature, and entitules him to his
Fathers Attributes, (...) right Heir thereunto.

Now the Father has been the Creator of all things, visible and invisible;
then also the Son.

The Father has pre-existed from Eternity, so also has the Son. Both these I
prove from express Testimonies of Scripture.

1. The Son has been Co-worker and Co-agent with his Father in the Creation of
the Worlds.

Genesis 1.26. it is said, Come let us make Ma^^ in [Our] Image. This was the very
Son of God, of which I have been speaking, that did commune here with his
Father about the Creation of Man. Again, in the first verse of that Chapter, it
is said, In the beginning the Gods (or Elo^im) created the Heavens and the
Earth; for so it stands in the Hebrew, as the learned tell. Again, John 1.3. it
is said of the Son of God, All things were made by him, and without him was not
any thing made that was made. Col. 1.16. For by him were all things created
that were in Heaven, and that are in Earth, etc. And he is before all things,
and by him all things do consist. Heb. 1.10. it is said of him, And thou, Lord,
in the beginning have laid the Foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are the
Works of thine hands.

. 7. 2. That the Son of God has pre-existed from Eternity, even that visible
Person Jesus, who in the full^ess of Time was made a Man. And this I prove from
express Scripture also.

Prove. 8 23 It is affirmed, under the Title of Wisdom, thereby shadowing out
the Son of God, I was set up from Everlasting, or ever the Earth was, etc. Job
19 25. I know th^^ my Redeemer lives, etc. Then he was in being, and
pre-existed. Psalm. 93.2. David cries out thus in Admiration of Christ and his
Kingdom, when he was deeply meditating on him, T^y Throne is established of
old, thou art from Everlasting. Isa. 9.6. the Prophet styles the Son of God,
The everlasting Father; that is, he who in time became a Father to his Church,
was a Person from everlasting. micha 5 2. there it is said, His goings forth
have been from of Old, even from the days of Eternity (as in the Margent) etc.
to wit, that blessed (...) that was brought forth by that blessed Virgin in
Bethlem, in the days of Herod the King. Rev. 1.17. he says himself, I am the
first and the last, even he that lives, and was dead, verse. 18. And that he
was visible, with respect unto his pre-existency, is evident from his outward
appearance unto Abraham, Jacob, Moses, Joshua, Isaiah, and the three Children.

. 8. Having thus fully proved the first Proposition, I shall now proceed to
answer a Qui^^ble they make in this second Point of Doctrine, concerning the
word [ Body] for so they put it down in their charge, The visible Body, instead
of visible Person.

Now I Answer; It is true, I cannot remember that ever I preached after that
manner, to use the word Body, with relation to his descending from Heaven, but
always kept to the Term Person.

But if I had used it, yet what advantage would my Adversaries have thereby?
for I may safely, truly and properly say, that that visible Body, viz. the Lord
Jesus Christ, came down from Heaven, and not thereby intend at all that Christ
brought a Body of flesh from Heaven (which indeed I never believed) for there
is a great difference betwixt saying, That visible Body came down from Heaven,
and That visible Body came down from Heaven in a Body of flesh. But if we
should understand words and phrases at this rate, we should understand the
Apostles, Paul and John, That Christ came down from Heaven a Man, because John
says, Behold a Man which comes after me, for he was before me. And Paul says,
The second Man is the Lord from Heaven. Now these Phrases must be understood in
the present Tense, and not in the Preter-perfect; that is, Christ was a Man
then, but not a Man before John, but a divine Person before John was a Man; and
so of the rest. So then when Christ, who came down from Heaven, was made a Body
of flesh, or a Man, one cou^^ properly say, That Body or Man came down from
Heaven, because then there was, nor is now no difference betwixt the Eternal
Person and the Body of Flesh; but the Body of flesh now is the Eternal Person,
because the Eternal Person was made flesh in the fullness of Time.

But what is the matter, Christ's and our Adversaries are so envious and
spightful at the body of flesh? (which was Christ) Answer; they themselves do
plainly tell their Reasons; J. Wats and W. Pens Reasons are, because in that
regard, He was an impotent, weak, and finite Creature; T. Clayton, Priest of
the Church of England; and Isaac Penningtons are, Because (as T. Clayton
affirmed before credible Evidence) That that Body of flesh would have Rotted,
if it had laid longer in the Grave, Isaac Pennington says, It was of a
perishing nature G. Eage^^fi^ld says (in effect) That that Body of flesh which
the Jews saw, was not the second Person in the Trinity. And T. Fitzwater a
Quaker said (in Effect) It was not the worlds Savior. And so their Reasons are
one and the same in the ground; the brief sum of which is to deny the Lord that
bought them, which Peter calls a damnable Heresy; and then sure such must
needs be Heretics. Hence that Prophecy comes true, concerning such (The Lord)
That fr^sterateth the tokens of the Liars, and makes Di^iners mad, and turns
wise men backwards, and makes their knowledge foolishness. Isa. 44.25. For
Although ^. Clayton did account himself a Learned, and wise man, and a Divi^e,
as others may do, yet when by their wisdom and nominal Divinity, they improve
their Craft, not only to blaspheme, but also to deny the Son of God, then God
he frusterateth their Lies, their Divinity become Demonity, and he makes them
mad (as they are a^m^, and others in this Age for opposing them) and turns
them backwards, by those they account foolish and si^ly men; as now they s^ink
and crouch in cornne^s, ^u^te^ing there, but fear to bring their Deeds to the
light to be proved by it, and answer such they account filly, in the public
view of the world. Thus God makes their knowledge foolishness and destroys
their wisdom, and brings to nothing, the understanding of these prudent ones;
and a Disputer is not ^ound am^ngst them, even amongst all their Learned o^es,
But men of such (...), even Mechanic men, not wise, noble n^r mighty men after
the flesh God c^^ls and choseth, e^e foolish things, of the world, and weak
also, ye^, such that are despised, and o^ ^o account, to the end the wise men
of the world m^^nt be co^^ou^ded (as they are at this day^ by such as they
account base things and mean, but yet God us^th them to overthrow such high
towering mortals, and their babel structure, by mortals of a b^^er Rank, and so
brings to naught their things which are, by such things as they account to be
not; and the end of all is, That no flesh should glory in his Presence.

Note Reader, It is not that Prince or Captain that stands at a d^^tance with
his Army, raving and railing at his Adversary af^r off, treating him with
approbious and despightful Language, telling him, That he has no ^kill no^
knowledge in feats of Arms and Militant Affairs, and therefore it is beneath
him, who is a great Po^entate, to engage Battle with such an insignificant
Captain that is accounted the Victor or Conq^o^er.

But he that wi^h modest approach, without much boasting and vaunting of his
Power and Strength, or lording over his Enemy by reproachful Language, engages
with his Adversary fairly in Battle, in the open field, and by his Heroical
Courage, Magnaminity and Dexterity in Military Affairs, and feats of Arms, and
skill in Warfare, does, by well managing of the Battle against his Adversary,
according to the Laws of Warfare, manifest himself to be the Victor and
Conquorer, by making his Enemies fly before him in the field. Thus, when our
Adversaries have dealt so by us, then let them make an open Acclamation of
Victory, and not till then.

But hitherto they have manifested their Inability by their Pusillam^nity and
dastarized Spirits, as well as the imbecility and weakness of their Cause, in
shunning to engage in an open Dispute, with poor, ignorant, unlearned and
Mechanic Men, (as they render us, the Smith and the Turner) even as T. C. the
Clergyman, (who did espouse J. W' s cause) as well as others have done.

CHAP. V.
Proposition II.
THat Christ, the very outward, visible and eternal Person, or Logos, and
proper Son of God, did in the fullness of time, descend from Heaven, according
to the Predictions of the Prophets, and was incarnate or made Man in the
Virgins Womb.

. 1. The mystery of Christ's Incarnation, is a tremendius and notable Wonder,
great and beyond all comparison 1 Timothy 3.16. That one of the blessed Trinity
should thus condescend, for the sake of fallen man, to be made a man, of a
Woman, Gal. 4 4. of whom he himself was the Creator, (most to be admited indeed
by all, but less possible to be expressed by any living man, far surpassing the
bounds and limmits of our shallow capacity to fa^hom thi^ Hypostatical Union,
that the Person of the Son of God, should be made the Person of the Son of Man,
and yet one and the same Person, both the Son of God, and the Son of Man, and
also without any confusion, or transmutation of his Natures, and yet so
marvellously united, that it is impossible to distinguish betwixt them*

God having created Man in the beginning upright, he did oblige him under
Obedience to his most holy Law, which Man was bound to pay as a perpetual
Tribute to his Creator, under the Penalty of suffering an infinite and
everlasting funishment. But being now by his own default b^come bank^rupt, he
is not able to discharge in the least measure, and that there is no possibility
to escape the Penalty of his Offense, unless an infinite and eternal Person
becomes Surety to God the Father for him. And that also there was no such
Person to be found, to perform this great Work of (...) Redemption, that was
proper for that Undertaking, to pay man's ^ebt to, and satisfy infinite and
offended Justice, but he alone that was Gods only Son And that also this he
co^ld not possibly do, unless he were qualified to that end; and the
Qual^fications that were requisite hereunto, were, That he should be made like
unto us in all things, sin only excepted, viz. that he must be made Man; and
that by virtue of his wonderful Death, all men might be res^o^ed to life, and
so redeem them from infinite and eternal Punishment.

Having thus fa^ dilated, by way of introduction, I shall ^ow return to my
Proposition, and I shall p^oc^ed according to the same method as I did in the
last Proposition.

The A^gument.
Major. Now that Person that the sacred Scriptures does (...) set forth unto
us, to come from Heaven ^n the f^ll^ess of time, and upon th^s (...) De^cention
to be made Man in the Womb o^ (...) Virgin, must need^ be him alo^e that did so
co^^ from Heaven, and was so made Man.

Minor. But the sacred Scriptures do clearly set forth unto us, That Christ the
very outward and visible eternal Person, or Logos, and proper Son of God, did
so descend from Heaven in the fullness of time, and upon thi^ his descention
was made man in the womb of a Virgin.

Conclusion. Therefore that outward and visible eternal Person, or Logos, and
proper Son of God, did descend from Heaven in the fullness of time, and was
made Man in the Womb of a Virgin.

As in the first Proposition, so in this, the major Proposition is grounded on
the Authority of sacred Scripture, which none dares to question The minor
Proposition is that which does remain to be proved, which by Gods assistance I
will prove from the Scriptures also. And it branches it self into two Branches.
1 st, the Descention of Christ, 2 ly, the Incarnation of Christ.

. 2. Branch 1 st. The descention of Christ I prove from express Testimony of
Sc^ipture, and the first that I shall begin with, shall be that Notable p^ace
upon which my Antagonist J.W. with his Followers have began their Quarrel, John
6 38 There Chr^^^, the very outward, visible and et^rnal Person, and proper Son
of God, does ^ffirm expres^^, concerning himself, saying, I came down from
Heaven, and^. Here Christ himself does positively affirm th^s to be a truth,
respecting himself. Who then da^es question i^? Here it seems he cuts o^^ all
Objections, directly pointing o^t himself, by the Pronoun primitive [ I]
saying, I came down; as much as if he had said, I mean no other but my self,
whom you see and do behold, who am talking with you, as to him that was born
blind he does declare, John 9.37.

. 3. Object. But my Adversaries may object, This Text must not be understood so
literally, as thereby to conclude he meant his outward Person.

Answ. If it must not be understood literally, then it must be understood
allegorically; but seeing there is no cogent Reason that urges us to
understand it allegorically, we must therefore understand it litt^rally,
according to this School Maxim, All Scripture must be taken in a litteral
sense, when there is no cogent Reason that urges to the contrary. And again,
if we should allow it to be understood allegorically, yet that will make no
advantage for my Adversaries* to prove the contrary to what I do affirm,
according to this Maxim, Sensus allego^icus non est argum^ntivus, i. e. The
Allegorical Sense prove nothing.

But again, if in an allegorical Sense, what must this Allegory be? Now when we
say, b^ a Metaphor or Allegory, That the King is the head of the Common Wealth,
although we do not intend thereby that the King is the head of a Man from
whence this Metaphor is borrowed) yet he is the Body of the ^ommon Wealth, as
the Head is the chief Member in the Body of a Man. But here can be no such
Metaphor or Allegory, because here is no such Reason to be found, which answers
by way of proportion, to a litteral sense.

But if Christ meant no^ his outward Person, he had not spoke to the capacity
^f his hearers; but here christ speaks to the Capacity of his hearers. Ergo,

And again, if he meant not his outward Person, yet my Adversaries ^are not
deny but that he meant a Person. And then it must be ^n inward Person which
speaks in this outward Person, and this would imply, 1 st. That Christ did
possess that outward Person as sometimes infernal Spirits possess the Persons
of other men and speak in them as though it were the ou^ward Person, although it
be not really so, but a cheat of the Devil. But so to conceive of Christ would
be blasphemous, abominable and Wicked. And, 2 dly, It would (...) two Persons,
one outward, and another inward, which would infer two Christ's. And this would
be a ^ro^i^ious absur^i^y. And again, if it were so, this ^nward Person must be
that which they (...). But as to that the^ themselves do (...) h^ld for a
Principle, That it is every where present alike, (and then as much without as
with^n) and can neither ascend nor descend; but ^f they take it to be
under^^ood of his Manhood (as they distinguish) then this overthrows their
Objection, because that they wi^^ allow to be outward. But again, it would
follow if his Ma^hood did descend, then he was not Man in (...) Virgins Womb,
but that he was a Man (...), and did so come from Heaven, and consequently it
was not the Son of God; none of which they will allow, but they look upon these
to be erroneous, which indeed they are.

Having thus sh^wn the Absu^dities that do follow at the Tail of this their
Opinion, That the outward Person did not descend, as well as shew^ that i
cann^t possibly be understood (...), I will sum up the Truth in this (...).

Christ being an outward Pers^n from Eternity, his being made Man altered him
nothing in respect of his outwardness and (...), but these Properties he
retained in ^he same manner as he did before, only the Condition of these
Properties were somewhat changed, in respect of his Humiliation and
Incarnation, having left his Glory behind him in Heaven. And his Incarnation
added unto him another Property and Quality which he had not before* and yet he
still retained all those Properties and Qualities which he had before, without
any change or (...) ^^mutation, excepting in the Cond^^^^n) but this made him
neither more nor less outward and visi^le than he was before. So then, when he
says, I came down from Heaven, he means, his outward Person did as properly
and as litte^ly descend, by a local mutation of his Princely Residence, as when
a man being on the top of some stupendous and famous Fabric, he must descend
to come down or go to the Earth; so properly did the outward Person of Christ
descend; and yet from thence it will not follow, that his humane Nature did
descend, which he had not ti^^ after his Desce^tion from Heaven; for his humane
Nature added nothing to him, which made him either more or less visib^e and
outward, but a Nature o^ Quality to his outward Person, which his outward
Person had not before, as before^ signified. And hence it is that he preaches
^^mself, viz. that outward Person, to be the living ^^ead which came down from
Heaven, John 3.51. And verse. 32. Moses gave you not that Bread from Heaven, but
my Father gives you the true Bread from Heaven, viz. God sent his Son to be
the Redeemer of the World, that whosoever believes on him should not perish,
but have everlasting ^ife. V. 33 For the Bread of God is [He] which comes down
from Heaven, and gives Life unto the World. Note the Pronou^ [He] He is the
Bread of Life, to wit, his vi^^ble Person, as he confirms it further, verse 35,
and 48. sayi^g* I am the Bread of Life. And in verse 50. he says, pointing to
himself, T^is is the Bread which came down from Heaven, and he repeats it again
in verse. 58. that he might print it upon their M^mories, even this weighty
Truth. And then again, he expounds ^u^ther, v 50. what he means by the Bread,
that they might not mistake him, saying, And the Bread that I will give you is
my flesh, (...) I will giv^ (...) the (...) of the World, m^aning, he would
offer up his own Person a Ransom upon the C^oss, even unto Death, that he
thereby might procure to all men Life, that would thus truly believe in his
Death.

Object. But seeing he says, His f^^sh is the Bread, and the Bread came down
from Heaven, this does seem to infer as though he broug^ flesh from Heaven.

Answ. This is a great Mistake, for he might bring that substance from Heaven,
which is the Bread, viz. his own eternal Person, and yet that Bread or
Substance was not flesh, when it did so come from Heaven, but Christ the Son of
God, o^ heavenly Bread, he came ^own from heaven, and then he was made flesh,
and then it was proper to say The flesh was the Bread which came from heaven,
because his eternal Person was the Br^^d, which coming from Heaven, was made
flesh, and hereupon the Bread became Flesh. Neither does it infer any more that
he brought flesh from Heaven, than the words of the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 15.47.
does (...) for he came a Man from Heaven, where he does further confirm my
Propo^^^^on sayi^g, in these words, (pointing to his outward Person) The second
Man is the Lo^d from Heaven, meaning Jesus Christ, Gods proper and eternal Son,
who the^^ was truly made a Man. And further, the same Apostle argues, Ephesians.
4. 9, 10. Now that (...) says he) what is it but that (...) first into the
lower parts of the Earth? He that d^scended is the same also that ascended up
^ar above all Heavens, that he might (...) all things. Note, with what
carefulness the Apostle sets ^t down, lest the Ephesians should mistake him; he
presses it with great earnestness, doubling, as it were, his Speech over
ag^^^, saying, The same that descended, was the same also that ascended; and he
that ascended, did first descend, or come down from Heaven.

. 4^ Our Savior asserting his Prerogative above all other men to Nicodemus,
that be alone could ascend by his boundless and unlimitted knowledge, even into
Heaven, and by virtue thereof could search all the parts of the same, and could
behold and see all those wondrous Works and stupendous Actions wrought and
do^e amongst the celestial Hosts and Q^i^es of Angels; therefore he intimates
to Nicodemus, That that was a small thing he had told him of the necessity of
man's being born again, seeing it was but an earthly thing, and yet he could not
believe; from whence Christ queries with him, if he could not believe when he
had told him earthly things, how then could he believe if he should tell him
that things were wrought and done amongst ^e Angels in Heaven, even at that
instant which he right well knew) therefore he says, (...) 3.13. No man
ascends up to Heaven but (...) that came down from Heaven, even the Son of
Man which is in Heaven. As much as if he (...) said, I the Son of Man who came
down from Heaven, have only this Prerogative ^bove all other men, to speculate
and search ^he ^eights and depths of Celestial Actions, which at this present
I do behold and see as perfectly as though I were personally in Heaven

Having now done with the first Branch concerning his Descention, I now shall
(God willing proceed to the second Branch concer^ing his Incarnation.

Branch 2d concerning Christ's Incarnation.

. 1. It is matter of Admiration to me that men, especially that do pretend to
make the holy Scripture their Rul^, should never the less condemn such plain
Truths (as well as fundamental ones) for H^^^sies. But to proceed to my Proofs,
That the ^^tward and visible Person, or eternal Son of God, was made Man of a
Woman in the fullness of Time.

This was not only pre^^^ted by the Prophets, but also pro^^sed by God
immediately after the fall, saying, Genesis 3.15. to the Serpe^^, I will p^t
Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy seed and ^er (...) shall
braise thy head, and th^^ sh^lt braise ^is ^eel. The meaning whereof is this;
which is delivered to us by the Apostle in two of his Epistles, Gal 4.45. When
the fullness of time was come God sent forth his Son, made, of a Woman, made
under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law, etc. Heb 2.14. That
through death he might destroy him that both the Power of death, that is, the
Devil* etc. The Prophet Jeremiah, chap. 31.22. pointing Directly to Christ's
Incarnation, says, prophetically, The Lord has created a new thing in ^he
Earth a Woman shall compass a man, He says, The Lord Has, as though it were
then done, to denote the certainty of its doing. And so the Lord (as the
Apostle says calls things which are not, as though they were. The Prophet
Isaiah ^oretells of his miraculous birth, of his being born of a Virgin, and
what he was. Isa. 7.14. with a note of attention, Behold, a virgin shall be
with Child, and shall bring forth a Son, and they shall call his name Emanuel,
which being interpreted is God with us, says Matthew chap. 1.23. And when he
was born in Bethlehem of his Mother, the virgin Mary, as was proph^^^ed of also
by Micha, chap. 5.2. Even the very Place where he was to be (...) and also the
Authority and Rule he was to bear, and be exactly accomplished, according to
these predictions of the prophets, the Evangelist Matthew declares, That (...)
this was done that their Prophe^ies might be fullfilled, Mat 1 22.

. 2. Now I shall proceed to more express Testimonies of the New Testament, that
do emphatically prove this Truth, That the Eternal Logos or Son of God, was
made Flesh in the fullness of time. John in the beginning of his Gospel, does
declare, That the Word was in the beginning, that is, the Eternal Son of God,
and he was God, and with God his Father. And in v. 14. of this first Chapter he
expressly says, And the Word was made flesh and dwelt amongst us, and we saw his
Glory as the Glory of the only begotten Son of God, etc. This is so express,
that it were enough, if I had no more proofs to prove it. But I have more The
Apostle Paul, Romans 1.^. says, That he was made of the seed of David according
to the Flesh, viz. He was not Flesh until he was made of David's seed, which
after (...) was, being made ^^esh thereof viz. Of (...) Virgin Mary that did
belong to that (...) to wit, of Judah. Again, Gal. 4.4. When (...) fullness of
time was come, God sent forth his (...) made of a Woman, etc. Note, it was Go^
Son which was sent forth, to wit, from He^^^en, That was made of a Woman. Heb
2.1^ As Children are made partakers o^ flesh and Blood so also Himself took
part, of the same. (...) serves for an explanation of all the forme^ Citations,
which shows how, and after wha^ manner he was made flesh, not by an absolut^
Tra^smutation of his former Nature into flesh with the Addition of human^
Nature, an^ so not to retain his form Nature. Lots (...) was absolutely
changed from a Body of fl^s^ into a Pillar of Salt, and so retained nothin^ of
the nature of flesh But so it was no^ with Christ when he was made flesh; For
he assumed our nature in the Virgins Womb and yet truly retained his Eternal
Nature which was Divine, without an^ confusion ch^^ge or transmutation, and
also, a rea^ and proper Incarnation, by the assumptio^ of humane Nature to his
Person, in such wise that there were two whole and entire Natures united
together in Christ Jesus, yet they made but one whol^ and entire and perfect
Person, for although he rem^ined to be what he was; yet he was made to be what
he was not. So then as Children are truly made by the participiation of the
flesh and Blood of their Parents, to wit, of Father and Mother, so also it was
requisite that Christ should participate of the Nature of Man, so that his
Nature might be both Divine and Humane, by which means he might be made of it,
Mediator to dye for man. For Christ did not take the single Person of any one,
into Personal Union with himself, but the common Nature of all men; For if so,
then that one Person only would have been exalted and saved, and also there
would have been two Christ's. So then Gods eternal Sort was truly made a Man of
a Wom^n, and then that Man was truly Gods eternal Son. Hence I shall conclude
my Proof for this Branch of Christ's Incarnation, in that astonishing Speech of
the Apostle, when he had been contempl^ting on i^, being ravished with Wonder
and Admiration at the tho^ghts of it, cries out, Without Controversy ^aith he
great is the Mys^^y of Godliness, God ^as (...) flesh, etc. 1 Timothy 3.10. (...)
proved the (...) my Argument, the Conclusion does (...), follow.

Conclusion. Therefore that outward visible and eternal Person or Logos, and
proper Son of God, did descend from Heaven (...) of time, and was made in the
W^mb of a Virgin.

3 Object. 1. My Antagonists do obj^ct against this Doctrine, That Christ was
^ot made flesh properly, but only in that sense the Apostle says he was made
sin.

Answ. I say, he was made flesh properly, and was flesh as truly as Children
are; for so John says expressly, as well as properly, The Word was made flesh.
Now if he was no otherwise made flesh th^n he was made sin, then it (...), that
because he still retain^ the nature of flesh, he therefore still retain^ (in
th^^ sense) the nature of sin. But this is absurd.

. 4. Object. 2. But by this you seem to hold, that the Word was turned into
flesh.

Answ Although (as I said before) the Word remained to be what it was, yet it
was made to be what it was not But if it be lawful to infer from these
expressions, The Word wa^ made flesh, ^ when ^or another use them) the (...)
Word was cur^^d into flesh; then it is ^ lawful to infer it from the Apostle
John, or rather more lawful, because I make him my President in this thing. But
if by turned, they understand it in such a se^ce, that the Word, viz. Gods
eternal Son) by virtue thereof did really, trully and prope^^, become Flesh, in
such wise that notwithstanding the Word still retained the property and
substance of its former Nature, which was truly divine and eternal, although
that very divine and eternal nature and substance, was truly made humane by
assumption of humane Nature into the nature divine, so (...) the eternal Person
became a humane one, and that he was a humane Person in the very same
consideration that he was a divine on^, and a Divine Person in the same
Consideration he was a Humane one, without any idle and vain Philosophical
dist^^ction between the Natures, I g^ant it; but not so turned as Lots Wife was
turned into a Pi^^ar of Salt, who wholly lost the substance of ^lesh; (...) as
our Savior turned Water into Wine, wh^^eof Water became Wine, without the
additi^n of the substance of (...), the substanc^ or Nature of Water was wholly
l^st, and it became the substance of Wine by virtue of the Miracle. But after
neither of these ways was the Word turned into ^l^sh.

But if our Savior, (who could have so done, if he had pleased) had added the
substance of Wine unto the substance of Water, and by virtue of a perfect Union
of these two substances, had made one perfect substance, retaining two perfect
Natures in one and the same perfect Substance, consisting both of Wine and
Water, in such sort that one could have truly and properly said, the Wine was
truly Water, and the Water truly Wine, both in color and relish, and both of
them made but one perfect and entire substance. This would have given u^ light
into this Mystry, how two perfect and entire Natures make but one perfect and
entire Person. But further, seeing the Apostle says, That Christ did partake
of the substance of Father and Mother, (...) Children do of their Parents; Now
then, seeing it is impossible to discern or dis^^nguish in a Child the
substance of Father and Mother distinct or abstract, but that it is accounted
(...) Child of such honest Parents to whom it does belong, consisting of the
substance both of ^ather and Mother, conjunct or concreet. So likewise must we
conceive of Christ, that he is not a complete or perfect Savior in the
abs^^^ct, but in the concreet, viz. the Natures consubstantiated, but not
transubstantiated, ^wo Natures being made one Su^stance, with^^t any change in
either of the Natures into ^^other Substance.

. 5. Object. 3. But this seems to be im^^ssible, and against Reason, that two
perfect Sub^^ances should be so united into one substance, that reason of this
Union they two are become one (...) Substance, and yet the perfect Nature and
(...) of each Substance is perfectly retained in (...) perfect Union of the
two, each Nature equally ^^tributing in the Union, to the perfection of (...),
and yet no confusion in the Natures.

Answ. That thing which is impossible with (...), is notwithstanding possible
with God; (...) hence the Incarnation of Christ is the (...) of Men and Angels,
and past all com^^^ison* And again, although it be no^ against (...), yet it is
above Reason, according to (...) Maxim, The great Principles o^ our (...)
Faith, although not contrary unto, yet they (...) above Reason, as in the case
of the Resur^^^^ion.

CHAP. VI.
Proposition III.
THat Christ the eternal Logos, or proper (...) of God, after his Incarnation,
conj^nctive^ in both Natures, in an inseparable Union, as was the Son of God
and the Son of Man, (...) God incarnate, the second Person in the Trinity did
pay the Ransom of our Sins, by bu^bling hi^ self unto the Death, even the Death
of (...) Cross.

. 1. The Argument.
Major. That Person which the (...) Scriptures set forth unto us clearly and
plain^^ to be the Person, who by dying on the (...) for man's sins, did pay the
Ransom of the (...) to God, ever the Father, must needs be hi^ and none else.

Minor. But the s^cred Scriptures set for unto us, the Person of the Son of
God, t^ God and ^erfect Man, the second Person (...) the Trinity, to be the
Person that by (...) on the (...), did pay the Ransom of (...) Sins to God,
even the Father.

Conclusion. Therefore ^e that dyed upon ^he Cross, being true God and perfect
M^n, lying as truly God as Man was the Person that paid the Ransom of ou^ sins
to God, ^ven ^is Father, and none else.

As in the former Arguments, so in this, the ^^jor Proposition is g^ounded on
the Autho^^ty of Gods Word, and the Assumption is to (...) proved from the
same. And then the Con^^^sion naturally follows.

Where let the Reader Note, That I have (...) need to prove that the Person
that dyed (...) the Cross was Man, because this is granted (...) my
Antagonists. But that part of my As^^mption which is denied by them, is, That
(...) that Man dyed, God truly dyed, because ^^at Man was true God, which I
have to love; which when I have done, then it will ^llow, that the eternal Word
and second ^^rson in the Trinity, and Gods proper Son, (...).

First, I prove, Tha^ that Man that dyed upon (...) Cross, was God. 1 st, From
express Testi^^nies of Scripture. 2 dly, From acts of ^orship done to him. 3
dly, From the Mi^^cles that he wrought

. 2. 1 st, From express Testimonies of ^^ripture.

Mat. 1.23 And they shall call his Name Im^manuel, which being interpreted is,
God with us and this was the Virgins Son. Mat 4 ^ Jesus says unto him, (to
wit) the Devil, is written again, Thou shall not tempt the Lo^^ thy God; This
was that Man Jesus, who^^ he ought not to tempt, but to worshi^ V. 10. Then
says Jesus unto him, Get (...) hence Satan, for it is written, Thou shall
worsh^^ the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serv^ John 20.28. Thou as
says unto him, to (...) unto the Man Jesus, My Lord and my Go^ Rom 9.5. he is
said to be God over all. He^ 1.8. The Father says unto the Son, (...) throne,
O God, is forever and ever, etc. Ther^^fore has God, even thy God, anointed
thee wi^^ the Oil of Gladness above thy fellows. Here (...) God, to wit, the
Father, anoints another to wit, the Son. 1 Timothy 2.3. he is stile^ God our
Savior. And so, 1 Timothy 4.10. he entitul^d, The living God, the Savior of Men.
Tit 1.3. there again he is called, God our Savior. 1 Timothy 3.16. he is said to
(...) God manifest in the flesh. 1 John 5.20. he said to be the True God. Jude
25 The (...) wise God our Savior. And all this is spok^ of the Mediator, whom
the Apostle style The Man Christ Jesus. ^ Tim. 2.5. Acts ^ 31 That Man, the
Lord of Glory. 1 Cor. 2 8. Prince of Life. Acts 3.15. who was crucified and
killed. Isaiah prophesied of this child, and told, his Name should be called,
The Mighty God, Isa. 9 6. The Angel testifies, That he is Christ the Lord, Luke
1.43. Mary his Mother calls him God her Savior, Luke 1.47. Therefore her Soul
did magnify him the Lord, and her Spirit did rejoice in him. Again, he is said
to be God our Savior, 1 Timothy 1.1. Tit. 2.13 he is styled The great God. Rev.
1.8. he is called, The Almighty. Whence the great Apostle and Evangelist John,
in the beginning of his Gospel, as an Antidote to expel the Poison of Ebbians
Heresy, does affirm, That he was in the beginning with God (his Father) and
was God, John 1.1. Wherefore the great Apostle of the Gentiles does d^aw the
Conclusion for me, in two particular places, That he that shed his Blood for
the the sins of the World, was God, yea, as God he did so shed his Blood, Acts
20.28. 2 dly, That he that laid down his Life was God, and therefore he laid it
down as God, as well as Man, 1 John 3.16. Hereby perceive we the Love of God,
because he laid down his Life for us.

. 3. 2 die, From acts of Worship given to this Man, This Man is proved to be God.

Now worship is due to none, but to him that is truly G^d.

But Worship is not only due, but has been duly given unto this Man, Jesus
that dyed upon the Cross.

Therefore, that Man that dyed upon the Cross was truly God.

The Assumption I prove.

1. The Kings of the East worship him, lying in the Manger, Mat 2.11.

2. The Leper worshipped him, Mat. 8.2.

3. The Ship men worshipped him, Mat. 14.33.

4* The Woman of Canaan worshipped him, Mat. 15.25.

5. Mary Magdalen worshipped him, and the other Mary, Mat. 28.9.

6. The man in whom the unclean Spirit was, worshipped him, Mark 5.6.

7. His Disciples worshipped him, Luke 24.51.

8 The M^n that was born blind worshipped him, John 9 38.

9* Angels worship him, Heb* 1.6.

10 The four Beasts and four and Twenty Elders before the Throne, fall down
before the (...), and worship him, Rev. 5.8.

. 4. 3 dly, From the Works and Miracles that he wrought, this Man is proved to
be God.

1. This Man he commands the Winds and the Seas to be still, and they obey him,
Mat 8.26.

2. The Devils come out of the possessed at his Word, Mat. 8.3. Mark 9.25*

3. He gives sight to the blind, John 9.7. even to him that was so born.

4. He makes the La^^ to walk, Mat. 15.39. chap. 11.5.

5. He makes the Deaf to hear, Mark 7.35. Luke 7.22.

6. He makes the Dumb to speak, Mat. 15.30.

7. He cleanses the Lepers, Mat. 8.2.

8. He raises the Dead, John 11.44.

9 He heals the sick, Mat. 4.23. chapter 8.16.

10. He turns Water into Wine, John 2.9.

11. He feeds five Thousand with five Barley Loaves, and two small Fishes,
Joh. 6 9. and twelve Baskets full o^ Fragments to spare, v. 13.

12. He gives Power by his Word to the Man that had an Infirmity 38 ^^ars,
instantly to walk and carry his Bed, Joh. 5.9. And all this by the Power of his
Word, without any external Medicine.

Th^se Tremendious, Miraculous and Amazing Wonders wrought and done by him
alone, and never by no man else, do certainly prove this Man to be God.

Next, I shall lay down some Arguments in further Confirmation of this Truth.

A^gument 1. He that is the proper Son of God, is as truly God, even as his
Father.

But this outward Person that dyed upon the Cross, was and is Gods proper Son,
as I have already proved.

Therefore he was, when he did so dye, and is still as truly God as his Father.

Argu. 2. He that has pre-existed from Eternity is truly God.

But that outward Person that dyed upon the Cross, has pre-existed from
Eternity, Ergo.

Argu. 3. He that has been Creator of the Worlds, is God.

But this outward Person that dyed upon the Cross, has been Co-agent with his
Father in the Creation of the Worlds, as I have proved. Ergo.

Argu. 4. He that is the first and the last, is God.

But that Person that hung dead upon the Cross, was the first and the last.

Therefore that Person that hung dead upon the Cross, was God.

The Assumption, prove from Rev. 1.17, 18. the words of Christ to John, Fear
not, I am the first and the last; I am ^e that lives, and was dead.

Argu. 5. He that has all Power in Heaven and Earth, is God.

But this Man that dyed upon the Cross, has all Power in Heaven and in Earth.
Ergo

The Assumption I prove from Mat. 28.18. from the words of Christ himself; he
says unto his Disciples, All Power in Heaven and in Earth is given unto me,
etc.

Argu. 6. He that knows the Thoughts of Men, is surely God.

But this Man that dyed upon the Cross, knew the thoughts of Men. Ergo.

The Assumption I prove from John 2.25. it is said, He knew what was in Man,
etc.

A^gu* 7. Christ is God, as has been already proved, and is granted by our
Adversaries.

But Christ suffered, Luke 24.26, 46. Acts 17.3 1 Pet. 2.21. cap. 3.18. cap.
4.1. and dyed, Romans 5.6.8. cap. 8.34. cap. 14.9.15. 1 Cor. 15.3.

Therefore God suffered and dyed, to wit, God the Son.

Argu. 8. He that is God the Father's equal and fellow, is God.

But thi^ Man Jesus which h^ng upon the Cross, was, and is God the Fathers
equal, Phil. 2.6. and fellow, Z^ch. 13.7.

Therefore that M^n that hung dead upon the Cross, was God.

Object. But how could that Man be God the Fathers equal, seeing he says
himself, That his Father was greater than he? Joh. 14.28.

Answ. He was equal to his Father in respect of Honor and Wor^hip, as well as
of Nature, therefore he says, I and my Father are one, John 10.30. to wit, one
in nature and kind of being, (though two distinct Persons, John 8.17, 18.) That
all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father, John 5.23 but in
subjection to his Father, in respect of his Office or Mission, therefore he
says, he came not of himself, but his Father sent him, Joh 8 42.

Having thus far proved my Proposition, That he that dyed upon the Cross, was
properly and truly God, as well as Man, even the Son of God and the Son of Man;
it follows, that the Eternal Logos and second Person in the Trinity dyed upon
the Cross, who was the Son of God and the Son of Man, even the self same He,
(...)' set forth unto us under diverse Titles.

CHAP. VII. Containing twelve Objections that are brought against the former
Doctrine of Christ's dying, as he was God, as truly as Man. With the Answers to
each.
BUt against this Doctrine, That the Death of Christ did as truly relate to his
divine as Humane Nature, there are diverse Objections brought.

Object. 1. By W. P and J. W. That Sufferings are acts of Impotency and
Weakness, therefore none but impotent, weak and finite Creatures can suffer.

Answ. This Objection is not only false in it self, but also highly blasphemous
and injurious to Christ Jesus, rendering him an impotent, weak and fini^e
Creature, who is an Omnipotent and ^nfinite Creator*

1 st. I will prove the Objection is false in it self, and grounded upon a
gross Mistake; and prove the contrary by Scripture.

Though some sufferings are acts of Impotency and Weakness, yet all Sufferings
are not such; for (not to go so far back as to the Apostolical Ages, and
sufferings of the primitive Church) never no man of Reason and Judgment,
accounted that the Martyrs in Qu. Marys days suffered through impotency and
weakness, but on the contrary* that which carried them through their
Sufferings, was Power and Strength. But much more was Christ Potent and strong
in the very midst of his Sufferings, and also in his Death; for through Death
he overcame and got the Victory, Heb. 2.14. Therefore the Psalmist
Prophetically tells, That God, to wit, the Father, laid help upon one that was
and is Mighty, to wit, upon his Son, Psalm. 89.19. and therefore the Prophet
calls him, The Mighty God, Isa. 9.6. And David further declares of him, That he
is the Lord strong and mighty in Battle, Psalm. 24.10. And hence it is that when
the Earth and the Inhabitants thereof were dissolved, he bore up the Pillars of
it, even by his Death, Psalm. 75.3. And hence the Apostle tells, That God the
Father up^eld the Worlds by the Word of his Power, meaning his Son: wherefore
Christ testifies, That all Power in Heaven and in Earth was given to him, Mat.
28.18.

Whence it is, that the Prophet Isaiah, prophesying of his bitter sufferings,
puts the Query, Who is this that comes from Edom (which signifies Red) with
dyed Garments from ^ozrah? This that is glorious in his Apparel, traveling in
the greatness of his strength? The Answer is turned by the Lord himself; I that
speak in Righteousness, mighty to save, to wit, he that trod the Wine press
alone, which was the only begotten Son of God, Isa. 63.1, 2, ^.

2 dly, But J. W. basely abuses and perverts the words of the Apostle. 2 Cor.
13.4. to prove this his blasphemous Doctrine. He was ^rucified through weakness.

Answer, This is not the intent of Apostle as J. W. would have it) that Christ
was ^eak in himself, no more then he says elsewhere, 1 Cor. 1.25. The weakness
of God is ^^ronger then men, he intends not to prove ^hereby that God was weak,
but only thereby (...) signify, that that which did appear weak and base, in
the eyes of base and carnel men, (...) it was not so in the sight of God; so
(...) death of Christ appeared, (and does so (...)) base and weak in the Eyes
of base and ^eak men, but glori^us and powerful in the (...) of God and his
Saints.

But if our Antagonist J. W. should make so bold with our Earthly Prince as he
does with the Prince of Life, he would hardly escape the Penalty of that
offense; For what can be a greater Indignity to a Prince and Potentate, then to
render him impotent (especially when he is not so) Then much more is it a high
Disdain, a great Indignity, a foul Blasphemy, a black Approbriety, as well as a
Scurrility, to fix such an Epithete upon the Wonderful Potentate of Heaven and
Earth, Christ Jesus. Again, if Christ's Death and Sufferings were finite, then
that which was purchased by the same (which was our Salvation) was finite also;
for a finite Cause can never produce an infinite Effect But now our Salvation,
which was purchased by Christ's Death, is infinite and eternal, Rom 6.23.
therefore his Death and Sufferings were so also, virtuously and meritoriously,
viz an infinite and et^rnal Person did pu^chase, by a temporal Death, an
infinite and eternal Life and Salvation to Mankind For the Justice offended
being infinite, the satisfaction must bear a Proportion therewith, which the
Man Christ Jesus surely paid, he being infinite, a^ before.

Object. 2 By J. Wats. Though he which laid ^own ^is Life for (...) was God,
yet he did not lay down his Life as God

Answ. Grant to an Atheist liberty to ^^igne according to this Rule, and he
will easily pro^e by Scripture, that there is no (...) D^^il, no Heaven, no
Hell, no (...) Joy or Torment, etc ^or (...) is said, There is one God,
according to J. W. he is not so as God. God ^^^ated the Heavens and the Earth,
but according to this Rule) he did not do it as God Christ dyed, but according
to this Rule, he did not dye as Christ. But enough of these gross Absurditie^;
this is the ready way to introduce Atheism.

Object 3* But when a Man dies, his Soul does not dye with his Body, but
surviveth it: so when Christ dyed, his flesh s^ffe^ed and dyed, which wa^ his
humane Nature, but as to his Godhead or Divine Nature, it was in Paradise that
day with the Thief, when his Body hung dead on the Cross; for as Soul and Body
is one Man, so God and Man is one Christ.

Answ. As to the first part of the Objection* (...) Soul of our Sa^iour did
survive his (...) with the Soul of the (...) hung on the Cross (...) of (...)
O^j^ction, (...) Nature, it was (...) Body hung dead on the Cross (...) Opinion
does not (...) to be the very ^^me with the (...) who said, That Christ (...)
So^l, but his (...) Nature (...). But to answer (...) directly* As to the
little Godhead, we find it not d^sti^c^ly (...) the Pa^^ion of Christ, either
be^^re (...); but a^ to Christ^ Godhead or H^^d, (...) himself ^n any sense
with respect to his ^ivine or human Na^ur^, neither distinctly no^ (...), but
his Father; therefore the Apos^^^ (...), 2 Cor. 11.3. The Head of Christ as
God; and God the Father to be sure, (...) in Heaven, as we (...) before and
(...). But the^, if (...) Person of the Son of God (...) ^^^rnity; I say then
we can no more say to speak properly) that the Person of the Son of God, which
was from Eternity, was in Paradi^e any more than he was on the Cross, and (...)
in the G^ave; for although it was his Body of flesh only that hung on the Cross
after he had given up the Ghost) and laid in the Gra^^; ^et this Body was not a
mere humane Body, but was as truly divine as it was humane. Hence it is that
hi^ divine nature lay in the Grave An although it was his divine Nature which
was in Paradise that day with the Soul of the Thief, yet that divine Nature was
his humane Soul, as truly as his humane Body was divine in the Grave; for
Christ's Body and Soul is and was both divine and humane, which were the
consistent parts of the Person of our Mediator. So then it hinders nothing,
because the Soul of our Mediator was in Paradise that (...) (which was (...)
truly divine as h^mane but that his Body of flesh, which hu^g on the Cross, and
after was laid in the Grave, (...) divine also. For (...) have humane Soul does
properly belong (...); so in like mann^^, (...) being as truly divine (...)
must be so also* ^or such a^ the Soul i^, (...) the Body.

But that only ^he flesh of our Lord suffered, is (...) upon a great Mistake;
and this is evident (...), when the Soul has le^^ the (...) the ^ody (...)
when the Soul is departed. (...) our cries out, My Soul is exceedi^^ (...) unto
Death, Mat. 26.38. and therefore the Prophet (...), His Soul (...)* Christ's was
made an Off^^^ng for Sin, Isa. 53.10. meaning, hi^ Soul, as well as (...) our
sin^.

Nex^ (...) the l^st part of the Objection, As Soul (...) ^ody (...) one Man*
so God and Man is one Christ* So then, according to this (...) ^^militude,
seeing the Body of a M^n is incapable of suffering o^ feeling pain, when the
Soul is depa^^ed, as was before she^n, so also the Mank^^d of Christ had been
inca^able ^f suffering o^ feeling pain, if the (...) had depart^^ ^^om it.

But ob^^erve, the Union between Body and Soul, (...) the Mystery ^e^wix^ the
Divine and Humane Natures in christ, neither (...) like unto it, but darkens
it, and makes it more obscure than it is in it self; for this Union (...) by
reason of that Union, the huma^^ Soul does not become the humane Body, no^ the
human ^ody does not become the humane Soul.

Object. 4. But Christ says, He had ^ower (...) lay (...) his Life, and he had
power to take (...) again, John ^0.18. And that Peter says, He was put to
death in the flesh, but quickened by ^he Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.^8. By these w^
understand his divine Nature, which did not dye, raised his humane Nature,
which did dye.

I Answer briefly, In that he raised himself, and was quickened by the Spirit,
it relates to ^he Power and Efficacy of his Immortal and Mediatory Soul,
together w^^h the concurring and joynt-working of his Father therewith, (...)
raising up his (...) ^ody from the dead* but this proves not that (...) Soul,
which wa^ immortal, and quickened h^s ^ody, was any (...) divine, than the Body
or Flesh (...) was.

Object. 5. God is Unchangeable, and there^fore (...) cannot ^y^.

Answ. As to God the Father this is true, but as to God the Son, it is false;
for God the Son dyed, as I have before proved.

Object. 6. It was Christ's flesh, or the (...) that suffered, Heb. 10.20.

Answ That Christ's flesh suffered, I grant* In the sense that I have before
shown. Bu^ that his flesh is a Vail, I deny, neither is i^ an^ where so called
in the Scripture; for where the Apostle says, By a n^w and living way* which
he has consecrated f^r us through the Vailpunc; viz ^is Flesh, he does not
mean that his flesh i^ the Vail, but his flesh, or himself, (...) made the way
for us through the V^il* to (...) the visible Heavens, as the same Apostle else
where clear it, Heb. 6.1^, ^^. which Hope we have (...) Author of the Soul,
^oth (...) within the Vail, (...) the ^ore-runner (...) High Pr^^st (...), etc.
H^^e Jesus d^d (...) himself, but through the Vail (...) Heaven^, according as
it was (...) forth under the L^^, by ^he high Pri^st entering i^ thro^g^ the
Vail that hung b^tween the Temple and the ^ol^ place (on which was depainte^
all the Images of the Coe^estial (...) which signifi^d the partition ^etwixt
Heaven and Earth* into the Holy of H^^ies, once every year This signifying,
that the everla^ting High Priest should (...) in once through the whole
Heavens, into H^aven it self for all. Therefore if we read the words of the
Apostle thus, we shall have his meaning. Heb 10 20. He (that is to say^ his
flesh has consecrated for (...) a new and living way, through the Vail, viz.
the visible Heavens.

Object 7 The P^operties of the M^nkind (...) agree with the Properties of the
Godhead.

Answ. To this Objection I shall lay down Sam Clark's answer verbatim, (...)
Divinity, p. 267 By reason (...) of the (...) of this Person (...) Union,
whatsoever may be verified of either of those Natu^es, the same may be truly
spoken of the who^e Person, from whethersoever of the Natures ^t be
denominated* Then Observe, no disagreement in the Properties.

O^j^ct. 8. But t^is Doctrine of Christ's dying as (...), does necessarily
conclude two Gods, because you say, that God the Father was in Heaven when Go^
the Son dyed; and this seem^ to be contra^y to Scripture, which (...) there is
(...) O^^ Go^, Isa. 44 6, 8. chap. 45 5, 18, 21. Mark 12.32. 1 Cor. 8.4.

Answ Its true, this Doctrine of two Gods is not only carped at, but denied
almost by all, albeit all, almost, bu^ Quakers, confess in words, there are
three Persons, which are each of them a God, but yet they believe it not. But
as for the Quakers, because they do not ow^ that he that is God can be a
Person, they therefore think it unreasonable to believe that Jesus of Nazareth,
the outward Person, the Son of the Virgin Mary was God-m^n, o^ that God-man
could be born of Mary, an^ therefore they say they do not find such
Expressions, as that Mary was the Mother of GOD, Christ God-man, any where but
in the Popes Canons. And further argue, as they think, to prove the Doctrine
absurd, That it is Non sense and Unscriptural Language to tell of God bring
Co-creator (...) the Father, or that God had glory with God; (...) not this
(say they) imply two Gods, or that God had a Father? And this (it is true) they
do suppose, as others also do, to be a dangerous Heresy; see D.L's News of a
Trumpet, p. 4. quoting W. P. and p. 30 quoting G W.

But, 2 dly, In all these places of Scripture alleged against this Doctrine,
there is nothing that contradicts what I have affirmed, for wherever the
Scripture says, There is but One God, it is either with respect to God the
Father, and so it is explained, 1 Cor. 8.6. or else with respect to all the
three Persons in the Trinity, and intends the one sole Object of our Worship,
because the Father, Son and holy Ghost are all equal, in respect of Nature, and
therefore they must be equally worshipped under one Notion of divine Worship.
And hence I conceive that the Title Godhead does appertain to all the three
Persons concre^tively, and implies all whatever is worthy of, or ought to be
worshipped by us, Acts 17.29. Romans 1.20. where ^ the second Person in the
Godhead or Trinity, being our Mediator and middle Person in the Trinity, a^ the
streams and lines of divine W^r^hip, equally due to all the three Persons, meet
in him as the Center of the same; for we must come unto God by him, and
consequently must worship the Father in the Son, as also the holy Ghost.
Therefore the Apostle says, That the fullness of the Godhead dwells Bodily in
him; that is, the Object of our Worship, respecting Father, Son and holy Gho^t,
is him the Son* as well as that the seven Spirits of God do rest upon him, Isa.
11.2. Hence then, when-eve^ it is (...)* There is but One God or to that
purpose) as in those places of Isaiah and Mark* etc. mentioned in the
Objection, it is intended, that there is but one Godhead or object of divine
Worship consisting of three Persons, Father, Son and holy Ghost* and includes
all, but excludes neither* according to that place of John, 1 John 5 7. There
is Three that ^ear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word and the Spirit, and
these Thre^ a^^ One O^e in rega^d they are of one Nature and kind of Being, and
s^ must be wor^hippe^ eq^ally a^ one; Th^ee in regard ^hey are ^h^ee particular
Perso^^, and (...) one of these ^hree Persons is a God* so (...) we may truly
and properly say, there are three Gods, viz. God the (...) and God the holy
Ghost But i^ a (...) and Object^^e sense o^ r^spect, th^re is (...) One God.

3 dly, (...) s^ems to be like unto that of (...) and Stoic Philosophers, who
did encounter Pa^l, Acts 17* ^8. saying of him, (...) will this Babbler say? He
seems to be a setter forth o^ strange Gods, because he preached unto them Jesus
and the Resurrection. In which preaching, you may be sure St. Paul preached
Jesus to be God, which made them thus carp a^ hi^ Preaching. But now, th^se are
not Pagan Philosophers, but pretended Reformed Christians, that do not only
ca^p at it, (to whom Jesus Christ seems to be a strange God^ but do condemn
such Doctrine for Heresy, and the ^erson that preaches it to be a Heretic
Blus^, O Heavens, and be ashamed O Earth!

4 thly, But for a further Demonstration of his Truth, Observe, By reason that
thr^^ Divine Persons do consist of one divine Nature, equa^^^ par^icipant of
all Divine Honor and Worship, The Object of Worship, respecting all the thr^e
Person, becomes o^^, in respect of (...) of that Nature, i^ which all the
(...). And this is the (...) Reason therefore it is so after (...) shooted for
joy; for so it stands in the H^brew, as the learned inform me.

Object. ^ Christ says unto Phillip, He that has seen m^, has ^een the
Father, Jo^. 14.^. Then (...) the Father and the Son be two Persons, seeing
(...) in the Father, and the Father in him? verse 10.

Answ. That Christ and his Father are and were from Eternity distinct Persons,
is granted (at least in words (...) my Antagonist ^. W. for he says, Our Lord
Jesus Christ, the second Person in the Trinity [Then there was a first] did
truly come down from Heaven So then, according to this, when Christ says, He
that had seen him, had seen the Father, he means, not that he that had thus
seen him, had seen (...) of the Father; for, a^ that rate, God the Father would
be seen in the shape of a Man. But th^^ I conceive is the meaning, in short;
just (...) if we should see a Friend at a distance, are we do not know him to
be our Friend, we do not account that we saw our Friend at all, because we did
not know him to be (...) that by some strong Reasons, that should ^ver ^a^^ance
ou^ Mistake, we be convinced to the contrary.

So, he that saw (...), and considered him not truly and really ^o, by a strong
Persuasion and Belief, that he was the Son of God, they saw him under a
mistaken Notion, and so in that sense they did not see him at all. Hence our
Savior argues with Puthip, verse. 9. Have I been so long time with you, and yet
have thou not known me, Phillip? And verse. 7. ^e tells them, If they had known
him, they should have known the Father also, viz. they that truly and really
knew and believed in the Son, that he was the Son that was sufficient to
convince them that he had a Father, seeing he was the express Image of the
Father, none need to say to him, (...) the Father, for they that had thus seen
him, had seen the Father, viz. in that consideration that they were assured
thereby that he (...) a Father^

But as to the last part of (...) Objection, That Christ was in the Father, and
the Father in him, the meaning is explained, John 17.23. viz Christ was in the
Father as the Disciples were in him, by a (...), no^ personal Union, in the
concu^rence and agreement of all things.

Object. 10. J. Wa^s does again object, Christ is true God, 1 Jo. 5.20. and God
is a Spirit, Joh. 4.24. But a Spirit has not flesh and bones, Luke 24 39. and
therefore no^ Blood. From whence it appears, Christ, who wa^ God, could not
suffer and dye.

Answer, This is exactly agreeable with the Doctrine of the Quakers, who argue
from the Spirituality of Christ, That, th^^ ^ody of Flesh, Blood and Bones, was
not Christ, but a divine Spirit within tha^ Body. And hence they and others
call that Body a Garment, a Vail, a Clothing, and upon this very ^round they
de^ the outward Person to be the prope^ Son of God, which although J. W. and
others (...) to word the matter, yet they mean (...) the same, as the Reader
may (...) in this objection; For if it (...) from this, (...) because a Spirit
has (...) Flesh and Bones, and Christ being God, and God a Spirit, That
therefore that outward Person, consisting of Flesh and Bones, was not Christ,
^hen all whatever the Quakers affirm concerning Christ will be true, and the
contrary Doctrine, in opposition to them, will be false. And then why should
such a Racke^ be made against them, by this J W. (his Presbyterian and Church
of England (...),) about their Herisies, seeing they do ag^ee with them ^o
exactly in the things con^rover^ed? For never could the Quaker have a better
way of arguing to prove his Tenets by, then this which John Wats does use in
this Objection, and according to this, he and othe^s ought to submit
themselves, and acknowledge their faults unto the Quakers, and forever after
^ay their hands upon their mouths, and be silent, with shame, and not oppose
the Quakers in these things, seeing they believe the very same themselves.
Hence our Savior faith, by way of reproof Thou Hypocrite (says (...)) first
cast out the (...) thy (...) Eye, and then shall thou see clearly to cast the
(...) out of thy Brothers Eye. And S. Pa^^ says, That that Man is in^^cu^^ble,
whosoever (...), that judges another, when he that judg^^^^ (...) the same
things. But so it (...), as the Apostle says, they pervert these, as they do
the other Scriptures to their own destruction, both Quakers and others.
Therefore if they were not too proud, and would heartily hearken to me, by Gods
help, I would convince both Quaker and them of their gross Mistake, as well as
damnable Heresy.

1 st. Then there is one Christ which is God, to wit, a Spirit, they grant in
the Objection, and this the Quakers also allow. And the Scriptures prove, that
there is but one Christ 1 Cor. 8 6. Ephesians. 4.5 And also that one Christ suffered
and dyed, ^om. 5.6 8. Then it will fo^^ow by a natural consequence, seeing it
is granted, that there is one Christ, which is true God, viz. a Spirit, and
that there is but one Christ, as the Scriptures declare, and also that one
Christ suffered and dyed. That this one Christ which suffered and dyed, was
true God, and consequently true God suffered and dyed.

2 dly. But then they will object again, How is it possible that a Spirit can
dye?

Answ. Yes, this is possible that a Spirit can dye; for Christ is said to be
the quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45. and Christ dyed, Romans 5.6, 8. therefore it
is possible for a Spirit to dye.

3 dly, But as to those Scriptures which J. W. brings in his Argument, to prove
that Christ did not dye; because Christ is God, and God is a Spirit, and a
Spirit has not flesh and bones, J. Wats conclusion must naturally follow, That
therefore that outward and visible Person that Thomas handled his hands and his
feet, consisting of Flesh (Blood) and bones, was not Christ. This is, I
presume, the natural consequence of his Argument.

And because he has basely abused and perverted those Scriptures, to patch and
piece this his vile Argument together, I shall endeavor to undeceive his
unwary Reader, and to rectify that mistake, and show the Truth of the said
Scriptures.

As to the first, That Christ is true God, 1 John 5.20 I need say nothing to
that. But as to the next, That God is a Spirit, Joh. 4.24. Hence men would
infer as though (to speak with Reverence) God were a mere nothing, because our
Savior says to the Woman of Samaria, God is a Spirit. It seems J. Wats and
others would gather from hence, that God was not a person, but only a Breath,
or Air, every where present alike. But this our Savior speaks not in
opposition to Person, but in opposition to the carnal and legal Conceptions and
gross Misaprehensions of many Jews, as well as Samaritans, of some particular
Prophecies, Isa. 2.3. ^ alluding to Gospel* worship, which they did (through
mistake) conceive was to be confined unto the litteral Jerusalem, as though God
would except of no Worship, but what was performed in that City, as appears by
the words of the Samaritan Woman to our Savior, Joh. 4 2^. But to that end our
Savior might rightly inform her of the sole intention and purpose of the God
of Israel, in erecting this legal Worship at Jerusalem, was to introduce and
bring in a perpetual and everlasting Worship in Gospel times; which should not
consist in such Shadowy and Worldly Ceremonies, as those under the Law, but in
Spirit and in Truth, tells her, That God to whom this worship is to be given,
is a Spirit; viz. such a Divine and heavenly Person, that cannot be confined
only, to Jerusalem, as a place which could be essential to the acceptance of
that worship, which should be given to him; but does respect all places alike,
and does invisibly attend, every one, in every time, and in every place, when
and wheresoever with a gracious acceptance) this evang^lical (not Legal)
worship is performed to him, in Spirit and in Truth.

2 dly, The next place which J. W. perverts, i^ Luke 24.39. the words of our
Savior to his Disciples to rect, (...) their incredelity concerning him; that
he was risen from the Dead, which they much scrupled and questioned whether it
was him or no, when they saw him, but supposed it was a Spirit; He says unto
them, Behold my hands and my ^eet, in which were the print of the nails,
wherewith he was nailed to the cross* and evident token that he was him, and a
convinccing argument, that it was not a Spirit. And further to confirm them,
that it was himself risen from the dead, and not a Spirit, he bids them handle
him; and the reason is, that thereby they might be certified that he was not a
Spirit, as they supposed; For a Spirit could not be so handled, neither had it
Flesh and Bones, as they saw him to have. Now then the next thing to be
enquired into, is, What a sort of Spirit this is, which is here spoken, of
which the Disciples did suppose our Savior to be? It must be such a kind, of
Spirit that did use to appear sometimes, in the primitive Age, and therefore
our Savior, when he walked on the ^ea, was deemed to be such a Spirit, Mat
14.26. by those that were in the Ship; and those were such a kind of Spirits,
that the Apostle distinguishes from A^g^ls, Acts 238. wherefore it was not an
A^gel* which was supposed* for Angels have been and may be touched, but this
could not. Christ himself was a Spirit, as well before as after his
Incarnation* and that before his Incarnation he was capa^le of Tangib^^ity,
Genesis 32.25. Then seeing these Spirits of which Christ was supposed to be one
of, was neither such a Spirit that Christ was, either before or after his
Incarnation (to speak amply) neither an Angel^ neither ^ Man; because these are
capable of Tangi^^^ity, but this was not; Therefore such (...) must needs be
the Souls of departed, Saints, which did sometimes appear to mo^tal Saints, and
these had not flesh and bones, because they were not risen from the dead, and
therefore could not be touched, as we may see in the case of the Soul of Moses
appearing in the Mount, with ^lias; He could not be (...) from the dead,
because Christ was not then risen, who was the first that did rise from the
dead, Acts 2^.2^. And this in all probability was the opinion of the Di^cip^^s,
they might think it was the Spirit o^ (...) Christ, it being so lately that he
was (...), but it was (...) for them to (...) that he was risen from the (...).

Hence it appears to be a grand abuse put upon the sacred Scriptures, to bring
this place, Luke 24.39. about Spirits, and parrallel it with that in John 4.24
making thereby God to be such a Spirit as this supposed one, and so equalize
the Creator with the Creature, and to make the Scriptures clash and contradict
themselves (which is very grateful to Atheists) surely is very impious work;
and so to argue from particulars to universals, That because some Spirit^ have
not flesh and bones, therefore no Spirits have. This is no good arguing or
reas^^ing (...) men are said to be Spirits, 1 John 4. (...) 3. Then according to
J. W. Men have not flesh and bones. Christ is the quickening Spirit, then
according to him, he had not fle^h and bones, and consequently he that had
such, was not Christ. These are gross absurdities. But God the Father has not
flesh and bones as we have, neither an Angel, neither such Spirits as these,
and therefore such Spi^its cannot dye, because they are immortal Spirits.

I shall sum up all, relating to this Objection in this Argument.

The Apostle Peter says, in effect. That whosoever denies the Lord that bought
them, they bring in damnable Heresies.

But the outward and visible Person* consisting of Flesh and Bones, was Christ,
true God, the Lord that bought us.

Therefore they that shall deny this, they bring in damnable Heresies, denying
the Lord that bought us. But this J. Watts and his faction, and all that
justify him, have done, Therefore, etc.

Object. 11. It was his Body (or humane Nature) which was prepared to do his
Fathers Wi^^ in, and that suffered, Heb. 10.5* But his divi^^ Nature did not.

Answ The holy Ghost does not intend at all by this phrase, A Body have thou
prepared me, that therefore nothing of the substance of that Body was Divine,
and from Eternity; for although the Son of God did really take a substance of
the Virgin Mary, which he had not from Eternity, which after this his
assumption or Incarnation, was essential to his Body, as well as Soul, by which
meant he was made flesh, yet notwithstanding his Body and Soul did consist of
pre-exi^tant matter and substance, which was divine and eternal; neither do the
words here imply as though his Body was here intended abstractively from his
Soul, no more than elsewhere it is said by the Prophet, The Lord (to wit, his
Father made his Soul an Offering for sin, does imply, his body i^ excluded from
being an Offering, Isa. 53.^0. but the whole Person of the Son of God is there
included, to wit, that fourth Person that appeared in Nebuchadnezars Furnace,
is the Body here spoken of, that is thus prepared for sufferings. Hence then,
in this expression or phrase [ A Body] is a peculiar Emphasis, and has a
particular allusion to the Sacrifices under the Law, to wit, the Bodies of
Beasts, Heb. 13.11. for every High Priest under the Law was ordained to offer
Gifts and Sacrifices, wherefore it was necessary that this Man, to wit, the Son
of God, should have somewhat to offer (because he was a Priest, not after the
order of Aaron, but after the Order of Melchizadeck made a Priest forever, Heb.
8.4. chap. 6.20* chap. 10.4.10. Now then, his Offering or Sacrifice was not to
be any Bodies or Body of a Beast as it was under the Law, which could never
take away sin (nor make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the
Consciences, Heb 9.9. but his own Body, viz. his own Person or his own self,
whom God, even his Father, had thus fitted and prepared for Sufferings, that he
might be the one Atonement, Romans 5.11. The One Sacrifice, Heb. 10.12. The One
Offering, v. 14. And thus the same Apostle explains himself in diverse places of
the same Epistle, Heb. 7.27. W^o. (meaning Christ) needs not daily, as thos^
Highpriests, to offer up Sacrifices first for his own sin, and then for the
Peoples; for this he did once, when he offered up [Himself.] Then Note, his
Body, which was the Sacrifice, was himself, his own Person. Heb. 9.12. Neither
by the Blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood, etc. for if that by
sprinkling the Unclean, sanctify, etc. how much more shall the Blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit (to wit, by the potency and strength of
his own Spirit, which was eternal) offered up himself without spot unto God,
etc. Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, etc. And v.
26. But now once in the end of the World, has he appeared to put away sin, by
the Sacrifice of himself. S^eing then it was impossible (as the Apostle says)
that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sin, Heb. 10.4. yet it was
the Will of God the Father nevertheless, that sins should be taken away by one
Sacrifice, that should be the substance of, and put an end to all those Typical
ones. Therefore the Kingly Prophet. David foreseeing this by the Spirit of
Prophecy, personating the Son of God* as he was ^ Type of the same, phraseth it
after this manner, Psalm. 40.6. Sacrifices and Offerings thou would not, etc.
The Apostle a^^edging these out of the Psalms, applies them unto Christ, when
he is come into the world, and says, Heb. 10.5 wherefore, when he comes into
the world, he says, Sacrifice and Offering thou would not, but a Body have
thou prepared me; and that is this Body or Anti-typical Offering; for the
Sacrifices and Offerings, and burnt Offerings and Offerings for sin, which were
done under the Law, God had no pleasure in, Heb. 10*8. therefore there must be
another Sacrifice prepared, by which his Will may be done, in which he could
have pleasure, and that must be Gods own Son made flesh, who is ready to do his
Fathers will. And therefore he says, Lo, I come to do thy Will, O God, v. 9.
And then the Apostle notes upon it, By the which will we sanctifie^, ^^rough
the offering of the Body of Jesus once for all, v. 10. Not any Body of a Beast,
but the Body of the Son of God, or the Son of God himself. Thus then it appears
that the Body that was thus prepared for a Sacrifice, was a divine and eternal
Person.

Object. 12. But how is it possible that an outward and visible Person, of such
dimensions (...) bigness, could be in a Virgins Womb?

Answ. These sort of Objectors are rather to be termed Cavelle^s with and
Carpers at the Omniprescency of God; they would measure and limit Gods Power by
their own shallow Capacities. But in short, all things are possible with God.
They may as well sa^, it was impossible for Christ to come in amongst the
Disciples the Door being shut, and yet this is a truth, but we cannot
demonstrate how it was done.

Reasons added.
Having thus done answering the Objections that are commonly brought against
this Doctrine of Christ dying as he was God, as truly as Man, I shall add five
Reasons which do further confirm the same.

Reason 1. If he did not dye as truly God as he was Man, then he that dyed
could not be Gods proper Son, because in that consideration he could not have
the Nature of his Father.

Reason 2. Neither could he be a Mediator, if (as J. Watts says) the Manhood
only suffered, because he is not a Mediator simply as he is Man, but as he is
both God and Man

Reason 3. Neither in that Consideration could he be a Person, because he took
not a Person of Mary, but brought his Person from Heaven, as J. W. does grant,
but he did not bring his Manhood from Heaven.

Reason 4. If that that suffered was only the humane Nature, and that humane
Nature was a Person, and yet another Person came from Heaven, this would make
two Christ's.

Reason 5 And again, if he that suffered was only Humane, and not a Person,
then i^ must be an irrational Creature, which to conclude would be real
Blasphemy.

Now all these Difficulties are easily removed, and those Absurdities avoide^,
i^ we believe, confess and acknowledge, That (...) Person, who was both God and
Man, suffered and dyed conjunctively in both Natures.

But before I proceed to the next Chapter, I must add here a Supplement to the
eighth Objection, which was omitted there.

Whereas I have shown that whenever th^se Scriptures mentioned in the Eighth
Objection, are understood with relation to Worship, every Person in the Trinity
is included under that singular expression, according to that of ^ Joh. 5.7.
These Three are One, But when or wherever, we find added unto the same, such
Official Epethites, Notes and Signs, which do plainly and familiarly show to
which Person it does belong, and that such Offici^^ Titles, Epethites and
Attributes cannot po^^sibly be appropriated (without violen^^ done to Gods
Word^ to any Person in the Trinity, save one, then under that singula^
expression, must be understood one singula^ Person.

As for Example, Isa. 44.6. The King (...) Israel, The Redeemer, is said to be
God, an^ besides him there is none. Isa. 43.3 The hol^ One of Israel Isa. 4^ 3*
11. The Savior. Exodus* 24.12. The God of Israel. Exodus 3.2. The Angel of the
Lord.

All which places belong to the Son of God absolutely and properly, and cannot
be appropriated to the Father, without Violence done to Gods Word, as will
appear from these following Reasons.

1 st, The King of Israel, is Jesus Christ the Son, because he being the Son of
David, was right Heir to the Crown of Judah, even of that temporal Kingdom,
whence he is so styled, as well as that he remains to be King of spiritual
Israel; and he is reigning on the Anti-typical Throne of his Father David, and
he shall reign over the House of Jacob forever, and of his Kingdom there shall
be no (...). This Nathaniel does confirm, saying ^^to him, Joh. 1.46. Thou art
the King of ^^^ael.

2 dly, The Reedemer, is Jesus Christ, and not (...) Father, Beceuse he has
redeemed us to (...) (the Father) by his Blood, Rev. 4.9.

3 dly, The Savior, is an attribute of the (...), and not of the Fathers;
because the Son (...) us from the wrath of the Father, And (...) is his Name
and Office, signified by the ^^gel, Mat. 1.21.

4 thly, The Holy One of Israel, is a Title pro^ to the Son, because it denotes
one of Isreal's ^^^age and Geoneology, and so it alludes to (...) Incarnation of
the Son, which when that (...) accomplished, he was not only one of (...), but
the most holy One. Hence he is (...). The Holy Child Jesus, Acts 4.27. The
(...) One, chap. 3.14.

^^^^thly, The God of Israel, is a proper Attri^^^e of the Sons, because it
belongs to him (...) does purchase Israel with his own blood, (...) was Christ
alone, and so he restores (...), and gives him access to the Father, and
^^^ittanc^ into his Favor again, which he (...) offending the Fathers Justice,
until such (...) that this is done, all men lie under the (...) of the Father,
whence we are styled, ^^^^dren of Wrath, Ephesians. 2.^. But Israel's God delivers
Israel from the Wrath to co^^ 1 These. 1.10. and reconciles both Jews (...)
Gentiles unto God in one Body, by the Cros^ Ephesians. 2 16.

2 die, Because the Father has not be^^ visibly manifested and see^ in the
presence (...) any Mortal, John 1.18. and 6.4^* 1 Timothy* 6.^ 1 John 4 1^. But the
God of Israel was Pe^^sonally seen upon the Mount, by Moses, Aaro^^ Nadab and
A^i^u, and seventy of the Elde^^ of Israel, Exodus 24.^0, 11. And they (...)
God, etc. And this God of Israel appear^^ to Isaiah in the Temple, Isa. 6 5.
and he (...) hi^ with his Eyes, and he styles him, The (...) (and that it was
Christ, is clear from (...) 12.41.) and so this God of Israel stil^ ^^^self,
Isa. 44.6. Thus says the Lord, (...) King of Israel, and his Redeemer, the
Lord (...) Hosts, I am the first and the last, and besi^^ me there is no God,
to wit, he that was dea^ and is alive, and lives for evermore, Rev. 1.^^ and
28. There is no God of Israel besides (...) Lord of Hosts, that is, a Savior
and R^^deemer; the multitude of (...) Gods cann^^ save.

6 thly, The Angel of the Lord. This cann^^ be an Attribute of the Father, for
the follo^^ing Reaso^^.

1. Because the Father was never visibly and personally in the presence of any
Mortal, as before; but this Angel of the Lord was seen by, are present with
Moses in the Bush, and in the Mount.

2. The Father was never an Angel or Messenger to no^e; but this was an Angel
or Messenger of the Lord, to wit, of the Father.

2 dly, It cannot be a created Angel, 1. Because he is expressly called God. 2.
he calls himself the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. 3.
Our Savior, after his Incarnation, plainly tells, Mark 12.26* That it was God
that spoke in the Bush unto Moses.

3 dly, and lastly, And therefore it must needs (...) Gods own Son, the Angel
of the Covenant, Mal. 3 (...) and this is con^^rmed by this Angel himself, by
intimating his Name unto Moses, That it was I Am, which is explained by our
^aviour himself, after his Incarnation, to sig^ifi^ himself, John 8 58. saying
to the Jews, (...) o^e Abraham was I Am, meaning himself, who was I Am, was
before (...), who ap^eared unto him in the Plains of Mamre.

7 thly, The Lord of Israel, Deuteronomy. 6.4. is ^^tended of the Son, 1. Because he
that reveals the Father unto Israel, is Isreal's Lord, and he alone; But the Son
does reveal the Father, Mat. 11 27. and he alone. Therefore the Son is Isreal's
Lo^d, or the one Lord, and also the one God of Israel. 2. Because the Kingly
Prophet David distinguishes Isreal's Lord from the Father, by ^aying a claim
unto him as his own, saying, Psalm. 110.1. The Lord said unto my Lord, etc. 3
Because the Apostle in like manner distinguishes, Ephesians. 4.5. saying, One
Lord, etc. One God and Father of all, etc. And hence our Savior informs the
Scribe, Mark 12.29. That the chief Commandment in the Law was this, Hear, O
Israel, the Lord thy God is One Lord. Wherefore St. Matthew does affirm, upon
an occasion of the Peoples praising and glorifying Christ for the Miracles that
he wrought, That they glorified the God of Israel, Mat. 15.^1. And therefore
wherever the Scripture affirms, That there is no other Gods but one, 1 Cor.
8.4. or such like Expressions, in relation to the Redemption Office, it intends
Jesus Christ, Gods Son, and not the Father.

CHAP. VIII. Containing a Corollary, 1. Of John Wat's Denial of several
Fundamental and Christian Doctrines. 2. His gross and foul Contradictions. 3.
His abominable and vile Heresies. As also some Observations of G. Keiths false
Doctrines, his unjust dealings with the Quakers, and herein he is proved to be
one with them in the main Points controverted, as also many gross ^bsurdities
that follow at the Tail of this Doctrine.
. 1. NOw I hope, from what laid down, it will plainly appear to the judicious
and Christian Reader, that those seven Points charged upon me for Her^sie, are
proved all to be Fundamental and Evangelical Truths. For those that deny these
7 Points, deny, 1 st the Resurrection of Christ. 2 dly, the Eternity of Christ.
3dly, the Incarnation of Christ 4ly, the death of Christ. 5ly. the humiliation
of Christ. 6ly. The Hypostatical Union. 7ly. the (...) Persons. But all these
are not only denied, but condemned by J. W. and his faction, (as well as by
many others) for Heresy. Therefore they de^y seven fundamental and evangelical
Truths.

Now whosoever shall deny any fundamental Truth or Truths, are Heretics, as
Elias Keech defines Heresy. But so has J. W. and his faction done. Ergo. The
Major Proposition is prov^^ from the Authority of E. Keech. The Minor have
proved at large in my Book before. The^ the Conclusion naturally follows.

2. His gross and foul Contradiction.

Contradi^^^d
1. Christ and his father one single and individed essence. There are three
(...) Godheads. 2. Christ is impotent* weak and finite. Christ is wholly
infini^^ and omnipotent. 3. The 2d Person in the Trinity did truly come down
from Heaven. But that outward Per^son which the Jews sa^^ did not. 4. It was
only the humane Nature of Christ that suffered. At that very instant when he
suffered, he was both God and Man in one Person. 5 His Manhood only suffered.
So he dyed not as a mere Man. 6. He that laid down his Life was God. Yet he
laid it not down as God. 7. Christ as Man must not be worshipped. The 2d Person
in the Trinity is worthy of equal worship with the Father and the holy Ghost.
Now if Babel signifies Confusion, then cer^ainly this is part of Babel^
structure, which has been laid by th^se Babel Builders.

3. His abominable and vile Heresies, which J. W. has avouched and broa^hed in
his Manuscripts, as well as those Contradictions before mentioned, as I am
ready to prove out of the same at any time, by Gods permission.

1. Christ is an impotent and finite Creature.

2 The Father and the Son are one single and individed Essence.

3. There are three distinct Godheads.

4 That the Man Christ alone could not merit for us, nor procure the Pardon of
one sin.

5. It was only the humane Nature of Christ that suffered.

6. That (outward) Person which the Jews saw with the^^ natural Eyes, and
crucified, did not come down from Heaven.

7. Christ, as Man, must not be worshipped.

Now whosoever does deny Worship to Christ as Man, he denies Worship to
Christ. The reason is, because there is no Christ but one that is a Man.

But J. W. denis Worship to Christ, a Man. Ergo J. W. denies Worship to Christ*

2. Whomsoever denies Worship to Christ he is no Christian. But J. W. denies
Worship to Christ; this is proved before. Ergo he is no Christian.

3. He that is no Christian, he does not believe in Christ. But J. W. is no
Christian, as I have proved. Therefore he does not believe (...).

4 He that does not believe in Christ he is an ^nfidel. But J. W. does not
believe in Christ. Ergo.

5 He that does affirm that Christ is impotent, he does deny Christ's
Omnipotency. But J. W. does affirm, that he that suffered upon the Cross (which
was Christ) was Impotent. Therefore he does deny Christ's Omnipotency

6. He that does deny Christ's Omnipotency, does blaspheme Christ. But J. W.
does deny Christ's Omnipotency. Therefore he does blaspheme Christ, and
consequently he is a Blasphemer.

This is clear from Mat. 27.39. And they that pass^d by reviled him; in the
Greek it is Ebl^sp^^mon, i. e. blasphemed. And v. 42. it is said, In like
manner, or likewise, the chief Pri^sts mocking him, etc. viz. bla^phemed him,
saying, He saved others, but himself he cannot save; which was a denying of his
Omnipotency, as John Wats does, and this is Blaspheme.

7 He that denis Worship to, and blasph^^e the M^n Christ, he does deny the
(...) ^^ought us* ^ut J W. does, Ergo. (...) that does deny the Lord that
bought (...) damnable Heresy, 2 Pet. 2.1. But J. W. does deny the Lord that
bought us. Therefore he does bring in damnable Heresy.

9. He that does bring in damnable Heresy, is certainly a Heretic. But J. W.
does bring in damnable Heresy. Therefore he is a Heretic.

. 2 Some Observations on some of G Keith's false Doctri^es; His Unjust Dealings
with the Quakers, wherein it appears that he is one with them in the main
Points controverted, as also many gross A^surdities that follow at the Tail of
his Doctrine.
1. HE calls Christ's Humanity a Clothing, Truth advanced, p 16. a Garment,
^.66. a Vail, as the Quakers do* And thi^ is to deny the Hypostatical Union
betwix^ the Son of God, and the Nature of Man, as also his Incarnation, ^r^m
Heresies revived, p. 2. for which the Quakers there are judged Heretics.

z. He does deny the Resurrection of our corruptible Bodies, Truth Advanced, p
113. in these words, The true Body of Man ^orrupte^ not And again, in the same
page, That flesh that is gross, mortal and corruptible, is not that flesh that
shall be raised up Immortal and Incorruptible. And page 111. he denies that the
Saints after the Resurrection shall have a Belly or Outs (as he coursely words
it.) And this Doctrine of G. K 's does exactly agree, for length and breadth,
with W. P. about the Resurrection, Reas. against Railing, page 153. where he
does ingenuously confess, in the Name of the Quakers, That they do deny the
Resurrection of the natural and corruptible Body, as G. K. does. Now G. K. in
his 3 d Narrat. calls this a Fundamental Doctrine of the Christian Faith, viz.
the Resurrection of the Body that dies; and because the Quakers do not own it,
he judges them Heretics, and yet he does d^ny it himself; which is very
unreasonable dealing; and upon this very occasion the Apostle does affirm, That
such a man is inexcuseable, Romans 2.1. nay, he goes further, and tells, In that
the judges another, he condemns himself; for if it be not mortal, then it does
not dye. But so he says, The mortal flesh is not that flesh that shall be
raised up Immortal. Hence G. K. denis the Resurrection of the Body that dies,
which he himself sets down for one of the four Fundamental Christian Doctrines,
3 d Narrative.

3 dly, He does deny that there is any knowledge of God, in these words, p.
110. of the said Book, God can neither be seen nor known with the Eyes of Men's
minds or of their Bodies, contrary to these Scriptures; Mat. 5.8. John 17.3.

4 thly, He does not believe the outward Person to be the proper Son of God.

1 st, Because he holds for Doctrine (3 d* narrative, p. 6.) The Eternal Word,
(which is Christ the proper Son of God) to be the Light within. For there he
tel^ in his Note, tha^ the s^mething else (meant by him) without which the
Light within cannot save is the Manhood of Christ. For (says he) if our whole
Salvation be placed upon the eternal and assential Word, without the Manhood of
Christ, etc. Then Christ only is our Savior, as God. Where Note, that G. K.
holds the Light within is God, or the Eternal Word. Now for him to argue
against the Quaker that the Light within (which he says is God, is not
sufficient, is as much as if he had said God is ^ot sufficient. Now forasmuch
as the Eternal Word is Gods proper Son, and none else, which G. K. dares not
deny, and that he deems is the Light within. Then he cannot believe that the
outward Person is the proper Son of God, because the Light within cannot be an
outward Person; and then herein he is one with W. P.

2 dly, Because in p. 15. of his 3 d. Narrative, He charge G. W. of opposing
this Doctrine, That Christ's Manhood did consist of a created Soul and Body. But
I presume G. K. does not deal justly with G. W. For G. W. I suppose, does
believe erroniously as G. K. does, That the outward Person Jesus did consist of
a created Soul and Body (which G. K. calls the Manhood) and this I presume G.
W. (...) never deny. But that which G. W. does oppose is this, That the outward
Person Jesus was Christ. And this G. K. cannot believe neither, Because he
holds that outward Person to be a m^er Creature, in affirming that he did
consist of a created Soul and Body (which makes a Person) which Christ the 2d
Person in the Trinity cannot do. For if so, there would be two Persons which
were Christ's, viz. two Christ's; For the Divine Nature did not assume a Humane
Person, but a Divine Person which was the 2d. Person in the Trinity, the
eternal Son of God, did assume a Humane nature, viz. The true Nature of a
Humane Body and Soul, although not a Body and a Soul. Now then, the second
Person in the Trinity is Gods proper Son, to wit, Christ the Eternal Word, and
none but he. But such was the outward Person Jesus, Ergo. Now unless G. K.
believes this; his belief is (...) one with G. W. and W. P. in the point. But
this he cannot do, because he says before That the Eternal Word is the Light
within; and ^his is the same with the Principle of G. W. and W. P.

3 dly, Because he denis that there were two distinct Angets in the Creation of
the Worlds, as it plainly appears by his denying G. W's Inference from these
Posit^ons of the Baptists, 1 st. That the word God was Creator with the Father.
2. The word of God had Glory with God before the World was 3. That God had a
Father. From all which G. W. infers, that this Doctrine must needs imply two
Gods, two Efficents and two d^stinct Angets; which consequence G. W. does
suppose to be Nonsense, Confusion and Blasphemy, which he deemed the Baptists
were guilty of, because they asserted such Doctrine. Now this consequence of G.
W. G. K. denis in these words, 3. Narrative, page 17. But who told him so, or
how does he prove it? The contrary (says he) does appear from the Septuagint,
Prove. 8.27.30. sumpa^^m^^ and ^unte^esas, i. e. I was Co-existent and
Co-efficient. This indeed one might tell G. K. as he does T. E. (but with
greater reason) page 15. Is a silly Sophism^, for to bring this place to prove
from the Septuagint there were not two Agents, when as it proves the contrary,
according to G. K's interpretation of it; for says he, the Participle Co
signifies Simul, viz. jointly, or togethe^, answering to the Greek particle
(Sun.) And then he which is Co-creator, must needs be Creator together with
another, or else the p^rticiple Co^ loosseth its Empha^^s, and then it might
have been only a Creator far more prop^^^y. But G. K. allows it to G. W. in the
same P^ge, that it may signify another; in th^^e words, Christ is said to be
another, as (...) as the Holy Ghost is said to be another. Now notwithstanding
all this G. K. blames G* W. as bringing false and Socinian consequences,
because he infers from these sayings, That God was Co-creator with God, That
this does import Two Gods and two distinct Angels. But although it be a
Socinian cons^quence, yet it may be true enough for all that; for it may be the
Socinians know how to infer true C^nsequences as well as G. K without any
d^sparagement to his Learning. But why (...) he be angry with either Quaker or
Socini^^? for if he will not allow the Quaker and Socinian consequence to be
true, then he jumps in his Judgment with them; for that it is which they are
for, as well as Sebellius and Muggleton, That there was but one single Agent
that had any hand in the Creation. And hence it is that neither Sabellius,
Socinus nor Quaker will allow that that outward Person was Gods proper Son,
because they do not believe he had any such; and this G.K. does not believe
neither; seeing he does deny there were two distinct Agents. For he that does
deny that there were two distinct Agents in the Creation of the World, does
thereby deny a Trinity of Persons; for if there were not two distinct Agents,
then there could not be two distinct Persons, and consequently not three,
because every distinct Person in the Trinity is a distinct Agent. And so it
follows, that G. K. holds only a distinction in Name and Manifestation; and
this himself says, in the same page, is the Sabellian Heresy. And again, if
there were not two distinct Agents, then not two distinct Persons, as before,
and consequently no eternal and natural Son of God, as Socinus and Sabellius
will have it. And then it will follow, that the Word was never Incarnate,
giving the lie to the Apostle John, cap. 1.14. And again, it will follow, that
the outward Person was not Gods proper Son, as VV. P. will have it; or else he
must hold that the Word was the Father, and he was incarnate; and this G. K.
says in the same page, was the Error of the Patripassions. And further, it is
denied by this means, that the Word was Creator with the Father, and that God
had glory with God, etc. and that God had a Father; and all this is blamed by
G. K. in G. W. as erroneous, because he blame^ these expressions in the
Baptists.

But to return again, now as G. Keith tell^ G. W. the contrary does appear from
the Septuagent, so here I tell G. K. (but with greater Truth) the contrary to
G. K 's Doctrine does appear from the Hebrew (as the learned of the Church of
England tell ^ Thomas Jackson) and the Author of the Practice o^ Piety, p. 27.
interprets Genesis 1.1. thus, viz. Elohim bar^, Dij creavit, The mighty Gods, or
all the three Persons in the Godhead, created. Then sure more than one single
Agent.

5. G. Keith says, That Christ had a Sou^ and Spirit of a Man from the
beginning, and that this did come down from Heaven, and tabernacled in a Body
of flesh (as he says) and that the eternal Word did not simply come down from
Heaven, Truth advanced* p 64, 65. from which it appears plainly, that G. K.
does not believe that the outward Person Jesus was the eternal Word or proper
Son of God, no more than W P. Socinus or Sabellius. But ^ne might make so bold
to ask G. K. What ^cripture he has to prove his Doctrine of ^umane Souls
coming from Heaven? But I ^resume there is no Scripture for it, but it is ^nely
an invention of his own, therefore ^one is bound to believe it; but let me tell
^im, as he tells the Quakers, This contradicts (...) of the Church of England
Articles, Art. 6. that the holy Scriptures do contain all things ^^cessary to
Salvation. So that whatever is ^ot read therein, nor may be proved thereby,
(...) not to be required by any man, that it should ^e believed as an Article
of Faith, or be ^hought requisite and necessar^ to Salvation.

But G K's Notion of Christ having a humane Soul from the beginning, and coming
from Heaven, is not read in the Scriptures, ^or cannot be proved thereby.
Therefore ^e ought not to require it of any man as an Article of Faith, or
think it necessary to Sal^ation.

6. G K. in a Letter writ from England in^o America, to one P. Chamberlain,
denye^ that our Bodies, after the Resurrection, shall have the some figure or
form, and distinction of Members, as I showed before, he says, the (...) will
not rise: What other Members we shall not have then, which we have now, he does
not tell, only he says, they will differ, as also in our form and figure; and
there i^ reason for it, seeing he says, We shall have (...) Belly or Gats;
according to which, in short we shall be metamorphized, changed into other
shapes. But this I cannot give credit to.

. 3. Some Notice taken of G. Keiths Mystica Doctrines.
1. Truth advanced, p. 21. speaking of the Creation of Adam, he says, But even
the Image of the earthly was very glorious before the fall, for though God made
him of the Dust of the ground, yet that Dust was not common Dust, but much more
pure and refined than [that] of which the Bodies of men since the fall are made
of. Note, From whence G K. plainly holds for the two different Creations of
Man* both with respect to the different Matter of which they have been created,
as also with respect unto the different Times when they were created. From
whence it will follow that we are no kin^ to Adam, but are of a second order of
Creation, which was of a more baser stuff; therefore well may G. K. call our
Bodies Oar, Gross, etc. and deem them not worthy of eternal Reward, by denying
them a Resurrection, excepting its being turned into Vegetables, and so rise
again, seeing as he deems) they do not consist of the same matter and substance
as Adams Body did.

2. He holds it for an Error, That the Garden or Paradise where God placed Man,
when he made him, was some part of this visible Earth, Truth Adv. p. 16, 25.
but was that Paradise up into which Paul was caught, which was the 3 d Heaven,
p 17.

3. The Garden of Eden he holds to be C^^^st the Eternal Word, p. 18, 25, 26

4. The Tree of Life in the midst of it, to be the Life in the Word.

5. The Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, The severe Justice and Wrath of
God in Christ the Word, p. 18.

6. The other Trees in the Garden, divine Perfections and Virtues.

7. The Beasts of the field, the fallen Angels, page 26.

8. The River that watered the Garden, is the Spirit of Life, p. 26.

9. The Clothing wherewith God clothed Adam and Eve after the fall, was the
skin and flesh of this frail and corruptible Body, which he calls, a Shell,
Prison, Cave, Dungeon, Oar or Mine, p. 27.

10. He holds, that God took a whole side (...) Adam, and of it made Eve, viz.
split him into ^ halves, as when a round or square Body is ^^^vided into two
halves, p. 28.

11. He holds, That Adam and Eve (...) have multiplied their species in one
Body, with^^ Eve 's being taken out of Adam, if the fall (...) not been, p. 28.

12. He holds, That by means of the fa^^ Adam and Eve, as they were in one
Body, we incapacitated, made unfit and unfruitful, as (...) the manner of
propagating their species or (...) their baeks being joined together, p. 29.
and the faces averted; but when they were divided, the faces were set one to
the other again, p. 28, 29.

13. He holds, That the Soul of Man receive not its being by humane Generation
or conception in the Womb, p. 33.

14. And therefore he holds, That all the Souls of Adams Posterity were
contained in (...)* (and so have actually pre-existed ever since.)

. 4. Here follows diverse gross Absurdities that do naturally spring from the
aforesaid Doctrines.
1. If Paradise were the eternal Word, as G. K. will have it, then Adam was to
dress and keep the eternal Word; which is absurd.

Note, G. K. is very uncertain about Paradise, what it is, sometimes he thinks
it is Christ, at another time the third Heaven; and then again, the new Earth.

2. If the Beasts of the field were the fallen Angels, then Adam was to give
Names to the fallen Angels, and also they were formed out of the ground, Genesis
2.19.

3. If the Trees of the Garden were divine Perfections and Virtues, then divine
Perfections and Virtues spring out of the Ground, Genesis 2.9.

4. Again, if the Tree of knowledge was Gods severe Justice and Wrath in Christ
(as G. K. will have it) and the Tree of Life in Christ also, and Christ the
Garden, according to which, the Garden, the Tree of Life, and the Tree of
Knowledge of good and evil, are all one. And, 2 dly, if there is the Tree of
^i^e and the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil, both in Christ, they must both
belong to Christ, and then there is in Christ good Food and evil; and then it
follows, that G. K. has taught us to eat of the forbidden Fruit, when he
preached amongst us, That whole Christ must be spiritually eaten, as the
Paschal Lamb was naturally. All which is very absurd, as well as reproachful to
Christ.

5. If the Soul of Man receives not its being by humane Generation (as G. K
says) then by the same parity of Reason one might say, the Body does not
neither. But if G. K denies this consequence, and will have it that the Body
does, but the Soul does not. Then I may argue, according to G. K. that Bodies
are capable of generating and propogating without Souls. But G. K. being a
Philosopher, might have remembered better this Rule in Natural Philosophy, viz.
Every like begets its like. Now according to the Rule, if a Body only be
begotten, then it was only a Body that did beget it, in which Gignation the
Soul was not active or concerned, and then dead Bodies may multiply and
increase Bodies as well as live ones. These are foul and gross Absurdities.

6. Again, if by the Precept enjoined to Man and Woman in Paradise, Be fruitful
and multiply, etc. Genesis 1.28. be to be understood only with respect to the
multiplication of Bodies, and not of Souls, then by the same parity of Reason,
we must understand the same words which relate to the multiplication of Fish
and Fowl, with respect only to their Bodies, and not of Souls; and then it will
(...), that the Spirits of Fish and Fowl, as (...) Beasts too, have pre-existed
also.

(...) our corruptible Bodies are only skin^ ^athing, then they are no part of
our (...); and if so, G. K. has good reason to our mortal Bodies are not the
Bodies ^^all be raised up Immortal, and therefore ^^ve no part of our future
Reward. Th^se the Natural deductions and consequences (...) new coined
Doctrines, and such that account divine openings, I hope it will (...) to every
enlightened Understanding, ^hey are not only absurd and false in (...), but
also destructive to the (...), as well as reproachful to Christ, (...) of it.

CHAP. IX. (...) an abstract of Humane Authorities.
WHich I produce not for any proof, but by way of Illustration only, they may
be of weight with some, and it may be manifest that not only Scripture
Authority, but even Antiqui^^ self, which is so much boasted of, is for great
Truth.

I shall state them under three Sections.

1. The Testimonies of the Apostolical Chu^^^ 2. The Testimonies of the
Succeeding (...) 3. The Testimonies of the Protestant (...) since the
Reformation.
. 1. The Testimony of the Apostolical (...) is proved from their detestation
and (...) of the contrary Tenets in those (...) that Age did broach them, viz.
the which J. W. holds, and also Edw. (...) Priest of Philadelphia, who in the
(...) diverse Evidences, affirmed, It was (...) to assert, that the proper Son
of God dyed

1 Phigollius and Hermogenius men^ by Paul, 2 Timothy 1. Abdias Babilonic^s that
they held, (the same Principle with Portlock and J. Wats) That he that (...)
not the proper Son of God.

2. Corinthus, Disciple to Simon (...) held the same.

3 Ebton agreed here-with.

These Tenets confuted and reproved Apostle John, proves that the (...)
Churches were of the contrary (...) he calls a Liar and Antichrist, 1 John ^2.
Ebion he refuses, Joh. 1.1 proving that (...) or the Word was with the Father
in the (...), and was God.

2. The Testimonies of the succeeding Ages. ^ Arius, condemned for an Heretic
in the (...) Council of Nicea, for denying that he dyed was of the same Nature
with his Father, so not Gods proper Son (as Edw. Portlock have it) And in
opposition to Arius the (...) Creed was framed.

^ Nestorius is condemned for an Heretic (...) second Council of Ephesus, for
affirming ^ame, in effect, as J.W. and E. Portlock do.

The Turks also are condemned by the (...) for the same thing.

^ So also the Jews.

So likewise Socinus, Samosatinus, (...), Plotinus and Sabellius.

(...) these have been denied as and condemned (...) Heretics by the Churches
succeeding the ^^^stles, because they did, as J. W. and E. P. (...) deny him
that dyed to be Gods proper Son.

^bserve also, J W. Sabellius and Muggleton ^ery well agree in this also, That
the Father, ^and holy Ghost are one single and individed (...).

. 3. The Testimonies of the Protest^^^ Churches since the Re^ormation.

W. Perkins upon the Creed, in his Wo^^ p. 169 says, Christ's anointing is
according^^ both his Natures, for in what Nature he was M^^diator, in the same
he is anointed, but accord^^^ to both his Natures jointly he is a Mediator;
(...) Divinity is no Mediator without the Human^^^ nor the Humanity without the
Divinity; (...) therefore his anointing extends it self both (...) Divinity and
Humanity. No^e, Here (...) needs be two Gods intended personally, (...) he that
is anointed is God, he that anoi^^ must needs be so too. And therefore the sa^^
Author affirms further, p. 28. That (...) humbled himself in respect of his
Deity: To (...) sure he does not mean that the Father hu^^bled himself.

S. Clark, Marrow of Divinity, p. 26^. (...) concerning the union of the
natures in Christ thus, Whatsoever may be verified of either of the Natures,
the same may be verified of the (...) Person, from whethersoever of the Natures
it denominated. Note, then according to S. ^^ if it be verified that the humane
Nature dye^ then this is spoken or verified of the who^^ Person, in which is
included the divine N^^ture also.

Again, p. 276. he queries thus, Why must this God and M^n be one Person? He
answers, Because if each Nature were a distinct Person, (...) there would be
two Christ's, and so the actions of the one could not be the attributes of the
other.

Again, page 270. he queries, What was the principal Debt? he answers,
Obedience to Gods most holy Law, which Man was bound to pay as a perpetual
Tribute to his Creator, though he had never sinned; but being now by his own
default become Bankrupt, he is not able to discharge in the least measure; his
Surety therefore being to satisfy in his stead, none will be found fit to
undertake such a Payment but he who is both God and Man.

Ed. Leigh's Body of Divinity, p. 257. The Father was not made flesh, yet the
Son was. p. 57. He that is but a Man, cannot merit. P 573. We were redeemed by
that Person who was God; Christ was to be God and Man that he might lay the
foundation of our Union in his Person.

Thomas Jackson, Dr. of Divinity, Chaplain to his Majesty K. Charles 1st, in
his Book entitled, The knowledge of Jesus Christ, etc concerning what we are
bound to believe, he says, p. 3. Whilst this Man, (meaning Jesus) was put to
death, crucified, the true and only Son of God was likewise crucified. Note,
This Ed. Portlock, Priest of Philadelphia says, is Blasphemy.

P 201. He says, God, according to the litteral sense of Scriptures, was in
latter ages to be incarnate, and to converse with Men. P. 232. That God was to
visit his Temple after such a visible and personal manner, as the Prophet
Jeremiah in his Name had done. P. 234. The Lord God of Israel would watch his
opportunity to visit his Temple, after as evident a manner to flesh and blood,
as the Prophet had done. P. 249. These, and the like considerations, will
persuade the Jews, that however the God of Israel be one, yet in this Unity of
the Gobhead, they and we must acknowledge more than an Unity or identity of
Persons. P. 250 That in the divine Nature there is an eminent ideal Pattern of
such a distinction as we call between party and party, a capacity to give, and
a capacity to receive; a capacity to demand, and a capacity to satisfy,
Capacities sufficiently different for the Exercise of justice and love, not ad
extract^ only, but within the divine Nature it self. P. 264. Jesus Christ the
Son of God, who not only us, but the Socinians grant, was truly coeternal to
God the Father. P. 305 When it is said, the Son of God was made of a Woman,
this implies that he was truly flesh of the Woman's flesh, and bon^ ^f her
bones, as the first Woman was flesh of the first Man's flesh, and bone of his
bones. P 417. For now he wh^ is high^^ than the Heavens, who fills both
Heaven and Earth with his Presence ( the true and only Son of God) comes down
from Heaven, is [ inclosed] in the Virgins, Womb become her Son, and the fruit
of her Womb becomes the Son of God.

Practice of Piety, p. 164. large impression, are these words relating to
Christ, Our Emanu^l, God made Man. Then surely that Man was God, and that Man
dying, God dyed

W. Dyers Works, Christ's famous Title, p. 62. The Turks mock the Christians for
believing in a crucified God. The Heathen say, with reproach to Christ, they
would not believe in a hanged God. Again, ^e quo^i^g Gregory upon the words of
the Cam^^l^s He came leaping, etc. That is, says he, leaping from the Throne
to the womb, from the womb to the Cradle, and from the ^radle to the Cross, and
from the Cross to the Throne again. P. 134. This is wonderful (says he) the
Lord of Life should dye, and the great God become a Babe, and the eternal Word
not able to speak a word. P. 65. He Is the Theantropos, the God-Man. P. 64. thus
he argues, None can be eternal but God. But Christ is eternal, therefore Christ
is God Page 71. He who made Man b^came Man, suffered by Man and for Man. P.
125. He thus queries, Had we run so far upon the score of Vengeance, that none
could satisfy, but God himself? P. 143. If we consider who Christ was, he was
God, the God-Man.

In the Westminster Confession, or shorter Catechism, they say, in answer to
this Question, Who is the Redeemer of Gods Elect? Answ. Jesus Christ, who being
the eternal Son of God, became Man, and continues to be God and Man in two
Natures, and one Person forever.

Bp. Usher's Body of Divinity, p. 3. The divine Nature did not assume a humane
Person, but the divine Person did assume a humane Nature. P. 160. in answer to
this Question, What say you of him? (meaning Christ) Answ. I believe he is the
only begotten Son of the most high and eternal God. I take him to mean him, to
wit, that Person that dyed on the Cross. And then, according to Edw. Portlock,
Priest of Philadelphia, Bp. Usher is a great Blasphemer. But it may be he will
tell me, I may hang Bp. Usher, as he told me and T. R. in his own house, we
might hang Sam. Clark and Dr. Hammond about our neck* A very odd expression for
a learned man to use*

S. Clark's Anno^ations on John 1.1. sait^ thus of the Word, That he had a
distinct sub^sistence, or was a distinct Person from the Father Note, Then
sure, according to S. Clark, the^^ must needs be two Gods personally, to wi^^
God the Father, and the Word or Son, wh^ was God, and distinct.

G. K's 3 d Narrative, p. 8. As Christ is Go^ so he is Man also, and the true
Christian Fai^^ is a Faith in him so considered. Note, The Christ dying as he
was Man, so he dyed as (...) was God also, and the true Christian Faith (...)
his Death is a Faith in him thus considered

Ne^^, it appea^s from the Canons of the Church of England, that Christ dyed as
(...) God as Man, A^^^^le 2. they say thus, (...) whole and perfect Natures,
that is to say, the Go^^head and Manhood were joined together in (...) Person,
never to be divided, whereof is one Christ very God and very Man, who truly
suffered, (...) crucified, dead and buried, etc. Note, Ve^^ God and very Man
was crucified, dead and b^^ried, according to the natural import of (...)
words, especially seeing the Natures we^^ never to be divided, and so not the
intrim^^ Death.

In their Te Deum laudamus, thus they confess, Thou art the King of Glory, O
Christ! thou art the everlasting Son of the Father; when thou tookest upon thee
to deliver Man, thou did not abhor the Virgins Womb; when thou had overcome
the sharpness of Death* thou did open the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers.

From whence observe two things, 1 st, The Everlasting Son of the Father did
not abhor the Virgins Womb 2 dly. That the everlasting Son of the Father did
overcome the sharpness of Death, and consequently the everlasting Son of the
Father was Dead, viz. Gods proper Son, the outward and visible Person Jesus.
And this is Blasphemy, says Edw. Portlock, Priest of Philadelphia, whence he
condemns the Authors of the Canons of their own Church for Blasphemers.

John, Bishop of Canterbury, in a Book containing 3 several Sermons, preached
at three several times, p. 19. speaking of Christ, he says thus, Though the
Word was truly and really God, yet he was not God the Father. Again, p. 30. The
Word was God, not God the Father. Note then, Then the Word which is God, and
not the Father, and the Father which is God, and not the Word, make two
distinct Gods personally, according to the Bishop of Canterbury.

Now I shall proceed to insert some Testimonies of the Baptized People, who, as
they are the most sound, and nearest to Christ of any other (as we know of) in
the due and right performance of his blessed Ordinances, so also in relation to
the Person of Christ (some of them) they do a^sert the Truth most plainly,
having opposed, with Christian zeal and courage, the contrary in the Quakers.

Benja. Keach, in his T^eatise, entitled, Christ alone the way to Heaven, or
Jacobs Ladder improved, p. 15. thus he says of Christ, It was necessary also
that he should be God, that he might reach Heaven, I mean, the full demands of
Gods Justice, by way of Satisfaction; a mere Man could not satisfy Infinite
Justice, or make up that Wrong our sins had done to God; but seeing both
Natures ^n Christ make but one Person, when Christ dyed, he that was truly God,
dyed: Hence it is said, God purchased the Church with his own Blood, which was
an infinite Satisfaction to divine Justice. P. 74. Thus, is it not a mavelous
thing to see him who was in the form of God, and thoug^t it no Robbery to be
equal with God to be in the form of a Servant, and lie in a Manger! to see him
w^o made the Creature, to be trod under foot of the Creature, etc. Page 77
thus, And since it was i^finite Justice our sins had wronged, and ^^finite
Punishment must be suffer^^, which no^^ but one that was God, could bear, nor
sati^fie for, etc.

Benj. Keach, in his Poems, speaking of Christ, in answer to the Quakers, (who,
with others, do deny that outward Person to be God) brings this for a reason to
prove Christ was God, He knew all things before they came to pass,
Which clearly proves the eternal God he was.


Again, He that was God, was flesh assuredly.

Against the Quakers he proves, That man's outward and fleshly Eye did see the
true Christ.

Again, He that Mary did conceive and bear within her Womb, was the Immanuel,
etc.

The Quaker objects, That the Body was not the Christ. He answers, He that lay
in the Manger was the true Christ And then he adds, God Man I testify in
verify,
Is the Christ of God, and none but he


And again, Jesus of Nazareth is God, and he that was sl^^n on the Cross was
Christ,

Even him, I mean, that hung upon the Tree,
You do deny Ch^i^^ Jesus for to be.


And then the Quaker answers, For though that Body which the Christ did take,
And for a while h^s Habitation make,
We do deny to be the Christ, yet I
Affirm Christ Jesus is the Lord most high,
Or the eternal God of strength and might,
Who does alone dwell in the glorious Light,
Which mortal Eyes cannot approach unto,
As Paul to Timothy does plainly show.


He answers the Quaker, The Matter's covered still, that I propound,
And unto it no answer yet have found,
Jesus of N^zareth is he, or no?
The eternal God, it is that which would know:
He that the Jews did crucify and stay --


The Doctrine laid down by W. P. in his (...) Foundation, page 14. which he
renders (...), riggid and unscriptural, I urge (...) in defense of this
Doctrine of Christ (...) as truly God as Man, which is this, That Man having
transgressed the righteous (...) of God, and to exposed to the Penalty of (...)
Wr^th, its altogether impossible for God to (...) or forgive, without a plenary
Satisfaction, (...) that there was no other may by which God (...) ob^^in
Satisfaction, or save men, than by (...) the Penalty of i^fi^ite Wrath and
(...) on Jesus Christ the sec^nd Person in (...), who for sins past, (...) and
to come (...) born and paid it to the offended Justice (...) Father.

Thus having finished my Testimonies, there comes an Objection in my way, which
I must answer.

Object. However you may improve many of these Sayings of the Church of
England, t^ justify this Doctrine, and condemn the contrary, yet they have
another meaning, which will wel^ enough reconcile them with themselves, and
whereby you will be found mistaken in the supposed advantage. For surely if
this be their meaning there must needs be great Contradictions in and among the
Church of England, which we cannon reasonably suppose is possible to be in a
Church that is ruled by so many learned Bishops and Priests (...) she is.

Answ. Whatsoever their meanings may be yet their word and reasons appear
substantial Arguments to justify the Doctrine which plead for, and ^^futes the
contrary as vain, foolish and absu^d, as well as proves it to be Heretical. And
therefore if (...) of the said Church should be of anoth^r mind, and contradict
those Authori^ies which the Church allows, thereby they prove themselves
(...) to be the true Religion, according to the (...) of one of their own
Teachers; That Relig^on that contradicts it self, and th^se Authorities which
it approves and allows, cannot be a true Religion. But whether they intend
the thing that they speak or no, it hurts not our cause ^t all, because the
sacred Records are sufficient ^or the defense thereof, without the help of
^umane Authority. So then, as we are to ^ollow Paul no further then he did
Christ, so neither must we follow Authors any furt^er then they do follow
Scripture.

Postscript.
NOw if any, either my Antagonist, or any other Person or Persons, whatsoever
and whoms^ever, that shall read this Treatise, shall notwithstanding still
remain dissatisfied ^oncerning the Doctrine herein laid down, ^et them not
longer remain, (as hitherto they ^ave done) to m^tter and whisper in holes and
corners, and rave and rail behind the Au^hors back; but let them appear openly
and publicly before the Authors face, even in the Light, viz. in the face of
the world, (if they are bent for opposition^ and refute (...) Arguments,
Reasons and Proofs ^er in (...) down, if they are able (by Scripture to (...)
it, and I shall submit my Judgment, when ^ can see and h^^r substantial
Scripture Proofs Reasons and Arguments to the contrary, (...) him or they that
shall thus render them; Bu^ if this they cannot do, and yet are still di^
satisfied then let them repair to me in Love (if they are not too proud) and I
promise by Gods Grace, to give them further Satisfaction; but if they will
neither appear public for Refutation, nor private for Information, and yet
will still remain to carp a the Author, or the Doctrine, o^ both, let (...) be
an argument that it is more out of (...) and malice against the Person of the
Author than for any reason they have or are able (...) render against the
Doctrine.

And, 2 dly, if my Antagonist John Wat. or any other Person or Persons
mentioned ^ this Treatise should suppose I have abuse them in any thing, let
them but publicly mak^ it appear, where and when I have liberty t^ hear and
answer, and I will, God permitting pub^lickly right them Or if none of these
(...) Proposals be taking, and yet they will (...) ^eceive and embrace the
Doctrine, then I ^ope such that can neither Refute, nor yet will ^e Informed,
(but will be Obstinate) that ^hey will be quiet.

Conclusion.
NOw for a Conclusion of all what has been said, notwithstanding ^here is such
a Difference in the World about Christ and the Faith of him, yet ^he Faith and
Knowledge of all Christen^om, relating to Christ, is concluded or ^omprehended
under these two Con^^derations.

1 st Christ is either an Invisible Spirit, which never was nor could be seen
with ^odily Eyes;

2 dly. Or else an outward Person, which has and will again be seen with
^odily Eyes.

From whence I lay down these Di^omma's,

Dilem. 1. Now they that own and believe the first, they deny the Incarnation,
Death, Burial, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ.

They that own and believe the second, they do own and believe that God was
Incarnate, dead, buried, raised from the dead, and ascended into Heaven,
because Christ is God, and all this befell Christ, who was visible, to wit,
seen with Bodily Eyes.

Dilem. 2. John Wats, and others like him, must either believe that the outward
Person was properly the Son of God, or else that he is not.

If they believe that he is, then the proper Son of God was the second Person
in the Trinity, and was eternal, and also was a God, and the outward Person
dyed, which was a God, according to their own belief. And then this they have
condemned in me for Heresy.

Or else they must believe he was not, and then he was not the second Person ^n
the Trinit^, and was not ete^nal, and (...) not a God. And this they have
con^emned in the Quakers for Heresy.

Dilem. 3. They must believe that ^^ther Christ took a Body and a Soul in Mary,
or else he did not, but only took (...) entire Nature of Man.

If they believe the first, then a Body (...) a Soul makes a Person, and that
^here was another Person that took his Person, and this makes two Persons in
Christ. And if they believe the second, that he only took the entire and proper
Nature of Mankind, and not a Man or Person. Then there was a Person that ^ook
this Nature, which was an eternal Person, the second Person in the ^rinity, and
truly a God; and because that visible Man was a Person, and that there is but
one Person in Christ, and Christ is the second Person in the Trinity, which is
^ruly God, and also that visible Man, and so, he that was a God, was a Man, and
that Man dying, he that was truly God dyed; and this they have condemned in me
for Heresy.

Here they are pinched between the Door and the Hinges, and which way they will
make their escape I cannot tell, either they must embrace Quakerism to shun
Christianity, or they must embrace Christianity to shun Quakerism; and yet both
of these they have condemned for Heresy.

The upshot of all is this, As it was impossible for the Divine Nature of
Christ to suffer strictly in the abstract, so it was impossible also for the
Humane Nature to suffer so considered, but both together in the Concreet.

FINIS.

