Pillars of Salt.

An HISTORY OF SOME CRIMINALS Executed in this Land; FOR Capital Crimes.

With some of their Dying Speeches; Collected and Published, For the WARNING of
such as Live in Destructive Courses of Ungodliness.

Whereto is added, For the better Improvement of this History, A Brief
Discourse about the Dreadful Justice of God, in Punishing of SIN, with SIN.

Deuteronomy. 19.20. Those which remain shall hear and fear, and shall henceforth
commit no more any such Evil among you.

BOSTON in New England. Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Samuel Philips
at the Brick Shop near the Old-Meeting-House. 1699.

Preface.
WHen the Blessed Farel, had Preached unto a Vast Multitude of People, some
that liked it not; asked, By whose Command, or, at whose Desire, he P^eached?
He Answered, and it was Answer Enough; B^ the Command of Christ, and at the
Desire of His People It Is possible, the Author of the Ensuing Disc^urs^s, and
Relations, may be asked a Reason for doing what he has done, in this
Publication: Bu^ his Reasonable Account of it is, It Is all done by the Command
of Christ, and at the Desire of His People.

One ^a^es we^l, That Sermons Preached, are like Showers of Rain, that Water
for the Instant; B^^ Sermons Printed, are like Snow that lies longer on the
Earth. God grant that the Truths falling from Heaven, in this Form, this Winter
upon our Neighbors, may Soak into their Hearts, with a Sensible and a Du^able,
Efficacy.

We find in Zuinger, the mention of a City besi^ged by a Poten^ Enemy; where
the Inhabitants took the Dead Bodies of the Starved People, and set them in
Armor on the Walls; at the sight whereof, the Amaz^d Enemy F^ed. Viee is ^^e
Enemy that beseiges ^s; a Number of Dead Wretches are here set on our (...) may
the horrible Sight cause that worst Enemy to fly before it*

REFLECTIONS on the Dreadful CASE of Sin Punished With Sin.
Made, November. 17. School, at Boston-Lecture.
Give Attention to as Dreadful a Case, as ever (...) was discoursed! You find
it proposed, in

ROMANS I.28. God gave them over unto a Reprobate Mind, to Do those things which
are not Convenient.

THE Fearful Judgments of Go^ upon men, for their Sins against Him, are so
observably multiplied among us, that we are unaccountably Sinful, if we do not
Cry out, Lord, My Flesh Trembles for Fear of ^hee, and I am Afraid of thy
Judgments.

But it is to be Feared, That the most Fearful of all those Judgments, are
least of all observed Namely, The Judgments wherein the Holy God Punishes one
Sin with another, and Leaves a woeful Sinner, yet more woefully to Sin against
Him. Sirs, These Judgments of God, are of all the most Fearful; and yet, alas,
they are of all the most Frequent. Of these amazing Judgments, we may say, How
unsearchable are the Judgments of God, and His Ways past finding out

These are the Judgments of God now before us. The Apostle of the Gentiles, is
here decla^ring, the Means to know God, which the Gentiles and particularly,
the Romans, had Enjoyed is the Light of Nature; and relating how they
neg^lected and abused those Means, in their not Glorifying Him as God; but
Inventing, and Erecting and Adoring vain Images of Him. The pro^gress of the
Divine Judgments, against the For^lorn Gentiles, for their not Glorifying of
God, (...) here described unto us. God Left them, For this cause, in the first
place, to become vain in their Imaginations. It is a mavelous Thing, I have
often marvelled at it! That while the more Ba^^barous Nations have Worshipped
the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, and the more specious and gli^^tering Objects of
Idolatry; such Learned Nat^^ons as the Egyptians worshipped a Bull, a Dog and a
Rat; The Learned Graecians, worship Fevers, and Passions, for their Gods;
and o^ most Learned Romans worshipped the very Fur^ of Hell. Truly, there was
the Just Wrath of God, in this Thing, That the Nations, who had most of Light,
whereby to know God, and yet Glorified Him not as God, should become thus Vain
in their Imaginations. But stopped they here? No; There is mentioned a further
Depravation whereto God loft them, in His Just Wrath against them, for their
Idolatries: For this cause God gave them up to Vile Affections; which also
imply and comprize Vile Practices in them. It is here indeed, Three Times over
noted, That God punished their Idolatries, by leaving the wretched Idolaters to
other and farther Abominations; Especially, He punished the Spiritual
Uncleanness of Idolatry, by leaving them to the Corporal Uncleanness of
Debauchery: They who worshipped God under the Shape, it may be, of Bruits, were
left by God, unto the Sins, which made them worse than Bruits. If you Read the
Old Pagan Suetonius his life of Nero, you will see those very Villainies acted, in
the Unclean Court of Rome, which our Apostle here Brands with Infamy. The
Christians at Rome, knew where to find a Court, that at this very Time* would
afford an Exemplification, and Explication, of what the Apostle thus wrote unto
them.

In our Text; the matter is once again Repeted. Behold, the Holy God here
Punishing of Sinners, by Giving them over to a Reprobate mind. But what is a
Rebrobate mind? It is here Explaned; A mind let upon doing of those Things
which are not convenient: Or, which are unreasonably wicked. And a Black Lest
of those things then follows; The Bottom of Hell it self, could not afford but
such a Black List of Crying Abominations.

Now there is a very Terrible Doctrine which even like a Thunderbolt hence
falls among us.

That the Holy God, often Punishes many Sins of men, by Giving them up to
still Blacker Sins against Him.

I find, the Jews have a Notable saying; Merces Transgressi^nis Transgressio;
That is to say, Men are punished for One Transgression, by being therefore
Given up unto Another. And this is the Thing, that is now to be said unto us;
God help us to Receive with an Agreeable and Profitable Attention, what shall
be said concerning it.

There are Two very Important CASES, to be now Treated upon.

In the first place, the Methods of the Divine Sov'raignty and Equity, in thi^
awful manner, are now to be set before us. It is a Subject of deep Enquiry;

The First CASE. How does the Holy God, Punish men for One Sin, by Leaving them
to Another; and how is it Consistent with His Holiness to do so?
Now this is an Enquiry so full of dazzling Mystery and Amazement, that it must
be answered, with all Humble Modesty. Our Humble Answer to it, must be, in
these Conclusions.

Conclusion. I.
There are certain Spiritual Plagues, as well as Temporal Plagues, among those
Terrible Things, which a Sinful world is justly Plagued wi^hal. Temporal
Plagues, or, Disastrous Blows upon men, in their Secular concerns, are not the
only Punishments, that their Sins are chastis'd withal; Calamities that befall
Sinful men more immediately in their Outward man; Such as Poverty, and Slavery,
and Reproach, and Sickness, and the Embittermen^s and Abbreviations of the
Natural Life, are not all the Sc^u^ges, with which the Sins of men are
punished. There is another Sort of Arrows, in the te^^ible Quiver of the
Sin-Revenging Lord: Even Spiritual Plagues, or direful and i^e^ul Strokes from
God, upon the Spirits of them, that Sin against Him. In these Plagues, the God
of Heaven, says, as to that Sinner, in Exodus 9.14. I will send my plagues upon
thy Heart; The Heart, the Soul, is the Object, that these Plagues, more
immediately fall upon

This General Conclusion, we lay in the Foundation of our whole Discourse;
because to thi^ Head of Spiritual Plagues, is to be referred the whole Case,
of, One Sin punished with another.

Conclusion II.
As an Instance of Spiritual Plagues, The Oracles of God, have often told us,
That Some Sins, are not only Consequents, but also Punishments of others. To
this purpose, we have that famous passage, in Isa. 6.10. where, the people who
had sinfully Stopped their Ears, and Shut their Eyes, have this Judgment passed
upon them for it; Make the heart of this people Fat, and make their Ears Heavy,
and Shut their Eyes. The whole Jewish Nation, have now for many Ages, been a
Flaming Monument of such Plagues, and Fulfillment of the Prophecy that
praedicted them: God has for this Cause given them up to a vile Unbelief: they
are Shut up in Unbelief, as in the Utter Darkness of a Prison, because they
have to criminally Refused the Lord Messiah; and in that Prison of Unbelief,
must they Ly punished, until the Times of the Gentiles are fulfilled. The Wrath
of Heaven, does not Now commonly with such Visible Strokes from Heaven, cut off
them that have provoked it, as perhaps it commonly did, when the Lord more
visibly Exhibited Himself, as a King among His People, in the Mosaic Paedogogy.
But Spiritual Plagues, and such Derelictions, and such Dispensations, as more
immediately affect the Spirits of men, with a Confirmed State of Sin, are those
that are now Scattered like Brimstone on men's Habitations. And yet such Plagues
also were of Old ^^flicted, as well as Now. Hence we read, in Psalm. 81.11, 12.
My people would not Hearken to my voice; so I gave them up, unto their own
Hearts Lust, and they walked in their own counsels. This was to punish men's
former Sins, by giving them up to further Sins; even all the other Sins, that
their own Hearts Lust would incline them unto. Hence we read, in Psalm. 95.10,
11. It is a people that Err in their Heart, and have not known my ways: Unto
whom I swear in my wrath, that they should not Enter into my Rest. This was to
punish men's first Refusal of Entering into Rest, by giving them up, unto One Sin
after another, which might bring Desolation upon them. Hence we read, in Hos.
4.17 Ephraim is joined unto Idols: And now, What shall be done to Idolatrous
Ephraim? Enemies* Devour him* Famines, Consume him! Thunders, Batter him* No; A
worse Thing than all of This, Let him alone. But then, I am sure, Sin and Hell,
will not Let him alone. Upon this Passage, I remember one of the Ancients, breaks
forth into that Exclamation, Vis Indignantis D^^ Terribilem vocem dudire? It Is
the Dreadful Voice of an Angry God! Ponder to this purpose, Likewise that
passage, in Isa. 63.17. O Lord, why have thou made us to Err from thy ways,
and hardened our Heart from thy Fear? God punishes One Sinful Error in men, by
giving them up to another, One Sinful Hardness, by giving them up to another.
It is an awful Observation, of Austin's; Jussist et sic est, ut paena sua sibi
sit omnis inordi^atu^ affectus.

Conclusion III.
As well Scripture as Reason tells us, That Sins may truly be accounted
Punishments; and that it is among the worst of Punishments, to be given up unto
a Reprobate mind. As there is a Moral Evil in every Sin, so Sin may be reckoned
a Paen^l Evil too. There is no Sin, but what is a Misery as well as a Sin. A
man, by Running into Sin, does run into Darkness: The Sinner does, according to
1 John 1 6 Walk in Darkness: And is it not a miserable thing to Walk in Darkness
from day to day? A plagued Egypt scarce knew a thing more miserable. By every
Sin, a man is Degraded, and Debased and Disgraced, and made a miserable Wretch.
Hence we are told, in Romans 3 23. All have sinned, and come short of the glory
of God. Alas, By Sinning, we very sadly Loose our glory. Sin is in the very
Nature of it, a Departure from God: and therefore it is a Departure from the
Chief Good, and from that Faelicity, and Fr^ition which is most of all to be
desired. In every Sin, a man does that astonishing Thing, in Jer. 2.12. To
Forsake the Fountain of Living Waters, and h^w out cisterns that can hold no
water. Now, Sy^s, Think, and judge, and say, Whether an Immortal Soul, can
bring upon it self a greater misery. Yea, and the more of Sin any man does
commit, the more of misery does belong unto that man; and the more of Wrath
will God at the last proportion out unto him. The Sinner is, as the Bible
speaks, Heaping up Wrath; and by every New Sin, he adds unto that Heap, which
being Fired by the Breath of God, shall scorch and scald upon him, throughout
Eternal Ages. The Wages of Sin is Death; and the more Sin that any man has
done, the more of Wages, and of Burnings, and of Torments, will belong unto
that man for ever. There are also Degrees of Sin; the Book of Truth informs us,
that there are some Greater Abominations; and some Sins have more of misery in
them, than others have. Some Sins bring more of Blemish on the Names of men,
and more of Blindness, and Bondage, and Horror on their Minds. There are
Miscarriages, that bring more of Confusion with them, and that more confound
men in all their Interests. It may be, they are miscarriages, that render men
presently and grievously obnoxious to the Resentments of the Societies which
they belong unto, and that bring Censures and Ruins upon the obnoxious. I have
read of a Judge, who being to punish a man for Drunkenness, ordered that the
man should be Drunk over again: He judged it seems, That the Crime it self was
its own punishment, a man could not be worse punished than by being Left unto
such a Beastly Crime: [and have I not wronged the Beasts, in calling it so: The
Beasts affect it not!] Indeed the very Pagans themselves have seen cause to
say, Sceleris in Scelere Supplicium. Sin is its own plague. He that lays all
these things together, will be convinced of This, Lord, Thou do never punish
our Sin more Terribly, than by Leaving us to Sin yet more against thee!

Conclusion IV.
The Punishment of Sin, does ever proceed from the God, that is offended by
Sin; though Sin it self do not so. A Reprobate mind is not made by that God,
who is Goodness it self, and who always made all Things very good: And yet
this Good God may order the Effects of a Reprobate mind, for to be the
punishments of those that have done Evil before Him. We are wisely to
Distinguish, between Sin, as it is a Crime, and as it may be the Punishment of
a Crime. Now, according to this Distinction, we are certain, That God cannot be
the Author of Sin: Ultor peccati non est Author peccati. The Jesuits and
Arminians, that Revile us, for Holding that God is the Author of Sin, do but
show, that they Resolve to Revile: The Lord Rebuke them* No, We all Agree to
say, He that cannot Look on Iniquity, will not Make Iniquity; He that Hates all
the Workers of Iniquity, cannot Himself Work Iniquity. The God that cannot Lie,
cannot in any thing Decline, from His own Eternal Rule of Right, nor Incline
any of us to Decline from that Rule, Are Sinners given over by God? Never so,
but that at the same time it may be said of them, as in Ephesians. 4.19. They have
given themselves over unto Wickedness. Hence is that caution, in Jam. 1.13, 14.
Let no man say, when h^ is Tempted, I am Tempted of God; for God cannon be
Tempted with Evil, neither Tempts He an man; But every man is Tempted, when
he is draw^ away of his own Lust, and Enticed. But then we are also certain,
That there is no punishmen^ of Sin, but what comes from God. God Act as a
Judge, in the punishment of Sin; yea, there are Positive Acts of God about it;
It is a Flow of His Crown, in Psalm 94.1. O Lord God, T^ whom Vengeance
belongs. The Revenging of Si^ is from God; from the Throne of God, from the
Hand of God, and not without some Act o^ the Great God, issue out all those
Revenge^ which testify against the Sins of men.

Conclusion V.
The Acts of God, in bringing about, the Pu^^ishment of one Sin with another,
are infinite^ Blameless, but marvellously Various. There a^ several Holy Acts
of the Thrice Holy God, in giving a Sinful man up unto a Reprobate Mind. When
God Punishes one Sin, with leaving a man to Another, it is by doing that
Stupendous Thing, whereof we often Read in His Word; Namely, The Hardening of
the Heart in such a man. But how is this brought about? Some have conceived,
That this was one of the Unutterable Things, heard by our Apostle Paul, when he
was Caught up to the Third Heaven; It Is very sure, no man on Earth, can fully
Utter this Tremendous Operation of God.

In general; We all Agree with Austin, That God Hardens not the Heart of any
man, or gives him up to a Reprobate Mind, Infundendo Malitiam, or, by Infusing
of Sin, into his Heart: but He rather does it, Non Infundendo Gratiam, or, by
not Infusing of Grace.

Let us more particularly, take up these Apprehensions Concerning it.

I. The Original Sin, which man has De^raved himself withal, contains in it*
an hideous and hellish Disposition, to Every Sin whatso^ver* Besides our Actual
Sins which are Numberless, we have within us, an Original Sin which indeed, the
Original of them all. Of this do ^ome understand, what they so Read, in Psalm.
90.^. Thou have set our Secret in the light of thy countenance; even that Sin,
that is of all the most Secret; the Original Sin defiling of our Hearts within
us. However, of this most plainly, we have that Confession, in Psalm. 51.5.
Behold, I was shapen in Iniquity, and in sin did my Mother conceive me. Our
First Parents, whom God justly made the Representatives of all mankind, were
made Mutable; and it was no Unjust Thing in the God of Heaven to make them thus
Mutable: Immutability is the prerogative of God alone. These (...) Parents
being thus Mutable, abused the Liberty o^ their own will, and by Sinning
against God, they brought a Pravity upon their Natures. This Pravity is with
all possible Equity unavoidably derived unto Us, their Children; who
accordingly bring Vicious Natures into the World with us. Now, in this Original
Sin of our Natures, there are the Se^ds of all the Wickedness Imaginable. We
are told, in Matthew 15.19 Out of the Heart proceed Evil Thoughts, Murders,
Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, False Witness, Blasphemies. But we are sure,
There comes nothing out of the Vessel, which was not first in the Vessel.
Truly, This Evil Figment (as the Jews call it) in the Heart, is perpetually
Forging of Wickedness, and it naturally carries us to all the villainies which a
wicked world was ever defaced withal. When you have brought in (if you can do
it) a Catalogue, of all the monstrous Enormities, that have been drying this
World for the Fires of the Last Conflagration, Then let me say, In my Heart,
and in thy Heart, there is a woeful Disposition to all of those Enormities!

II If God should not by His Grace, Restrain the Rage of Original Sin, in the
Hearts of Men, they would soon ^ush upon the most Outrageous Impieties in the
World. As it was said, in Psalm. 76.10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise
thee, the Remainder of that wrath shall thou Restrain: So may we say, Surely
the Rage of Sin is permitted by God, so far as His praise may be fetched out of
it; but the Remainder of that Rage He Restrains most gloriously. The Restraints
of Grace upon the children of men are Wonderful. Upon Some there are the
Restraints of Special Grace. There is a principle of Sanctity showred from on
High into their Hearts; and Original Sin is powerfully mortified by that
principle. Hence the persons under those Restraints, heartily Hate Sin, and
Loath Sin, and will not freely commit any known Sin; but say as in Genesis 39.9.
How can I do this great wickedness, and Sin against God? Upon Others, there are
only the Restraints of Common Grace. There is a Conscience in them; and though
that Light within be so Darkene^, that it is not a sufficient guide unto Life,
yet this Light shows men many Fair Things, and Like a Fire, it flashes Fiery
Rebukes upon them, if they do not those things. This Conscience is a curious
Engine, whereby God, the Supreme Governor of the World keeps the World in
Order. Men would be so many French Dragoons, or Turkish Pirates one upon
another, if it were not for this Check from God upon them. A man would soon
Murder his Father and Mother, Destroy his own Wife, and Debauch his Neighbors,
Blaspheme God, and Fire the Town, and Run a m^ck among the people, if God
should not Lay upon him Restraints of Conscience, (and some further, of
Interest,) and say, as in Genesis 20.6. I witheld thee from sinning against me.
Men may say Like Hazael, when they hear of any Brandeable Action, Am I a Dog,
that I should do such a Thing? But every man of us all, would be a Dog; and a
Devil too, if the Restraints of Grace were taken off. The Devout Martyr
Bradford therefore, when he heard of any Extraordinary Sin perpetrated in the
Neighborhood, would smite his own Heart, and say, In this Heart of mine is
that which would soon betray me into the same Sin, if God should Leave me to my
self! And such was the Speech of the Ancient, on such an occasion. Ille Heri,
Tu Hodie, Ego Cras: If he Sinned Yesterday, and if Thou Sin To Day, I am as
Likely to Sin To morrow.

III. God, upon great provocations, Withdraws, or Witholds from Sinful men, the
Grace, which He never owed them; and Thou! they Sin, most horribly, enormously,
prodigiously. There are Venomous Fires, as one may call them, in the Souls of
men; The Grace of God, keeps under those Fires, with Heavenly Chains upon them:
If men stir up their own Sin, till He Remove these Chains, those Fires will
break forth, and belch out, and vomit up Affronts to Heaven, Like so many
Flaming Mountains; men will be all over Set on Fire of Hell immediately. It Is
very sure, That God may Deny to men, the Grace which He never Owed them. God
never obliged Himself unto any Unregenerate man, to bestow the Influences of
His Grace upon that man. And, if this Grace have been Despised, and Rejected,
and Rebelled against, how much more unexceptionable does it still become; for
the Sovereign Lord of all, to forbear bestowing of it? In this point we are
Silenced, from Romans 9.14, 15. What shall we say then? Is there unrighteousness
with God? God Forbid For He says, I will have mercy, on whom I will have merey.
To Ly at the Foot of the Sovereign God, with an Humble Silence, under His
Uncontrouleable Irresistible Will, is an Essential part of that Humiliation,
without which, no man shall see the Lord. Now if the Grace of God, be not
granted unto Sinful men, what piece of Sinfulness will they stick at? At None
at all* Should the Dam of Restraining Grace be taken down, a devouring Flood of
Sin, will presently carry all before it.

IV. When the Punishment of Sin with Sin, is to be brought about, the Sinless
and Spotless Providence of God, often presents unto the Sinner, those Objects,
which are the Occasions and Incentives of his Falling into Sin. It was by the
Spotless Providence of God, that the Golden Wedge came in the way of Achan, and
that the Charming Lady came in the sight of David: And now, what needed any
more to Captivate the Forsaken of the Lord? We say, It Is Opportunity that makes
a Thief: God, in His most Spotless Providence, gives to many a Sinner, an
Opportunity, to Exert the Lusts that are Nested in him; and there needs no more
than such an Opportunity, for an Heart abandoned by Heaven, to conceive Sin,
and bring forth Death. A man once, who did not know his own Heart, wondered when
it was told him, That he should Burn Cities, and Kill People, and Brain
Children; and Rip up Women with Child: Thought he* I am sure, I have not an Heart
for to do such Barbarous, Things! Now the Prophet, that he might assure this
man, of his Living to Do all these Things, only says to him, 2 King. 8 13. Thou
shall be King: q d Thou shall have an Opportunity to do all of this; There
needs no more! The Mistress of a Family, Lets what Plate is necessary, be
commonly used about the House, though a Thievish Servant will Steal that Plate,
and Smart for doing so, God, in His most Unblemishable Providence, gives a
Chenter, an Opportunity to Defraud his Neighbors: and gives a Drunkard, an
Opportunity to see the Wine give its color in the Cup: and gives a Wanton, an
Opportunity to Court his Mistresses. There needs no more, to Take such a
prepared Heart, as the poor Sinners is: The Sparks are no sooner struck, but
the Tynder takes immediately.

V. There is nothing that more Entraps a Sinner, in the punishment of Sin with
Sin, than the Scandal of Sin committed by great Pretenders to Godliness: and it
is not without the ordering of God, that this Trap is laid for ungodly men. The
Sin of men, is, that they do not themselves Personally, and Seriously, and
Sincerely, enter into Covenant with God in Christ, and Walk in His Blessed
ways, according to His Covenant. Now, God will Punish this their Sin, by
giving them up unto more Sin, and unto Obstinacy in all their Sin. How is it
accomplished? Men are very ready to take up their Opinion of a Way, from the
Character of them who walk in that way. But there will always be persons of a
Bad Character and Carriage, among those, who profess the Christian Religion,
which is the way of Truth. And So there follows that mischief, i^ 2 Pet. 2 2 By
reason of them the way of Truth shall be Evil spoken of: Men take up
unreasonable prejudices against the way of Truth, and so they go on in the way
of Sin, until they die. Now, God Orders it, that when such Things Do fall out,
as they must fall out, our ungodly people shall be acquainted with them. David,
a professor of the way of Truth, did a very Scandalous Thing, upon which he
received that Admonition, By this Deed, thou have given great Occasion unto the
Enemies of the Lord to Blaspheme. Now, the Lord has Ordered the Recording of
This Deed, that men for the Sin of being the Enemies of the Lord, may be given
up unto their Blasphemies. We find, in the writings of the Ancients, that about
a Thousand years after this, namely, in the primitive Times of Christianity,
many Pagans, would not be Christians* and made this plea for it: The Christians
tell us, that their Christianity, is a thing much better than what we profess:
but it cannot be as they say: for one David, was one of their greatest Saints,
and by their own Confession, this David, was one who did as Damnable Things, as
could be done by a mortal man! Oh! Lamentable Wretchedness! [compare, Ezekiel.
36.20. with Romans 2.23, 24.] Sometimes, when a multitude of Sinners must be
Given up to Sin, God Orders it, that they shall see the Scandalous
Immoralities, that some Eminent Man falls into. There was once a Minister of
God, that fell into a Sin, for which the Displeasure of God brought a very
Tragical Thing upon hi^: An ungodly man, who before this, had some A woe upon
him, from the words of that Minister, saw the Tragedy: And now, what followed?
We read, in 1 King, 13.33. After this Thing, Jeroboam Returned not from his
Evil way. Thus, there are Strict pretenders to Godliness, that fall into Sins,
which give Scandals to the Neighborhood: The Neighbors, that were through
their own Sinfulness, before this, not well-Established in Godliness, After
this Thing, they cast off all Regards of Piety, and become very Impious. I have
read of one, sorely Tempted unto Atheism, who gave this doleful Account of it;
I Live under a Minister that will Preach Good Sermons, but his Conversation is
quite Contrary to his Preaching: He is a Lascivious Wretch; and therefore,
since he does not Believe, that there is a God, it makes me suspect, whether
there be one or no. Thus, the Great God, sets a Cup of Poison, before ungodly
men, who have slighted the Waters of Life: The Sin of a Scandalous Example, is
a Cup of Poison set before them: They Take it, and Swell, and Burst, with
Enmity against God, and perish in their Enmity.

VI. An Offended God, sometimes for Sin, gives men up to a Singular Energy of
Satan; and Then! Then they go on to Sin, with a very Satanical Fury. There Is
many a Prayerless Heart, many a Slothful Heart, many a Coveteous Heart, many a
Malicious Heart, many a Lascivious Heart, many an Heart inordinately set upon
Sin, after means used for the Cure of it. Some Devil sees this Heart, and puts
in, as it were, a Memorial desiring, That he may take a fuller possession of
that woeful Heart. The Righteous God permits (...); and it is a Righteous Thing
with Him to permit it. God will no longer Defend the Soul of the Sinner from
the Efficacy of the Devil. And now, what follows? The Sinner is, Led Captive by
the Devil at his will. And, alas, what will not men do, when the Devil is in them?
As we read, in 1 King 22.22. There came forth a Spirit, and he said, I will go
forth, and I will be a Lying Spirit: -- And the Lord said, Thou shall persuade
him, and prevail also: Go forth, and do so. Thus, the Devils; They stand ready
to Go forth, and be, one of them, a Lying Spirit, another of them, a Sensual
Spirit, another of them, a Profane Spirit, in the Hearts of them, that are
given over by God: God says, Do, Go, Thou shall prevail against that miserable
Sinner. There is a prodigious Instance of this Thing in profane Swearers. When
they have used themselves to Swear Profanely, some Devil takes that possession
of their Tongues, that they Belch out Hellish Oaths continually, and Swear so
commonly, tha^ they know not how to speak without it. Wha^ Vile Things did
Judas perpetrate, when as it i^ said, in Joh. 13.27. Satan Entered into him: An^
Ananias, when, as it is said, in Act. 5*3. Satan filled his Heart? Even a
Peter, a Child of God, may do very Criminal Things, when Sifted by a Devil: The
presence of a Silly Damsel, most wretchedly Entangles him. How much more, will
one that is a Child of the Devil, he most heinously Criminal, when he is given
up to do the Lusts of his Father? But under this Diabolical Possession, there
is no prop^rty of the Devil, more commonly to be noted, than that of his being,
An Unclean Spirit. An Unclean Spirit often Seizes the Heart of a man, that has
Invited him. And that Heart, then becomes an Oven, that has the Fire of Hell,
upon every Temptation glowing in it: The Vile Affections of Uncleanness, do
then Shake off their Bridles: The Beast is by some Devil Spurred on to
Exorbitances that cannot be imagined: When the Spirit of Uneleanness, has
taken the Sinner, it is very Rare, [ Solomon saw Scarce One of a Thousand!] that
they Stop, till they be run down into Deep, of Perdition, with their Brethren.

VII. One very usual way, wherein, God gives ^en up to a Reprobate Mind, is by
leaving them to ^he Delusions of an Erroneous Mind; and Suffering them to take
up Vile Opinions, that Suit their Vile Affections. We read of some Sinners,
^ere, That they become vain in their Imaginations, and their Foolish Heart is
Darkened. And thus, we read of some, in 2 These. 2.10, 11, 12. They Received not
the Love of the Truth, that they might be saved: For this cause, God shall send
them Strong Delusion, that they should believe a Lie, that they all might
(...). Fallen man, is a Creature full of Ignorance: His Fall has wounded his
Intellectuals: He is more prone to Vain Thoughts, than to Right, ones: Leave
this Wild As^ Colt unto himself, and he will rush Head Strong into every False
way. If God, the Father of Lights, do not Enlighten us, we shall see nothing
aright: But He wi^holds His Enlightening Influences, From the minds of those,
who not Love the Truth, which He has given them: The Powers of Darkness, then
set in (...) Darken them, with Strong Delusions; They are Blinded by the (...)
of this World: And, Strong Delusions do certainly lead men to Strange
Iniquities. Yea, sometimes God gives men over to such Strong Delusions, that
they will count the most bloody Murders, to be a Good Service to Heaven; they
will count the most Nicolaitan Abominations to be but Innocent Recreations;
they will plead for no less Crimes, than that of which the Impudent Italian
Cardinal, published an Apology, and an Encomium. What a Reprobate Mind is there
in those men, that can Reverence an Incarnate Devil at Rome, as if he were an
Infallible Vicar of Christ, and a God upon Earth; and that can conform to all
the Extravagant Folly and Madness of Popery? All Europe did so two Hundred
years ago, and more than Half Europe do so, to this Day! God has given men
over to such a Strong Delusion, to Punish them for their not Loving the Truth
of the Lord Jesus Christ. What a Reprobate Mind, is there in those men, that
can reckon such a foolish and such a Filthy Whore-master, as that Impostor
Mahomet, for the great Prophet of God, and receive such a Volumn of abominable
Non sense as the Alcoran, for the Book of Life? The Three Greatest Emperors
upon Earth, do it, at this day; and mighty Empires, and Kingdoms do it! God
has given men over to such a Strong Delusion, to punish them, for their not
Loving the Truth of the Lord Jesus Christ. What a Reprobate Mind, is there in
those men, who look upon the poor feeble ruined Conscienc^, the Remainder of an
Excusing and a Condemning Principle in Fallen man, to be, The Christ of God;
and who make the whole Gospel of Christ, nothing but an Allegory of this poor
Conscience; and who dream, that when this Proud Wicked Conscience is become so
unfaithful as to Cease Accusing of them for Sin, they are then Free from Sin?
More than an Hundred Thousand in the English Nation, since our Time have done
so! It Is because a Jealous God, will Punish men, for their Slighting of His
Precious Christ, and not living in the Love of the Truth. But, Ah, Lord, What
will thou do to Nations, wherein there is to be found after all, a more
Horrible Thing! The Revelation of the Christian Religion, is the most Glorious
Favor, that ever the God of Heaven Enriched the World withal: And there is as
full Demonstration given, to the Christian Religion, as there is for the Being
of a God: It is impossible for any thing to be more fully Demonstrated than
This, That our Blessed Jesus is the Redeemer of the World, and that He is Risen
from the Dead. And yet there is a Generation of Sinful men, of late horribly
multiplied in the English Nation, who Deride all this Reveled Religion, and
Blaspheme the Glorious Lord of it. Whence is this? Truly, It Is from the
Dreadful Vengeance of God, upon this Generation, for their Disobedience unto
His Holy Religion. By the late Reigns, that made more than Three Kingdoms to
Sin, it is Incredible how much Vice got head in the Kingdoms: Vice, which is
ever contrary to, and Condemned by, the Holy Religion of our Lord. Men that
were called, Christians, would give themselves over, to that Vice, which was
not allowed among the Sober Pagans themselves: and now God has given them
over, to shake off the very Name of Christians. Men have Rebelled against the
Oracles of our Lord Jesus Christ; and now they abandon those Heavenly Oracles,
to set up wretched Stuff, which they call, The Oracles of Reason. There is the
Vengeance of God in this Thing, to Ripen the Nation for an Amazing Storm, that
will doubtless break upon it, ere this Generation pass away.

It is an awful passage, which I find in the Writings of a Learned Person, of
the English Nation, who has sometimes Preached in that very Pulpit, where I am
now Standing.

The Hydra of Socinianism, has not only Hissed, but mortally Stung many a Soul
in the Polonian, Hungarian, Transylvanian, and Begick Churches, and I could
heartily wish it had never S^vum after Pelagius, through the (...) Sea's, with
whole Polios tied about its Neck, to lay its Poisonous Eggs, in our Seminaries.
The Lord speedily Crush them in pieces, that they may never hatch into fiery
living Serpents, to provoke the Lord unto Vengeance. What Country in Europe
has Sw^^e^ed under more Tearing Scourges, bitter State-Confusions, and
Convulsions, and dreadful Shakings, than Poland, where it had its first vent
and patronage? And how far the Belgic Lion, has had his Nails pared, and his
Teeth knocked out, by that Hammer of Gods Wrath, in Europe, since the
Publication of those Blasphemous Treatises, I wish both They and We did
seriously lay to Heart.

[Thus Mr. S Lee.]

But what may now be feared, for the Fate of England, where Socinianism has
not only been prevailing horribly, but also been advancing into Deism, which
Denies the only Lord God, even our Lord Jesus Christ, with a yet more horrible
Degree of Blasphemy!

THus you have seen the Holy methods of God, in Punishing of Sin with Sin: Yea,
you have at this very moment before you, a Tragical and Amazing Instance of His
doing so. That man's Heart is all Adamant, and a very Reprobate Mind indeed is
in that man, who is not now Inquisitive, How to prevent so direful a
Punishment. It is Time for us, to take into our Thoughts,

The Second CASE. What course we are to take, that the Great God, may not make
our being left unto more Sin, the direful Punishment of our Sin?
That we may Escape this Tremendous Vengeance of God, Si^s, Let us attend unto
the Counsels of Heaven, that are now to be set before us.

I. Let us not be of such a Reprobate Mind, as to Esteem it a Small Thing, for
the Great God once to give us over, unto the Punishment of Sin, with Sin
Consider, with a Trembling S^ul, Consider the Deplorable condition, of them who
are under the sore Punishment of Sin with Sin; There never was a Sorer
Punishment! Never did any Rapid Peals of Thunder, carry such Alarums of Death
with them, as those, in Rev. 22.14. He that is unjust, Let him be unjust still;
and he that is Filthy, Let him be Filthy still. Never does the Curse of God
more Irefully Thunder-strike a Sinner; than when it Punishes him for one
Injustice by leaving him to another, and when it Punishes him for one
Filthiness by leaving him to another. Other Afflictive Dispensations of God,
may be Fatherly Castigations; But when Sin is Punished with Sin, this looks
horribly Vindictive. When the wise man speaks of men's being left unto the
Sinful Folly of Uncleanness, he says, in Prove. 22.14. He that is Abhorred of
the Lord shall fall therein. And when the Heavenly Psalmist, speaks of men's
being left unto the Sin of Coveteousness and Earthly-mindedness, he says, in
Psalm. 10.3. That man, the Lord Abhors him. Truly, when a man is given over to
Sin, it carries, this fearful Aspect with it; it looks as if such a man were
under the Abhorrence of the Lord! I tell you, Sirs, and it is a dreadful Thing
that I am going to tell you: This, of being Left unto Sin for Sin, it is a
Punishment for a Devil. The very Devils are punished by being left unto the
Sin, that augments the Chains of Black Darkness for ever upon them. Those
forlorn men, that are left unto Sin for Sin, have the Black Chains of Darkness,
in some sort, like those of the very Devils laid upon their Souls. Oh! Tremble,
when you Think on it! Mark what I say; There is not one Regenerate Soul among
you all, but what will readily own the Truth of This: A man had better have his
Eyes put out, than be given over to a Penal Blindness of Heart. A man had
better ly groaning under the dolours of the Stone, than be given over to an
Heart of Stone. A man had better be a Captive to Africans or Indians, than be
given over, to the Dominion of Sin, and be a Bond slave of Lust, a Vassal of
Mammon, and Led Captive by Satan at his will. What shall I say? To be given up
unto Vile Affections, is worse than to be given up unto the most Vile
Reproaches. Man, Thou art given over to a Reprobate Mind, if thou art not thus
persuaded. But for a man to be thus persuaded, is one way to Escape this Terror
of the Lord.

II. Let us not Refuse the Offered Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ in the
Gospel, to deliver us from all Sin, and from all the Punishment of our Sin.

Syrs, The Lord JESUS CHRIST, who Saves His People from their Sins, does in His
Gospel, [ The Gospel of your Salvation!] make you an Offer of His Great
Salvation. One Thing in the Salvation of the Lord Jesus Christ, is, The Pardon
of all your Former Sins, through the Blood of that Son of God, which, (because
is the Blood of the Son of God!) Cleanses from all Sin. And when He gives the
Pardon of Sin, He also therewith gives a Power against it, and that Blessing of
the New Covenant, Sin shall not have Dominion over you. The only way to be
Delivered from Falling into Sin, is, To get into that New Covenant, by a Real,
and Cordial, and Thankful Acceptance of the Salvation, which is offered unto
us, on the Terms thereof.

We read it Three Times noted concerning Pharaoh, That he Hardened his own
Heart: But then it follows no less than Seven Times upon it, That the Lord
Hardened the Heart of Pharaoh. Ah, miserable Unregenerates; The Spirit of the
Lord Jesus Christ, with His Righteousness, is Tendered unto your Acceptance,
even that Spirit whose office it is, to Preserve your whole Spirit, and Soul,
and Body, Blameless unto His Coming. If you Harden your own Hearts, against the
calls of the Gospel, to Accept of this Grace, t'wil come to This, that the Lord
will Harden your Hearts. And, when the Lord shall Harden your Hearts, alas,
you will be giv^^ over to Sin, and Wrath unto the uttermost. We read of Some in 2
These. 2 10, 11. Because they Received not the Love of the Truth, that they
might be Saved; For this cause, God shall send them Strong Delusion. Sinners,
if you don't Receive the Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, propounded in the
Truth of the Gospel, For this cause God will send you strong Confusion, and lay
you under Strong Fetters of Sin, your Bonds will be made Strong forever! The
Lord Jesus Christ from Heaven, makes a wondrous Offer of His Grace unto us. --
But before I do Articulate, that Gracious and Wondrous offer, there is one
Solemn Advice that must be given you. It Is This; The Devils of Hell, doubtless
observe who Consents to the Motions of Heaven; and where they observe an Heart
that Consents not, They, They! lay a claim to that woeful Heart. Since that
Heart, will not have a Christ, and the Spirit of Christ, Say those wretched
Devourers, Let us enter into that Heart, and have it, and hold it for ever. The
Formidable wrath of God, says, It shall be so! And then, Oh! what Sins, what
Sins, are the poor Sinners left unto! After this awful Admonition, I am now to
propound unto you, the offer of the Lord Jesus Christ! an offer, which I would
preface with the All-Summoning Words of Micajah, Hearken O all ye people every
one of you. It Is This; Perishing Soul! Shall I Reconcile thee to God, and
Furnish thee with Everlasting Righteousness? And shall my Holy Spirit now take
Possession of thee, and Subdue Iniquity in thee and, preserve thee from
Iniquity, and Guide thee by Counsel, and Bring thee to Glory? Consent miserable
Soul, Consent! and thou shal't be Saved from all thy miseries. And now, Take
the Warning of God? If your hearts do not Readily, Thankfully, Sincerely Accept
this Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, no man can say, what Sin you may be left
unto! There is no Sin but what you may be left unto: You have no Assurance, but
that you shall Sin Extravagantly, Sin Impenitently, yea, Sin unpardonably. It Is
for this Cause, That I can Foretell, In places where the light of the Gospel,
now shines brightest among us* We shall see breaking out the most incredible
Efforts and Furies of Wickedness.

But under the dread of this, O Soul in peril, do Thou to Day, Hear the Voice
of God, in His Gospel! that thou may not be Hardened in Sin, and punished
with it.

III. Sensible of our own Inability to preserve our selves, let our Prayers to
be preserved from Sin, and not punished with Sin, be Daily, be Hearty, be full
of Agony. Is there any one person (...) who dares pretend, That he is his own
Keepe^? I hope, Not one. Be not self confident. Say not, I shall never fall
into such or such gross Abominations. Man, my heart Aches to (...) thee say so:
Thou a^t the most likely of all men, to fall into those very Abominations.
There is no Sin more certainly, and more signally punished with Sin, then this
vain self confidence. God punished it, in Peter with a Fall, that broke all his
bones for him. No, when we see Malefactors in chains, or hear of the most
Criminal and Capital offenses committed, it becomes us, most sensibly to
confess, Lord, It is from thy Grace, thy Free Grace, thy Rich Grace alone, that
I am not in the circumstances, of those Doleful creatures! Being therefore very
jealous of our own propensity to Sin, let us, make that Prayer continually, in
Psalm. 119.133. Lord, Order my steps in thy word, and let not any Iniquity have
Dominion over me. Make that Prayer continually, in Psalm. 13.3, 4. O Lord my
God, Lighten mine Eyes, least I sleep the sleep of Death, least mine Emies say.
I have prevailed against him, and those that trouble me, Rejoice when I am
moved.

Christians, you are not now urged unto that Prayer, Lord, give me not poverty!
Because you may be poor in this world, and yet, Rich in Faith, and Heirs of a
Kingdom. You are not now urged unto that prayer, Lord, Remove from me Reproach
and Contempt! Because you may be made a Gazing stock by Reproaches, and yet
have a great Recompense of Reward after all. Nor are you urged unto that
Prayer, I wish I may prosper, and be in Health! Because you may be Troubled
with often Infirmities, and yet have a Sound Heart within you. But you are
urged unto Prayer to be Delivered from Sin, even to be preserved from the evil!
because there is the Bitterest Indignation of God in That. Oh! make this
Prayer, with all possible Fervency and Agony, Lord, Lord! whatever befall me,
give me not over to fall i^to Sin against thee: Oh! Do not leave me to
Dishonor thy Glorious Name, I pray thee, I pray thee! Yea, let your Prayer to
this purpose, be assidi^ous and incessant, and wonderfully Import^^^^^.

IV. Let us Examine our selves with sincere Impartiality, and humble Sincerity,
whether we are not Already Fallen into some Sin, wherein we are punished for
some Former Sin. Indeed this is one of the unhappy Symptoms usually attending
a Soul given up to Sin for Sin; That such a Soul, is most unhappily Insensible
of its own wretched circumstances. Of such, it is said in Romans 11.8. God has
given them the Spirit of Slumber. It Is perhaps an allusion, to those that are
Bitten with an Asp; on which Bite they are Stupefied, they Slumber, they doze,
they die away in their Stupidity. Syrs, if a Stupidity be upon you, while you
are growing more and more Sinful before the Lord, God is now smiting of you,
with this Transcendent Wretchedness, of being Left unto Sin for Sin. Caution,
Suspicion, Fearfulness, and Self Examination, would be a good prevention of
this Wretchedness. Examine particularly; Do you Indulge no^ Sins, which
Evidently do you all sorts of Injuries, and yet you can'^ for your Lives leave
off those Injurious Miscarriages? A man is given over to Sin for Sin, when he
plainly sees himself (...) by Sin, and yet says, as in Prove. 23.35. I will seek
it yet again. Many a man, Evidently sees it, yea, Feels it, That by his
Drunkenness, he brings upon himself a Woe; That by his Uncleanness he gets unto
himself a Wound; That his Vain Company ever serves him, as the Thieves did the
poor man Traveling from Jerusalem: And yet the man is in, A Bond of Iniquity:
he cannot forbear Sinning, any more than the poor Animal in the Woods, running
into the mouth of the Fascinating Rattle Snake, although he fears, and Cries,
and Shrieks, and knows that he runs into the Jaws of Death. Ah, Soul; That Sin
seems now to be Armed with a Commission from God, thus to Hold thee, in such a
Bond of Iniquity. It Is a Sin that is a Punishment upon thee, as well a Sin; a
Punishment upon thee, for thy not Repenting of Sin.

Or, Again; Do you not now Make Light of Sins, and those, very Atrocious Ones
too, which once were no such Light Matters with you? It is a Token of one Given
over to Sin for Sin, in Prove. 149. To make a mock at Sin. David once could have
his Heart Smite him, for little more, than an evil Glance of his Heart; but
when he is Left unto Sin for Sin, he scarce Relents, at the most horrible
Adulteries. Those things that once would have Terrified your Souls, can you now
do them without any Terror of Soul at all? Sins either of Commission, or of
Omission, that once would have set your Hearts, all on a light Fire with
Anguish, can you now allow from Day to Day, without any Anguishy Remorse of
Heart about them? Then! There seems this Doom from God passed upon you, Let
that Sinful Heart be Hardened in Sin! And there is the Punishment of your Sin,
in that very Sin.

Syrs, If it be thus with you, it is time to look about you.

But being thus fallen upon the Symptoms, of Sin punished with Sin, we will
mention a few more of those Deadly Symptoms. Particularly;

Are none of you unaccountably confirmed in your Sins under and after very
great Afflictions? It was a Black Brand upon a man, whom God had Given over to
Sin for Sin, in 2 Chronicles. 28.22. In the Time of his Distress, did he Trespass
yet more against the Lord. The Errand of our Afflictions, is, to Embitter Sin
unto us, and Recover us out of Sin: All the Fruit should be, To take away our
Sin. Well; Although sharp and sore Afflictions have been upon you, do you
continue as full of Sin, as you were before you were Afflicted? May that
character be given of you, A Fool brayed in a Mortar, and yet his Foolishness
not departing from him? Does the Almighty complain concerning you, In vain have
I Smitten him, he Receives no Correction? Obstinate Sinner, Wha^? Art thou as
Worldly, and as Prayerless, and as Profane, after all the Blows of God upon
thee, as thou wast before* Truly, Sins that appear thus Incureable, do seem
special Effects of the Divine Wrath, upon the Souls of men; Man, if thou had
not been Given up to the Sins thus upon thee, the Chastisements of God, one
would have thought, might have Cured them. An Impenitent Thief on a Cross, is a
Wretch Given over to Sin for Sin. There is no Repeated Impaenitence, but what
is punitory; There is a Punishment as well as a Sin, in all persisted
Impaenitence.

Moreover; Have none of you Fallen into Sins, that have proved unhappy, and
scandalous Occasions, to the Falls of others? God was Giving over a People to
Sin for Sin, when He Left them to that mischief, in Ezekiel. 36.20. They profaned
my Holy Name, among the Heathen, whither they went, when they said, These are,
the people of the Lord! Sometimes a man is Left unto Sins, that others make
Occasions for them to profane the Holy Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. The
Enemies of that Holy Lord, [ Alas, Are there such among us!] have Occasions, by
the Sins of some, given unto them, to say, These are your Christians, These are
your Church Members, These are your Professors! No, Syrs, No; They are no^
These. But you that have by your Sins, given Occasion for others to Sin, have
more than a little Occasion to mourn before the (...). If God had not been very
Ang^y with you, for some other Sins, He would never have Left you unto These. It
is the saddest Infelicity, that can befall any man, to be a Stumbling of
Iniquity unto those that are about him, and an Instrument of causing others to
Fall into Iniquity. Oh! how much better were it for a man to Die, than to have
those things fall out in his Life, that shall really wound the precious Name of
the Lord Jesus Christ, and prejudice others against His Truths and Ways and
Interests! Better Die immediately! Poor man. Have thy Sins put others upon
Sinning? Art thou by thy Sins, an Example, and Incentive, of Sinning? Oh, Read
the ho^. Indignation of God against thee, in such Exposing Sins: They are a
severe punishment from the Hand of God upon thee, for some other Sins, not yet
enough considered: Is it possible for a man to be more severely punished?

Finally; It may be, a Spirit of Hatred and Railing against the Faithful
Ministers of the Lord Jesus Christ, has Seized some among you. God has given
over a Sinful man, to Sin, and Death, when he comes to say, about a Faithful
Minister of God, in 1 King. 22.8. As for that man, I hate him. There are many
Ministers of the Lord Jesus Christ, whose whole D^sign and Business it is, to
Glorify their Lord, and Edify His people. There is not the worst Enemy they
have in the World, but they Love that man, and would gladly Serve him either by
Day or by Night. The very Conscience of the worst Enemy they have in the World,
makes that man to own, That these are Good men, and Love nothing so much as to
Do Good continually. Well, If such Ministers of the Lord Jesus Christ, were
duly Held in Reputation, God would probably make their Ministry wonderfully
profitable to you; their Ministry might vastly Help your Faith, your Joy, your
Everlasting Salvation. Why then, are so many of you, given over, to Persecute
the Servants of God with cruel Reproaches? If a Minister, do but his Duty, as
he will answer it unto the Son of God, (...) the prevention of Sinful
Apostasies in the Churches, Why must he be Barked at, with Names, that cannot
come out of a Christians mouth? If a Minister do but carefully and watchfully
use his Opportunities, to be Serviceable, as knowing that he must give an
Account, Or, If a Minister do but Preach with a Zeal that becomes the Oracles
of God, Why must the Infamous Taverns ring with the most odious Titles there
Smok'd out upon him? Silly Souls, Can you do Us any Hurt, think you? Indeed you
would, if you could: We Forgive you with all our Hearts: Oh! Our Father, Our
Father Forgive them, for they know not what they do! But alas, you Hurt your
selves in all of this; And, Oh! if our Tears, though they were Tears of Blood,
might but Save you, from thus Wronging of your own Souls. In this your Sin, the
Great God is punishing of you: He Gives you over to all, of this Malignity,
because of your ^arrenness under our Ministry. The Calls of Heaven in our
Ministry, have not been duly Entertained; and now God Leaving you, to a Raging
and Foaming Madness against Us, may seem to say, Never shall that Ministry, or
any other be of much Benefit, unto those miserable Souls; Thus will I punish
them, for their getting so little Benefit heretofore! O consider of it.

V. Let the Sins of Unchastity be Loathed by us, with a Peculiar Antipathy;
because ordinarily there are more Sins that follow, to Punish them: It Is very
Rarely otherwise. Unchaste Persons have this foretold concerning them, in Prove.
5.11, 14. They shall mourn at the last, and say, I was almost in all evil.
Alas, If you wallow in the Nasty Vices, and Puddles, of Unchastity, God will
give you over, to be Almost all in Evil! There are Two Things, that frequently
occur among us. One thing very Frequent is This; A person that falls into One
Act of Unchastity, if they don't presently with Bleeding Souls fly to the Blood
of the Lord for Pardon, they are usually left unto another. Yea, and God
punishes the Unclean, by giving them over, to proceed from one kind of
Unchastity unto another. First the young Wretch, confines his Wantonness unto
himself alone; but he goes on to Fornication, he goes on to Adultery; he goes
on, -- to ne^andous and stupendous Abominations. The Fire of Lust, becomes like
the Fire of Hell, in the Oven of that Unchaste Soul; it is never quenched, until
God shall drench it in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimestone. And
another Thing very Frequent is This; A Person abandoned unto the Sins of
Unchastity, is rarely brought unto Repentance; God punishes the Unclean, by
giving them over to Eternal Obduration in their Unchastity. These are Sins,
whereof it is said, They take away the Heart: The Bruitified Wretch that is
Habi^uated thereunto, has no Heart for Christ, no Heart for Penitence, no
Heart for Piety left unto him. Hence you shall see, That though Malefactors,
have by an Unchaste life brought themselves unto the very Gallows, the Fire of
Lust has B^ked their Hearts into such Insensible Hardness, and Seared them
into such Insensibility, that nothing will work upon them. We have seen, that
they will continue their Whoredoms, in the very Prison; they will go out of the
World with Lies in their Mouths; you shall have almost as many Lies from them
as Tears: The Sottishness upon them, is the Amazement of all Spectators. Whence
is this? It Is the punishment of Sin with Sin, in those, who as Ephesians. 4.19. Being
past all Feeling, have given themselves over unto Lasciviousness to work all
Uncleanness with Greediness.

In fine. I Remember a Notable Stroke of the Syriack Interpreter, on that
passage, in Psalm. 9.16. The wicked is snared in the work of his own Hand; unto
this purpose, In senectute quando relinquitur Improbus, a Peccato, turpiter ad
idem revocatur in Desiderijs. An Old Sinner, who instead of leaving Sin, has
had Sin through Old Age leaving him, is yet in his Old Age again Ensnared with
the Lusts of his youth. And when it is said, in Psalm. 11.6. Upon the Wicked, God
shall Rain Snares; I Remember some of the Ancients make this gloss upon it;
Laquei sunt Vetera Peccata (et cupidines) iterum praedominantia; The Snares of
the wicked, are their old Lusts again getting power over them: As the Poet
complains of it, in a man of Fifty years Old, Intermissa Venus diu, Rursus
Bella moves. Alas, how often do we see God, thus leaving men, to Ensnaring
Unchastity.

VI. Let us walk Humbly, and Softly, and Sadly, all our Days, under the sense
of Old Sins, that we may not be Punished with New Sins for the Old ones. I will
mention to you, a Dismal Thing, which has before now, befallen a David
himself. David seems to have a little Forgotten, that Humiliation, to which his
Old Falls had obliged him: And now, you will quickly Hear of New Ones! Now, as in
1 Chronicles. 21.1. Satan stood up, and provoked David, to do a Thing, wherein a
positive Commandment of God was neglected; and, what a world of Mischief ensued
upon it! Even Good men are sometimes left unto very Heart breaking Sins; Why?
Because their Hearts, which were once Broken for the Lamentable Sins of their
Youth, are grown Proud, and Vain, and carnal, and Corkish, and Frothy, and have
lost the Tenderness, and Watenfulness, which they were once Humbled into. They
too much loose that Frame of Repentance for Old Sins, which they should mentain
all their Days, and God leaves them to New Sins, that so their Old Wounds may
Bleed afresh, and the work of Repentance be duly Renewed in them. We shall now
have those Lamentations from them, in Lam. 3.19, 20^ Remembering the Wormwood
and the Gall; my Soul has them still in Remembrance, and is Humbled in me!

And there is another Observable Thing, here proper to be mentioned. The Sins
of our Children, are in some regard our own. Let it be now Remembered, That if
we Loose the Paenitent Remembrance of our own Youthful Vanities, God will
Remember against us the Sins of our Youth, by Leaving our Children, to Do in
their Youth, as we did in ours. We Live to see our Children Left unto those
very Sins, which were the Iniquities of our Heels, but the Sorrowful
Remembrance whereof, we have too much Laid at our Heels; It Is for our doing so,
that God leaves them to act our Old Sins over again, and Revive in us the
Sorrowful Remembrance of them, and bring our Gray Hairs with sorrow to the
Grave.

VII. Let us all take heed of Sinning with Presumption; for Sin is mostly and
justly the punishment of all presumptuous Wickedness. It Is not usually for Sins
of Infirmity, that God sends this Horrendous Damnation upon a Sinner, To give
him up unto Sin: It Is for Sins of presumption, that is to say, when men Sin,
and Know that they Sin: It Is as we are here told, for Holding the Truth in
Unrighteousness; that is to say, when men Know the Truth, and yet will Do
Unrighteousness. Hence was that Supplication and Expectation, in Psalm. 19.13.
Keep back the Servant from presumptuous Sins; then shall I be Innocent from
much Transgression. The Advice from Heaven, then to us all, is This; Do not
Rebel against the Light: God will give us over to the Dark Influences of more
Sin for the punishment of such Rebellion.

I Address this Advice, very particularly to you, that are Members of our
Churches, in the Full Communion thereof, and Communicants at the Table of the
Lord. Oh! Let all such be afraid of Living in any Open or Secret Course, of
doing those Things, for which you Know, that the Wrath of God comes upon the
Children of Disobedience. Be mindful of it, Syrs; You Stand in an Holy Place:
For You to allow your selves in any Wickedness, Known to your selves, though
perhaps to no body else, It Is an High-handed presumption in you. If you don't
Pray, both in your Families, and in your Retirements; if you are Gamesters, or
Cheaters, or Fornicators, or Adulterers, or unaccountable Mispenders of your
precious Time at the Tavern; You Sin with an High Hand and God will give you up
to Sin with an Hard Heart; That, That shall be the punishment of your
presumptuous Impiety! It may be, some will go Reeking Hot, upon the
Gratifications of their Fil^hy Lusts, Either To or From, the Dreadful Sacrament
of their Confusion at the Table of the Lord. An Horrible Thing! Ye Atheistical
Wretches, I am verily persuaded, a Terrible God will Avenge Himself upon many
of you, by Leaving you to some Further Sin, that shall bring you forth to be
Censured, before all the Congre^^tion; And after this, you shall be but Brands
of Hell fire, though spared a while, it may be to keep Stinking and Smoking,
in your Neighborhood, for the Admonition of your Neighbors. Then, the
Churches will see the Flaming Sanctity, and the Sharp-Edg'd Omniscience, of the
Lord Jesus Christ, when you are thus Led forth among the Workers of Iniquity.
Hear, Hear the Change of God! Oh, be afraid of being Sinners in Zion; Let
Fearfulness of being Hypocrites there, now fall upon your Souls.

And that this Advice, may reach to more, that are greatly concerned in it, I
now further say, Behold, how much you that have had a Religious Education, are
to be careful that you do not Irreligiously Sin against that Education. It may
be Remarked, That there are no greater Prodigies of Wickedness, and Scoffers
and Haters o^ Religion, than many who have had a Religious Education: There is
a Corruption Optimi, in them; the most Generous Wine, produces the sowrest and
sharpest Vinegar of Wickedness. They who in their Childhood were Instructed,
and Inspected, and Corrected by their Pious Parents, do sometimes prove Impious
Apostates. They Apostatize to Superstition, They Apostatize to Profanity,, They
Turn the veriest Villians on Earth and Firebrands of Hell; It may be said of
them, as it was about the Sons of that Eminent Minister of God, Old Eli, The
Sin of the Young men is Great: At Last, they have that Epitaph upon their
Graves, They Died in Youth, and their Life was among the Unclean! Why does this
come to pass? Why, It Is the Irritated Vengeance of God upon them, for their
Unfruitfulness under a Religious Education. They have made no Good Improvement
of the Godly Precepts, and the Godly Patterns, which they have had from their
Godly Parents: And the God of Heaven Therefore so Forsakes them, that at Last,
they are more Improved in Presumptuous Wickedness, than any other Young Men
that Sin against Him. Hearken my young Folks; Oh! Work out your own Salvation,
with a Fear of becoming thus very Desolate.

VIII. Being Reproved for any Sin, Let us Hear the Reproof Suitably and
Fruitfully, Lest we be punished with another Sin, for our not Hearing of it.
Many a man, in the way of Sin, meets with a Reproof* that stands Like an Angel
with a Drawn Sword in his way: If the man will still rush on, God passes that
Sentence of Death. upon him, On let him go! Let him go on still in his
Trespasses! There are Parental Reproofs, There are Pastoral Reproofs, There are
Fraternal Reproofs, There are Ecclesiastical Reproofs, and there are
Providential Reproofs. Are we fallen under any of these Reproofs? O give an
Obedient Ear, unto a Wise Reprover, and approve thy self Wise, by a Reproof
Entering into thee, more than an Hundred Stripes into a Fool. Man, Let the
Reprover of thy Sin, be like a Good Angel appearing to thee; and say as David,
when one Reproved him for his Rashness, in 1 Samuel 25.32. Blessed be the Lord
God, which sent thee this day to meet me. Be'nt Fretful at a Reproof, Like a
Dog with a Thorn in his Foot, snapping and snarling at any one that goes to
take it out; But be Thankful for a Reproof. Otherwise there will come this
punishment from God upon thee, That thou shall be Given over to more Sin, as
one utterly Incorrigible: and as a Foolish one, who will be no more Admonished
There was a man once, who taunted and Scoffed at a man of God, that Reproved
his Offenses; and that man of God says unto him, in 2 Chronicles. 25.16. I know
that God has Determined to Destroy thee, because thou have not Hearkened unto
my Reproof. Is there now any man, Reproved for an Omission or a Commission,
which the Great God is offended at? If the man do slight all Reproofs, why may
it not be said, I know, That the Lord has Determined to punish thee, with
leaving thee to more Sin, for this thy Rebellion? There is a word of God, that
Falls like an Hot Thunderbolt from the Firmament of Heaven upon those that will
not be Reproved; in Prove. 29 1. He that being often Reproved, Hardens his Neck,
shall suddenly be Destroyed, and that without Remedy. How? Perhaps, by being
left unto some Destructive Act of Sin, that shall bring upon him, an Excision
from the People of God, and render him like water spilt upon the Ground.

IX. Finally; Let us with a very particular and profitable Notice, Entertain
the Warnings, of such as we have seen left unto Sins, that have at last brought
Public Shame upon them. We see Criminals ever now and then brought forth among
us, who in their Confessions acknowledge, what Sins they were, for which the
Holy God left them unto the Grosser Sins, that have at last brought Ruin upon
them. Those Confessions, what are they but so many Warnings from God unto us
all, to Hear and Fear, and beware of doing any such Dangerous Wickedness? In
the Name of God, Sirs, Take these Warnings, lest we also be left unto the Sins,
that have proved so Fatal unto others.

I must now Report unto you, the Horrible Cries, that I have known uttered, by
Detected Sinners, under the Loads of Public Shame, in the Hours of their
Distresses.

There have been some, whom our Churches have laid under the Highest Censure,
for their Wickedness; our Churches have in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
pronounced upon them, a Dreadful Sentence, of Excommunication, as a Token of a
more Dreadful Sentence, to be passed in the Day of God, upon the Workers of
Iniquity; our Churches have Chased them out of the Camp, for the Leprosy of
their Iniquity found upon them. Now, the Censured Sinners, I think, generally
make this Confession, That they made little Conscience of Secret Prayer; long
before they fell into the Sins, that brought the Censures upon them. It Is often
seen, That when Christians grow Dull, and Cold, in Secret Prayer, it is not long
before they fall into some Sin, that lays their Souls a bleeding, fainting,
Dying before the Lord. Grievous Falls from God, and Falls into Sin, They
usually, if you mind it, begin at the Closet Door. Would you not be Punished,
with Armies of Sin prevailing over you? O keep the Hands of Secret Prayer
lifted up. You Will shortly fall into some horrid Sin else, and then have cause to
Lament with Origin, My Secret Prayers, were poorly, if at all, performed in the
morning of the Black Day, when God left me to my self! Yea, some, that have
Dyed not long since upon the Gallows, there Cried out, That their Living
without Prayer in their Families Laid them open to all the Wick^dness, for
which they were now to Die so Tragically.

This leads me to add, There have been those among us, that have been
Exterminated for Capital Sins: the Sword of Justice, has cut them off, in the
Execution of Just Laws, which have Condemned such Criminals to Die before their
Time. And there are especially Four or Five Sins, which I have known, the
Malefactors, in the Cords of Death at the Gallows, bemoan, as the Sins for
which the Holy God left them unto the Crimes, that were so Capital.

First; Some of the Dying Malefactors, have much Lam^nted, the Sin, o^ Apostasy
from Good Beginnings in Religion. They had been under some Convictions, and
Awakenings in their Younger Time, and they had been concerned about the
Condition of their Souls; but they have cast off all S^riousness, and so gone
on from Bad to Worse, until they had utterly lost themselves in a Deep Gulf of
Wickedness: First I left God, and then God left me, and now. I am come to This!
Thus have I known them Cry out, when the Dimness of the Anguish of Death was
upon them. Come then; You that have been well Catechized, and Admonished in
your Childhood, and that have afterward Joined yourselves unto Assemblies in
which the Lord Jesus Christ has been most Purely Worshipped: O Don't Cast off
the Thing that is Good, lest you Roll down the Hill, without ever Stopping till
you come at the Bottom of Wickedness. It was the Observation of an Excellent
Man, That if any began well in the ways of Religion, and Godliness, and
afterward cast off their Profession, God usually sets a Visible Mark of His
Displeasure upon them, even by some Visible Judgment in this World; so that all
who passed by, might say, This was an Apostate!

Again, The Dying Malefactors among us, have much Lamented, the Sin, of,
Notorious Unprofitableness under the Means of Grace. Their Outcries have been,
That upon very Trivial Pretenses, they have commonly Absented themselves from
the Public Ordinances of God; and that when they have heard the Sermons in the
Public, and heard the Offers of a Lord Redeemer, they have Slighted all that
they have heard. This, This has been like a Dagger at their Hearts, when they
have seen themselves going out of the World; and they have Cried out, Oh! how
many Worlds would I give now, for that Christ, and Pardon, and Glory, which
once I trod under foot! It is because I Refused a Blessed Savior, that God
has justly let the Destroyer now take possession of me! And hence also, there
are no Outcries more usually groaned and Shrieked, by these Miserables, than
those about, Their Profanation of the Lords Day! They usually tell us, That
their neglecting to Sanctify the Lords Day, and Mispending the Holy Time of
that Day, gave the Devil his First Advantage over them. Then, and Thence, it
was, (they tell us) that the Devil filled their Souls, with all manner of
Wickedness. Will you Remember these Things, My Neighbors; and Remembering them,
Avoid these Paths of the Destroyer?

Moreover, The Dying Malefactors among us, have not seldom Lamented, the Sin,
and Snare of, Evil Company Keeping. You have been told, A Companion of Fools
shall be Destroyed. And I have seen the Destroyed Creatures making those out
cries, Ah! This I have got, by keeping so much Company with Fools; It Is my
wicked Company, that has brought me to This! O my Young Folks, Take this
Warning; If you Love your Lives, Forsake the Foolish, and Live. There is
nothing that more Infects our Young Folks with Wickedness, than their Wicked
Company. Our Ears are filled with Complaints, That there is a knot of Young
Beau's in this Town, by whose Vicious courses, all our more Hopeful Sons, are
in danger to be infected, poisoned, ruined. If any of those Lewd Youths, are
now present in this Assembly, I Leave this Warning from God upon you, That it
is to be feared, God will make some of you Examples, of an Early and a woeful
Death, for your Impieties. But, as for Thee, My Son, if those First-rate
Sinners Entice thee, Oh, consent thou not!

Finally, There is no One Sin Lamented with more Frequent and Bitter
Ejaculations, by the Dying Malefactors among us, than that of, Disobedience
unto Parents. When I have Asked, as I have often Asked, the Criminals, For what
Sin, do you think, the provoked God of Heaven, gave you over to the Sins, for
which you are now to Die* What might be the special provocation, that procure^
your being thus given over by God? The common Answer which they have made, has
been, Oh my Disobedience to my Parents, my Disobedience to m^ Parents, and my
Ungovernableness, under such Parent^ and Masters, as God had given me! These
have been their doleful Out cries, when the Shado^ of Death has been upon their
Eyelids, and when their quivering Souls have been just going (...) appear
before the Judgment Seat of God.

Think of it, Young, People! And O Treat your Parents, with all possible
Reverence and Affection, That so your Days may be long in the Land. When David
had a Son, that proved Rebellious, he foretold concerning that Son, and the
Accomplices of his Rebellion, in Psalm. 55.23. These Bloody and Crafty men shall
not live out half their Days. Whence did he gather this? He might gather it,
from the Fifth Commandment, where the promise to those that Honor their
Parents, implies a Threatening, for those who do not so, That their Days will
not be long in the Land. There was long ago made this Observation, in Prove.
30.17. The Eye that mocks at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the
Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall Eat it: The
Young man shall go abroad, and be killed in the Wars, and the Fowls of Heaven
shall prey upon his unburied Carcass. An Eye, wherein a Parent is despised, it
is worthy to be a prey of Ravens and Eagles, which indeed rise up in the
Reproach of such an Eye. When the old Ravens are sick and spent with Age, the
young Ones, will keep with them, and nourish them while they Live, and bury
them when they Die: When the Bills of the old Eagles are so grown over with Age,
that they cannot Feed themselves, the young Ones Feed them, and Help them, with
a mavelous Tenderness. Child, If thou would not perish unper the Curse of
God, be not such a Cham, as to contemn the Persons, or the Commands, of thy
Parents. No, Study to oblige them, study to obey them, study by all possible
Wisdom, to give a Glad Heart unto them, Lest* God give a Sad Heart unto thee,
another Day, for all thy Wickedness.

Hearken, Young Folks; Perhaps, you have the solemn Charges of a Father, who is
full of Anxiety for you, That you should know the God of your Father, and serve
Him with a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind. He charges you, To Pray in Secret
without Ceasing, and, Read the Holy Scriptures which would make you wise unto
Salvation, and keep clear of the Epidemical Vices, and of all Vicious Company.
Oh! Tremble to come under such a Tremendous Doom, as that in 1 Samuel 2.25. They
Hearkened not unto the voice of their Father, because the Lord would slay them.
A Righteous God, has a purpose to Slay thee, in thy Sins, if the voice of thy
Father do not Save thee from thy Sins! Or, if your Father do not enough advise
you, yet you may have a Mother, that Importunately pursues you, with her
Advice. Truly, She is even in Travail for you over again; She w^ings her Hands,
and She Drowns her Eye, and She begs of you, and for you, What? My Child! And
What ^ the Child of my Bowels! and what? the Child of my Vows? Give not thy
Soul to Satan, and thy Ways to that which Destroys Souls. Oh! Trample not on
these Entreaties of thy Mother; her Language to thee, is that, in Judge. 9.7.
Hearken unto me, that God may Hearken unto thee. What shall I say? Dutiful
Children, have in all Ages, been Signalized by the manifold Blessings of God:
But unto the Undutiful, the Signal Hand of Heaven, fulfils that word, in Deuteronomy.
27.10. Cursed is he that sets Light by his Father or his Mother. Children, I
have taught you how to Escape the Curses of God. Now, the Lord g^ve to all of
you, understanding in all things.

Pillars of Salt.
IT has been Thought, that the Dying Speeches of such as have been Executed
among us, might be of singular Use, to Correct and Reform, the Crimes, wherein
too many do Live; and it has been wished, that at Least, some Fragments of
those Dying Speeches, might be preserved and published. Upon this Advice, from
some Good Persons, I have Stolen an Hour or Two, wherein I have Collected some
Accounts, of several Ill Persons, which have been Cut off, by the Sword of
Civil Justice in this Land: and this Collection, I suffer to go abroad, in
Hopes, that among many other Essays to Suppress growing Vice, it may signify
something, with the Blessing of Heaven thereupon, to let the Vicious
understand, what have been the Cries of our Miserables, when passing into
another World. Behold, an History of Criminals, whom the Terrible Judgments of
God have Thunder struck, into Pillars of Salt.

(I)
ABout the Year, 1646. here was one Mary Martin, whose Father going from hence
to England, Left her in the House of a Married Man, who yet became so Enamoured
on her, that he attempted her Chastity.

Such was her Weakness and Folly, that she yielded unto the Temptations of that
miserable man; but yet with such horrible Regret of Mind, that begging of God,
for Deliverance from her Temptations, her plea was, That if ever she were
Overtaken again, she would Leave her self unto His Justice, to be made a
public Example.

Heaven will convince the Sinful Children of men, that the Vows, which they
make, Relying on the Stability and Resolution of their own Hearts, are of no
Significancy. A Chain of Hell was upon her, and the forfeited Grace of Heaven
was witheld from her; She fell a Third Time, into the Sin, against which her
Vows had been uttered.

Afterward, going to Service in Boston, she found her self to have Conceived:
But she Lived with a favorable Mistress, who would admit and allow no
suspicion of her Dishonesty,

A Question, Like that Convincing One, of our Saviors unto the Woman of
Samaria, was once oddly put unto her; Mary, Where is thy Husband? And One said
also; Did I not think, thou were an honest and sincere Creature, I should
verily think, thou were with Child! These passages, which were warnings from
God, unto her guilty Soul, did serve only to strike her with Amazement, not
with any true Repentance.

She concealed her Crime, till the Time of her Delivery; and then, being
Delivered alone, by her self in a Dark Room, She Murdered the harmless and
helpless Infant; hiding it in a Chest, from the Eyes of all, but the Jealous
GOD.

The Blood of the Child Cried, when the Cry of the Child it self were thus
cruelly stifled. Some circumstances quickly occurred, which obliged her Friends
to charge her with an Unlawful Birth. She Denied it Impudently. A further
Search confuted her Denial. She then said; The Child was Dead Born, and she had
Burnt it to Ashes. With an Hypocritical Tear, she added, Oh! that it were True,
that the poor Babe were any where to be seen! At Last it was found in her
Chest; and when she Touched the Face of it before the Jury, the Blood came
fresh into it. So She confessed the whole Truth concerning it.

Great Endeavors were used, That she might be brought unto a True Faith in the
Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the pardon of her Blood guiltiness; and it
may be, none ^ndeavoured it more, than that Reverend man, Old Mr. Wilson, who
Wrote several Sheets of pathetical Instructions to her, while She was in
Prison. That Renowned Man, Old Mr. Cotton also, did his part in endeavoring
that she might be Renewed by Repentance; and Preached a Sermon, on Ezekiel. 16.20,
21. Is this of thy Whoredoms a small matter, That thou have (...) my Children?
Whereof great Notice was taken. It was hoped, that these Endeavors were not
Loft: Her Carriage in her Imprisonment, and at her Execution, was very
Paenitent. But there was this Remarkable at her Execution: She acknowledged,
her Twice Essaying to Kill her Child, before she could make an End of it; and
now, through the Unskilfulness of the Executioner, she was turned off the
Ladder Twice, before She Dyed.

(II.)
THere was a miserable man, at Weymouth; who fell into very ungodly practices:
but would particularly Signalize his ungodliness, by flouting at those Fools
(as he called 'em) who would ever Confess any Sins, laid unto their Charge.

This man lived in abominable Adulteries; but God at lenth smote him with a
Palsy. His Dead Palsy was accompanied with a Quick Conscience, which
compelled him to Confess his Crimes: But, he Confessed them so Indiscreetly,
that by their Divulgation, they reached the Ears of the Authority: And in this
Confession, there was involved and concerned, the Wretched Woman, who chiefly
had been concerned with him in the Transgression.

By the Law of this Country, Adultery was then a Capital Transgression, as it
has been in many other Countries: and this poor Adulterer, could not escape the
Punishment which the Law provided.

(III.)
ON June 6. 1662. At New Haven, there was a most Unparalled Wretch, One
Potter, by Name, about Sixty years of Age, Executed for Damnable Bestialities;
although this Wretch, had been for now Twenty years, a Member of the Church in
that Place, and kept up among the Holy People of God there, a Reputation, for
Serious Christianity. It seems that the Unclean Devil, which had the possession
of this Monster, had carried all his Lusts with so much Fury into this One
Channel of Wickedness, that there was no Notice taken of his being Wicked in
any other. Hence it was, that he was Devout in Worship, Gifted in Prayer,
Forward in Edifying Discourse among the Religious, and Zealous in Reproving the
Sins of the other People; Every one counted him, A Saint: And he Enjoyed such a
Peace in his own mind, that in several Fits of Sickness, wherein he seemed Nigh
unto Death, he seemed Willing to Die; Yea, Death (he said) Smiled on him.
Nevertheless, this Diabolical Creature, had Lived in most infandous Buggeries
for no less than Fifty years together; and now at the Gallows, there were
killed before his Eyes, a Cow, Two Heifers, Three Sheep, and Two Sowes, with
all of which he had Committed his Brutalities His Wife had seen him Confounding
himself with a Bitch, Ten years before; and he then Excused his Filthiness, as
well as he could, unto her, but Conjured her to keep it Secret: but he
afterward Hanged that Bitch himself, and then Returned unto his former
Villainies, until at last, his Son, saw him hideously conversing with a So^* By
these means, the burning Jealousy of the Lord Jesus Christ, at Length made the
Churches to know, that He had all this while seen the Covered Filthiness of
this Hellis^ Hypocrite, and Exposed him also to the Just Judgment of Death,
from the Civil Court of Judicature. Very Remarkable had been the Warnings,
which this Hell-Hound, had Received from Heaven, to Repent of his Impieties.
Many years before this, he had a Daughter, who Dreamt a Dream, which caused
her, in her Sleep, to cry out, most Bitterly; and her Father, then with much
ado obtaining of her to tell her Dream, She told him, me Dreamed, that she was
among a great Multitude of People, to see an Execution, and it proved her own
Father that was to be hanged, at whose Turning over, she thus cried out. This
happened before the Time, that any of his Cursed Practices were known unto her!
At another Time, when there was a Malefactor adjudged in those parts to Die, for
the very same Transgressions, which this Rotten Fellow was guilty of, the
Governor, with some of the Magistrates, most unaccountably, without any manner
of Reason, for their so doing, turned about unto this Fellow, and said, What
think You? Is not this man worthy to Die? He now Confessed, That these Warnings
did so awaken his Conscience, as to make him, for a Time, Leave off his
Infernal Debauehes; and so, he said, He thought all was Pardoned, all was well
with him. Nevertheless, he Returned unto his Vomit, and his Quagmire, until the
Sentence of Death, at last tell upon him; and then he acknowledged, That he had
Lived in the Sin of Beastiality, ever since he was Ten years Old, but had
sometimes Intermitted the Perpetration of it, for some years together. During
his Imprisonment, he continued in a Sottish, and Stupid, frame of Spirit, and
marvellously Secure about his Everlasting Pardon and Welfare: but the Church
whereto he belonged, kept a Solemn Day of Humiliation on this Occasion, wherein
Mr. Daven^o^^ Preached on Josh. 22 20. Did not Achan Commit a Trespass, in the
Accursed Thing, and Wrath fell on all the Congregation of Israel? And in the
close of the Fast, that Faithful People of God, Excommunicated this Accursed
Achan, from their own Society. But as I have seen Bewitched Self Poisoners,
under a Singular Energy of some Devil, obstinately Refuse all offered Relief,
until the Poisons had prevailed so far, that all Relief was too late, and then
with roaring Agonies they would have given Ten Worlds for it; So this Bewitched
Beast, that had not been afraid of Dying, till he came to the Place of
Execution, when he came There, he was Awakened into a most Unutterable and
Intolerable Anguish of Soul, and made most Lamentably Desperate Out cries;
Among which Out cries, he warned men, particularly, to Take heed of Neglecting
Secret Prayer; which he said, had been hi^ Bane. He said, he never used Secret
Prayer in his Life, and that he frequently omitted Family Prayer too; Yet, he
said, he had Prayed and Sinned, and Sinned and Prayed; namely, by Ejaculations,
with which he contented himself, throwing Set Prayer aside. But so he Perished!

(IV.)
AN English Ship, (in the year 1673.) Sailing from somewhere about the Month of
the Streights, was Manned, with some Crue^ Miscreants, who quarrelling with the
Master and some of the Officers, turned 'em all into the Long Boat, with a
Small Quantity of Provisions, about an Hundred Leagues, to the Westward of the
Spanish Coast.

These Fellows, in the mean while, set Sail for New England: where, by a
Surprising providence of God, the Master, with his Afflicted Company, in the
Longboat, also arrived; all, Except one who dyed of the Barbarous Usage.

The Countenance of the Master, was now become Terrible to the Rebellious Men,
who, though they had Escaped the Sea, yet Vengeance would not suffer to Live a
Shore. At his Instance and Complaint, they were Apprehended; and the
Ringleaders of this Murderous Pyracy, had a Sentence of Death Executed on them,
in B^ston.

Under that Sentence, there was heard among them, a grievous Lamentation for
This; Their Education had been under the means of Grace, and the faithful
Preaching of the Gospel in England; but they had Sinned against that Education.

And one of them sadly Cried out, Oh! It Is my Drunkenness, It Is my Drunkenness,
that has brought me to this Lamentable End!

The Horrors, which attended the Chief of these Malefactors (one Forest) in
the last Hours of his Life, were such as Exceedingly astonished the Beholders.
Though he were a very stout man; yet now his Trembling Agonies and Anguishes,
were inexpressible One Speech let fall by him, was, I have been among drawn
Swords, flying bullets, roaring Canons, amidst all which, I knew not what Fear
means: but now I have Apprehensions of the dreadful wrath of God, in the other
World, which I am going into, my Soul within me, is amazed at it.

(V.)
ON March 18. 1674. two men, (whose Names were Nicholas Feavour, and Robert
Driver) were Executed at Boston. The Crime for which they were Executed, was,
the Murder of their Master; whom, upon the Provocation of some Chastisement,
which he had given them, they knocked on the Head, with an Axe, in their Bloody
Rage.

After they were Condemned, they bestowed their Lamentations not only, on the
Particular Crime, which had now brought them, to their Untimely End, but also
on some Others, for which their Consciences told them, that the Righteous God,
had left them unto This.

One of them, said, His Pride had been his Bane; For, he thought much of it,
that such a one as he, should be a Servant; and he would sometimes utter such
words as these, I am Flesh and Blood; as well as my Master, and therefore I
know no Reason, why my Master should not obey me, as well as I obey him. And
now, said he, See what my Pride has brought me to!

One of them also, said, That his Idleness had Ruined him: He would not
Industriously follow his Calling, but Live an Idle, Slothful, Vagrant Life.
This, he said, had undone him.

And one of them, said, That his Disobedience to his Parents, had brought this
misery upon him. His Father, he said, gave him Good Instructions, when he was a
Child: but he Regarded them not. He would not go to a School, when his Father
would have sent him to it. He would not go to a Trade, when his Father, would
have put him to one. After his Father was Dead, he would not be Subject unto
them that had the Charge of him; he ran away from Them; and after that, he ran
away from several Masters. Thus he Ran into the laws of Death.

These things are particularized, in the Sermon Preached just before their
Execu^ion; and afterward Printed under the Title of, The Wicked man's Portion.

(VI.)
ON Sept. 22. 1681. One W. C. was Executed at Boston, for a Rape committed by
him, on a Girl, that Lived with him; though he had then a Wife with Child by
him, of a Nineteenth or Twentieth Child.

This man, had been Wicked Overmuch. His Parents, were Godly Persons; but he
was a Child of Belial. He began Early, to Shake off his Obedience unto Them;
and Early had Fornication laid unto his Charge; after which, he fled unto a
dissolate Corner of the Land, a place whereof it might he said, Surely, the
Fear of God, is not in this Place: He being a Youth, under the Inspection of
the Church at Roxbury, they, to win him invited him to Return unto his Friends,
with such Expressions of Lenity toward him, that the Reverend Old Man, their
Pastor, in a Sermon, on the Day when this man was Executed, with Tears bewailed
it.

After this, he Lived very Dissolutely, in the Town of Dorchester; where, in a
Fit of Sickness, he Vowed, That if God would Spare his Life, he would Live as a
New Man: but he horribly forgot his Vows. The Instances of his Impiety, grew so
Numerous and Prodigious, that the wrath of God could bear no longer with him:
he was Ripened for the Gallows.

After his Condemnation, he Vehemently Protested his Innocence, of the Fact,
for which he was Condemned; but he Confessed, That God was Righteous, thus to
bring Destruction upon him, for Secret Adulteries.

A Reprieve would have been obtained for him, if his foolish and froward
Refusing to hear a Sermon on the Day appointed for his Execution, had not
hardened the Hearts of the Judges against him. He, who had been a great Scoffer
at the Ordinances of God, now Exposed himself, by being Left unto such a
Sottish Action!

He had horribly slighted all calls to Repentance, and now through some
Wretches overperswading of him, that he should not Die, acc^^ding to the
Sentence and Order of the Court, he hardened himself still, in his unrepentant
frame of mind.

When he came to the Gallows, and saw Death (and a Picture of Hell too, in a
Negro then Burnt to Death at the Stake, for Burning her Masters House, with
some that were in it,) before his Face, never was a Cry, for, Time! Time! A
World for a Little Time! the Inexpressib^e worth of Time! Uttered, with a more
unutterable Anguish.

He then Declared, That the greatest Burden then Lying upon his miserable Soul,
was his having Lived so unprofitably under the Preaching of the Gospel.

(VII.)
ON March 11. 1686. was Executed at Boston, one James Morgan, for an horrible
Murder. A man, finding it necessary to come into his House, he Swore he would
Run a Spit into his Bowels; and he was as bad as his word.

He was a passionate Fellow; and now, after his Condemnation, he much bewayl'd,
his having been given to Cursing, in his passions.

The Reverend Person who Preached, unto a great Assembly, on the Day of this
poor man^ Execution, did in the midst of his Sermon take occasion, to Read a
Paper, which he had Received from the Malefactory then present in the Assembly.
It was as follows.

I James Morgan, being Condemned to Dye, must needs own to the glory of God,
that He is righteous, and that I have by my sins, provoked Him to destroy me
before my time. I have been a great Sinner, guilty of Sabbath-breaking, of
Lying, and of Uncleanness; but there are especially two Sins whereby I have
offended the Great God; one is that Sin of Drunkenness, which has caused me to
commit many other Sins; for when in Drink, I have been often guilty of Cursing
and Swearing, and quarrelling, and striking others: But the Sin which lies most
heavy upon my Conscience, is, that I have despised the Word of God, and many a
time refused to hear it preached. For these things, I believe God has left me
to that, which has brought me to a shameful and miserable death. I do therefore
beseech and warn all persons, young men especially, to take heed of these Sins,
lest they provoke, the Lord to do to them as He has justly done by me. And for
the further peace of my own Conscience, I think my self obliged to add this
unto, my foregoing Confession, That I own the Sentence which the Honored Court
has passed upon me, to be exceeding just; inasmuch as though I had no former
Grudge and malice against the man whom I have killed, yet) my Passion at the
time of the Fact was so outrageous, as that it hurried me on to the doing of
that which makes me justly now proceeded against as a Murderer.

After the Sermon, a Minister, at his Desire, went unto the place of Execution
with him. And of what passed by the way, there was a Copy taken; which here
Ensues.

The DISCOURSE of the Minister with James Morgan on the way to his Execution.
Min. I AM come hither to answer your desires which just now you expressed to me
in the Public, that I would give you my company at your Execution.


Mor. Dear Sir, how much am I beholden to you! you have already done a great
deal for me. Oh who and I that have (...) wretch, that any Servants of God
should take notice of me!


Min. I beseech you to make this use of it, I believe there is not one
Christian this day beholding you, who would not willingly be at the greatest
pains they could devise to save your precious Soul: How merciful then is that
Man who is God as well as man! how unspeakably ready is the Lord Christ to save
the Souls of sinners that affectionately Look unto him! The goodness, and
pi^ifulness of the most tenderhearted man in the world is but a shadow of what
is in Him. The compassions of any man compared with the Bowels of a merciful
JESUS are but as the painted Sun, or the painted Fire in comparison of the real.


Mor. Oh that I could now look unto Him as I ought to do! Lord help me.


Min. Well, you are now a dying man, the last hour or two of your life is now
running. You know your self now to stand just on the brink of Eternity; y^u
sh^^l ^^^sently be in a state of wonderful happiness of horrible misery which
must endure forever: which of those estates do you now count your self stepping
into?


Mor. Oh Sir, I am afraid, but I am not without hope that God may have mercy on
me.


Min. What Is your ground for that hope? O see that your confidences been't such
as God will by and by reject.


Mor. I don't know well what to say, but this I hope is a good sign, I have
lived in many grievous sins, in Lying, Drinking, Sabbath breaking and evil
Company keeping; God has made now these so bitter to my soul that I would not
commit them again, might I have my life this afternoon by doing it.


Min. That Is a great word, God grant it may not be a word only, the good word
of a good pang, without such a through change of heart as you must have if you
would not perish everlastingly. You are not like to have any longer time in
this world to try the Sincerity of your Profession.


Mor. I know it, and I beseech you Sir to help me what you can: I hope the
means used with me since my Condemnation have not been lost.


Min. I would not have the sense of the pain and shame which your body is about
to undergo, any ways hinder your mind from being taken up about the Soul
matters which I shall endeavor to set before you.


Mor. Sir, as for the pain that my body must presently feel, I matter it not: I
know what pain is; but what shall I do for my poor Soul? I Am terrified with the
Wrath of God; This, this terrifyes me, Hell terrif^es me: I should not mind my
Death, if it were not for that.


Min^ Now the Lord help me to deal faithfully with you, and the Lord help you
to receive what he shall enable me to offer unto you. Mark what I say: You were
born among the enemies of God, you were born with a soul as full of enmity
against God, as a Toad is full of poison. You have lived now, how many years?


Morg I think about Thirty.


Min. And all these thirty years have you been sinning against the Holy God.
Ever since you knew how to do any thing, you have every day been guilty of
innumerable sins; you deserve the dreadful wrath and curse of the infinite God.
But God has brought you here, to a place where you have enjoyed the means of
Grace. And here you have added unto your old Sins, most fearful Iniquities: you
have been such a matchless, prodigious Transgressor, that you are now to Die by
the stroke of civil Justice; to Die before your time, for being wicked overmuch.
There is hardly any sort of Wickedness which you have not wallowed in. That Sin
particularly which you are now to Die for, is a most monstrous Crime. I cannot
possibly describe or declare the sins whereby you have made your self an
astonishing Example of Impiety and punishment.


Mor. O Sir, I have been a most bellish Sinner. I am sorry for what I have
been.


Min. Sorry, you say: well, tell me, which of all your sins you are now most
sorry for, which lies most heavy.


Mor. I hope I am sorry for all my sins, but I must especially bewail my
neglect of the means of Grace. On Sabbath days I used to lie at home, or be
ill employed elsewhere when I should have been at Church. This has undone me!


Min And let me seriously tell you, your despising of Christ is a most dreadful
sin indeed. You have for whole years together had the Call of Jesus Christ to
seek an Interest in him, and you would now give all the world for that
Interest, but you would take no notice of him. The Jews of Old put him to a
worse death than yours will be this afternoon; and by your contempt of Christ
you have said, the Jews did well to do so. How justly might he now laugh at
your Calamity? And for these sins of yours, besides the direful woes and
plagues that have already come upon you, you are now exposed unto the Vengeance
of eternal fire. You are in danger of being now quickly cast into those
exquisite amazing Torments, in comparison of which, the anguishes which your
body ever did feel, or shall feel before night, or can ever feel, are just
nothing at all; and these dolorous torments are such as never have an End; as
many sands as could lie between this earth and the Stars in Heaven would not be
near so many as the Ages, the endless Ages of these Torments.


Mor. But is there not Mercy for me in Christ?


Min. Yes, and its a wonderful thing that I have now further to tell you. Mind,
I entreat you. The Son of God is become the Son of Man; the Lord Jesus Christ
is both God and Man in one Person, and he is both sufficiently able and willing
also, to be your Savior. He lived a most righteous life, and this was that
such as you and I might be able to say before God, Lord, accept of me as if I
had lived righteously. He dyed at length a most cursed death, and this was that
we might be able to say unto God, Lord, let me not dye for Sin, since thy Son
has dyed in my room. This glorious Redeemer is now in the highest Heaven,
pleading with God for the Salvation of His Chos^n ones. -- And he pours out his
Spirit continually upon them that do believe on him: might you then be enabled
by his Grace to carry your poor, guilty, condemned, enslaved, ignorant Soul
unto Jesus Christ, and humbly put your trust in him for deliverance from the
whole had state which you are brought into. Oh then his voice is to you the
same that was to the penitent Thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.


Mor. Oh that I might be so! Sir, I would hear more of these things: I think, I
cannot better fit my self for my Death than by harkening to these things.


Min. Attend then: The never dying Spirit that lodges within you, must now
within a few minutes appear before the Tribunal of the Great GOD; in what,
(...) in whose Righteousness will you then appear? will you have this to be
your Plea, Lord, I experienced many good Motions and Desires in my Soul, and
many sorrows for my sin before I died: or will you expect to have no other Plea
but This, Lord, I am vile, but thy Son is a Surety for the worst of Sinners
that believe on Him; for his sake alone, have MERCY on me.


Mor. I thank God for what He has wrought in my Soul. --


Min. But be very careful about this matter: if you build on your own good
Affections instead of Jesus Christ the only Rock, if you think they shall
recommend you to God, He that made you will not have mercy on you.


Mor. I would be clothed with the Righteousness if JESUS CHRIST.


Min. But you cannot sincerely desire that Christ should justify you, if you
don't also desire that He should sanctify you: those two always go together. Is
every lust that has hitherto had possession of your heart become so loathsome
to you, that it would fill your Soul with joy to hear Jesus Christ say, I will
subdue those Iniquities of thine; I will make a holy, an heavenly, a
spiritually minded person of thee.


Mor. I would not Sin against God any more.


Min. But I must deal plainly with you: You have made it sadly suspicious that
your repentance is not yet as it ought to be: when men truly and thoroughly
repent of sin, they use to be in a special manner watchful against that Sin
which has been their chief Sin: one of your principal sins which has indeed
brought you to the Death of a Murderer, is Passion, unmortifi'd and outrageous
Passionateness: Now I have been this day informed, that no longer since than
the last night, upon some Dissatisfaction about the place which the Authority
has ordered you by and by to be buried in, you did express your self with a
most unruly Passionateness.


Mor. Sir, I confess it, and I was quickly sorry for it, though for the present I
was too much disturbed: 'Twas my folly to be so careful about the place where
my body should be laid, when my precious Soul was in such a Condition.


Min. Truly you have cause to mourn for it. Sec^^e the welfare of your soul,
and this (now) pinioned, hanged, vile body of yours will shortly be raised unto
glory, glory for evermore. And let me put you in mind of one thing more, I
doubt you have not yet laid aside your unjust Grudges against the Persons
concerned in your Conviction and Condemnation: You have no cause to complain of
them: and you are not fit to pray, much less are you fit to dye, till you
heartily wish them as well as your own soul: if you die malicious, you die
miserable.


Mor. I heartily wish them all well, I bear Ill Will to none* What a lamentable
thing is this? Ah this is that which has brought me hither!


Min. What do you mean?


Mor. I over heard a man mocking and scoffing at me when I stumbled just now,
he does very ill. I have done so my self. I have mocked and scoffed like that
man, and see what it has brought me to; he may came to the like.


Min. The Lord forgive that foolish hard hearted creature. But be not too much
disturbed.


Mor. Yonder! I am now come in sight of the place where I must immediately end
my days. Oh what a huge Multitude of people is come together on this occasion.
O Lord, O Lord, I pray thee to make my Death profitable to all this Multitude
of People, that they may not sin against thee as I have done.


Min. Amen, Amen, ten thousand times; the Lord God Almighty say Amen to this
Prayer of yours! It would indeed be an excellent thing if you would now come to
receive your death with some satisfaction of soul in this thought, That much
Glory is like to come to God by it: I am verily persuaded God intends to do
good to many souls by means of your Execution: This is a greater honor than
you are worthy of.


[After the Discourse had been intermitted about a minute or two by reason of
the mie^y way.] Mor. I beseech you Sir speak to me Do me all the good you can:
my time grows v^ry short: your discourse fits me for my Death more than any
thing.


Min. I am sorry so small a thing as a plashy Street should make me loose one
minute of this more than ordinary precious time; a few paces more bring you to
the place which you have now in your eye, from whence you shall not com^ back
alive. Do you find your self afraid to die there?


Mor. Sir, if it were not for the Condition that my Soul must by and by be in,
I should not fear my death at all; but I have a little comfort from some of
Gods promises about that.


Min. And what shall I now say? These are among the last words that I can have
liberty to leave with you Poor man, thou art now going to knock at the door of
Heaven, and to beg and cry, Lord, Lord open to me! The only way for thee to
speed, is, to open the door of thy own soul now unto the Lord Jesus Christ. Do
this, and thou shall undoubtedly be admitted into the Glories of His Heavenly
Kingdom: You shall ^are as well as Manasseh did before you: leave this undone,
and there is nothing remains for you but the Worm which dies not, and the Fire
which shall not be quenched.


Mor. Sir, show me then again what I have to do.


Min. The voice, the sweet voice of the Lord Jesus Christ, (who was once hang^d
on a tree, to take away the Sting and Curse of even such a Death as yours) unto
all that close with him, His Heav^nly voice now is, O that I and my saving work
might be entertained, kindly entre^ted, in that poor perishing Soul of thine.
Are you wil^ing?


Mor. I hope I am.


Min His Voice further is, If I am lodged in thy Soul I Will sprinkle my blood
upon it, and on my account thou shall find Favor with God. Do you con^ent to
this?


Mor. This I want.


Min. But this is not all that he says, His Voice further is, If I come into
thy Soul, I will change it, I will make all sin bitter to it, I will make it an
holy heavenly soul. Do you value this above the proffers of all the World?


Mor. I think I do, -- and now Sir, I must go no further, Look here -- what a
solemn sight is this! Here lies the Coffin which this Body of mine must
presently be laid in. I thank you dear Sir, for what ^ou have already done for
me.


Min. When you are gone up this Ladder, my last Service for you, before you are
gone off, will be to pray with you: but I would here take my leave of you. Oh
than I might meet you at the Right Hand of the Lord Jesus in the Last Day.
Farewell poor heart, Fare thee well. The Everlasting Arms receive thee! The
Lord Jesus, the merciful Savior of Souls take possession of thy Spirit for
himself. The Great God, who is a great Forgiver, grant thee Repentance unto
Life; and Glorify Himself in the Salvation of such a wounded Soul as thine for
ever. With Him, and with His free, rich, mavelous, Infinite Grace, I leave
you. Farewell.


Being Arrived unto the place of Execution, his Last Speech upon the Ladder,
then taken in Shorthand, was that which is here inserted.

I Pray God that I may be a warning to you all, and that I may be the last that
ever shall suffer after this manner* In the fear o^ God I warn you to have a
care of taking the Lords Name in vain. Mind and have a car^ of that Sin of
Drunkenness, for that Sin lead to all manner of Sins and Wickedness: (min^ and
have a care of breaking the sixth Com^mandment, where it is said, Thou shall
not a^ no Murder) for when a man is in Drink, he i^ ready to commit all manner
of Sin, till he fi^ up the cup of the wrath of God, as I have done by
committing that Sin of Murder. ^ beg of God, as I am a dying man, and to
ap^pear before the Lord within a few minutes that you may take notice of what I
say to you* Have a care of drunkenness, and ill Company and mind all good
Instruction, and don't tur^ your back upon the Word of God, as I have done.
When I have been at meeting, I have gone out of the Meeting House to commit sin
and to please the lust of my flesh. Done make a mock at any poor object of
pity, bu^ bless God that he has not left you as he has jus^^ly done me, to
commit that horrid Sin of Mu^^der. Another thing that I have to say to you is
to have a care of that house where tha^ wickedness was committed, and where I
ha^^ been partly ruined by. But here I am, an^ know not what will become of my
poor sou^ which is within a few moments of eternit^ I have murdered a poor man,
who had (...) little time to repent, and I know not what is become of his poor
soul; Oh that I may make use of this Opportunity that I have! O that I may make
improvement of this little little time, before I go hence and be no more. O let
all mind what I am a saying now I Am going out of this world. O take warning by
me, and beg of God to keep you from this sin which has been my ruin. [His last
words were] O Lord, receive my Spirit, I come unto thee, O Lord, I come unto
thee, O Lord, I come, I come, I come.

(VIII.)
ONe Hugh Stone, upon a Quarrel, between himself and his Wife, about Selling a
piece of and having some words, as they were walking together, on a certain
Evening, very barbarously reached a stroke at her Throat, with a Sharp knife;
and by that One Stroke fetched away the Soul, of her, who had made him a Father
of several Children, and would have brought yet another to him, if she had
lived a few weeks longer in the world. The wretched man, was too soon Surprised
by his Neighbors, to be capable of Denying the Fact; and so he pleaded,
Guilty, upon his Trial.

There was a Minister that walked with him to his Execution; and I shall insert
the principal Passages of the Discourse between them; in which the Reader may
find or make something useful to himself, what ever it were to the Poor man who
was more immediately concerned in it.

Minister. I am come to give you what Assistance I can, in your taking of the
Steps, which your eternal Weal or Woe, now depends upon the well or ill taking
of.


Hugh Stone. Sir, I Thank you, and I beg you t^ do what you can for me.


Min. Within a very (...) Minutes* ^ur immortal Soul must appear before God the
Judge of all. I am heartily sorry you have ^ost so much time since your first
Imprisonment: you had need use a wonderful Husbandry of the little piece of an
Inch which now remains. Are you now prepared to stand before the I (...) of God?


H. S. I hope I am.


Min. And what Reason for that Hope?


H. S. I find all my Sins made so bitter to me, that if I were to have my life
given me this Afternoon, to Live such a Life as I have Lived heretofore* I
would not accept of it; I had rather Die.


Min. That is well* if it be True. But suffer me a little to search into the
Condition of your Soul. Are you sensible, That you were Born ^ Sinner? That the
Guilt of the First Sin commit^ted by Adam, is justly charged upon you? And that
you have hereupon a Wicked Nature in you full of Enmity against all that (...)
Holy, and Just, and Good? For when you deserved to be destroyed, as soon as you
first came into this world.


H. S. I am sensible of this.


Min. Are you further sensible, that you have lived, a very ungodly Life? That
you are guilty of thousands of Actual Sins, every one of which deserves the
Wrath and Curse of God, both in this Life, and that which is to come?


H* S. I am sensible of this also.


Min. But are you sensible, That you have broken all the Laws of God? You know
the Commandments. Are you sensible, That you have broken every one of Them.


H. S. I cannot well answer to that. My Answer may be liable to some
Exceptions. -- This I own, I have broken every Commandment on the Account
mentioned by the Apostle James; That he who breaks one is Guilty of all. But
not otherwise.


Min. Alas, That you know your self no better than so! I do affirm to you, that
you have particularly broken every one of the Commandments; and you must be
sensible of it.


H. S. I cannot see it.


Min. But you must Remember, That the Commandment is Exceeding Broad; it
reaches t^ the Heart as well as the Life: it includes Omisions as well as
Commissions, and it at once bot^ Requires and Forbids. But I pray, make an
exp^riment upon any one Commandment, in which you count your self most
Innocent: and see whether you do not presently confess your self Guilty
thereabout. I may not leave this point slightly passed over with you.


H. S. That Commandment, Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image; How
have I broken it?


Min. Thus: You have had undue Images of God in your Mind a thousand times. But
more than so; that Commandment not only forbids our using the Inventions of men
in the worship of God, but it also requires our using all the Institutions of
God. Now have not you many and many a time turned your back upon some of those
glorious Institutions?


H. S. Indeed, Sir, I confess it: I see my sinfulness greater than I thought is
was.


Min. You ought to see it. God help you to see it! There i^ a bo^nlless Oeean
of it. And then for that SIN, which has now brought a shameful Death upon you,
it is impossible to Declare the Aggravations of it; hardly an Age will show the
like. You have professed your self Sorry for it!


H S. I am heartily so.


Min. But your Sorrows must be after a Godly Sort. Not merely because of the
miseries which it has brought on your outward Man, but chiefly for the Wrongs
and Wounds therein given, to your own Soul; and not only for the Miseries you
have brought on your self, but chiefly for the Injuries which you have done to
the Blessed God.


H. S. I hope my Sorrow lies there.


Min. But do you mourn without Hope?


H. S. I thank God, I do not.


Min. Where do you see a Door of Hope?


H. S. In the Lord Jesus Christ, who has died to save Sinners.


Min. Truly, There is no other Name by which we may be saved? The Righteousness
of the Lord Jesus Christ, is that alone, in which you may safely anon appear
before the Judgment Seat of God. And that Righteousness is by the mavelous
and infinite Grace of God, offered unto you. But do you find, that as you have
no Righteousness, so you have no Strength? that you cannot of your self move or
stir, toward the Lord Jesus Christ, though you justly perish if you do not Run
unto Him? that it is the Grace of God alone which must enable you to accept of
Salvation from the Great Savior?


H. S. Sir, my Case in short is This, I have laid my self at the Feet of the
Lord Jesus Christ for my Salvation; and had it not been for His mere Grace and
Help, I had never been able to do That. But there I have laid and left my self;
I have nothing to plead, why he should accept of me. If He will do it, I am
happy, but if He will not, I am undone for ever; it had been good for me that I
never had been Born.


Min. And you must justify Him if He should Reject you. You surprise me, with
at once giving me so much of the Discourse, which all this while I have been
laboring for. I can add but this! The good Lord make you sincere in what you
say! -- Your Crime lay in Blood; and your Help also, That lies in Blood. I am
to offer you the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, as that in which you may now
have the Pardon of all your sins. Now you may try the sincerity of your Faith
in the Blood of the Lord Jesus for a Pardon, by this. Have you an Hope in that
Blood, for all the other saving effects of it? shall I explain what I mean?


H. S. Do Sir.


Min. The Blood of the Lord Jesus is not only Sin Pardoning Blood, but also
Soul purifying, and Heart fof^ening Blood. It embitte^s all Sin unto the Soul,
that it is applied unto and mortifies every lust in such a Soul. Are you
desirous of this?


H. S. With all my Heart?


Min. The Lord make you so. The Lord Seal your Pardon, in that Blood, which is
worth ten thousand Worlds! But what will you do for that God, who has given you
these hopes of a Pardon? you must with a holy Ingenuity now do something for
the Honor of that God, whom you have sinned so much against.


H. S. What shall I do?


Min Why, Confess and Bewail the Sins that have undone you, and publicly
Advise, and Exhort, and Charge all that you can, to take heed o^ such evil
waves.


H. S. I will endeavor to do it as God shall help me.


Min. I pray tell me plainly what special Sin, do you think it was, that laid
the first Foundation of your Destruction? where did you begin to leave God, and
Ruin your self?


H. S. I was Contention in my Family. I had been (...) unto something of
Religion: and I was once (...) the Worship of God, not only with my Family, but
in secret also* But upon Contention between me and my Wife, I left off the
Ways of God and you see what I am (...) to.


Min. I would pray you to Vomit up all Sin with a very hearty detestation. You
are going (if I may so speak) to ^isgorge your Soul; i you do not first cast up
your Sin, i^ your Son and your Sin come away together, you cannon But know so
nothing of the dismal condition which it must pass into* O what cause ha^^ you
^o (...) out with Sin for ever? it has bee^ your only Enemy. Here is the only
Reven^^ which you may allow in your self. You mus^ not new bear any (...)
against any one man in the World, but forgive even those that have done you the
greatest Injuries. Only Upon Si^ be as revengful as you can; I would have yo^
like Sampson so to Die, taking of a just Revenge.


H S. I hope I shall.


Min* Well, we are now but a very few paces from the place, where you must
breathe your last. You are just going to take a most awful Step, which has this
most Remarkable in it* That it cannot be twice taken. If you go wrong now, it
cannot be Recalled throughout the Days of a long Eternity. I can but commit
you into the Arms of a Merciful Redeemer, that he may keep you from a
Miscarriage, which cannot be recalled and redressed throughout Eternal Ages.
The Lord show unto you the Path of Life! Attend unto these, as the last words
that I may speak before the Prayer, with which I am immediately to take a long
Farewell of you. You are now just going to be Confirmed for ever. If the Great
God presently find you under the power of Prejudice against any of His Trud^s
and Ways, or of Enmity against what has His blessed Name upon it, you shall be
fixed, and settled and confirmed in it, until the very Heavens be no more. But
they ^re very terrible Plagues and Pains, which you may be sure will accompany
this everlasting Disposition of your Soul. On the other side, ^f God now find
your Soul, under the power of Inclinations to Love Him, Fear Him, Serve Him;
and to esteem the Lord-Jesus Christ above ^ thousand Worlds; you shall then be
Confirmed in the perfection of such a Temper, and of all the Joy, that must
Accompany it. Which of these is the Condition that I row leave you in.


H.S. Sir, I hope the latter of them.


Min. The Good God make it so; and grant that I may find you at the Right Hand
of the Lord Jesus, in the Day of His Appearing. May this Ladder prove as a
Jacobs Ladder for you, and may you find the Angels of the Lord Jesus ready here
to convey your departing Soul into the Presence of the Lord.


After this Discourse; ascending the Ladder, h^ made the following Speech*

YOung Men and Maids; observe the Rul^ of Obedience to your Parents; an^
Servants to your Masters, according to the wi^ of God, and to do the will of
your Masters: ^ you take up wicked ways, you set open a Ga^ to your Sins, to
lead in bigger afterward; the^ can not do any thing but God will see thee,
a^ though thou think thou shall not be (...) thou think to hide thy self in
(...) when as God in Heaven can see thee, t^oug^ thou have hid it from man. And
when the go to Thievery, thy wickedness is discovere^ and thou art sound
Guilty O Young Wom^^ that is Married, and Young Man, look on (...) here; be
sure in that Solemn Engagement, y^^ are obliged one to another; Marriage is an
O^^dinance of God, have a care of breaking that Bond of Marriage-Union; if the
Husband provoke his Wife, and cause a Difference, he sins against God; and so
does she, in such Carriage; for she is bound to be an Obedient Wife. O you
Parents that give your Children in Marriage, remember what I have to say, you
must take notice when you give them in Marriage, you give them freely to the
Lord, and free them from that Service and Command you ought to have, yet you
ought to have a tender regard to them. O thou that take no care to lead thy
life civilly and honestly, and then Committest that Abominable Sin of Murder,
here is this Murderer, look upon him* and see how many are come with their eyes
to behold this man, that abhors himself before God; that is the Sin that I
abhor my self for, and desire you, take Example by me; there are here a great
many Young People, and O Lord, that they may be thy Servants! Have a care, do
not sin; I will tell you, that I wish I never had had the opportunity to do
such a Murder; if you say, when a person has provoked you, I will Kill him:
It Is a thousand to one, but the next time you will do it. Now I Commit my self
into the Hands of Almighty God.

His Prayer.
O Lord our Good God; thou art a Merciful God, and a Gracios and Loving Father;
Alas, that thou should Nourish up Children that have Rebelled against Thee!
O Lord, I must confess, thou gave me opportunity to read thy Written Word;
Thou art also my Creator and Preserver; but, Lord, I have not done according to
the Offers of thy Grace; thou have not hid from me the opportunities of the
Good Things and Liberties of thy House and Ordinances, but I have waxed wanton
under the Enjoyment of them. I have given thee just cause to provoke thee to
Anger, and thou have left me to Shame, not only on my self, but on my
Relations. O Lord God I do confess that I have sinned against thee, and done
all these Iniquities against Thee, and before thine eyes. Lord, I have sinned
especially against thee; pardon my Sins of Youth; Lord, pardon this bloody Sin
I stand here Guilty of. O Lord, hide not thy face from me; I humbly beg it of
thee: for there is no man can Redeem his Brothers Soul, but only the Blood of
Jesus Christ must do it. Let it be sufficient to satisfy for my poor Soul. I
have not done any thing that thou should be pleased to show me thy Love, or
that I should have any thing from thee, but only Everlasting Misery. I am
unworthy to come to thee; yet Lord, for thy Mercies Sake* have pity on me. Now
I am coming to Judgment, Lord, let the Arms of thy Mercy Receive my Soul, and
let my sin be Remitted; Good Lord, let not my sins which Condemn me here in
this world, rise up to Condemn me in the World to come; though they have
Condemned me in this world, show mercy, Lord, when I come before thy Judgment
Seat. It my Soul be not humbled, Lord, humble it; let my Petition be acceptable
in Heaven thy Holy Mountain. I am unworthy to come into thy Presence, yet O let
me come into thy Kingdom; and deliver my Soul from Blood Guiltiness, in the
Blood of Jesus Christ. O let my wounded Soul mourn for my Sin that has brought
me here, Sin brings Ruin to the poor Soul; woe is unto me for mine Iniquity. If
I had gone to Prayer in the morning when I committed this Sin, Lord God, thou
would have kept back my hands from sheading innocent Blood* O Gracious God,
Remember thou me in Mercy; let me be an Object of thy pity and not of thy
wrath; the Lord hear me and pardon my sins. Take care of my poor Children. I
have scattered them like straggling sheep flying before the Wolf; pity the poor
Children that go like so many Lambs that have lost their Keeper; that they may
not come to such a Death as I do! Lord, for the sake of Jesus Christ, and the
Righteousness of thy Son, accept my Soul, and receive me into the Arms of thy
mercy; that I may enjoy Everlasting Rest. Pardon all my sins; and let the
Prayers of all those that have put up their Petitions for me, be accepted for
^he sake of Jesus Christ. Now I am coming, now I am coming, thou may say, I
cal^ed to thee, and thou would not come; I must say, my sin brought me here,
O the World, and the corrupt nature of man, that has proved my ruin! O Lord,
Good Lo^d, let me enjoy Rest for my Soul. The desire of my Soul is to be wi^h
thee in thy Kingdom, le^ me have a share in that Kingdom. Now is the time, Lord
Jesus; the Grave is opening is mouth; I am now living, though dead in Sin, I^
my praye^s be h^a^d in ^eaven thy holy place; thy hands has made me, and I
know thou can Save m^; hide not t^y ^a^e ^^om me; and affect the hea^^ o^ thy
people with this sad O^ject, (...) they may labor to serve thee be^imes, and
may not give themselves up to Profan^ness and Wickedness, ^^pecially that Sin
of Drunkenness, which is an in^let of all Abominations.

When thou have thy head full of Drink, the Remembrance of God is ^ut of thy
heart; and thou art unprepared to c^mmit thy se^f and Family unto God; thou art
unfit to come into Gods (...) I have cause to cry out an^ he ashamed of it,
that I am guilty of it, because (...) gave way to that Sin more than any other,
then God aid it (...) to practice Wickedness and to Murder (...) man, whom I
should have taken a great (...) in, which if I had done, I had not been here to
suffer this Death.

Thou art Holy, Just, and Good, and therefore O Lord have mercy on me, for the
sake of thy Son pity me, now Lord, I am coming. O that I could do thee better
Service.

[ Many of you that behold me, I know wish you never had seen me here.]

Lord, receive my Soul into a better place, if is be thy blessed will; it is a
day of great Trouble with me; my Soul is greatly troubled; give me one Glimpse
of Comfort in thy Kingdom; by and by let me have one dram of thy Grace. Accept
of me now at this time, it is the last time; Good Lord, deny me not, give me, as
the Woman of Samaria, a Taste of that Living Water, that my Soul may Thirst no
more. I beg it for the sake of Jesus Christ. Amen.

After this, he was by the Prayers of a Minister then present, Recommended unto
the Divine Mercy. Which being done, the poor man poured out a few broken
Ejaculations, in the midst of which he was turned over, into that Eternity
which we must leave him in.

The Speech o^ Hugh Stone, in the Prison, the morning before his Execution.
When Young People are Married, they make use of (...) in their Families, and
when they Pray, they do believe there is Sincerity and Affection in their
Prayer; but when Difference between a Man and his Wife does arise, then that
does occasion hindrance of Prayer in their Family; and when Prayer is wholly
omitted, it let us in all confusion; and every evil work: He said, That he used
to Pray in his Family, but when he did Pray, it was in a formal manner, but now
from the Consideration of Eternity that he was going into, he was made the more
Considerate in his Prayers that he made, and did hope that now he had the
Spirit of Prayer in (...) Praying.

(IX)
ON June 8. 1693 Two Young Women, (the one English, the other Negro) were
Executed at Boston, for murdering their Bastard Children.

The English Young Woman, gave to the Minister, who Preached that Afternoon,
the following Paper of Confessions; which he took occasion, in the Sermon, to
publish unto the Congregation, where she also was then present before the Lord.

I Am a miserable Sinner; and I have justly provoked the Holy God to leave me
unto that Folly of my own Heart, for which I am now Condemned to Die. I cannot
but see much of the Anger of God against me, in the Circumstances of my wof^l
Death; He has Fulfilled upon me, that Word of His. Evil pursues Sinners. I
therefore desire, Humbly to Con^ess my many Sins before God, and the World: but
most particularly my Blood Cuiltiness Before the Birth of my Twin-Infants, I
too much parlyed with the Temptations of the Devil, to smother my Wickedness by
Murdering of them: At length, when they were Born I was not unsensible, that
at least, One of them was alive; but such a Wretch was I, as to use a Murderous
Carriage toward them, in the place where I lay, on purpose to dispatch them
out of the World. I acknowledge that I have been more Hard hearted than the Sea
Monsters; and yet for the Pardon of these my Sins, I would Fly to the Blood of
the Lord Jesus Christ, which is the only Fountain set open for Sin and
Uncleanness. I know not how better to Glorify God, for giving me such an
Opportunity as I have had to make sure of His Mercy, than by advising and
entreating the Rising Generation here, to take Warning by my Example; and I
will therefore tell the Sins, that have brought me to my shameful End. I do
Warn all People, and especially, Young People, against the Sin of Uncleanness
in particular; it is that Sin that has been my Ruin; well had it been for me,
if I had answered all Temptations to that Sin, as Joseph did, How shall I do
this Wickedness, and Sin against God? But, I see, Bad Company is that, which
leads to that* and all other Sins; and I therefore beg all that Love their
Souls to be familiar with none but such as fear God. I believe, the chief thing
that has brought me into my present Condition, is my Disobedience to my
Parents: I despised all their Godly Counsels and Repro^fs; and I was always of
an Haughty and Stubborn Spirit. So that now I am become a dreadful Instance of
the Curse of God belonging to Disobedient Children. I must Bewayl thi^ also,
that although I was Baptized, yet when I grew up, I forgot the Bonds that were
laid upon me to be the Lords. Had I given my self to God, as soon as I was
capable to consider that I had been in Baptism, set apart for him, How happy
had I been! It was my Delay to Repent of my former Sins, that provoked God to
leave me unto the Crimes, for which I am now to Die. Had I seriously Repented of
my Uncleanness the First Time I fell into it, I do suppose, I had not been left
unto what followed. Let all take it from me; they little think, what they do,
when they put off turning from Sin to God, and Resist the Str^vings of the Holy
Spirit. I fear, it is for this, that I have been given up to such Hardness of
Heart, not only since my long Imprisonment, but also since my Just
Condemnation. I now know not what will become of my Distressed, perishing Soul.
But I would humbly Commit i^ unto the Mercy of God in Jesus Christ; Amen.

(X)
IN the Year, 1694 A miserable Indian, called Zachary, was Executed for Murder.

He understood so very little English, that it put the English Minister, who,
after his Condemnation, visited him, unto an Inexpressible deal of trouble, to
convey unto him, the Principles and the Directions of our Holy Religion. But
the Lord so succeeded the endeavors used upon the wretched Salvage, that
within a little while, he could give a sensible, though a Shattered, Account, of
the Fundamentals in Christianity. And such an Impression, had the Doctrine of
Grace upon him, that he professed himself, desirous rather to Die, than to Live
at his Old sinful rate. He seemed, even to long for his Execution, that so he
might be delivered from all disposition to Sin against God. But all his Hopes
of Everlasting Salvation, he seemed very Suitably to place, on the Obedience
which the Lord Jesus Christ, had yielded unto God in the room of Sinners.

Of this poor creature, nothing had been here mentioned, if it had not been to
introduce the mention of this one passage.

He said, That the Thing which undid him was This: He had begun to come, and
hear the Preaching of the Gospel among the Indians: But he minded the
Indian-Preacher, how he lived; and he saw plainly that the Preacher minded his
Bottle, more than his Bible: be loved Rum too well, and when his Rum was in
him, he would quarrel with other people, and with himself Particularly. This
(he said) Prejuduced him against the Gospel. So ^e lived as a Pagan still; and
would be Drunk too; and his Drunkenness had brought all this misery upon him.

(XI.)
IN the Year, School. Was Executed at Springfield, one Sarah Smith.

Her Despising the continual Counsils and Warning of her Godly Father in law
laid the Foundation of her Destruction. When she was married, she added unto
the Crime of Adultery, that o^ Stealing; which latter Crime occasioned her to
fly unto New Jersey. Afterward, coming to Reside in Deerfield, her (second)
Husband, was carried captive unto Canada: But the woman, in Grievous Horror of
mind, for the Breaches of the Seventh and Eighth Commandment, received many
most suitable counsils, from Mr Williams, the (...) Minister of that place. In
conformity to his Counsils and Warnings, for a while she led a Reformed life,
and se^med much affected with the word of God, in the public Dispensations of
it. But e're it was l^ng. she lost her Seriousness, her Tenderness, her
Convictions; and R^lapsed into the Sin of Adultery Her m^st Relapse into that
Sin was at^ended with a Conception, which, though she endeavored for to render
it an Abortive, the Holy providence of God would not suffer i^ to be so She
did, with much Obstinacy, Deny and Conceal her being with Child: and when the
Child was Born, she smothered it: but the Neighbors found it ou^ immediately.
She then owned the matter, but made the usual pretense, That the Child was Dead
Born: and remained as poor Sinners undone by the Sins of unchastity use to be,
under extreme Hardness of Heart. Mr Williams rarely visited he, but found her
guilty of New Lies: though sometimes viol^nt pangs of Horror would come upon her,
wherein she detected her own Lying, and seemed greatly to Bewail it. The
Honorable Judges, desired Mr Williams' to go down unto Springfield, (which was
the place,) at the Time of her Execution; who then found her under an
astonishing stupidity of Soul: and yet not pretending to Hopes of Happiness in
another world. He found her guilty of more Lies! which afterward she confessed
so to be; she slept both at the Prayer and the Sermon: in the public Assembly
on the day of her Execution: and seem^d, the most unconcerned of any in the
Assembly: professing therewithal, That she could not but wonder at her own
unconcernedness. At her Execution, she said but little, only, That she des^^ed
to give Glory unto God, and to take shame unto her self, and that she would
warn all others, to beware of the Sins, that had brought her unto this
miserable End; especially, Stealing, Uncleanness, Lying, Neglecting to Read the
Scriptures, and Neglecting to Pray unto God. She had absented her self much
from the word of God, on Lords-Dayes, and Lecture Days: and staid at home,
till she had fallen into this capital Transgression: Then, she would come unto
the meetings, with some seeming Devotion. She had Sinned away great
Convictions, and Awakenings; and Satan, with Seven more unclean Spirits, entered
into her; and God. s^^med then to withhold from her, the Efficacy of the means
of Grace and Good, which His Faithful Servants in the Neighborhood, used with
her.

(XII.)
ON November 17. School. There was executed in Boston, a miserable Young Woman,
whose Extraordinary circumstances rung throughout all New England On this Day
of her Execution, was Preached the Sermon, which we have now placed, at the
Beginning of this History, as an Inscription upon our, Pillars Of Salt. Because
the last passage of that Sermon, gave a summary Narrative, of what it is fit
the public should know concerning that Criminal, I have Transferred them, into
this place. The Sermon Concluded in these words.

BE astonished, O Congregation of God, Stand astonished, at the Horrible
Spectacle, that is now before You: This House, and perhaps this Land, never had
in it a more Astonishing Spectacle.

Behold, a Young Woman, but an Old Sinner, going this Day to Die before her
time, for being Wicked over much! Behold, One just Nineteen Years Old, and yet
found Ripe for the Vengeance of a Capital Execution. Ah, Miserable Soul, With
wath a swift progress of Sin and Folly, have thou made Have unto the
Congregation of the Dead! Behold a Person, whose Unchaste Conversation appeared
by one Base Born Child many months ago! God then gave her a Space to Repent,
and she repented not: She Repeted her Whoredoms, and by an Infatuation from
God upon her, She so managed the matter of her next Base Born, that she is
found Guilty of its Murder: Thus the God, whose Eyes are like a Flame of Fire,
is now casting her into a Bed of Burning Tribulation: And, ah, Lord, Where will thou cast those that have committed Adultery with her, Except they Repent!
Since her Imprisonment, She has Declared, That she believes, God has. Left
her unto this Undoing Wickedness, partly for her staying so profanely at Home
sometimes on Lords-Dayes, when she should have been Hearing the Word of Chirst,
and much more for her not minding that Word, when she heard it. And she has
Confessed, That she was much given to Rash Wishes, in her Mad Passions,
particularly using often that III Form of speaking, He be Hanged, if a thing be
not thus or so, and, I Will be Hanged, if I do not this or that; which Evil now,
to see it, coming upon her, it amazes her! But the chief Sin, of which this
Chief of Sinn^rs, now cries out, is, Her Undutiful Carriage toward her
Parents. Her Language and her Carriage toward her Parents, was indeed such
that they hardly Durst speak to her; but when they Durst, they often told her,
It would come to This. They indeed, with Bleeding Hearts, have now Forgiven thy
Rebellions; Ah, Sarah, may thou Cry unto the God of Heaven to Forgive Thee!
But under all the doleful circumstances of her Imprisonment, and her Impiety,
she has been given over, to be a prodigy of still more Impaenitent Impiety. A
Little before her Condemnation, she Renewed the Crimes of her Unchastity: she
gave her self up to the Filthy Debauches, of a Villain, that was her
Fellow-Prisoner; and after her Condemnation, her Falsehoods, and her Furies have
been such, as to proclaim, That under Condemnation she has not Feared God. Was
the^e ever seen such an Height of Wickedness* God seems to have Hanged her up
in Chains, for all the Young People in the Country, to see, what prodigies of
Sin and Wrath it may render them, if once they Sell themselves thereunto.
Behold, O Young People, what it is to Vex the Holy Spirit of God, by Rebelling
against Him. This, This it is to be Given over of God! And yet after all this
Hard-hearted Wickedness, is it not possible, for the Grace of Heaven to be
Triumphantly Victorious, in Converting and Pardoning so Unparalled a
Criminal? Be astonished, Miserable Sarah, and Let it now break that Stony heart
of thine, to Hear it; It is possible! It is possible! But, O thou Almighty
Spirit of Grace, do thou graciously Touch, and Melt this Obstinate Soul, and
once at last, mould her Heart into the Form of thy Glorious Gospel. The
Glorious Gospel of God, now utters unto thee, Undone Sarah, that Invitation,
Though thou have horribly gone a Whoring, yet Return unto me, says the Lord, and
I will not cause my Anger to fall upon thee. The Lessons of this Gospel have
been both privately and publicly set before thee, with a vast variety of
Inculcation. If all the Extraordinary pains that have been taken for the
softening of thy Stony Heart, be Lost, God will dispense the more terrible
Rebukes unto thee, when He anon breaks thee between the Milstones of His Wrath.

Oh, Give now a great Attention, to some of the Last Words, that can be spoken
to thee, before thy passing into an astonishing Eternity.

The Blessed Lord JESUS CHRIST has been made a Curse for Us; there has been a
most Acceptable Offering and Sacrifice, presented by the Lord Jesus Christ unto
God, for all His Chosen: there is a Fountain set open for Sin and for
Uncleanness: and thou, O Bloody Sinner, art Invited unto that Open Fountain.
Such is the Infinite Grace of God, that thou may come as freely to the Blood
of the Lord Jesus Christ, for the Forgiveness of thy Sins, as they that have
never Sinned with a Thousandth part of so much Aggravation; Come, and Welcome,
says the Lord, who Receives Sinners. If God Enable thee Now, to Lay Hold on
the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, though thy Faults are Infinite, thou will yet before Sunset Stand without Fault before the Throne of God. Thy Soul
is just sinking down, into the Fiery Ocean of the Wrath of God, but the
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, is cast forth unto thee, once more, for
thee, to Lay Hold upon. Oh! Lay Hold upon i^, and Live! If God help thee, to do
so, Then, as it was said, The Mary whose Sins are many, has them Forgiven her,
So it shall be said, The Sarah, whose Sins are many, has them Forgiven her!
Then, as it was said, Rahab the Harlot perished not, so it shall be said, Sarah
the Harlot, perished not! Though the Blood of thy murdered Infant, with all thy
other Bloody Crimes, horribly Cry to God against thee, yet a louder and better
C^y from the Blood of thy Savior, shall drown that formidable Cry. Yea, then,
There will be Joy in Heaven this Afternoon among the Angels of God; the Angels
of Heaven will stand amaz^d, and say, O the Infinite Grace, that can bring such
a Sinner unto Glory! But if ever the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, be applied
unto thy Heart, it will immediately Dissolve that Heart of thine; it will cause
thee to Mourn for every Sin, to Turn from every Sin, to give thy self entirely
unto God. It will be impossible for thee, to Go on in any Known Sin, o^ to Die
with a Ly in thy mouth, (...) Die than commit any Known Sin in the World. If
this Disposition, be (...) in thee, before Three or Four (...) Expired, thy
Immortal Spirit, will anon pass into Eternal Torment: thou will before To
morrow morning be a Companion of the Devils and the Damned; the Everlasting
Chains of Darkness will hold thee, for the Worm that never d^^s, and the Fire
that never shall be Quenched: thou shall fell in^o the Hands of the Living God,
and b^come as a glowing Iron, possessed by his Burning Vengeance, throughout
Ete^nal Ages; the God that made thee, will not have mercy on thee, and He that
formed thee will show thee no Favor. But for his Mercy, and Favor, while
there is yet hope, we will yet Cry unto Him.

FINIS.
Advertisements.
THere is now in the Press, and will speedily he Published, A Book, Entitule^,
The Fo^^y of Sinning. Opened and applied in t^^ Sermons, Occasioned by the
Condemnation* One that was Ex^cuted at Boston in New England, on November 17.
School. By the Reverend Mr. Increase Mather, Praesident of Harvard College in
Cambridge, and Preacher of the Gospel at Boston in New England.

Sold by Michael Perry, at his Shop over against the Town House, in Boston.

There will also be Published, A Book, Entitled, Decennium Luctuosum. Or, An
History or Remarkable Occurrences, in the Long WAR, which New England has had
wi^h the Indian Salvages, from the year 1688. to the year School. (with some
other Memorables) Faithfully Collected and Improved.

Sold by Samuel Philips at the Brick Shop near the Town House in Boston.


