TRVTH RESCVED FROM Forgery and Falsehood, BEING An Answer to a late Scurrilous
piece Entitled THE CASE PUT AND DECIDED etc.

Which Stole into the World without any known Authors name affixed thereto, And
renders it the more like it is FATHER, Who was a Liar and Murderer from the
beginning.

BY SAMUEL JENINGS.

Printed at Philadelphia By Reynier Jansen 1699.

TRVTH RESCVED FROM Forgery and Falsehood, etc.
Impartial Reader,
Had the Authors of the Libel I am now to answer, been so just to me and the
World, as to have sent their Names along with it, it might have saved me much,
if not all, of this Labor; they having (especially of late) so signalized
themselves, by diverse memorable actions, that hardly any whom fame has reached
with the knowledge thereof, will hesitate in giving them their Character, and I
think it not a little to my reputation, that mine and theirs are so different.
And though JOHN TATHAM, THOMAS REVELL and NATH. WEST-LAND did at last, when I
had staged the Author' or Authors for Forgery and Falsehood, come forth, and own
themselves the Authors, yet their Libel being before dispersed without a name,
and mighty fall into some hands, who were Strangers both to the things and
Persons, I find it necessary to pursue it with this. What induced these angry
Counselors, to fall upon me in this Boorish manner, at this time, is plain,
from the burden of their Complaint; That the Authority which they have assumed
is not recognized, which I know is a great vexation to men of their temper and
circumstances, whose ambition is to rule, and their leisure from other
employments such, as may be a temptation to them, like Locusts to live upon
other Men's labors: To which I having shown some aversion, they thereby fondly
take an occasion to magnify my Interest with others, to an excessive extreme,
and make me Author of all the Interruptions* and affronts they have me^ with,
in the exercise of their sh^m Authority. My share of it I am willing to own;
but not to exclude others, to whom for their fidelity to their Country, belongs
a share of that regard, that^s due to men, that will not basely and meanly
truckle, to any pretentions, where Royal Authority is wanting: For which reason
the two last General Assemblys of this Province, have not thought fit to
recognize the Authority by which these men act; and how far they have approved
themselves true men and Friends to their Country, who have opposed their
Private sense, to the declared sense of the Province by their Representatives,
will (I hope) in a little time be more fully discovered, and rewarded according
to its due demerit. Let this suffice for an Introduction, I shall now proceed,
to touch upon the several parts of their Libel, as it lies before me in order,
and begin first with what they call, and would have the World to believe, to be
the Aw^rd.

That there was such a thing as a Difference, betwixt Edward Billing on the one
part, and the Proprietors and Inhabitants of West-Jersey on the other, is
certain; which they have misrepresented in their T^^le-Page, and render it to
lie betwixt Edward Billing on the one part, and some West-Jersians headed by me
on the other part, Whence I can not but observe, that when they have a mind to
reproach me, they will make me as big as a Province, that they may load me with
the blame of a Province, and presently (to serve their own turn) confine me
again, to such narrow limits, as may render me very dimin^tive; but when they
have said and done all they can, By the grace of God, I am what I am, 1 Cor.
15.10. But to proceed; How basely does it look, to betray the Reader into a
belief, That it was only a Faction of West^Jersians, headed by Samuel Jenings,
that opposed Edward Billing, and thence sprung the Controversy? But to
undeceive my Reader, I must let him know, That it was no less, nor no other,
than the General Assembly of West Jersy, which I no otherways headed, than as
being at that time their Governor, which made the other Party, who accordingly
commissionated me and Thomas Budd, to go to England, to negotiate their affairs
there with Billing, Georg Hutcheson at the same time offering himself as a
Volunteer, to our assistance. Pursuant to our Commission and Instructions, we
proceeded in the Voyage, and by the Grace of GOD, arrived in a good and short
time a^ our Port; and when we came there, meeting with Billing, we imparted our
business to him, which was, in the name of the Proprietors, to make a demand of
the Government, to whom he had as much sold it as the Soil, and taken their
money for it. This message was very ungrateful to him, who resolved (as the
consequence has shown) to cheat us, in what we esteemed the best part of our
bargain; For at that time, the Soil, without the Government, would have been of
no value to the Purchasers. And though before our arrival, he was the great
Complainant, and threatened high what he would do, if his Authority should be
disputed, yet finding now, that it was like to come to that indeed (for so were
we instructed, viz. if he refused to comply with our just demands, to complain
against him at White Hall or Westminster Hall, as able Counsel should advise)
and fearing nothing more than his, and well knowing, that his Actions could not
abide so severe a Test, makes it his business with might and main to prevail
with our Friends, to use their endeavors, to take up this business, and make a
more private end of it, if they could, or at least, to prevent our procedure
against him in the way we intended. Upon which a proposal was made, by some of
the Persons, who were afterward Arbitrators; That we would submit the
Controversy, to the determination of a certain number of Persons, to be equally
chosen. To which we replied, we had no such power nor direction from our
Principals, but were it so it had affected us only, we should cheerfully do it.
They urged some reasons, which I shall here omit to give, why it was not then a
proper time to Prosecute such an affair, in the way we intended; But if it was
not in our power, to submit the decision wholly to them, in the name of the
whole, yet we might do it on our own proper account: With which Thomas Budd
first closed, and then I was disabled, not having power to act alone, and
therefore complied also; Although my compliance with this Proposal, I must
declare, to be an Act of necessity, and not of choice; and rhough I put an high
value upon concord amongst Brethren, yet that relates chiefly to Religions
concerns, and may be inviola^ly maintained, notwithstanding our different
sentiments, in Civil affairs. Thus we submitted, and they undertook to hear and
determine our case, which accordingly they did, and delivered the Award into my
hands, the eleventh day of October 1684., where it has remained ever-since,
and still is, being an Original and signed with the Arbitrarors own hands. But
finding a Printed thing steal into the World without a name 'under the visor of
the aforesaid Award, I took the Pains to compare them, and find at least thirty
eight variations, some of which not being very material, I shall pass by, and
account them the act of the Pen man, in trying to correct and amend the sen^e;
who will hardly allow, that any man (at least in these Parts) understands it
like himself. But others there are, that seem to be designedly and knavishly
foisted in, of which nothing is to be found in the Award; Which wen I had
considered' I Published a few lines in Manuscript, declaring; That what was
published in print as the Award, was Spurious and false; Which occasioned the
Publishing of diverse in that manner on each side, with which I shall not much
meddle now, except to touch a little upon their last Paper, the rest being
already answered.

I come now to give some Particular Instances of their Forgery and Falsehood,
and begin with Page 3., where they make the Award to spaek thus: That whereas
S. Jenings and the Assembly in West-Jarsey had Positively acknowledged E.
Billing as Governor, and acted about two years by virtue of his Commission and
Power, and S. Jenings as his Deputy engaging to serve him, and preserve his
Interest in that capacity; Now after all this they accepting E. Billing as
Governor only in trust, as they allege, in order to have him assign his Power
and Government to the People; which not being obtained with his consent, then
they rejecting him the said Billing, and choosing S. Jenings Governor in his
stead, and his accepting thereof, WAS A BETRAYING HIS TRUST; as also rejecting
W. Welsh, since deputed by E. Billing, without giving E* Billing any previous
notice of these their designs and proceedings against him and his interest,
These we judge Irreg^lar Proceedings, Unfair and Unwarrantable, Unsafe and
wor^^y of blame in S. Jenings and all Persons concerned therein.

Here I charge my Adversaries with downright FORGERY and FALSEHOOD, there being
no such words in the whole Award; as betraying of trust, of which they seemed
so fond, suiting their malicious design so well, that to give it the greater
Emphasis, they put it in Capital Letters; But being now discovered, and their
Forgery detected, serves only to render them Capital in malice and abuse: Nor
does it excuse them to say, as in one of their Papers they do, That not any
thing is couched in the said Printed Award; no not even that noted reflection
upon Samuel in Capital letters, but what we will prove to be true, when
occasion shall require etc. But this is still to do, and this I leave as a task
upon them to perform, when they shall think the occasion requires. I am glad I
am so much before hand with them, having Proved my charge against them before
several credible Witnesses, who for their private satisfaction, have compared
what they have Printed, with the true Award, and (I believe) will not refuse to
give evidence, to the truth of what I here assert, if it be desired; and I do
hereby further promise, to give the like satisfaction, to as many as shall
soberly request it. But, say they, The Award now Published, -- as received from
their [the Awarders] hands, so was transmitted hither for information, and is
by us made public, for the same end, without the least variati -- on. And is
it more reasonable to rely upon his veracity, in this matter, than the worth
and reputation of those honorable Gentleman in England, that sent it hither
verbatim as We have Published it etc.

Thereby implying as if the Award they have Printed is of equal force and
validity with the other. To which I answer, Theirs can be but a Copy, as
appears by its date, being four days after the Originals were delivered into
the hands of the Parties concerned, and therefore not of equal credit with the
Original: But my business is not to consider what it is, nor how they come by
it; my complaint and charge is That they have Printed and published to the
World, in the name of eight of my Friends, a thing called their Award, with
diverse Additions, Omissions and Variations, and that in diverse of the most
considerable passages in it, tending greatly to slander and reproach me. and
this I call Forgery and Falsehood, and shall leave it upon them, till they can
more fairly throw it of, than yet they have done.

And again in page 3, where they say: These we judge Irregular proceedings,
unfair and unwarrantable, unsafe and worthy of Blame in S. Jenings and all
Persons concerned therein.

There is no mention made of S. Jenings, nor any blame laid upon him, but in
conjunction with the Assembly, who are Blamed for choosing, and he for accepting
their choice of him for Governor. But I am glad of this oppretunity, to clear
that point, which I doubt not to do, to the satisfaction of any indifferent
person; and to acquit my self, and the Assembly too, from any just blame upon
that occasion.

But here I expect to meet with an Objection, viz. But why then did your
Friends blame you in their Award, and were not they Divinely inspired in what
they did? I answer; Because I find my Adversaries harp so much upon that, and
make such a perverse, or rather malicious use of it; I put it upon them to
prove, when ever our Friends have placed their Conduct in Civil affairs, so
high; No, we can very well admit of different sentiments in those things,
without any braech of Religious union; and this being partly a Law-case, upon
which the judgment of these Friends was grounded, it is not utterly
impossible, but they might be somewhat mistaken in it: However, it should have
lain untoucht for me, had not I thus unexpectedly, as well as unfairly been
assaulted afresh, and recriminated by the Award. But to meet with this from any
Members of West-Jersey, that would be thought to be tender of her Rights and
Priveledges, for the sake of which I suffered what I did, in defense of them,
is very strange; especially considering how much I was importuned, and in a
sense forced, for the preservation of the Peace of the Province, into a
compliance; which I should think, cannot be forgotten by one of my Adversaries,
at least, who had not the least share, in advising what was done; from whom I
did not expect such a return, for former kindnesses showed him, by me and
others: Who in the time of his necessity, enjoyed all the places of profit,
that he was capable of in the Government, by the favor of those, over whom he
has since made his insults; by which means, he has justly drawn upon himself,
the hateful Epithet of Ingratitude, a thing common to men of his temper, which
having branded him with, at present I shall leave him.

But to proceed, you may perceive by the Award, that the Agents of the
Province, did allege when in England, That they accepted E. Billing as
Governor only in Trust, in order to have him assign his Power and Government
to the People. Which is all very true and reasonable; for it was to such
People, as had before bought and paid for it, and E- Billing himself, when he
First obtained the grant from the Duke, endeavored to make us believe, that he
received it but in trust, and would use it no otherwise, and excuses thae
taking it in his own name, alleging, It must he in a single person, and he
could not obtain it otherwise Which there was no reason to do, had he not been
conscious to himself, that the right of it did appertain to others. And William
Penn, one of E. Billings Trustees, of whom we bought, and well knew the Rights
of the People, whose Interest was the great means of obtaining the Grant of the
Duke, always declared; that he solicited for it in the name of the People,
that they might be able to make good what they had sold them. And Sir William
Jones, on whose opinion the Duke much relied, gave it as his opinion, that the
Right belonged to the People; Upon which the Duke Frankly ordered, That a
Second Grant should be given; The intent being only to confirm but not to
destroy the former. And lastly, than which nothing can be more clear; The
Second Grant, by which the powers of Government were more clearly granted to
Billing, was never proposed to be sought for, but at the request and charge of
the Proprietors; For, says Billing and some of his Trustees in a le^^er now in
my hands, it will cost much money to obtain it, and when gotten, you shall have
the benefit of it. This I think is enough to say for proof of this Point,
though I could say a great deal more, but shall use what brevity the case will
bear.

Edward Billing having thus obtained the grant as aforesaid, sends over a
Commission to several persons, in which I was first named, and in case of
mortality, the rest to succeed in their order as Deputy Governors: Now to show
with what caution this was accepted, and no otherwise, but with a saving our
Right, the Records of the first General Assembly held in West-Jersey will
show. But before that Assembly was called, I knowing it to be against the
Rights of the People, for him to grant Commissions, and assume the place of a
Governor, I called together as many as I could, of the most ancient and
considerable of the Inhabitants here, as soon as I had received the Commission,
and freely gave my sense of it, and told them; my resolution was, never to
impose it on them nor make any use of it, except they apprehended, it might be
of service to them: Upon which the thing was considered, debated, and at last
concluded, that it was better, not wholly to reject the Commission; but to
accept it as aforesaid, that some face of Authority might be kept up, to avoid
the confusions of an Anarchy. Some are yet alive, to affirm to the truth of
this, though most of our ancient Inhabitants, are by death or otherwise
removed. But besides all this, when Billing sent his Commission, he sent a long
Letter with it, in which are contained the Apologies before mentioned,
declaring, It was his intent suddenly to come, and settle the affair, to thae^
hearts content of all concerned; and to ^ack all this, a Ship was then newly
arived, in which were Passengers, William Biddle, Elias Far and Benjamin
Scott, with diverse others, but these I mention as of most note, and intimate
with Billing, who declared, it as their sense; That he would he as good as his
word, and that he was put upon a necessity, of accepting the Grant as he did,
and that it was requisite his Commission should be accepted for the time, till
his arrival, which they judged would he shortly. Thus I have shown the manner
and reasons of accepting that Commission which I think makes it evident enough,
to be but in trust; I come now to show our reasons for rejecting it.

When Billing, by this soft and crafty dealing with us, had drawn us on to
recognize his Authority (which he thought had been without condition or
teserve, for knowing him to be hotheaded and rash as well as Indigent, we gave
him no notice of it, least in a Frenzy he should Sell the Government, and so
make it more troublesome to us to recover; but expecting of him here, thought
We might best deal with him upon the place) he now begins to treat us in other
terms, and to let us know, he did not intend to part with the Gouvernment; Of
which We complaining to him, of his dishonesty to us; in his next he tells us,
That it was as much as our necks and estates were worth, to assume (what he
before had owned to be) our Right. This opened the eyes of all, undeceived
those that aforetime had been best opinionated of him, and the next General
Assembly when Set, did generally declare, They would no longer submit to his
Authority, but immediately assert their own right, and choose their Governor
themselves: Which they did; pitching upon me. How unwillingly I yielded to
serve them in that station, several then present cannot have forgotten;
although I was satisfied of the Justice and equality of the thing, and that it
was no evil in it self, yet it might carry another aspect, with those who had
only heard a superficial account of it.

I have now shown, why we received, and why We rejected Edw. Billings
Commission; the next is to inquire, how far We (viz the Assembly and my self)
are criminal for it: But especially my self, who (by the forgery of my
Adversaries) am represented to the World as a Betrayer of my trust to Billing;
To do which, in common understanding it must be presupposed, that I acepted a
trust from him, which I deny ever to have done; for what I did in accepting his
Commission, was to serve the Country, and at their request, as I have before
shown; nor had I any reason to do it for his sake; who was much a Stranger to
me, and from whom I never received any reward for it, and to be yet more plain;
the Infamy that he was under was such, that to serve him, would have been a
blemish upon my reputation: Yet there was a necessity that We should
acknowledge, that the Government was in him, though but in trust, else how
could We expect, that he should reconvey it to the Purchasers, as by solemn
engagements bound. So that upon the whole, the trust was in Billing, and not in
me, and it was he that betrayed his trust, and not I; nor can I see, how any
blame is justly chargeable upon me, or that Assembly that renounced his
Authority; seeing to have done otherwise, had been to strengthen him in his
Injustice to the Province, or rather to have made our selves Parties with him,
against our own Right* And now I have done with this part, wherein I have been
so plain and candid, as I hope will satisfy the Impartial, and for others, I
regard not their clamor.

And whereas the Award says, And S. Jenings as his [ E. Billings] Deputy
engaging to serve him, and preserve his interest in that capacity etc. I
answer, I know of no engagement of that kind, that was ever put upon me, and if
any such expression did fall from my Pen, in a private letter to Billing; it
was, before it was discovered, that he intended to set up a corrupt Interest,
in opposition to the just Rights of the People: For at the time he made large
protestations, That he would promote no other Interest than that of the
Common-waelt; Which had he stuck to, I should have served him in it: But can
any body believe, I was quite so senseless or pros^igate, as to engage to serve
any Interest that he should promote, without any regard to the Justice of it; I
hope not: But the controverting of this point formerly, gave occasion to an
Ingenious Friend of mine to say: He that will Judge aright, most know as well,
As things, the times wherein each thing befell.


I intend to touch upon one thing more in that Sham Award that my Adversaries
have Printed, and so to leave it. It relates to the second Paragraph of the
Award, page the 3d., at the close of which they note in the name of I know not
who, that Whence (I suppose it should be whereas) this sentence above cited was
hastily razed out of the Original the 11 of 8 mo. 1684. It Is, our judgment
that it were better and more clear to be incerted. The Sentence is this.
Neither do We understand that such a grant as was expected was attainable, when
the 2d. grant was solicited for. The design of incerting this is easily seen,
to be to cover Billings head, from a stroke that otherwise would ^^evitably
have fallen upon him: For, knowing that the Right of the thing sought for
belonged to the People, which also is acknowledged in the Award, page the 2d.
and 4th.; it could not but look ill in him, so much as to take it in his own
name, if it could have been otherwise obtained: But whose judgment it is, that
it were better and more clear, that that Sentence should be inserted, I know
not; for they have placed it under, and after the names of the Arbitrators, and
I would hope, that it is none of their act, nor have I any reason to believe it
to be so, since I am sure, there is nothing of it in that they delivered to me,
and I am not willing to entertain a thought, that after the time was elapsed,
and the Award given, (...) add to, or alter, what was before so (...) they
should I judge such an action to be Irregu^^^, (...) and Unwarrantable, unsafe*
and worthy of blame in all Persons concerned therein. But before I pass from
this, I must note, that whereas any 8 of the Awarders had power to determine,
there is no more than the bare number, several of those who were appointed,
hearing little of the Case, and some none at all, others were dissatisfied with
the Award, and thought it much too easy on Billing's part, and therefore
refused to sign; And yet it will not follow, but they might al be good men, and
perfectly agree, in all the necessary principles and fundamentals of the
Christ^an Religion, I shall show re fully anon; and in the folly of my
Adversaries, in insinuating the contrary.

I have now don with the Award it self, and am come to the Observations, and
Animadversions, my Adversaries have made upon it, the first of which, seems to
be the work of some Apostate Quaker: But be it as it will, my intention is to
detect the folly and falsehood of it, where I find the Observator praying his
Reader to observe, That by the Award of those eminent Quakers (as he in
scornfully calls them*) the Government was in Billing, and not in the People of
West-Jarsey. This is true, but the matter is (...) so much, in whom it was, as
in whom it ought to be: And this was the ground of our complaint against him,
that he had abused us, in taking it to himself, and detaining it from us. But I
must desire this Observator further to observe, That though they did
acknowledge it was in him, yet not right fully, and therefore they enjoin him
To go so far as he is able, and lawfully can do to their (viz the Proprietors)
just satisfaction. See The Case put etc. Page the 4th. And they give reasons
for it, and great and valid ones too, as in the first Paragraph page the 2d.
viz That E. Billing has, by concessions, signed by himself, with other words
and circumstances, as also by Letters Written by Gawen Lowry, Nicholas Lucas
etc. to the Proprietors, given them ground to expect that they should have and
had the Government with the Soil. Here I confess Billing has been too hard for
us; for had We only given him an expectation on the consideration; as he did us
of the Purchase, We had been of equal terms with him; and why not as much
reason for the one, as the other. But to return. The first reason the
Arbitrators assign for his doing as aforesaid, is, because of the Concessions
made and Signed by him self, which were made the bait to catch buyers, and I
believe few purchased before they had seen them; which concessions lodged the
whole power of Government in the General Assembly, and were to be so
inviolably observed, that whoever shoud but attempt to break them, was to be
deemed an Enemy to the peace and Privileges of the Province: yea, so sacred
were they esteemed, that if any refused to sign them, they were not to be
admitted to the possession of any Land, though before bought and paid for.
Secondly (...) ^^couragement given by the Sell^^s, in di^vers letters (...)
affirming, that they had the Government with (...) and were ready to sell, and
make a good title to both (...). Because of some words (they say) in some of
their Deeds, giving an expectation that the Proprietors should or might have
the Government or power to elect a Governor among themselves. Thus it is
evident, that these Awarders did grant, That though the Legal part of the
Government was in Billing; yet, as they supposed, the equitable part belonged
to us, And though they seemed to doubt, whether he could legally and safely
perform, to a Punctillio, all that he had given us an expectation of, yet (say
they) We all agree, that he is thereby bound to perform to the Proprietors, so
far as he legally and safely may do. And also We judge, that the said Billing
ought to go so far as he is able, and lawfully can in all things to their just
satisfaction. (What is this, but to divest himself so far as he could, and
invest the Proprietors with the Government: But I know they proceeded upon a
notion, that this he could not safely or legally do, wholly (which perhaps was
a thing ^itter to have been argued by Lawyers) and therefore they prescribe)
That he shall make and confirm unto them [ the Proprietors] such Fundamental
Laws, concessions and provisions, consonant, and not repugnant to the Laws and
Government of the Realm of England, as may fully secure them from all abuses,
oppressions and enchroachments upon their freedoms and liberties, both as men
and Christians, by and from himself; his heirs or Assigns, according to the
contents of his own letter dated the 15 of 8. mo. 1680. sent with his last
grant from the Duke. What is here enjoined, has never been performed, by
Billing, nor any of his Successors, which were it done (I suppose) would
satisfy very fully all the Proprietors, and well disposed Inhabitants in the
Province. I have insisted the longer on this head fully to clea^ the point, not
intending to touch it any more.

What the Observator says, of my (...) condemned by the Awarders for betraying
my trust; (...) it is in its self a Falsehood, and piece of the Forgery (...)
upon them, I have said enough to it already, and (...) ^^erefore pass it by,
But the last part of this first paragraph must detect for its falsehood, finding
it there charged; That I affirm the Government to be in the People, thereby
encouraging and exciting the people to rebellion against the present Governor,
and other their lawful Rulers, to the great obstruction of the peace and
prosperity of the Province. Surely this Observator is much a stranger, to the
reason of the Province's not owning the present Government (for so is the act
of the is Representatives) Did We break upon that foot? N^y, did We not desist
from urging that point? the first Assembly that sat after Jeremiah Basse's*
arrival, on purpose to try i^ We could come to an accommodation, and had he had
the King's approbation, he had been recognized, as the minutes of that Assembly
will show. Therefore this charge is as wrong as falsehood can make it, to say
nothing of malice: Nor have I made it my business to excite others to disobey
the Government: Which if I had, I should have counted no Rebellion, because, I
never thought the Authority, by which they acted, lawful; Which having said,
shall hereafter say little in my own vindication, to any charge against me, for
non subjection to the Government, esteeming it now almost too late, for any man
to give a reason for that; it is rather now their part that exercise that
Authority, to consider of a reason for their so doing.

What is said in the next paragraph concerning P. Fretwell and T. Gardener, who
are termed two of my Minions amd Quondam Justices. I shall say little to,
further than this, that I know diverse of the things suggested against them to
be false, and believe so of the rest, and cannot think their reputation hurt by
it, since the names of their Accusers are known. However, there may be a fit
time to look into those things* when the wheel, I lately advised them to
consider the motion of, has advanced its nether parts a little more. Methinks
if there were a Conjurer amongst them, they might ha^^ (...), and avoided many
absurdities, they have fall (...) in this short lived Usurpation. The rest that
(...) a hence it is, I shall say little to, because I perc^^^^ (...) know not
whence it is, that the things they mention have arose. And as to that of Salem,
I believe they can never prove what they say, there may be a time to call for
it, if they can. What is said concerning a great meeting, held at my Plantation
house in December last, I shall not gratify my Adversaries so much, as to give
them any account of it, further than in a general Way, that I hope it has not
proved uneffectual.

But I would fain know What these Busy Bodies have to do, to call in question
the actions of that Assembly, where they say, that I and my faction refused to
sign the Association of fidelity to King WILLIAM? I ask my Adversaries, if they
ever knew any Quaker that did or could sign such an Instrument? But although We
could not sign that for Conscience sake, something being in it, that We could
not comply with; yet We did sign to a Declaration of our Alleigance and
Fidelity to the King and Government, such as the Governor was pleased to
accept and commend, and I suppose was since transmitted to White^^all, and no
dislike shown to it, that ever We have heard of; So that I must tell them, It Is
a saucy, as well as a busy part, for them to meddle with it. But the great
charge is yet behind viz That I am a great Jacobite: This is not the First time
that these fools have been nibling at this; but finding their proof formerly to
be gouty and lame, they let it fall, but now renew it again, thinking
themselves cock sure, and that they can prove it with a Witness, which they
thus attempt to do viz. He covenants with those to whom he sells his Land, in
their Deeds, to pay their Quit Rents to the late King James, a known Enemy to
the Kingdom; this all who please may see recorded in the Registers Office at
Burlington. This is a piece of pure envy, as well as folly; whether it has any
shadow of truth in it I know not, It Is long since I signed any ^eed: But (...)
it to be true; where is the offense? The Quit-(...) to him when Duke, and were
none of the (...) of the Crown. But to expose my Adversaries a little (...)
consider how considerable these profits may be, which I have been so careful
to secure to King James. I suppose, by what I have heard from others, it is not
more than one Deed, of the many I have executed, that^s thus faulty, and that
perhaps for one hundred acres, or perhaps less; for I am wholly a Stranger to
it on my own knowledge, but suppose it should be two hundred; What will it
amount to? Our whole Province pays but Tenn Nobles a year to the Lord of the
Soil, be it to whom it will: So that this proportion will hardly be a half
penny in twenty years. Now judge Reader, This is the test, they say, I have
given of my being a Jacobite; I am sure, they have given a far greater of their
malice, and sometimes I have thought, that it was necessary, that such a day as
this, should be put into the hands of these and such like men, that they might
fully discover themselves, which being done, they might receive the correction
of their own Folly, and all men might abhor them.

In the next place I am charged with having got away the Book of the Laws of
the Province, for proof of which they say my Friend H. Grubb informs them fo. I
shall leave this to Henry to acquit himself as he can, for be sure he denies it
to me; but whatever he says, I say it is false, and so much for that.

I am now come to my Observator's Lastly, which I suppose was reserved for a
Clintcher, and says It is not to be doubted, but when a Committee of both
houses did debate S. Jenings and his Parties pretentions to the Government, at
the Assembly held in November 1697. It did inspire great boldness to Jenings
and his Faction to proceed as they have done, that the then Governor Hamilton
did plead so sti^ly for them and their pretended Right, and had not one word to
offer on behalf of the Society, for which his Zeal on their (...), and against
the Society, they honestly answered (...) expectation with a present of 200
pound. Methinks, how lavishly soever, they had used their tongues and Pen^s
against me, they might have spared our late Governor, especially being absent.
But, certainly this is suffered, that the world may knew, the^ ^o^ly, rage and
rudeness of these men, to be such, as that there is nothing so mean, unmanly
and base, that they will stick at, if they can but hope, thereby to malign and
injure those to whom they are disaffected: But seeing it is so generally
expected and desired, that Collonell Hamilton's approach to this Place, may be
near, I shall say the less to it; but must say so much, That he is much
traduced and abused in it; nor do I believe, that any body, besides these three
or four men, whom prejudice has thus corrupted, will or can say, that in that
conference, any thing fell from Collon. Hamilton, indecent or disregardfull
toward the Society. But to render it a Compact or Combination (which it must
needs be if I understand their dark sentences) is such a piece of villainy, as
none, but those of their own herd, would offer to suggest: For if the Governor
expected, and We honestly answered his expectation, with a Present of 200
pound, for the reasons aforesaid, I can make no other construction of it' But
however, I hope I shall now ride quietly, and enjoy the use of my Horse,
without further reflection; for if the 200 pound, was given upon the
consideration they have now assigned, then it was not for the Horse, and they
must be mistaken in one: But what if it was for neither? Which I believe no
body doubts but themselves, how ill then do they deserve, at the hands of those
they have thus stigmatized? And therefore it will be their wisdom (in my
opinion) to make sure of their evidence, for what they asse^t, against the time
that it may be required of them. I shall not trace my Observator much further,
having followed him to the Mobb here, and scum of England; where I intend to
leave him, as very fit company for him, if I am not much mistaken in my guess.

I am now come to their Animadvers^^^ and I hope near a close of my work,
finding it now (...) out of season, to controvert the matters therein
contained; Providence having found out a much better way of decision than that
of any man's Pen: For since the main design and end of them, is, like so many
shores, to support their tottering Authority, which I now see is like to fall
flatt, maugre all their Props, it makes me the less concerned to remove them;
yet not wholly to pass them by, I shall reduce them to these following heads,
which I think comprehend most of the matter contained in them: And since the
Award is the foundation on which they are built, I having already shown the
Injustice and Injury done to me, by the Forgeries and Falsehoods, contained in
what they have Printed, and called the Award, I shall pass that by and consider.

1. Their charge of Nonconformity to the Award.

2. The emptiness of their silly conceit, and false, as well as foolish
suggestion; That, Because our Friends Hold and maintain, a neeessity of the
Immediate guidance of Gods Holy Spirit, in all Religious Performances; that
therefore it must follow, That We pretend the same in all our civil affairs;
Which is on their part to prove.

3. That every dissent in opinion from the Judgment of each other in things
natural and common* proceeds from a spirit of error, and is matter of scandal
and disgrace.

4. That We Preach up our Friends as the Messengers of Truth and not inferior
to any of the Holy Apostles.

5. Their repeated charge of Rebellion and that I should tell the present
Governor to his face, That I neither liked him nor his Commission, did
therefore from thenceforth denounce perpetual hostility against him, and should
not cease to make War upon him, until I had driven him out of the Government.

6. Whether Jeremiah Basse had the Kings approbation, according to the true
intent of a late Act of Parliament, in that Case provided.

7. How far it concerns us to inquire into it*

8. Whether they or We have transgressed the late Act of Parliament, as it is
suggested, we have done.

And lastly, Their indecency, after all their abuses, to take upon them, to act
a Religious part.

First, Their charge against me and my Friends, for Nonconformity to the
Award. To the which I answer, Neither Billing, nor his Successors, did ever
perform their part, as I have before shown, and our part depending upon a
condition never performed on their part, I take to be a Release to us. However
our not recognizing the present Government, was never on that foot, as is plain
from what is already said.

2. The emptiness of their silly conceit, and false, as well as foolish
suggestion; That, Because our Friends, do hold and maintain, a necessity of the
Immediate guidance and assistance of Gods Holy Spirit, in all Religious
performances; that therefore it must follow, that We pretend the same, in all
our civil and common concerns, which is on their parts to prove. And if they
fail in this supposition, which is the foundation of all their structure; then
the inferences drawn from it, must be unnatural, weak and idle: And that they
are mistaken in this, I affirm, and charge it upon them as a falsehood; let
them acquit themselves if they can.

3. That every dissent in opinion, from the Judgment of each other, in things
natural and common, proceeds from a spirit of error, and is matter of scandal
and disgrace This being another inference, drawn from that false supposition,
must ^all with it, and be numbered amongst the rest of the falsehoods and abuses
put upon us. Surely these Adversaries, had shown more wit, as well as honesty,
if they had not personated the Quakers, and spoke so many things in their name,
till they had known them, and their Principles better.

4. That We preach up our Friends, as the Messengers of Truth, and not
inferior to any of the holy Apostles. That We own our Friends as the
Messengers of truth, That are employed in the Gospel Ministry, is true. And let
me ask them, Pray whose Messengers are your Ministers, if not Messengers of
Truth? But that We preach, or believe them, not to be inferior to any of the
Holy Apostles; I utterly deny, and if my Adversaries cannot prove it, I must
call this a falsehood also.

5. That I should tell the present Governor to his face, That I neither liked
him, nor his Commission etc^ And what of all this; I believe I might say that,
o^ something like it, and when all is done; How will he help himself? But I
suppose this is a fault, my Adversaries are little guilty of, viz., to speak
their resentments to the faces of their Adversaries: They are too full of
falsehood and flattery for that. But that I should say, I did therefore from
thenceforth denounce perpetual hostility against him, and should not cease to
make war upon him until I had driven him out of the Government; is a notorious
B --, there being at the same time and place, I believe, not less than a dozen
persons, who heard what discourse passed, betwixt Jeremiah Basse and me, and
believe none beside ^ B. himself, will say, That I said any such thing: Could I
and some others whom they (...), have used that liberty, I believe those
arrogant Insulters might sooner have been reduced to better manners: But upon
his telling me, He believed I would use my endeavors to remove him from the
Government, and (...) in Coll. Hamilton again; I did tell him, That he (...)
hand at guessing, and that he might depend upon (...) And though I hope it^s
nigh to be effected, yet I cannot be so vain as to imagine, that any interest
tha^ I ^ould make either pro or con could be much available; however I own, my
hearty wishes, with many others, have been for it, and nothing willingly
omitted, that might contribute to it, the benefit of which (I hope) We shall
soon have the enjoyment of.

6. Whether Jeremiah Basse had the Kings approbation, accordng to the true
intent of a late Act of Parliament, in that case provided. To which I shall
Presume to make to other answer, than what the Provincial General Assembly have
done, at then two last sittings. At the first of which, to the best of my
remembrance it was Resolved, Nemine Contradicente, That he had not the Kings
approbation, neither as the Act of Parliament directs, nor after any other or
circumstantial manner, and for that reason refused to recognize him Governor.
And though some few that were Members of that Assembly, did afterward crouch,
after a base and beggarly, treacherous manner, for thet sake of places or
profit or honor, and some of these very persons, were again upon the last
Assembly; yet the number did not exceed five out of near fifty, but what
declared themselves as much dissatisfied at this sitting, as they were at the
for^mer, in the case aforesaid.

But how vain and frivolous their arguments, deduced from the case of the late
Governor Hamilton, Because, he was not approved nor sworn according to the
Act, which took p^ace sometime before he was superseded, is very obvious, and
his case with Jeremiah Basses hol^s no parallel. For when Colonel Hamilton was
e^^^^alled Governor, there was no such Act, and his Authority was good without
it, and this Act was never transmitted hither, by order of the Crown, to weaken
it; So that it remained good ^^ill, and he was not obliged to know, that there
was any such Act in being, unless it had been sent, as aforesaid. And as to his
not obtaining a Dedimus Potestatem, to enable him to take the Oath etc. I think
it had been a very preposterous thing in him to have sought it; It was as much
as concerned him, to have obeyed the commands of his Sovereign, when required;
Which, I dare say, he would never have refused: But this being never done, nor
any law appearing to enjoin it, I think it not improper to use the old maxim
viz, Where there is no Law, there is no transgression. But this is none* of
Jeremiah Basse's case; He comes immediately out of England, where he might, and
ought to know, and doubt less did know, that there was such an Act in force,
and that it was his duty to obey it, and that his Authority could not be good
without it; Yet notwithstanding presumes (he says by advice of some of those
he calls his Council) to publish his Commission, and impose his Authority upon
us; to which I shall have occasion to speak a little more anon. But (say my
Opponents) it is manifest by the Dedimus Potestatem, which the now Governor
brought along with him -- that he comes to this Government, approved of by his.
Majesty Now they begin to bring out their strong reasons; but let us try them a
little^ That Instrument, did no more but give power, to persons within named,
to administer the Oath, to the Governor for the time being: That might have
been any body else, as well as him, and to be sure could never be intended for
him, seeing it was given, at least three months before the date of his
commission, and it is most probable, was committed to the care of the Society of
West-Jersey, to be by them sent hither, for the service intend^ed. So that; if
his being the Messenger, to bring the Dedimus Potestatem hither, be a manifest
and undeniable proof of the Kings approbation, I must yield the point; and thus
I leave it What they say of His Instructions from the Lords Justices, signed by
the Lords Commissioners of the Treasury -- And a letter from his Majesty,
addressed to him in the style of Governor of New Jarsey (as also) the printed
Gazets published by Authority, wherein his Majesty's approbation of him, (...)
the Governor of the Jer^^ys was davertized, and several other writings,
Instruments and Testimonials, which (they (...)) are as so many unquestionable
vouchers and irrefragable proofs; that he comes to his Gouvernment approved of
by his Majestey, according to the said Act of Parliament. I say, all this I
know nothing of, and knowing the Asser^ers so well, have no reason to credit
it. Nor do I believe, that any of the writings or Instruments aforesaid, had
any particular relation to him; but were intended to the Governor for the time
being. So that I see no reason (from all that they have offered to prove his
approbation) to recede from my former opinion; That he neither had, or, which
is more, is never like to have it.

7thly How far it concerns us to inspect whether he has or has it not.

I have always observed, these have been the two m^an Engines, these
Janisaries have used, to batter down the opposition they have met with, to
their Authority. First, They would labor to persuade that he had the Kings
approbation, if not so formally as the Act directs, yet he had what was
tantamount to it. But if this b^at would not take, then the second was, It
concerns none here to enquire or look into it; Is he the less a Gouvernour if
he wants it? He only forfeits his thousand pounds. I confess I could never be
brought over to this opinion, and that for this reason; That seeing it has
seemed meet to the wisdom of England, to enact, That no subject shall be any
longer permitted, to appoint a Gouvernour over their fellow subjects, without
the Royal approbation, and allowance declared in the s^^d Act: Who is he that
shall dare presume, to commission any person, at any time, to exercise the
necessary Regal^^s of Government? Or who is he that being so commissioned,
dares to exercise such Authority without it? Is not this to bid defiance to the
Authority of England; especially since America is expressly within the intent
of the Act. But (say they) the Act relates to trade, and not to Government. But
I must tell them, That what belongs to the constitution of a Governor, must
needs very sensibly affect the Government, if the having a well qualified
Governor, be any advantage to a Government, or if to have an ill one, be the
contrary. And farther, I think it looks a little unhandsome, if not disloyal,
for them to suggest, That the King regards the advantages of trade more than
the weal of his subjects; For as Parents value their Children above their
Inheritances, or Worldly advantages, so we ought to believe, that the King as
Father of all his subjects, in a Political sense, more regards their well
being, than all the advantages of trade. Why should we not then thankfully
embrace the Kings bounty to us, who will himself be satisfied, who, or what
they are, that are so posted, and not suffer every little fellow, to make his
Insults over his Subjects And I still hold my opinion, That if any shall
attempt it, it is most lawful, and loyal for the People not to submit to their
Authority who pretend to any so high as that of a Governor, especially by
their Representatives, when legally met together; in whom resides a
considerable share of the necessary powers of Government, and who must act
along with him, if any thing in Legislation be acted. So that I am still of
opinion, That it very much concerns them to be satisfied, in order to their own
safety, as well as preservation of their Previledges, whom they ioyn with, in
acts of so high a nature, and to do otherwise were s^pine negligence, and
unworthy of the trust to which they were elected. I shall not follow them
further on this subject at this time, believing th^^ Penman has lost his
labor bestowed thereon, and that his sophistical endeavors will prove
abortive, as most of his projects have hitherto done.

Yet I shall take a little notice of the slant blow, they give at such little
souls as Samuel Jenings; which I could (...) well have passed by, but that I
thought it was a (...) opportunity to lay hold of, to show the magnanimity of
these great towering Counselors: Who upon the report of Coll. Hamiltons being
superseded by Jeremiah Basse, did express their resentments of it with great
reluctance, were the first that moved Coll. Hamilton to convene the Assembly,
to consider if any thing could be done, to prevent so miserable an exchange:
When the Assembly met, were the men that solemnly promised to the Governor and
Assembly, to use their Interest, if Jeremiah Basse should arrive, under the
circomstances as was reported before an other Assembly, to dissuade him from
publishing his Commission, till we heard again from the Society in England, to
whom we had written, and that Coll: Hamilton's Commission might not be thereby
superseded. How real they were and how they have acquitted themselves like men
of common honesty, to mention nothing higher, is so well known in these parts,
as renders an information useless. But before I have done with this, I must
give another instance, of the fidelity and greatness of these men; in which I
must make a little digression, while I inform, or rather remind my Reader,
That, the controversy betwixt the Sucessours of Billing, and the Proprietors
here, was never yet determined; which has occasioned jarrs and
misunderstandings, to be kept on foot betwixt them and us; to prevent which for
the future, these great souls did agree, at the then Governors motion,
together to write a persuasive Letter to the Society, to grant us what we
requested, and believed was our right: This was performed, signed by the
Governor and his Council (of which these men were a part) delivered in to the
house of Representatives, to be sent to England, and accordingly was sent; Yet
these very men, my present Adversaries, sent another privately about the same
time, to dissuade the person that both they and we had addressed, as aforesaid,
from granting our request. Now what think thou, Reader, of the six of these
men's souls? Had they dealt thus with a private person, it had been very
detestable; but to do it to a Province, is a thing so unaccountable, I shall
leave it without a name.

8thly Wether they or we have transgressed the Act of Parliament as it is
suggested we have done. This is so plain a case, that I shall leave it to the
decision of my Reader, having said so much already on this head: But if to
cont^^d for obedience to the requirings of the Act, be a Transgression of it,
we will submit to their charge.

Lastly, Their Indecency, after all their abuses, to take upon them to act a
Religious part. This puts me in mind of the old Proverb, viz When the Fox
begins to preach, bew^re the geese. The best of it is, there is not many here,
that much affect the Religion of these men, but especially that o^ the
Penn-man; if yet he may be supposed to have any at all. But that nothing might
be wanting, that falsehood and flattery could furnish them withal, they
pretend, that what they do, is, in tenderness to the people and inhabitants of
the Province of West-New-Jarsey; than which nothing could be more remote from
them, and is so apparent, that I think none by these means will b^ deceived by
them.

And now for Conclusion: I shall (as I have promised) touch a little upon the
last paper these men posted against me; which I find so full of scurrility and
railery - that I scarce know where to touch it without fouling my fingers. It
does indeed render them M^sters of their (...), and the extravagancy of their
abuses to me in it are such, as makes it the less needful for me to make any
defense against it. For when any have so debaucht-their tongues or pens, as to
have no regard to the truth of what ^hey say or write, instead of blemishing
those with whom they contend, they brighten them, and only hit themselves a box
on the ear: For which reason, I can very contentedly be silent, to all the
scorn, reproach and falsehood they would disguise me with; knowing that men of
candor will see-for themselves, and not be imposed upon by such notorious*
ungenerous and s^eaking Adversaries.

I perceive they are uneasy, that I still insist upon my charge of forgery
against them, from which I (...) never acquit them, nor will all their
shuffling, wrigli^^^, twisting and twining extricate them from the guilt of it.
They ask a question of me, which I cannot answer viz "Did we receive or forge
the Award? They might be guilty of the worst part of it, for ought I know: But
as I have said before; it concerns not me to enquire how they came by it, but
they printed and published it, forged as it is, and on whom should I charge the
guilt of this foul act, but on them, the justice of which, I leave to the
censure of my Reader.

Their reflections upon those judicious persons that I mentioned, whom they
render Comical; and Ianus like with to faces each, I shall not meddle with;
knowing them to be sufficiently able to make their own defense, if they think
themselves abused by it.

I find they would have the world believe, and therefore say They solemnly
declare [that what they have done] was not from any resentment or disaffection
to me, or any other particular person or persons. To which I shall not answer a
word, but leave my Reader free, to judge of the truth of it upon perusal. I
judge, with the like sincerity they mention the Awarders, with a show of
respect; which serves only as a further discovery of their hypocrisy, who have
at times, so freely expressed resentments against Quakers in general. But they
proceed to point at oaths: under the same denomination who for their Probity,
Veracity, or other wise, compared with them, will not appear better than
spurious, a reproach to the name, but as boils and botches to the body they
hypocritically pretend to. Here I am willing (though not for their merit) to
spare a little those common tools who signed along with the Penman; believing,
that in reality they have been little more concerned, than the Ca^, that it^s
fabled* the Monkey made use of the Paw of for hot service^ to save his own. But
to return, Methinks this man should have been very cautions of exhibiting such
a charge against others, knowing his own circumstances; and how well they are
known to others here; Who for his -- has been spued out of the most corrupt
body pretending to Christianity, or like a bo^^h or s^^h dropped from it: And
though I know he would thus mask it, viz, That it is allowable and commendable
for men to reform; yet his not attempting it till under Impeachment carries no
good nor honest aspect with it.

And here I should break off and conclude, were it not that I am charged with
murder; I am glad that the charge is no higher than murdering English and
sense; better so than to murder English in the worst sense. But here I must
tread softly, least it revive old jealousies, and look to my own safety; being
threatened (though I hope it is not ominous) in these words. There fore shall
(...) come upon thee, thou shall not know from whence it rises; and mischief
shall fall upon thee, thou shall not be able to put it off. I hope my Adversary
may be mistaken; but if it should be otherwise, I should not be the first, that
has been suspected to fall after that m^ane^ nor have I any GOLD to spare to
allay his fury or Purchass his favor. But still my trust and confidence is in
that Arm I mentioned in my first, and shall conclude with it in ^his knowing
that in the end, it will be too strong for all i^s Opposers and Deriders.

S: J.


