Anno Regni Regis Gulielmi III. Duodecimo. AT A Great and General Court or
Assembly Of His Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England,
begun and held at Boston upon Wednesday the Thirty-first day of May 1699. and
continued by several Prorogations unto Wednesday the Thirteenth day of March
following. In the Twelfth year of His Majesty's Reign.
An Act for granting unto His Majesty, A Tax upon Polls and Estates.
WE His Majesty's Loyal and Dutiful Subjects the Representatives of His
Majesty's Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, Convened in General
Court or Assembly, having had before us the Accounts of the Treasury, whereby
we are sensible of the necessity of granting a further supply of Money: As well
for the paying and discharging of the Debts already due and owing from the
Province, as of the future growing Charge thereof: For procuring of Arms and
Ammunition for the use of this Province; As also for the subsisting and paying
of Wages to Soldiers and Seamen, and Vessels Hire, that have been, are or
shall be employed in His Majesty's Service within this Province; For the paying
of such Salaries and Allowances as have been or shall be made and granted by
the General Court or Assembly: And all such Allowances and Payments as are
directed by any Act of this Province, to be made out of the Public Treasury;
And for support of the Government, and answering of the incident and contingent
Charges in and about the same. Do unanimously Grant unto His most Excellent
Majesty, for the ends, uses and intents before mentioned, and for such other
use and uses as shall be limited by this Court and no other, A Tax of Three
Thousand and Seventy Nine Pounds, Ten Shillings in Money, to be Levied upon
Polls and Estates, both real and Personal within the said Province, as in and
by this present Act for the manner and proportion thereof is directed and set
forth.

And be it Enacted by His Excellency the Governor, Council, and
Representatives in General Court Assembled, and by the Authority of the same.
That the Treasurer do forthwith issue out and send his Warrants directed to the
Assessors, Select-men or Trustees of each Respective Town and Precinct within
this Province, (...)
Requiring them to Assess and apportion the Sum herein set upon such Town or
Precinct to this present Tax on the Polls and Estates lying and being within
the same, or Districts thereof, or next adjoining thereto, not paying else
where, in manner and according to the Rules following: That is to say, To
assess all Male persons of the Age of Sixteen Years and upwards (other than
such who are herein after exempted) at the Sum of Two Shillings on the Poll,
and all Estates as well real as personal in whose hands tenure or occupation
soever the same is or shall be found, and Incomes by any Trade or Faculty which
any persons do or shall exercise (except as in and by this Act is hereafter
excepted) at one Penny on the Pound, and to abate or multiply said Sum (if need
be) so as to make up together with what shall arise upon Polls the Sum total
hereby set and ordered for such Town or Precinct to pay; and in making their
said Assessment, to Estimate Houses and Lands at Six Years Income of the yearly
Rent whereat they are or may reasonably be set or let for in the places where
they lie, and to Estimate Indian, Molatto and Negro Servants proportionably as
other personal Estate according to their sound Judgment and Discretion; Also to
Estimate every Ox of four years old and upwards, at Forty Shillings, every Cow
of three years old and upwards, at Thirty Shillings, every Horse above three
years old, at Forty Shillings, every Swine of a year old or upwards, at Eight
Shillings, and every Sheep a year old and upwards, at Four Shillings. Likewise
Requiring the said Assessors, Select men or Trustees to make a fair List or
Lists of the said Assessment, setting forth in distinct Columns against each
particular persons name how much he is assessed at for Polls, how much for
Houses and Lands, and how much for his personal Estate and Income by his Trade
or Faculty, and the List or Lists so perfected and signed by them, or the major
part of them to commit to the Collector, Constable or Constables of such Town
or Precinct, and to return a Certificate of the name or names of such
Collector, Constable or Constables, together with the Sum total to each of them
respectively committed unto himself, some time before the Sixteenth Day of May
next Ensuing. And the Treasurer upon Receipt of such Certificate, is hereby
empowered and ordered to issue forth his Warrants to the Collectors, Constable
or Constables of such Town, Requiring him or them respectively to collect the
Sum total of the List or Lists to him or them committed, (...)
and to pay the same in to the Treasury, and issue the Accounts thereof with
himself or his Successor in said Office at or before the the last day of June
next following.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That each Town and
Precinct within this Province, shall be assessed and pay as its proportion to
this present Tax, the Sum hereafter following. That is to say, In the County of
SUFFOLK.
l. s. d. Boston, Five Hundred Eighty Five Pounds. 585 00 00 Roxbury, Fifty Two
Pounds, Ten Shillings. 52 10 00 Dorchester, Sixty Seven Pounds, Ten Shillings.
67 10 00 Milton, Twenty Seven Pounds. 27 00 00 Brantrey, Forty Eight Pounds. 48
00 00 Weymouth, Thirty Three Pounds. 33 00 00 Hingham, Fifty One Pounds. 51 00
00 Dedham, Thirty Five Pounds, Five Shillings. 35 05 00 Wrentham, Nine Pounds.
9 00 00 Medfield, Thirty Pounds. 30 00 00 Mendon, Six Pounds. 6 00 00 Hull,
Fifteen Pounds. 15 00 00 In the County of ESSEX.
Salem, One Hundred Twenty Three Pounds. 123 00 00 Ipswich, One Hundred Thirty
Seven Pounds, Five Shillings 137 05 00 Newbury, Ninety One Pounds, Ten
Shillings. 91 10 00 Salisbury, Twenty Four Pounds. 24 00 00 Aimsbury, Twelve
Pounds. 12 00 00 Haverhill, Twenty Four Pounds. 24 00 00 Andover, Thirty
Pounds. 30 00 00 Bradford, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00 Topsfield, Twenty Four
Pounds. 24 00 00 Marblehead, Forty Eight Pounds. 48 00 00 Lynn, Forty Nine
Pounds, Ten Shillings. 49 10 00 Wenham, Twenty One Pounds. 21 00 00 Beverly,
Thirty Seven Pounds, Ten Shillings. 37 10 00 Gloucester, Twenty Seven Pounds. 27
00 00 Manchester, Seven Pounds, Ten Shillings. 7 10 00 Rowley, Thirty Six
Pounds. 36 00 00 Boxford, Eighteen Pounds. 18 00 00 In the County of MIDDLESEX.
Charlstown, Eighty Four Pounds. 84 00 00 Cambridge, Fifty Seven Pounds. 57 00
00 Watertown, Eighty One Pounds. 81 00 00 New Town, Thirty Three Pounds. 33 00
00 Sudbury, Thirty Nine Pounds. 39 00 00 Marlborough, Twenty Seven Pounds. 27
00 00 Medford, Eleven Pounds, Five Shillings. 11 05 00 Malden, Twenty Five
Pounds, Ten Shillings. 25 10 00 Wooburn, Forty Five Pounds. 45 00 00 Reading,
Thirty Three Pounds. 33 00 00 Billerica, Sixteen Pounds, Ten Shillings. 16 10
00 Chelmsford, Twenty One Pounds. 21 00 00 Concord, Forty Three Pounds Ten
Shillings. 43 10 00 Stow, Three Pounds. 3 00 00 Groton, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00
Lanchester, Six Pounds. 6 00 00 Sherbourn, Sixteen Pounds, Ten Shillings. 16 10
00 Framingham, Six Pounds. 6 00 00 Dunstable, Three Pounds. 3 00 00 In the
County of HAMPSHIRE.
Springfield, Thirty Six Pounds. 36 00 00 Northampton, Thirty Four Pounds, Ten
Shillings. 34 10 00 Hadley, Twenty Four Pounds. 24 00 00 Hatfield, Nineteen
Pounds, Ten Shillings 19 10 00 Southfield, Seven Pound, Ten Shillings. 7 10 00
Westfield, Twelve Pounds, Fifteen Shillings. 12 15 00 Enfield, Three Pounds. 3
00 00 Deerfield, Three Pounds. 3 00 00 In the County of PLYMOUTH.
Plymouth, Thirty Nine Pounds. 39 00 00 Situate, Fifty Five Pounds, Ten
Shillings. 55 10 00 Marshfield, Thirty Three Pounds 33 00 00 Duxbury, Twenty
Four Pounds* 24 00 00 Bridge-water, Twenty Seven Pounds. 27 00 00
Middleborough, Nine Pounds. 9 00 00 In the County of BARNSTABLE.
Barnstable, Forty Six Pounds, Ten Shillings. 46 10 00 Yarmouth, Thirty Pounds.
30 00 00 Eastham, Thirty Pounds. 30 00 00 Sandwich, Thirty Four Pounds, Ten
Shillings. 34 10 00 Falmouth, Nine Pounds. 9 00 00 Manamoit, Nine Pounds. 9 00
00 Rochester, Nine Pounds. 9 00 00 Harwich, Twelve Pounds. 12 00 00 In the
County of BRISTOL.
Bristol, Twenty Seven Pounds. 27 00 00 Taunton, Forty Six Pounds, Ten
Shillings. 46 10 00 Dartmouth, Forty Three Pounds, Ten Shillings. 43 10 00
Freetown, Six Pounds, Fifteen Shillings. 6 15 00 Rehoboth, Thirty Six Pounds.
36 00 00 Swansey, Thirty Three Pounds. 33 00 00 Little Compton, Thirty Pounds.
30 00 00 Tiverton, Twelve Pounds, Fifteen Shillings. 12 15 00 Attleborough, Six
Pounds. 6 00 00 In the County of YORK.
York, Six Pounds. 6 00 00 Wells, Three Pounds. 3 00 00 Kittery, Fifteen
Pounds. 15 00 00 In Dukes County.
Edgar town, Fifteen Pounds. 15 00 00 Tisbury, Seven Pounds, Ten Shillings. 7
10 00 Chilmark, Nine Pounds. 9 00 00 Nantuckett, Thirty Pounds. 30 00 00

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Assessors of
each of the Towns and Precincts aforesaid, shall assess and apportion the Sum
herein before set on such Town, upon the Folls and Estates within the same,
according to the Rules before mentioned to be contained in the Treasurers
Warrant for assessing the same. And if any person or persons shall upon notice
given by the Assessors refuse or neglect to bring in unto them a List of his or
their Estates, such person or persons shall be assessed according to the sound
discretion and judgment of the said Assessors.

Provided, That nothing in this Act shall extend or be construed to the
Assessing of the Governor and Family, nor of the Praesident, Fellow or
Students of Harvard College, Settled Ministers, Grammar School Masters, or of
any that receive Alms. Who are hereby respectively Exempted as well from being
taxed for the Poll as for their Estates being in their own hands, and under
their actual management and Improvement and their Income.

And whereas by an Act made and passed at this present Session, Entitled, An
Act, Directing how Rates and Taxes to be granted by the General Assembly, shall
be Asessed and Collected: It is provided, That Assessors of Public Rates and
Taxes may be annually Elected by the Respective Towns at the time by Law
appointed for the Choice of Town Officers. And whereas all or most of the Towns
and Precincts within this Province have Chose their Town Officers for the year
ensuing, before the publica^ion of the said Act, and their being made
acquainted with the contents of the same.

Be It therefore Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That each Town and
Precinct within this Province that has not, or shall not Choose Assessors of
Public Rates and Taxes at the same time that they have or shall make Choice of
other Town Officers as aforesaid, may, and hereby is empowered (before or within
the space of seven days next after the Receipt of the Treasurers Warrant
aforesaid, by the Select-men or Trustees thereof) to Choose Assessors for such
Town in such manner as by the before recited Act they might have done at the
time when they made choice of other Officers for the same Town or Precinct: And
that such Assessors so Chosen at any Town Meeting duly to be warned and
assembled, shall be liable to the same Service and Duty, and to the same
penalty in case of their refusal or neglect, as if they had been chosen at the
same time with other Town Officers. And that the Select men or Trustees of each
and every Town or Precinct where no Assessors are or shall be Chosen or being
Chosen shall refuse to Serve, shall be the Assessors of such Town, according to
the true intent and meaning of the said Act before recited.

And be it further Enacted, That the Sum of Four Hundred Pounds, of the Tax
herein and hereby granted, shall be applied to and for carrying on of the Trade
with the Indians, (if His Excellency the Governor, and Council shall see it
necessary) to be managed according to the Directions contained in the Act past
at the last Session of this Court, Entitled, An Act, For giving necessary
Supplies to the Eastern Indians, and for Regulating of Trade with them

And whereas in the year One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Six, There was set
upon the Inhabitants of the Town of Wrentham by an Act of the General Assembly,
the Sum of Twenty Pounds as the said Towns proportion to a Tax then granted,
and a List thereof committed to Edward Gay, then Constable of said Town, yet by
reason that the Treasurers Warrant (for the better enabling the said Constable
Edward Gay to Collect the said Sum) did miscarry, and through some other
defects, the said Twenty Pounds has not been hitherto Collected, but is still
outstanding and unpaid.

It is hereby further Enacted, That the Treasurer be and is hereby empowered and
directed forthwith to issue out a Warrant to the said Edward Gay, impowring and
requiring him to collect and gather in the said Sum of Twenty Pounds assessed
upon the Inhabitants of said Town of Wrentham in the Year aforesaid, and not
hitherto collected according to each persons proportion in the List committed
then to him by the Select-men of that Town, and to pay in the same into the
Treasurer, and issue the Accounts thereof with him, or his Successor, on or
before the last Day of June next. And the said Edward Gay upon Receipt of the
Treasurers Warrant aforesaid, is hereby empowered and required to collect and
pay in the said Sum accordingly.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Treasurer be,
and is hereby empowered to issue forth a certain number of the Bills of Credit
of the late Colony of the Massachusetts, to the Sum of Two Thousand Pounds and
no more, toward the uses for which this present Tax (...) granted, which Bills
shall pass out of the Treasury at the value therein expressed, the Treasurer to
have Credit in his Accounts for so man(...) Bills as he shall so emit and issue
forth at the same value they we(...) received into the Treasury; And the said
Bills shall be taken and a(...)cepted in all public Payments at the Sum
therein expressed, and (...) present Tax to be a Fund for the repayment of all
such Sums in (...) Bills as shall be in the hands of particular persons in
current Mon(...) of this Province. And all persons having now any Bills of
Credit (...) their hands are to bring them into the Treasury by the first day
of Ap(...) next, and shall thereupon have Credit in the Treasury as formerly
(...) such Bills as they shall so bring in; but in case of their neglect to
bri(...) the same in accordingly shall lose the benefit of any advance
thereupon.

Boston, Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, Prin(...) to His
Excellency the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL. 1700


