GRACE TRIUMPHANT.

OR, A Notable EXEMPLE of a Great SINNER, Becoming A Great SAINT.

Improved for the DIRECTION and ENCOURAGEMENT, of them that have SINNED
Exceedingly, to seek Salvation from all their SINS.

Admone^ur omnis ^^as, id fiere posse, quod aliquando factum est. Boston, in N.
E. Printed by T. Green, Sold by Benjamin Eliot. 1700.

To the READER.
THe Author was in a Course of Sermons, upon, The Cahpter of Faith, in the
Epistle to the Hebrews. One of the Sermons, which had nothing else to
distinguish it, had a Singular Impression upon some of the Hearers. The
affected Hearers, Loving to see Grace Magnified, asked for a Copy of the
Discourse, that they might again have it as Readers. The poor, and plain
Discourse, is, without any Ornaments, but those of a Constant Preaching,
(sometimes more than twice or thrice in a week,) here Exposed. And perhaps, the
less Adorned it is, the more Useful it will be to those, whose Edification is
therein most aimed at. A Minister of the Gospel, should not be discouraged from
using all Opportunities to Do Good; but rather in Endeavors to bring forth
much Fruit, render himself worthy of the Name, which I find was the Name of a
Spanish Bishop; namely, Fructuosus.

Grace Triumphant.
Heb. XI.31. By Faith, the Harlot Rahab Perished not, with them that Believed
(...), when she had received the Spies with Peace.

Stand still, O my Hearers, and Consider the wondrous Works of God.


THE Jews Confess, (and it is a very Christian Confession,) that all the six
hundred and thirteen Precepts, which they reckon in the Law, are summed up in
that One, Hab. 2.4. The Just by Faith shall Live. A Justify^^ Faith, is, A
Reliance upon God for Life, through His promised Messiah. The Apostle Paul (for
the Apostle ^eter tells us, it was he!) calls upon the Hebrews, to continue
steadfast in the Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, though the expected Kingdom of
the Messiah at the Resurrection from the Dead, were for a while deferred. The
Glorious Exemples and Achievements of a Justifying Faith, are here therefore
in a whole Chapter of them Exhibited.

The last Believer, of whose Faith, we have a particular Account and Applause,
in the Apostolical Catalogue, ^ow appears before us. It is a Woman, for Faith
is Compatible to both Sexes: and it is a Woman of wonderful Circumstances, to
be found in such a Catalogue. For the Larger and Fuller History of the matter,
you must have Recourse to the Second Chapter of Joshua.

It is not among the Hebrews only, that the Examples of a Great Faith are to be
found: We find them among the Gentiles also: Rahab was one of them. Now, what
was this Rahab? What was the Action of Rahab? What was the Issue of the Action?

First. The Person famous for Faith, was, The Harlot Rahab. The word that first
signified an Hostess, did come also to signify an Harlot. In those Debauched
Countries, and those Brutish Ages, Women that kept public Houses of
Entertainment made them to be Bawdy Houses as well as Drinking Houses. It Is
true, in our better Times of Christianity, we often see more Virtuous and
Modest women, Employed about public Houses. But the Old Scandal should
admonish them, to keep the stricter Guard upon their Virtue. Rahab it seems,
comes under an unhappy Character, both for Idolatry and Unchastity: No doubt
the One subordinate unto the Other. The Rites of Idolatry were nourished, and
maintained by the Snares of Unchastity. The women that served the Temples,
where men did Sacrifice to Idols, were provided also for their Fornication.
Rahab seems to have been of that quality. And it was not on any Ill Design,
that the Honest men of Israel, went into the House of a woman of that quality;
But God had prepared the Heart of the poor woman for their coming to her House,
Even a Faith of Gods fulfilling to His Israel, the Great Promise of His Messiah
to come. She had heard What Great Things had been done by God, for His Chosen
people, and That these Great Things were in Order to the Appearing of the
Redeemer of the world, one Day among them. And God set Home what she Heard; By
this Hearing, there came Faith unto her.

Secondly. The Action whereto Faith inclined this person, was that of Receiving
the Spies with peace. It was (...) a Young Faith, which had been infused into
her; and yet a Y^ung Faith must be a Tried One. Christian, If thou have any
Faith, look for some Trial of it. The Prince of Jericho had got some
Information, that certain Israelitish pies were come unto her. She not only
covered and concealed the Spies, and notably assisted their Escape, when she
might have gained the Princes Favor by Betraying them, and she ran the Hazard
of her very Life by not Betraying them: but also upon her Examination, she told
an Officious Lie to preserve them. How contrary now is the Goodness of God,
unto the Ma^es of man! The way of Man usually is This: If there be some little
Infirmity in any One, we Proclaim it, we Magnify it, we Aggravate it, with all
the Reproach imaginable: And rather than fail, we will Stigmatize that for an
Infirmity, which rather is an Excellency. On the other side, Behold the way of
God! He takes no notice of Rahabs Fault: But He publishes Rahab Faith, with all
possible Commendation. My ways are not like your ways, says the Lord.

Thirdly. The Issue of the Action produced by the Faith of this person; was,
Her not Perishing with them that Believed not. If there be but One Believer in
a Multitude, in a Town, in a Land, you see, God will find out that One
Believer, with singular Expressions of His Favor. Christian, If thou have the
least Grain of true Faith, neither Thou, nor thy Faith shall be lost. She
Perished not! No, when all the rest of the City were dreadfully Destroyed in
their Sins, Rahab had the Pardon of all her Sins. The Life of her self, and of
all her Family was given to her. Life, did I say? Yea, she was honorably
Married unto One of the Nobles of Israel. And more than so? Our Lord Jesus
Christ Himself descended from her: You see Rahab her self by Name, among the
Ancestors of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Will you not now Stand astonished, O Congregation? Stand astonished at the
Triumphs of Justifying Faith! and with a Just astonishment now give Attention
to this Doctrine of God.

The Vilest of Sinners may become the Highest of Saints; and by Believing on
the Lord Jesus Christ, Escape the horrible Perdition, that shall Overwhelm
those who Persist in Unbelief. We have these PROPOSITIONS now before us.

I. The Great God singles (...) sometimes the Vilest of Sinners, to make them
the Highest of Saints. (...) the Harlot Rahab, Stand as an Eternal Monument of
what Forgiveness, what Holiness, what Blessedness, the V^lest of S^nners may
arrive unto! Rahab, a Canaanitess, yea, an Amoritess, belonging to a Nation,
devoted by God unto Everlasting Desolation; a Serpent in a Generation of
Vipers: Rahab, One that had worshipped Idols and Devils with her Spirit, and
that with her Body perpetrated the most Filthy Villainy, the most Loathsome
Filthiness: Rahab, a scandalous Wretch, a Pagan and a Prostitute* This Rahab
you see incorporated into the only true Church of God, and so distinguished
with signal smiles of Heaven. She became a Mother in Israel; Yea, a Mother to
the Savior of Israel. And when Salmon, an Eminent person in Israel Espoused
her, it was not because of her Eminency in worldly Riches and Honors; for she
had nothing: but because of her Eminency in Piety. If her Piety and Sanctity
had not been as Notorious as once her Wickedness, doubtless the Oracles of God
would not more than once in the New Testament, have celebrated her, as a most
Exemplary Person.

We meet with another woman, that was a very Vile woman. It was the
Samaritaness, who Successively and Illegally procured her self to be Divorced
from several Husbands, and was an Abominable Adulteress. And yet! We read, Joh.
4.39 This woman did not only become a Disciple of the Lord Jesus Christ her
self, but also was an Instrument of Discipling many others.

We meet with a Third woman, who was also a very Vile woman. It was Mary
Magdalene, who was Emphatically one that every One called A Sinner. And yet! We
(...) Luke 7.47. Her Sins, which (...), were Forgiven her, for she (...) much.

In the Genealogy of our Lord J^^sus Christ, there are several Women mentioned.
But there was in some one Remarkable Respect or other, an Ill Note upon every
One of those women. And it is the Note, which one of the Ancients has upon it,
This was, Vt qui propter peccatores venerat, de peccat^ribis nascens, Omnium
peccata deleret: Our Lords Birth was from Sinners of all sorts, to teach us,
that His Death is for Sinners of all sorts.

Will you Believe it, Sirs? There is no Sinner so Vile, but what may come to be
Justified, and Sanctified. It is an amazing passage! 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.
Foznicatozs, Idolaters, Adulterers, Effeminate, [ i. e. Self-Polluters;]
Sodomites, Thieves, Ephe^^us, Drunkards, Revilers, E^t^^tioners: Such were some
of (...) but ye are Washed, but ye are (...), but ye are Justified, in the
(...) of the Lord Jesus, and by the (...) of our God. Yea, Sometimes (...) of a
more Civil and Moral behavior, may finally Perish in their Unregeneracy, when
persons that have been most notorious and flagitious for the worst of Crimes,
have become Regenerate. Certainly, there were many more Innocent women than
Rahab in Jericho, who perished under the Wrath and Curse of God, when the
Harlot Rahab, at last became the Saved of the Lord. Most Noted and Awful, are
those words of our Lord Jesus Christ, Mat. 21.31. The Publicans and Harlots go
into the Kingdom of God, before the Pharisees.

But what is the Reason of such a Dispensation in the Providence of God?

The Grand and Sole Reason of it, is, that First Reason of all Reasons, The
Pleasure of God. We must fall down before Sovereign Grace, and say, Mat. 11.26.
Even so, Father, for (...) seemed Good in thy sight.

More particularly.

First. God will display His own ^^finite Mercy, in receiving the Vilest of
Sinners to His Mercy. When God will show Mercy, He will do it like a GOD.
Hence, as God will have Mercy, on whom He will have Mercy, so He will make the
Vilest of Sinners, the Subjects of His Mercy: and He will put up Injuries, and
pass by Offenses, that would break the back of all Humane Patience. Thus it is
said, Hos. 11.9. I will not Execute the fierceness of my Anger, for I am God,
and not man. The Free Grace and Mercy of God is a Boundless Ocean: And God will
declare the Glory of His Mercy, by casting the Greatest of ^ins, into the
Depths of that Ocean. The Design of God, in bringing home Sinners to Himself,
is to Exercise and Glorify His Free Grace: He does what He does, to manifest
the Exceeding Riches of His Grace. Now the Free Grace of the most High God, is
Glorified unto the Height, in Choosing the Vilest of Sinners from the rest of
mankind, and bringing them home unto Himself. As it is said; Tit. 3.3, 5. We
were sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and
pleasures, living in malice and envy, hateful, -- but according to His Mercy He
Saved us: Thus, when the most foolish and hateful of Sinners, and they that
wallowed in the Vilest of Lusts, are Saved, Oh, how much will the Mercy of God
shine forth in their Salvation! Methinks, I overhear the Songs of the Redeemed;
Lord, If thou had not been abundant in Mercy, I tha^ have abounded in Sin,
could never have been Saved! Lord, If thou had not De^^ghted in Mercy, thou
would never have Saved me, that have made Sin my Delight! Lord, Thou art
Merciful, and Ready to Pardon, Else I, who have been Ready to Sin, had never
found a Pardon! And the Angels of God, make a Consort hereto, with Eternal
Hallelujahs.

Secondly. God will display the Infinite Merit of our Lord Jesus Christ, by
making the Vilest of Sinners feel the Efficacy of that Merit. If only Sinners,
of an Ordinary Elevation in Sin, were Saved, the Merit of our Lord Jesus
Christ, would not be seen to be of such an Unlimited Value as indeed it is. But
when Extraordinary Sinners, and the tallest Giants, and the fiercest Monsters,
of Sin, come to be Saved, Then! Then indeed, it is made Evident, that the Blood
o^ Jesus Christ, the Son of God, cleanses from All Sin. Hence it is urged, Psalm.
25.11. For thy Names sake, O Lord, Pardon mine Iniquity, for it is Great. What
is Great? Why, As the Sin is Great, so, the Name is Great the Name of God, that
is to say, the Christ of God. When Great Sin is Pardoned, it shows, that there
is a Great Christ who has purchased the Pardon, and that he has paid a Great
Price for the purchase of it, and that He is, A Savior, and a Great One. When
the Vilest of Sinners are Saved, (...) is a vast Encouragement unto other
Sinners to come unto the Lord Jesus Christ, who, they see, will not Cast out
the Vilest of Sinners, when they Come unto Him, and whose Blood is an Open
Fountain for the Vilest of Sinners. Thus the Apostle, 1 Timothy 1.15, 16. Christ
Jesus came into the world, to Save Sinners of whom I am Chief; I obtained
Mercy, that in me first, Jesus Christ might show forth all long-suffering, for
a Pattern to others. When the Chief of Sinners are Saved, there is a Pattern
given, of what the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ can do for them that come
unto it.

Thirdly. God will display the Infinite Power of His Holy Spirit, by making the
Vilest of Sinners* feel the transforming Effects of that Power upon them. When
Sinners are Saved, they are not only Released from the Damnation whereto they
were Exposed by their Sins, but they are also Rescued from the Dominion which
th^i^ Sins had over them. In the Saving of Sinners, the old Sinners are made
New Creatures; They have New Principles, New Abilities, New Dispositions: The
Sinners undergo a wonderful Renovation in all their Faculties: The Image of
Satan is Abolished in them, and the Image of God Introduced: A Toad is turned
into a Man, yea, a Serpent is turned into an Angel. This Conversion of a Sinner
is a mighty work, and a work that can be done by none but the Almighty Power of
God: We are told, Ephesians. 1.19. We believe according to the working of His mighty
Power. Now, for the Vilest of Sinners to have the Experience of such a Change,
as that which is undergone in Conversion, and be Changed from the Slaves of
Hell, into the Sons of God; This, Oh! This does manifest the Power of the Holy
Spirit, with a very mavelous Demonstration. To fetch a forlorn Sinner from
the very belly and bottom of Hell, and Extinguish all the hideous Lusts which
he is depraved withal, and Rectify all that is amiss in him, and make him a
very Picture of the Lord Jesus Christ Himself throughout Eternal Ages: Oh! the
Power of the Spirit, that shall do such a thing? It Is said, Act. 11.21. The Hand
of the Lord was with them, and a great Number Believed, and Turned unto the
Lord. Now when the vilest of Sinners are Turned unto the Lord, He as it were
Glories in it, saying, See what my Hand can do! One of the Heathen writers in
the Primitive Times, made that Cavil against Christianity, That it was a
Sanctuary for the vilest of Sinners! Origin made this Excellent Answer to the
Cavil, A Sanctuary, Sir! No, It Is an Hospital for the vilest of Sinners.
Christianity indeed Receives the Vilest of Sinners, but it Releives those whom
it Receives. God will show what His Holy Spirit can do, by making the Vilest of
Sinners become the most Holy Christians..

II. Believing is a sufficient Se^^rity against Perishing. If a (...) do not
Perish, it is by Faith she must be Saved. Salvation is most certainly secured
by Believing.

We will Enquire, First, What is the Believing, that will secure Salvation?

And that Enquiry shall be thus Answered. It is a Looking to, and Trusting in,
the Lord Jesus Christ, for Salvation. Faith cannot be better described, than in
that Call to Faith which our Lord has given us, Isa. 45.22. Look unto me, and
be ye Saved. A man mu^^ see himself plunged into doleful circumstances of
Sinfulness and Wretchedness, by his Fall from God, and see himself unable to
help himself out of those doleful circumstances. A man must see God manifest in
Flesh, and the Son of God become Incarnate, in our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Lord Jesus Christ become the only Mediator between God and man. A man must see
the Lord Jesus Christ making Satisfaction for the Sins of His Chosen by His
Obedience to the Death, and now Everliving to make Intercession for us, and
able to Save unto the uttermost all that come to God by Him. A Sight of these
things, and a Flight unto the Lord Jesus Christ upon what we see, This is
Faith. Faith is an Addressing to, and a Depending on* the Lord Jesus Christ, as
the only One, that shall Recover us to Everlasting Happiness. Faith is a
Repairing to the Lord Jesus Christ for Salvation. It says, Psalm. 116.4. I
beseech thee, O Lord, to deliver my Soul. And Faith is a Relying on the Lord
Jesus Chrst for Salvation. It says, Psalm 62.5, 6. My Soul, wait thou only upon
God, for my Expectation is from Him, He only is my Salvation.

We will Enquire, Secondly, What is the Salvation, that we secure by Believing?

And that Enquiry shall be thus Answered. All the Benefits to be derived and
expected from the Lord Jesus Christ, are comprised in th^^ One word, Salvation.

More particularly.

Adoption is one stroke i^ the Salvation, that follows upon Believing. We read;
Gal. 3.20. Ye are all the Children of God, by Faith in Christ Jesus. We no
sooner Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, but Then we are fetched out of the
Devils Family Then the Almighty God says unto us, Ye are my Sons and my
Daughters* And the Angels of Heaven acknowledge us for their Brethren.

Justification is another part of the Salvation that follows upon Believing. We
read, Romans 5.1. We are Justified by Faith. When we Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ* Then we are accquitted from all the Curses which the Law of God had
pronounced upon us; Then we are inve^ted with the perfect Righteousness of that
Obedience which our Surety has yielded unto the Law for us; we are entitled
unto the Blessedness of the Righteous; Then the Great God says unto us, Be of
Good Cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee.

Sanctification is one more part of the Salvation that follows upon Believing.
We read, 2 These. 2.13. God has Chosen us to Salvation, through Sanctification
of the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth. When we Believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, Then we Die to Sin and Live to God, and we are set at Liberty from the
Bondage of our Corruptions; Then the Divine Influences of our Lord Renew us in
the Spirit of our mind, and Adorn us with His Heavenly Graces, and Assist us to
bring forth much of that Fruit whereby our Heavenly Father may be Glorified;
and render us meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

But, finally, the Consummation of ^ur Salvation is in that Inheritance. We
read 1 John 5.13. You that Believe (...) the Name of the Son of God, may ^^now,
that you have Eternal Life. If we Believe on our Lord Jesus Christ, Then we
shall at the End of our Life, receive the End of our Faith, even the Salvation
of our Soul, in Everlasting Life. Then we shall at our De^arture, go to be with
the Lord on whom we have Believed, where to be is by far the best of all, and
find that we know whom we have Bel^eved, for He has kept what we have committed
unto Him. Then at the Second Coming of our Lord, when He shall be Admired in
all them that Believe, we shall be Raised from our Graves, and in Raised Bodies
we shall converse with our Lord Jesus Christ, and partake of a Felicity which
Eye has not seen, Ear has not heard, and the Heart of man has not conceived.

We will Enquire Thirdly, The Security that our Salvation has by our
Believing, what is it, and where lies it?

Our Answer to that Enquiry must be This.

First, Faith puts the Believer under a Promise of Salvation. We have the
unfailing Promise of the God that cannot Lie; It is the Promise of God, Mar.
16.16. He that Believes shall be Saved. It is the Promise of God, Act. 16.31.
Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be Saved. And because of this
Promise, it is said, Joh. 3.36. He that Believes on the Son, has Everlasting
Life.

And then Secondly, Faith is the Instrument by which the Believer does Receive
the Promised Salvation. Salvation is all for the Receiver. If men will not Reject
Salvation, but Receive it, they shall have it. Now, Faith is a Receiving. All
the Blessings of the New Covenant are tendered unto us: The Great God makes
this Tender, Will thou have my Son, and shall His Righteousness be Imputed unto
thee? Will thou have my Spirit, and shall His Holiness be Imprinted upon thee?
Will thou have my Word, for the only Rule of thy Life, and will thou have thy
Happiness, in my Kingdom for (...)? The Heart, the conquered Heart, answering,
Lord, I take ^t, I take it, with all my Heart! That Is Faith: Here Is Faith.
Faith is a Receiving of the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Savior. We read,
Joh. 1.12. They that Receive Him, are they that Believe on H^s Name. Hence it
cannot but be a Receiving of Salvation with Him. When the Lord Jesus Christ is
Received by any Soul, He says unto that Soul, as He said unto Zacheus, This
Day Salvation is come unto thee. As Rahab was Married unto Salmon, so by Faith
we are Married, unto our Savior. When the Mystical Marriage is brought about,
He is ours; but if He be ours, All is ours; and God will with Him, give us all
things.

III. Perdition will be the unavoidable, the irremediable, the intolerable
Consequence of Unbelief. The Inhabitants of Jericho, from whom Rahab therefore
came out (as likewise all they must that would not be Destroyed with the Romish
Jericho!) were to be Destroyed. Now that which Exposed them to Destruction was,
their Unbelief: That is, They would not come in, and submit unto the God of
Israel, and List themselves, among the people of His Messiah. Unbelief (...)
not the only Destroying Sin; the Wages of every Sin, is Death. But it is the
only Sin, that makes Destruction Unavoidable, and Irrem^diable. What can be
more Monitory, than that Thunder, Mar. 16.16. He that Believes not, shall be
Damned: And that, Joh. 3.18. He that Believes not, is Condemned already: And
that, Heb. 3.18. To whom Swear He, that they should not Enter into His Rest,
but to them that Believed not?

Lay together these CONCLUSIONS

First. Though Every Sin be a Destructive Evil: yet God has provided a Remedy
to deliver a Sinner from Destruction. As it was said, Hos. 13.9. O Israel, Thou
have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy Help: So may the God of Heaven say, O
Sinner, thy Sin has destroyed thee, but I have provided Help for thee. The
Least Sin, is against the Great God. The Dignity of the Object affronted, and
offended, by Sin, makes the Destruction of the offending Sinner, to be the
Demerit of it: There must be a Destruction to the workers of Iniquity. But the
Lord Jesus Christ, the God-man, has been made a Sacrifice to God for man. That
Sacrifice has made Atonement for Sin. If we made use of that Sacrifice, we
should be Delivered from the Destruction, whereto we are obnoxious.

Secondly. Unbelief is a Refusal of the only Remedy, for the Deliverance of a
Sinner from Destruction. As it is said, Heb. 2.3. How shall we Escape, if we
neglect so great Salvation? Truly, Unbelief is a Neglecting, yea, a Rejecting
of the Salvation, which God has prepared for us. Had a Stung Israelite Refused
and Forbore, to have Looked unto the Healing Serpent, he must have remained
unheal'd; but he could have Blamed none but himself. An Unbeliever is a Refuser
of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of that Wisdom, that R^ghteousness, that
Sanctification, and that Redemption, which the Lord Jesus Christ is ready to
bestow upon us. The Destruction of the Vnbe^liever cannot be prevented, because
He Despises and Refuses, the Only Name whereby he can be Saved.

Thirdly. Positive Unbelief makes the Destruction of a Sinner, (...) only
Unavoidable, and ^rremediable* but also of all, the most Intolerable* The
Negative Unbelief of them that never heard of the Lord Jesus Christ, makes
their Destruction to be Unavoidable, and Irremediable. But then; If they that
know not God, shall be punished with Everlasting Destruction, what shall they
be, that Obey not the Gospel of God? Surely, when our Lord shall be Revealed
from Heaven in flaming Fire, none shall so Exquisitely feel the Scalds of it,
as they that have slighted Him, after they have had Him Revealed from Heaven,
in the Light of the Gospel to them. There is a Positive Unbelief, which Lies in
a Contempt of the Lord Jesus Christ by them that sit under the Tidings and the
Tenders, of the Gospel. Herein, men that have the Lord Jesus Christ set before
them, do ^rample under foot the Son of God, and count the Blood of the Covenant
an Unholy thing. And what can remain for those, but a fearful Expectation of a
fiery Indignation to devour them? The Destruction of these Criminals, truly
it will be of all the most Intolerable. The mouth of Truth it self has spoken
it; Mat. 11.24. It shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, in the Da^
of Judgment, than for them. Truly, Sirs, It will be a Sorer Punishment, than a
Death without Mercy, that such miserable Unbelievers will be doomed unto. The
saddest, the darkest Portion, of the Damned, is called, Luke 12.46. A Portion
with Unbelievers.

But let us now Apply these Faithful sayings of God.

APPLICATION.
Despair! Despair! Thou art never to open thy mouth any more. What? May Rahab,
the Harlot, become a Sincere, and a Saved Believer? And may the Blackest of
Sinners, become the Brightest of Saints? Let no Sinner after this be Despaired
of* Never, Never let it be said, concerning the Vilest Sinners, that are not
yet gone down into the place of Torment* and the P^^ where the cannot hope
(...) Christ of God, as it was of old said, Ezekiel. 37.11. Our Hope is lost.
Sinner, be thou never so far gone in Sin, yet, Oh, yet! There is H^pe in I^^^el
concerning thee. If, as the Psalmist complained, Psalm. 3.2. Ma^y the^e be,
which say of my Soul, There is no Help for him in God: So if the Sinner should
have many Objections, and many Temptations, against Hope for the Mercies of
God, let him Reply, Yes, O my Soul, There is Help for thee. Though Defiled,
though Depraved, though Destroyed unto the uttermost; not there is a CHRIST,
that can Save thee to the utte^most.

Wherefore,

First. Let no Sinner fall into an Affrighting Despair, as if it were
Impossible, he should have all his horrid, and bloody Sins, Forgiven, him. It
was not Impossible, for a Menasseh himself, to be Forgiven, though he had
wrought much Evil in the Sight of the Lord, to provoke Him unto Anger: And
though he had made others to Err, and to do worse than the Heathen. To thee, O
Sinner, is directed that Heart-melting word, of a God, who forgives Iniquity,
Transgression and Sin; Isa. 1.18. Come now, and let us Reason together, says
the Lord; Though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow,
though they be (...) like Crimson, they shall be as (...)* The Invitation of
the Lord Jesus Christ, is to thee, O Polluted Creature, though thou have a Soul
a^ black as Hell, and art but one (...) out of Hell. He Invites thee, in these
terms, Mat. 11.28. Come to me, all ye that labor, and are heavy laden. Come to
Thee; Ah, (...) Lord! For what? Oh, For what? Come to me, He says, That my
Blood may Cleanse thee from all Sin, though thou art as Unclean, as all Sin can
render thee. Come to me, He says, That though thou art the most Guilty upon
Earth, yet thou may now stand in my Righteousness, without Guilt before the
Court of Heaven. But who may Come? He says, Let all Come! What? Lord, may
Rahab Come? Yes, let Rahab Come. Oh, Don't stand aloof, Don't keep away: when
the Lord Jesus Christ thus Calls thee to Him! The Bad may Come, (...) well as
the Good. [Se Mat. 22.^^] Return, O Prodigal, Return; (...) Bowels of thy
grieved Father, ^^ill yet yearn toward thee. And ^^ere will be Joy among the
Angels (...) God, at thy Return. I remember, (...) Peter, had been weeping over
(...) prodigious Crimes* one of the Angels was ravished with it: Says (...) Go
tell His Disciples, and Peter, (...) before you: -- he takes more Notice of
^eter, than of all the rest of the Disciples. It is a surprising passage, 2
Cor. 5.20. As though God did beseech you by us, we ^ray you in Christ^s stead,
Be ye Reconciled unto God. Come now, and thus argue upon it; Oh thou God of all
Grace, do thou Beseech me to be Reconciled unto thee, after all my Wicked and
Cursed Enmity against the! my Soul is astonished at this Grace! That which I
do, with inexpressible Ardours of Soul, beseech of thee, is, That thou will be
Reconciled unto me, I could never have Believed such a thing to have been
possible, if thou had not Commanded, and Enabled me, to ^^^lieve it. And,
since thou do ((...) Wonderful Grace! Infinite Grace!) Beseech me to be
Reconciled, surely thou will be Reconciled, now thou do but it in my Heart
thus ardently to Beseech it of thee.

Secondly. Let no Sinner fall into an Enfeebling Despair, as if it were
Impossible, he should ever obtain a Victozy over his Violent Sins. It is not
Impossible, for a woman that has been a (...) Sinner against the Lord, to
become. Great Lover of the Lord. Many ^^e discouraged, like those, Jer. 18.12.
They said, There is no Hope, but we will every one do the Im^^^nation of his
Evil Heart; Or, like those, Jer. 2.25. Thou said, There is no Hope* No, for I
have Loved Strangers, and after them I will go. Thus, they say, There is no
Hope, that ever I, shall shake off the Chains of Darkness (...) are upon my
Soul; There is (...) Hope that ever I shall be Effectually Reclaimed from all
my Evil Courses; There i^ no Hope, that ever I, shall attain the Graces, and
Comforts, of an Heavenly Life. Oh! Say not so! There is Hope, there is Hope.
Even a Rahab her self, may become Renowned for Godly ^^^version; God may fetch
a ^ain^ (...) of the St^ws, and make a Rahab, a Pattern of Godliness, to (...)
Israel. A Wanton may (...) Pattern of Chastity; A (...) may become a Pattern of
Sobriety; A Swearer may come to have (...) Tongue made a Tree of Life; and the
Mouth which Cursed Many, may come to Feed Many. And be it known to thee, O
Desolate Sinner; when thou art come to Repentance, all thy Old miscarriages
will be Forgotten, as if they had never been at all. The Blessed God will
fulfill that word unto thee, Jer. 31.34. I will Forgive their Iniquity, and I
will Remember their Sin no more. And no Man will Remember it, and Mention it,
for thy Disgrace, except he be a Base man, unworthy the Name of a Man: and one
to whom the Reviled person may say, as Beza did of them that basely twitted
him, with the Repented Vanities of his youth, What strange Folks are these, to
Envy me the Grace of my Lord Jesus Christ!

(...) Let us not with Utter (...) over any Sinner, (...) our Friends, for whom
we are Concerned. Perhaps we may have Relations, (or others,) that (...) given
over to all Impiety. No Counsils, No Charges, No Warnings, take any Impression
on them, to make them desist from their Impiety; However, let not us give over,
these Extravagent Sinners, or our Counsils to them. Who can tell, what God may
do for them? We read, Romans 5.20. Where Sin did abound, Grace did much more
abound. It may be, the Grace of God, may bring that Sinner, to ^^urn for, and
to turn from Sin, and become a Remarkable Penitent after all. Christian, That
Wild Son of thine, for which thy Soul is in Trav^^l, ^oth such Unutterable
Groans, any yet be Recovered. Thy Lewd Child (...) and yet come back. Thou
may yet have (...) to Sing, He was dead, but (...)* And he may one day (...)
Heart as Glad, as he now (...) Sad. God, in the Saving of Sinner^ does
mavelous things without (...)* Excuse the Roughness of the Expression, if I
say, That Sinning, Sin^^^ Relation, for which thou have Employed so many
Prayers, and Tears, that it is hardly possible they should Peaish, Despair not
of them, I say, Despair not, and Give them not over, until you see them turned
over at the Gallows.

II. But what shall we Do, That we may secure Salvation, that we may avoid
Perdition? Do! It is not to be done by Doing, but by Believing.

We must Every one of us, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, or Despair of
mercy; Believe on the (...) Jesus Christ, I say, or else (...) Perish under the
Indigna^^ God* Believe; That is to say, (...) a perishing Soul into the ^^ving
Hands of the Lord Jesus Christ, knowing, that He is Able, (...) Willing, to
Save, what thou have ^^^mitted unto Him. Accept the (...) Influences of the
Lord Jesus Christ, and Request Him to Rule (...), as well as to Save thee.
^^nsent that the Lord Jesus Christ should make thee Righteous, by Doing, and by
Dying for thee, and (...) ^is Good Spirit, make thee Holy, as the Fruit and
Sign of His having made the Righteous.

The Question of the Disheartened ^inner, is, May I Venture to Believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ, after all my Superlative Sinfulness? Why not, as well as
Rahab? Venture! Yea, thou art Siez'd by the Eternal Vengeance of God, if thou
do not Venture. May I Venture? Yea, (...) not only May, but Must. Ther^ is
the Indispensable Command of Go^* for it; 1 John 3.23. This is His Commandment,
That we should Believe on the Name of His Son Jesus Christ. Your Weal, or your
Woe throughout Eternal Ages, turns upon your Obeying of this Command; Necessity
is laid upon you: and Woe unto you, if you do it not.

But then, this Admonition remains to be introduced. Rest not in a False Faith.
Even from Rahab, we are taught, That a Saving Faith, will be a working Faith.
There is no cause to Reject the Epistle of James, for that passage in it, Jam.
2.25. Was not Rahab the Harlot Justified by works, when she had received the
Messengers, and had sent them another way? The Sincerity and Reality of our
Justifying Faith in the Righte^^^ness of our Lord Jesus Christ, must be
Justified by (...) the Works of Evangelical Obedience.

(...) this, more (...) ^ook Entitled, The Everlasting Gospel.]

You Judge that you Believe: Shall I now Try, whether you do or no?

First, What use do you make of the Scarlet Line? The safety of Rahab, was
managed by that Sign, Josh. 2, 21. She bound a Scarlet Line (...) the window;
And the sight of that Sign, according to previous Contract, preserved her. The
Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, shall be that, whereto the Scarlet Line shall
Conduct our meditations. I say then; Do you show the Blood of the Lord Jesus
Christ on all occasions, and make That your only plea, for your preservation?
Faith will produce the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, as the only Defense,
against all the terrible strokes of Heaven.

Secondly, What Company do you ^^ke? The Faith of Rahab was Con^^icious, in her
forsaking the Com^^ny of all her wicked Contrymen* ^ave you Renounced the
Company (...) all that you see to be Vicious, ^^d Ungodly, and Embraced the
^^mpany of them that have the ^ower of Godliness, to recommend them. Faith
inclined one to say, Psalm. 119.63. Lord, I am a Companion of all them that Fear
thee, and that keep thy Precepts.

Thirdly, What Confession do you make? The Faith of Rahab, was ^videnced, in
her making a Confession of what Effect, the Words and Works of God had upon
her. Do you, as the Apos^le speaks, Ad unto your Faith, Courage? Or, are you
unable, or unwilling to make a Confession of the Lord Jesus Christ o^ Ashamed
of a Confession, that sha^^ Declare what He has done (...) you, and what you
Desire to (...) for Him? It Is said, Romans 10.10 With the Heart man Believes
(...) Righteousnes^, and with the (...) Confession is made unto Salvation.

Finally, What Respect have y^^ for the Messengers of Joshua? The Faith of
Rahab caused her to Receive the Spies with Peace. The Faithful Ministers of the
Gospel, are the Spies of the Lord Jesus Christ: But men much maligned in the
world. If you are carried away with a Spirit of malignity against them, it is a
very Ill Symptom up^^^ your Faith. Especially, if th^^ (...) those Ministry
Faith was wrough^


