Spiritual Desertions Discovered AND REMEDIED.

BEING The Substance of diverse SERMONS Preached for the help of dark SOULS,
laboring under Divine withdrawings.

By Samuel Willard, Teacher of a Church in Boston.

Isa. 35.3, 4 Strengthen ye the weak hands, and confirm the feeble knees. Say
to them that are of a fearful heart, be strong, fear not.

BOSTON in New England, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Michael Perry
and Benjamin Eliot. 1699.

READER,
WHosoever shall take the pains to revolve the following Discourse, be
entreated rightly to consider your selves and accordingly apply it to your
present condition. Either you are Strangers to Christ and his Saving Grace; and
then it will be well for you to think, if such may be the case of Gods dearly
beloved, as is after declared, what then may you expect at his hand, who have
him for your enemy? And if so, you may be awakened and persuaded to make haste
and fly to the Refuge set before you, it will thus turn to your everlasting
advantage. Or you are gotten into Christ by a Living Faith: and then, either
you are at present entertained in his Embraces, and comforted with the
apprehension of his love; and then, you will here be cautioned, not to be
high-minded, but to ^ear: and accordingly, in expectation of, to be providing
for a dark time of Desertion, that when it comes, it may not be a strange
thing, or find you unprepared. Or you are under the apprehension of Divine
Withdrawings, and feel in your selves the very case of such, as is here
deciphered: and for your sake more peculiarly was this intended. That God was
pleased to make these Sermons profitable to any such Souls, in the Delivery,
let him have the praise: and if the d^sires of such to make them more public,
may be blessed with a like good success, by Gods Blessing: it will Crown my
highest ambition; which that it may, I shall follow it with my Earnest Prayers
to the God of all Grace,

Who am, Less then the least of all Saints, S. W.

Spiritual Desertions Discovered and Remedied.
PSALM. XXX.7. -- Thou did Hide thy Face, and I was Troubled.


AMong all the Dispensations of Gods Providence toward the Children of Men, in
this World, there are none more awful and mysterious, than the Desertions which
he sometimes exercises his own withal. Whatsoever trials they meet with in
this World, as long as they can go up and down in the light of Gods
countenance, all is well; but when once that is last, nothing can afford them
any (...). There are two sorts of Professors in the Visible Church; C^rna^ men,
who never experienced the gracious presence of God with them, and are not
therefore sensible of their want of it; but if they can enjoy his common
goodness, all pleases them, and they seek no farther; and if they are in
trouble at any time, it is only for want of these things: and Gracious Souls,
who have been made apprehensive of the Love of God, and felt the preciousness
of Communion with him; which if it be at any time withdrawn, they quickly
repent it, and it brings them into great distress; and because it is now a time
wherein God seems more than ordinary, to treat his Children with such
Providence as these, (...) may no^ be amiss for the help of these, to treat a
little on this Subject. I find by my observation, many of those, if not the
most, whom I have occasion to treat with about their Soul Concerns, who are
serious, to be much in the dark, and not a little perplexed about their
Spiritual State, and ready to say of themselves as she, Genesis 25.22. If it be
so, why am I thus? I shall therefore endeavor* by Gods help, to open this
malady, and prescribe the remedy which he has (...) down in his word. We have
this Ca^^ here instanced in David. That David was the Pen man of this Psalm,
appears by the Ti^^e; the occasion of it is also intimated the^e: at the
Dedication of his House: but Interpreters are at a loss about the proper
meaning of it. Some read it, A Psalm and Song of David at the Dedication of the
[or that] House, viz. the Temple, which though he lived not to see dedicated,
yet, as a Prophet, he prepared this Song then to be Sung* Others read it as our
Translation, and suppose that it intends the Dedication of his own House;
though some observe that all the Hebrew Expositors carry it in (...) former
sense. The word translated Dedication, properly signifies, to initiate* or
introduce a thing into its use. When it is applied to men, it intends the
Catechizing or instructing them in that which they should follow; so it is
used, Prove. 22.6. Train, etc. when used for other things, it intends the
appointing them to their first use, and the Service we designed them for; and
it seems the Israelites, when they Built an House, did solemnly consecrate it
to the Service of God, engaging that he should be Served in it, and it should
be kept pure from Idolatry and Debauchery: though with what Ceremonies they did
it, or whether with any at all, the Scripture is silent, Deuteronomy. 20.5. But likely
they did it with Prayer, in which they obliged themselves to God, that if he
would continue them in their Dwellings, he should be faithfully Served therein;
and if this course were used, instead of riotous, or at best but civil
House-warmings, it would savor more of Christianity. We may see an instance of
David's Dedication of his house, in Psalm. 101. whether this in the Psalm before
us, were when he first built it, or after it had been defiled by Absaloms
bruitishness, is disputed. Others suppose that it intends only a Psalm composed
to the Tune of the Song used in the dedicating of Houses: and the rather,
because there is not any thing particularly mentioned of his house in the
Psalm. However, as to the matter of the Psalm, it seems to be excellently
accommodated to David's return to his house, after the Rebellion of Absalom was
quieted. The Psalm is a Psalm of Praise or Thanksgiving: in it,

1. David sets himself to bless God for the wonderful deliverance he received*
of him, to verse 4.

2. He calls upon the Saints or People of God to join with him in this work,
verse 4. and to help them in it, he gives them an account of the whole case,
which consists of four particulars; which he introduces with a general
observation to be relied on by all that fear God, verse 5*

1. The Ill Improvement that he had made of his prosperous state, verse 6. and
that was to Carnal Security; though he still acknowledged God in it, verse 7.
David forgot himself; and carnal confidence is usually followed with
temptations which are too hard for us: and we may think that he has a tacit
respect to the matter of Uriah.

2. The sudden change that befell him on this, Text.

3. What course he took when under such a condition; he sat himself to Prayer,
to verse 11.

4 The blessed event of it, ver. 11, 12

The words of our Text then contain the second of these remarks, or the sudden
change that befell the Psalmist, when he least suspected it: he was gotten over
his troubles, settled in his Kingdom with great tranquillity; and now he thought
his troubles were at an end, and he should spend the rest of his time in ease;
and the rather because he maintained the Worship of God in his house, and
acknowledged God to be the author of his Settlement: and on a sudden the Scene
is altered, and he is again plunged into as deep distress as ever. In the words
observe two things:

1. The Occasion, or that from which this distress did proceed; thou did hide
thy face. What is intended by it, may be afterward considered.

2. The Effect of it, or the distress it self, I was troubld. The words in the
Conjugation in which it is here used, signifies a sudden and grievous
const^rnation on the mind, occasioned by some unexpected very great evil that
assaults a man, and leaves him wit^out counsel, or power to escape it, and so
puts him into a panick fear: and so it very sutably expres^th the present case.
Hence,

DOCTRINE. When God at any time hides his such from his own Children* it is
very troublesome and terrible to them.
There are two Propositions contain^^^ in this Doctrine, which may be taken
notice of viz.

1 That God may, and sometimes (...) hide his face from his choice^t Servants.

2. That his so hiding from them is very troublesome and terrib^e to them.

Of these distinctly.

Proposition 1. That God may, and sometimes (...) his face from his choicest
(...).

David is an instance for this, of whom we have an account in the Scriptures*
that he was a man after Gods own heart, one whom God had chosen peculiarly to
himself, with whom he had made a Covenant well ordered in all things, and sure*
and yet we have him here asserting this, and how frequently is he, in the
Psalms, bemoaning of himself by reason of such a Dispensation? Psalm. 10.1, 13.
(...) and many the like.

In prosecution of this Proposition, we may Enquire,

1. When God may be said to hide his face from his own?

2. What it is that procures this hiding of his face from them?

3. For what end or design does he so hide his face?

4. To what degrees this may arrive?

5. How long this may be?

1. When God may be said to hide his face from his own.

A. The Expression is Metaphorical and allusive, and ascribed to God after the
manner of men* God is a Spirit, and has no body, and consequently no members
or parts of a body; when therefore he assumeth such in the Scriptures, he
speaks to us in our own language, and is to be spiritually understood* Now the
face is the most conspicuous part of the body, and is usually bare and open to
view. The showing of the face to any is therefore frequently used for kindness,
freedom, and familiarity; and the hiding of it is a token of estrangedness and
displeasure* 2 Samuel 14.24. let him not see my face: Hence David prays for Gods
favor in such words, Psalm. 4 6. Lift up the light of thy Countenance upon us.
Gods hiding of his face then from his Creatures, intends his withdrawing from
them these sensible or experimental discoveries of his benignity to them, which
sometimes they enjoyed; or his witholding from them those manifestations of
himself which they long for, and which he has been ordinarily wont to bestow
upon others: for though hiding do properly intend a withdrawing out of sight,
yet it also includes in it a keeping out of sight, and not showing one self.
God is sometimes said to hide his face from Sensitive Creatures* Psalm. 104.29.
which intends his Providential witholding from them the support of their lives.
He is also said to hide his face from Wicked men, Deuteronomy. 32.20. and that may be
both on a temporal and a spiritual account; when he brings trouble upon them,
and affords them no relief or comfort in it. But when it is spoken of True
believers, it then more peculiarly intends those Spiritual Desertions, which
they are brought into, and left under; or those withdrawings of his manifesting
himself to them in his special favor, the enjoyment whereof is their very life
and consolation. The end of Union unto Christ in Conversion, is for Communion
with him; in which there is a mutual commerce maintained between him and us,
whe^^^in he imparts to us of his Grace, and enableth us to return to him
Service and Praise. Whatsoever therefore either imp^des o^ obscures this
Communion, belongs to the hiding of his face, or the Desertion of which we are
now considering: and hen^e*

1. A Christian may be without outward comforts, and ordinary helps, and yet
(...) the hidings of Gods ^ace. God can take away from his Children (...) their
health, (...) strength, relations, estate, liberty, and ^ake up all (...) light
of his counten^nce. Wa^ (...) no^ so with David, when in the (...) of the
Shadow of Death, Psalm. (...) Prophet, when the Figtree did not blossom, etc.
Hab. 3.17, 18* (...), he can take (...) the Ordinance^ themselves from them,
which are the ordinary way of their Communion with him, and sti^l be a little
Sanctuary to them, Ezekiel. 11 16. God therefore gives them that gracious
encouragement in the want of all, Isa. 41.10. Fear not, for I am with thee, etc.

2. He may enjoy all the outward benefits of the Covenant, and yet not enjoy
the face of God in them; he may partake in the fullness of these, and yet God be
withdrawn from them; it is one thing to enjoy the means, and another thing to
have God in them manifesting himself to us, by his gracious cooperation with
them; and these are separable: out of doubt David was sensible of this, when he
put up that request to God, Psalm. 51.11, 12. take not thy holy Spirit from me;
restore to me the joy of thy Salvation.

3. There may be real Communion maintained between God and the So^^^* and yet a
Child of God be at a loss about it. It may be carried on so secretly, as that
not only others may be ignorant of it, but the Christian himself may have great
doubtings about it. God is never nearer to his people than at some times when
they think he is farthest from them; he brings them in a way that they know
not, and (...) them in paths that they have not known, Isa. 42.16. he steals
his grace into them, and draws forth the exercise of it, and carries them
heaven* ward, when they are complaining that they cannot see him nor find him.
Was it not so with the Spouse, Cant. 5. never was her Grace in more vigorous
exercise than at that time, when she complains that her beloved had withdrawn
himself.

4. All those withdrawings whereby God leaves his Children in the dark about
their spiritual condition and concerns, belong to this Desertion, or hiding of
his face. God may be, yea is at work for them in his greatest retirements, but
they want the apprehension of it: When therefore they complain as he, Lam. 3.2.
he has led and brought me into darkness, but not into light* Now they are so
far deserted; and this is to be read in the Dispensation of himself to them in
his Providence on a spiritual account: and there are many respects in which he
thus does; some of the principal whereof we may here take notice of; viz.

1. When God not only brings outward troubles on his people, but with them
witholds Consolation, and lets in Terrors. Outward Afflictions indeed are not
a Rule of our judgment, since they may befall the most dearly beloved of God,
and a beam of Gods love in the Soul, will make them all appear light and
momentany, as Paul's did for this reason to him, 2 Cor. 4.17. But God is often
wont to use them as expressions of his anger, and witnesses of his displeasure:
and they are frequently so to his own; the Rods with which he corrects them;
and whilst they can see a fathers hand in them, they can take them well: but
when they are made to apprehend him coming as an enemy against them, and his
terrors make them afraid, now they see not any Consolation in his countenance,
but wrath; thus it was with Job in that distress of his, on which account he
utters that complaint, Chap. 13.24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and
hold me for thine enemy?

2 When God withdraws from his Ordinances, and they apprehend not that wonted
power of his accompanying, to give them their efficacy. Time was when they
never went to an Ordinance, but they met with Christ there, and received some
token of his presence with them, and acceptance of them: their hearts were
touched, their affections raised, the Word and Sacrament left impressions on
them, and they were quickened, resolved, en^ivened, strength^ned, and comforted
by them: but now it is not so; but on the other hand, they go with a great deal
of listnessness, and attend with deadness and wandering, and come away rather
more stupid and out of order as to what is good: and if God were there, would
it be so? David therefore longs that he may see God as he has seen him in his
Sanctuary, Psalm. 63.3. and for this it is that he values the Ordinances, Psalm.
27.4. to behold the beauty of the Lord. The want then of this felt, is a dark
dispensation.

3. When they set about Duty, and find that assistance witheld which they
needed, for want of which they fail in the performance; when they would do good
evil is present, and that not only to withstand, but to Ca^tivate them, Romans 7
22, 23. they would pray earnestly and enlargedly, but their affections are
cold, and their hearts are straightened; they would pray believingly, but are
shaken with doubting, and ready to let go their hold on the promise; they would
hear intensly, but their hearts are wandering, and steal away from them into the
corners of the earth e^e they are aware, and the like in other holy duties; and
now what miserable work do they make in their best performances? they feel
themselves like Sampson when his locks were cut, Judge. 16.20.

4. When they are left to themselves in an hour of Temptation, and so are
driven away by it into Sin. God does not only suffer Temptation to assault
them, for so he had often done, and given them a glorious victory and triumph
over it, and so brought them off conquerours; and therein witnessed his
admirable presence with them: but they have been tript up by it, and carried
down the stream of it, as it was with Hez^kiah, when God left him to himself, 2 Chronicles 32.31. and Peter when he cowardly denied his Lord; and many others in
Scripture record; and this brings them to a loss in their thoughts; and they
are brought to conclude, i^ the Lord had been with me, it would not have been
thus; if he had not been withdrawn, I had not been thus deserted.

5. More especially when they are left to some more gross and Conscience
wasting sins, and their Conscience is hereupon let loose to terrify them. David
prays especially to be kept from presumptuous sin, Psalm. 19.13. when therefore
they are at any time overtaken with such a sin as is against the light of
nature, and the plain precept of the Word of God, such as David's Adultery and
Murder were, such as that of the incestous Corinthian, 1 Cor. 5.1. this lo^ks
so much like a spot that is not of Gods Children, that it occasioneth very much
darkness in them; and though often for the present such a sin benums and
stupifies their Consciences, and they are insensible of it, yet when God
rowseth their Consciences, and makes it to reflect on the sin, and sets it
home wi^h its aggravations, it becomes very dreadful to them: we may be
satisfied how it was with David on this account by many passages, in Psalm. 51.
and they are ready to be swallowed up with the remorce of it, as he, 2 Cor.
2.7. lest he be ^e swallowed up with overmuch sorrow.

6. When their own Evidences are so blurred that they cannot read them. The
Christians evidences for his good estate are within him; they are the special
fruits of the Spirit, which he produces in none but the Regenerate: called the
things that accompany Salvation. Heb. 6.9. From these he is to argue to his
being under the promise, because thereby the condition of it is fulfilled in
him But, though these are in him, yet he cannot find the reality of them: he
cannot distinguish his Faith from Presumption, his Repen^^n^^ from that which
is Legal, his Obedience from that which is False and Hypocritical: and this
makes him afraid that nothing is right in him; that he has only a shadow and
not the substance, which makes him to walk in the dark, as they in, Isa. 50.10.
And he calls the truth of every thing into question, and dares to fix upon
nothing.

7. When the Spirit of God witholds his Testimony from confirming their
evidences. Though the evidence be in us, yet the confirmation of it must be by
his Testimony. Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self bears witness with our Spirits.
Whereas he does not now so witness, but leaves us in suspense, and though we
cannot deny, yet we dare not conclude, but are tossed and turmoiled about it,
and full of fears, thinking that if all were right, he would surely set his
hand and seal to it, and let us discern it. Thus therefore David deprecates in
the forecited. Psalm. 51.11. Take not thine holy Spirit from me.

8. When we want these joys in exercise which are the privilege and duty of
the Children of God. The Apostle could say, 1 Pet. 1.^8 Ye rejoice with joy
unspeakable. And the Psalmist prays, Psalm. 106.5 That I may rejoice with the
gladness of thy nation. And we are bidden to be always in the exercise of this,
1 These. 5.16. Rejoice evermore. And Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in the Lord always
Whereas, though he has some hope, and is not altogether abandoned, yet he is
full of trouble; his heart is heavy, he is a stranger to this joy, and goes up
and down with a grieved Spirit, and in the bitterness of his Soul. Such is the
Psalmists moan, Psalm. 42.3, 9. My tears have been my meat day and night, whiles
they continually sa^ to me, where is thy God? why go I mourning because of the
oppression of the enemy.

9. When, in this condition, they pray to God, and can find no answer to their
prayers and tears. It is true, he many times answers them graciously, when they
do not understand him: however they are to their own sense unanswered, they do
not find those returns which they hoped for, and esteemed to be proper for
their condition, though they cry incessantly, and mourn after God ardently. So
the Psalmist uttered himself, Psalm. 22.2. O my God, I cry in the day time, but
thou hear not me, and in the night season, and am not silent. Nay, it may be
to their apprehension, God answers them in anger, and gives them the most
discouraging returns; as he expostulates, Psalm. 80.4. How long will thou be
angry at the prayers of thy People? And Job 30.20, 21. I cry unto th^e, and
thou do not hear me, I stand up, and thou regardest me not, thou art become
cruel te^me. And he apprehends that God rejects his petitions, as, Lam. 3.8.
When I cry and sho^^, he shuts out my prayer.

10. When discouragments oppress, and almost over bear them. Their fears are so
great, and their hopes run so low, that they are ready to give up all for gone,
and are at the very brinks of despair. Thus it was with David* Psalm. 31.22. I
said in my have, I am cut off from before thine eyes. And the Prophet, Jonah
2.4. I said, I am cast out of thy sight. And the Church, Lam. 3 18. I said,
mine hope and my strength is perished from the Lord. The very thoughts of God
trouble him, and he is calling in question every thing in the Covenant. Psalm.
77 3, 7, 8, 9. And he cries out as, Psalm. 38 10. Mine heart pants, my strength
fails; as for the light of mine eyes, it is also gone from me. And he is afraid
that he shall not hold out a moment longer, but be overwhelmed. All these are
the fruits and evidences of Divine Desertions, and such as, the Scriptures
cited under them do make it appear, that they may befall the best of men in
this life.

2. What it is that procures this hiding of his face from them?

A. In general, this must be sought for in them: and for a clue to lead us in
the search, that we be not mistaken about it, let me offer the following
Conclusions.

1. That if it were not for sin there would be none of these Desertions be
falling the People of God. When God made man in his integrity, there was an
entire friendship and intimacy between them; there was no cloud to hide his
face from him: nor shall there be any more of this when we come to the General
Assembly of the Spirits of just men made perfect. This began upon man's
Apostasy, which made a separation; and though it remains with the Children of
God through this life, yet it shall continue no longer; and the reason why they
experience it now, is because they have sin abiding with them. The Psalmist
hereupon presumes, Psalm. 17. ult. I shall be satisfied when I awake with thy
likeness. And if you ask, why must they meet with such dark despensations here
(...) the best answer is, because they carry ^ body of Death about with them,
and till they put it off, it is like to be so.

2. That Spiritual Desertion, of its own nature, belongs to the Curse of the
first Covenant. It is in it self a great evil, and of a worser sort, being
Spiritual. It belongs to the Death that was denounced in the threatening, Genesis
2.17. And it is the greatest affliction that Gods Saints meet with in this
life, as will be after made manifest* Desertions will be of the sorest Plagues
that shall befall the Damned in hell; it will be the quintessence of their
misery, that they shall depart from Gods presence, and never see his face
shining on them: the very sentence conteins this in it* Math. ^5.41. Depart ye
cursed. And we are ^old, 2 These. 1.9. They shall be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power; and
if in his presence there is fullness of joys, Psalm. 16.11. then in a separation
from it, there must be fullness of sorrows. Every distance from God is a
misery; and if so, then to be utterly forsaken of him is the upshot of
infelicity, Hos. 9.12. Woe unto them, when I shall depart from them. Now all
misery came into the world by the Curse.

3. That the Desertions of the Children of God, are no part of Revenging
Justic^, as they befall them: They are so indeed to the wicked, because they are
under the dispensation of the old Covenant: but believers are not under the
Law, but under Grace, Romans 6.14. And in the new Jerusalem, there is no Curse,
Rev. 22.3. God, in infinite wisdom, sees meet to continue many of the evils
themselves upon his own, which sin introduced into the world, but he has taken
away the stin^^ and poison out of them; and as a skil^^^* Physician turns them
into Medicine, and they belong to the all things that shall work together for
good to them that love God* Romans 8.28. and come into the Saints inventory. 1
Cor. 3.22. All is yours. For it is a truth, that all the dispensations of God
to them that are in Christ, as all believers are, are to bring about the great
design of fitting them for the glory to which they are appointed. Besides, i^
is certain, that whatsoever belongs to the execution of the revenging Justice^
of the first Covenant, has been born by Christ himself, on the account of all
for whom he was made a Sacrifice, and so cannot again be exacted upon them.

4. That God uses much of his Sovereignty in these Desertion that he
exercises his people withal. He indeed has holy ends and purposes in all that
he does, a^ will be seen in the next enquiry: he never uses his Sovereignty
separate from his Wisdom: though he is arbitrary in what he does, yet he never
forgets to carry on his own Glory and his People^ Salvation in and by it.
However, he uses a liberty, of which he will not give us an account, and for
which we can assign no other reason moving him, but because it so seemed good
to him. Hence, all his Children are not exercised alike here-with, neither as
to kind, nor as to degree. Some walk in the dark, while others go up and down
in the light. Nay, the most watchful and circumspect Saints may meet with
these; he that fears the Lord, and obeys the voice of his servant, may walk in
darkness, and have no light, Isa. 50.10. And so there is no room left us to
censure others on this account: we ought not to be high minded, but fear.

5. That God visits them with these never but when they need them. It is a
truth universal concerning the Children of God, 1 Pet. 1.6. Ye are in heaviness
if need be: which need we are not to measure by our shallow understandings, as
if God could not, by his absolute power, bring them another way to Glory; but
this is the way which his infinite Wisdom has contrived, in which to lead them
to it: and there are those occasions for these, which make them very convenient
at such a time, which he knows, though we are at a loss about them. God
therefore so bespeaks his deserted people, Jer. 29.11. I know the thoughts that
I think toward you, thought^ of peace, and not of evil. And there is a (...)
when they also shall see and adore, as Christ to him, Joh. 1^.7. Wha^ I do thou
know not now, but thou shall know hereafter.

6. That it is usually some sin of their^, which grieveth his Holy Spirit, that
procures these Desertions. His Spirit is very tender, and he may be grieved,
why else are we so cautioned against it? Ephesians. 4.30. And there is nothing but
some sin and folly of ours that so does; and such as by which we have put some
special^ affront upon him; for he is pitiful, and knows our frame, Psalm.
103.14. Now if we do so grieve him, we must expect^ that he will show his
resentment of it in some way or other; and in what more suitable* than in that
which shall put us to grief, though so as shall bring u^ back to him by a
kindly Repentance, and so make up the breach, and remove the strangeness that
was procured by our sin? Hence we find David to be once and again, under a
sense of Gods withdrawing, bitterly complaining of his sins, as the occasion
thereof. Psalm. 31.9, ^0. and 38. begin. So that there can be nothing more
proper for us, when we meet with such things in Providence, than to call our
selves to a severe account, and ^^^ictly enquire, what we have done.

3. For what end or design does God so hide his face?

A. In general, we may be assured that God always aims at his own Glory, and
^is Childrens good, when he so treats them. That God must design his own glory
by it is certain, for that is his last and in all his works; and it is
inconsistent with his Holiness that he should do otherwise; and that he has
connected with this in an inseparable subordination, the best good of his
people, is a truth of Divine Revelation; inasmuch as having appointed them to
Salvation, for the Glorifying of his Rich-Grace in them, he con^^cts them by
his mature Counsel, in the right way to it, so he presumes. Psalm* 73 24. thou
shall guide me by thy Counsel, and afterward receive me to Glory. So that
there is no one passage in it but what was before contrived and laid out in
Infinite Wisdom. Now the discovery of wisdom is not only in choosing a worthy
end, but also in making a choice of suitable means, and rightly applying them
for the obtaining of the end. These hidings belong to this conduct, and the
design of them is to be discovered by the way in which God makes them to serve
thereunto. Hence a Child of God may say of every desertion he meets with, as
Paul in another case, Phil. 1.19. I know that this shall turn to my Salvation;
and as Job, chap. 23.10. when he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold; and
this Rule may help us in the particular enquiring into the design of God upon
this account, in which we must always have an eye to these five Rules that can
never fail us.

1. That these withdrawings are not from Gods hatred, but his love; they are
ready to suspect this, and say, as Psalm. 77.7, 8, 9. will the Lord cast off for
ever* etc. but it is their infirmity, verse 10. they think, because he hides
himself, he loves them not; but indeed he does therefore so hide, because he
loves them. Zion thinks that now she is forgotten and forsaken; but God
assures her that it is far otherwise, Isa. 49.14, 15. and God is grieved that
his people should think there is any defect or decay in his love, because he so
carries to them.

2. That though God love them, yet he may be angry at them, and withdraw in
anger. Love and Hatred are contraries, but Anger is subordinated, and may be
employed by either of them; there is an anger of love as well as of hatred: A
Father has a dear love for his Child, but he may be very angry at him, and
manifest it too in severe tokens. God can be provoked, so as to withdraw from
his own; and he so declares, Isa. ^4.8. In a little wrath I hid my face from
thee.

3. Yet this anger is managed by love, and shall work accordingly. Gods
displeasure at his Children shall do nothing but what love directs; if then he
hides away from them in anger, it is because he sees it is best for them: it
shall not extinguish, no, nor diminish, no, nor so much as intermit the
operation of his love toward them, but shall always do loves work: when
therefore he afflicts, it is in faithfulness, as Psalm. 119.75.

4. That God may withdraw from his people when he is not angry; they indeed
have cause to be afraid of some provocation given, and accordingly to make
diligent search: but God sometimes withdraws from them, when there is no
special provocation given him* Job had great desertions, as has been observed,
and yet God himself testifies of him, that there was none like him in the
earth, a perfect and upright man, Job 1.8. and the Church could say, in Psalm.
44.17. all this is come upon us, ye^ have we not forgotten thee, nor dealt
falsely in thy Covenant.

5. That there is ever something in the condition of his people, for which
these withdrawings are suitable; they are in such a posture as is best for the
glory of God, and their everlasting welfare, that they met with such a
dispensation. And now let us take notice what that is, that so we may be helped
to discover Gods special design herein; and this may be reduced to three heads.

1. God does it for their chastisement and amendment. Divine Corrections are
one part of Gods dispensations to his people here, Heb. 12.6. whom the Lord
loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he receives: and the aim of
them (...) the doing of them good; let us then observe how he makes these
desertions ^^rve to this purpose in a few particulars.

1. Gods Children are sometimes overtaken with sins that both dishonor him,
and wound them; if they were not liable to folly, they would not need
Correction. Nor is their folly restrained to ^^sser infirmities, but sometimes
breaks out unto more bold transgressions. God pre^^mes such a thing may be, and
for that reason threatens a Rod in case, Psalm. 89.^0. etc. sometimes Gods name
is blasphe^ed by what they do, as it was by David's folly. 2 Samuel 12.14. and
their own bones are broken, as he complains, Psalm. 51.^. there are some such
wounds as these, which the most eminent Saints on Scripture record have gotten
to themselves, though more seldom.

2. And they very often grow dull and remiss in the exercise of their graces:
Carnal Concupiscence that remains in them, and the occasions and temptations
they meet with in the world, are apt to cool their gracious frames, and bring
them into deadness, so that though Grace (...) alive at the root, yet it does
not flourish; there is fire on the hearth, but it is covered with ^mbers; they
grow drowsy and lukewarm, it was so with the Spouse, Cant. 5.3. and with the
Church of Sardis, Rev: 3. begin. and usually their being exposed to the
forementioned sins begins here, it is generally supposed that David was in
such a posture, when he was surprised on the house top, 2 Samuel 11. begin.

3. The glory of God, and their good, are concerned in their recovery. It is
not consistent with either of these for them to be left always in such a
condition as they have brought themselves into by such things. Gods name
suffers not a little by the former, nor is there any way for them to repair the
injury done to it, but by a soaking repentance; and their work lies by by both,
and there is no progress made in the business wherein they are to work out
their own salvation. For the reparation therefore of both these, it is
requisite, that they be made to see and lament their folly, and be rowzed up to
their business: and Gods Covenant Faithfulness engages him to do this for them.

4. Many times other means to reclaim them are unsucce^sf^^. God useeth other
courses, and they remain stupid and senceless. David doubtless lived under the
enjoyment of, and attendance upon the Ordinances of God, and yet he is stupid
and remorceless till the Prophet comes. It is too awfully observable that
Godly men, under some eminent decays, content themselves with formality, and
feel not their malady, till God comes in some more awful way to bring them to
this sense.

5. Hence God exercises them with such Desertions for their awakening,
humbling and hea^ing: and when he so does, and touches their Consciences, then
they resent them, and are brought to themselves. When God hid his face from
David, he then Cries, and Confesses, and begs for the Restoring of his
Spirit; and he obtain^ it. Psalm. 51. When Christ came to his beloved with sweet
allurements, she wantonly neglected and rejected them, but when he put in his
finger, and left a touch-behind, and then withdrew, now she is quickened, her
grace begins to stir and revive, and she rests not till she has gotten the
sight of him again. Cant. 5.

2. God does it for the exercise and trial of their Grace. That this is one end
of Gods dark dispensations to his people, we are told in, Deuteronomy. 8.16. To prove
thee. And we may see the reason or ground of it in these things.

1. God has put his Graces into his people for exercise, in which he is to be
glorified. The Creatures last end is the Glory of God: and that man may glorify
him, he must have grace to do it: and he only glorifieth God by the exercise of
these Graces, without which he would receive them in vain. This is the
fruitfulness by which Christ tells us, that His Father is glorified, Joh. 15.8.

2. This exercise of Grace is made illustrious when it is put to the trial.
Grace is like gold, which is discovered by the trial of it, both as to the
reality and excellency of it: and what says he? Job 23.10. When he has tried
me, I shall come forth as gold. By these the truth of Grace is made manifest;
if there be any activity in it, it will now show it self: and the streng^h of
it will now be proved, whether it be weak or strong. When Peter was upon the
waters, he exer^^sed his faith, but so as to show that he had but little, Matt.
14.31.

3. Temptations are suited for this Trial. And here by Temptations I understand
all sorts of afflictions. Prosperity indeed has its Temptations in it, but the
Spirit of God more peculiarly puts this title upon afflictions, because hereby
we are brought into difficulty, wherein it will be proved whether God, or any
other be our object of hope and trust, the Apostle therefore tells us that our
manifold Temptations are for the trial of our faith, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7 Now we are
in the dark, and many will say, where is your God? Besides, there are some
Graces that are peculiarly suited for, and the proper occasion for the exercise
of them is from an hour of Temptation, such as patience, meekness, submission,
etc.

4. Desertions belong to these Temptations. And indeed grace is never so put to
the proof, as when God hides his face from us. To believe in a withdrawing God,
to be following hard after him, when he seems to be going away from us; to hold
him the faster, when he offers to knock our hands off; to resolve with him, Job
13.15. Though he slay me, I will put my trust in him. And him, Isa. 8.17. I
will wait for the Lord, who hides his face from the house of Jacob; requires
no small measure of faith: when it is with us, as it was with the Psalmist,
then to say and do as he did, Psalm. 22. begin* argues grace to have great
vigor in it.

5. God hereby lets them know their own weakness, to humble them. When God
withdraws, the corrupt part stirs: unbelief is ready to discover it self,
impatience to break forth in unsuitable expressions, and carriages; the
Christian who before thought, what he ^ould do, if assailed, now finds himself
to be at a loss, and ready to sink; see how David expresses himself, in Psalm.
77* begin. as if all were gone; and is made to confess that it was his
infirmity, Verse 10.

6. And he lets them herein experience his own fidelity and power. When he
gives them a full proof of their own weakness, and helps them to cry out to
him for help: when with Peter, Matthew. 14.30. They find themselves sinking, and
call unto him for his aid, now he stretches out an hand* to them, and upholds
them, and thereby wonderfully manifests himself to them. They had never known
how faithful and able a God he is, had it not been for such an exigency. It was
when the Psalmist was Compassed with the sorrows of Death, etc. and he called
upon God, Psalm. 116.3, 4. that he Celebrates him with that Confession, Verse 4.
Gracious is the Lord and righteous, yea our God is merciful.

7. And herein he also helps others of his Children. One such experience is
of great use to many, when they are in a like case. We are advised, Heb. 6.12.
To be followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the promises.
God has recorded such experiences for our admonition, direction, and
encouragement. Hereby also he makes such a Christian to be fit to help others
at a dead lift, by communicating of their own experiences, for this reason
Christ gave that advice to Peter, Luke 22.32. When thou art converted,
strengthen thy brethren.

8. And the tendency and issue of all this, is to advance their glory. This is
Gods design concerning his Children in all their Temptations, and so in this of
Desertion, 1 Pet. 1.7. That the trial of your faith, may be found unto praise,
honor, and glory. Those very Providence in which God seems to disregard his
people, are yet a part of his counsel, by which he guides them to glory, Psalm.
73.14. with (...) and he will so manage them by his wisdom and power, that they
shall in the event add to the weight of their Crown, 2 Cor. 5.17.

3. And God does it many times for prevention. Not only to reclaim them from
those sins which they have fallen into, but also to preserve them from falling
into Sin afterward; and that these do greatly serve to this end will appear, if
we observe.

1. That Gods Children are in danger of being drawn into sin; they live in a
world of Temptation, and they carry about with them a body of death: there are
the remains of Concupiscence in them, by which they are ready to take the
impression of such Temptations as are offered to draw them aside; for which
reason Christ has given us that as a petion in our addresses to God, Mat.
6.13. lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. A Child of God is
never free from this hazard as long as he lives in an evil wo^ld, and has a
flesh in him ^^uing against the spirit.

2. By Sin they obstruct the progress of the work* of their Generation. There
is a work that God has called them to; but sin is no part of it, but contrary
to it; and not only so, but every sin, especially such as are more bold,
deadneth them, and renders them unfit for the business they are engaged in; a
Believer whilst under the efficacy of any lust, is not progressive, but
regressive; however God can make it serve to his after faster growth: David was
thus all the while he lay under his sin.

3. The corruption in them oftentimes abuses the comforts of Gods presence to
presumption and carelessness. Such is our weakness whilst we are here, that wa
can bear but a little of the new wine of Consolation. We are like children,
who, if cockered by their Parents, grow saucy and licencious. This was David's
case in our Context: God had made his mountain strong, and he thereupon grow
secure, and believed himself to be out of danger, and that made him to grow
wanton, and remit of that care and watchfulness over himself that became him.

4. Hence God uses such des^rtions to make them the more careful and fearful
for the time to come; these become a close lesson unto them, to let them see
what an egregious folly it is for them to abuse their fathers kindness, and
familiarity; this becomes a memento to them as long as they live, and they can
hardly out grow it, but it gives them an item, when at any time a temptation
offers it self: it was doubtless such an experiment as brought David to that
resolve, Psalm. 39.1. I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not; and by this
means there is more close communion afterward manifested betweeen God and them.

4. To what degree this desertion may arrive?

A. We may take this brief account of it.

1. That Gods desertions are not alike to all his Children; nor alike to the
same at all times, as there are the degrees of his manifesting himself to them,
so of his withdrawing from them; he does not deal with all alike on this
account; some are deeper in the Valley of the shadow of death than others are:
and the same believers are at sometimes more deeply deserted than at others.
Some are carried through the world, as with no extraordinary captures of
comfort, so with no extraordinary depressions and terrors of soul: whereas
others are sometimes ravished beyond measure with the clearest apprehensions of
Gods love, and again deserted unto astonishment, under the hidings of God from
them, and the desolate estate which they are reduced unto thereby: and how
frequent such times had the Psalmist? as will appear by several Psalms.

2. That God never deserts his Children so as he does wicked men; they indeed
may not always discern it, but he evermore makes a very great difference
between these and those. Deserted Believers are the Children of God as well
then, as when they have never so much of the light of his favor shining upon
them. Nor does he at any time so leave them, as to put them out of his favor;
he loves them still, and will never cease so to do; he cares for them, and
looks after them still, and they are under that conduct, by which they shall
assuredly arrive at his Kingdom in the end: That is an abiding truth, Psalm.
94.14 the Lord will not cast off his people* neither will he forsake his
inheritance. Whereas wicked men are now his enemies, and he will forsake them
for ever.

3. That God, in their greatest desertions, maintains the life of Grace in
them. Whatever wounds their Graces may suffer, and whatsoever decays they may
be under, by reason of Gods withdrawing his influence from them; though they
may be in a swoon and fainting; ^et they shall not be extinguished: they may
still say as he, Psalm. 118.17: I shall not die but live, and declare the works
of the Lord. Th^re is li^e at the ^oo^ in the greatest Winter, when the Sun of
Righteo^sness absents himself never so far from them. Christ's Prayer for
Peter, that his faith might not fail, L^k. 22 32. shall be effectual for them
too. God left David awfully, but yet not totally; they may to sense and
appearance seem to be dead, but yet they are really alive; and when this Winter
is over, and the Spring returns, they shall flourish again; the seed that is
sown in them ever abides; and they are preserved by the power of God through
Faith unto Salvation. 1 Pet. 1.5.

4. There are also the stirrings of Grace in them at such a time, though it may
be very faintly. It has been a question among some, whether a Believer may not
be so deserted as to assistance, as that his graces may be reduced to the
habit, and all acts of them wholly cease? and sense many times will plead hard
for the affirmative: and I question not, but that a Child of God may be at a
very great loss about it, and not apprehensive of any such stirrings: but yet
oftentimes there are manifest contradictions between Grace and Corruption in
them: so it was with the Psalmist, Psalm. 73.13, 15. but whether it be so or no,
out of doubt the sense of the sorrow for, and impatience under such desertions,
bespeak the stirring of grace, though under very grievous overbearings of
Corruption in them: for these are not in themselves the resentment, of the
Flesh, but of the Spirit. All the relentings of ^eart in Gods Children, under
the discoveries of his absenting himself from them, though there be much of
sinfulness accompanying the eruptions of them, are yet the indication of the
wrestling of the spirit against the flesh.

5. Yet they may be left to grievous sins under these desertions. If God
withdraw his assistance from them, and do not afford his wonted influence to
the graces of his spirit that are in them, their vigor will fail, their
strength will be enervated, and the carnal part in them will woefully prevail
over them, and lead them into Caprivity, and they shall wound themselves
fearfully: Let Peter have never so much love for his Lord, and be never so
resolute to stand by and for him, yet if Christ withdraw from him, he shall
deny him bitterly, when a temptation offers If God leave Hezekiah to himself,
he shall sin provokingly. If David be thus deserted, he shall involve himself
in one great sin upon another. Nor can it be named hardly what one sin there
is, which they may not fall into, and that unto very grievous aggravating
circumstances, bating that one which is unpardonable.

6. And they may be utterly at a loss about their spiritual state. There does
seem to be a greater latitude in those desertions which refer to Comfort, than
such as relate to assistance: Gods faithfulness will not suffer him so to
withdraw from their graces, as to suffer them to be extinguished in them; but
it is possible, and consistent with his Covenant fidelity, that sometimes they
lose the comfort of their good estate. Not only may the Spirit of God withdraw
his Testimony, and refuse to bear his witness to their Sonship; and when he so
does, all the witness of their own Spirits will not satisfy them in the
conclusion; but leave them in sad doubts and fears whether there be any thing
of truth and sincerity in them; (...) a misgiving heart, and tempting Devil
setting in, put them upon drawing of sad conclusions against themselves, whilst
their own evidences are beclouded, so as they cannot read them, nor produce any
argument for themselves which they dare to place confidence in, and so they are
enveloped in dismal darkness; and such a condition as this is that supposed in
Isa. 50.10.

7. And they may be hereupon under sore Temptations to despair, and give up all
hope: they may think themselves lost, and refuse to be comforted, be just ready
to sign and seal the conclusion; not only that they are unregenerate, but
Reprobates too, and gotten beyond all hope of mercy: was it not so with them,
Psalm. 31.22. I said in my haste, I am cast out of thy sight, and Lam. 3.18. my
strength and my hope is perished from the Lord; and Jonah 2.4. I am cast out of
thy sight. There are indeed at such a time the efforts of Faith, but they are
so languid, that they cannot tell what to make of them; although they are still
such as God preserves, and never suffers them utterly to renounce or abandon
their hopes in him; they shall many times utter contradictions in the same
breath, which shall be a witness of two contrary principles wrestling in them:
but still they known what to make of themselv^^, and are fearfully tempted to
despair, and ready to conclude that they can hold out no longer; and though
such degrees of desertion as these, are not very frequent, yet sometimes God,
to show his power, and let it be known what he can do in bringing of his to
glory at l^st through the sorest Temptations, suffers it to be so.

5. How long these Desertions may abide on a Child of God?

A. There are no certain limitations to be set here, but we may take this
general account of it.

1. That Gods Sovereignty is to be adored in these Dispensations. The best way
to silence the cavellings of corrupt nature about the degree or duration of
Gods absconding from his Children, ^s that of Elihu, Job. 33.13. he gives no
account of any of his matters: and if we have risings of heart against this,
God will, before he has done with us, bring ^s to acknowledge, that here is
reason enough to stop our mouth^: so he did by Job.

2. Yet the Desertion shall last no longer than till the end of it is attained.
God aims at something by it, and accordingly, uses it as a medium in order
thereunto; and consequently he will continue it no longer then till he has
done that by it which he designed* it for; and this must needs be so, because
God is infinitely wise, and will do no thing in vain: how then should he
continue to do that which himself calls his strange w^rk, any longer then there
is occasion for it.

3. Hence those Desertions that are for Chastisement, usually end when we are
brought to Gods foot, and amended by them. If God corrects us for our folly,
and we continue to be stout and refractory, or careless and regardless, it is
not to be wondered if he proceed with us in this course; he has therefore said,
Hos. 5.15. I will go and return to my place till they acknowledge their
offense, and s^^le my face: and David tells us, how long it was with him in
this regard, and how he obtained a return, Psalm. 33.3, 4, 5.

4 There are some Desertions that have their frequent revolutions: there are
the turns that some of Gods Children are entertained withal: sometimes they are
in the light, and anon in the dark; now they are lifted up, and presently they
are cast down; and they can come to no settlement: God is not to be contended
with when it is so; but if we search diligently, we may possibly find a
satisfactory reason in our selves for it.

5. God will show his manifold wisdom in bringing of his to glory, and hence
acts very differently with them in the exercise or trial of their graces. If
God may be glorified by us, that should satisfy us; and in this way he gains
great glory; hence,

1. Some have but few of these desertions, and those also very short: and they
are carried the greater part of their life in a clear light: Of such we have
the Psalmists remark, Psalm. 89.15, 16. they shall walk, O Lord, in the light of
thy countenance; in thy name shall they rejoice all the day.

2. Others have more of these at their setting out, and afterward they enjoy a
great serenity. God pleases to hold them a considerable time in the dark,
before he makes remarkable discoveries of himself to them; though he gives them
the grace, yet they want the comfort of it; but afterward, after humble
waiting, he comes in with his wondrous light, and replenisheth them with it;
they find the meaning of that, Psalm. 112.4. unto the upright there arises
light in the darkness; a cloudy day has a serene sunset, and in the evening
it is light.

3. Others begin fair, but are afterward tried with ^wful withdrawings God at
first seals his love up to them, takes them into his chambers, and manifests
his wonderful love to them: and after that he changes his providence toward
them, and they are carried into deep waters, where there is no standing: when
they have been Royally feasted with his love, they are called to the trial of
their grace by his withdrawings. Such was the close of David's Reign.

4. Others have a dark time between; their beginning and ending is bright, but
God interposeth a time of clouds and darkness, in which they feel no small
exercise. So it was with Job.

5. Others are kept in the dark all their days; and possibly set in a cloud
too; the Apostle speaks of some such, in Heb. 2.15. who through fear of death
were all their life time subject to bondage; and we find the Psalmist thus
representing of his own condition in this respect, Psalm. 88.15. I am afflicted
and ready to die from my youth up. Now in all these things God brings about his
own glory, and carries on the saving good of his Children, and is not to be
disputed but adored in the arbitrary conduct which he affords them through life
and time.

Proposition 2. That his so hiding from them, i^ troublesome and terrible to
them; it is that which oppresses, and almost sinks and overwhelms their
spirits.

There are two things that may here ^^me under consideration.

1. We may enquire into the nature and operation of this trouble.

2. We may observe, whence it is that th^se Desertions are so terrible to them?

1. Concerning the nature and operation of this trouble, we may first take a
general description of it, and then trace it in the effects which it produces
in the Christian.

1. Of this trouble take this general description; It is the most distressing
perplexity of Soul, in a Child of God, arising from his apprehension of Gods
withdrawing from him. We before observed that the (...) used in our Text is
very emphati^al* which is engrossed in the description, and may be laid forth
in the opening of it. Here therefore observe.

1. The subject of these hidings; and that is a Child of God. That these may
undergo them has been already observed and made manifest; as also that there
is a vast difference between Gods hiding from these, and from wicked men; and
accordingly there are also different resentments in them, both as to the things
wherein God hides, and the entertainment which they give thereunto. We must
therefore carry in our minds whom it is that we are treating about.

2. We are told whence it is that their trouble proceeds; viz. The ^^prehens^^^
of Gods withdrawing from them. And here observe,

1. The foundation of this trouble i^ in the desertion it self: it is that
which gives being to it. If God should not withdraw, they would not thus be
troubled: could they always enjoy the light of his countenance, it would
abundantly satisfy them, let what else will befall them. Psalm. 23.4. When I
walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will from no ill, for thou
art with me.

2. That which nextly produces (...) trouble is their apprehension of this.
Sometimes they are in so drowsy a frame, that God is hidden, and they are
insensible of it, and so long it disquiets them not. How long it was thus with
David we cannot certainly tell, but it was so till the Prophet came and r^^sed
him* ^ Sam. 12. begin. But when once the spiritual sense is awakened, and they
miss, and cannot find him, now they are distressed. And it is an usual thing
for him to give such a touch on the Conscience upon his withdrawing, which
quickens this sense; so ^he found it in, Cant. 5.4. My beloved put in his hand
by the hole of the door, and my bowels were moved for him. And the reason is*
because he ever deserts them with a purpose to return again, and this is in
order to it.

3. The trouble it self is a distressing perplexity of Soul. We observed that
the word signifies such a Consternation as leaves a man, in his own
apprehension, without counsel or help: he is brought into a labyrinth, and
cannot ^^e his way out; he can look no way but he is entangled, and this
distracts him; so he complains, Psalm. 88.15. While I suffer thy terrors, I am
distracted. And we have such moans, Psalm. 31.9, 10. I am in trouble, mine eye
is consumed with grief, etc. And 38.8, 10. I am feeble and sore broken, I have
roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart, my heart pants, my strength
fai^^* etc.

4. For the quality of it, it is the most distressing. Not but that there are
deg^ees in it, as will anon appear, but in the kind, it is the greatest of any;
there is no other sort of destress that a Child of God meets with that is
comparable to it; all are tolerable in comparison with this; hence that, Prove.
18.14. The spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity; but a wounded spirit who
can bear? But this will be more evident by considering of the effects which it
produces in the Christian. Only let me premise in general, that this trouble
operates diversely, both as to manner and degrees, accordingly as God hides his
face from them. We must therefore consider these effects according to this
diversity, and there are some that are common to all, and there are others that
are proper to these and those, according as they are accommodated to their
particular resentments* We may take a brief account of each of them.

1. Those effects which are common to all are principally such as these.

1. It renders their life very uncomfortable. If God hide his face, they lose
their comfort and joy: if this light be withdrawn, they are made to sit in
darkness; and it puts a sad face upon every other cond^t^on they are in; so
that,

1. It takes away the comfort of prosperity. Let God give them never so much of
the outward enjoyments of this ^ife* Health, Strength, Wealth, Friends,
^iberty, etc. they cannot take content in them. When they could enjoy God in
and with these, then they could resent this kindness, and be delighted in them*
^ut he is withdrawn, and what good can these do them? if one thing wanted, will
eat out the Worldlings comfort in every thing else, when he has the greatest
affuence thereof; as that miserable Haman confessed. Esth. 5.12, 13. What then
must the absence of God do to a Believer, whom he relies upon as his portion?
What comfort had David in his Kingdom, and all the glories of it, when God was
withdrawn from him? See how he cries out, Psalm. 143.7. hear me speedily, O
Lord, my spirit fails.

2. It embitters every other affliction; adversity it self is an evil which
innocent nature does not easily resent; but yet when he had God with him, he
could go through fire and water, and bear it well enough, Isa. 43.2. but now he
sees Gods anger in the ^od; affliction comes, and God i^ gone; and that is an
evil indeed, where should a Ch^^d of God seek his support under all troubles
but in his God? if all other persons and things leave him, it is no matter, so
God will but stand by him, he could say, 2 Timothy 4.16, 17. no man stood with me,
but all men forsook me: nevertheless the Lord stood with me, and strengthened
me; and he* Psalm. 142.4, 5. no man would know me, refuge failed me, no man
cared for my soul* I said, thou art my refuge, and my portion in the land of
the living.

3. It takes away the Consolation even of Spiritual Duties and Ordinances.
These are the relief of a Child of God, when he can find none else here, Psalm.
73.17. till I went into the Sanctuary. If he met with any grief in the world,
he co^^d ease his mind in his Closet, and make up all at a Prayer, a Sermon, a
Sacrament, by communion with his beloved; but now, when he comes thither, he is
not there; he cannot see him as he has seen him; and this makes bitter
Sabbaths and Sacraments to him, nor can he take rest any where.

2. It falls them with fear; there is a filial, and there is a slavish fear;
the one proceeds from the Spirit of Adoption, and the other from a Spirit of
Bondage: and as there are the beginnings of the one, so the remains of the
other in the Children of God: the operation of these is diverse, and oftentimes
very much mixed in them at such a time; the Psalmist says, Psalm. 119.120. My
flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I am afraid of thy Judgments; and never
more so, then when under Desertion^; inasmuch as these afford occasions for
this fear to be stirred: this night when it comes, brings its terrors along
with it.

3. It makes them restless till the desertion be removed, and God reveals his
face again to them. There will indeed be the stirring of corruption as well as
grace in this disquietment of mind; but in the whole they cannot abide quiet
under these withdrawings; nor can any thing in the world give them satisfaction
in the room of that presence of his: the Spouse, in Cant. 5. when her beloved
was withdrawn, could not lie still in her bed, nor abide within doors, but she
must up and after him, nor could abuses stop her in her quest, or she be at any
rest till she had found him again.

2. With respect to the several resentments the^ have of these Desertions; and
these may be considered either as to their kinds, or their degrees.

1. As to the kinds of them, observe,

1. When they resent Gods hiding of himself in respect of his Assistances; so
that their graces fail in the exercise of them, and they apprehend the means of
grace in a great measure unprofitable to them; and instead of growing in grace,
they rather wither and decay, and temptations prevail, and they are drawn into
sin: the effects especially following on this, are,

1. This fills them with an apprehension of Gods anger, and is terrible to
them; and indeed there is not a more fearful token of Gods displeasure at his
Children than when he leaves them to sin, and withdraws his Spirit from them;
we read, 2 Samuel 24* 1. the anger of God was kindled against Israel, and he
moved David against them, to say, go number Israel and Judah* How shall they be
able to pursue their work, and obtain the Crown if thus left? God is angry
indeed, when he lets every Grace languish, and corruption to gather strength,
and carry them Captive, and they cannot but so resent it.

2. This puts them upon a diligent search after the provocation: they conclude
on this, that there is blame in them; God would not have so deserted them, if
they had not some way prevaricated: this therefore they must find out, and they
are in great anxiety of mind till they can come at it; ^hey cry out as he, Job
10.2. show me wherefore thou contendest with me; and they look into every
corner of their soul, to find out the Achan. David therefore in this trouble of
his, runs up to the cause of it, viz. his carnal confidence, verse 6.

3. It makes them penitently to mourn after him: it produces in them a Godly
sorrow unto Repentance, as 2 Cor. 7.10. the perplexity of their souls, brings
them to confess and seek pardon of God, Psalm 32.3, 4, 5. they beg of him to
have his Spirit resto^ed, and a new heart created in them, and all that is in
them set right again, Psalm. 51.10, 11. and nothing can satisfy them till they
obtain this at his hands.

2. When they apprehend God deserting them as to comfort; when he hides the
light of assurance from them, and leaves them in the dark about their spiritual
estate, there are these effects that properly follow.

1. This makes them to call their state into question: There is an Assurance
which is the basis of a believers consolation* and according to the degrees of
it, such is his comfort in it; this is helped by Gods enabling of him to read
his own evidences, and to judge of the reality of them, and by his
co-witnessing with them. When therefore God witholds this, he is left in the
dark about is; and the proper result of it is to be afraid whether ever any
thing was right in him, whether he has not all this while deceived himself,
and built on a false hope; out of doubt this fear stirred in David, when he put
up that petition, in Psalm. 51.11. Cast me not away from thy presence.

2. Hence it fills him with terrible thoughts about the issue. What shall
become of him at last? if he has hitherto deceived his own soul; if he has
boasted of a false gift; if he has arrogated to himself the title of a Child
of God, and there be no such thing, what shall he do? how shall he appear? he
thinks of the terrible day of accounts* and if he should then be found a cheat,
and if Christ should say to him, I never knew you, how dreadful will it be? and
on this account the Terrors of God make him afraid*

2. With respect to the degrees of these Desertions. God does not always hide
himself alike, neither as to the graces, nor* as to the comforts of his people:
and hence there are diverse measures of this darkness, and distress which is
upon them; the lowest whereof are terrible, but yet with more activity of faith
than the other. Here then,

1. If the Desertion be in lower degrees.

1. It fills him with deep sorrow and mourning. Let God be never so little
departed, when he knows it, it produces this, in him, nor can it do less; it
makes him to say, as Psalm. 38.6. I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly, I go
mourning all the day long: grief and bitterness seizes him, and it fills his
eyes with tears, and his heart with sighing.

2. It raises a combat between hope and fear. There is some stirring of faith,
there is also a great moving of diffidence and distrust; his heart is full of
tossings, he would hope that God will return to him again; and yet he is afraid
whether he will or no: fear presses him down as an heavy weight, and hope
endeavors to buoy him up again; there is a wrestling, as Psalm. 42. ult. Why
art thou cast down O my soul, etc.

3. It puts him upon loud cries, and earnest expostulations with God; and these
also with a mixture of faith and unbelief: He pleads with God, argues the case
with him, begs hard of him; so he, Psalm. 42.9. I will say unto God my rock, why
have thou forgotten me? he draws desponding conclusions, and eats them up
again, Psalm. 32.22. I said in my haste, I am cut off; nevertheless thou have
heard the voice of my supplications* Jonah 2.4. I said I am cast out of thy
sight, yet I will look again toward thy holy Temple. He cries out, how long?
Psalm. 13.1. he deliberates with himself, and expostulates with God, Psalm. 85.5,
6. will thou be angry for ever? will thou not revive me?

2. If the desertion be in higher degrees, and comes to that, Isa. 50.10. that
he sits in darkness, and sees no light; and this may sometimes be the case of a
gracious soul, though it be more rare and infrequent; the effects are usually
answerable; and though faith be not utterly extinct, yet its actings are next
to indiscernable, but unbelief gets head, and break^ forth into am^zing
effects; the principal whereof are (...) as these.

1. It makes him to (...) all the work that was wrought in him. He not only
questions it, but passes a definitive sentence upon it. He concludes that he
has ^laid the hypocrite all this while; dissembled with God, and imposed upon
men, and deceived his own soul* David had some such resentments on him, when he
prayed God to Create a clean heart in him, Psalm. 51.10. nay, those very things
which sometimes were his evidence for his good estate, and in which he could
take comfort, are now turned into arguments to disprove it.

2. It creates prejudices against God. He has, in this condition, to do with
the fierce Wrath of God; he apprehends that God hates him, and is his enemy,
Job 33.24. Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and boldest me for thine enemy; and
verse 26. thou writest bitter things against me. The very thoughts of God,
which were wont to be his relief and solace are now his distress, Psalm. 77.3. I
remembered God and was troubled; and he begins to call all the encouragements,
promises, hopes that ever he had from him in question, and suspects the truth
of them all, verse 7, 8, 9. will the Lord cast off for ever? etc. and is ready
to conclude that he has served an hard master; to say, as Psa^ ^^ 13. I have
cleansed mine heart in (...) have wa^hed mine hands in innocence.

3. This hurries him to conclude himself a Castaway. It brings him to the very
brink of despair, and he is ready to vote himself not only an unregenerate
person, but a reprobate; that as he never was a Child of God, so he never shall
he* he is just throwing himself upon this desperate conclusion, Lam. 3.18 I
said, my strength and mine hope is p^rished from the Lord: And this puts him
into a deadly discouragement, and produces such things as these.

1. It discourageth him from all use of means: Those very Duties and
Ordinances, which were heretofore his delight, are now his terror, and he is
afraid of them. What should he pray for? God will not hear him: Why should he
read the word? he reads nothing there but his own doom, and every thing in it
speaks evil against him: Why should he go to the House of God, to attend upon
the Ordinances there dispensed? he shall but increase his guilt, and lay in the
more against himself, when every Prayer and Sermon will rise up (...) judgment
to condemn him: he (...) not approach to the Lords Table, lest he should there
a new Seal up his own Damnation.

2. It makes him to put away all counsel and comfort, and snatch at all
terrors and affrightments. David says in, Psalm. 77.2. In the day of my
trouble, my soul refused to be comforted. Let Godly friends apply to him the
encouragments of the Gospel, and lay open before him the mercy and pity of
God, he puts it away from him, and concludes that this does not belong to him:
the promises are none of his, but the threatenings, and he reads his own doom in
them.

3. This makes him afraid either to live or to die. His trouble is so intense,
that sometimes his Soul chooses strangling and death rather than his life, as
he, Job 7.15. And yet the very thoughts of death are a grievous amazement to
him, because he is afraid that it will but post him over to the consummation of
miseries. Hence we read of those, who through fear of death, were all their
life time subject to bondage, Heb. 2 15. Only let it be observed, that though
he apprehend it not, yet there are the efforts of Grace even under this
distress, and sometimes he, before he is aware, Calls God his God; and
sometimes he expresses his ardent longings. Oh! that he would not utterly cast
me off, Oh! that he would give some glimmerings of his light! etc.

2. Whence it is that these Desertions are so terrible to him?

A. Here in general, let us observe;

1. That man is naturally insatiably desirous of happiness, and averse to
misery. This is a congenerate principal of Humane nature, and can be no more
separate from it than Humanity; the very Elective power in man involves it in
it. They were the cries o^ nature, as well as of Grace which he tittered in that
request, 1 Chronicles. 4.10. Oh that thou would bless me indeed, and that thou
would keep me from evil, that it may not grieve me.

2. That man is a dependent Creature, and must have an object of trust, for
happiness, and freedom from evil and misery. He has not his felicity, nor his
security in himself, but must have it from abroad; and if he have it, he must
have an object that is able to derive it to him, on whom he may rely; else his
trust will be vain, and his expectation frustrate: hence their complaint on
this account, Lam. 4.17. As for us, our eyes yet failed for our vain help: in
our watching we have watched for a nation that could not save us.

3. If therefor his object fail him, and he have no other to rely upon, he
must needs be perplexed. It is a killing thing to be disappointed in ones
expectation, in which his all is concerned: and if the deferring of hope makes
the heart to faint, the defeating of it must needs make it to die in the man;
especially when he sees no other course to be taken, or any other re^^ge where
he may repair this loss: it will make him to say as he, Judge 18.24. Ye have
taken (...) my Gods, and what have ^ more?

4. And the deeper apprehension that he has of his misery hereby, the more
oppressed must he needs be. It is certain that according as men apprehend the
good or evil they are concerned in, they will be proportionably affected with
it; for the affections are moved by the will, according to the resentment which
it has of the good or evil which are the objects of it These things are
accommodated to the rational powers which God has put into man, and are
answerably exerted by the Children of God, in whom grace does not destroy but
rectify nature. Here therefore let us take a particular account of them, as
they refer to the matter before us, in the following Conclusions.

1. A Child of God has been made apprehensive of the fearful misery under
which he was by sin. This is wrought in the Heart and Conscience* by the Spirit
of God, in order to the making of the Children of men the Children of God; and
the remembrance of it abides with them as long as they live. Fallen man is in a
miserable condition, having lost his right to all good, and being fallen under
a curse that involves all infelicities in it. The natural man does not resent
this of himself; (...) God, when he comes to conveit a sinner, reveals it to
him, and makes him to know it and feel it, and that both temporal and
spiritual: hence that, Jer. 2.19. Know and see that it is an evil thing and
bitter: and this belongs to the work of the Spirit, Joh. 16.8. He shall
convince the world of sin.

2. He has been deeply concerned to escape this misery, and obtain eternal
felicity. This also has been the fruit of the operation of the Spirit in him:
for, though nature it self stimulates men to enquire after an escape, upon
conviction of danger, and to use means to obtain it, yet it is God only who
has discovered the way for it, and moves the soul to hearken after it; for, by
the light of nature there was no discovery of this: nor can the natural man
comprehend it, when it is discovered in the Gospel: but God has touched the
heart of this man with a remor^e and an enquiry, What shall I do to be Saved?
and made him very sollicitous to obtain it: he was loath to perish, and longed
that he might escape; and the terrors which he read in the threatening were so
great upon him, and such was his expectation of their ^alling upon him, that he
restlesly longed for relief.

3 He has found the emptiness and insufficiency of every other object of
trust: He has been looking every way for relief; he has been trying many
courses to help himself, but they have all disappointed him; he has gone to
the world, and that has deceived him; he has looked to his pri^^ledges, and
they have not succored him; he has attempted his own Righteousness, and that
has failed him: he has accordingly been broken off from all these, and dares
no longer to look that way; has resolved as they* Hos. 14.3 Ashur shall not
save us, etc. and Jer. 3.23. in vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and
the multitude of mountains.

4. He has discovered the fullness of sufficiency there is in God, through
Christ, to deliver him, and make him perfectly blessed. God has made himself
known to him in his communicable perfections, to be one in whom he may trust
for salvation; and has revealed himself in the face of Christ, as a God ready
to receive him, and bestow eternal salvation upon him: he has seen that he can
deliver him from all his miseries, and fill him with those glories which shall
make him satisfied: he has appeared to him, as a sun and a shield, and the
author of grace and glory and every good thing, Psalm. 84.11. As one that is
able to save him to the uttermost, Heb. 7.21. and he has been made to believe
that all they are blessed that put their trust in him.

5. He has utterly renounced all other trust, and placed his alone hope in
God, through Christ for salvation. He has rejected the world, both men and
things of it, and cast off all his own righteousness and strength, and chosen
God in Christ for his portion, and said to him, as Psalm. 73.21. Whom have I in
Heaven but thee, and there is nothing on the earth that I desire in comparison
of thee; and has obliged his soul to this, as Psalm. 62.5, 6. my soul trust
thou in God alone, etc.

6. Hence his life is bound up in the ^avour of God: All his help is in that;
he has no where else to go; he is resolved in this, that if God do not save
him, he must perish; if he be not his portion, he must have none: if God should
fall him, he has no where else to repair, but must needs sink; he utterly
^^spairs of having succor from any other hand; he has no other string to his
bow; he can not go any whither else, but says, as, Joh. 6.68. whither should
we go, thou only have the words of eternal life.

7. Hence the anger of God cannot but be very terrible to him, if he has his
whole dependence for time and eternity on Gods favor; surely then it cannot
but be very bitter, to see him discover his anger, and look to him as an Enemy:
this is it that he alone account^ fearful; Psalm. 7^.7. Thou, even thou ar^ to
be feared, and who is he that can stand, when once thou art angry?

8. Those withdrawings of his discover him as an angry God, to his Children.
They readily read wrath and indignation in them: hence the Psalmist complains
how heavily his wrath lay upon him, in these dispensations* Psalm. 88.7, 16. thy
wrath lies heavy upon me* thy fierce wrath goes over me.

9. Hence proportionably to their apprehension of this wrath, must their
distress be* As they count it happiness complete to have this God their friend
and father, so that it is the too of misery to have him for their enemy: and
the more of comfort they have ever felt in communion with him, the more
oppressing must his withdrawing be: hence that, Job 31.23. Destruction from God
was a terror to me, and by reason of his highness I could not endure. Christ
is his life, Col. 3.4 And if his life have deserted him, what shall he do?
whither shall he go? he knows not how to live at present without him; if his
God be gone, he cries out as, Psalm. 38.10. My heart pants, my strength fails me.
He is desolate and bereaved, and because all his hope for eternity is bound up
in God, if he is brought into fear whether ever he will return again, he is at
a loss about his interest in him, and suspects whether he has not cast him off
for ever; the very thoughts of losing these glorious refreshments, and
pleasures, and joys that are in his presence, and at his right hand for
evermore, and undergoing those miseries which he has had an apprehension of,
which are the portion of those that must be eternally separated from his
presence, must needs be dismal beyound conception. None can apprehend or
believe it, but the Soul that feels it; no^ can he express it to others, so
bitter and dreadful it is: and he may well cry out as the Church does, in Lam.
1.12. Behold and see, if there be any sorrow like my sorrow.

USE. I. For INFORMATION in a few particulars.
1. Learn hence what a foolish thing it is for the Children of God, to nourish
in themselves carnal confidence, and security. We ought indeed to live in the
exercise of Faith, and labor always to strengthen and establish it; but there
is a Presumption which the best are in hazard of, and if they reckon it to be a
strong faith, they grievously mistake themselves. For a believer, when he finds
his heart engaged, to think himself Temptation proof, and be thereupon
adventurous beyond a Call; or because he now stands in the light of Gods
countenance, to conclude that he shall never be beclouded again, is carnal
confidence: and the Doctrine before us will discover the folly of it, if we
consider;

1. That there is a vast difference, between this and faith in exercise. And to
make this evident we have need to take notice only of this, viz. That faith it
always accompanied, in its exercise with holy fear: a Child of God dares indeed
to ^^ust in him; but he knows that this ^aith is to be found in the use of
means, and not to indulge a neglect of them: hence that, Ephesians. 5.15. See that
you walk Circumspectly. Faith tells him that if he would have God to keep him,
he must look to his ways, and not lay himself open by security. What further
difference there is between these, will be seen in that which follows.

2. There is no reason for us to promise our selves that we shall never be
Deserted, but on the other hand, great reason to expect it. Faith ought to be
able to give a reason for its confidence, but there is none to be rendered for
this, for*

1. The best of Gods people have been Deserted: So that Grace is no security
against it. What has been, may be Except we can prove some particular immunity
granted us on this account, we have no ground to monopolize any privilege to
our selves, which none of the Saint^ which ever went before us, could
challenge. Job, David, Heman, Peter, etc. were deserted, and who are we then
that we should promise our selves to escape it? What is written of them in the
word of God, is for our admonition.

2. God has made no promises to us that we shall not be Deserted. He has
indeed promised that He will never forsake his people, but has not said that
he will never withdraw, or hide his face from them. Nay, (...) far is it from
this, that he has threatened it in case, and made it one of the chastizements
which he inflicts (...) them for their follies. Now faith must have a word on
which it builds its conclusion, else it is not faith, but presumption; and a
Divine faith must rely on the Testimony of God, beyond which it dares not to go.

3. As long as we live here, we are in hazard of provoking God to desert us. We
observed in the Doctrinal part, that the more bold transgressions, or more
gross sinful neglects of the people of God are the procurers of this, and that
by it he corrects them for such follies: and we are not secure against these.
We have a deceitful heart in us, a carnal part that will betray us, if it can:
a vigilant Adversary that lies in wait to hurt us, and we walk in the midst of
snares, and traps, and pits that are covered, and if we be not the more
watchful, we shall be ensnared in them.

4 Nay, God may, if he sees meet, so exercise us, when we are most heedful to
our selves: for we observed, that God may do it for the farther exercise and
advancement of the Grace of his Children; and accordingly dispenses himself,
in this regard, with a great deal of arbitrary liberty; so that though we take
heed to our selves, and diligently attend to Gods counsels, that we may be
brought into the dark; for this is presumed of such as fear the Lord, and obey
the voice of his Servants, Isa. 50.10. not but that the most likely way to
enjoy the most of God with us, is to walk close with him, in obedience to his
revealed will: however, he is Sovereign, and his wisdom knows what is best; we
therefore ought not to be secure.

3. It will greatly increase the perplexity of a desertion, when it comes
unexpected. We are wont to say, forewarned, sore armed. Desertions are hard to
bear, when we are best prepared for them: though Job could say, Chap. 3.26* 27.
the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me, etc. Yet the temptation of i^
put him too much out of frame. But out of doubt David's trouble was the greater,
because he was secure against it* never looked for the wind to blow any* more
from that quarter. Sudden surprises are astonishing, and discompose us much;
whereas expected evils are fore pondered, and accordingly we are laid in the
better to meet with them; and they are not strange.

4. And indeed there is nothing will sooner procure this desertion, than such
carnal confidence, and good reason, for there is nothing which puts a Child of
God more out of frame for the due serving of God, and exercising of faith on
him, or more exposes him to be a prey to the adversary, and entangled in every
temptation. If Peter grow confident of his strength, and on this adventures
farther then he had a call, he is ensnared and taken. Mat. 26. If David thinks
himself out of the reach of trouble, God thinks it high time to give him
disquietment, Text. Be we then warned by others examples, to take heed to our
selves, how (...) allow such frames to grow upon us: (...) we do not, it will
certainly cost us sorrow before God has done with us.

2. This tells us* that it is a dangerous thing for a Christian, to value
himself only upon the comforts which he enjoys in Gods presence. It is the duty
of Gods people, to get and keep a clear evidence of their good estate,
according to, 2 Pet. 1.10. give all diligence to make your calling and election
sure; and to be very sollicitous on this account, is a good sign that we value
the favor of God more than life: but it is great wisdom to get this so
settled, as we may be able to make use of it at all times: and hence to have
nothing to conclude it from but these comforts, is not safe. Consider,

1. It is true, it is a serene time with us, when we are so, and we cannot but
be strengthened by the experience of it. A Child of God must needs be
abundant^y satisfied, when he finds himself in the arms and embraces of his
Savior, when Christ brings him into his Chambers, and spreads his banner of
love over him; when he has all the witness, seals, and earnests of the spirit
afforded him: hence that, Psalm. 36.9. In thy light shall we see light: By this
all his doubts are answered, all disputes against his good estate are silenced;
and he can rejoice in the Lord, and triumph in the hopes of glory. I seek not
therefore to discourage, but would to the utmost encourage the prizing, and
making the best improvement that may be of such a condition as this, whenever
God vouchsafes it to us. But,

2. What shall we do when these are lost? we have been assured that they may so
be; and to what a measure th^^ privation may arrive, God only know^* and it is
our duty to be laying in for a wet day. A Christian ought to be provided to be
able to hold out in a storm, as well as to flourish in a calm: though he wants
the comfort, yet he should keep his resolution, and say as he, Job 13 15.
although he slay me, I will trust in him, how this is to be done, will come to
be pointed at in a following Use: here only in general let me offer thus much*
viz. let us not only boast, though there is great reason to boast, in the
comforts of Gods presence with us, but let us labor to be acquainted wi^h our
grounds of Assurance; that it is undoubtedly the light of his countenance that
we do at present enjoy, and that there is no mistake in it. If we find our
hearts raised, and possibly ravished, with inward apprehensions of Gods love to
us, let us not only exercise our joy and delight about it, but let us now take
a distinct view of that which may evidence it to be real, and not a delusion;
if we only please our selves with our present feeling, and search not to be
acquainted with the foundation of it, when it goes off again, and we have lost
it, we shall be utterly at a loss, and not know how to answer the accusations
of a misgiving heart which will charge us for having boasted of a false gift.
If we argue only from the comforts themselves, because we feel our hearts
warmed and refreshed by them, when they have left us, our arguings will then
fail us; and this is one main reason why many are cast down as low, upon such a
turn, as they were before exalted: Whereas, though the sense of the comfort be
gone, yet the reasons of it, if they were solid, will abide: and if they were
once true, they are so for ever; and may be called to remembrance for our
support, in the darkest hours of Gods withdrawing, this improvement did the
Psalmist make of such experiences, Psalm. 77.10, 11.

3. Know therefore that if we lose the exercise of our faith, in the darkest
times. We shall dishonor God, and obstruct our own obedience; if when Gods
face is hidden, we also remit the exercising of our faith in him, and sink into
despondency, wherein do we glorify God as we ought to do? it is a duty lying on
all the people of God, to trust in him at all times, Psalm. 62.8. but there are
times wherein God is withdrawn: and it may possibly so be, that the greatest
part of our time shall be spent under these withdrawings; but we have still a
work of our generation to do, and this will not excuse us from it; and there is
no other living at such a time, but by the vigorous exercise of our faith, as
Heb. 10.38. but the just shall live by faith, if that fails, our whole work
will be suspended together with it: Nay, the times of desertion are peculiarly
to try our faith, and not to kill it; and if we do not so improve it, then we
lose a fair opportunity: If the Spouse finds that her beloved is withdrawn, her
business is not to ly still, and give him up, and say, I shall never see him
more; but to get up and follow him with resolution never to rest till she has
him again, Cant. 5. and they were the wings of faith that carried her: she
therefore calls him her beloved, and argues to it, because she finds her self
sick of love for him, verse 8.

3. Here we may see one great reason of the different frames tha^ are
observable in the Children of God. It is certain, that they do not at all times
carry it after the same manner; and that neither in respect of their vigorous
exercise of holiness, nor their cheerful or comfortable carriage of themselves.
Sometimes we shall see them very vigorous in their zeal for the glory of God,
and pursuit of the work of their generation; anon they flag, and are remiss,
and less watchful to themselves. Sometimes we may see them carried above all
the world, and in the midst of all trials, comforting themselves in the love of
God, and hopes of glory; anon drooping and disconsolate, and ready to be
overborn by every little trial which they meet withal; and possibly we wonder
whence this is, and are ready to be stumbled and prejudiced at it: but it is
not to be thought a strange thing. Observe then,

1. The Christians life depends on the influence of the love of God Paul says,
Gal 2 20. I live by the faith of the Son of God who loved me. There is a double
life of a Child of God; a life of holiness, and a li^e of comfort; the one
belongs to his Sanctification, the other is a part of his Inchoate Glory: now
the maintenance and support of both these flows from the Communications of
Gods love to him: Not only does God in love bestow the principles of holiness
upon him as Jer. 31.3. I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore in
loving kindness have I drawn thee: But the upholding and acting of it, is by
the same author, John 15.1^. without me (...) do nothing. Phil. 4.13. I can do
all things, through Christ strengthening me; he also is the God of all
Conso^ation, as he is called, Romans 15.5.

2. God does not always appear to them alike in the dispensation of his love to
them. He indeed loves them always unchangeably; but in the application of this
to them, he acts his pleasure, according to his Wisdom. Sometime he affords
them a mighty presence, in aiding of their graces, and then their souls set
them as the Chariots of Amminadib; but anon he witholds this, and leaves them
to themselves, and then all flags in an instant, now their hands hang down and
their knees buckle under them, and their graces are in a withering condition.
Sometimes he refreshes them with his flaggons and then their hearts are
cheered as with new wine, anon he witholds these ravishing, and carries it
aloof, and they are cast down and disquieted. Thus he will let them know, that
their all depends upon him.

3. And these changes many times have their frequent revolutions. It is not
only thus for once and away, but the Sun of righteousness now shines bright
upon them, anon it is beclouded, and then it breaks out again, but presently a
sable cloud interposeth. No wonder then if there are such alterations in their
carriage, when there is such a change in Gods discovering of himself to them.
The coming and going of the Sun makes Summer and Winter. And indeed, though it
be always our duty to be in the exercise of our faith, yet it becomes us to
carry our selves in the exercising of it, suitably to Gods providence in the
displays of it to us. It is the wise man's advice, Ec^^. 7.14. In the day of
prosperity rejoice, and in the day of adversity consider. And Christ himself
gave that observation in Math. 9.15. Can the Children of the bride chamber
mourn, as long as the bridegroom is with them? but, etc. And if in these they
also discover much of sinful frailty, it is not to be admired, since their
grace is weak, and their corruption strong, and ready to take the advantage of
an hour of Temptation to exert it self forcibly.

4. Learn hence what need there is that Gods Children should be Charitable one
to another. Does God act his holy pleasure in his manifesting of himself to
them, or in his withdrawing from, and deserting of them? There may arise from
hence Temptations to wound their Charity each toward the other, more ways than
one. We had need then to be very cautious to our selves upon this account. And
here these Rules are proper.

1. Let us not envy the comfortable condition of them that do always rejoice in
the Lord. Do we see some more ^andled in the lap than others, and, like the
Apostle John, that beloved disciple, lea^ing in Christ's bosom, and having a
more intimate familiarity with him? now let us beware of Envy. There is such a
spirit apt to appear; Jam. 4.5. The spirit that dwells in us lusts to envy.
Is not this to murmr at Christ himself? to find fault with his wise and holy
managing of his own, as he sees meet? and shall our eye be evil because his is
good? What if he will that such an one shall have large ^ips of the rivers of
his pleasure, whiles we are made to taste of gall and wormwood? What is that to
thee or me? Let us bless God for such instances, and learn by them, that there
is such a thing as rejoicing in the Lord: and how useful may this be to help us
in our droopings, if we could lay aside our discontent at Gods providence in
it? think; God knows what is best for me, and if I had such repasts as they
have, I might grow wanton under them, and not make that holy improvement of
them that they do: however, if God will glorify himself in me some other way,
His will be done.

2. Much less let us censure such. I confess, there are some who talk high of
their assurances, and joys, and raptures, that give serious Christians too mu^^
reason to suspect that they labor of some fearful delusion, in that mean while
they indulge themselves in a loose and licentious Conversation; and let all
such take heed of the issue; those stolen waters may be sweet, but the dead
are there. But let us not say that these spiritual joys are fancies, or
conclude that all such as pretend to them are Hypocrites: no, spiritual joys
belongs to the Godly man's portion, Psalm. 97.11. Light is sown for the
righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. And God vouch-safes to his
holy ones, when he pleases huge first fruits of that harvest in this life. If
then we see any such living the more holy, engaged the more strenuously in a
singular endeavor to show forth the virtues of him that has called them out
of darkness, into his marvailous light; let us acknowledge them to be the
beloved of the Lord, and endeavor to imitate them in their holy lives, as
knowing that this is the most likely way for us to enjoy more also of this
blessing from Gods hand.

3. Let us not condemn them that are in the dark, and full of spiritual
troubles. Suppose we enjoy much tranquillity, and serenity of Gods presence
with us, so that we can bear up and be cheerful, and maintain a good hope in
God, let us take heed of censuring and despising them that cannot do as we do.
Suppose we see them very disquiet, to discover much of sinful infirmity, ready
to speak in the bitterness of their Souls, words that are very unsuitable, that
savor of murmuring against God, and discontent at their condition; yea,
possibly such as border upon despair: these things indeed are grievous, and we
ought to endeavor their help against them; but still they call for our
Compassion, and not our Triumph over them. They ought to be reproved for it,
but yet withal to be encouraged: we may say unto them, as Christ did to Peter,
when he began to sink, and Cried out, I perish, Oh! thou of little faith; but
not vote them for unbelievers, or conclude them to have no grace, because
sinful corruption is too hard for them, in this juncture of desertion: this is
uncharitable, and so we may condemn the generation of Gods Children. This was
the fault of Jobs friends, who, because he let drop some unguarded expressions,
in the bitterness of his Soul, presently declare him to be a wicked man; and
for thi^ it is that he complains of cruelty shown him, and he tells them, Chap.
19.28. Ye should say, why persecute we him, seeing the root of the matter is
found in me. Let us think, what would we expect at their hands, were our Souls
in their Souls stead? and demean our selves accordingly. Let us not thrust them
under water, who are already sinking, but put forth an hand for their help, and
offer them the best relief that we are able.

4. Let us not be too rigid in reflecting upon them that die in a cloud. God
indeed ordinarily lets in some beams of light into the Souls of his
Children, wherewith he refreshes them, after they have lain a long time in the
dark, when they come to depart out of this world, for their own and others
comfort; but he is not bound to this, and he can carry them through death it
self, and not let them know or be satisfied, till they find their Souls fallen
into the hands of the glorious Angels, to be carried by them to the Eternal
Habitations. And to how great a degree this Desertion may reach at such a time,
is not for us precisely to determine, but if we find such as have led holy and
exemplary lives, very dark and anxious about their eternal state, in their last
agonies, and possibly to express little or nothing of their comfortable hopes
of their future well being; let us adore the Sovereignty of God in this dark
dispensation, and hope well concerning them, that their clouds are now
scattered, and that they are now satisfying themselves with the everlasting
vision and fruition of God, whom they followed hard after in this life, though
in the dark. Let us therefore look upon the lives they led, and make our
remarks accordingly.

5. Learn hence that perfect happiness is not to be expected by the children of
God, in this world. The truth in hand discovers to us, how unreasonable a thing
it is for them to promise it to themselves here: For observe,

1. Our felicity consists in our Communion with God: He is our Objective
Happiness: nothing else can confer it upon us; and we enjoy no more of it, than
we have of fellowship with him; the Church could say, Lam. 3.24 The Lord is my
portion; and the Psalmist, Psalm. 144. ult. happy is that people whose God is
the Lord. They that have no interest in God, have no title to happiness* He
only can save as from the Evil, which otherwise will undo us; and none but he
can bestow upon us the good without which we must remain miserable.

2. Perfect happiness must consist in perfect communion with him: it must be
full, it must be perpetual; so much as is short of this, so much we come behind
of that which our very nature craves to make us completely blessed: Perfect
happiness can consist in nothing short of the fruition of our object to that
degree of the fullness of satisfaction that we can desire; so that we can
receive no more. In whatsoever measures the Object communicates it self to us,
that are short of this, they will leave a vacuity, which must be replenished,
if ever we come to rest, and seek no farther: thus the Psalmist describes it,
Psalm. 63.5. my soul shall be satisfied as with-marrow and fatness: Psalm. 16.
ult. in thy presence is fullness of joys, and at thy righthand are pleasures for
evermore.

3. Our Communion with God in this life is very imperfect. There is indeed a
fellowship which Gods people have with him at present the Apostle could say, in
1 John* 1.3. truly our fellowship is with God the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ; and hence there (...) an Inchoate blessedness which they do enjoy, on
account whereof they are declared to be now blessed; but it is not in that
fullness which our souls do crave, and ou^ hopes grasp after. It is but mediate
for the present, and the medium also is obsc^re, 1 Cor 13 12. we now see
through a g^ass darkly: they are but earnests and ta^^s that we have of this
love now. Our present Communion is conveyed to us in promises, the performance
of which will not be here completed, but this is reserved for another life;
and it is by faith and hope that we have communion with him; which is a thing,
though comfortable to the soul, yet inconceivably short of that which shall be
by sight, and immediate enjoyment of him, which is the thing that we look for
at his coming and Kingdom: this is the reason the Apostle gives of his
expecting to be dissolved. 2 Cor. 5.7. for we walk by faith, and not by sight.

4. And this Communion here is much and frequently interrupted. It is true, it
never cease, but yet it is often beclouded, and so obscured by Desertions*
that we are plunged into a sad condition, and cannot enjoy the satisfaction of
our interest, but are ready, to sink, and be overwhelmed, and at an utter loss:
we have many solitary dark nights, which cost us many a ^ear and groan, whilst
we miss and know not where to find him: and as long as it is so, we are a great
way off from that perfect happiness that God has appointed us for.

5. Hence let us long and prepare for the time when it shall be completed: One
would think this should be enough to make the Children of God weaned from this
life, unto a willingness to be gone, to think how much they do here miss of
that light which is their life. To be weary of this world in discontent at the
difficulties, labor, and trouble that accompany our work, is sinful; and a
Child of God should patiently be any thing that God sees meet, so he may be
glorified by him; but to wish for, or at least cheerfully to meditate of the
time when we shall be called hence, and accordingly to be diligently preparing
every day for it; and, from the very sense of these frequent desertions felt or
feared, to strengthen our longings after the fruition of that communion with
our beloved, which shall never be intermitted or beclouded, is a thing very
advisable: and* though it should not make us impa^ie^^* or unwilling to tarry
Gods time, and do what remains of the work of our generation, yet it may safely
put us into such a posture as he was in, Phil. 1.23. I am in a strait betwixt
two, having a desire to depart, and be with Christ, which is (...) of all; and
if our desertions do but put us in this frame, they will be blessed ones in the
event.

6. We learn hence, the miserable state of all ungodly sinners: the
consideration of the Desertions which are incident to the Saints, and those
that are dea^ly beloved of God, may point us to conjecture how it is like to be
with those that are the hated of is soul. It was a remark which Chr^^^ advised
them to make upon the consideration of what he himself suffered at the hand of
God, Luke 23.31. (...) it be done thus in a green tree, what shall be done in
the dry? and the Apostle has a remark not unlike to this, 1 Pet. 4.18. if the
righteous scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and the sinner appear? let
then all Unregenerate Sinners learn this lesson from the Doctrine before us: if
there be such Desertions, and dreadful sorrows, that Gods Redeemed may be
exercised withal: Then you that are his enemies, and abide under his Curse, if
you do not timely repent, and make your peace with him, may well expect
^ndignation and Wrath, tribulation and anguish at his hand, snares, fire and
brimstone, and an horrible tempest to be the portion of your cup. Insult not
then over the mourning and sorrowful children of God* remember how the Church
replied upon such, and so may they upon you, Mic. 7 9, 10. I will bear the
indignation, etc. then shall she that is mine enemy see it, and shame shall
cover her which said unto me, where is the Lord thy God?

USE II. For EXHORTATION and DIRECTION, in two branches.
1. To those that do at present stand in the light of Gods countenance: the
consideration of the truth in hand, will afford matter of serious and
seasonable advice to such; and because all do not enjoy this in the same
manner, or to the same degree, nor are in all circumstances alike, I shall
endeavor to adapt the counsel to be offered, to several circumstances.

1. To such as have had a clear and comfortable apprehension of Gods love, ever
since their Conversion. God saw meet to give them eminent discoveries of his
grace, in bringing them to Christ, and working the great change (...) them, and
did set the seal of it so (...) that they clearly discerned it, and they, have
maintained the comfort of (...) still, by a continued Communion with God. There
are some whom God so treats; and to such let me say.

1. Acknowledge this as a great favor, with singular thankfulness. Let God
have the praise of it, do you find comfort in it? remember it is his gift, and
he does not bestow it upon all on whom he has conferred saving grace; think
how many drooping souls there are, who do truly fear God, and would give a
world, if it were in their dispose, that they might enjoy the serenity that you
do. And let this put you upon studying how you may show your gratitude to God
for it; let it put you often upon making that enquiry, which David did on a
like account* Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render to the Lord for all his
benefits toward me?

2. Carry it very humbly; beware of being li^ted up in your minds with this
privilege. There is a pride remaining in the best; and its most dangerous
efforts are in respect of the best things, in the Children of God. As to poor
carnal minds, which know no better, they are apt to be proud of their Wealth,
Strength, Beauty, Bravery, etc. which possibly you can look upon with a great
deal of contempt: but Gods Children are in hazard of being proud of their
spiritual gifts, and graces, and comforts too. You will be temp^ed to think
that there was some peculiar worth in you, which God observed, which made him
to be so familiar with you: but take heed; say as, Psalm. 115.1. Not unto us,
etc. And here consider, that there is nothing which will sooner provoke God to
alter his carriage toward y^u, than pride and self conceitedness: remember
what he has said, Isa. 57.15. I dwell in the high and holy place, with him
also that is of an humble and contrite spirit: this humble carriage is the most
likely course to enjoy the continuance of such a favor.

3. Walk very circumspectly. You have heard that you are not out of the danger
of being deserted; and that usually the great reason of Gods hiding his face,
is some licentiousness in his Children; they grow remiss, and neglect their
spiritual watch: such was the case of the Spouse, in Cant. 5. begin take heed
then to your selves: it is the Apostles advice, 1 Pet. 1.17. if ye call on the
father, etc. pass the time of your sojourning here in fear. Certainly, if you
would have God to walk with you, it concerns you to be very careful to walk
with him: if that be comfortable, let it be a memento to you, to beware how you
displease him, by drowsiness in your watch, or by an ungirt Conversation in the
world.

4. Take heed of saying, you shall never be moved. Take warning by David here;
you may see in his example how dangerous a thing it is to draw such a
conclusion from your present sense. God will have his Children to know, that
the preserving of their comfort depends on his pleasure; and would have them to
be expecting changes ev^ry day, and be put upon carefully providing for them.
Know it, if you gr^^ secure and presumptuous in this regard, you are in all
likelihood, not far from some fearful Desertion: Consider, that all which you
can be positive ^in, is only that in, Psalm. 73.24. thou shall guide me by
counsel, and afterward receive me to glory; as for all the circumstances of the
way in which he will conduct you, it is entirely at his dispose.

5. Carry it very tenderly toward such as want this light. If you begin to
despise such as are under sad withdrawings, and full of their bitter
complaints, your father will take it very ill at your hands: they are as dear
to him as you are; and he can easily shift his Providence, and set them in
your light, and bring you into their darkness; and it will be a righteous thing
for him so to do, if you thus insult over them. Pity them, and adore the
loving kindness of God to you the more, when you see that all his precious ones
are not so favored: and be ready to impart your help to them at all times, as
considering that you know not how soon the time may come, when you may stand in
need of theirs.

2. To such as, after much darkness and distress, are gotten into the light.
There are those whom God sees meet to keep under a cloud a great while; they
seek him, but they cannot find him; they cry after him, but he does not show
himself to them, so as to let them apprehend his love, and discern the smiles
of his countenance to their consolation: but after long waiting, and praying,
and groaning, and many a longing look; at length he comes and darts in his
refreshing light into them, with which he makes them glad, and their souls are
abundantly satisfied with it: to such as these let me offer these counsels.

1. Acknowledge that it is Gods free grace that he comes at last. Account your
selves well rewarded for all your waiting; and be so far from murmuring against
him that he came no sooner, as to admire at his undeserved kindness that he
would come at all. Let him then be entertained with all the Testimonies of an
heart ravished with his favor, and abundantly satisfied in hi^ company: give
him therefore all the welcome that possibly may be; express your gratitude to
the highest: let it now be seen in your whole carriage, that this change has
produced an answerable frame in your minds according as David tells us his did.
Context verse 11. thou have turned for me my mou^ning into dancing: thou have
put off my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness.

2. Be humbled for all your unsuitable carriages under Gods hidings. It is now
a proper time for you to be ashamed of your selves: and doubtless, if you will
look back upon that hour of temptation, you will find enough to lay you low in
the remembrance of it. David did so, Psalm. 77. and it is very convenient, to
let us know how little we did to procure this return. Now think how injuriously
you murmured and fretted at the Providence of God, how wrongfully you charged
him with forgetting his Covenant, and breaking his promise; how, without reason
you voted your selves cast aways, and refused counsel or comfort; how foolish^y
impatient you were, and short spirited, in that you could not wait for his
salvation.

3. Beware of forgetting the former times, and falling into carnal frames. You
have experienced the bitterness and temptation of a deserted condition, you
have tasted the wormwood and the gall, and let your soul keep them in
remembrance: there is an use to be made of them, and God expects it of you; and
what is it, but to caution you how you carry it afterward: and more peculiarly
let it admonish you to take heed of such things as you have by such providence
already felt the smart of: Possibly you can remember what it was that
occasioned the former desertions which you have felt; let this remembrance be a
monitor to you, to stand clear there, to look to your selves with a special
circumspection, that you precipitate not your selves into the like folly
afterward: if any temptation of this nature offer it self, have this in a
readiness to quench it withal, this has cost me too dear, ever to yield to it
again.

4. Labor to testify your resentment of this kindness by an answerable holy
walking. How holily should they live ever after, whom God has brought out of
the horrible pit, and set them upon a rock? if God has now set you in the
light of his countenance, let your light shine accordingly, so that it may
appear that you have intimate converse with Jesus, that the influence of his
favor is accompanied with the influence of his grace, exciting all the graces
in you to a more vigorous exercise. How fast should Christians grow when they
live under the refreshing beams of the Sun of Righteousness irradiating of
them? the Psalmist says, Psalm. 92.13, 14. those that are planted in the house
of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of our God: they shall still bring
forth fruit in their old age; they shall be fat and flourishing.

3. Be sure now to lay in for a dark time. It is now summer with you, and that
is a season to provide in against Winter; and to neglect it will be egregious
folly. Christ has now taken your into his banqueting house; be sure to take
this happy advantage to establish your faith, and every grace. Think there may
come a spending time again, and how much it concerns you to be better stored
against it comes, than formerly: Consider therefore, and suppose you hear God
saying to you, as once he did to the Prophet, 1 King. 19.7. arise and eat,
because the Journey is too great for thee. Now lay up experiences, now record
the evidences which are so clearly given your of his love to you, and the
confirmations of your safe and good estate; that when other witness fails, as
it may, you may have this to support you then. If you neglect thus to do, it
will be no small disadvantage to you in a shock of desertion, which you cannot
tell how soon you may be afresh assaulted withal.

3. To such as for the present, have more than ordinary discoveries of Christ's
love made unto them. There are such seasons with some of his people, wherein he
makes extraordinary visits unto them, and bestows on them, not only comforting
assurances, but raptures; they are as it were carried into the Third Heaven,
and made to see and hear things that cannot be uttered; and though the
transport may be soon over, yet the impressions of it may remai^, and the soul
continue under the joys of it: so it was with the Spouse, Cant. 2.3, 4. I sat
under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste: he
brought me to the banqueting house, and his barner over me was love. To such
let me give this counsel.

1. Take heed of being proud of these visits. Truly there is reason to be
exceedingly glad of them; Christ does therein wonderfully manifest his love to
the Soul: but you have no reason to be High minded on this account: it is a
free favor, and you ought to say, what am I that he should thus regard me a
sinful worm? remember that these visits are not your ordinary repast; you must
have something else to live upon. It may be you never had such a treat from him
before, and possibly you shall never meet with such another, till you come to
be lodged in his everlasting embraces: and if you begin to be lifted up, there
is a Thorn ready to prick this bladder, as Paul had his for his prevention, 2
Cor. 12.7.

2. Expect that there is some extraordinary either Service or Trial near to
you. Gods Extraordinary Visits are usually to prepare us for Extraordinary
Exercises. The time when Christ took his Disciples with him into the mount wa^
a little before he was to be taken from them, and they had hard Service to
engage in. When Paul was to be peculiarly used in Christ's work, and exposed to
greater trials than any of the other Apostles, he had glorious visions of
Christ. It is good for the Children of God to Rejoice with Fear. Expect now to
be called into the field, and to have your graces proved with great
Temptations. Lay in then for it, and be sure to take down by faith, large
draughts of these flaggons of consolation, which may be for suitable support
under such trials: and helping you with resolution to go through them: this
will be your best wisdom, and so shall you be prepared for such an hour.

4. To such as are conducted in a middle way. Possibly you have had no
experience of the extraordinary raptures, and transporting joys that some can
tell of; and on the other hand, you have not encountered those distressing
plunges, and dismal ^arknesses, arising from grievous Desertions, which others
also have cried out bitterly of; but your way is more even; you are not without
your fears, but yet you can hope in Gods Grace, and encourage your Souls to
trust in him, and wait for his Salvation. And if sometimes there be a cloud
that does a little obscure you, it is not long before a ray breaks forth and
gives you light: and though you sensibly labor of infirmities, yet you are
kept from great Transgression, and helped in the work of God which you are
engaged in: and this is likely the condition of the greatest part of Gods
Children. To such then let me offer,

1. Believe that God is infinitely wise in his conduct. Be sure that you
maintain adoring thoughts of him: judge therefore that this is the best
condition for you. Reckon that your father knows what is most proper for every
one of his Children, and that his love manageth all these concerns. Think, this
is the way in which he sees meet to lead me, and I believe it is the right way;
and how little cause you have to murmr that it is otherwise with some. Do not
say that God deals better with them than with you: what though you do not meet
with their raptures? consider also that you are not oppressed with their desolate
trials.

2. Be much in stablishing your hope. God has given you a good hope; make much
of it, and be always fortifying of it, and take heed of exposing it to be
undermined: and in special, beware of that temptation which is sometimes urged
to disquiet and disturb the minds of the Children of God, viz. to question the
solidity of your hope, because you have not been entertained with those
horrors that others have not met withal, nor those ravishings which some talk
of. Know then that those are not essential, but arbitrary. Let your care be to
see that the root of the matter is in you, and that your hope is built upon the
Grace of God in Christ, revealed in you, and is such an hope as sets you upon
the pursuit of Holiness, according to, 1 John 3.3. He that has this hope in
him, purifieth himself, as he is pure. And let this encourage you to be very
faithful in Serving of God, and waiting to see his Salvation.

3. And let your fear produce the greater caution in you: let not your fear
disturb and weaken your hope, but serve it. Let it quicken your spiritual
watch, let it maintain in you an holy awe and reverence of God, and help you to
look the more carefully to your ways, lest you should sin, and make you more
forward and constant in working out your own Salvation with fear and trembling,
Phil. 2.12. Let it make you to shun all the snares that are in your way, and
help you in discerning them, and excite you to walk circumspectly: remember it
is said in Job 28.28. The fear of God, that is wisdom, and to depart from evil
is understanding.

2 To such as labor under spiritual Desertions. And to such it is that our
Doctrine more directly points; and because it is a time wherein there are not a
few who labor under these in a great measure, whose condition says as he did,
Job 19.21. Have pity upon me, Oh my friends, for the hand of the Lord has
touched me. Let me apply this advice distinctly to such: and that way may be
made more clearly to pursue this, give me leave to remove something out of the
way, to prevent the mistakes which some may labor of, with respect to their
true and real condition; here then,

1. To such as sometimes thought themselves converted, but were mistaken in
their apprehension: and now they find trouble, and call all in question, and
suppose themselves deserted: such a case may be, and possibly is more (...)
than we are aware of; and is very hazardous. They have possibly formerly
pretended to great confidence, but now they are in fear. Give me leave to lay
out the case of these, and then offer them some counsel: for the discovery of
such, let these things be observed.

1. There are those that have had something of a common work on them, every one
has a natural Conscience in him, whose nature and office is to reflect inward,
and apply practical truths to one self, and this Conscience is not at once
brawned and seared: the Word and Ordinances are accommodated to meet with men's
Consciences, to put them in fear, and make them sollicitous: and the Spirit of
God often comes in these means under which men sit, and strives, and gives them
inward touches and awakenings, which puts them upon endeavors to get quiet;
and though natural corruption seeks to stifle such motions, and divert them
from them, and so quench the Spirit: yet they cannot always so do, but are put
upon it to do something that may bring them inward peace, and nourish in them
an hope that it shall go well with them; that they are reconciled unto God, and
shall escape his terrible indignation; so it was with them, Jer. 33.24.

2. But they have taken up short of a good foundation: The work has not been
carried through, but has stopped in the way, and they have rested in something
else, before they have come over to Christ, which has prevented their coming:
and this is a frequent deceit. The conviction of some leads them to a Legal
Reformation: they have seen some of their actual sins, and the Law that has
been broken by them, and the threatening out against such sins written in it,
but have not been led to the fountain of original sin from which these streams
do flow; and so they were never concerned for a new heart, but thought if they
took up a new life, abstained from those sins in practice, and set upon the
practice of neglected duties, they should herein please God, and hereupon they
have pacified their Consciences; this was the farthest reach of the Pharise,
Luke 18.11. or possibly their trouble for sin has been met with the general
offer of pardon, upon believing in Christ, and they have entertained it with
joy, as the stony ground hearers are represented, Mat. 13.20. they accept of
the offer, and now they are secure: but they never knew the utter impotency to
believe which they labor of: never understood the truth of that, Joh. 6.44 No
man can come unto me, except the father that has sent me draw him; and so they
rest in a faith of their own, and have not that which is of the operation of
the spirit, being never humbled out of their own Suffici^ncy and Sovereignty.

3. Upon this they have thought that much assistance and comfort have been
afforded them; they have engaged in moral and religious duties, and been
carried to and through them with a great deal of pleasure and ease, and it has
greatly satisfied them; and they have reckoned these for influences of grace,
and joys of the spirit; by reason whereof they have argued themselves, to a
strong persuasion and high confidence that all was well with them, and have
said to themselves, as Agag once did, the bitterness of death it over.

4. But now they find all this to fail them, and they are brought into a deep
plunge. Now they are made to see that they can do nothing: they are either left
to some foul sin, or conscience is awakned to tell them, they have deceived
themselves, and that they are in the gall of bitterness; that the Wrath of God
is upon them, their whole profession is a mere cheat, and their building is
upon the sand; and this puts them into fears, and possibly they take it for a
desertion; whereas indeed it is but a discovery. In such a case as this, let me
offer two things.

1. This calls you to search your selves to the bottom: the case of such has
some resemblance to that of deserted Saints: when therefore it is so, the first
business is a trial of our selves thoroughly; and herein we must prove our
selves, whether ever we were in the faith, as they are advised, 2 Cor. 13 5.
whether ever we were thoroughly broken off from every other object, and brought
over to Christ, and built upon him: yea, and to beg of God also to search us,
that we be not mistaken in the very founda^ion; for an error there cannot be
repaired in any other way, but in laying it a new, and digging deep enough for
it.

2. If you have failed here, this is a merciful dispensation to you: Had God
left you under these mistakes, you would have gone on securely, and dropped
unawares into perdi^ion. God has not deserted you, but made your false hopes
to forsake you, that so you might in time seek a better security. This is the
way in which God is wont to bring proud legalists, and carnal Gospellers home
to himself. God is not going from you, but coming to you, and these are the
methods of the Holy Spirit: this is the best sign that God has a purpose of
everlasting love to you, and is now coming to draw you home to himself: for he
will drive that soul out of self, and its own righteousness, which he will have
mercy upon and save. But,

2. Our main business is with those that have indeed the root of the matter in
them; have a principle of saving Grace, and belong to Christ, but are under
Desertion. And there are two things which I shall apply my self unto in respect
to these.

1. To direct them how to carry it under these Desertions.

2. To point what is to be done to get relief under, and deliverance from them.

1. For direction how to carry it under these Desertions. There is a right
behavior which God expects of his Children, when he thus treats them: and it
is for his honor, and our advantage, that we comply with it. And there are
three things that I shall urge on this account.

1. Be sure to carry it humbly toward God. God expects it, and is now putting
of this grace to the trial; let it then have its exercise, and seek to him for
help herein, and for your guidance in it.

1. Adore his Sovereignty: it may be your dejected and disquiet minds, are
entertaining strange surmizes about the Providence of God in this, and
leavened, as his was, in Psa. 73. and 77. but know it; if you cannot resolve
your selves in the particular reason of it, this is enough to silence and
satisfy you, that it is of God, who can do no wrong, and is not to be contended
with. Job was brought to this, before God had done with him: he was ready to
say, behold, I am vile, Chap. 40.5. and to resolve to lay his hand upon his
mouth.

2. Acknowledge his Righteousness* Possibly you may, upon enquiry, see a
sufficient reason for his so deserting of you; yea, the particular provocation
that has procured it* here is enough to bring you to his fo^t, and put you
upon humble confessing his justice and equity in his proceedings: this David
aims at in our Context, verse ^. by telling us how his was introduced. But if
you are at a loss about the particular occasion, yet you have always enough
before you, if you are humble, to make you to say, God had reason enough to
deal thus with me, and it is rich mercy, that he does not always do so.

3. Beware of charging him with partiality. There is an envy on this account,
too apt to discover it self; such as was in Peter, when Christ had told him
what trials he must encounter, is inquisitive what must befall the beloved
Disciple, for which he received a rebuke, Joh. 21.21, 22. hence such musing*
are entertained: Why are these taken into familiarity with him, and I must be
treated at a distance? Why do they enjoy his smiles, and I suffer his frowns?
etc. take heed of pining; Why should your eye be evil, because his is good?
must his love be cal^ed in question by your jealousy? or must he ask your
counsel and leave how to carry it in his family?

4. Call neither his truth nor his wisdom in question on this account. Say not,
how can he bring good to me out of this, or what advantage can accrue to me by
it? Say not, where is now the veraci^y of his word which he has made me to
hope in? how is this the performance of his promise? this is pride: Remember,
His thoughts are not as your thoughts, nor his ways as your ways, but as high
above them as the heaven is above the earth. Resolve that he is the Potter, and
you the Clay, and that you will lie as such in his hand.

2. Have a care of rashly judging your own state from hence. How ready are the
Children of God in a dark hour, to cast off their hope, and repeal their
evidenc^s, and vote themselves Hypocrites? this ought not to be, nor does it
serve to the d^ty lying upon you at such a time, but is c^ntra^y to it. God
expects that now you should not let go your hold of faith on him, but that you
take the faster hold, and say as he, J^b 13.^5. Though he slay me, I will put
my trust in him. And he, Isa. 8.17. I will wait on the Lord, who hides his
face. And for help, Consider,

1. It is no new thing for Gods Children to be Deserted. It ought not then to
be a strange thing to you, much less an argument that because of this, you are
none of his Children. This stopped the Psalmists mouth, Psalm. 73.15. If I say, I
will speak thus, I should offend against the generation of thy Children. As to
the more remiss Desertions, it may be said to you, as, 1 Cor. 10.13. There has
no temptation taken you, but such as i^ common to man. And if you combat with
such as are more intense, and full of darkness, yet you are not without the
instances of such, who were very dear to God. There can then be no such
conclusion safely built on this argument: it cannot amount to a Demonstration,
since this is one part of the way in which God leads his own to glory.

2. There may be Grace where there wants light: it is true, a Child of God
cannot see or read it, when the light is taken from him: but possibly he has
read it, when he enjoyed this light: and the withdrawing of it from him does
not make any alteration in his state, though it does in his sense of it. This
therefore ought not to beat you off from your former experiences, but calls you
rather more carefully to improve them, as he, Psalm. 77.10, 11. I will remember
the years of the right hard of the most high, I will remember the works of the
Lord, etc. If Grace were gone, every time comfort and assurance is obscured, it
would be sad indeed; but it is nothing so; your state is the same, though your
frame be altered.

3. There may be the evidence of true Grace, where there is not the evidence of
strong Grace: and reason good, for there may be faith, though not like Abraham,
who against hope, believed in hope, but like a grain of mustard seed. There are
the Characters of real faith, in its lowest actings; and there are the notes of
the strong and vigorous actings of it: and we are apt to apply our selves in an
hour of temptation, to the latter, and because we find them not, we overlook
the former, and vote our selves to have none, because we have it not in such
degrees, and hereby we greatly injure our selves.

4. God may not be withdrawn as to Assistance, when he is so as to comfort: and
certainly this affords matter of encouragement in a dark time. Nay, it is to be
observed, that sometimes God gives more powerful assistances at such a time.
When Christ withdrew, as to comfort, from the Spouse, Cant. 5. yet never was
her grace in such vigor and resolution as then, expressing her insuperable
love to him, her insatiable desire after him, and her unconquerable resolution
to follow him, till she had found him again; nor did she ever give a more
glorious description of him, than in that Desertion, Verse 10. etc.

3 Above all take heed of concluding your selves Reprobates. We observed, that
sometimes the temptation may grow up to a readiness (...) to do, and therefore
it needs to be cautioned against, as a thing very dangerous* and for
prevention, Consider,

1. A Soul may apprehend neither life nor light, and yet a (...) of Grace be in
it. Though p^obably Grace is never totally suspended from its actings, yet they
may be so fain^, and the (...) of the (...) so potent, and ^he w^thdrawings of
Divine light so great, that he may not be able to discern them, or upon
strictest enquiry find them; and now he knows not what to make of himself: but
to argue to the not being of Grace, from our not discerning of it, is not
Demonstrative; it may be there, although beclouded as to your discerning: David
had then a right spirit in him, when he sought to have such an one renewed*
Psalm. 51.10. And if it be there, your state is safe.

2. Suppose you never were Converted, this does not say that you never shall.
Though you have been mistaken, yet this does not Seal- Reprobation upon you.
There is Grace enough with God, virtue enough in the blood of Christ, power
enough in the Spirit of Grace, and an opportunity and price still in your
hands: So that put case your state be as you fear, yet you^ case is not
desperate.

3. All the arguments that Unbelief and Satan furnish you withal for this
conclusion, are preca^i^us. Suppose you have made a great pr^fession in
hypocrisy, yet God can take away that false heart, and give you a true one. If
you have had beginnings and lost them; doubtless God suffers his chosen many
times to out grow convictions, and legal purposes once and again, and yet in
his time he returns, and does the work effectually; what though you have lived
a great while thus, yet it is not too late so long as God yet strives, and
waits, and calls, as he does: Nor is it of force, that now you find no
disposition in you, nor efficacy of means and endeavors, but all seem to your
apprehension to work contrary, and you think your selves ^o^saken: this may
also be to break you off from your selves, and to make his grace the more
admirable. So that on supposition that you were in such a condition, yet it is
too much for you to conclude from ^hence, that you are undone for ever.

Be then advised to take heed of casting off the means, but resolve to wait
upon God in the constant and diligent use of them: and for that end,

1. Know that this is your duty and work. God has commanded it you, and you
cannot neglect it without sin. God, who has appointed the means of Grace, to
advance our salvation by, has commanded us to wait upon him in them.
Conscience of duty then should make you afraid of neglecting them.

2. There is at least a who can tell? and that should stimulate you; whiles
there is a possibility, hope is not ^ut off. You find an Heathen King could so
argue, Jonah 3.9. Who can tell if God will turn and repent? etc. and the
Prophet urges this on Gods professing people as an encouragement. Joel 2.14.
Who knows if he will turn, and repent, and leave a blessing behind him? to be
sur^, all your reasonings against it, are nothing but the suggestions of a
misgiving heart, without any Scripture evidence to confirm them; for that
plead^ the quite contrary.

3. Nay, this is the way to recover out of Desertion, and to be supported under
it. God is wont to stir up in his Children a resolution to seek, and follow
hard after him, in order to his gracious returning to them: and this will be an
argument of a sincere soul, to say as David, Psalm 63.8. my soul follows hard
after thee; and it was in thi^ way that the Spouse so found her beloved again,
Cant. 5, and 6.

2. Let me now proceed to point what is to be done to get relief under, and
deliverance from these Desertions: and here let me premise, that though Gods
Sovereignty is to be acknowledged, and must be submitted to, yet this does not
discha^ge us from our duty, nor tell us that it is vain for us to attend it: he
has therefore told his people, in his word, what he would have them to do at
such times: and for direction,

1. Withstand the Temptations which at such a time, would undermine your Hope.
Hope is your life; for we live ^y hope, Romans 8.24 be therefore very tender of
it, and do not throw it away, or suffer your selves to be deprived of it; take
heed then of the suggestions offered to put you from it; especially,

1. That never any Child of God was in your case. It is very discouraging to go
in an untrodden Wilderness, where there is no beaten path: it is therefore an
usual enqui^y, was there ever any in such a condition as mine is? and if we
think that we are led in a way, which God does not use to carry his own in, we
thereupon despond. But this discouragement oftentimes prevails upon us, for
want of right consideration. Whereas, if we would enquire into the Word of God,
we might find our case there eminently exemplified: possibly it is a very,
ordinary case, but that our short spirits* do magnify it beyond all bounds of
reason, and so put another* aspect upon it* Or suppose it a thing more rare and
infrequent; yet it is not beyond the power and wisdom of God to govern it to
his glory and our best good. Jobs condition was such in his time; and that was
it which amazed and misled his friends, and drew them to hard censures of him*
but he resolutely, maintains his integrity, and reliance upon God.

2. That God hides his face the farther from them, the more they seek after
him. They read, and hear, and pray, and ponder, but still it grows darker and
darker under all; and from hence they infer that there is no hope for them ever
to find him again: and has it never been thus before? are you the first of
Gods Children that have been* thus treated? God in wisdom has set bounds and
degrees to the D^sertion; and he knows what is most proper and profitable for
you: but what have holy men been wont to do when it was so? How does David
carry himself? Psalm 22 begin and what says the Church in that di^mal distress
of her^? Lam. 3.26. it is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait
for the salvation of the Lord: and God gives his people this encouragement at
such a time, ^er. ^9.11. I know the thoughts that I think toward you, says
the Lord, thoughts of peace, and not of evil, to give you an expected end.

3. That you seem to grow worse under the Desertion. You think that if God had
a love for you, and intended you good by it, there would some spiritual
advantage accrue to you from it; but all your Graces languish, and your
corruptions gather strength under it; and no doubt, it may be so to sense,
whiles God is preparing of you for the good of this trial; the peaceable fruits
of righteousness which are to be produced by it, are to came afterward, Heb.
12.11. see what a sudden change there was with David in this rega^d Ps. 116 11,
12 I said in my haste, all men are liars. What shall I render to the Lord for
all his benefits toward me!

2. Take heed of mistaking those things for Desertions, which are not so in
themselves. Gods Children are too apt to ce^sure him, and discourage themselves
in this regard, and so create to themselves needless trouble: and Satan readily
suggests to a misgiving heart, that which may perplex him on this account: in
particular.

1. From outward afflictions, if some great outward trouble befall a Child of
God, he presently refers it to Gods anger, and by it he concludes that now he
hides his face; and as she once said to Christ, Joh. ^1.21. if thou had been
here my brother (...) not died; so he concludes, if God (...) been with him,
this or that evil had not befallen him. It is true, afflictions are some of
Gods Rods, wi^h which he is wont to correct his people, Psa. 89.32. and it
becomes them now to make search into their own hearts and carriage: however,
God often brings them for trial and exercise, such were those that Job met
wi^hal, Chap. 1. nor are all corrections desertions, but the clear discoveries
of Gods fidelity: he therefore could say, Psalm* 119.75. I know that in
faithfulness thou have afflicted me.

2. From stronger temptations. God sometimes brings temptations that carry more
force in them than ordinary, and we are woefully assaulted by them: it may be
they are many and complicate, and now we say, that he is withdrawn: but this
may be a mistake too: if God suffers us to be tempted, and then leaves us to
our selve^ it is then indeed a Desertion, as it was with Hezekiah, 2 Chronicles.
32.31. who being so left, fell into that which procured Gods displeasure: but
if God verify that to his people, 1 Cor. 10.13. ^ith every temptation he make a
way to escape, that we may be able to bear it, it is not a Desertion: if he
gives us grace to resist, and not to give way, it is a precious trial, and so
to be acknowledged, 1 Pet. 1.6, 7. Christ himself was very fiercely tempted by
the Devil, Mat. 4. begin* but he was not deserted in it. What though you have
great fightings, yet if you come off Conquerours, and more than so, will you
say that you have been deserted? or if at present you can say as he, Psa.
118.13. thou have thrust ^ore at me that I might fall, but the Lord helped me.

3. From greater discoveries of their own corruptions, and frailties* it is an
usual complaint, I grow weaker in duty, I find so much deadness, wandering,
unbelief, so many vain thoughts crouding in, more than ever, that methinks,
instead of growing, I am withering; and if GOD were with me, wou^d it be so?
but consider, as a Christian grows more in spiritual duties, he will see more
of his own vileness in them: when he did them more perfunctorily, he found less
of that; for the more there is of the Spirit, the more there will be discovered
of the lustings of the flesh, Gal. 5.17.

3. Endeavor to put the best interpretation on the Desertion. We observed that
God ever has gracious designs in the bottom, respecting his Children; and it
becomes us to think so, and accordingly to reduce all to such things as may
encourage us. Here,

1. Enquire what was the cause of it: usually when God hides his face, if we
were observant, we might understand how it came about; and that will help as
much in our judging of it. David tells us how his came about, Context, ve^. 6.
and the Spouse declares how it was with her, Cant. 5. begin* by this enquiry
we may come to be satisfied in the need there was of our meeting with such a
trial, and the fidelity and care of God in ordering it to be so, and this will
help us greatly, to bear it suitably, and to say as the Church, Mic. 7.9. I
will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him.

2. From the occasion learn to acknowledge the Righteousness of God. Let it
stop murmurings, and hard charges which are the most dangerous temptations
under Desertions, the Psalmist resolutely maintains that under the most dismal
withdrawing, Psalm. 22.13. nevertheless thou art holy. When we can justify God
in his dealings with us, that very frame will help us to a more believing
waiting upon him; if we put off our controversy with God, and lay aside all our
prejudices at him, we shall be the better persuaded to wait for him.

3. Observe the operation of the Desertion; and be sure to do it, not only in
this or that circumstance, or passage of it, but in the whole tract of Gods
managing of it; if thus you do, you will find enough to humble you in your
selves, and make you ashamed of the many violent efforts of sin and unbelief
which you have labored of: Let it help to mortify every carnal lust, and abase
you the more, and bring you to take the greater heed to your selves: let it
wean you from the world, and make you more heavenly in your conversation: and
if this be the operation, you may thereby discover that there i^ the carrying
on of the great design in you, and that God is still leading of you to heaven,
though in the dark; and if for some while you cannot discern the operation to
be any whit this way, by reason of the confusion and distraction there is in
you, yet wait for it; and when you find any thing thereof, be sure to improve
it as an earnest of his returning again shorty unto you.

4. Neglect not your former experiences; it is too usual a thing for the
Children of God, when an hour of Desertion comes, to abdicate all that ever
went before; time was when they thought they had sweet communion with God,
their hearts were greatly raised, their graces were made lively, and the seals
of Gods love were legible: but now he is withdrawn, they presently cry out, all
that was before, was but a dream there were no such things in reality. Whereas
we shall find, that holy men have practiced otherwise at such times; and when
they were in the dark never so much, yet they would call over former
transactions between God and them, and stay themselves thereby, so we observed
David does, Psalm. 77.10. and so do you. God will sometimes bring his people to
live on the stock, and they ought to be glad and thankful that they have one;
and to help you in this, take these conclusions.

1. He that is once a Child of God is ever so. Adoption is one of the
unrepentable gifts of God. Effectual Vocation flows from his everlasting love,
Jer. 31.3. and therefore it will certainly abide in its efficacy to
everlasting: if then you once truly knew your selves to be the Children of God;
the thing is certain and unchangeable. Why then should you change your
thoughts, a^though there be changes in Providence, which are to be expected,
and therefore can be no contradiction to the truth on which your hope is built.

2. If your evidence were once true, it is so still and this follows from the
former: a believers evidence is from the things that accompany salvation; and
that concomitancy is inseparable; (...) ever you had real communion with God,
and participated in his Grace, it was a witness of your good estate: and though
the scene be now turned, yet it will be a truth for ever, that God came and
sealed the Covenant with your souls: and though he does not do it now afresh,
yet he did it then; and if he loved you then, he loves you still, John 13.1.
Having loved his omn which were in the world, he loved them to the end: And
this will prove it.

3. That this change in Providence, has made no change in God. God says to
deserted Jacob, Mat. 3.6. I am God, I change, not, therefore ye sons of Jacob
are not consumed: he has reasons in the management of his Kingdom of Grace in
you, to alter his dispensations, but he is still driving on the same design, he
intends one thing, both in his manifestations and hidings of himself, and that
is to bring you to glory.

5. St^ictly observe, whether there be no weak stirrings of Faith and
Repentance, notwithstanding the Desertion; if you can discern the least motion
of any Grace, it may greatly support you, because it witnesses that ^he is
your father, and will not forsake you, Here then,

1. Do you indeed miss him, and are you grieved at it? It is a taken of Grace
in the heart, that we are sensible of his spi^itual retirings from us,
especially, when with this sense we are sorrowful for it, and cannot bear it
without bitterness; So it was with the Spouse, Cant. 5.4. My bowels were moved
for him.

2. Is your unbelief a burden to you? you find it very strong and overbearing,
and it is too hard for you: you cannot persuade your misgiving hearts to
resolve to trust in him, but you sink, and are cast down: but this is very
displeasing to you; and you wish that you could believe, and condemn your
selves for your irregular discontents, and say as, Psalm. 42. ult. Why art thou
cast down, O my soul, and why art thou disquieted in me? and Psalm. 73.22. So
foolish was I, and ignorant, etc.

3. Are there not in you restless longings for Christ? you are afraid whether
he will come any more to you, but there are in you craving desires after him;
your Soul cannot rest in this condition; nothing can content you whiles he is
withdrawn, there is neither person nor thing that can fill up his room, or be
to you in his stead: you can say as he, Psalm. 73.25. Whom have I in heaven but
thee? and there is nothing on earth that I desire in comparison of thee. And
as, Isa. 26.9. With my soul have I desired thee ^ the night.

4. Is there not in you a love to Holiness? though you find that your strength
fails you, and you can do nothing as you should, yet holiness is the thing you
would fain have: the sin that is in you is burdensome, and you hate it, and are
vile in your own eyes by reason of it. Can you say as he? Romans 7.15. What I
would, I do not, and what I hate that do I.

5. Do you not find something in you that resists this unbelief? would you not
fain, if you dared, cry out as he, Matthew. 9.24. I believe, Lord help mine
unbelief? Would you not give a world, if you had i^, that you could trust in
him, and wait for him? Something in you, that when you are ready to give up all
for gone, will not suffer you, but gives you some check? and what is this but,
at least, some faint stirring of faith; an effect of it, though under grievous
oppression?

6. Are there no cries and looks under this pressure? though you are
overwhelmed, and look this and that way, and see no relief, yet you call and
cry, and cast a look toward God, as he, Psalm. 142 3, 4, 5. When my spirit was
overwhelmed in me, etc. I cried unto thee, O Lord! and said, thou art my
refuge, and my portion in the land of the living. You are just ready to draw up
desperate conclusions, but yet you resolve as he, Jonah 2.4. I will look once
more toward thine holy Temple. You doubt that it is in vain, yet you cannot but
groan after it: and is not this from the Spirit, who helps our infirmities, and
supplies us with groans that cannot be uttered? Romans 8.26.

7. Nay, what is the bitterness it self that you labor of? What makes you so
disquiet? why can you not in still and be content? it is not because of his
absence? because you cannot see him as you have seen him, is it not the want of
his company? and if he should come again, would you not be satisfied? would not
that make up all? if it be so, surely you have known what it is to walk in the
light of his countenance, and that anunconverted Soul never did.

8. Are there not, now and then, some beams of light let in, though soon gone
again? in darkness, there is some light: sometimes you suddenly cry out, my
Lord, and my God: Some promise, some encouragement darts in, and lifts up your
head above water: but because it is transient, and you are presently s^nk with
another wave, you think it a delusion; whereas indeed it is a gracious respit
given you, to take a little breath; and so you ought to interpret it.

7. Encourage your selves by the Name of God, now to go to him, and wait upon
him. This is the advice given to such as sit in darkness, and see no* light,
Isa. 50 10. If you cannot apply a Promise, so as to challenge an interest in
it, yet take hold of an Attribute. God has proclaimed his name to us for our
encouragement: Every Attribute of his, is an handle which we should lay hold
on, and support our selves by: read then in what letters he has proclaimed his
name, Exodus 34 6, 7. And do you make use of all. It is possible that a truly
gracious Soul may be in so great darkness, as not to be able to discern himself
from one that ha^h no grace; and to such God offers his Name for their relief
under d^s^ondency, and for help, learn;

1. That if you never were Converted, yet you may be. Here is sufficient to
support you against the desperate conclusion. He has power enough to do it,
for he is the Lord, God: he has mercy enough to do it, for he is Merciful and
Gracious: he may do it though you have long withstood him, for he is long
suffering, there is nothing here to be objected, but what may be fully answered
in his name.

2. There is enough in these Attributes to nourish hope in you, for;

1. He is a God that delights in mercy. Not only can he be merciful, but it is
that in which he takes great pleasure. All the contrivances of man's Salvation,
which are recorded in his word, are a witness for this: and he is so recorded,
Micah 7.18. He delights in mercy.

2. He is able to deliver you. This was an encouragement to the poor Leper to
come unto him, Math. 8.2. If thou will, thou can make me clean. And this it
that which our Savior enquired of them, Chap. 9.28. Believe you that I am able
to do this for you. We should exert faith in his power, and that should carry
us to him, because, though he is Sovereign, yet we are assured that he who is
able, is also willing.

3. Jesus Christ has purchased Salvation, He has paid the price of it; He
has made himself an offering for it; it was the very business that he came
into the world for: and doubtless he cannot but be willing to afford it to such
as wait upon him for it; He is not willing to lose his labor, but would have
all that hear of it, to come to him for it, and he has said, that such as do
come he will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6.37.

4. He is still standing before you, and offering you his Salvation. You cry
out, he is gone; but though he be so as to your apprehension of his comforts
and assurances, yet he is waiting to be gracious; yea he is striving with you,
and bidding you to Look to him: and why should you say, there is no hope?

5. The Spirit of God is ready to help you. If you do but ask him, he is ready
to come, Luke 11.13. Your heavenly father shall give the holy Spirit to them
that ask him? Why should you sink under the apprehension of your own inability
to come or look? is the^e but a groan after him? he hears and understands it.

6 God can wonderfully glorify himself in this way. You say, how can it be that
he should regard such an one as I, who have been so deceitful and vile, and
sinned against his Grace, dissembled with him? know it, he can glorify his
Grace, by every of these circumstances that you aggravate your folly by.
Suppose therefore, if you will needs have it to be so, that you have been
deceived, and dare not lay claim to the promise, yet here is enough in his Name
to help you to seek and wait for him.

3. Resolve then to adventure your selves upon God. Run into his Name; you are
encouraged so to do, Prove. 18.10. The Name of the Lord is a strong tower, the
righteous runs into it, and is safe. And therefore if you find such
resolutions stirring in you, nourish and prosecute them. Thus, by renewing
Faith and Repentance, you shall, Grace assisting, recover the light of Gods
countenance, and have your mourning turned into danceing; your sackcloth shall
be put off, and you shall be girded with gladness.

FINIS.

