THE Young Man's claim unto the Sacrament OF THE LORD'S SUPPER.

OR The EXAMINATION of a Person approaching to the Table of the LORD.

Composed By the Reverend Mr. JOHN QUICK, Minister of the Gospel, in London.

And now, in a Second Impression, Offered unto the Churches of New England; by
Sundry Ministers of those Churches, Approving of it, and Attesting to it.

With a Defense of (...) Churches, from what is Offensive to them, in a
Discourse lately Published, under the Title of, The Doctrine of Instituted
Churches.

By certain Ministers of the Gospel, in Boston.

BOSTON, Printed by B Green, and J Allen, for Samuel Phillips, at the Brick
Shop near the Old Meeting House 1700.

HIS respondent, qui vul^^ vocantur Free-Admitters, inter quos Populi
multitudines, pietati ut plurimum eheu^^ nimis inimicae, tanquam faeces
Subsidu^t.

Beverl. Unio Reform. p. 35. A Defense of Evangelical Churches, IN A Soft
Answer to what may Offend the Churches of NEW ENGLAND in an Hard Attempt
against them, under the Title of, The Doctrine of Instituted Churches. AND, A
Short Account of the Discourse about, A Claim to the Lords Table, here
Published and Commended, as a Treatise worthy of Great Acceptance in the
Churches.
ENGLAND acknowledges New England, as the most Resembling Daughter among all
her Colonies; and She may receive Instructions from thence, that may render it
most unreasonable for her to Forsake the Law of her Mother. There was a Time,
when He who holds the Stars in his Right Hand, sent over many Scores of them,
to Shine in this American Orb, out of reach to the sweeping Rage of the Dragon.
But of Later Years, the Stars that Shine in Europe, do without moving from
thence, only send over their sweet Influences, in their Holy and Heavenly
Writings. Besides the many Treatises which New England is continually, by the
way of the Press, receiving from the Divines born and bred in this Country, it
annually Vends (I suppose) Hundreds of Books published by Divines Beyond Sea;
and many of them are here found so Acceptable and Serviceable, that New England
give^ them a Second Impression. If the Groans of the Plantations complain, That
they meet with some Difficulties from England, on Political Accounts, it is w^ll
that on Religious Ones, we have some Compensation made unto us. And if the Non
Conformists, Who are the truest and soundest part of the Church of England, yet
meet with Discouragement there, let it be some satisfaction to them, that here
is a whole Nation of Non Conformists, which know them, and love them, and Read
them, when they cannot See them.

Among those Worthy Ministers of London, whose Labou^s have been Useful and
Precious to the Christians in these Ends of the Earth, a Character of special
Respect is due to the Reverend QUICK. His Great Pains ^n Translating and
Publishing, the Synodi^^n ^alliae R^formatae, des^rve acknowledgments from all
Good men, and Sharpen their Appetites for his Icones. But if he had never
gratifyed the Public, with any other of his Composures, besides his, Young
Man's Claim to the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, That alone were enough to have
endeared him unto the Christians that compose the Churches in the American
Regions. The Discourse is Brief, and yet Full; Full, and yet Plain: Plain, and
yet Quick and Powerful; Holiness brea^hes in every line of it; it consists of
Right Words; and it is admirably well accommodated unto the Designs of
Practical Christianity. In tenui Labor, at tenuis non Gloria. -- The Young
People of New England, so much forget the Church State which was the Errand of
their Fathers into this Wilderness, and so little prepare for, and Approach to,
the Sacred Fellowship of that Church State, that we may not wonder at the
terrible Judgments, which have, like Fire from the Neglected Altar, i^^^ed
forth upon them. To Quicken our Young People, unto such a Conscientious
Renovation of their Baptismal Covenant, as may make it appear that when they
are Come to years of Discretion, they are Come to years of Religion, and to
Assist both Pastors and People, in bringing our Baptized, under an orderly
Confirmation, and in that Examination which may bring the well qualified unto
the Table of the Lord; This (...) a thing (...) ^^vantageous to our (...) Now
(...) Do This, is the Tendenc^ of the Discourse here put into our Hands* And
though the Worthy Author, should never in this World Know all the particular
Success of this his Discourse, yet there is a World, wherein he may Expect both
the Knowledge and the Reward of (...) yea, whatever be the Success, Great will
be the Reward.

(...) First Intention in the Second Impr^ssi^n of ^his Euchiri^^i^n Juvenis
Christi^^ (as we may call it,) is, To Direct and Exci^e, Practical
Christianity, in that (...) of it, The Celebratio^ of (...) Eucharistpunc; But
when a Neighbor, whose Respect both for the Author and the Master of this
Little Book, disposed him to put himself unto some (...) for the Re^printing
thereof, requested us, to Write a Praeface unto it, the like Respect in Us,
(One of whom, did at London Eight years ago enjoy a personal Acquaintance with
the Author,) caused us joyfully to Embrace that Opportunity. Nor is it a small
satisfaction unto us, that (...) have herein so good an Opportunity, to do some
further Service for our Churches, and to take some Notice of the Circumstances
which call for tha^ Service*

We cannot but be sensible, When the most considerable part of the Ministers of
the Gospel throughout this Colony, have un^er their Hands proclaimed their
sense of it, That ^he^e are Tendenc^es among us, toward Deviations from the
Good (...), whe^ein our Churches have, (...) to the Word of the Lord (...)
Esta^l^shed and (...) Excellent Servants (...) jesus Christ, not concurring
every punctilio of our Platform, whom we are very far from counting Enemies to
our Churches, or Apostates from the Religion of them. And we are as far from
Censuring and Reproaching, All our Young Men, as gone off from the Way of their
Fathers, and of the Churches, while we know that so many of them, are of pious
Dispositions, answerable to their other Lovely Accomplishments. Nevertheless,
the Ministers who complained of, Tendencies toward Deviations from the Good
Order of the Churches* must not be condemned as making a Rash Complaint: While
their Ears do often hear men expressly wish for Another Order to be introduced,
and their Eyes do see many things, not only Writ, but also Done, that are
contrary, yea, Destructive t^ the present Order. There is no arguing against
Sense: and when we feel an House pul^ing down, it will be imp^ssible for any
but men fast Asleep, to dream, that it is Building up. Ind^ed (...) promoters
of those Deviati^ns an^ Innovations which threa^en the ^h^r^h^s do not seem
Agreed am^^g ^hems^l^^s, i^ any one point, but This, that they would not have
Things to be as the Eminent Planters, and General Synods, of our Churches have
Left them unto us: And it is not without a Remarkable Providence of the Lord,
who Walks in the midst of the Golden Candlesticks, that nothing has been
hitherto Emitted against the Constitution of th^se Churches, but it has been
Decried even by those that are not over-fond of that Constitution: it has had
some odd strokes that even they that wish for, and heave at the Alteration
therein Endeavored, have yet been scandalized at, as indefensible. There is*
in this Dispensation of God, an Admonition to them that will receive it! It Is
also true, for the most part, sober men will profess, That they Look upon the
Holy Churches of New England as dear to God, and for the main in a better
Order, than most upon the face of this miserable Earth: nor do they actually
mend any thing, in gadding to change their way. But yet such is the Levity of
an Unstudied and Unstable Generation, that if any thing be Done against that
Order of the Gospel, they will Invent all the Colors imaginable to excuse it,
and maintain it; and if any thing be W^^t or Sp^ke for that Order, they will
Employ as many ^^vils as they can ^p^n it; it is distastful to them. The Books
Written to explain and maintain the Discipline of our Churches by the brave men
that first Enlightened these parts of the Earth, they so slight them, that they
never so much as Read them; and at the same time, the Books written by the
Ultramarine Adversaries of the Churches are in their Hands Night and Day. Let
it be but intimated, That a man is disaffected unto the Churches, they will
have his Person in Admiration, as being a man of Absolute Learning, (though he
should be so no otherwise than in Erasmus's phrase:) And let a man be Looked
upon, as a Friend unto the way of the Churches, his Reputation is gone with
'em; he can do nothing worth looking upon. If all men are such Friends to the
Constitution of our Churches, What means this bleating and Lowing? There are
too many, who do not very prudently, that they can find no other methods of
expressing their Friendship. No Syrs, Habent Opera (...) Linguam; I^ a man have
never so little Acquaintance with Church History, and the, Prudentia veteris
Ecclesiae, the prospect of such things will give him some Apprehensions.

Among the many other Devices, wherewith our Inconveniences are car^^^ on, we
cannot but complain of one, that has in it as much of Injustice, as of (...):
And this is, That they must be carried on, under the Name of Presbyterians, a
Name which the Churches of New England mention with (...) justly expecting from
them that claim (...), nothing but Kindness. It Is true, as every thing admits
of a Distinction, there may be two sorts of Presbyterians: The Author of the
Unto Reformanti^^^, Long since noted a very notable Distinction between, The
Reforming Presbyterians, and, The Presbyterian Formalists; adding, That the
Congregationals, are a choice, if not the best part of the True Presbyterians.
There are those whom we may call Reforming Presbyterians* men that are Studious
of Piety and Sanctity, and a Discipline that shall promote Piety and Sanctity
in the Churches of the Lord Jesus Christ. And then, there are some, who cannot
indeed presently conform to (...) the Superstitions retained in part of the
Church of England, but yet are either Strangers to the Discipline in the best
Ordered Churches of the Reformation, or Averse to it, on other principles than
those of Piety and Sanctity; and such as Labor and Rejoice where ever they
come, to see Enclosures about the Churches demolished, and whatever
distinguishes them from the wide and wild World Extinguished. Hi Classicalium
nomine (as one that knew them, says of them) Reformationi omni reali obicem
posu^re, et etiamnum p^nunt. Now, the true Reforming Presbyterians will find so
little disagreeable to them, in the Churches of New England, that We are
satisfied, they would never offer any Disturbance to them, never value
themselves upon any Difference from them, never signalize their Dissatisfaction
at them. There are certain Heads of Agreement, whereon the Presbyterians and
Congregational Brethren in London, have United. And indeed the Varieties
between them, are so Little, that we wonder any Men of Great Souls can find any
matter worthy of Contention in them. The famous Robinson himself though counted
as far from a Presbyterian as any, declares, Regimen nostrum Ecclesiasticum est
^^mi^^e Democraticum, s^d plane Aristocraticum et Presbyteriale. And on the
other side, the famous Newcomen, though a great Presbyterian, when our Platform
of Discipline was first published, he carried it one day into the Pulpit with
him, uttering a great Approbation of it. Now, Let all the World know, That the
Churches of New England, are as much in that Happy Union, as any under the Cope
of Heaven; and we do, and shall contend with none, but those who violate the
Articles of that Union. Reforming Presbyterians of an Eminent Character
sometimes retiring hither, have been as much Received, Beloved, and Esteemed
here, as any of the Pastors born and bred among us; and as the Churches of
New England imposed nothing upon them, that was grievous to their Conscience,
thus they, not only conformed unto the Things which they found here practiced,
but even made Conscience of doing so. The Presbyterians which have sought the
peace of these Gardens of the Lord, have not in any Laudable thing been
inferior to those that shall under the Nation of Presbyterians go to break
down the hedge about them, or fill them with We^d^* which did not use to be
there. A Brief Treatise Vindicating, The Order of the Gospel, professed and
practiced by the Churches of New England, has been lately set forth among us;
and their Vindication in every point is fetched from the Concessions of the
Reforming Presbyterians beyond Sea, yea, not only this and that particular
Author of Great Fame among those of such a Denomination, but whole Synods,
whole Nations of them. Now a Treatise thus proved and Approved by the most
unexceptionable Authority of Presbyterians, must be assaulted with a Review,
pretending to Answer it; and the Answerers will be Angry, we suppose, if they
been't counted Presbyterians. Whatever may appear Injurious in that Review, we
have the same cause to forbear any Rejoinders, that Melancthon had, for
persuading Vitus Theodorus against Rejoyning any thing upon Osiander when he
had abused him; and we have considered, Optimus ille qui f^rre novit Injurias
plurimas All we ask is, That the Authors will find for themselves another Name
than that of Congregational or Presbyterians! What shall we say more? Our
Authors will hold forth, that where a Church has Elders, there is no necessity
that they should consent unto the Choice of more, [Mr. S. S. Doctr. of
Churches. p. 9*]
when more shall be Chosen, but the Vote of the major part of the Brethren is
valid, without the concurrence of the Elders. And yet these challenge the Name
of Presbyterians, as belonging to them. It Is also well known, That in almost
all the Presbyterian Churches on the face of the Earth, the Rights of the
Fraternity are still after some sort preserved, by a Consistory of Elders,
chosen from among them; Whereas our Presbyterians, for the most part, so far as
we are informed abhor, disdain, deride the very mention of them: And some that
will permit such Elders, [Mr. S.S p. 12]
yet forbid 'em any ways to intermeddle in the affayr, of Trying and Judging,
who shall be Admitted unto Sacrament^* This is not fair! Briefly, There (...)
some who are unacquainted with the Orderly Establishments, in the Scotch, the
Dutch, the French, the Genevian, and other Churches of the Reformed, which are
all Presbyterian: but they have seen some Churches in the English Nation,
Gathered* o^ Continued, with much ado, by very Holy Ministers, in a Time of
Persecution, and therefore in more feeble, more defective* more uncertain
circumstances, than they themselves would gladly have been. And now, they set
up as Reformers for the Churches of New England, but the Reformation which they
propound is, for our Churches to part with Orderly Establishments, wherein they
Harmonize with other Presbyterian Churches, and to put themselves into the
feeble condition of those few that just make a shift to Live, and that would
with all their Hearts, get into the Condition of New England, if they could. A
Laudable Attempt! If these our Fri^nds, are Presbyterians, why do they pay so
little Respects unto the Classes of the Pastors in the Vicinity? Our Pastors
have their Associations, for mutual Assistance in the Work of the Gospel; If
these Associations do not assume unto themselves all the power, which many
Presbyterians can allow to them, yet they may unquestionably assume and expect
so much power, that the^e be no public Actions done to Invade and Alter the
Constitution of our Churches, without the Advice of the Neighborring Ministers.
But when or where was this Advice, ever so much as once taken for any of those
Actions that have been done (even in Print*) contrary to what is commonly
professed and practiced in the Churches of New England? Give us leave to say
it: There has not any one thing been done against the Established Order of our
Churches, by those, who call themselves Presbyterians, but if they had been in
any other Country of Presbyterian Churches under the C^pe of Heaven, they
would have been severely Censured. Synods of all the Churches in our Colony,
and Synods consisting very much of those Holy, and L^arned, and Able Divines,
i^ comparison of whom, the minds of those that now oppose their Determinations,
are (to speak in an Hebrew phrase) Like the Eye of a Needle, to the Gate of a
Temple, have given us from the Word of God, an Established Order to be kept in
our Churches. And though some Raw Youths may under the Name of Presbyterians,
now value themselves upon their contempt of the (...), of Discipline, which is
the Sum (...) Established Order, yet th^^e Reverend Presbyterians, who
published their Jus Divinum near fifty years ago, Expressly declare, That they
agree with the Things of the greatest concernment in it; and their Debates
about some things of lesser consequence, were not Contentiones, but
Collationes. They that go to undermine this Established Order, do not in the
least pretend, that any one Sinful Thing is therein imposed: and yet without
the Sentence of any Synod (so much as a Provincial One,) they not only do
themselves depart from our Establishments, but also, partly by Manuscripts
industriously and mischievously handed about the Country, and partly by
Printed Oppositions, Excite all people to give up what they have in the Way of
God received from His Word We Appeal to all the Reforming Presbyterians in the
World: Say, O ye men of God, and of Order, Say, O our Ever-honoured Brethren;
Will you approve such Things? Or, can they who do such Things, easily make you
a Reparation, for the Wrong they have done you, by making your Name, the
Umbrage of their Disorderly Undertakings?

The Reverend QUICK shall speak for you. That Excellent Presbyterian, has
written the very Spirit of the New-English Reformers; he writes the Principles,
that are the very Vitals of our Churches, and they will Prize him, and Love
him, and Bless God for him. He proposes, that our Young People, in performance
of their Baptismal Vow, humbly craving Admission to the Lords most Holy Table,
be found able and willing to perform the Duties of Regenerate Christians; and
he proposes, that they be Exam^^^, Whether they be sensible of their Spiritual
Wants; And of their manifold Sinfulness, and Wretchedness? And, whether they
have by Saving Faith betaken themselves to the Lord Jesus Christ, in all His
Offices, for Salvation from their Sinfulness and Wretchedness? And, what Ground
of Hope they have, that God has Accepted them, and Pardoned them? And, where
they hope to find their Justifying Righteousness? And, whether they be yet in
the Covenant of Grace? And, After what manner, they will Prepare for, and
Approach to, and Discern the Lords Body at, the Table of the Lord? And he
concludes with bringing them under a COVENANT, That they will Submit unto the
Discipline of that particular Church whereto they shall apply themselves; to be
Admonished, (...), Censured, ^f need be, by the PASTOR, and BRETHREN of that
Church.

Sirs, New England it self is not more New English! If the Pastors of our
Churches will Examine all the Candidates of their Communion, with such
Questions as these, and Expect fit Answers to the Questions, and Report as much
of the Answers as may be judged fit unto the Brethren, This is all the Relation
of Experiences, that ever we would urge for. And we fear, a Relation has often
been Produced and Accepted by great pleaders for it, without half so much
Examination.

We earnestly declare unto you, O People of God, That This is the very
Discipline which we wish to see preserved in ^he Churches of New England, as
Fearing ^^at the Churches themselves cannot be ^^eserved, but soon become
Lothesome to Heaven, if This be lost. We could without any Trouble, see
Varieties in the Customs of the Churches* about such Things as may be Vari^d
according to the sense of Edification one way or another; nor did we ever much
admi^e the Wisdom of them that have been the (...) and (...) of ^^^forming in
things (...) different. But we confess, that we are more than a little
Troubled, nor can we forbear Speaking to them, and saying* Do not Sin against
the Churches* when we see men laboring to Unhinge the very Essentials of our
Churches and change the very Matter and Form of them: And the more noted the
men are for Experimental Religion, and the more we value and honor them for
their strict Conversation (wherein, Sobrij accedunt ad perdend^s Ecclesias,) we
are still the more Troubled. Had it been an Enemy, we could have born it, but
they are our dear Brethren sometimes, and men that we have a great respect for
on the account of their profitable Preaching, and Exemplary Walking. We hope,
they will hear your cries, O ye Endangered Churches, reaching to their serious
Hearts; What thou, O our Son! Thou that we hoped, would have been one of our
Guides; Thou that have been so well acquainted with us; Thou from whom we have
had such sweet counsel. Thou, whose Company has been so grateful unto us in the
House of God: Think, we pray thee* Think of what thou do. Certainly, Thou
can not wittingly and willingly do us any Hurt! Why should thou be through
thy mistake so unhappy, and why should thy worthy Talents be so unhappily
Employed, as to damnify the Interests, which the Sincere Intention of thy Soul
was to have preserved? And that which we think, should cause the Cries of the
Churches, to arrive with the more of Pungency, unto the Hearts of these our
Brethren is, The Evil Tendency of their Undertakings. For, as they do not
Substitute a Better Order for our Churches, in the room of that, which they go
to take away, and which we judge we should Let no man take away, so, they
cannot rationally imagine, that what they propound as a Better Order should be
for one while brought in upon them. All the Tendency therefore of the Writings
that batter the Order of our Churches, can be only to fill the Mouths of a
Revolting Generation, with Cavils against those things, which the Generality of
our more Devout, and more Studied People, take to be the Right ways of the
Lord It is too notorious, That every Town, has more or less a Company of loose
People in it, that are without the Power of Godliness; and yet, while there is
a Church in the Town, that in its Discipline* represents the Kingdom of Heaven
unto the Neighborhood, they are struck with some Terror from Heaven, that
makes their minds uneasy in their Unregeneracy. Now, the Writings that are shot
forth against our Churches, do for the most part marvellously please that sort
of People; who accordingly being furnished with Quibbles, What plain Scripture
have you for this? and, What plain Scripture for that? which they see done in
the Holy Hill of the Lord, they divert and quiet the unea^siness of their self
condemning Minds, under their criminal Unfruitfulness under the means of Grace,
and Extinguish in them, the sense of many a Duty incumbent on them. This is all
the Effect, we have hitherto seen of these Writings. The Hearts of the
Righteous have been made sad, and Impiety has been Gratified and Strengthened.
We beseech you, Syrs, in the Fear of God, consider what you do! What Account
will you give, to the Great Lord of these Holy Churches?

Of all the Writings, that have been grievous to the most of the People of God,
throughout the Country. We have not observed any to have given more Grief, than
one lately Published by a Reverend Brother, whom nevertheless we Resolve always
to Embrace in the Arms of our most affectionate Charity. We told him Seven
years before the Publication of it, That if it came abroad, we would as
Publicly animadvert upon it; But now going to be as Good as our Word, we find
our selves in many Respects almost wholly Excused from it. The little Book
about, The Order of the Gospel, which came abroad ^ust before this Doctrine of
Churches, anticipated it, with an Answer. They that have ever thoroughly
Studied the Order of the Gospel, we would humbly persuade our selves, will not
easily abandon so much of Scripture and Reason and Antiquity, merely because a
few Gentlemen at Boston and New York are Displeased with it, but rather make
their Displeasure, something of an Argument on the other side. That, Order of
the Gospel, must first be Refuted a little more Significantly, before we need
proceed unto a Refutation of what is Offensive, in the Novelties, wherewith our
Friend has undermined it; and this the rather, because he advances very little
besides down right Assertions and Positions, without so much as a Shadow of
Demonstration. Certainly, no Metampsychos^^ has transformed us into such
Pythagorians, as to take an, Ipse dixit, for a Demonstration, or to conclude a
thing Must be, because an Ingenious and Contemplative Gentleman, in his
Retirements, conceives, It may be. Yea, it were easy to show, that the Pamphlet
every where has answered it self: but our Tenderness for the Author, will cause
us to shun every thing, that looks like a Catching at the Opportuni^ies, which
his manifest Inconsistencies, and Self contradictions, would give unto more
Touchy Disputers, to lessen him. Nor may we wonder, if they who Contradict the
Scriptures be left also to Contradict themselves. And if none of all This could
be said for our Excuse from a Labor (and yet Scarce a Labor) whereto our
Entire Affection for the Author were enough of it self to indispose us, there
is one thing that abundantly Supersedes it; and that is, That the Writings of
the most eminent Presbyterians in Europe have an hundred times over
Sufficien^ly R^selled all that this Gentleman has Written against the Churches
of New England. Never^heless, we shall bestow a Gentle Touch upon his
Novelties, lest he count himself neglected; and indeed the little Room whereto
we are now confined, will permit no more than a Touch, upon them.

We shall not concern our selves, with his Doctrine, That Elders have not only
power over their particular Churches, Doctrine of Chs* p. 14.
but also over others; and his Essay to Erect Provincial and National Churches,
(and these must Consist only of the Clergy) as of Divine Right. For there is no
Fear that This Doctrine will take among us: It never took yet in any Nation of
Presbyterians: And among our selves, They that upon as carnal accounts like not
the Order our Churches, will, if it were only to prese^ve their Purses, never
submit unto this Order, and the unknown Decrees, and Canons, and Anathematizing
Thunderbolts, which may ensue upon it. The Episcopalians, which plead for such
a Church, have been convicted of a Plot, and a very Treasonable one it is, to
subject the whole Christian Church unto the Patriarch of the West: But we are
too well acquainted with that Old Gentleman, to put our selves into his Hands:
And we flatter our selves with (...), That the Twelve Hundred and Sixty years
are too near out, for him to Expect it Our Friend abhors, we know, such an
Issue of his Hypothesis: but we do not know, how it will be Staved off, or how
an Ecumenical Church is less of a Divine Right, than a National: or at least,
a Church of Europe than a Church of England. The more Sober Divines in the
Church of England, which are for a National Church, but not for a Foreign
Jurisdiction, would yet have it Recognized as being of no more than an Humane
Right; nor do they see, how without the hazard of High Treason, and of a
Foreign Jurisdiction ^o have it otherwise* and among others the Ingenuous
Author of, Catholicism without Popery, giving us the Scheme, which the late
Queen, and Arch^bishop, would have Prosecuted, if Death had not cut off their
Noble Purposes, does confess, He that Impartially considers the Writings for
Episcopacy and against it, will find these two things to be True: First, That
the English Prelacy as now Exercised, has no foundation in Scripture, or
Primitive ^^iquity. Secondly, That Indepen^^^^y, if it be meant of the Relation
(...) Pastor and his Flock, is plainly, Jure Divine. But for all the Claims, of
the Clergy, meeting when they think fit, in Provincial and National Synods, to
be Provincial and National Churches, of a Divine Institution, it is Answer
enough, that we only say, Gentlemen, Show us the Institution. To tell us, That
the Constitution of the Church of Israel, and of the Synagogues as particular
Churches under it, in the Land of Canaan, is an Instituti^n for the Churches of
the New Testament, will rather Astonish than satisfy Considerate Christians. We
find in the Acta Erudi^orum, that the learned Vitringa has in a late Discourse
evinced that there were no Synagogues in the days of the first Temple: he has
also proved that by the Church in Math. 18 17 the Congregation and not the
Elders only are intended. But alm^st all ^he Traditions that we have about the
Church Government of the Synagogues, are either the Fabulous, or at best,
uncertain Reports of the Talmuds, which were not in being, till several
Hund^eds of years after our Savior: yea, ti^l a little before the Days of
Justinian Our Friend indeed blames us, for Attempting to compile a complete
Platform for our Churches, out of the Books of the New Testament: Indeed! We
see now the Fault of our Platform of Church discipline; It Is too much compiled
out of the Books of the New Testament!

But we are concerned, when we see the Brethren in our Churches, by the New
Doctrine of Churches, utterly stripped of the Liberties which the Lord Jesus
Christ has pu^chas^d for them, and confer^ed on them. It seemed Odd unto us,
to Read, That those Males which are not their own Masters, Doct of Chs. p. 1^
have nothing to do, to to V^te in the Church: because we thought, the Lord
Jesus Christ had made them His Free men: and though this our Friend Forbid
their Votes, Ca^^tel est sa plaiser, yet we never heard, until he now told us,
that the Lo^d Forbad them. But that which augments the Oddity, is, Why Brethren
of that particular Character, should have such a particular Exception from a
Share in the Liberties of the other Brethren, when it seems no Brethren have
any Liberties at all anon left unto them. For, We find the Brethren Expressly
shut out from any ways ^ntermeddling, or, Doct. of Chs. p. 12
looking to have their Consent Asked,) in the affairs of Admitting, and of
Censuring, and of Restoring their own Members; and anon, we have the Synods of
Provinces and Nations, claiming an Appointment from the Lord, for the
Government of the Churches within their Bounds. It Would puzzle any man to tell
what affairs now remain to be managed by the Votes of the Brethren. If you say,
the Choice of their Officers; No, we suppose the Classes will soon take That
also into their Hands: For, alas, This People know not the Law.

But what need we contend with our Friend, about the Lordship over the Heritage
of the Lord, unto which he would animate his Catechumens^ Let him first make
his Peace with the Good Old English Presbyterians, the London Ministers, who in
their Vindication of the Presbyterian-Government, Expressly say, p. 70, 71.
It is as warrantable by the word of God, for one Minister to assume unto
himself alone the Power of Suspending from the Sacrament, as it is to assume
the whole Power of Admitting to the Sacrament, for, Contrariorum eadem est
Ratio; For one Minister alone to Assume this Power unto himself is to make
himself a Congregational POPE -- Upon the (...) of which passage, we will take
(...) That those men (...) wonderfully ^^norant of Church History, who are not
sensible, That the Rise of Popery was, the Clergies engrossing all things in
the Church to themselves, and the Peoples ignorantly and imprudently parting
with such Rights as belonged unto them. There was (by the way) a Time, in the
Church of Rome, when, It was not so. That very Clemens, of whom the Apostle
Paul says, His Name was in the Book of Life, the Pastor of the Church at Rome,
writing to the Church of Corinth, urged the Contentious in that Church, to
yield Obedience unto, the (...), the Things Appointed and Commanded by the
Multitude of the People. If it had been an Evil Thing for the Brethren to have
their Sha^e in Appointing what should be done, it would have been an Evil Thing
for Clemens to have advised Obedience unto what they Appoi^t^d. However, if a
Citation from English ones, will merit no Attention, we will try a little, what
may be had from Scotch Presbyterians: The Celebrated Rutherford shall be one of
them, to whom, we hope, you our Brethren in the Colony of Connecticut, that
Exceed all the rest of New England, for proclaming your Indisposition to the
Order wherein your Churches have so long flourished, will above others attend;
Because it was Rutherford that was against your Thomas Hooker, even that
incomparable Thomas Hooker, who* though he were (with your leave) the greatest
man that ever your Colony saw, yet now the most Raw Youths among you can [O
Times and Manners!] Confute him! Says Rutherford, (and, his Witness is true,)
Grave Beza, Cal^in, Bucer, Bullinger, Melancthon, Bucan, Paraeus, Rivetus,
Sibrandus, Junius, Tre^catius; The Fathers, Cyp^ian, Jerome, Augustine,
Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Theodoret, Theophylact, require^ ALL THINGS to
be done, Consentiente (...), with the PEOPLES Consent Si^s, we would not have
Troubled* you with this H^mane Authority, but only that it is a little Ad
Hominem; and that you may blush a little, when you call your selves
Presbyterians. We readily grant, That the Elders of the Churches, are to be the
Rulers of them; and that it is a gross piece of Morellian, and Brownistical
Anarchy for the Votes of the Brethren to be valid without their Concurrence,
(as the Presbyterianism that runs down Connecticut River has newly taught us!)
and that the Corahism of Brethren taking their Work out of their Hands, is very
offensive to the God of Order. Nevertheless, Is not One Extreme to be shunned
without Running into another? Such Blessed Reformers as Musculus, have shown
us, That Ministerium Christi, et Libertas Ecclesiae non sunt (...). Let those
that so confidently go to Rob the Brethren in our Churches, of their just
Liberties, first Read Parker, and Ames, and Cartwright, yea, Let them first
Read, Beza, and Zanchy, and Whitaker, and Bucer, and Bl^ndel; for our Brethren,
will be content, with what those illustrious Writers have unanswerably
Challenged on their behalf. But that we may do the Young men, Right, they have
yet Read so little, a little more time at some Kiriath-Sepher, would be a
Kindness to them. After all, if we cannot bring Divine Authority, to praeserve
the Liberties of the Brethren in our Churches, 'twill be no Sacrilege to
pillage them away: But either there is Divine Authority for it, or else we have
all this while mistaken the C^mmand given to the Corinthians* If the Brethren
in a Church are to Act, in the Censuring and in the Restoring of those who
belong unto the Church, then the Elders may not therein proceed wholly without
the consent of the Brethren. And, If the Brethren in a Church, are in
Conjunction with the Elders, to judge, who shall be Rejected from the Church,
and who shall be Re admitted, they are to be Judges, who shall be Admitted. But
in both of these Consequences, the Former is True; Therefore the Latter. They
are very unreasonable Folks, that will put us to prove the Consequences. The
Assumptions are plain, from the Command given unto the Corinthians, [1 Cor. 5,
12, 13.] To put away a Wicked Person, and this, as passing a Judgment on him:
And again, [2 Cor. 2.7.] To Forgive that wicked Person, when Repenting of his
Wickedness. Why should not the Brethren of our Churches, pretend unto the same
Liberties and Privileges with the Corinthian Brethren? The Answer given is,
That though we find these Things written to the Brethren, yet none but the
Elders were to do the Things. But this is a most Shuffling Evasion: It Is the
Talk of Loosers: And for the more thorough mortif^^^tion of the Shuffle, it is
Expressly said [2 Cor. 2.6.] It Was done by, THE MANY: now, THE MANY, certainly
are not merely the Elders. But indeed the whole Books, which have been written,
to prove, That Church Government is to be managed, with the consent of the
People, have never yet had any thing like an Answer. And instead of all the
other Unanswerable Arguments, therein brought forth, we will in this place
offer no more than one: the Scriptures of Truth having instructed us, That when
we have proof enough, we should know when we have enough* and not multiply
things, which the Time would fail us to tell. We say then; The Brethren in our
Churches, for the most part, challenge no other Liberties, than what the
Brethren in the Primitive Churches enjoyed for Hundreds of years together. That
man must have l^ss Modesty than a Roman Catholic, who shall Deny This Report;
We will refer such an Immodest man, to such a Roman Catholic, as Du^pin, for
the Castigation of his Anistoresie. We will now thus argue upon it. If the
Brethren in our Churches have not such Liberties as ours do chall^nge, of
Divine Right belonging to them, then the Ravishing of such Liberties, from the
Primitive Churches, after they had been some hundred of years in the possession
of them, was the Reforming of those Churches. But was it so? No sure. That
Reformation, was the Romish Apostasy; and not the first, nor the least Instance
of it. If it was a Reformation, it was one of Antichrists making: though no
doubt, some very Holy men, were Instrumental and Subservient thereunto. But as
Ramus thanked the Cardinal of Lorrain for making him a Protestant, by
suggesting to him, that the further the Church went from the Age of the
Apostles, the further it went from the Golden Age; Thus, to talk of the
Churches being in a more Scriptural and Regular co^^ition, five hundred years
after the Apostles, than they were in one or two Hundred, would be strange
Language for the Mouth of a Protestant. Our beloved F^iend, must Pardon us, if
we tremble at the terrible Judgments of God, when we hear very Holy men,
pressing a Reformation upon our Churches, and when they come to Explain
themselves, What Reformation they mean, telling us in Effect, You must put your
selves out of the condition, wherein the Primitive Churches flourished, (as
well as out of that, wherein you your selves have done so) and put your selves
into the condition, whereinto the Romish Apostasy had sensibly drilled on the
Churches, after the Revolution and Expiration of several Centuries. Alas, Ne
nos ad Tales compellite coetus. We do the rather take notice of This; because
all the molestations hitherto given to the Churches of New England, have much
arisen from unacquaintedness with the Antiquities of the Primitive Churches*
and our Friend particularly, seems a little Shye of advising to repair unto the
State of the Primitive Churches, See Doct of Chs p. 2, 3.
for any Illumination about the meaning of those passages in the New Testament,
relating to Church Order, which he will have to be contested.

Nor are we less concerned, when we find the New Doctrine of Churches, aim at
the very Apple of the Eye of all our Churches, Doct. of Chs. p 7.
by denying the Formation of a Congregational Church, to be by a
Church Covenant, Explicit or Implicit, wherein they bind themselves to walk
together, according to the Order of the Gospel: and adding, [Worse and Worse!]
That there is no Necessity of any such Bond, Ibid. p. 8.
to distinguish one Church from another, and to avoid confusion of Churches;
And, We read of no such particular Covenant in the New Testament, we have no
Precept for it, we have no Precedent for it, -- no Syllable in the Word of God,
intimating any such thing, neither is there any need of it.

And so let the Babes of New England at last come to understand, that the Milk
for Babes, which the Catechism that still generally instructs their Infancy
(and which we suppose this Authors Father did instruct him in) has cheated them
with Poison instead of Milk, when it gives them this Defini^ion of, A Church:
It is a Congregation of Saints joined together, in the Bond of the Covenant, to
Worship the Lord, and Edify one another in all His Holy^Ordinances: And in this
Covenant, according to that Catechism, They give up themselves and their Seed,
first to the Lord, to be His People, and then to the Elders and Brethren of the
Church, to see forward the Wo^ship of God, and their mu^tual Edification These
Essays to Un^teach the Children of New England, the very Principles of their
Catechism, cannot but be afflictive to the Hearts of Religious Parents, that
are afraid of nothing so much as their Childrens departing from the Religion of
their (...): And surely, There are some such Parents yet left among us! If the
Lord had not left us a Remnant of such, What should we have been! -- But let us
a little pause upon this point. Faederata Conjunctio constituet Ecclesiam, was
a Maxim among the Old Presbyterians, but our Young Presbyterians are of another
Opinion. Our Friend gives us another Form of His Church, His, we say, for it
shall not be Ours! The Form of it is, he says, That they are (...) by the
Appointment of God to (...) in One place, in a constant way, for the
Celebration of His Public Worship Then, (...) we, all the Ungodliest Wretches
that call themselves Christians, in the Town, (...) Church Members, even,
whether they (...), or no* And by the way, it is (...), That there are two
points by some (...). One is, that point o^ Tyranny, That the Faithful shall
not have the free choice of their own Pastors; Another is that point of
Corruption, That all Bap^ised People, who dwell together in the same Town,
shall be Compelled to Sit together at the Lords Table. But why must the
Covenant be thus decry'd in our Churches? We never until now, heard of any
Presbyterian Divines, but what granted, That every Particular Church is a
Society of Christians, which even the Law of Nature dictates, to be under an
Implicit Engagement (or Covenant,) of being faithful to the Relations they bear
unto each other. And the Grant is beyond all Contradiction: Where men do not
Implicitly Agree and Engage, to Worship the Lord Jesus Christ* together,
according to his Laws, it is uncontradictably, and uncontroleably certain, they
neither are, nor can be a Church. The Congregational Divines take advantage
from hence to in^er, If an Implicit Covenant be necessary to the Being of a
Particular Church, then an Explicit Covenant, is Expedient, is Profitable, is
Desirable. Yea, they prove that it is a Duty* For we have the Law of Nature,
and the Law of Scripture too, to Dictate thus much unto us, That God must be
Served with our Best: W^ to him that puts the Lord off, with a Defective Thing,
when he has a Better: and we are as certain, as any certainty it self can make
us, That an Explicit Covenant is Better than an Implicit. The sharp Eyed Mr.
Baxter thought there was no Difference between the Presbyterian and the
Congregational on this point, of, The Covenant; and adds, God forbid that any
faithful Minister of Christ, should fight against that which is profitable to
the well being of a Church, merely because the Church without it may have a
Being. Then must we pl^ad for Hunger and Want and Calamitous Diseases, that
Leave us but the Being of men! Alas, that we see now not only the Well being,
but the very Being of our Churches, fought against, under Presbyterian Colors,
but not fairly or truly hung out! The State of the Case in short is this Are
Par^icul^r Chur^hes an Institution of the Lord Jesus Christ or no? If they be,
Are ^here parti^ular Du^^ which the Members of these Chur^^^, owe to their
Elders and one another? These Duties indeed (...) D^ties ^^^posed and enjoined
in the Covenant of Grace. And our Church Covenant is nothing but the Covenant
of Grace, applied unto the Duties and Concerns of Particular Churches. Behold
then, and Answer if you can. If the Lord Commands men to Acknowledge their
obligations unto the Duties of the several Relations, whereinto He brings them,
then the Lord Commands men to Enter into (at least an Implicit)
Church Covenant. For our Church Covenant is nothing else, but an Acknowledgment
of our Obligations unto those Duties which become Incumbent on us, as Related
unto such or such a Church of His: No man that knows any thing, ever took it
for any other. But no man will dare to deny, that the Lord Commands men to
acknowl^dge their Obligations unto the Duties of their several Relations. And
^hen we presently gain what we Asked for, That we should make this
Ackn^wledgment, as Explicit, as there is any occasion that it should be; and
there is no Transaction under Heaven, in which there is more occasion that such
an Acknowledgment should be Explicit, than that of Gathering a Church for the
Lord Jesus Christ. And though the hazard of having the Word misconstrued, among
malignant Enemies, might make the Apostles forbear using the word, Covenant,
yet, If you will please to consult the New Testament in its Greek Original, you will
find, the First Christian Church, [Act. 2.42.] Joined and cleaved together;
which how they could, without mutual Promises to each other, let any Rational
Thing imagine if he can! We need not insist on the practice of the Primitive,
and the Reformed Churches, to Vindicate what is practiced by the Churches of
New England, in their Church Covenant: They shall be Vindicated by Mr. Solomon
Stoddard. For, not only, says he, Doct of Chs. p. 6.
A Church is a Body Corporate: We are sure then, A Church is a Body Covenanted:
Form a Corporation, if you can, without a Covenant: But, anon, To keep clear of
an O^cumenical Church, Ibid. p. 28.
lest we should say, that according to him, The Angelicane Church and the
Ga^licane Church are one, (which some are dri^ing a^,) he repli^s, No, because
that several Christian Nations, though they are in the same ^pecifical
Covenant, yet they are not in the same Individual Covenant. Now, Sir, by your
Favor, a National Church, is a Particular Church, in respect of the Church
Universal. You now tell us, That which makes the Distinction between one such
Particular Church, and another, is, Their not having the Same Individual
Covenant, though they have the Same Specifical Covenant. Why then did you tell
us, Twenty pages before, There is no necessity of any such* B^nd to distinguish
one Church from another: when it is this Bond that makes the Distinction? Behold,
How Autor^m seriunt tela retorta suum. Dear Sir, Why should you Tempt men, to
R^proach one of the most Serious, and Solemn, and ^awful Actions, that is ever
done in the Churches of the Lord, as being A Need^ess Thing, and so (for if it
be a Needless Thing, it must be so!) A taking of the Name of the Lord in vain!
And When the Ministers of God throughout the Land, are toyling Day and Night,
with (...) to bring their Hearers under the Bond of the Covenant, that God may
be gl^rified in their Professed Subj^ction to His Glorious Gospel, Why, Sir,
Why should you go to Evacuate ^o important a Scope of their Ministry? We are
verily persuaded, that you are dear to Heaven as well as to Us, (and therefore
to Us!) and that the Lord Jesus Christ has a Crown in Heaven for you: and that
He has invested you with that Righteousness of His, whereon His C^urches do
thank^ully Enjoy your worthy and your prin^ed Labors: But we are also
persuaded, that your Entrance into the Kingdom, would be the mo^e Abundant, if
you would make to the Churches of the Lord, some Reparation* for the Damages,
that your Invasi^ns upon their Holy Discipline, are like to do unto them.

We Leave it. But we must in the Last place declare, (though perhaps we shall
say Least concerning i^,) That in the New Doctrine of Churches, the thing at
which we are most concerned, is, that perilous Paradox; That men may and ought
to come unto the Lords Supper, Doct. of Chs. p. 21.
though they know themselves to be in a Natural Condition: Ibid. p. 22.
And That the Lords Supper is Instituted to be a means of Regeneration: And,
That they who are not Saints, do not profane the Ordinance. The Churches of New
England had hitherto held fast the sound Words, with which such Holy
Presbyterians, as Gelapsy, and Baxter, and Dyke and others had instructed them.
They durst not shut themselves out, from the Union with the Presbyterians in
London, whereof this is one Article, None shall be Admitted as Members in order
to Communion in all the Spceial Ordinances of the Gospel, but such as to a
Judgment regulated by the Word of God, are persons of visible Godliness and
Honesty* credibly professing cordial subjection to Jesus Christ. They have Read
also a famous Writer of the Congregational Way giving this Acc^unt of i^; She
does not judge it any way conducing toward the Quickening of those who are dead
in Trespasses and Sins to put them in conceit that they are Living Stones, by
putting them into the building of the Spiritual Temple of God; nor does She
willingly suffer any man to eat and drink damnation to himself, to further him
in his Salvation. That Popish Fancy (Espous^d also by some of the more popishly
disposed Lutherans,) That the Lords Supper is Appointed for a mean of bringing
the Unregenerate home unto God, has been from the beginning Exploded in the
Churches of New England. They have taken it, for an Upstart Noti^n, (as Mr.
Vines calls it) and (with him) wondered that any man should stand up in the
Defense of it, since there is an Army to a man against them. It would not have
been imagined, That when the Twenty ninth Article of the Church of England
says, That in the use of the Lords Supper, such as are void of a Lively Faith,
to their Condemnation Eat and Drink the Sign and Sacrament of the Body and
Blood of Christ: And when the Common Prayer Book of the Church of England says,
That in no wise men should come but in the Marriage Garment, Let him not come
to the Holy Table, but let him truly Repent of his sins past, and have a Lively
Faith in our Savior Christ; there should now arise Divines in the Churches of
New England, that should preach this Doctrine to us: Though you know that you
never did Repent of Sin and never did Believe on Christ; Yet come to the Table
of the Lord: Fear not; You may as well come to a Sacrament as to a Sermon.
Though you know your selves to be Enemies of God, and impenitent Haters of what
is Holy and Just and Good, yet Eat O Friends, Drink abundantly, O Beloved. This
Chills with a sort of Consternation, the Hearts of almost all that have any
Fear of God in them, from one end of the Land unto the other. Yea, 'twere
enough to make the Land shake four hundred Pars^e. One th^^ was Famous for
building the Churches of New England, and indeed a Master Builder, in them,
wrote a Book, Entitled, The Holiness of Church Members. But in the next
Generation, there come those who break down the Carved Work thereof, and among
the Axes and Hammers therein Employed, One is a Book, the Title whereof might
be, The Unh^liness or Hypocrisy of Church Members. Possibly, that which may
have betrayed our Friend into these Hallucinations, is, a peculiar Exactness in
his Thoug^ts about a Work of Regeneration. In the Experience of his own
Religious and Regenerate Soul, there may have been such and such notable
Operations of the Holy Spirit upon his mind; and it is natural for such good
men, to make their own Experience a Rule for others. If others have not
perceived all the same Operations, in the ^ame Measure, and in the same Order,
with themselves, their trembling Apprehensions of Gods Righteousness, and of
Man's Deceitfulness, not making a due Allowance for the Variety used in the Way
^f the Spirit, cause them to fear that such are not yet Regenerate. Hence
according to the Judgment of Severity, passed by these Eminent Christians,
there will not be in a whole Town, Regenerate Persons enough, to make a Church
where a Judgment of Charity* would find a considerable Number. [And yet, by the
way, we know not how it comes to pass, that there is one Time in the Month,
wherein Severity strangely Vails to Charity; and concerning those Persons, to
whom the Apostle Peter says, Act. 2 23. Ye have taken Jesus, and by wicked
Hands have Crucified and Slain Him, We must be expressly told, They might be
Godly (...) Now, Doct. of Chs. p. 21
to avoid this E^^umbance, the Regeneration of Communicants must not be
Enquired after, no, not so much as by themselves, in order to their
Communicating. Our Friend finds himself under a Necessity to grant, That a
Church must be a Society of Saints; Doct. of Chs. p 5
but now, lest known Sinners then should be kept out of the Church, and lest it
should be said unto the Wicked, What have thou to do, that thou should take
the Covenant of God into thy mouth, it is provided, That we must not look upon
those only to be Visible Saints, Ibid. p. 6.
who make a profession of the true Religion, joined with an Holy Conversation.
Yea, it is provided, That a person lying under Scandalous Offense and under
censure for his Offense, Ibid. p. 23.
is not deprived of visible Saintship. And yet, such Inconsistences does the
Truth compel our Friend unto, [Tis the Revenge of Truth upon him, for striking
at it!] That when he comes to tell us, Who are the Visible Saints, that are to
be Admitted unto the Lords Supper, he lets ^^all these words, which do at once
give up all: Such a Profession, as being sincere, makes a man a Real Saint,
being morally sincere, makes a man a Visible Saint. Behold, a Concession of all
that we ask for! Haec verba loquentis ab Ore -- Gaudens arripio. First, A man
that would be Admitted unto the Lords Supper* must make a profession of Real
Sanctity: He is not a Visible Saint, Except he make a profession of That, which
if it be Really in him, would render him, a Real Saint: But by a Real Saint, we
can understand no other, than One, that has Really Repented of Sin, and
Believed on Christ, and Obeyed the calls of the Gospel from his heart.
Secondly, This profession of Real Sanctity, must be morally Sincere, or else
the man is not so much as a Visible Saint. But now, a man's profession of being
a Real Saint, cannot be morally Sincere to himself, while he knows it himself to
be False, or knows himself to be Unsanctifi^d Nor d^es the man's profession
appear morally Sincere, unto them that are to Try it, while they can convict
him of the Falsehood in it, and of his being Unsanctified, either by being
unable to give any Tolerable Account of any Impressions from the Grace of God
upon him or by being Ungodly in the course of his Conversati^n* What need we
now go any further? The Tree has it sel^ lent us an Helve to the Ax, that cuts
all down by the Roots. But that we man Cut Home, we need only say; Is the
Lords Supper a Seal of the New Covenant, or no? If it be, Let this Argument
come out of it. Either a Saving Faith is requisite unto Worthy Partaking at the
Table of the Lord, (so requisite, that without probable Hopes of it, it is a
Presumption to approach that Holy Table, or else a man that knows himself to be
an Unbeliever* may venture to come, while he knows himself to be so. But now,
That a man who knows himself to be an Unbeliever, may not come unto the Holy
Table, is thus Evinced. A man may not Receive the Seal of the Covenant, while
he does Reject the Covenant it self. But an Unregenerate, and an Unbeliever
does Reject the Covenant of God, and of Life. It Is a most unreasonable, a most
preposterous, Imagination, that a man who continues in Rebellion against the
Covenant of God, should have that Covenant Seal^d unto him. If a man Refuse all
the very Great and Precious Promises of the Covenant, why should his Interest
in those Promises be Sealed unto him with a Sacrament? But a man who does not
Refuse the Covenant, and the Prom^ses of it, that man is a true Believer: he
that accepts the Proposals of the New Covenant, is a Regenerate man. But one
word more. Is the Lords Supper to be praeceded with a Self Examination, or no?
I^ it be, Let this Argument be put into the Scale. If a man may not come to the
Table of the Lord, until he have Examined himself whether he shall be a Worthy
Receiver, Then a man who knows himself incapable of being a Worthy Receiver,
may not yet come unto that Holy Table. What is the Scope of the Self
Examination, that must go before coming to the Holy Table, but for a man to see
whether he can yet come Worthily, and not come till he have by due Prayers, and
Pains, made Experiment, whether the Lord has helped him to do those things,
that must be done before he come? This is a thing so plain, that we are put
upon helping our Charity with any Sort of Spectacles, to Think, that any man
will Dispute it, any otherwise than merely for Disputation sake And indeed,
they that understand Greek, need not be told, that when it is said, 1 Cor. 11.28
Let a man Examine himself; an Examination even to Approbation is called for.
But now, a man that knows himself to be still Unregenerate, and Unrepentant,
knows that while such, he cannot be a Worthy R^ceiver at the Table of the Lord.
For, deal Sincerely; He that Receives the Bread and the Wine, in the Eucharist,
but Receives not the CHRIST, Exhibited therein, is he a Worthy Receiver* But an
Unrenewed Mind, cannot Receive a CHRIST: A CHRIST is Received by none, but
those whose Mind is Renewed by the Holy Ghost: Such an one is a Regerate man.
The only thing here that some cannot get over, is This; Then they, who don't
know themselves to be Saints, don't know* that it is Lawful for them to
partake, and so far as a man has any Scruples about his Saintship, he must
proportionably have Scruples about the Lawfulness of his participation. In
short, As a certain Manuscript, which Walks about, [the Author whereof, we know
not, only we know, it was not our Excellent MITCHEL, One of the bravest men
that ever our College bred, and one in the History of whose Life, there is an
Eternal Confutation of all the Pamphlets, that have been casting Fire into our
Churches.] intimates it, He can^t Eat in Faith, and so it is Sin. But any Child
may easily get over it. It is the Command of the Lord Jesus Christ, that His
Disciples do Celebrate the Holy Supper; as it was* for the Israelites, to
Celebrate the P^sseover. They can have no Doubt about this Command; they must
be so far from Questioning the Lawfulness of Celebrating the Holy Supper, that
they must own it a Duty. Now, the Passover might not be Celebrated in an
House* that had any Leaven in it. Well, but it was not necessary, the People
should infallibly know that there was no Leaven in the House; it was only
necessary that they should Search the House, and that upon and after a due
Search, there should be no Leaven that they knew of; they should not Know, that
the Leaven was yet unremoved. Thus in the Lords Supper: The Heart must be
Searched, whether the Leaven of Unregeneracy, or Original Sin in the whole
Reign of it, and Reigning Lust, be yet unremoved. Though we don't infallibly
know, That the Leaven of an Unregenerate Mind, is Removed from our Heart, yet
we must come to the Lords Supper, because of the Command for it; We must yield
Obedience to the Command as well as we can, and we do not know of any Bar to
our Immediate Obedience. But if we do know that the Leaven is yet wholly
unremoved, th^n we have something else to do, before we may dare to Celebrate
our Passover. Briefly, A probable Hope of Regeneration, is enough to Embolden
our coming to the Holy Table, as we are commanded: Yea, to come though we may
have many Doubts and Fears upon us: for while we have that probable Hope, we do
not know, of any thing, that should Hinder us. Wide is the Difference between a
man's knowing himself to be in the Bond of Iniquity, and a man's not infallibly
knowing himself to be Regenerate, and yet having a probable Hope of it. We
would not for Ten Worlds, run the Hazard of bringing the Blood of so many Souls
upon our Heads, as we might, if we should bid men in their Known Unregeneracy
to come unto the Tremendous Mysteries, which in the Early Days of the Church,
were thought fit, as Origin assures us, for none but Souls Exquisitely
Searched. We cannot forget the words of Luther. If I were to call for a Curse
upon my greatest Enemies, it should be This: Let them go hear the Word of God,
and then Despise it, and Reject it; So, Let them hasten to the Table of the
Lord, and hereby they shall Seal the Stone upon their Grave, and have DAMNATION
Written in great Characters upon their Foreheads. We call to mind, That the
Communicants of the Church in Phillippi, were those, of whom the Apostle could
say, Phil. 1.6, 7. God has begun a good work in you, It is meet for me to
Think this of you all. (And all the Epistles have passages of like importance.)
Accordingly, We would have our Commucants to be such, that upon Examination, It
may be meet for us to think of them all, that God has begun a Good Work in
them, which He will Finish. And when we find our Friends answer, That the
Communicants might be such, when the Apostles wrote, but they were not such
when they first became Communicants, we can scarce imagine, that they
themselves really take it for an Answer: it is a forlorn cause, that must fly to
such an Answer. That the Lords Supper, is not Appointed for the Ordinary means
of Working the First Grace in Unregenerate Men, but for the Confirming and
Strengthening of Grace in the Regenerate, We need not go to prove, till they
that are Undermining our Churches, can show a proof of such an App^intment. We
can tell where (...) said, It comes by Hearing: Let them tell where it is said,
It comes by the Sacrament ^^vertheless, one of us, was (...) of more than
Twenty pages, to maintain the Present Truth, concerning the Importance of
probable Regeneration, as a Qualification for the Subjects of Sacraments, in a
Treatise Entitled, A Companion for Communicants. Our Friend has not counted so
much as One Reason of the many there offered, worthy of the Least Answer: but
then, we request the Readers, to compare the Doctrine of this our Friend, with
the Doctrine and Reason, of the Excellent Charnock, in a whole Sermon which
does Refel it unanswerably and Irrefragably. In the mean time, we shall envy to
no man, the Consolation, (Alas, a sad one!) of having done what he can, that
persons, in order to their being Admitted unto the Lords Table, shall not be
asked by their Pastors, no, nor by themselves neither, Whether they have ever
given themselves unto the Lord Jesus Christ: or having done what he can to
prove, That such vile Hypocrisy, as for a man to put on the Face of Religion,
when he knows his Heart neither has nor Likes Religion, is the Qualification
of One that is to abide in the Tabernacle of the Lord, and to dwell in His Holy
Hill: and that an Histrionical Faith is enough to Qu^^ifie one, for the Seals
of Pardon and Glory. These few things, we thought proper to Write, on the
occasion of our having so Good Company as our Honored QUICK, for what we
Write. We are not insensible, to what Reproaches, and Invectives, we Expose our
selves, by our Freedom, in thus Defending the Churches; for Grievous Revolts
must be carried on with Slanders. And when the New modellers of our Churches
can make no other hard Character stick upon us, they will industriously
characterize us about the Country, as Humoursome men, who if they cannot have
their own little Humors gratified, will make a deal of Disturbance. But, be it
known to you, O ye Churches of the Lord; Although we are our selves for the
Congregational Church Discipline, yet we never do appear with open Expressions
of Dissatisfaction, but at those Innovations irregularly started among us,
which the Writings of the Reforming Presbyterians Beyond Sea, have
discountenanc^d. And we have pressed no Singular Opinions of our own, as all
that ^ry up and push on the Innovations (...) have pleaded far (...) have been
the Decisions, and the Directions left us by the General Councils, of all our
Churches. Nor have we made any Disturbance; Except men will be Disturbed, when
they are but Lovingly Advised of Aberrations; for we ask the Rebukes of our
Neighbors, when ever they find us forget that Rule, Being Reviled, we Bless;
Being Defamed, we Entreat. And that which necessitates our Doing what we have
Done, is our considering, That we are set for the Defense, as of the Faith, so
of the Order of the Gospel* Nor are we without Praesages, that when the Order
of the Gospel is gone from among us, the Faith will soon go after it. For we
daily see one point going after another, and such a slothfulness, and
sleepiness and cowardice upon those that should be m^re Fai^h^ul to the
Evangelical Inter^sts, and should appear more vigorously to stop the Torren^,
as no Good Account can be given for. Yea, we see those Churches that (...)
themselv^s as being most Eminent for praeserving the (...) of their Evangelical
Principles, ha^dly (...) pres^^ve themselves from the (...), which almost all
the Reformed Churches in the World have prohibited. If a Backsliding Generation
do thus, While we are yet Alive, what will they do, a few years hence? We may
perhaps, a little altering the words with which the Roman Orator begins one of
his Orations, conclude, Nemo his Annis Viginti Ecclesiarum Hostis fuerit, qui
non Bellum eodem Tempore nobis quoque en dixerit. But if our Watchfulness and
Faithfulness to the Churches of New England, bring all the raging Obloquy
imaginable upon us, We humbly hope, That the Lord, who Walks in the midst of
His Golden Candlesticks, and Who knows our Works, and our Labor, will still
help us unfaintingly to Labor for His Names Sake, and for His Churches: And it
will turn unto us for a Testimony.

Increase Mather. Cotton Mather.


Advertisement.
LET not the Churches imagine, That their Pastors, have generally deserted
their Principles. The Principles which rendered these Churches famous in the
former Generation, are not all Dead, with the Brave men of that Generation. The
Doctrine about the Examination, and Qualification of Communicants at the Holy
Table, is yet Alive in the Country, and will out live all the Stabs that are
daily given unto it. When unhappy Pamphlets, decrying the necessity of men's
coming with Repentance, and Faith and Love, in their Hearts to the Holy Table,
are zealously dispersed and Defended in the Country, it is a vain thing to
flatter us, that there is no Apostasy, carrying us away from our first
Foundations: For the Apostasy of the Young men is very great before the Lord;
Yea, it cries aloud unto the Reforming Presbyterians a thousand Leagues off, to
come in for our Help against it. If things go on, the Holy Writings of Dyke,
and Vines, and Gouge, and Roberts, and of Doolittel, and others, which have
been blessed for the making of so many Christians in America, must be hissed
back to Europe again. But the Pious Doolittel's Book about the Lords Supper,
(as well as the rest) will be still Read and Prized in the Churches of New
England, notwithstanding the Attempts of some Late Papers, to render it an
Erroneous Piece. Many Hundreds thereof are Sold among us; and it is at this
very time Reprinting in Boston. The Holy Quicks Treatise will have the like
Reception. Those Ministers that have, as it were accidentally had the
opportunity to peruse it, have gladly Signed their Testimony unto it, and unto
the Design of it. That no more have Signed it, is because they have not yet
Seen it, or had the like opportunity: For they are not all afraid of apearing
faithfully to warn the Churches of their Dangers; these Eight, are not the only
Ministers that have their Hearts in the Ensuing Attestation. Let those that
cannot concur to the Reverend Quicks Divinity, be content that our Churches will
first see the Reforming Presbyterians beyond Sea-part with it, before They be
deluded (...) it.

An Attestation.
UNderstanding, that some well-esteemed Persons, are intending to Reprint in
and for this Country, a Savoury Treatise, about A Claim to the Lords Supper,
Some time ago Published in London, by the Reverend Mr. John Quick* a Worthy
Divine, of the Presbyterian Persuasion in that City; We, that have seen the
Treatise, do much Approve of, and Rejoice in, a Second Impression of it:
concurring to the Substance, End and Scope thereof.

And We are the rather induced hereunto, because that under the Umbrage of the
Name of Presbyterians whom we most Highly Value and Honor, as our United
Brethren, there are some, who endeavor to-bring in among us, thos^
^nnovations, which would be as R^in ^s to our Churches, as they are Cont^ary to
the Doctrine and Spirit of such Presbyterians, as the Excellent Author of the
Little Book now before us.

Among the Endeavors, to U^^inge our Churches, whereof we have ca^se to
complain, a Special Mark belongs to those of a late Treatise, Entitled, The
Doctrine of Instituted Churches. And we judge it needful that a Testimony
should be born against the Unhappy Novelties therein assaulting the State of
our Churches; and that the Rising Generation be warned against that Declension
from the Order of the Gospel in the Churches, which it is the Tendency of such
Writings to betray them into.

John Higginson William Hubbard Zechariah Symmes Sen. Samuel Cheever Nicholas
Noyes Jeremiah Shep^rd Joseph Gerrish Edw^rd P^ison.


The PREFACE. TO THE Baptized Youth Come unto Years of Discretion; AND Capable
of Examining themselves. The best Blessings!
THE Prodigal demanded of his Father, That he would give him the Por^i^n of his
Goods, which upon a Dividend would fall unto him b^ h^s Death. This rash,
unthinking Young Man would have his Portion in hand, Livery and Sei^in of his
Estate, before he was in age capable to manage and improve it. Should many
young Persons have their wills, they would have God's best things at their own
disposal, that is, to be profaned, and profanely used, to be squandred away and
misspent upon their Lusts and Debaucheries.

But soft and fair, Sirs! Holy things are for holy Persons. Dogs must not have,
for all their greedy craving, the Childrens Bread; nor unsanctified Youth,
though they express eager desi^es for it, the Lord's most holy Supper. God
ordered a Boundary to the sacred Mount, and there be Rayls affixed even by
Christ himself round about his holy Table. There was this Inscription over the
Temple gate, Let no Foreigner enter here. Christ's holy Supper is not for all
Comers and Goers His Church is neither an Inn nor a Prison; not an Inn, where
the worst are to be admitted to all privileges, let them be never so vile and
irreligious, as well as the best* Not a P^ison, into which Men and W^men shall
be driven and enforced, and others kept and detain^d by the same violence.

All that are Baptiz^d, have no more a right to the blessed Sacrament of the
Eucharist, than all Circumcised Israelites ha^ unto the Passover; unl^^s these
were ceremonially clean, they were to be excluded.

But yet as the Priests and Levites under the Law were to put a difference
between the Clean and the Unclean; and the Door keepers in God's House were to
keep out the latter, till they were purified, from participation of the
Sacrifices; and that they were to sanctify themselves and their Brethren, and
so to eat the Lord's Passover: Even so by parity of reason should Pasto^s of
Churches, Helps in Government, and all Chu^ch-Officers, be assistant to them in
sanctifying and p^eparing the incomplete and unfit Church Member for this
heavenly Banquet And did they more conscientiously discharge this their
particular Duty, the Lord's Table would be more fu^nisht with Guests, and those
of better quality, and better qualified.

However, blessed be his Holy Name, tha^ the^e be yet any, and that this heap
of Wheat is set about with some Lillies; and that when the King comes to visit
hi^ Guests, they be not all without the Wedding Garment, but that the Graces of
many Communicants, like Spikenard, send forth a pleasan^ smell!

That the lea^t of Christ, and of all true Christians may be refreshed and
revived with those sweet Odours from Communicating Saints, is the desire and
prayer of all that love the Lord Jesus in sincerity; and that the Rising
Generation, our hopeful Youth, may be assisted and encouraged herein, must be
the design and endeavor of all his Ministers. O! how comfortable is it to see
our Youth looking after God and Heaven, and securing the Salvation of their
Souls early and betimes; and to be enquiring the way to Zion with their hearts
and faces thitherward! I have no g^eater joy than to see my Children walking in
the truth. It has drawn Tears of Joy from some Godly Ministers, to see the
holy seriousness, zeal and forwardness in Religion of some young Christians. O!
their first love to God, how wa^m, strong and lively is it? Would they but keep
up these holy Affections in their power and vigor, what singular Blessings to
the Church, whereof they be Members, and to the Land of their Nativity, would
these be? Happy shall we be if our Sons be as Plants, Plants of Righteousness
of God's own planting, grown up in their youth; and our Daughters as
corner-stones polished into the similitude of a Palace for God to dwell in!

Come my dear Youths, and help fill up my Joys! Labans Daughters that were
married unto Jacob, asked him, whether there was any Portion or Inheritance for
them in their Father's House? You are married unto Christ: He espoused you unto
himself in Baptism; he purchased you, as the Custom of the East was and is, to
be his Bride, but the price was his own Blood. Though in your natural Father's
House, the old Adam, you have no Portion, none Inheri^ance, but Sin and Curse,
Death and Wrath; yet in the House of the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven,
there is a most worthy Portion, a double Portion for you, Grace and Glory;
there be Purchases and Promises, there be Blessings for evermore.

O, don't stand in your own Light, nor refuse your own Happiness! Come, put in
your Claim to them, and demand it as your Right and Due from ^he Pastors of
Churches, that these glorious favors and p^iviledges may be sealed to you in
this Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper. They cannot, they will not r^ject
you, provided you come in God's way, and don't bar your own Claim by your Sins
and Unworthiness; but resolve through Grace, to make good, fulfill and
accomplish your Baptismal Vow. You be of years and capacity to do it. The Lord
waits for the performance of it. Yield then your selves now up unto God; become
by a renewed, solemn, sincere, serious and hearty Stipulation with him his
Covenan^ Servants; take up his easy golden Yoke; wear his Badge and Livery,
true Holiness; subject your selves willingly unto Church Discipline; fill up
all your Relations and Employments with Grace; answer fully to the Demands of
all Duty; count Subjection unto the Scepter of Christ's House your Dignity,
Liberty and Fe^icity: You are never free, nor will you be truly free and happy
till then.

THE Young Man's Claim UNTO THE SACRAMENT OF THE Lord's Supper.
1. Quest. WHY do you now present your self before God and this Assembly?

Answ. I come to profess my Faith and Hope in God, and to testify that I take
upon me the performance of my Baptismal Vow, and humbly crave admission unto
the Lord's most holy Table, as my right and privilege. Psalm 22.22, 23, 25.
Exodus 12.43, 49.

2. Q. Have you then a right and privilege to Communicate at the Lord's Table?

A. Yes.

3. Q. Produce and prove your claim.

A. I lay claim to it, 1. Because I am a baptized Person, adult, and come to
years of discretion, capable of examining my self, able, and in some measure,
through Grace, willing to perform the preparatory Duties to it, the Concomitant
ones in it, and the Consequential after it. Exodus 12.43, 49. 1 Cor. 11.28.
Psalm. 110.3. and 119.32.

4. Q. Have you any other Title to this most holy Sacrament?

A. 2. Yes, this in the second place, That I need Grace infinitely, and in this
holy Sacrament the Lord does offer it unto the needy, hungry, thirsty Souls
freely, and will communicate it most abundantly. Rev. 3.17, 18. 1 Cor. 10.16. 1
Cor. 11.24, 25, 26.

5 Q. What are your wants that must be supplied?

A. I want Grace of all kinds, and in all degrees; strength of Grace, the
supports and comforts of Grace: unless I have these (and they be to be had in
the Lord's Supper) I shall suffer very much in my (...) Soul. Rev. 2.17, 18.
Levit. 13.45. Luke 15.17. and 18.13.

6. Q. What are those particular Graces you would more especially receive, and
be growing in by your Participation of the Lord's Supper?

A I find my Faith weak, and that must be strengthened; my Repentance flat and
dull^ and that must be revived and exercised; my Hopes, Love and Desires mean
and low, and they must be r^ised up and inflamed; my ability for Duty is poor
and small, and this must be heightened and augmented; my Sins many, and they
must be pardoned; my Corruptions and Temptations powerful, and they must be
mortified and subdued. I want assurance of God's Love and Grace to persevere
unto the end; all which our blessed Savior offers and tenders, and would seal
in this heavenly Banquet unto worthy Communicants. Luke 17.5. Ezekiel. 36.25, 26.
Psalm. 62.1, 5* 7. Cant. 7.12. Isa 26.8. Joh. 15.5. Gal 6.3. Psalm. 25.11. Mich,
7.19. Psalm. 4.6, 7. and 90. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Math. 26.28.

7. Q. What are your thoughts and sense of Sin?

A. Ah! Sir, I find and feel it by most woeful Experience to be the worst of
Evils. Sin indwelling in me, the Sin of my Nature has horribly defiled me,
alienated me from God and all good, robbed me of his Image my glory, wounded me
in all my faculties and powers, rendered me altogether useless and unprofitable,
produces innumerable actual Sins in my heart and thoughts, words* and life,
with and against my will and consent, made me a Slave of the Devil, and exposed
me to the curse and wrath of God for ever. Psalm 38.1. to 11. Eccles. 1.29. Isai
1, 6. Jer. 13.23. Hos. 4 12. Zach. 11.8. Luke 10.30. Romans 3.12. Joh 14 4. Romans
7.14, to 24. Psalm. 26.11. and 130.8. Deuteronomy. 27. ult.

8. Q. Since you are so miserable through Sin, what course do and will you take
to alter and better your condition?

A. I run to Jesus Christ, God made Man, who loved poor Sinners, and died for
them; who being Immanuel, is able and willing to save even to the uttermost all
Sinners, that come unto God through him: besides he calling and inviting the
weary and the heavy laden to come unto him, and promising, that such as come,
he will in no wise cast out; and he being to be had and found, received and
embraced in this Holy Sacrament, I therefore desire to be admitted to it, that
therein I may meet with the Lord Jesus, receive him and all his Benefits to the
Comfort and Salvation of my poor Soul. Matthew. 11.28. Heb. 7 25. Joh. 6.37. Isa.
45.22.

9. Q But will Jesus Christ save you from Sin and Hell?

A. Yes, I hope through Grace; (though the good Lord help my Unbelief!) that he
will.

For 1, I close with him now this very instant, and profess in the presence of
God, and of his holy Angels that I have done it already, as I do now again once
more with all the seriousness and sincerity of my Soul, close with him in all
his Offices.

I take him for my only High Priest to satisfy God's Justice for mine offenses
by the Sacrifice of his Death, and to be my Advocate, and to make Intercession
for me.

I take him as my Prophet, to reveal all the Counsels of God to me for my
Salvation, which he does by his holy Word and Spirit.

I do also close with him as my Lord and King; not only to defend me, and to
subdue my Soul's Enemies under me, but to rule and govern me by his good, holy
and righteous Laws recorded in the Scriptures of Truth. Psalm. 110.4 Isa. 53.4,
5, 6. 1 John 2.1, 2. Heb 7.22, 25. Deuteronomy 18.15, to 20. Psalm. 73.24. Psalm. 44.4.
Isa. 33.22.

10. Q. Why else do you Hope that the Lord Jesus will be your Savior?

A. 2. Because as I close with him in all his Offices, so I do also in all his
Ordinances. I desire and res^lve, Grace enabling me, to walk with him in all
his ways public and private. (...) 1.6 Psalm. 119.4, 5, 6, 8.

(...) also as with his Crown, (...) and according to that grand and first duty
of the Gospel, to deny my whole self whenever it comes in competition with his
Glory, resolving to part with Name and Fame, Liberty and Livelihood, (...) and
Relations, Estate, Limbs, and Life it self, rather than with Christ Jesus. I
shall also through the aids of Divine Grace take up my Cross daily and follow
him whither soever he goes, though it may be into the greatest and sorest
t^^ubles here below. Matthew. 16.4. Luke 14 6, to 23.

11. Q. Have you any other ground to hope for Salvation through Christ?

A. 4. Yes, I was dead in Sins, and Trespasses, and he quickened me; blind in
spiritual Matters, and he enlightened me: I was lost, and he found me; a Rebel
against God, and he has converted me. He first convinced me of my woeful estate
of sin and misery, h^mbling me for all mine iniquities, original, habitual and
actual, of Omission and Commission, for my own and my other Men's sins; and
then by the power of his Holy Spirit, alienated my Heart and Affections from
them, and implanted me into himself unto newness of Life. Ephesians. 2.1, 2. Luke
15.32. Psalm. 23 3. Jer. 32.18* John 16 8, to 11. Rev. 6.17, 22. and 8.2, 5, 9

5. I seek only for Wisdom, Righteousness, Holiness and Redemption through him.
He is my Sun and Shield, he will give me Grace and Glory; and being upright
before him, I shall never want any thing that is good for me. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Psalm. 84 10.

12. Q. But have you no righteousness of your own, whereby to be just^fied
before God?

A. No Mine, the very best of it is but Wretched Rags and filthy Clouts. I come
short in every duty of God's glory; and when I have done my best, I am but an
unprofitable Servant. Jehove T^idkenu, Christ Jesus, he only is my
Righteousness. By the Merits of his Obedience active and passive I only believe
and expect to be justified, pardoned, adopted, reconcil^d and saved. Isa 64 6
Romans 3 3. Luke 18.10 Jer. 23.6. Gal 2.15, 16 Acts 15.11. John 1.12. Ephesians.
2.13, 14.

13. Q. But why ^ust the Lord Christ be your All for Righteousness and Life?

A. Because I cannot be saved by the terms of the First Covenant, the Covenant
of Works; but by those of the Second the Covenant of Grace. Romans 3.20.

14. Q. What is the difference betwixt the two Covenants?

A. The Covenant of Works requires doing, but the Covenant of Grace, believing:
The Covenant of Works, personal Obedience, and inherent Righteousness; but the
Covenant of Grace, Righteousness imputed. The Covenant of Works requires
complete, perfect and universal Obedience; but the Covenant of Grace accepts of
sincere and cordial. The Covenant of Works requires Duty, but gives no ability
to perform; but the Covenant of Grace gives strength for all services and
performances. Levit. 18.4, 5. Acts 16.30, 31. Romans 10.4, 5. Heb. 7.22. Gal.
3.10* Prove. 23.26. Phil. 2.12, 13.

15. Q. What other difference is there between the two Covenants?

A. This, That the Covenant of Works makes us to serve God unwillingly, and to
sin the more, and drives Souls under it ^o despair; but the Covenant of Grace
engages us to serve God cheerfully and delightfully, and fills the Soul with
holy Joys. Lastly, The Covenant of Grace has a Mediator, even the Lord Jesus
Christ; but the Covenant of Works none. Romans 8.15. Psalm. 119.108. Heb. 12.24. 1 Timothy 2.5.

16. Q. Under which of these Covenants are you?

A. Blessed be everlasting Love for visiting me with his tender Mercies in the
dayspring from on high! and drawing me out of my deplorable estate of Nature!
and striking me off from all my false Rests, Pharisaical and legal
Righteousness! and bringing me into the Bond of the Everlasting Covenant of
Grace! and engaging me to depend and roll my Soul upon the Lord Jesus for all
spiritual and saving Blessings: So that though I am (...) in my self, yet I
live by Christ; though accursed in my self, yet am I blessed in Christ Jesus* I
am nothing, have nothing, and can do nothing; but Christ is my All, and All in
all. Grace! Grace! Glory be to God for the Unsearchable riches of his Free
Grace! Psalm. 40.2, 3, 4, 5. Col. 2.11. Zech. 4.7. 2 Cor. 9.15.

17. Q. What other Claim have you (...) the Lord's Table?

A. The express Call, Command and Summons of God by his Word, Ministers and
Spirit, which I read in the Holy Bible, and hear published in the Churches, and
are perpetually inculcated and sounding in my Ears, Heart and Conscience; so
that I cannot without sinning against God, grieving of his Spirit, contempt of
his Grace, scorn to his Word, Ministers and Saints, (whose Communion is highly
to be valued) and without offering irreparable wrong to my own Soul, I cannon
omit and refrain coming unto the Lord's Tab^^* Mat. 22.3. Rev. 22.17. Numb.
9.13.

^^ Q What must you do before you (...) the Lord's Table?

A I must ea^ly in the Evening of the last day of the week sequester my self
from the Wo^ld, and by se^i^us Self-Reflections and Examination, by reading and
meditation, and by fervent* importunate Prayers, fit and prepare my Soul for
this most Holy Sacrament, 1 Cor. 11.28.

19. Q. How will you Examine your self?

A. 1. I will see the face and state of my Soul in the infallible Glass of
God's Word. To this purpose I shall set be^fore me a Catalogue of Sins and
Duties, Sins forbidden, and Duties commanded in the Decalogue, and then
seriously ask of my Soul, whether I am guilty of Omissions and Commissions or
not. Job 13 23. Jam. 1.23, 24.

2. Being convinced in my Conscience of them, of their Aggravation^, and of my
^ll deservings for them, I will through Grace renew my Repentance, and mourn,
and be confounded for them. I will hate, detest and forsake them; and shall
seek for and sweep ou^ of my Soul, with the B^som of godly jealousy and
indignation, this accursed Leaven, and all its Crumbs and Relics that are
lurking in me. Zech. 12.10. Psalm. 119.23, 24. 1 Cor. 5.7.

3. I will flee to my only Sanctuary from the Curse and Wrath my Sins have
procured and purchased me, even to the Wounds, Bl^od and Death of my dearest
Lord and Redeemer. Luke 18.39. John 3.14, 15, 16. and John 1.10.

20. Q. How will you employ your self at the Lords Table?

A. 1. I shall join with the Church of Christ in all their public Duties of
Prayer and Contemplation of the Ministerial Actions in breaking the Bread, and
distributing it and the Cup unto the Communicants.

2. I shall give my self to private and particular Meditations and Prayers.

21. Q. What holy Thoughts will you have at sight and Ministration of the
sacred Elements?

A 1. When I see the Bread consecrated and blessed, I shall think upon Christ
Jesus, that immaculate Lamb of God, chosen out and set apart by God himself to
that great work of satisfying Gods Justice, of reconcil^ng and redeeming me,
and the whole World of God,s Elect from Sin and Hell, that Wrath which is to
come. John 1.29.

2. When I shall see the Bread broken, and the Wine poured into the Cup, I
shall tremble at Gods fierce wrath against Sin and Sinners, which fell so
heavily upon his most dearly beloved Son, and might most justly have fallen
upon my guilty Soul. This shall raise in me an holy horror and abhorrency of
Sin, and engage me to an everlasting Apostasy from it. Psalm. 76 7 1 Samuel 6.20.
Romans 5.4 Romans 6.1, 2, 3.

3. When I see the Bread and Cup brought to me, put into my Hands, and I am
bidden to take and eat, to take and drink the Body and Blood of my Lord (...)
remem^^ance (...) him for the (...) of my Sins; I shall be ravished at the
Wonders of Divine Mercy in offering Christ, and bringing him home with all his
Benefits unto my poor Soul. And I shall then most cordially and thankfully
receive Christ, his Pardons, Righteousness, Adoption, Purchases, Promises,
Grace and Glory, Psalm 8.4. Mat. 8.8.

22. Q. May you at the Lord's Table make a particular Application of the Lord
Jesus and all his Benefits unto your Self?

A. Yes, as I am a Believer and an invited Communicant, it is both my
Privilege and Duty so to do; for I am to receive and feed upon the Lord Jesus
Christ in these sacred Elements by Faith, which is nothing else, but to make a
personal* and particular Application of Him unto my Soul. Mat. 26.26, 27 Mark
14.22, 23* Luke 22.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.

23. Q. But will not this be high and daring Presumption in you?

A. No, The humble serious, hear^y Obedience of Faith (...) of my blessed dying
Savior is ^o presumption in me. (...) I am to take and eat his bro^^^ Body,
and to drink his precious blood, is that Duty whereunto I am positively and
personally bound and obliged by the very Words of Institution. I read them in
three Evangelists, I read them also in the Apostle Paul. So that I should be
very wicked if I neglected the doing of it. The Lord Christ is offered and
tendered to me by Himself, and Minister at this Holy Sacrament; should I refuse
him, I were guilty of pro^aning it, and should eat and drink unworthily, to my
own Damnation. I shall therefore through Grace at the Lord's Table, lift up the
everlasting Doors of my Soul, that the King of Glory may come in: And though I
am not worthy to lodge such a Guest under my Roof, yet in as much as he is
pleased to tell me he will come and Sup with me, and dwell in and with me, I
will sweep the Guest Chamber of my heart clean for him, and entertain him with
Loves and Joys. Psalm. 24.7, 9. Mat. 3.3 Rev. 3.20. Luke 2^.5, 6.

24. Q. What other Holy Meditations will you have at this Sacrament?

A. 4. This, That the Lord Jesus is the Bread and Food of Believers, the Stay
and Staff of my Souls Life. By his Death I live; By his Curse I am blessed: he
was broken for me, and given to me that I may be saved by him. This thought of
him shall be very sweet and precious to me, that such a dead Dog as I am shall
live by him, and have Life more abundantly from him. Job. 6.33, 35, 47, 51.
Joh. 5.26. John 10.10.

25* Q What other good and comfortable Thought will you have at the Lords Table?

A. 5. This also, That though the Blood of Christ was shed by me, yet it was
also shed for me, that my Sins might be ^lotted out, and an incensed God
reconciled to me. So that I am now come to the Communion of the Blood of
Sprinkling, which speaks better things to God for me, than the Blood of Abel.
I see Christ in this holy Sacrament propitiating God unto me with his own
Blood. For he is my Peace. He has made up the Breach between God and my Soul.
Matthew. ^6.28. Heb. 12.24. 1 John 2.1, 2. Ephesians. 2.14.

26 Q What else will you be thinking on at this Holy Sacrament?

A 6. The wonderful and everlasting Love of Christ unto poor fallen Man. He
rejoiced from all Eternity in the habitable parts of the Earth, and his
Delights were in the Miserable Children of forlorn Adam. He showed no Mercy
unto the Apostate Angels; but has displayed and bestowed the Miracles of his
saving Mercies unto us, and unto me, the worst of Sinners in particular. When I
was not, he loved me. When the Devil plotted my ruin, he frustrated his
Devices, and turned them to his own Destruction. He became my near Kinsman, and
redeemed me from mine Iniquities, from the sub^il^ies, malice, rage and power
of Hell by his most precious Blood. I can read his flaming Love to me, in his
streaming Blood for me: Would he have died for me, if he had not loved me?
Prove. 8 31. Jer. 31 3. Heb. 2 16. Ro^ 5.6, 7, 8, 9, 10* Genesis 3.15 Job 19 25
John 3.16.

27. Q Have you any other good Thought to be put forth at the Lord's Supper?

A 7. Yes, That I now see the Lamb of God carrying away the World of my Sins
out of Gods sight into the Land of forgetfulness. For all my Sins were put upon
Him, and like the Escape goat he has born them quite away, so that they shall
never be found more. Christ's Blood has fully satisfied Gods Justice, quenched
the Fire of his Wrath, turned away his Indignation from me. The God and Father
of my Lord Jesus, is in and through him become my God and my Father. John 1.29.
Lev. 16.21, 22. Matthew. 20.28. Isa. 53.56. Romans 3.24. Isa. 12.1* John. 20.17.

28. Q. What other Reflections will you have in this Sacrament?

A. 8. That the Lord Jesus has bequeathed a Gift and Legacy in his Last
Testament that very night in which he was betrayed, his Blood and Love unto
Believers. He neglected himself, to remember us, and has left a public Bank
and Stock for our common Relief. So that I am bound to look unto a Crucified
Jesus, as all the Saints do; and to fetch from him in this Legacy that Grace
which is needed by me. Matthew* 26.26* 27, 28. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25, 26. John 14.27.
Heb. 12.2. Isa. 45.22.

9. That as Christ has loved us, so we should love one another. This is a
Feast of Love: And a Christ has loved me; so am I truly and sincerely, though
I can never equally in degree and measure, to love all those for whom he has
died. 1 John 4.10, 11. and 1 John 3.16.

29. Q. What else is there to be done by you?

A. I shall during the whole Action, be very intent in my private Solilo^quies
between Christ and my own Soul. I shall also join with the Congregation in
solemn Thanksgivings, and joyful singing of his Praises, and in Acts of Love,
Charity and Mercy to (...) poor Members of the Lord Jesus according to my
ability. Moreover through Grace I shall labor and endeavor to live this
Sacrament when it is ended, to watch over my Heart, Tongue, Senses, and all my
Ways and after-Actions; to pay all my Vows, and to walk more humbly and closely
with my God the remainder of my days, and shall long most earnestly after
another Sacramental Opportunity. Psalm. 104.34. and 139.17, 18. and 22.25. and
104*33. Heb. 13.15, 16. Gal. 6.9, 10 Psalm. 16 2, 3. 1 Cor. 16. Psalm. 39 1. Job
31 1. Ephesians 5.13. Psalm 116.12, to 19. and 101.2. and 42.1, 2. and 84.1, etc.

30. Q. Will you submit to the Discipline of this Church? to be admonished,
reproved and censured, if need be, by the Pastor and Brethren of this Church?

A. Forasmuch as Christ's Yoke is easy, and his Bu^then light, and ^his Great
and Sovereign Lord and King of the Church requires that all his Disciples and
Subjects be Holy, even as God is Holy; I do pro^ess and promise, as in his
presence, to subject my sel^ to be governed by the golden Scepter of his holy
Laws in his written Word, and to embrace Counsels and Reproofs wi^h all
humbleness and thankfulness, and hope that through Grace I shall never by any
miscarriages of mine incur and deserve the Censures of God's Church* but if I
should be so unhappy through the violence of Temptations, and the out breakings
of Corruption, to scandalize the holy Name and good ways of God, the Censures
of the Church being divine Medicines of God's own Appointment to cure and
recover diseased and fallen Church Members, let them be administered to me for
my cure and recovery by the Pastor of the Church and its Officers. Psalm.
116.16, 17. 1 Cor. 6:20. and 10.31. Romans 14.7, 8, 9* Psalm. 141.5. and 17.3. and
19.12, 13. 1 Cor. 3.3, 4, 5. 2 Cor. 10.3, 4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 16.22. Mat. 18, 15,
18.

FINIS.
Page 59. l. 9. r. indixerit.


