THE NECESSITY OF AN EARLY RELIGION BEING A SERMON Preached the 5 th. of May
Before The HONORABLE ASSEMBLY OF MARYLAND By THOMAS BRAY D. D.

ANNAPOLIS Printed By Order of the ASSEMBLY By (...) Reading, For (...) seller,
Anno Domini 1700.

May the 9 th. 1700.
ORDERED That Doctor BRAY be Returned Thanks for his Excellent SERMON on that
Text, Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth, etc. And desire the same
to be printed.

THO: SMITHSON SPEAKER.

A SERMON. PREACHED BEFORE THE HONORABLE ASSEMBLY* OF MARYLAND. May the 5 th.
1700.
Ecclesiastes the XII. Verse the I. Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy
youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when th^^ shall
say I have no pleasure in them.


THIS Book of Ecclesiastes was wrote by Soloman in his ^ld^^ Years (as is
supposed by most Interpreters) as a Recantation, and Penitential, after he had
spent the youthful part of his days in the fullest enjoyments of the things of
this life. This Person had the largest Soul and greatest share of understanding
that (...) was given to the Sons of Men. And as he had Wisdom to find out, so
(...) had Power answerable to his Wisdom, to procure whatsoever could (...)
delightful, and pleasing in this World. And being thus furnished with Wisdom
and Power, he accordingly set himself to enquire, what was th^^ Good for the
Sons of Men, wh^^t might make them happy. And then (...) length upon a full
Experience of all that this World can afford us, to (...) us so, he gives us
this testimony of it, that it is all but vanity and vexat^^^ of spirit; of a
frail, empty, perishing and unsatisfying Nature* na^ (...) it is blended with
much of sorrowful and vexatious mixtures, (...) that this World can afford us.
This he does in the s^x^ first Chapte^ (...) to Haman Wisdom, Riches, Honors
and Pleasures the great things wherein most Men place their chiefest happyness.
And then he proceeds, in the (...) last Chapters to let us know wherein our
true and only Felicity really does consist, and that he tells us is in this,
that we fear God, and keep his Commandments, as that which will yield us solid
Comfort and Satisfaction in this life, besides the joyful expectations it will
give us in the next.

AND having done this he does then very affectionately address himself to young
Persons in the words of my Text, that taking it upon his word and experience,
the truth of what he had before said, as to the mere vanity of all Earthly
Enjoyments, and the true satisfaction there is in the fear of God; they would
not make it their whole business to pursue the empty Enjoyments of this World,
which would certainly disappoint them; but betake themselves to an early Piety,
so acceptable and well pleasing to their Maker, before Sickness and Old Age
force them, whether they will, or no, to make an unwilling, and a loathed
^acrifice of themselves to him. Remember now etc.

SO that these you see, are the kind Admonitions of a Charitable Person (who
himself had once been sadly shipwrack'd in a gulf of sensuality and filthyness,
they are his kind warnings to you that are younger Persons, to avoid the li^e
Errors; But to betake your selves seriously to the necessary business of
Religion betimes, and to make it your first, and earliest choice; to engage
your selves in Gods service in your more youthful, healthier, and active days;
and not to defer this weighty Affair, till you are sick, or are broken by the
infirmities of Old Age, when it is hardly to be expected that He should at all
accept of so heartless, and languid a Service, as we can then pay him.

Now Solomon tho a great King, yet being withal a Preacher, as he pleases ^o
style himself Chap. 1.1. it might be seasonable for him at any time to give so
necessary and so impor^ant Instruction, as this in my Text. But especially it
became him, after so dear an experience, as his own had (...), of the vanities,
and follies of youth; particularly to apply himself (...) them. And the case is
in some measure the like with us at this (...).

^HERE is nothing which is more incumbent upon the Ministers of Gods Church at
all times, than to form the principles, and manners of youth, as may appear
from that Emphatical Charge of our Saviors to St. Peter John 22.15. and in him
to all other the Apostles, and Ministers in his Church. Feed my lambs. But now
at this time especially, we of the Clergy in this Province, have more than an
ordinary Call to apply our selves particularly to this Duty.

FOR why? It is now that the Patriots of this Country are giving that
Establishment by Law to Religion amongst them; and with that Unanimity, and
general Consent, which shows that it is no indifferent thing to them, And this
they do so nobly express, In such words, as indeed deserve to be written (both
for the perpetual Honor of this Province, and for a Memorandum to us of the
Clergy, to what purposes we are established) in Letters of Gold, on Pillars of
Marble.

IT is for this End they declare they do this glorious Work, that their
CHILDREN AND POSTERITY BEING PRESERVED IN THE UNITY OF THE CHURCH, FROM FACTION
AND SCHISM, IN HONESTY AND CHARITY, MAY BECOME GOOD AND SOBER MEN, LOVING
VIRTUE, FLYING VICE, THE RATIONAL CONS^QUENCE OF TRUE CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE. And
sure then, ^f for this reason principally a Clergy are to be here established;
to this work therefore it is in a more especial manner, that they are called to
exert their Labors, as a most important part of their Ministry.

Well! I can venture here to promise for all those my Brethren, over whom I
preside^ that with these terms they will heartily comply, and to answer those
expectations every one of them shall make it his principal Care. And as the
Call we have to this Duty is extraordinary, so the methods, which shall be
taken, will be more than common; so that not only the Children shall be
instructed in the Elements of Christianity, by learning their (...) by heart;
Together with some short (...) of it; But the youth that are come up to years
of Discre^ion (...) therefore more capable to receive a more through knowledge
in the (...) Doctrines of the Christian Religion, and of their Covenant wit^
(...) shall be taken care of by such a method of instruction in the way (...)
liar Conference, as will,, I am persuaded, when tried by them, be as (...)
pleasing, as it will be found profitable to all of them.

BUT then the execution of this grand part of the Ministers Duty will be
impossible for them without the concurrence of those committed to their charge,
respectively. The persons to be thus Catechis'd and instructed are of two
sorts, Children, and grown Youth. The former are incapable of knowing the
benefit of such instructions, so as to be induced of themselves to desire, or
seek the means thereof; and those therefore must be brought, obliged, and if
occasion shall be, must be ordered and made to come to be Catechized, by their
respective Parents, and Masters, whose duty it is, with Joshua, to take care,
that they, and their house serve the Lord. And I have great reason to hope that
this charge will be duly performed by Parents and Masters throughout the
Province, being the Chief persons in the several parts thereof, and whose
example therefore will be sufficient to influence others, have so solemnly
declared to the World, that the end wherefore they Establish Religion is, that
their Children and Posterity may be trained up in it.

THE great work will be to persuade Youth of riper years to yield up themselves
to the Tutelage, and Instruction of their respective Pastors, Since that Youth
too commonly are vain, headstrong, and averse to serious Admonitions. But
besides that the methods which will be taken with them, shall be so free and
familiar, as I dare say, would not be disagreeable to such as are most advanced
in years; In order to prepare them to be more complyant with the persuasions
therewith of their respective Pastors, I shall make it my present business to
engage them especially to an early entertainment, and choice of Religion. In
the management of which duty of theirs, I will endeavor by Gods Assistance, to
do these two things.

1. By way of explication I will show them wherein the duty consists, and what
it is to Remember our Creator.

2. By way of motive I will show them how very advantageous it will be
accordingly to Remember their Creator in the days of their youth; and on the
other hand, how exceeding dangerous to defer it to the evil days, the days of
sickness, or of old age; those days we our selves have no pleasure in.

AND first, let us consider the duty, what it is to Remember our Creator.

AND to Remember our Creator is of the number of those Scripture expressions,
that do imply in the meaning of them, the whole Sum, and Substance of Religion.
Thus to know God, to believe in him, to ^ear him, and to love him, do all of
'em import no less in Scripture many times, than to be entirely Religious;
because that Knowledge, Faith, Fear, and Love are powerful, and active
principles within us, influencing those who are possessed therewith, to be in
the whole frame of their mind, and will, entirely Religious. And of the same
nature is this expression also Rememember your Creator. For,

1. To Remember our Creator does necessarily suppose a due knowledge of him,
for that it is impossible to remember, or call to mind what we never had any
knowledge of. Now Almighty God may be known by his Creatures both in his Nature
and Attributes; and in his works of Creation, Providence, and of Grace; and in
those excellent and gracious Laws which he has given to us to govern our Lives
and Conversations in this World. And in all these respects it ought to be the
chief study of Mankind (whom above all inferior Creatures he has made capable
of such knowledge) thus to know him; especially it concerns Youth to furnish
themselves with such knowledge of their Creator betimes, as it is ordered them,
and as they are advised here in my Text. Remember thy Creator, in the days of
thy youth, etc.

AND now if we would know him as to his Nature and Attributes, what other is
he, than the supreme Governor of the World, whose knowledge reaches to all
things past, present, and to come; which pierces into the most secret Councels
and Contrivances of our Hearts; and takes our thoughts in their first motions,
even before we our selves have found them, whose Wisdom has allways in its Eye
the best Ends, and does often bring about his wise Purposes by means most
improbable to our seemings! whose Goodness permits him not to slave his
Creatures with rigorous, and unreasonable Impositions. (He commands, nor forces
any to tear their Skins with their Nails, to cut their Flesh wi^h their Knives,
as the worshipers of Baal did. He is not so delighted with the reaking streams
of Hum^n Gore, that he would have us sa^rifice our Sons, and Daughters to him)
But his Commands are all Righteous, Just, and Reasonable; every way fittest for
us as Rational Creatures to perform; and every way ^ending to perfect our
Natures to the highest pitch of Happyness that Humanity can reach. As a Branch
of his Goodness, we may justly add to his Patience, which we may with Amazement
behold in the Repeated, Continued, and in the Numberless Provoca^^ons,
Insolences, and D^ring Wickednesses of a Profligate, Lewd and Atheistical
World. But whose Justice we shall not only see, but feel, feel in the ^tmost
Severities and Strokes that long abused Mercies, that wearied, and tired
Patience (tired with forbearing I mean) can lay on, If we will st^ll remain
Obstinate Rebels to his Laws. Not to speak of his Power, which is never
wanting, to what his Will is to perform, or inflict.

Such is our Creator in his Nature, and Attributes; such he is in himself, and
such he will more manifestly appear to us if we shall but meditate upon his
glorious Works of Creation, Providence, and Grace, and Consider those Excellent
and Gracious Laws he has given us to govern our Lives and Conversations in this
World.

HIS Creation! and Good God! what astonishing Power was his! which, with one
Word of his Mouth could call forth out of Nothing, the whole frame of Nature
which we behold; rhis Earth which we now tread upon, and yonder Heavens also,
which we hope ere long to mount into! And what depth of Wisdom was that, which
amongst the Millions of Creatures that he has given Being to, has not made one
thing for ^ought, but all to serve some good End; most of them at least
serviceable to the use of Man, and he, to Serve and Glorify his Creator.

WHAT shall I say of his Providence? Is not that Power, and Wisdom, and
Goodness, and every thing, which preserves us in Being, which protects us from
Dangers, which provides for our Necessities, and which in a Thousand In^^ances
we see, is careful of us, and bountiful unto us!

IT would take up more than our present time will afford, should I attempt to
display his Power, and Wisdom, his Goodness, and Justice, and all his
Attributes as they were manifested in his works of Grace, in that Stupendous
Bus^ness of Man's Redemption. Ch how did Mercy and Truth here meet together,
how did Righteo^sness and Peace here kiss each other! Mercy! was ever Goodness
like unto that, which pass^ng by the fallen Race of Angels, should take us a
desperately wicked, and Rebellious Generation into Favor again, on the
reasonable conditions we would return to him! Righteousness! was ever Justice
and Holiness so manifested, that nothing could atone for our sins less than
the Blood of the Son of God! But there would be no end of our Meditations
should we once launch out into that Ocean of his Love, and Goodnes^, as they
were seen in the Redemption of us. To hasten therefore to the consideration of
them as they were seen in his Government and Laws.

AND sure Gratiousness, and Goodness were never known in any Governor, if not
in God, who has not given us one Precept, but which either tends to the health
of our Bodies, or the quiet of our Minds; to preserve Peace in societies, and
Love in Neighbourhoods; and which does no^ some way or other tend both to
perfect, and to render us like unto God here, and to make us happy with him
hereafter.

AND so much for the first thing implied in this Duty, which is, to Know our
Creator. To Remember our Creator does necessarily suppose a due knowledge of
him; for that it is impossible ^o Remember, or call to mind what we never had
any knowledge of. And what it is to know him, and the necessity of it, you have
been now told.

II. AND having thus gaind a Competent Knowledge of our Creator, of his Nature
and Attributes; especially as manifested in his works, and in his Laws; It may
be easily gathered what it is to Remember our Creator thus known. And what else
pray can it be, than always to have a Sense of him in our Hearts and Souls, to
have a due Regard to him, to set him always before our Eyes as thus known; and
so demean, and deport ourselves in reference to him, as is suitable to him, and
is fit for us?

TO Remember a Person is not barely to call him to Mind, or to think of him,
but it imply's something more. Scripture Expressions (...) hearty Expre^sions,
and though they are sometimes such as literally signify some Act of the Mind, yet
generally they imply an equal share of the Will and Affections. And indeed such
is this Phrase to Remember our Creator in vulgar and common Acceptance. I^ I
were bid to Remember a Person Understanding and Wise, that sees what I do, and
were present with me, I should take it as a caution to act Circumspectly, and
carefully in his presence. If I were bid to Remember a good and kind Friend, I
should take it as a prompting of me to be grateful to him, and to return him
Love and Thankfulness for all his Kindnesses. If I were bid to Remember a
severe and upright Judge, I should take it as a warning to live so honestly,
and uprightly as not to come under the severity of his Justice. And lastly, if
to Remember one of great and uncontrowlable Power, as an Intimation not to
offend him. And accordingly such must be the Importance of our Duty, and the
Phrase expressing it, Remember thy Creator here in my Text. He being Infinite
in Knowledge, what can it else imply but that we every where walk before him in
Sincerity and Truth, as before one that sees in secret? Being of unsearchable
Wisdom* knowing both what is best for us* and what means ar^ best to compass
it, ten thousand times better than we can, what else can it mean, but that we
entirely resign up ourselves to his disposals, and never murmur under any of
his Dispensations? Being he is of abundant Goodness, Goodness that knows no
bounds, but what his other Attributes necessarily give it; of such Goodness as
to give us the best, and most easy Laws, to accept of such Obedience as we are
able to pay him* and to recompense that little with Rewards so infinitely
beyond the Merits of our Performances; when we are bid to Remember him, what
else can it import, but that we love him to the intensest Degrees, and obey him
with the exactest Observance, suitable Returns for such Love on his part? And
Lastly, being of that unspotted Holiness that he cannot endure Sin, and of that
inflexible Justice, that he will certainly punish it with the utmost degrees of
Sorrow and Torture, if obstinately persisted in; what but that we with all
imaginable Have forsake our Sins, trembling least his Wrath should overtake us
and we should be found in them?

THIS is to Remember our Creator in reference to his Nature and Attributes. And
so likewise in reference to his Works of Creation, Providence, and of Grace, and
those Gracious and Excellent Laws he has given us. Since he has made us, is
the Author of our Being, and Well-being, and we have nothing we can claim as
our own, but live upon his Charity; to Remember him, what is it but that we
live wholly to him, to his Honor, and Glory, and that we entirely serve him.
Being he exercises a gracious Providence over us, Feeds and Maintains us,
Cherishes and Preserves us, and we are beholden to him for all the Necessary's,
Conveniences, Accommodations, and Superfluities we en^oy: To Remember him,
what is it, but that in subservience to his Providence, we only use an honest
Diligence in our Respective Stations, and then without carking and
thoughtfulness, as to the Event, refer the Success to him, resting contented,
and satisfied, when matters fall not ou^ according to our Designs, returning
him our acknowledgments and thankfulness for whatever we have received? Being
he has Redeemed us from the power of our Sins, and the Tyranny of Satan; from
the former, by giving us of his Spirit to subdue our Lusts; from the latter, by
paying down his own most precious Blood a Ransom for us; To Remember him, what
is it, but to give up our selves to him as his purchased Possession, and to
serve under his Banner against Sin and the Devil* And Lastly, being he as a
most gracious Gov^rnour, has given us the most reasonable Laws; To Remember
him, what is it, but that we render him a most cheerful and willing Obedience
to them.

THIS now is to Remember our Creator in reference to his Nature, his Works, and
his Laws. And this brings me to my Second general Proposal, to show you, how
advantagi^us it (...), accordingly to Remember your Creator in the days of your
youth; and on the other hand, how exceeding dangerous to defer it to the evil
day, the days of (...), or of old Age, those days we our selves have no
pleasure in.

AND First pray consider, how very advantageous it will be accordingly, as has
been showed you, to Remember your Creator in the days of your youth.

A Young Dovotee is the choice Favorite of Heaven. We see it in the beloved
Disciple John. He was a young Man, but being very Pious, very Good, He was the
Disciple who always lay in our Saviors Bosom, whom Jesus loved. John 13.23.

AND he is the Favorite of Men too, He is his Parents Darling, the Hopes of his
Family, the Admiration of all Men. A Regular, Pious, young Person, who hates a
base Action, that injures no Man, would do good to all Men, breaks not his
Parents Hearts by hearing of his lewd Pranks, his infamous Courses. He does not
imbitter all the Comforts of their Life, so that the most plentiful Fortunes
can afford them no Satisfaction* He does not cause 'em to wish with Job, that
the day would pe^^^h (...) ^ern, and the night in which it was said, there
(...) ^^nceived. He does not by his prof^se prodigality, and (...) living
dissipate those Fortunes, which his Ancestors Industry had got, and his Parents
Care have preserved for him; but by his good Husbanding the Talent they have
already given him, and the useful Employment it thereof, to the doing good
therewith to himself, and others, (...) them to hope he will add to, not
diminish from their Fortunes and (...). Nor lastly, by his horrid Debaucheries
does he make himself the Scorn and Contempt, the Hatred and Abhorrence of all
that know him; but by his innocent, and useful Conversation, by his tender and
merciful Disposition, is the Love and Admiration of all about him.

IT is certainly a most Lovely Object, a Young, Pious, and orderly Person, for
as a great Man expresses it, There is a peculiar kind of Grace, and Loveliness
in the worthy and excellent Actions of Youth, early Habits of Virtue, like new
Clothes upon a young and comely Body, sit very gracefully upon a straight, and
wellshap'd Mind, and do mightily become it.

NOR do Men barely love, but admire an early Virtue. For whether it be that
great things are not ordina^^ly expected from Persons at that Age, or whether
from the scarcity of such happy Instances (especially in such an Age as this,
wherein our Youth are distinguished by their Immodesty, Profaneness,
Irreverence to God and Men, from other Persons) whatever may be the cause; so
it is, that all Men do pay a peculiar Veneration to a young Person full fraught
with Wisdom, Virtue, and Goodness. Whose Understanding is well furnished with
useful Knowledge, whose Lips do utter nothing but wise and sober Discourse,
whose Appetites are under Command, whose Passions are calm, whose Affections
are orderly, and to Crown all, who is active and zealous in doing Good, and
suppressing Mischief. It is hardly to be expressed the Veneration and Esteem
such an one does receive from all sorts of Men. Job does incomparably well
represent it in his own case; I shall therefore give it in his own words, Chap.
29. Oh that I was as in the months past, Says he, as in the days of my youth;
when the secret of God was upon my Tabernacle, Then when I went out through the
Gate, through the City, when I prepared my Seat in the Street; the young Men
saw me, and hid themselves; And the aged arose, and stood up; the Princes
refrained talking, and laid their hands on their mouths, the Nobles held their
peace, and their Tongue cleaved to the Roof of their Mouth, when the Ear heard
me then it Blessed me, and when the Eye saw me, it gave witness to me. And
wherefore all this? Why for his worthy Actions you will find, Because I
delivered the poor that cried, and the Fatherless, and he that had none to help
him. The Blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I caused
the Widows to sing for joy, I put on Righteousness and it clothed me, and
Judgment was as a Robe and Diadem; I was Eyes to the blind, and Feet was I to
the lame, I was a Father to the poor, and the Cause which I knew not, I
searched out. And I brake the Jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of
their Teeth. Then my glory was fresh in me, and my Bow was renewed in my hand.
Unto me Men gave Ear, and waited, and kept silence at my Council; after my
words they spoke not again, and my speech dropped upon them, and they waited for
me as for the Rain. And they opened their Mouth wide as for the latter Rain. If
I laughed on them, they believed it not, and the light of my Countenance they
cast not down. I chose out their Way, and sat Chief, and dwelt as a King in the
Army, as one that comfort the Mourners.

NOR are the worthy Deeds of a young Person more admired by others, than they
are Laudable in themselves. For what a Glorious Scene is it to see a Youth
besieged by powerful Temptations on every side, to acquit himself Bravely, and
Resolutely to hold out against the most violent Assaults: To behold one in the
Pride, and Flower of his Age, that is Courted by Pleasures, and Honors, by the
Devil, and all the (...) Vanities of this World, to ^^^ect all these, and to
cleave (...). Nay to frown upon all these Temptations, and ^o look dow^ (...)
the^ with Indignation and Scorn, and to say, let those (...) who know no
better: Let them adore Sensual Pleasures, (...) Lying Vanities, who are
Ignorant of the sincere, and solid Satisfactions of Religion and Virtue: Let
them run into the Arms of Tempta^ions, who can forget God, their Creator, their
Preserver, and the Guide of their Youth: As for me, I will serve the Lord, and
will ^mploy my whole time either innocently, or usefully, in serving God, and
in doing Good to Men, who are made after the Image of God. Believe me
Christians, neither Solomon in all his Glory, nor the Alexanders, nor Caesar's
in the midst of all their pompous Triumphs, were half so great as one of these;
for if they had the Eyes, it is these have the Hearts of all beholders.

BUT alas! What is the Love, the Esteem, the Glory they receive from others,
to the Silent but Sweet Applauses of their own Consciences? Those Happy
Persons, who having prepossessed their Minds betimes with those Principles of
Goodness, which would never let them commit a base and unworthy Action, have
never felt rhose venomou^ and painful Stings, those bitter and severe Remorses,
which the wild, and unthinking Youth, have their perpetual Inmates on the
account of those enormous Crimes, which their Lust and Revenge have instigated
them to commit. It is not these whose Heart is sorrowful in the midst of
Laughter, whose Countenance, like Belshazers, even in the midst of their
Revels, Changes, and whose Thoughts are troubled, so that the Joints of their
Knees are loosed, and their Knees smite one against another; and yet whose
Ghastly Thoughts are so terrible to them alone, as to force them to that
miserable Refuge of Company, and Excess, to silence the Clamours of their
upbraiding Consciences, and to stupifie the Sense of their wounded Minds. What
shall I say? It is not those that in the day time start aside from every one
they meet, as a Constable, and in the night dream of nothing but Gibbets and
Halters: that in the days of their Health, by their Oaths and Blasphemies,
their Fornications and Adulteries, their Oppressions, and perhaps Murders, are
perpetually loading themselves with an intolerable weight of Guilt, and when
the evil day comes, when Sickness, and Adversities overtake them, have no
Comforter they can fly unto. And who after all cannot but entertain those
melancholy Suspicions, that there may be yet an after (...): Those Devils, and
that Hell, and that just God, who will adjudge ^n^ to both, out of the Belief
of which they have all their Life, so vainly labored to argue themselves. No,
no, those happy Persons who have given to God the early possession of their
Souls, are utter Strangers to those Gloomy Sorrows, those Hellish Miseries,
that such Men do feel.

NAY, but on the contrary, these Early Beginners in Religion, as they have not
half that struggling with Flesh and Blood, which Men once accustomed to evil
Courses do feel, before they can master their Corrupt Inclinations; So when
they have, for some time, habituated themselves to Virtuous, and Religious
Performances; these ways seem at length so easy, so agreeable, so natural to
them, that they cannot so much as think of, they abhor the very thoughts of
doing an ill thing; So true it is* that he who is born of God (...), because he
is born of God. Nay but at length accordingly as they proceed from strength to
strength, from one degree of Grace to another, they arrive at length to such
happy tempers, and have their Souls so exactly tuned to Goodness, that they are
unexpressible; the Satisfactions that such do feel in Religious Exercises, in
Devotion, and doing good; So that with David they can say, how sweet are thy
words unto my taste, yea sweeter than honey to my mouth. Psalm 119.103. Such are
the Advantages of Remembering your Creator in the days of your youth. It makes
you the peculiar Favorites of God, it makes you the Darlings of Mankind
withal. It procures you Love, and Esteem, and Honor amongst Men; and Lastly,
it gives you a perpetual uninterrupted Peace and Pleasure in your own Minds.

BUT on the other side, it is hardly to be expressed, how exceeding dangerous
it will be to defer this necessary work to the Evil Day, the Days of Sickness,
or old Age, those Days we our selves have no Pleasure sure in. However it may
appear in some measure (so far at least as to de^er Youth from such fatal
Delays) if they will please to consider.

1 st. WHAT an intolerable Affront they offer to God, to Sacrifice the Choice
of their Days to the service of the Devil; the World or their own Lusts; to
think to put him off with the Refuse of their Time, the Years that themselves
have no Pleasure in. 2 dly, How extremely difficult it will prove after a long,
and accustomed Forgetfulness of their Maker, to recover any tolerable Sense of
him: And 3 dly, how utterly impossible it will be, by the ordinary methods o^
Grace (and Extraordinaries, of all Men such have least reason to expect) to
Remember him to any purpose. And

I. Consider, what an intolerable Affront they offer to God, who Sacrifice the
Choice of their Days, to the Service of the Devil, the World, and their own
Lusts; and who think to put him off with the Refuse of their time, the Years
that themselves have no Pleasure in.

AND indeed can any thing be more disparaging to God, than to think him so
penurious of Friends, as to hold himself, and his Kingdom salable for the
Refuse, and Reversion of their Lives, who have Sacrificed the principal part
thereof to his Enemies, and their own Brutish Lusts, then only ceasing to
offend, when the Ability of offending is taken away from them? To think this,
is doubtless unworthily to Esteem God a very cheap, and easy Master, that will
be content, that may be put off with any thing. He did not appear so to the
Israelites, He ordered Deuteronomy. 15.19. To sanctify the Firstlings of their Flock
unto the Lord their God, but if there were any Blemish therein, as if it were
lame, or blind, he told them they should not Sacrifice it unto him.

AND can any of us expect then, when we are grown old, and decrepit, in the
service of our Lusts, and of Satan his Enemy; can we think so slight of God,
that he will be glad receive us then? Hear what Malachi Says. chap. 7.8. If ye
offer the blind for Sacrifice, is it not evil, and if ye offer the lame and
s^ck, is it not evil? Offer it now unto thy Governor, will he be pleased with
thee,, or accept thy Person Says the Lord of Hosts. Offer it to thy Governor*
What an intolerable Affront therefore is it to think to flatter the Majesty of
Heaven, with what a mortal Man would scorn and despise? Nay, and I may add,
consider whether you your, selves would be so served. None of you would receive
him as a Servant who is grown old, and useless, in the service of another
Person. (You would sooner I am sure, turn off those who have spent their
yourhful Strength in your own Service) And now be you your selves Judges,
whether it be not a Slight and Disparagement to God, very unworthy of him, to
imagine that he will presently accept, as if he were obliged thereby, of a few,
heartless and languishing Wishes, and Desires from us toward him, when we can
serve his Enemies, Sin, the World, and the Devil no longer. But

II. This is not all, you had best further consider how extremely difficult it
will prove after a long accustomed Forgetfulness of your Maker, to recover any
tolerable Sense of him. All Men who consider any thing will readily own it,
that it is a most vile Indignity (such as no Prince that is a mere Man would
endure) we do put upon God, when we thus undervalue him; and but that they
willingly persuade themselves that he is infinitely Good, they could have no
hopes of Mercy after it. But his Mercies they do easily persuade themselves are
so abundantly great, that though their Provocations have been never so many, yet
if they take Care in time to Repent of their Sins, and Return from their evil
Ways; God will mercifully accept them, as if they had never sinned. And we will
not dispute the difference at present, that will be made in those Men's Cases,
who from the very Beginning have faithfully served God; and those who in the
latter part of their Lives only, after infinite Dishonours done him, do yield
themselves at last obedient to him. We will grant that even those who after a
long Custom of sinning, do at last abominate, and forsake their Sins, shall be
Gods Favorites too; but the Question is, how they shall be able to hate, and
forsake those Sins they have so infinitely served, and so closely adhered to
heretofore. This mighty Change from one contrary Disposition to another, is not
so easy as these Men may imagine. There are many difficulties you will
certainly meet with, both in your selves and others, which will ex^reamly much
obstruct it.

THAT which in our selves will obstruct it, will be the almost inv^^cible Power
of the contary Habit and Custom. To Root out of our Hearts those Customs of
sinning, which we have been long used to, is in the Language of Scripture, to
pluck out our Right Eyes, and to cut off our Right Hands; Such Habits become so
interwoven into our very Natures* that they become part of our selves, which we
cannot easily offer v^olence to. And therefore does the Prophet make it almost
an impossib^^ thing to alter an evil Custom of sinning. Can the Etheopian
change (...), o^ the Leopard his spots etc?

Besides it ought to be considered, that when Men do come to have a Conviction
of the evil of Sin, and of the dismal Consequence of a continuance in it, and
do make, to their own seeming, most firm Resolutions to break off their Sins by
Repentance, presently come in those Companions with them in Sin, and what by
their Ridiculi^ng of all Piety and Virtue, and what by the Scorns and
Reproaches they with all the Wit that Satan can inspire them shall be cast
upon Religion, they will at first s^agger those former Resolutions, and at last
utterly overturn them; insomuch that we many times see these sickbed Penitents
in their Relapses become ten times more the Children of Hell than they were
before.

AND now, how shall such inveterate Habits of sinning, strengthened by the
fallacious Sophistry of vile Wretches, be ever broken? By your own power you
cannot do it, for that you found too weak at first, And Gods Grace you cannot
well expect, for his Holy Spirit was so long Resisted, till it was quite
withdrawn.

III. AND this is another Consideration which may well deter Youth from
deferring till the latter Days the great Business of Religion, viz. how utterly
impo^sible it will be by ordinary Methods of Grace, (and extraordinaries such
of all Men have the least reason to expect) to Remember him to any purpose.

AND yet this is the last Refuge of forlorn Sinners, and of such as Resolve
(...) taking their youthful Liberties. They think that God will violently
interpose, and will save them whether they will or no. (...) ^ow many Millions
are mistaken, and never open their Eyes to see (...) mistake* till awakened by
the Flames of Hell? How many are overtaken suddenly in the midst of their
Sins, dying either in a Fever that takes away their Understandings, or an
Apoplexy that deprives them in a Minute of their Sense? How many in a Duel, and
how many in a fit of Drunkeness? No! it is not to be expected that when the
various Talents of Gods Grace have been long (...), that he should still
continue them to us. He promises indeed to those that have, or make use of the
Talents they have, that more shall be given; But he does assuredly threaten,
that from those who have not, shall be taken away, even that which they have.
And so God knows it often happens, that the Divine Patience is at length so
worn out, that his Grace is wholly withdrawn from some Men; and they are given
up to a Reprobate Sense as irrecoverably lost, and have in Effect the dreadful
Sentence upon them, even before they go out of this World.

BUT do we not sometimes see Men Recover at last, by a Miracle of Grace? It is
true, but as Miracles are very rare, and a^^ never wrought but upon
extraordinary Occasions, so are these Men's Conversion. It was to serve some
Grand Purposes in the wise Government of the World, and must not ordinarily be
de^pended upon. And pray by what extraordinary Methods of Grace is it we do
sometimes see old, inveterate Sinners Recovered to a Sight and Sense of their
Sins? Why by some terrible Blow to them in their Persons, or Families; by some
dismal Calamities, and Losses in their Estates, or perhaps by some amazing
Strokes of Conscience. And is this advisable to put thy self into such a
State, that the way to bring thee out of it, is to make thee a most miserable
Creature? Can this be a Hopes to be depended upon, by one that values not a
Course of Sin, but for the Pleasures of it? How contradictious are the
Reasonings of such Men, who indulge themselves in a Course of Sin in their
youthful Days, in hopes hereafter to be brought to a better Sense of it. The
Sense they must hope to be brought to, will be but little differing from the
Pangs of the Damned; the better way therefore will be by a timely Religion
which has no Remorses following it, to prevent the necessity of such a
sorrowful, and terrible Repentance, as will be requisite in such a Case.

AND now my dearly beloved Youth, let me beseech you in the Bowels of Jesus
Christ, seriously to consider, and lay to Heart what I have now told you. Let
me entreat you as you would not cast the vilest, the most provoking Contempt in
the World upon your Ma^^r, by preferring your foolish Lusts before him; as you
would not render it extremely difficult hereafter to Remember him; as you would
not render it impossible for you without such Methods of Grace, as you of all
Men would have least Reason to expect, as you would have little Reason to
desire; on the other hand* as you would do the most pleasing, and acceptable
thing to God; as you would acquai^t your selves with the Sweets of an early
Piety; as you would ever Resist the unutterable Consolations of a timely
Religion: Nay, and let me add; as you would render your selves the Joy of your
Parents, the Darling of your Country, the Hopes, the Eager Expectations of the
next Age; let me request you, let me conjure you, to Remember your Creator in
the (...) of your youth.

TO Remember him! How I pray you? Why as I told you before; study to know him
in his Nature and Attributes, in his works of Creation, Providence, and of
Grace, and in those Excellent and Glorious Laws he has given us. And then
forget not, neglect not to present him often to your Thoughts, as thus known.
Remember him as a discerner of the Thoughts and Intents of your Hearts, and let
this chase away thence all impure, and unchaste Thoughts, all unrighteous, and
revengeful Thoughts, all impious and ungodly Thoughts, that they have not the
least entertainment there. Remember him as now sitting in Heaven, and
Registering up in a Book all your Words; and let this restrain the Exorbitances
of an evil Tongue; so that henceforth you may suffer no Oaths, nor Curses; no
Lies nor Slanders: no censuring, nor evil speaking, no Calumnies nor
Detractions to be uttered thence. Remember him next as a Holy and Righteous
Judge that Eternally hates Sin, and will infallibly punish it, if not Repented
of: And let this pu^ a stop to all Acts of Immodesty and Intemperance, of
Softness and Luxury, to all Acts of Wrong and Injury, Revenge and Cruelty,
Contention and Strife, and lastly, to all Acts of Profaneness and Impiety.
Lastly, Remember him as an infinitely good and gracious Governor that will
Recompense all your pains, and wa^^^^ness, and diligence in serving him, with
Rewards ten thousand times beyond the merits of your deservings, and let this
make you humble and selfdenying, just and charitable, and peaceable; pious and
devout, and resigned; zealous Lovers of God, and constant Frequenters of his
Worship, both in Prayers and Sacraments.

AND what good now is it that impedes this our Remembrance of our Creator? What
but a dangerous World, which if we love to the neglect of better things, The
love of the Father is not in ^s? What but a foolish transitory World, which
believe me my Friends; nay believe not me but Solomon, who had the fullest
experience of all it can afford us, and yet pronounces concerning it, that it
is all vanity, and vexation of spirit.

Vain it is, for that it neither does* nor can perform what we expect from it:
Vain, for that it promises satisfaction, but leaves us nothing but
disapointment; Vain, for that a single Cross will imbitter all its Comforts;
Vain, for that the longer we enjoy my Worldly Goods the more flat and insipid
do they gr^w upon us; and Vain, in that its highest Enjoyments are inconstant
and fickle. And as Vain, so Vexatio^^, for that its Crosses do generally exceed
its Pleasures. And lastly, Vain, and Vexatious both, for that it can stand us
in no stead at the hour of death, and the day of judgment, when we have the
greatest need of Support and Comfort.

AT the hour of Death what support for Men to Remember their foul Frauds, their
Revengeful Quarrels, their intemp^^ate ^^ots, their lewd Companions, their
profane Jests! At the day of ^udgment, what Comfort to see the Books opened,
the sorrowful Remembrancer of all these?

BUT when you come to die, the Reflections that from your Youth upwards you
have Remembered your Creator, this to Admiration will support and comfort you
both. It will mitigate your Pains under the Tortures of the Stone, it will
Refresh your Spi^its in the flames of a Fever.

BUT this is not half; It will help you to look Death in the Face boldly; It
will help you to welcome the stalking Monster; It will fill your Hearts with
Joys unutterable; Joys that will almost burst your Earthen Vessels; Joys that
are pure and Spiritual, Joys that are the Antepasts of Heaven; Joys such as Eye
has not seen, nor Ear heard, no^ ^ath ever entered our Hearts to conceive.

NOR is this yet the thousandth part of the Benefit, the early Remembrance of
your Creator will moreover yield you; When in the great and terrible Day of the
Lord, the Son of God shall appear from Heaven with an Euge Bone Serve, with a
Come ye Good and Faithful Servants, Enter into the Kingdom prepared for you;
you shall immediately in Reward for such your early Remembrance, ^e translated
into Gods Presence where there is fullness of Joy, and be placed on his Right
Hand, where there is Pleasures for evermore.

FINIS.

