A Monitory, and Hortatory LETTER, To those ENGLISH, who debauch the Indians,
By Selling Strong Drink unto them.

Written at the Desire of some CHRISTIANS, to whom the Mischiefs arising from
that Vile Trade, are matters of much Apprehension and Lamentation.

Inter omnes Barbarorum morbos, quibus Levandis, atque tollendis invigilare
debet Christiani Rectoris Providentia, nullus aut communior, aut Perniciosior,
and etiam ad Curandum Difficilior, Ebrietate.

Hornbeck, de convers. Indor. Ex Acosta. De industria pernicies tanta
conceditur, imo vero appetitur; propter privatas nescio quas Commoditates Alij
Indorum operas Larga Ebrietate concessa, sibi conciliant. Alij non Solum bibere
sinunt, verum ipsi quoque temulentiam propinant. Neque tam turpis, infamisque
quaestus pudet, -- gladium ultro porrigentes insano. Atque haec nostri
factitant, Lucrumque ex animarum interitu Captant.

Acosta. L. 3. C. 22 Boston, N. E. Printed in the Year 1700.

To E. B. Esquire.
SIR,
YOUR Zeal to Suppress Vice, and particularly the growing and gri^vous Vice of
Drunkenness, is very Laudable: God who so Accepted and Rewarded the zealous
Phinehas, will not let it go without Reward. But while as a Minister of God,
You Employ the Sword of Justice, to punish Drunkenness, both in the English,
and the Indians, You do, with Holy Sorrow complain of it, that You cannot
Re^^orm the English, of their Impi^ty in feeding the Lust ^f Drunkenness among
the Indians. You had an Hope, it seems, that some Offenders whom the Sword of
Justice cannot reach, may be reached by the Sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God. Your Desire to one, who would approve himself a Minister of God,
in another Order, that he would write therefore a Letter to those Offenders, is
here answered. The Writing of Epistles is indeed an Ancient and ^n Useful way
to Do Good; continued even to this Day in the Churches of the Faithful. And for
the Rulers, to ask the Help of the Pastors, thus to Do Good, is an Example that
has many charms in it. If You judge This may Do Good, among those who indeed
are a sort of Sinners, that cannot be too Coa^^ely, or too Warmly addressed, it
is entirely Left unto Your Wisdom, to Disperse it, How, and Where you please
among them.

TO THE ENGLISH, who Ruin the INDIANS, by Sellin^ Strong Drink unto them.
H^W unaccountably, O Unadvise Neighbors, And how much (...) our Sorrow, and
our Horror, is tha^ Observation of the Sacred Scripture verified, The Love of
Money is the Root of all Evil When to get so Little Money as is to be got (...)
it, so Much Evil is committed, as we hear and se^ that some of you commit upon
the Miserabl^ INDIANS!

It Is well known that the Indians which yet re^main in the Land, now to better
purpose possesse^ and occupied by the English, in the room of the Twenty
Nations of the Indians that once covered it, were utterly destitute of all
Intoxicating Li^quors, before the Arrival of the English hither. The Sovereign
God, who has provided for our Support in our Frailty, Liquid Cordials and
Re^freshments of all sorts, besides, Wines on the Lee, well refined, furnished
Them with nothing bu^ Water out of the Brook, and this to be handed unto their
mouths, not in Glasses, but in Clam^ Shells. But, as Drunkenness is most rare,
in some Coun^^eys that most abound with a variety of the Richest Wines,
wherewi^h men are easily Drunk, (...), on the other side, there are none that
Rave ^ore after Strong Drink, than the people of those Countries that have it
from far brought unto them; and perhaps the Ravingest after it, of any Wretches
under the cope of Heaven, are our A^erican Salvages. They will Sell and Pawn
all ^hey have in the world for Strong Drink; they ^ever can tell when they have
enough, but keep ^uzling until they have Drunk themselves down; and when they
Awake, whatever it have cost them, they say, I will seek it yet again. That
which now gives inexpressible pain to all Good Men among us, is, That there are
some Ill Men among the English in all corners of the Land, ^ho to obtain a
little bit of Money, do fit this ^icious, drunken, so^tish Humor of the
Indians, and Sell them the Drink, by which they cannot ^ut think the Salvages
will make themselves Drunk; and sometimes they take Advantage of the Humor
which the Salvages are in, to Scrue them into Bargains full of cruel Oppression
and Ex^ortion, which afterward throw them into the extremest Inconveniences.
I dare not Relate, how many Tuns of Strong Drink, I am credibly informed, have
been brought and spent among the Indians, within a few months even in One
Little Island.

It seems none of the wholesome Laws, Enacted in the several Provinces and
Colonies against this Wickekness, are enough to Restrain from the (...)
perpetration of it, some that have the Fear neither of God, nor man; The Wicked
Hun^^^ after a Little Silver, makes many break thr^ all Restraints. Who can
think of this Impiety, without falling down in some Anguish before the Lord,
and crying out, Oh! This people have Sinned a great Sin! But it is possible,
that when the Sinful People, who Consider not what they do, in this Great Sin,
have some Considerations livelily Laid before them, the Good Spirit of God
accompanying thereof, may cause them to say, I have done Iniquity, I will do no
more! and may keep others from falling into the like Iniquity. Now, Syrs, Let
these Expostulations find some Entertainment with you: Oh, Hearken to me, that
God may Hearken to you.

It is the Endeavor of every Godly man, and it is a Quality inseparable from
real Godliness, To do what may be done, for the Hindering of Sin in other men:
And then to Lament and Bewayl the Sin that cannot be Hindered. The man who does
not Labor to Suppress and Prevent Sin in those that are about him, and who
does not Bewayl the Sin that he cannot prevent, is most certainly an Unconverted
and an Unsanctified Man, and an Enemy of God. I pray then, what will you judge
of your selves, O ye Authors of the Indian Drunkenness? The Drunkenness whereby
those forlorn Creatures do stumble into such horrible Pits of Sin, so far is it
from its being ^our Grief, that you make it your Gain; and you ^re so far from
doing all you can to Save them from their Sin, that you do what you can to
^^are them in it. Monstrous Impiety! It is plain, That if you dare go on in
this Impiety, you are ^et in the Gall of Bitterness, and the Bond of Ini^uity;
and if you Die in this Unregenerate State, (...) had been Good for you, that you
had never been Born.

The man who does make himself Drunk, does make himself a Beast, yea, worse
than a Beast, ^or a Beast ordinarily will not be Drunk. But when a man will
pass on to make others Drunk, ^e does the part of a very Devil. The Devils,
that are never Drunk themselves, never Show themselves more Devils, than when
they push men on to Drunkenness. To Assist and Excite Others unto such a Sin,
truly it looks very Diaboli^al. If you plead, That you don't compel the ^ndians
to Drink, it is answer enough unto the ^^ea, That you Permit them, you Invite
them, and you know that if you Sell your Drink to them, they will be Drunk with
it, and, they Buy it with that Intention. You must therefore know, That there
is An having Fellowship with the Sins of other men, [Eph 5.11.] And, [1 Timothy
^5.22.] A being partaker of other men's Sins; by which you may contract an
infinite Guilt unto your selves. When you supply the Indians, with the Drink,
wherewith you are sensible, they will immediately Debauch themselves, You have
a criminal Fellowship with the Sins of their Drunkenness, you are criminal
partakers of the Sins whereinto they wi^^ be betrayed by their Drunkenness. The
Gospe^ of God, commands you, [ Tit. 2.12.] To Liv^ Soberly; And that
commandment requires yo^ to promote Sobriety, among your Neighbors the Indians
as well as others. The Gospel of Go^ Instructs you, [Gal 5.23.] The Fruit of
the Spi^rit is Temperance: And that Instruction direct^ you, to help your
N^ighbours to be Temperate the Indians as well as others. The Gospel cauti^ons
you, [Eph. 5 18.] Be not Drunk; and the Caution Forbids your being an
Instrument o^ Drunkenness unto others, and even unto the Indians.

Drunkenness is indeed a Complicated Sin. If on^ should Enquire, which of the
Ten Precepts in the Law of God, are violated by Drunkenness, we man say, All
the Ten, as well as the Third. And in^deed, it not only unfits men to keep all
the Law of God, but also Inclines men to Break them all. If the Indians
Transgress all the Laws of God by being Drunk, Then You, O unhappy Drink
sellers, are also Transgressors of all those Laws, in the Drunkenness of the
Indians, whereto you have so directly contributed. And, for the English to do
thus unto the Indians, is a Fault that has its peculiar Aggravations.

Our Christian Profession obliges us, yea, and it has been our m^st Explicit
Profession in these our American Settlements, To Civilize and Christianize the
Salvages. And is this the Christianity that you Teach them, Syrs? Even the
Drunkenness. which they never Learned or Saw, till you, pre^entled Christians,
Taught it unto them? They were Salvages before; some few Rational men among
them, do bitterly complain of it, that by the Drunkenness got in among them,
they are made yet more Salvages: A Drunken Indian, what is he but a very
Centaur? I pray, What are you then that make them so? If our Lord Jesus Christ
could say, Woe to you, that make a man twofold more the Child of Hell, Think of
it, Syrs; The Indians were the Children of Hell before; but by their
Drunkenness, they are twofold more so; for we are expressly told, Drunkards
shall not ^nherit the Kingdom of God. Now, what a dread^ul symptom of your own
Exclusion from that Kingdom do you procure unto your selves, and whose Children
will you declare your selves at ^ast, by the Assistance that you give unto the
Drunkenness of those that are thereby confirmed in their having the Devil for
their Father? Woe ^o you, that make Indians twofold more the Children of Hell!
Satan had a Strong Hold of these doleful Tawnies before; but by the
Drunkenness, wherein you by your Strong Drink support them, there is no small
Strength added thereunto, he holds them in the faster Chains of Darkness.
Truly, Syrs, I will deal Freely with you, and you are a sort of Offenders, with
whom the Sharpest Rebukes, cannot be said to deal Harshly: no Freedom is to be
counted Harshness. One well says, To Complement Vice is next to Worshipping of
the Devil! This miscarriage of yours must not be Complemented; The best that
can be said of it, is, That you do no little Service for the Devil in what you
do.

There are Numberless Mischiefs, that unavoidably follow upon the Drunkenness,
wherein the Indians, by your means confound themselves; Even all the Woes of
Drunkenness. There is what is as bad as Rats bane in the Drink that you Sell
unto them; There Is Death in the pot! They are Spoilt for all Employment and
Business; and they that would not work before, now cannot work: their
Drunkenness has made them Good for nothing. Their Health is Lost; and they
often perish by other Disasters in their Drunkenness, consuting the Lying
Proverb, A Drunken man gets no harm. Especially, when they are Drowned in
Strong Drink, their Drink very frequently proves the occasion of their Drowning
in the Water. Yea, some of them have been Tragically Burnt to Death, going from
the Tortures of one Fire to another. And more than all This; It Is an usual
thing for their Drunkenness to put them upon Bloody Quarrels, and those have
sometimes issued in Bloody Murders. There may be a fearful Cry of Blood against
you, beyond what you are aware, for the Drink that you have Sold. The paltry
bit of Money that you have taken for a bottel of Rum, or a pot of Cider, may be
the price of Blood! Fearful to be spoken! All these Mischiefs Ly at your Door,
Ye Miserables, who Sell unto them the Drink, that will certainly open the Door
to these Mischiefs: You are Acce^^sary to them All. Can you think of it,
without some Astonishment?

But there is, what is yet more Astonishing, The Glorious Gospel of God is made
wof^lly Un^successful among the Indians, especially by thi^ Vice of Drunkenness
getting in so much among them. The Gospel, which forbids Drunkenes^ under the
dreadfullest penalties imaginable, how can it be welcome unto a Generation of
Drunk^ards! There have been, and yet are Churches among our Indians; and,
Peantamapang, as they call themselves, or, men professing Religion; and, if I
mistake not, there are at this Time, above Thirty Assemblies of Indians, (though
small ones) in one of our Provinces, that meet for the Worship of the Lord
Jesus Christ. But it is the Lamentation of all Virtuous men, who behold it, and
even of the Indians themselves, That the Evangelical Work is in extreme Danger
of coming to nothing: The Good O^der in their Churches is Languishing; The
Christian Religion it self is like to be lost among them: That Great Work,
which has been the Glory of New England, and which already too much comes too
Little, is like e're long utterly to Expire and Vanish; and indeed the Decays
that have already prevailed upon it, are Deplorable. Yea, I tremble to write,
what I have lately Read, That some Old men among the Indians, affirm, that when
they were Heathens, many of them were not such great Villians, as they are
since they were Christians. Now, You Sellers of Drink to these Indians are the
cause of all this Wretchedness It Is the concurrent sense of all who have any
knowledge of the Indian Affayrs, That except a stop can be given unto your
Ungodly Trade of Selling Drink unto the Indians, a Flood of Drunkenness, is
like to Swallow up all that is good among them. And those Ministers of the Lord
Jesus Christ, who are carrying unto the Indians, the Tidings of that Great
Savior, are Sighing, That they Labor in vain, and spend their strength for
naught, because ^et them do what they can, Strong Drink does undo it all again;
and there are [But whose Ministers are those, think you?] those that by Selling
Drink unto these wild Creatures, do so deprave them, and stupify them, and
b^uiti^y them, it is impossible so much as to bestow a little Cicuration upon
them, and reduce them from any part of their Barbarous Wildnes^. Now, if the
Blessed Apostle, when he saw a Sorcerer withstand the passage and progress of
the Word of God, could Set his Eyes on him, and say, [Act. 13.10.] O full of
all mischief, thou Child of the Devil, thou Enemy of all Righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord? Certainly, the Servants
of the Lord Jesus Christ, obstructed by your means in their Service to Him, and
the Success of His Word, may say to such a Drink-Seller, O thou doer of unknown
mischief, by bewitching the poor Indians against all Good by the Word of God;
Why do thou so much gratify the Devil, and show thy Enmity to all
Righteousness, by making it impossible for the Indians to leave their old
Indian Tracks, or to learn the right ways of the Lord? Even the French
Missionaries cry, Shame, upon you, as Acosta long since did also upon his own
Countrymen; and they who Teach Idolatry to the Indians, are Scandalized at it,
that you Teach them Drunkenness: Both of them indeed are Damnable; but your
part is far more inexcusable than Theirs; They Think, that they Save the Souls
of the Pagans, you know that you Damn them.

Can you now without some consternation Reflect upon the Scandal that you give?
For a man to have the Blood of Souls to answer for; truly, it is a Tremendous
Thing! Has that man himself any Interest in a CHRIST, or can he hope for it,
who does what he can to keep others, Without Christ, and Without Hope? Did that
man ever consent, that the Lord should Reign over himself, who does what he
can, that the Lord may not Reign over others? Or will not the Lord in His just
Vengeance Destroy those Enemies who thus would not have him to Reign? Is any
one Sin yet pardoned unto that man, who does what he can, to keep others from
seeking after the pardon of their Sin, and plunge them into more Sin? Is not
that man yet under the formidable Wrath of God, who does what he can to keep
others with that Wrath abiding on them, and from seeking to be delivered from
the Wrath to come? Can that man preserve his own Soul, from the Hands of Satan,
who does what he can to betray the Souls of others into the Hands of the fierce
Destroyer? Shall ^e go to Heaven himself, who does what he can ^o keep others
out of Heaven? To make Indians Drunk, is to do all of This; and to Sell them
Drink, as they are known to be disposed, is to make them Drunk. The Souls of
these Drunken Indians, will go down into the place of Torment; but whither will
they go, think ye, and how horribly shall they be Tormented, that have brought
them thither? That there is indeed a place of Torment in ( Hades or) the
Invisible World, for Ungodly men, is a thing visible, even to the Natural
Conscience of every man. We see Ill men unjustly inflict most intolerable
Torments on Good men; and if there be a just God, as we are sure there is,
Reason and Conscience will say, there are as insufferable Torments to be
suffered by those Ill men, in another world. The Indians do by Drunkenness
prepare themselves for a worse portion of those Torments, ^han would otherwise
have been Dispensed unto them from the infinite Vengeance of God: And you, by
helping them to the Fuel of their Drunkenness, do but make your selves a Fuel
^or those very Fires of the Divine Indignation in Hell, wherein They shall be
ever making Satisfaction unto the Justice of Heaven. Will you then throw your
selves into those Everlasting Torments, where the Roaring Indians being made
your Companions, will upbraid you. It Is you English men, that have brought us
hither!

But what Gains do you propose unto your selves by this Desperate Action? A few
Pennies, or Shillings. The Souls, the Immortal Souls of the Indians, and you
own Souls, into the Bargain, may then Cry out upon you, A Goodly price are we
valued at, of them! I beseec^ you, Sirs, Don't set such a contemptible Price,
upon ^ Precious and Immortal SOUL! Which if a man d^ lose, he is a sad Looser,
though he have gained the who^^ World. And yet, I must also tell you, That even
thos^ little Gains, which you make by this vile Trade, will have a secret, but
a speedy, Blast upon them: You'^ suddenly find, That you have gained nothing at
all, bu^ put all into a Bag with Holes. If it be (and that man is more an
Atheist, than the very Devil that Articled against Job of old, who will not
grant, that it is) The Blessing of God on the work of men's Hands, by which
their Substance is increased: you must Expect little Increas^ from the Trade of
Selling Drink to the Indians; for yo^ cannot expect the Blessing of God on the
work of you^ Hands; It would be a Blasphemy for you to Ask or Look for His
Blessing. It may be, you take Advantage from the Insatiable Thirst of the
Indians after Strong Drink t^ Squeeze Rich Penn'oths out of them. This does bu^
add unto your Iniquity; For that man is an Oppresso^ in his Dea^ings, who does
not conform to these two Golden Rules of Charity in them. First, To Deal b^
others as I would have them Deal by me; And, Next, T^ a^m at the Good of those
with whom I Deal, as well as at m^ own. Wherefore, you do but Cheat the
Indians, when you find the Madness of their Lust, lays them open unto your
Tricks upon them, and then play upon them with such Tricks, as cause them, when
they come unt^ themselves, even to Tear their own Hair for Madnes^ Go write
then, at the Foot of your unlawful Gains those two Texts for the Sum Total of
them: [1 These. 4 6.] Let no man go beyond, and defraud his Brother in any
matter, for God is the Avenger of all such. And, [Jer. 17.11.] He that gets
Riches, and not by Right, shall leave them in the midst of his Days, and at his
End shall be a Fool. Inexcusable is your Blindness, if you don't See, or, your
Hardness if Seeing it, you are not Moved with ^t, That a wonderful Blast, and
Curse from God, has been upon the Estates, that have been advanced by Indian
Drunkeness. While the Preachers of Truth un^o the Indians, have been Rema^kably
Blessed in their Estates, the Sellers of Drink unto them, have been as
Remarkably Blasted. A strange Punishment has been upon those Workers of
Iniquity; and the Treasures which they have gotten by their Iniquity, have been
mere Treasures of Snow, very strangely Melted under the Burning Anger of God.

And if the Holy God should be provoked, [which who fears not?] again to let
the Indians be Intoxicated unto the Fury of making another War upon us, as the
^niquity of your Coveteousness will doubtless be one of the principal
Provocations, that procure so dire a Calamity, ^o you will be sure of no little
Share in that Calamity. Be sure your Sin will find you out, as that of your
Brethren ^n the East, has done Them, and their Trading Houses; ^he Objects on
whom you have Sinned, may be the Agents ^y whom you shall be Plagued; and God
may give you Blood to Drink in Revenge of the Drink with which ^ou have
poisoned and ruined the Souls of them, that He will now Commission to be the
Executioners of His Wrath upon you, even, a Wrath unto the uttermost.

These are some of the Faithful Admonitions, which (...) the Name and Fear of
God, were to be set before ^ou. And for the Conclusion of them, I Admonish ^ou
to meditate on that awful Word of God, in Hab. 2.15. Woe to him, that gives his
Neighbor Drink, that put thy Bottle to him, and makes^ him Drunken.



Being then at length terrified, by the terrible Woe, which you have incurred,
by Selling the Indians Drink, and putting your Bottle unto them, to make them
Drunk, that you may get their Money, or their Peltry, or perhaps their Corn
from them, I hope, you will even mingle your Tears with your Drink, for what
you have done. I hope you will Fly to the Mercy of God, in the Blood of the
Lo^d Jesus Christ, that your Bloody Sin may ^e forgiven. I hope, you will
Resolve to For^bear the Detestable Trade for the Time to come and believe that
there will be nothing Lost by Despising and Detesting the Gains of such a Trade.

The little that a Righteous man enjoys, with the peace of his own Conscience,
will be far bette^ than all the Riches of all the wicked men, tha^ have gone to
Enrich themselves, by Debauch^ing the Thirsty Salvages, who are never bette^
pleased than in adding Drunkenness unto their Thirst.

May the God of all Grace, now give a Gra^cious Effect unto this Advice, from,
one who is, A Mourner for your Sin, and a wisher of your (...)


