By His Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, Captain General and Governor in
Chief of His Majesty's Province of New York, and Territories depending thereon
in America, and Vice Admiral of the same, etc. A PROCLAMATION
WHereas His most Excellent Majesty has received Advice, That several Ships of
Force, fitted out of Scotland, were designed to settle themselves in some parts
of America; and lest the same should derogate from the Treaties his Majesty
has entered into with the Crown of Spain, or be otherwise prejudicial to any
of his Majesty's Colonies in America, His Majesty has been pleased to signify
his Royal Pleasure to Me, That I should strictly forbid all his Majesty's
Subjects or others, inhabiting within the Districts of my Government, that they
forbear holding any Correspondence with, or giving any assistance to any of the
said Persons, while they are engaged in the aforesaid Enterprise; and that no
Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, or other Necessaries whatsoever, be carried from
hence to them, nor be permitted to be carried, either in their own Vessels, or
any other Ship or Vessel for their Use. In pursuance of his Majesty's said
Royal Will and Pleasure, I have thought fit, by and with the Advice of his
Majesty's Council of this Province, to publish and Declare his Majesty's said
Pleasure, and by these Presents do strictly Charge and Command all and every of
his Majesty's Subjects, and others within this Province and Territories
depending thereon in America, That they forbear holding any Correspondence
with, or giving any Assistance to such Person or Persons, who have been fitted
out of Scotland in manner aforesaid, and are said to have settled in a certain
place, which they have called Callidonia, That no Provisions, Arms, Ammunition,
or other Necessaries whatsoever, be carried either in their own Vessels, or in
any other Ship or Vessel for their Use, from this Province, or any part
thereof. And his Majesty's Collector and Receiver General, and all other
Officers of his Majesty's Custom-House, are hereby required to take Notice
hereof accordingly.

And I do further strictly Charge, Command and Forbid (by and with the Consent
of his Majesty's Council, as aforesaid) all his Majesty's said Subjects, and
others within this Province, That they neither by themselves, nor by any other
Persons, authorized by them, do, contrary to his Majesty's Royal Pleasure as
aforesaid, hold any Correspondence, or give any Assistance, or enter into any
Traffic or Commerce with such Persons as are said to be settled in Callidonia
aforesaid. And if any Person or Persons within this Province, by themselves,
their Factors or Agents, shall, contrary to, and against the true intent and
meaning of this his Majesty's Royal Will and Pleasure signified unto me, as
aforesaid, hold any Correspondence, or give any Assistance, or enter into any
Traffic or Commerce, in manner aforesaid, then all such Person or Persons so
acting, as aforesaid, shall incur such Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures, as by
Law in such Cases are provided. And all his Majesty's Subjects, and others,
within this Province, are hereby Required to take due Notice hereof, and to
observe his Majesty's said Royal Will and Pleasure in all and every of the
Premises, as they will answer the Contrary at their Peril.

Given at Fort William Henry in New York the 15 th Day of May, 1699. and in the
Eleventh Year of his Majesty's Reign. By Order, B. Cosens, Cl. Concilij.
Bellomont.

God Save the KING.
Printed by W. Bradford, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, in
New York, 1699.

By His Excellency Edward Viscount Cornbury, Captain General and Governor in
Chief of her Majestys Provinces of New York, New Jersey, and Territories
depending thereon in America, and Vice Admiral of the same, etc. A Proclamation.
WHereas I have thought fit, for her Majestys Service, to Restore Thomas
Byerly, Esquire to his Office of Collector and Receiver General of this Province of
New York, I do therefore, by and with the Advice of her Majesty's Council for
this Province, hereby publish, declare, require and command that all and every
person and persons within this Province, who now are, or at any time hereafter
shall be indebted unto her Majesty in any Sum or Sums of Money whatsoever, for
Duties of Customs, Quit-Rents, Excise, or any other Branch of her Majesty's
Revenue of this Province, or who are or shall be in arrear for any Taxes raised
within this Province, and payable to the Collector and Receiver General of the
same, or to the Commissioner or Commissioners for executing that Office, That
they forbear to pay the same or any part thereof, to Peter (...), Esquire late
Commissioner for executing the said Office of Collector and Receiver General of
this Province, or to any person or persons by his Order, upon any pretense
whatsoever, but that they make Payment thereof unto the said Thomas Byerly, and
to no other person or persons whatsoever, at their peril.

Given at Fort-Anne in New York this 6 th Day of February, in the fifth year of
the Reign of our Sovereign Lady ANNE, by the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland, Queen, Defender of the Faith, etc. Annoque
Domini, 1706 By Order of His Excellency, GEO. CLARKE.
CORNBVRY

God Save the Queen.

