The FOLLY OF Sinning, Opened and Applied, In Two SERMONS, Occasioned by the
Condemnation of one that was Executed at Boston in New England, on November 17
th. School.

By Increase Mather, Praesident of Harvard College in Cambridge, and Preacher
of the Gospel at Boston in N.E.

Rom 16, 19 I would have you wise unto that which is good, and simple
concerning evil.

Boston, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Michael Perry over against the
Town House, and Nicholas Buttolph at the corner of Gutteridges Coffee-House.
1699.

THE FOLLY OF Sinning.
SERMON I.
Prove. XIV. 9. Fools make a Mock at Sin.


THERE is a great Variety of Readings, and thence of Interpretation of these
words among Expositors, which I shall not trouble you, my design not (...)
Criticize, which would tend little (...) ^dification of such an Auditory, (...)
plain and practical (...) of God.

(...) this verse, two sorts of (...), viz. Fools and (...) (...) ^^ghteous are
described in the latter part of the verse. It is said, That with them is
favor, or as the Hebrew word ( Ratzon) may be translated, Pleasure. Righteous
men take pleasure in doing righteous things. They delight in keeping the Law.
It is a pleasure to them to please God; but Fools (who are in the words before
us set in opposition to the Righteous) are described from a contrary property;
their delight is in Sin. They mock at Sin. They deride (as the original word is
sometimes rendered) at being guilty of Sin. Their own and other men's sins are
more a matter of mi^th than any thing else. They make a light matter of it. Sin
is the least thing that troubles them. This is here mentioned as a sign of
extreme folly. Wherefore the Doctrine from the words, is,

That they who make a light matter of Sin, are the greatest fools in the world.

The Doctrine may be Confirmed in three Propositions.

PROPOSITION I.
Sin is an Evil not to be made light of. Several things may be mentioned which
are sad Evidences, Convictive Demonstrations of the Truth before us.

Demon. 1. Sin is the greatest Evil. There is not, nor can there be another
Evil, so evil as Sin is. The Scripture calls it by the Name of Evil. Psalm. 34
13. Keep thy tongue from evil, that is from Sin. And Verse. 14. Depart from
evil, and do good. The good there spoken of is moral good* And the Evil is
moral Evil, i e. Sin, which by way of Eminency is said to be evil. Yea, it is
not only an Evil, but the Evil. Joh^ ^^ 15. I pray not that thou would take
them out of the world, but that thou would it keep them from the evil: viz.
from Sin, which is the evil the evils. It is Sin which has made all other
things evil. It has made the best and most excellent Creatures in the world to
become the worst. It has made the Fallen Angels to (...) Evil Angels: Whereas
in their First Estate they were Glorious Creatures Sons of God, and Morning
Stars. How great must that Evil be, which can turn an Angel into a Devil? Sin
has done this, and that as to millions of them. There are more Devils then
there are men in in the World; since there is no man, but there are Devils to
Tempt him unto sin; and we read in the Gospel of thousands of Devils possessing
one miserable man. It is Sin that has made so many Devils. Man was a glorious
Creature before he was a Sinner. The most glorious Creature that ever was made,
next to the Angels. Psalm. 8.5. thou have made him a little lower than the
Angels, and have crowned him with glory and honor; but Sin has made him the
worst Creature on the Earth. It has made him to be worse, nay, to be more
irrational than the beasts that perish. How often are Sinners charged with
acting more unreasonably than the beasts do. Isa. 1.3. The Ox knows his Owner,
and the Ass his Masters Crib, but Israel does not know, my people does not
understand. Alas! they were worse then bruits, who will pay some acknowledgment
to their Fee^er. A Beast wont meddle with that which he knows by an instinct of
natu^^ is poysonful and hurtful to him; yet thus irrational are men. Although
they are told, and cannot but know that Sin is deadly poison, and that if they
commit such Sins, their Souls must die for it; for all that they will venture.
Sin has made men to be thus unreasonable. Nor is there any Creature on earth an
enemy to God, but only man, and Sin has made him so. It is Sin that has made
this World to be an Evil World. Gal. 1.4. This present evil world. Had it not
been for Sin, this World had never been an Evil One. It has brought a Curse and
Misery on the Creation, so that the whole Creation sighs under it, and groans
to be delivered from that corruption, bondage, vanity and misery which the sin
of men has caused it to become subject unto. Romans 8.22. There had never been
any other Evil, if it had not been for Sin. No man would ever have known by an
experience of it, what Evil meant. Hence the forbidden Tree was called the Tree
of knowledge of good and evil. Genesis 2.17. Men should have had an experimental
knowledge of Good only, and not of Evil, if they had not sinned, Sin then is
the greatest evil. (...) an only evil; Other Evils have some mixture of good in
them, but Sin has not so; Nor is it possible ever to make it good; Nor has it
in its own nature any tendency unto good. It is not the cause of any good. It
is true, that Sin may through the wisdom power and goodness of God, ordering
and overruling all things, be an occasion of good. This we see in Onesimus,
who was gui^ty of theft, and ran away from his Master, and was Committed to
Prison, where the Apostle Paul became the Instrument of his Conversion. Philem.
10. A great sin may be an occasion of the Conversion, and so of the Salvation
of a Sinner, but not the cause of it. A corrupt Tree can not bring forth good
fruit. Does a Fountain send forth at the same place sweet water and bitter. No
Fountain can yield both salt water and fresh. Iam. 3. 11, 12. All the waters of
sin, are salt and bitter. Nor does any thing but what is bitter, come out of
this Fount^^n. If we compare Sin with other Evils, we shall see that it is
worse than any of them all. It is a greater evil than any Affliction. A man had
beetter (...) many Afflictions than one sin. Affliction though evil has some good
in it, but so has not Sin. David said, it is (...) for me that I have been
afflicted. Psalm. 119.71. He does not say, it is good for me that I have sinned.
Gods Children find Afflictions to be profitable things unto them. He does
chasten them for their profit Heb. 12 10. Therefore they may bless God for
sending Afflictions on them. It is reported concerning that Holy man, Mr. Dod,
that when a very bitter Affliction befell him, Well (said he) I will go into my
Study and bless God for this Affliction, for I am persuaded that He intends to
do me good by it. But a man may not say, I thank God I was left, to commit such
a sin. The Lord has promised that He will in faithfulness afflict his Children;
He will hedge up their way with Thorns, to prevent them from sinning. In the
Covenant of Grace there is a promise of Physic as well as (...) Food:
Afflictions are Physic for the Soul; but the Lord has not promised that He
will leave his Servants to fall into great sins, although He has promised that
if they do so, He will recover them out of their (...). Outward Afflictions
will not cause God to depart. When Joseph was Sold into Egypt, God was with
him. Act. 7.9. His Serv^^^s (...) experience more of his presence with them,
then when under sore Afflictions and Temptations. When they walk through the
midst of the Valley of the shadow of death He is with them. Psalm. 23.4. But Sin
will cause God to depart. A Prophet said, The Lord is wtth you, whilst you are
with him, but if you forsake Him, He will forsake you. 2 Chronicles. 15.2. When
Israel Sinned, the Lord withdrew from them, and told them that if they did not
put away the accursed thing, He would be with them no more. Josh. 7.12. Sampson
found this to be true by woeful experience, although He was not at first
sensible of it. Judge. 16.20. He wist not that the Lord was departed from him.
It was because he had Sinned, that the Lord departed from him. When the case is
so with a man, that he must either suffer or sin, if he is wise, he will choose
to suffer any thing rather then sin. Moses did like a Wise man, when he chose
rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures
of Sin. Heb. 11.25. For the greatest Affliction has not so much evil in it as
the least Sin. Death is a more formidable evil than Affliction: But Sin is far
more evil then Death it self. Solomon found it to be more bitter than (...)
Eccles. 7.26. And so shall every Sinner find it to be, either by bitter
Repentance for it, or else by being punished for it, when Repentance will be
too late. Men ought to resist unto blood striving against sin. Heb. 12.4. They
ought rather to loose their blood, to part with their lives, then to Sin
against God, Thousands of Saints have chosen Death rather than Sin. It is said
of the Primitive Martyrs, they Loved not their lives unto death. Rev. 12.11.
They might have lived much longer if they would have Sinned to save their
Lives; but they chose rather to die than to sin: Some of the Blessed Martyrs
chose to be tortured to death, rather than to commit a seemingly little sin.
Ecclesiastical Story informs of one that had his life offered to him on
condition that he would contribute but so much as one half penny to encourage
the Building of an Idolatrous Temple; but he chose rather to die by most
Exquisite Torments. And the Scripture speaks of them who were tortured not
accepting deliverance. Heb. 11.35. When that bloody Tyrant Antiochus told those
Martyrs he would spare their lives if they would but eat one mouthful of Swines
(...) they chose rather to be tortured to death, than to transgress the Law of
God, although it were but in a Ceremony. Sin is a greater evil than Hell it
self. Yea, there is more evil in one sin, then in all the Everlasting Burnings
of the bottomless pit. The Holy God has made Hell to punish Sinners. He has
ordained Tophet of old, He has made it deep and large, the pile thereof is fire
and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone does kindle
it. Isa. 30.33. But God is not the Author of Sin. He is the punisher of it, has
made a strict Law against it; bu^ never was or can be the Author of it. Now if
Sin be the greatest Evil, more evil than Affliction, then Death, then Hell it
self, it ought not to be made light of.

2. Sin displeases God. Therefore it should not please men Z^ch. 1.2. The Lord
has been sore displeased with your Fathers. He would never have been displeased
with them at all, if it had not been for Sin. The sins of men are called their
Offenses. Hos 5.15. until they acknowledge their offense. Shall a poor creature
make a light matter of offending the Almighty? Sin cannot but be displeasing to
God, because it is contrary to his reveal^^ Will. Every Sin is a violation of
that Law which is expressive of the Holy Will of God. It is indeed a despising
of the Law. Lev. 26.15. If ye shall despise my Statutes. Sinners cast away the
Law of the Lord of Hosts, and despise the Word of the Holy One of Israel. Isa.
5.24. A Sinner is a practical Blasphemer; he says of the Law of God, that it
is no good Law; that it is a Law not worth the regarding. Neh. 9.26. They cast
the Law behind their backs, as a man casts a thing that he despises, behind
his back. A Sinner Judges the Law. Jam. 4.11. by transgressing it, he judges
it to be a bad Law. Is such blasphemy a light matter, or to be mocked at? Sin
is Rebellion against the Lord. Hos. 13.16 Samaria has rebelled against her God.
Sinners make an Insurrection against Heaven. Mic. 2 8. They are risen up
against me as an Enemy. They take up Arms against the Infinite and Eternal
Majesty. Act 5 39 They are found even to fight against God. Sin grieveth the
Heart of God. When the Old World became exceeding sinful, it repented the Lord
that he made man on the Earth, and it grieved him at the heart. Genesis 6.6. (...)
the Children of Israel were in the Wilderness. Forty years was he grieved with
a sinful generation. Psalm. 95.10. The Lord speaks of the sins of men as if his
heart were broken by them. Ezekiel. 6.9. I am broken with their whorish heart,
which has departed from me. And shall men make light of that which is so
grievous to God! Sin is a dishonor to his Name. Romans 2.23. By breaking the Law
thou dishonourest God. Some sins especially cast horrible contempt on the
Glorious Name of God. Sins against knowledge (which the Scripture calls
presumptuous Sins do so. Numb. 15.30. The Soul that does ought presumptuously
reproacheth the Lord, as if he were either an Ignorant or an Impotent God: As
if he either did not know that such an affront was offered to his Name, or had
not power to revenge it. Sin is a practical disowning and denying the glorious
Attributes of the Ever Blessed God. When men sin, they do not really believe
the Omnipresence of God. Ezekiel. 8.12. They say the Lord sees us not, the Lord
has forsaken the earth. There are Sinners, that if they thought a man, nay, a
child of seven years old, that could tell of it, saw them, they would not
commit that sin. Do they then really believe that God sees (...) That He by
(...) they must be Judged another day, looks on them all that while! By sin men
defy his Power: Sinners give the Almighty the challenge. Isa. 5.19. They said,
Let him make speed and hasten his work, that we may see it, and let the Counsel
of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it. q. d. He has
threatened us a long time, but why does not he do what he threatens? Let him
come and do his worst, the sooner the better, we fear him not. We must not
suppose that they did in words thus express themselves, but this was the
language of their sinful practices. They lived as if they had been really of
that opinion, as if they thought they could be too hard for the Almighty. Sin
calls the Truth of God into Question God says, If thou do transgress my Law,
ye shall surely die for it: But Sin and the Devil says, it may be not for all
that. Genesis 3.8. Therefore it must needs provoke him. How are men provoked if
their fellow creatures give them the Ly? And will not the most High God be
offended, when wretched men shall make him a Liar? Sin strikes at the very Life
and Being of God: It says, (...) there is no God in Heaven. It is an Iniquity
to be punished by the Judge, for it denies the God that is above. Job 31.28. So
far as a man is a Sinner, he is an Atheist. Psalm. 14 1. The fool has said in
his heart that there is no God. It is hardly possible for a man with a rational
soul really to believe that there is no God; but the fool wishes there were
none. And he does not believe that there is such a God as indeed there is. He
is ready to think that God is altogether such another as himself, which is to
Ungod him. He says in his heart, that God is not so Holy a God as his Ministers
and as his Word declares him to be, which is in effect to say, that He is no
God: For if He should be less holy then He is, He should cease to be God.
Holiness is called the Life of God. Ephesians. 4.18. Wherefore Sin which strikes at
the Life of God, is the highest Treason. And is it then to be made light of? By
what has been said, it is manifest, that Sin is highly displeasing to the Lord;
and the Lord himself has in more ways then one made it known, that Sin does
provoke the Eyes of his Glory. He has made men and Angels to see that he can
not endure it, by his punishing of it. Sometimes the Holy God has (...)
dreadful punishment on his Creatures for one sin. So He did on all the Angels
that sinned. Jude 6 The Angels which kept not their first estate, he has
reserved in Everlasting Chains under darkness, unto the Judgment of the Great
Day. Would the Great God banish millions of those most Glorious Creatures out
of Heaven, and damn them to Chains of Everlasting Darkness, for one sin, it Sin
were not an evil infini^ely displeasing to him! So Adam and all his Posterity,
of which there are thousands of millions, are made miserable for one sin. They
are all condemned to die for that one sin. Romans 5.12. By one man Sin entered into
the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men. And in verse 14.
It is said, that Death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not
Sinned after the similitude of Adams Transgression. There were about two
thousand and five hundred years from Adam to Moses. All that lived in that
Time, even Infants, and all who never sinned after the similitude of Adams
Transgression, yet are dead, because of that sin of his. So all that have lived
and died in succeeding Ages. In ver. 18. the Apostle says, (...) by the offense
of one, (or as the words di henos paraptomatos may be read) by one offense
Judgment came upon all men to Condemnation. No Sin of Adam, excepting one, was
imputed to his Posterity, viz. his first sin in eating the forbidden fruit; for
after that he ceased to be a public person representing all mankind; so then,
for that one sin, he and all his Posterity were condemned to Death. Behold yet
further the severity of God. He has sometimes punished seemingly little sins
after a dreadful manner, that men might see how their sins displease him, and
that they might tremble to sin against him. When Nabad and Abihu instead of
taking fire from the Altar according to Divine Institution, would follow their
own invention, and make use of another fire, without any warning given to them
to repent of their sin, God killed them in a moment; there went out fire from
the Lord and devoured them, and they dyed. When in the Wilderness a man did but
gather a few sticks on the Sabbath day, God from Heaven commanded that that man
should be stoned to death. When Uzzah inconsiderately took hold on the Ark,
intending no harm, only to keep it from falling God smote him for his error;
and (...) dyed by the Ark of God. When the men of Bethshemesh looked into the
Ark, probably with no ill design, only to see whether the Philistans had not
taken something out of it, the Lord smote of the people, fifty thousand and
threescore and ten men. I Sam. 6.19. some have wondered how that could be,
because Bethshemesh was a small Town, not containing fifty thousand, nor so
many as five thousand; but as it is probable the people round about the Country
hearing that the Ark was come to Bethshemesh, came flocking thither, and did
irreverently look upon it, (which they might not do) and some would be
look-into it; and for this error, above fifty thousand, not of the men of
Bethshemesh only, but of the people, lost their lives. So highly is God
offended at sin. But his Holy Displeasure at sin appears in nothing so much, as
in the dreadful sufferings of the Lord Jesus Christ, when he stood in the room
of Sinners, sustaining their person before God his Father. Romans 8.32. He spared
not his own Son. Christ is Gods own Son, and a Son that never offended him in
any thing. Christ is dearer to God than (...) Angels in heaven, or men on
earth. Neverthess, when He became a Surety for Sinners, God would not spare
him, nor abate him any thing of the punishment due for sin. The truth is, God
never pardoned any sin without satisfaction made for the in^ury done to his
Name thereby. No sin but God either has punished it in the Surety and Savior
of Sinners, or he will punish it in the Sinner himself to all Eternity. And
shall wretched Creatures make a light matter of that which is so hateful unto
God! This therefore shall be the next Demonstration of the Truth before us.

3. The Sins of the E^ect were the procuring cause of all the bitter Sufferings
which Jesus Christ the Son of God Endured. Christ had no Sin of his own to
suffer for. Dan. 9.26. M^ssiah shall be cut off, but not for Himself; not for
any thing that He had done amiss. Inasmuch as the Man Christ Jesus is the Son
of God, or one in person with the Eternal Son of God, it was impossi^le that He
should Sin: In Him dwells the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and therefore He
neither did nor could Sin. But the Sins of His People imputed to him. 2 Cor.
5.21. God has made him to be Sin for us who knew no Sin, that we might be made
the Righteousness of God in him. God has imputed the guilt of the Sins of his
Elect unto his Son Jesus Christ, who out of Love to his Fathers Glory and the
Salvation of his People, was willing that it should be so: He was therefore
made a Sin Offering, that so God might deal with us as if we were Sinless and
Righteous. Because Christ sustained the person of Gods Elect, the punishment
which was due to them fell upon him Isa. 53.5, 6. He was wounded for our
Transgression, he was bruised for our Iniquities. The Lord has said on him the
iniquity of us all; that is the punishment due to us all has been laid upon
Him. This was taught by the Sacrifices under the Law. The Creature offered as a
Sacrifice must be killed, by which the off^rer confessed that he deserved to die
for his Sins, only the Creature was to die for him The Gospel of which, was,
That Christ, dying in our stead has Saved us from Eternal Death. G^l 3 13.
Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law being made a Curse for us The
Curse of the Law is (...) ^^pressibly dreadful thing; nevertheless, Christ the
Son of God became Subject to it, because of our Sins, that he might deliver us
from the Curse. What terrible things did Christ suffer for our sakes? Never man
did, nor could suffer so much as He the blessed Son of God endured on our
account. Isa. 52.14. His visage was so marred more than any man and his form
more thaen the sons of men. His Holy Body endured most exquisite pain and
misery. 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bore our sius in his own Body on the
Tree. When he was Crucified, his holy hands and feet had nails driven through
them* whereby he was fastened to the Cross, because our works and walkings had
been evil in the sight of God. Those sinewy parts, the hands and feet cannot be
pierced through without inexpressible pain. In this misery did the Son of God
hang on the Cross for six hours one after another, that so we for our sins
might not be hung up in Everlasting Chains of misery as we deserved. But
Christ's Bodily Sufferings, were nothing t^ the sufferings of his Soul. He
poured out his Soul unto death; His Soul was made an offering for sin. He felt
the pangs of the Second Death (...) pain whereof is unconceivable. (...)
therefore in an Agony in the Garden, and sweat great drops of blood, and prayed
with strong cries and tears, that if it were possible that Cup might pass from
him. Can we think that the Son of God would have been in such an Agony, if he
had been to suffer nothing but a bodily death? Would the thoughts of that have
put him into a bloody Sweat! Shall we imagine that he had less courage in him
then some of the Martyrs! But if Christ endured all this for our sins, shall we
make a light matter of Sins. The consideration of what Christ suffered for our
Sins, should make us afraid of the least Sin, and not to make a light matter of
any Sin: No not of idle words. No man ever spoke an idle word in his life, but
either Christ dyed to obtain the pardon of it; or, he that has been guilty of
it, must die for ever for it. Nor was there ever a sinful, no nor so much as a
vain thought in the heart, but if Christ the Son of God had not dyed to obtain
the forgiveness of that thought of thy heart, thou must have lain under the
Curse (...) Wrath of God for it throughout (...). Say now, is Sin to be mocked

4. Sin is the procuring cause of all those Judgments which men are exposed
unto Jer. 4.18. Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee:
This is thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because it reaches to ^hine
heart. What bitter sorrows and miseries do some Sinners undergo? They may thank
Sin for it all. Should they then mock at, and make mirth with sin? There are
three sorts of Judgments which Sin exposes men unto; all which show that it is
not an evil to be made light of.

1. There are Temporal Iudgmen^s. All the Afflictions which besal the Sinner
whilst in this World are the fruit of Sin. Psalm. 107.17. Fools because of their
Transgression, and because of their Iniquity, are afflicted. Poverty is a great
affliction, and Sin is the cause of it. That provokes the Lord to send
Impoverishing Judgments on a whole Land sometimes. Isa 42.24. Who gave Jacob
for a Spoil, and Israel to the Robbers? End not the Lord he against whom we
have sinned? M^n loose their Estates by Enemies, (...) water, by Fire. (...) if
it had not been for Sin, none of all this would ever have been. For a man (...)
loose his good Name is a greater evil (...) to loose his Estate, since a Good
Name is better than Riches; but this also is the effect of sin. Prove. 14.34.
Sin is a reproach to any people: Some sins especially are an everlasting
reproach to the person that shall be known to be guilty of them. Above all
other transgressions, vile breaches of the Seventh Commandment are so. The man
that shall be proved guilty of them, has lost his good name for ever. Prove.
6.32, 33. whosoever commits Adultery with a woman, lacks understanding, a
wound and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away.
That Sin will be a disgrace to him as long as he lives, and after he is dead
too. All bodily diseases, and death it self is the fruit of sin. Had it not
been for sin, Soul and Body had never been rent asunder. It is for sin that
some Die in youth, because they have been wicked overmuch, they die before their
time; and it may be by tragical and dismal deaths, by grievous deaths. They are
crushed in the Gate. The Sword of Justice cuts them off for being Criminals,
and not worthy to live. There is a great variety of Temporal ^udgments, and all
are the fruit of sins: (...) on particular persons, on Families, on Nations,
are the fruit of sin. How terrible is God in his doings sometimes toward the
children of men, in respect of public National Judgments, which their sins
pull down upon them? So on the Old World, when the Windows from on High were
opened, and God poured down the Cataracts of his Wrath on a sinful sinning
World: How many millions were swept away with that Beesom of Destruction? Sin
caused all the men, and women, and Children in the whole World to be drowned in
one year, excepting eight persons only. What a fearful day did Sin bring upon
Sodom and Gomorrah, when all the people in those Cities were destroyed in one
moment? It was Sin that provoked the Lord to rain down fire and brimstone, and
an horrible Tempest upon them. In our days, yea not five years ago, we have
heard of Earthquakes that have swallowed up whole Cities at once, and no less
then an hundred and forty thousand Souls then perished. Is Sin which brings
such Tremendous Judgments on the World to be mocked at, or made light of?

2. There are Spiritual Judgments, which although men are least sensible of ther^
(...) far more dreadful than any Temporal Ones. As the Soul is far more worth
than the Body, so Spiritual Judgments which lite on the Souls of men, are more
to be trembled at, than those which concern the outward man only. These are the
woeful fruit of Sin. The Loss of the Divine Image is a Spiritual Judgment. Sin
has brought that misery upon every man in the world. Romans 3.23. All have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God. There was in man before he sinned,
knowledge and wisdom, which made him resemble God, but sin has taken from him
that glory. But the Image of God in man did chiefly consist in that Holiness
wherewith his Soul was beautified. Without Holiness the Angels of Heaven would
be Damned Devils, and the Saints in Glory Damned Ghosts: But this Sin has
deprived men of. So that by nature no man has the least spark of grace or
holiness in him Romans 3.10. There is none righteous, no not one. But instead
thereof, all manner of spi^itual plagues has Sin brought on the miserable Souls
of men. A blind mind is a Spiritual Judgment which every (...) is smitten with.
He is blind, and (...) see afar off. Persons that have diseased Eyes, the light
hurts them; they see the worse for it. So does the light of the ^ospel as to
those that have minds prejudiced against the Truth: Therefore Christ said, For
Judgment am I come, that they which see might be made blind. Joh. 9. ^9.
Hardness of heart is a Spiritual Judgment: None of the ten plagues of Pharaoh
were so dreadful as that; but it is sin that hardens the hearts of men. Heb.
3.13. Take heed lest your hearts be hardened through the deceitfulness of Sin.
There are some, that there was a time when if they had committed such a Sin,
Hell would have been in their Consciences for it, but now they can do it, and
laugh and make a mock at what they have done. Thus are they smitten with
Judicial Hardness of heart. The Lord never punishes sin more fearfully then
when he punishes Sin with Sin. It may be a Sinner has been guilty of the sin
of Uncleanness. God to punish for it, leaves him to commit that Sin again, and
says, Let him that is filthy be filthy still. Or it may be, he shall be left
to another Sin, it may be to Murder it self, which is the greatest Sin against
the Second Table of the (...) Law. Yea, (which is awful to (...) Sins of
Omission provoke the Lord to leave men to sins of Commission. Psalm. 81.11, 12.
Israel would none of me. So I gave them up to their own hearts lust. Hearken
^ou that live in the neglect of Religious Duties: You that live without Prayer
in your Families. I have a dismal Story to tell you, and yet a true one. There
was a man Condemned and Executed for an odious Crime, (whom God out of his
Infinite Grace made a remarkable penitent) he then said, that he believed his
Sins of Omission, and in special his neglecting Prayer in his Family, provoked
God to leave him unto other sins, and at last to that sin for which he justly
suffered Death. Then let no man among you that has a Family, dare to live
without Prayer therein.

3. Sin is the procuring cause of Eternal Judgment. Mat. 25.46. The Wicked
shall go away into Everlasting Punishment. Sin brings upon men not only the
first, but that which is infinitely more terrible, The Second Death. The first
death is soon over, but the pains and pangs of the Second Death will never be
over. The first death is of the Body only, but the (...) Death is of the Body
and Soul too. Fear not them that can kill the Body, but fear him that can kill
both Body and Soul. How can the Soul which is Immortal be killed? The Soul
that is damned is killed. After the Resurrection and the Last Judgment the
Sinner must Body and Soul be cast into the Ever burning Lake. Murderers and
Whoremongers, and all Liars shall have their part in that Lake which burns with
fire and brimstone which is the Second Death. Rev. 21.8. In those Everlasting
Burnings must they be world without end. This comes of sinning against God. If
it had not been for Sin, there would have been no death, no hell. It is sin
that has kindled the Fire that never shall be quenched. Sin has filled the
bottomless pit with all the fire and brimstone that is there. It is sin that
has filled it with all those Treasures of Wrath that can never be consumed.
Shall we then make a light matter of Sin? Shall we be such Fools as to mock at
it? But thus for the fourth demonstration of the Truth before us.

5. One Sin unrepented of will be the ruin of a precious and Immortal Soul. The
Soul of a man is a most precious thing. How often have you been put in mind of
(...) Scripture, which a Religious man once advised a King to think of every
day, that Scripture: Mat. 16.26. What is a man profited if (...) shall gain the
whole world, and loose his own Soul? Or, what shall a man give in exchange for
his Soul? Although Sinners like fools as they are, know not the worth of their
own Souls, their Adversary the Devil knows it, and therefore will promise them
any thing if they will but let him have their Souls: He Will never stick at the
price; he will promise them the Enjoyment of that which their hearts are most set
upon. He Will promise them they shall have the things of the world; the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life; but if these things are
bought with the price of an Immortal Soul they are dearly bought indeed. That
Soul which is more worth than a world, sin hurts it. Heb. 2.10. thou have
sinned against thy Soul. Sin wrongs the Soul. Prove. 8.36. He that sins
against me, wrongs his own Soul. Sin brings woes upon the Soul. Isa. 3.9. They
declare their Sin as Sodom, they hide it not, woe unto their soul. They in Sodom
were not afraid nor ashamed to sin in the open street. So there (...) some
among us that will Curse and Swear as they go along the street. They declare
their Sin as Sodom,, woe unto their soul. There are some that are seen drunk and
staggering as they go along in the street; They declare their sin as Sodom, woe
unto their soul. There are some that when others are by, so impudent are they
as that they will be wanton and lascivious in their carriage, and utter obscene
filthy words, proceeding from a more filthy heart: They declare their Sin as
Sodom, woe unto their soul. Yea, Sin brings Everlasting Woe, it brings
destruction and ruin on the Souls of men: Sins against the Body are also
against the Soul: Abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the Soul; yea,
which destroy the soul. Prove. 6.32. He that commits adultery with a woman,
destroys his own soul. Now what an Evil is Sin which has destroyed millions of
Immortal Souls, which nothing else could hurt if it were not for sin? Nay, one
sin, if loved and lived in will be the ruin of a Soul. Therefore the Scripture
says, Repent and Turn your selves from all your Transgressions, so Iniquity
shall not d^ your ruin. Ezekiel. 18.30. But if there be one sin persisted in
without Repentance, that one will be the ruin of that miserable (...) Soul.
That one sin of Drunkenness, That one sin of Uncleanness, That one sin of an
Unbridled Tongue, That one sin of Lying, That one sin of scandalous
Coveteousness, That one sin of unmortified Pride if not turned from, will be
the Eternal Ruin of the Soul.

All these things Considered, surely sin is an Evil not to be mocked at, not to
be made light of. Before I proceed to the remaining Propositions for opening
the Doctrine before us, we shall conclude at present with a word of
Application. It is this, Oh Repent of Sin. This is that which all men are
concerned to hear. Do you think that in such an Assembly as is here this day, I
will say nothing but what concerns a poor Condemned prisoner? Nay, but let me
speak that which concerns us all. The Exhortation unto Repentance does so. Act.
17.30. God Commands all men every where to repent. For all men have sinned. If
there is a man in this Congregation that never sinned, Let not that man repent;
but such an one there is not, nor in the whole world, nor ever was there since
Adam, except only the Man Christ Jesus. As for (...) that have repented truly
and sincerely, yet they are to renew their Repentance. Especially, if they have
been guilty of backslidings from God, or have through Temptation fallen into
any known Sin, it concerns them Solemnly to renew their Repentance for that
particular Sin. When the Churches in Asia were like the Churches in
New England, very much degenerated, Christ from Heaven called upon them to
Repent, notwithstanding they had repented many years before that. Yea, though a
man should walk with never such exactness before the Lord, so as not to fall
into any Sin against his Conscience for many years together; for all that he
must continue repenting all his days. Let ungodly Antinomians upon whom God
has sent strong Delusion, say and think what they please, a Christian must
never cease repenting of Sin. That man who pretends to Peace and Assurance of
his Justification without this, does but deceive his own Soul. He does but walk
in the light of a fire which himself has kindled, and continuing so to die, he
shall lie down in Sorrow when repentance will be too late. Shall a man have the
guilt of heinous sins upon his Soul, and shall he not carry (...) with him a
Spirit of Mourning all his days! There is no man here, but the guilt of heinous
Sins have been upon his Soul* Adams Sin, Original Sin, the Sin of unbelief are
exceeding great Sins. Nevertheless, every one of us has been guilty of them
all. They that never repented of these or any other Sin, how are they concerned
Now to repent? Know therefore that you must either live or die forever according
as you shall obey this Commandment of the Gospel. It is said of the Gentiles,
that God gave them Repentance unto Life. Act. 11.19. So then Life is concerned.
As for Impenitent sinners, they are all under a sentence of Condemnation. The
Law has found them guilty: And God the Judge of all has Condemned them to dye
Eternally. It is in vain for any Sinner in the world to think that the sentence
of Death which God has pronounced upon him shall be reversed, or his Sins
pardoned if he repent not. Yea, it is in vain for him to hope that because he
pretends to Faith in Christ his Sins shall be remitted. For that Faith in
Christ which is not attended (...) unfaigned Repentance is no true (...) Christ
has therefore Commanded that Repentance and Remission of Sins should be
Preached in his Name. Act. 24 47. To Preach remission of Sins in the Name of
Christ, without Preaching Repentance is to profane that Sacred Name. Oh then if
ever you would have your Sins pardoned, and so your Souls to live for ever,
Repent and turn from all your Transgressions. And therefore think seriously and
sadly of the day of Judgment. God Commands all men to repent, because he has
appointed a day in which he will Judge the World in Righteousness, by that man
whom he has ordained. Act. 17 31. Would you have all your Secret Sins revealed
in the hearing of Heaven and Earth? If you would not, repent of them all* that
so they may be blotted out of that book where they are all written. Remember
this awful word; If thou should die with the guilt of but one Sin on thy Soul
Unrepented of, at the day of Judgment thou will wish that thou have never
been-born. And to awaken them unto repentance, let Sinners know that that great
day of the Lord is near at hand. Christ's coming to Judge the Earth is not so
far off, as carnal hearts wish, and as a secure world does imagine. Most of
those things which the (...) has said must come to pass before the Second
Coming of Christ, are already fullfilled. And therefore that glorious day
cannot be very far off. As therefore the Lord said when the time was near
wherein his Evangelical Kingdom was to be revealed. Mark 1.15. The time is
ful^filled, and the Kingdom of God is near at hand, Repent and believe the
Gospel. Thus now, many of those things which the Scripture has foretold the
accomplishment of, are fullfilled, and the Kingdom of Judgment is near at hand,
Repent ye therefore. Oh what a blessed thing would it be, if none in this
numerous Assembly might be found amongst the Impenitent in that day.

But let me direct this Exhortation particularly, To that Miserable Condemned
Young Creature, Sarah Threeneedle.
who is here before the Lord in this house this day. Poor Wretch! hearken as
for thy Life and Soul. I know you have with you some Printed Sermons which were
Preached on Occasion of the Execution of some who were Condemned for the same
bloody Crime which you (...) Convicted of, and must dye for. Nevertheless, a
few things let me now speak to you in the Name of the Lord.

Consider. 1. You have been a great Sinner: And in very Truth a great Fool.
Although you are little and young in years, you are great in Wickedness. It is
seldom seen that one so young as you are, has been guilty of such Prodigious
wickedness. You are (as I understand) hardly Nineteen years old, and yet ripe
for a Lamentable Destruction as to your Body, if not as to your Soul. You are
known to be guilty of Fornication and that more than once, and with more
persons than one, as young as you are: Oh horrid Shame! But besides that, you
have been guilty of Murder: Yea, and of unnatural Murder too. Can a woman
forget her Sucking Child that she should not have Compassion on the Son of her
Womb? She may, but then she must be unnatural. And so monstrously unnatural
have you been, as not to have Compassion on the Son of your Womb: but to be
guilty of Murdering it, whose blood Cries for Vengeance against you, from the
ground where you exposed it to death. You have defiled the Land wherein you
live. It should be an humbling Consid^^ration to you, that all this Provinc^^
(...) New England must fare the worse, and be exposed to the wrath of Heaven if
you should be suffered to live any longer in it: for so does the Scripture
speak. Numb. 35.31, 33. You shall take no satisfaction for the Life of a
Murderer which is guilty of blood. You shall not pollute the Land wherein you
are, for blood it defiles the Land, and the Land can not be cleansed of the
blood which is shed therein, but by the blood of him that shed it. Methinks you
should sometimes hear the blood of your woeful Infant, Crying, Vengeance!
Vengeance! Lord, upon my unnatural Mother, who murdered me as soon as I came
into the World. And what if you murdered its Soul as well as Body? What then do
you think will come on you? Nevertheless as vile a Sinner as you have been.

Consider 2. If you go to the Lord with a truly penitent heart, God will for
Christ sake forgive your sin. This will God do, not for the sake of your
penitence, (be ashamed and confounded thou sinful Creature) but for the sake of
the merit of the Death of his own Son, who shed his Blood, that so the
bloodiest Sinners who penitently believe on his Name, might be (...) and saved
from Eternal Death. That Sentence of Death which is passed on you as to your
Body, cannot be reversed; but the Sentence of Everlasting Death may. As yet it
is possible that you may be saved from the Second Death. There is merit enough
in the Death of Christ to make atonement for as great Sinners as you are. His
Blood is a Fountain set open for Sin and for Uncleanness. Zech. 13.1. But to
whom is it set open? To them that mourn in Jerusalem. Thy heart has been an
Hell of Sin: A Sink of Uncleanness, but if thy heart be broken for your sins,
the opened Fountain of the Blood of Christ will make that horribly defiled Soul
to become pure, and it shall live. The Lord Jesus Christ excludes none from
partaking in the Salvation purchased by the price of his Blood, because they
have been great Sinners. He came into the world to save the chief of Sinners.
As great sinners as ever lived in the world, upon their repenting and believing
on his Name, have through the exceeding abundant Grace of God, had all their
sins forgiven. What black Sinners had some of the Corinthians been, before
their Conversion? They had been guilty of Fornication, and besides (...)
Unnatural Wickedness; but when they repented and believed on the Name of Jesus
Christ the only Son of God, they were washed, and sanctified, and justified in
the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.
David committed Adultery, and to hide his Sin became guilty of Murder; but upon
his sincere repentance, God forgave the Iniquity; that is, remitted the
punishment of his sin, as to that Eternal Death which his sin deserved. His
prayer was heard, when he said with a truly penitent heart, Deliver me from
blood guiltiness, O God. Psalm. 51.14. What a bloody Sinner had Manasseb been?
He (...) streets of Jerusalem with innocent blood; but when the Providence of
God brought him into Chains (as he has done you) he humbl^d himself greatly
before the Lord, and prayed unto him, and he was entreated of him If you would
do so, who knows but that the merciful God would look upon you? Some of those
Jews who were the betrayers and murderers of the Son of God himself, which was
the greatest Crime that ever men were guilty of, yet upon their repenting and
believing on him (...) they had with wicked hands Sl^in and Crucified, obtained
through him the forgiveness of that, and all other sins which they had been
guilty of. Such Instances are recorded in the Scripture, that so no Sinners,
(no, not the greatest) might despair of finding mercy upon true Repentance
toward God, and Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.

Consider 3. If you die in your sins without Repentance, you shall receive no
ordinary damnation: Because you have sinned not only against the Law of God
more heinously than many have done, but also against the Gospel of Christ. You
have refused to hear the (...) reached many a time when you might have done it.
I remember one that was Executed in this Town many years ago, for the same
Crime which you have been guilty of, and must die for; Confessed that his
neglecting to hear the Word of God, which he frequently absented himself from
on the Lords Days, lay as an heavy burden on his Conscience; and so it should
do on yours. To go to Hell from under the Gospel is a fearful thing. Since you
Imprisonment, nay, since your (...) on, yea, and this very day, the (...) of
the Gospel has been offered to you. It is an astonishing thing, that the Great
God should offer a pardon and Eternal Salvation to such an one as you are; but
Infinite Grace does so. How shall you escape the sorest Damnation, if you
regard not this offer of mercy. If Indians that never heard of the Name of
Christ, commit such sins as you have done, they must go to Hell for it, but not
to such a fiery place there as you shall, because of your disobedience to the
Calls of the Gospel. It will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah at the
Day of Judgment, then for the despisers of the Gospel, and of the Grace of God.
(...) 14, 15.

Consider 4. Within a few days you will be in Eternity, and then Repentance
will be too late. Within a few days you will be gone down into the Pit, and
they that go down into the pit, cannot hope for Gods Truth. When once your Soul
is separated from your Body, there is a Gulf fixed: It is fixed in a Gulf of
Eternity, and that is a great Gulf indeed. Within a few minutes after your Soul
is out of your Body, you (...) where you must be throughout (...) Ages. If
Death find you a penitent Believer, as soon as ever your Soul is out of your
Body, Holy Angels will carry it to a better World than this is; but if
otherwise, cruel Devils will go with it to a place of torment; and there must
it remain until the General Resurrection, when Soul and Body shall appear
before the Judgment Seat of Christ, you must be tried and judged over again in
that day, when all your secret sins will be laid open before Angels and men.
The man (Christ Jesus the Son of God) whom God has ordained to be the Judge of
the whole World, will then Sentence you to Death, yea, to be Burnt to death.
Thou think it is (...) thing (and so it is) that you are Sentenced to be
hanged to death; ^ut Oh! what will it be when the Son of God shall doom thee to
Eternal Fire, and Command his Holy Angels to see Execution done upon thee
accordingly. They will cast thee, Body and Soul into the Fire. Do thou not
remember how Dives cried out being in Hell and in Torments, O for a drop of
water to cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this flame. Woeful Wretch! As
thou have sinned with thy Body, so must thy Body as well as thy Soul burn for
it. Those bloody (...) which have murdered thy child must be in torments. That
wick^d tongue which has told many a ly, must be in torment; yea, thy whole Body
must be cast into Hell. And how long must you be in this misery. After thou
have been in that Fire as many millions of Ages as there are sands on the Sea
shore, thou shall be no nearer to an end of it, then thou wast the first hour
that it came upon thee. This! This! will be thy portion as sure as this Bible
is the Word of God, if thou dyest an impenitent, Unbelieving Creature. Oh!
Consider of it. Some words of Coun^el, Let me set before you.

1. Endeavor that your Sorrow for Sin may be a Godly Sorrow. For Godly Sorrow
works Repentance which is unto Salvation. 2 Cor. 7.10. Do not mourn for Sin,
only because you have hurt your self by being such a Fool. You have disgraced
your self, and ruined your self. Or, because you have brought dishonor upon
all your Relations, and in a special manner on your Parents. That should indeed
be an heart breaking thought (...): you: but most of all you should mourn (...)
because thereby you have dishonored the Name, and grieved the Spirit of God.

2. Do not persist in any Sin. It is not confessing but forsaking Sin that will
prove you to be a true penitent. Turn from all sin. Stand not in any Lie. I
charge you before God, and as you will answer it at the peril of your Soul,
that you neither clear any guilty, nor accuse any Innocent person of committing
Folly with you. I speak this the rather because you have accused one who not
only denies what you have charged him with, but has appealed to God concerning
his Innocence. Having done so, in case he should be guilty, I am persuaded the
waters of Jealousy will come into his Bowels, and like Oil into his Bones. God
who will not hold them guiltless that take his Name in Vain, uses to make
those that Tempt him to show his Omniscience by appealing to Him when they know
themselves guilty, to become awful Examples of Divine Vengeance. But I am
willing to hope better things, and if there be nothing against him besides the
accusation of so Wick^d and Lying a Creature as you have been, there is no
suffici^^^ reason for uncharitable thoughts. (...) you have accused him falsely,
you can never make him amends for the wrong you have done to him: And if you
persist in a false accusation you destroy your own Soul. It is impossible that
you should be Saved if you do so. Will you go out of the world with a Lie in
your mouth, as Ananias and Sapphira did? Would you have your Soul to go to be
where their Souls are? Instead of persisting in any sin, do what in you lies,
that God may have Glory. The penitent ^hief on the Cross, in the little Time
that he lived after his Condemna^ion, brought much honor to the Name of God,
and of Jesus Christ. Oh that you would endeavor to do so. And therefore warn
others to beware of t^ose sins which have brought you to this. You say that you
believe your Disobedience to your Parents has provoked God thus to leave you.
Truly Disobedience to Parents is an unnatural wickedness. It may very well be
that as a punishment for it, you have been left to that unnatural Murder, for
which now you must die. But caution others against that sin. And do you Children
and (...) persons; hearken to this. Here is (...) your eyes, a poor young
Creature, come to a mise^able End: And she says, her Undutiful Carriage
toward her Father and Mother, has provoked God thus to cut her down out of
time. And will you then dare to be Undutiful Children If you love your Lives,
make conscience of the Fifth Commandment, and let there be none found among you
that shall set light by Father and Mother.

3. Go to Jesus Christ. If you cannot go to him with a penitent heart, go to
him for one. Him has God Exalted to be a Prince and a Savior to give
Repentance unto Israel and forgiveness of Sins. Act. 5.3 Oh Pray and Cry to
him: Pray him to pour his Blood on thy Soul: That will break the Rockiest
heart, the most Adamantine heart in the world. Pray as David did* Psalm 51.2
Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquit^, and cleanse me from my Sin. Purge me with
Hysop and I shall be clean. Thus does he pray that his Soul might he washed in
the blood of Christ. (...) have not you need to pray after the same manner? If
that precious blood be sp^inkled on you, then notwithstanding your sins have
been as Scarlet and red like Crimson they shall be as white as Snow.

SERMON II.
PROPOSITION. II.
THERE are some, yea many who make light of Sin. Notwithstanding Sin is such an
evil as has been declared, and they that make a light matter of being guilty of
it, show themselves to be Fools* the world is full of such Fools. This will
appear, if we consider who they are that do thus.

1. They that have little or no remorse for Sin. Who lay not sin to heart when
Committed either by themselves or others. An instance hereof we have in Joseph's
then ungodly Brethren, who after they had thrown him into the pit, it is noted
concerning them that they Sat down to eat bread. Genesis 3 7.25. Intimating that
they had little sense of the evil they had done. They were not grieved for the
Affliction of Joseph, nor yet for their own sin in the wrong they had done him.
Had they had a due sense thereof, they would have (...) little heart to eat
bread. There are few in the world that lay sin to heart as they should do. The
Prophet complained that there were in a manner none. Jer. 8.6. I hearkened and
heard, but no man repented of his wickedness, saying what have I done. There
are great sins, which but few have a due sense of their guiltiness before God
in respect of them. Adams Sin was a great one: An heinous transgression is
expressed, by saying, Like Adam they have transgressed the Covenant. Hos. 6.7.
He sinned against a positive Express Commandment to the contrary. Have thou
Eaten of the tree whereof I commanded thee that thou should not ^at, said
God unto him. So that he sinned against knowledge. Wherefore, sinning against
knowledge, is called a sinning after the Similitude of Adams transgression.
Romans 5.14. There was horrid unbelief in that sin. Adam gave more credit to the
Devil in the Serpent who said, you shall not surely Die, than to the God of
Truth, who said, you surely shall. There was intolerable Pride and Discontent
in that sin. When God his Maker had made him Lord over all the Creatures on the
face of the Earth, he was not satisfied with that, but aspired to be a God too.
There was Sacriligious ingratitude in that sin of Adam, since (...) God had
been so bountiful as to give him free leave to eat of all the Trees in Eden
excepting one, he would be Stealing that too. Yet this grievous sin is by a
Righteous Imputation the sin of every man. The Papists say of their
Bonaventure, In hoc homine non peccavit Adam, that he had no guilt of Adams sin
upon him. But the Apostle tells us, that in Adam all have sinned. Romans 5.12.
Yet how few are there that have any sense of their guiltiness on the account of
this great iniquity? Or, that did ever mourn before the Lord for it? That which
we commonly (from Austin who first and fitly gave it that Name) call Original
Sin, or (as the Apostle expresses it) the Sin which dwells in us, is no little
evil. That corruption of nature which men bring into the world with them, is
evil beyond all expression. The Apostle says that Sin taking Occasion by the
Commandment wrought in him all manner of Concupiscence. Romans 7.8. Such
wickedness is there in the nature of men, that because the Commandment says,
you shall not do such a thing, they are the more set upon doing it. Actual sins
are only the filthy streams which proceed from that (...) fountain of Original
Sin. The Scripture speaks of the Exceeding Sinfulnes^ of that sin. Romans 7.13.
It is Sinful Sin* It is impossible to call it by a worse name than it self, or
to give it a worse Epithet, than that of Sinful. Yet how do men make light of
this sin? Jews and Papists in their writings will hardly own it to be a sin.
And there are many who never did shed one tear, or send one sigh up to Heaven,
because of the guiltiness of their Souls before the Lord, by their Original
Corruption. The sin of unbelief or disobedience to the Gospel is a great sin.
The Spirit of God will one day Convince the world of Sin, that is to say,
Convince them that they have been guilty of a great and heinous sin, because
they have not believed on Christ. Joh. 16.9. Disobedience to the Gospel is a
greater evil than disobedience to the Law, and will be followed with a severer
Judgment at last. Heb 12.28, 29. He that despised Moses Law dyed without Mercy:
of how much sorer punishment suppose you, he shall be thought worthy that has
trampled under foot the Son of God. The unbeliever has done so. A vile Lust has
been more esteemed by him, than the Son of God himself. Yet how few are there,
that have bewailed their guilti^^^^ before the Lord by reason of this sin?
There is no man that has not been guilty of numberless Actual Sins. David was
sensible of this: he saw his sins were like a mighty Army which he could not
see to the end of them, and his heart failed him, he was ready to die away at
the sight of them. Psalm 40.12. To the same purpose Ezra, and others of the
Lords Servants. Ezr. 9.6. Iniquities are increased over our heads. They had
more sins than there are drops of water in a deep river enough to drown them:
And our trespass is gone up unto the Heavens* An heap of Sand which shall reach
as high as the Heavens, must have an infinite number of Sands in it: So is
every man guilty of an Infinite number of sins. But how few are sensible of
this? Men do not mourn for their own sins, much less for the sins of others.
The holy Apostle reproves the Corinthians in that when one in their Communion
was found guilty of Incest, they had not Mourned. 1 Cor. 5.2. They would have
done well to have set some time apart to Fast and Mourn because of the
dishonor done to the Name of Christ, and the wound which Religion received by
means of that Scandalous person. The Psalmist could say, not only that he
beheld the Transgressors and was grieved, but that Rivers of waters run down
his Eyes because men kept not the Law of God. Psalm. 119.136. How few can say
after him?

2. They that seek to Excuse and Extenuate Sin, make too light of it. Thus our
first Parents did. The woman who was first in the Transgression, would lay the
blame at the Serpents door: The Serpent beguiled me. Thus Eves Children think
to Excuse or Extenuate their sin by laying the fault on the Devil. Why would
you do such an evil thing? The Devil Tempted me say they. The man sought to
make some excuse for himself by accusing his Wife* and silently reflected on
the providence of God, The woman whom thou gave me she gave to me of the Tree
and I did eat. Genesis 3.12. Thus sinners to Extenuate their Crimes will reflect
upon God: They say, If God had given me Grace, I should not have done so
wickedly. Ever since Adams fall it has been natural for men to excuse and
extenuate their faults either by blaming others, or by some other pretext. When
Aaron committed a great Sin in making the Calfe in the Wilderness, what a
frivolous excuse did he make for himself, that the people brought him some
Gold, and he cast it into the fire, and there came out a Calfe. Exodus 32.24. As
if it had been only by Chance and not of Choice that a thing like a Calfe came
out of the fire. The Jewish Rabbis in their writings excuse that fact of Aaron,
pretending that he designed not to make such an Idol, but that there was an
Extraordinary operation of the Devil in that matter; but this fiction of theirs
is against the Scripture, which declares the activity of Aaron in the forming
of that Idol. Verse 4. He fashioned it with a graving tool: but then he had
another excuse to lessen his Crime. Verse 22. Thou know the people they are
set on mis^chief: he would lay all the fault at their door. If a good man, a
Saint of the Lord, as Aaron was, will when under Temptation find excuses for
great sins, will not sinners do so much more? We read concerning Saul, when he
spared Agag and the Amalahites substance, contrary to the Express Commandment
of God, he endeavored to extenuate his Crime, by pretending that he was afraid
to displease the people. 1 Samuel 15. 24. I have transgressed the Commandment of
the Lord, because I feared the people, and obeyed their voice. And he had
another excuse, viz. that the best of the sheep and of the oxen were spared for
Sacrifice unto the Lord. verse. 15. Thus men think to extenuate the evil of
their sin, by pretending that they intended no hurt in what they did: But Sin
is such an Evil, as the best intention in the world can never make it to be
good. Others think to excuse what they have done amiss, by pretending that if
it were sin, yet it was no great sin. Ephraim said, they shall find no iniquity
in me that were sin. Hos. 12.8. He means, no Iniquity that were a great sin.
Nevertheless, he loved to Oppress; but thought that such Oppression as that
which the Prophets charged him with, was no such great sin. Men are apt to say
of their sins, as Lot said of Zoar, Genesis 19.20. It is a little One? Is it not a
little One? They call their sins peccadillo's; whereas no sin can be so
absolutely considered. Although some sins compared with others are small,
nevertheless, that which is (as the least sin is) an offense against the
Infinite Majesty, cannot be a little Evil. Papists have invented distinctions
to make their sins appear little* Some are venial they say, and not mortal; so
they distinguish Lies into pernicious and officious. As if (...) tell a Ly to
do a Neighbor a kindness, were no evil. But the Scripture teaches us better.
Romans 3.8. we may not do evil that good may come of it. When that Case was
proposed to Austin, whether a man might not tell a Ly, if he could thereby*
save his friends Life, he answered, No, by no means. Nay, (said he) if it were
possible for thee to save the Soul of thy friend by telling a Ly for it, thou
may not do it: And though this may seem severe, it is sound Doctrine. For no
man can tell a Ly without dishonouring God, by sinning against him: And it were
better that any man in the world should perish, then that God should be
dishonored.

3. They that justify them selves or others in sin, make too light of it. To
justify and patronize evil deeds, or evil persons, is worse then only to
extenuate what has been amiss. It is therefore said, that he that justifies the
wicked is an abomination to the Lord. Prove. 17.15. If a man knows another to be
wicked, and shall then and therefore justify him, he is an abomination to the
Lord. Nevertheless, a good man being under temptation may justify himself when
he has erred greatly. So did Jonah; when it was said to him, do thou do well
to be angry? He replied, I do well to be angry even unto death. Whereas he had
no just reason at all to be angry, much less even unto death, that is as long
as he lived. But they are ill men who will justify themselves or others in
scandalous sins. Isa. 5.20 We unto them that call evil good, and good evil,
that put darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet,
and sweet for bitter. They that stand to vindicate scandalous evils against the
express Word of God, do so. Thus did Saul, for which cause Samuel charged him
with Rebellion and Stubbornness. 1 Samuel 15.23. He sinned against the express
Commandment of God, and that was Rebellion. He stood to justify himself,
saying, he had not sinned, but done as he ought to do; and this was
Stubbornness. The like Stubbornness we see in Dathan and Abiram, of whom it is
recorded that they came out and stood at the door of their tents. Numb. 16.27
which was boldly to declare that they would stand to what they had done. They
had sinned and provoked the Lord exceedingly, by abusing the two best men in
the world. They had reviled Moses and Aaron, and now would impudently come
(...) and stand at their doors, to signify that they would stand to what they
had done in villifying those Eminent Servants of God; so light did they make of
that their sin. There are those that will plead for Baal. There are none so
bad, but some or other will plead for them; yea, though they have been guilty of
Murder it self. There are those that are not afraid nor ashamed openly to avow
the vilest Opinions, and the lewdest practices: The Church of Rome does so. And
therefore it is said, that on her forehead is a name written, The Mother of
Harlots. Rev. 17.5. They are not ashamed to justify Idolatries. They are not
ashamed to maintain that for their Ecclesiastics, to marry is a sin, but for
them to have Concubines is no sin. In Rome it self, filthy harlots are openly
tolerated: Thus on her forehead is written the Mother of Harlots. It was said
to the Apostate Church of Israel, thou have an Whores Forehead. Jer. 3.3*
because they did justify themselves in great Impieties; like lewd Harlots, who
are not ashamed of the vilest Abominations. Alas! that there are men and women
in the world so far degenerated, not only from righteous, but from ^^tional
Creatures, as not to be ashamed of their living and doing more like bruit^ than
men; of such does the Prophet speak, Jer. 6.15. Were they ashamed when they had
committed Abomination? They were not ashamed, nor would they at all blush. And
do not such fools make a mock at sin?

4. They that take pleasure in sin make too light of it. There are wretched
Creatures that Sin is their delight. Prove. 15.21. Folly is a Joy to him that is
destitute of Understanding: They rejoice in Iniquity: It is their chief
delight. Prove 4.16. They eat the bread of wickedness, and drink the wine of
violence. They take as much pleasure in sin as an Epicure does in feasting:
Hence, they have greedy appetites after sin, as in verse. 16. They cannot sleep
except they cause some to fall. An hungry man cannot sleep until he has eat
something; no more can they until they have accomplished their wicked desires.
There is no wicked man, but some sin or other is sweet unto him. He keeps it
under his tongue, he spares it, and forsakes it not, it is sweet in his mouth.
Job 20.12, 13. which is a sign of an Hypocrite. A sincere Child of God may fall
into sin, but he does not love to do so: Sheep may fall into the mire, but they
do not love to be ther^^ They are Swine and not Sheep, that love to be
wallowing in the mire of their Iniquities: They are in a state of damnation. 2
These. 2.12. They all shall be damned that take pleasure in unrighteousness.
Nevertheless, thus it is with many: There are some that will boast and brag of
their Impieties, like bloody Doeg. Psalm. 52.1. Why boasts thou thy self in
mischief, O mighty man. When he had shed the Innocent Blood of some unarmed
men, he boasted of his being a mighty valourous man; he would then brag of his
Loyalty, as if he did a great matter to confirm the Crown on Saul's head. There
are that will brag of those things, of which they ought to be ashamed. Phil.
3.19. whose glory is their shame. They will glory and boast of their being
drunk, or wanton, or of their lying and cheating. Nay, some are so wicked, as
to brag of their committing abominations which they did not commit. Prove.
10.23. It is a sport to a fool to do mischief; or (as the Hebrew word imports)
to do very wickedly. There are who will speak of what sins they have been
guilty of, and then laugh at it, and make others laugh with them. It may be
(...) will tell of the sins and follies of their youth to make sport. How
unlike are such unto David, who prayed that God would not remember the sins of
his youth. Psalm. 25.7. And yet he had as unstained a youth as most in the
world. He feared the Lord from his youth; nevertheless could remember some sins
and vanities of his youth; and a sorrowful (not a pleasant) remembrance it was
to him. He would not tell of the vanities of his youth to make others merry.
There are some that take pleasure in seeing others sin; which argues an high
degree of Impiety. Romans 1.32. They not only do things worthy of death, but take
pleasure in them that do them. Yea, there are that when they cannot commit sin
themselves, delight in seeing others do it; which is perfect Diabolism. The
Devils are not drunk themselves, nor do they commit Adultery, being Spirits and
not Bodies, they are not capable of committing those sins, but they take
pleasure in seeing men commit those sins. If there be any pleasure in Hell that
is it.

5. They that cause others to sin, make light of it. As if the burden of their
own sins were too light for them, and therefore they must contract the guilt of
other men's Iniquities. Thus did Iereboam the Son of Nebat, He (...) Israel to
sin. And so did Rehoboam, He forsook the Lord, and all Israel with him. 2.
Chron. 12.1. One may cause others to sin, by requiring them to do it. Thus
Absalom caused his Servants to become gullty of Murdering his Brother Amnon. He
said to his Servants, smite him, kill him, Have not I commanded you? 2 Samuel
13.28. So Iezebel wrote a Letter in the Kings Name to the Elders in the City of
Iezrael, who she knew would do any thing the King and Court would have them do,
requiring them to take away the Innocent Life of Naboth, by a form of Law, and
under a pretense of Executing Justice on a Traitor: One may caus^ ^^nother to
sin by instigating them thereunto. Ahab sold himself to work wickedness, whom
Iezabel his Wife stirred up. 1 King. 21.25. Or, by giving bad Counsil. It is
said concerning Ahaziah, that his Mother was his Counselor to do Wickedly. 2 Chronicles. 22 3. Or by Teaching them how they may accomplish any evil design. So
Ionadab became guilty of Amnons Incest, by giving him subtle Counsil how he
might Compass his wicked desires. 2 Samuel 11.2, 3. So again, one may cause
others to sin by persuading and enticing them thereto. Prove. 1.10. My Son if
sinners entice thee consent thou not. Thus young people do often draw one
another into the Snares of Sin and Death by persuasions: Come (says a vile
Companion) lets go to such an house, There we shall find what we would have: By
this means a silly Creature is drawn into the sin of Drunkenness, Idleness, and
it may be into worse wickedness. Most certainly they know not what a dreadful
thing the guilt of sin is, that are thus willing to have not only their own,
but other men's sins to Answer for in the great day of Judgment. It may be the
Conscience of sinners which is now asleep will awake and roar upon them ere
long, perhaps on a death bed, and then they will be in anguish to think how
they have made others to sin. There was lately a remarkable instance of this in
a person of Quality Sir Duncomb Colchester, a Gentleman in Glocestershire, who
had drawn many into intemperance and other sins, but it pleased God by visiting
him with Sickness on his body to show him his transgressions that they had
exceeded, and then he could not be at rest in his Spirit, until he had caused a
writting to be publicly read in the Congregation, Solemnly warning all others
that should hear of it not to do as he had done in making others to drink to
excess, or in other respects to Sin against God: soon after which warning he
dyed, about four years since.

6. They (...) mock and deride at those who reprove ther^ (...) their Sins,
make a mock at Sin. There are such: If a Neighbor reproves them, it may be
they will jeer him to his face, or when he is gone they will rep^^^ what he
said, and deride him for it: Or, if a Relation, nay a Father reprove them,
they will but make a may game of all. When Lot advised his Sons in Law of the
imminent danger of destruction which was hanging over their heads, he was to
them as one that mocked. Genesis 19.14. They hardly thought he was in earnest:
What the Town be destroyed within such a time, That's a Jest indeed! They
thought he did either dote or dream. Thus when Parents warn their Children of
that Everlasting destruction which is near unto them, they account it little
less than dotage in them. Nay, some will deride at Ministers of God for their
Sermons. 2 Chronicles. 36.16. They mocked the Messengers of God, and despised his
words. Instead of trembling before the Threatenings of the word of God, they did
but mock at them. Therefore did the prophet say* be not ye mockers lest your
hands be made strong* Isa. 28.21* 22. There are some that have a form of
Godliness, but are enemies to the power of it; if Christ himself should Preach
to them, and warn them against their particular beloved sins, they would deride
at the Sermon. Luke 16.14. The Pharisees who were covetous derided him. When
the Lord told them of the danger their Souls were in by Covetousness, which was
their particular and beloved Sin, they did blow their Noses (as the Greek word
there used signifies) at what they heard, h. e. they entertained it with the
greatest Contempt and Scorn.

7. There are some who take pains to do wickedly. Of such does the Prophet
speak. Isa. 5.18. Woe unto them that draw iniquity with Cords of Vanity. When
men do not only set their wits on work to make vain excuses for Sin, but are at
a great deal of labor and toil for their compassing of their evil designs,
they draw iniquity with Cords of Vanity, and Sin as it were ^ith Cartropes.
Traces are made unto wh^^h Cartropes are fastened and beasts put forth their
strength in drawing the Cart with them: Such beasts are some Sinners; they Sin
with all their might. When they are about a Sinful work they will do it with
both hands. Mic 7.3. They do evil with both hands earnestly. They will sit up
late and rise early in the Service of Sin: they are intent upon nothing so much
as how they may accomplish their Sinful desires. There is many a Sinner that if
he would but be as industrious and diligent in Serving God as he is in Serving
Sin and the Devil, he would be an happy man forever. It was a doleful and
dreadful word which Cardinal Woodlsey uttered not long before he dyed
miserably, That if he had been but as faithful and diligent in Serving God as
he had been in Serving the Kings Interest, God would not have cast him off in
his old age as that King did. Alas! the practice of many Sinners, is, as if
they thought they could not go to Hell fast enough, nor get there soon enough:
Such mockers at Sin, and such fools are they.

We proceed therefore unto,

PROPOSITION. III.
That Sinners are Fools. The things which have been spoken prove them to be so.
None but Fools would make a light matter of such an Evil as Sin is. But further
to enlarge on the Probation of the Truth before us.

1. The Scripture every where speaks of Sinners as of Fools. How often are they
in the Holy Writings, (in the Book of Job; and in the Psalms, and in Proverbs,
and Ecclesiastes) called fools. The Scripture says of them that they are
foolish. Psalm. 5.4. The foolish, i. e. Sinners shall not stand in thy sight.
When they come to be tried for their lives before Gods Tribunal, they will not
be able to stand in the judgment. The Hebrew word HOLEPIM, there Translated
foolish, signifies mad men, or such as rave with folly; Sinners are subject to
moral madness: If they were not raving mad they would never do as they do.
Madness is in their hearts as long as they live, and after that they go to the
dead, nay, to the damned. Sinners are said to be without knowledge. Psalm. 14.4.
Have all the workers of Iniquity no knowledge. Truly, there is not one of them
all that has any saving knowledge; such of them as are wise to do evil, to do
good they have no knowledge. Isa. 27.11. It is a people of no understanding.
They are called simple ones. Prove. 1.22. How long ye simple ones will ye love
simplicity. Hence the Scripture compares them to Beasts, because they act as if
they were devoid of all reason or rational understanding. Psalm. 49.10. Wise men
die, likewise the brutish person: Who but a Sinner is that brutish person? A
Sinner is resembled to the most stupid of all Beasts; To the Ass, to the wild
Ass, nay, to the wild asses colt. Job 11.12. Man is born like the wild asses
colt. A Sinner is a born fool: They are compared to the silly Birds, to simple
fearful Doves. Hos. 7.11. Ephraim is like a silly Dove without heart. Yea, they
are compared to Ostriches. Lam. 4.3. The Ostrich is both a very foolish and an
unnatural Bird. Job ^9.16, 17. She is hardened against her young ones as though
they were not hers because God has deprived her of wisdom, neicher has he
impart^d to her understanding. Such an Ostrich has the Condemned Prisoner (who
was here the last Lords day) been. She has been hardened against her young one,
as if it had not been hers. Yea, though it was crushed to death she regarded it
not. True spiritual wisdom and understanding is in fearing the Lord, which is
contrary to sinning against him. Psalm. 111.10. The fear of the Lord is the
beginning of wisdom, and a good understanding have all they that do his
Commandments. As for Regenerate Souls, God has made them to know wisdom in the
inward parts. They that are wise unto Salvation are wise indeed; and therefore
Godly men are the only wise men, and will be found to be so at last. Yea, wiser
than the greatest Clerks or Politicians in the world, that have not Grace in
their hearts. A man may excel in political wisdom, and in philosophical wisdom,
and yet a poor illeterate obscure person, that makes no figure in the world,
but Loves and Serves God and Jesus Christ, will be found a wiser man than the
other, because of his being wise unto Salvation; which is the only true wisdom.
It is rel^ted concerning two Learned men, that as they were Traveling to the
Council of Trent, they espied a poor Shepherd in the Woods, with Tears running
down his Cheeks. They asked him the reason of his weeping, who replied, you may
see there an ugly Toad: I cannot but weep, to think of the goodness of God
toward me, who instead of making me a Toad, has made me a man with a rational
Soul capable to know, and love, and serve God. At this the two Learned men fell
a weeping too, saying to one another, this poor illeterate Shepherd will go to
Heaven when he dies; for he loves God and serves him; but we with all our
Learning are like to go to Hell: He is an happier and wiser man than we are. So
then there is no Sinner in the world that is a wise man, if we speak of true
heavenly wisdom. For,

2. Sin is the greatest Folly. Psalm. 85.8. Let them not turn again to folly, i.
e. to Sin. Prove. 8.11. As a dog returns to his vomit, so a fool returns to his
folly. A Dog has not the reason to consider and think with himself, that the
thing which he vomi's up, was it which made him sick, and therefore he returns
to it again. Just so it is with Sinners. It may be they have felt pain by their
sins, their Bodies have been hurt thereby: And it may be their Consciences have
smarted for what they have done; yet they will commit those Sins again. Thus do
they return to their folly. Such fools are they. All Sin is folly: For it is
against the rules of wisdom: All the Precepts contained in the Law or Word of
God are wise precepts. There is no Sin but it is a Transgression of one or
other of them. Jer. 8.8, 9. How do you say, we are wise? They have rejected the
Word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in them? Sin is a departure from God the
fountain of all wisdom: And therefore the more men sin, the more unwise are
they. The greatest Sinners are the greatest fools in the world. In the
greatness of their folly they go astray. Prove. 5.23. And as all Sin is folly,
so there are some Sins which are in a most peculiar manner so. Sins of
Uncleanness are most abominable folly. When Shechens had defiled Dinah, it was
said of him, that he had wrought folly in Israel, which thing ought not to be
done. Genesis 34.7. Sins of that nature bruitify men. They act more like bruit
beasts then like men with rational Souls. The wise man speaks of a young man
that was observed to go to the house of an Harlo^, there to debauch himself, of
whom he gives this character, that he was a young man void of understanding,
and that he went after her, as an Ox goes to the Slaughter, and as a Fool
goes to the correction of the Stocks. Prove. 7.7, 22. Such brutish folly are
such Sinners guilty of,

3. A Sinner has all the properties of a Fool belonging to him: he that has all
the properties of a Fool is one. That property which the Text before us speaks
of is enough to prove the Sinner to be a Fool if there were nothing more. A
Fool will laugh and make himself merry* with that which is matter of grief and
sorrow. And do not Sinners do so, like mad Fools. Prove. 26.18. As a mad man who
casts fire brands, arrows, and death, so is the man that deceives his
Neighbor and says, am not I in sport? A mad man will throw whatever comes
next to hand, though it be a Fire brand, or a dart, or any thing else that
shall cause death, and makes sport of it: If he wounds his Neighbor for which
he ought to be grieved, that is ^ sport to him And thus it is with some mad
Sinners: They will devise slanderous Lies of their Neighbor to the wounding of
his reputation, and then say, they did but Jest. The good Companionship of
rude Sinners, is (as one expresses it) no better than Horse play: They will
strike one another. When they are in their drink, and in their mad frolicks,
they will tell of one another Secret sins, and so expose their Neighbor to
reproach and shame: And this is their sport. Mad People will sometimes when the
phrenzy takes them kill their own Relations, and (though they have cause to
mourn for what they have done all their days) they rejoice in it. We are
informed of a Tragical instance of this nature which happened in a place in Wales
not five Months ago. A distracted man in a mad fit killed his Wife and all his
four Children in one bloody morning, without any remorse for what he had done.
Another sad instance there is in this Land is a neighbor Colony: A poor woman
now in Prison, cut the throat of her own Son, at which she rejoices, imagining
that she has notably imitated the Faith of Abraham in Sacrificing her Son A mad
man will sometimes cut and wound his own body, and then Laugh at his own
misery. And do not distracted Sinners do thus and worse than this? They gash
and wound their own Souls by their Sins, and yet laugh at what they have done.
It is impossible for a man to make himself Drunk, or Unclean, or to tell a
known Lie, without making a wound in his Conscience, which he will be sensible
of whenever he shall come to himself and see his undone Soul bleeding to death.
But at present they may mo^^ at their own misery, which declares their folly
and madness. Besides this which is expressed in the Text before us, there are
other properties of a Fool to be affirmed of him that is a Sinner. e. g.

1. Indocibility is the property of a Fool. He is unteachable: Suppose he
should have the best Instructors in the world, he will not learn wisdom, nor
get understanding. The Sinners amongst the Jews had Prophets to Instruct them,
and yet they would not Learn. Isa. 28.13. The word of the Lord was unto them*
Precept upon Precept, Line upon Line, here a little and there a little* God
dealt with them as we do with Children that must learn first one line and there
another, and but a little at a time. And or all that, they would learn nothing:
They were ever Learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth;
so unteachable were they. If a Fool be Corrected as well as Instructed, yet he
will not learn. There is no beating of knowledge into him: And is it not so
with Sinners? There is many a Sinner that has smarted for his sin and folly,
and yet he has not the sense to reform hi^ ways. Many a drunkard that has
suffered much in his Estate, and in his Relations, and in his Soul and Body,
because of that sin, and for all that, he has neither the Grace nor Wit to
leave that sin: Though he has been stricken and beaten for it, he will seek it
yet again. Prove. 23.35. What a Fool is such a sinner? We see every day that
what the wise man speaks is true. Prove. 27.22. Though thou should bray a Fool
in a Mortar with a Pestle yet will not his foolishness depart from him. In old
Time one kind of grinding which people used was to put their parched Corn into
a Mortar, and so to grind it to powder. The grains of Corn though much hardened,
would by a Pestle beating it in the Mortar be reduced to soft Meal; but a
Sinner is such an hard hearted Fool, that though the plagues of the Lord be
never so heavy upon him, he will not amend nor leave his ^olly. Let him be put
into the Mortar of Divine wrath, and bruised with the Iron Pestle of Judgments
one after another, he is and will be foolish still. Though the Lord has
stricken him, he receives not Correction, his heart is harder than a Rock, he
refuses to return. Would any (...) but a Fool be thus obstinate?

2. It is the property of a Fool to mind only what is present, but to be
careless of what shall be hereafter. A wise man will lay up a good foundation
against the Time to come: he will provide against a rainy day. Prove. 10.5. He that
gathers in Summer is a wise Son. He that is wise will in Summer provide
against Winter. It is said of the Ants that they are exceeding wise, because
they prepare their meat in the Summer. Prove. 30.25. Alas! Sinners have not this
wisdom. They are like beasts without reason who only indulge their present
senses, but have no thoughts where they must be, or how they shall live a few
years hence. If men were wise they would be often thinking of another world.
They would prepare for Death, and provide for Eternity. Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that
they were wise that they understood this, that they would Consider their latter
end. They that are wise will consider their latter end. They will remember
Death and Eternity. Why are some of the Virgins in the Parable called Foolish
Virgins, but because they did not take care to get Oil into their Vessels,
Grace into their hearts, and so be provided and prepared for the day of the
Lords coming! There is no sinner in this world, but he must shortly go out of
it, and go into another world where he must be for ever and ever: And yet he
remains unprepared and unprovided for that world. What inexpressible folly is
this? I remember a Reverend Author speaks concerning a certain noble man that
had a Servant belonging to his Family that was counted a Fool, to whom he
delivered a Staff and bid him keep that Staff until he should meet with one
that was more Fool than himself, and give it to that man: Within a while hi^
Lord fell sick unto Death: His Fool servant comes to him, and says, what are
you dying? Yes, saves his Lord: And whither are you going? Into another world
says he: And when will you come again says his Fool to him, a Month hence, or
a year hence, or how long first. I must never come again, says his Master, and
I shall never see thee any more. And (said the Servant) have you made any
provision for that world which you are going into, never to come here again?
No, said his Lord, I have not: No (said the poor Fool) then He give you your
Staff again, for I my self was never more Fool then so: Not to think of a world
to which I must go, and from which I must never return is greater folly than
ever I was guilty of, said that poor Wretch to his rich and great Master.

3. It is the property of a fool to refuse a good offer. When that is offered
to him, which would make him happy, if he had an heart and wisdom to embrace
it, he foolishly neglects his opportunity. Prove 17.16. Wherefore is there a
price in the hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he has no heart to it. Thus
it is with Sinners: They have Spiritual Riches offered to them in the Gospel;
they are told of that which will enrich their Souls, and make them for ever.
The Unsearchable Riches of Christ will do so. And that is freely offered to
them in the Gospel. Where that is preached, God from Heaven makes an offer of
his Son to be an Husband and a Savior to every Soul that will believe on him;
but foolish Sinners make light of this offer, although they never had, nor never
shall have another offer like unto it. Mat 22.4.5. All things are ready; come
unto the Marriage, but they made light of it, and went their ways, one to his
Farm, and another to his Merchandise. And are not they fools that will refuse
an offered Christ for a Farm? And all the Riches of the Son of God, the Heir of
all things, for the Merchandise of this world? Christ also offers himself in
the Gospel, but Sinners refuse him. Wisdom, that is Christ, complains of this
folly in Sinners. Prove. 1.24, 25. I have called, and ye refused, I have
stretched out my hand and no man regarded, but ye have set at naught all my
counsel. And that which adds to the folly, is, that Sinners do thus again and
again, many a time and often. The Lord Jesus Christ is graciously pleased to
offer himself to them with all his saving benefits, but they continue in their
refusals of him. Mat.23.37. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, h^w often would I have
gathered thy Children together, as an hen gathers her Chickens undor her
wings, and ye would not. Thus did they go on to reject the happiest offer that
ever was made unto men.

4. It is the property of a fool to make an ill choice: Not only to refuse a
good offer when he may have it, but to take a bad one. It has been the manner
in Civil Courts, when any person has been impleaded for a fool to try him by
offering a piece of Gold and a Counter, something of great value, or an apple;
if he chooses the Counter rather than the Gold, the Apple rather than the
Jewel, then he is cast for a fool, and his Estate taken from him, and given to
a wiser person. But thus it (...) with Sinners, they choose trisles rather ^^an
treasures, pebbles, (all the things of (...) world are no better when compared
with spiritual and eternal good things) ^ather than the pearl of great price.
They that choose Earth rather than Heaven, make ^ bad choice; yet this is the
Sinners ^hoice. When Christ said to the young man in the Gospel, Mat. 19.22. Go
and sell what thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in
heaven, and come and follow me; when the young man heard that saying, he went
away sorrowful, for he had great possessions. When it was put to his choice, we
would part with Christ and Heaven, rather than forgo his worldly Interests. A
rich Cardinal was not ashamed to profess that he would not part with his Estate
in Paris, for a portion in Paradise. There is not an ungodly man in the world,
but if God should say to him, thou shall have thy choice, either to live upon
this Earth for ever, and there to enjoy all sensual delights, or go to Heaven,
and there enjoy the pleasures which are at Gods Right hand for evermore; he
would choose Earthly rather than Heavenly Pleasures. But what a (...) choice do
they make, who choose Hell rather than Heaven! This Sinners do. They love death.
When life and death, heaven and hell are set before them, they choose death and
hell. Ezekiel. 33.11. Why will you die. They will, they choose death in the causes
of it: The things which will certainly end in death, are the things which they
choose. For a man to choose Eternal rather than a Temporal Death, is a very
unwise choice. It was well and wisely said by one of our English Martyrs when
one tempted him to Conform against the light of his Conscience, to the
Superstition of the Times; because he would loose his life if he did not, and
(said the Temter) death is bitter, and life is sweet: To whom the Martyr
replied, but Death Eternal is more bitter, and Life Eternal is more sweet.
Alas! Sinners have not the wisdom to consider this. Joshua said to the Children
of Israel, Choose you whom you will Serve, but I and my House will serve the
Lord. Thus when it is said to a Sinner, choose whom thou will have to be thy
Master; he makes the unhappiest choice that possibly can be: he chooses the
worst Master that ever any one did serve: For he chooses to be a Servant of
Sin: he had rather be a Slave than a Free man; yea, a Slave to Sin and Satan,
then the Lords Freeman.

5. It is the property of a fool to contend with one that is too strong for
him. A Wise man will sit down and consider with himself, whether he is able
with ten thousand, to meet with him that comes against him with twenty
thousand. Luke 14.31. Better sit still then rise and fall. But Sinners have not
the understanding to consider this. They are so foolish as to set themselves
against one that is Infinitely too strong for them. Is a Sinner a fit match for
the Almighty? Is he able to make his patty good with that God before whom the
Nations are as the drop of a bucket, and counted as the small dust of the
balance, yea less then nothing and vanity? Is he able to make his party good
with that God, who holds all the water of the Sea in the hollow of his hand,
and who measures Heaven with a span. O Sinner, consider with thy self, what
thou will do, when God shall strike thee with those hands which have made
heaven and earth. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy, are we stronger than he?
1 Cor. 10.22. What infinite folly are they guilty of that do so? Nevertheless
the Sinner does so. Job 15.25, 26. For he stretches out his hand against God,
and strengthens himself against the Almighty, he runs upon him, even on his
neck, upon the thick bosses of his buckler. The Threatenings and Sanctions of
the Divine Law are the bosses of his buckler; but the Sinner regards them not.
But can thou stand it out against God? Can thy hands be strong, or can thy
heart endure in the day that the Lord shall deal with thee? Have thou an arm
like God? or can thou thunder with a voice like him? do thou not know that
his Power is Irresistible? When he casts forth his Lightnings, what man is
there that can stand before the Thunder of God? It is reported concerning
Ca^igula, that for all he was Emperor of the World, when he heard it Thunder,
he would run under his bed to hide himself. Histories inform us of Kings that
have been Slain with Lightning when they have been surrounded with Armies to
defend them. Who can stand before the Omnipotent God when once he is angry?
Rocks cannot, for the Rocks are thrown down by him, when his fury is poured out
like fire. The Famous Island of Sicily* saw this to be true not many years
since. And the Kingdom of Naples saw it but a few months ago; when Rivers of
Fire broke out of a Mountain near unto them. Mountains cannot stand before his
Indignation: For he Overturns the Mountains in his anger, and those Pillars of
Heaven tremble at his reproof: Nay, Angels the mightiest and most powerful
Creatures in the World cannot stand before him: He spared not the Angels that
sinned, but cast them down to Hell. It was Inexpressible folly in the Apostate
Angels to set themselves against their Almighty Creator? Well might Eliphaz
say, His Angels he charged with Folly. Job 4.18. If then silly Worms on the
Earth shall rise up against him, are they not fools for so doing.

6. It is the property of a fool to make foolish bargains: So does the Sinner
do; for he barters away his precious Soul, and that for a thing of naught.
There is no Sinner, but he has a Jewel belonging to him, more worth then all
this world, namely, his precious and immortal Soul; this he parts with, and
what has he in exchange for it? Nothing more than the pleasures of sin for a
season. Was it not ext^eam folly in Esau to sell his Birthright for a mess of
pottage! but what horrible folly is it for a man to sell his Soul for the
enjoyment of a sensual Lust? Rather then deny his sensual appetite in respect
of a lust of Drunkenness, or of a lust of Uncleanness, he will loose his soul.
What greater folly can there be then to part with pleasures for evermore in
Heaven, and to go into Eternal Torments, and all to enjoy the momentany
pleasures of Sin? It was a sad word which a miserable man once uttered on a
deathbed. I have (said he) enjoyed the pleasures of sin for a little while,
and now I must be in torment for infinite millions of Ages.

Thus have we seen the Doctrine opened and confirmed in the particulars which
have been mentioned. For the Improvement of it, we shall speak a few things
briefly. Let the first USE be for Instruction, in two particulars.

Inf. 1. What folly are they guilty of who make light of the greatest Sins?
There are those in the world that do so. Profane Swearing is a great Sin:
Therefore does the Scripture say, above all things Swear not, neither by
Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath, lest you fall into
Condemnation. James 5.12. Yet there are some who make light of this horrible
Sin. If they be but a little provoked they will Curse and Swear like Devils
incarnate: And then think to Excuse it, by saying, such an one provoked me. And
art not thou a Fool to provoke the Eternal God, only because thy Neighbor has
provoked thee? There are Oaths unto which men to show how light they make of
being guilty of them, have given the Name of Petty Oaths: They think that for
them to Swear by their Faith and by their Troth is a small evil if any at all:
but it is a great Sin to do so. All Swearing by Creatures is a grievous sin. To
Swear by things that are no Gods is great impiety. Ier. 5.7. But the man that
Swears by his Faith and Tr^th, Swears by things that are no Gods How shall the
Lord pardon them for this without Repentance. Drunkenness is a great and a
Damning Sin: The word of the Lord says expressly that no man that is a Drunkard
shall inherit the Kingdom of God. 1 Cor. 6.10. Yet are there not those that
make a mock of this Sin. Yea, that will make others Drunk on purpose, that so
they may have something to laugh at, and to make themselves sport with. Ah!
what Fools are they that will make themselves merry with that, for the which
they mu^^ be shut out of Heaven for ever! The Sin of Uncleanness is an
abominable ini^quity: The abhorred of the Lord shall fal^ into it. Well did
Joseph say, when hi^ impudent Mistress tempted him to that folly, How can I do
this great Wickedness and Sin against God: Nevertheless, some that are guilty
of it say, They have done no Wickedness. Prove. 30.20. There was an unhappy
Prince not long since, who by his Whoredoms and Adulteries debauched three
Kingdoms. A man was hardly esteemed a Gentleman except he were a vile person.
But if he would make no Conscience of the Seventh Commandment that would
recommend him. What stupendous folly is it, to Commit the most disgraceful Sins
without either remorse or shame, especially for persons of Quality to do so,
who ought to be Examples of Virtue. When Thamar was Solicited by a Courtier
and a Royal Person to Consent unto a great Sin, she said, (and it was well and
wisely spoken) And I whither shall I cause my shame to go; and as for thee,
thou shall be as one of the fools in Israel. 2 Samuel 13.13. As for them who make
a mock of the greatest Sins, (be they who they will) if ever God intend them
mercy he will make them sensible of the greatness of their folly. There was a
great instance hereof in the late Earl of Rochester, who had been as great an
Atheist as perhaps was in King Charles his Court. But when God opened his eyes
on a deathbed, he said to his former Companions: (and gave it under his hand
that it might make the greater impression on them) he warned by me, as ever you
regard the welfare of your immortal Souls, no more to mock at sin. And another
late Example like to this was in Sir Alan Broderick, who had been one of the
greatest Debauches of this Atheistical age, but when he was dying he bewailed
his having spent so great a part of his Life in the Sports and follies of Sin,
professing that now he saw the Folly and Unreasonableness of Sin, so as that no
Temptation in the world could prevail with him to sin any more as formerly.

I^f. 2. Sinners are to be pitied and mourned over. We bear with Fools: I^ we
know them to be such, we pity them and bear with their folly; Sinners are the
miserablest ^ools in the World: And shall no body pity them? If we should see
distracted persons destroying their own bodies would we not pity them, and be
sorry for him: How much more when we see di^^^acted Sinners destroying their
own Souls What though they desire none of our pity? And what though they should
wrong us, and reproach and revile us, yet let us pity them for they know not
what they do. The Time will come when they will see and be ashamed of their
fully: Though for the present because madness is in their hearts, they are not
ashamed, nevertheless they shall be made sensible. Isa. 26.11. They will not
see but they shall see and be ashamed. Either God will Convert them and to make
them see their folly: Grace is Wisdom in the inward parts. True Repentance is
(a resipience) a growing wise again. Hence it was said of the returning
Prodigal, that He came to himself. Luke 15 17. He was not himself when he spent
his Estate in riotous Living. If he had not been mad he would never have done
so; but he saw his folly in departing from his Fathers house where he had bread
enough and to spare, and in bringing upon himself poverty, and misery, and
death. Or, if Sinners are not in a way of unfeigned Repentance, made to see
their folly whilst they are in this world, they will see it and lament it for
ever in another world: When they are put in Prison, and cast into the Dungeo^;
so are they that are mad sometimes brought to themselves. Thus when Sinners
shall be cast into that Dungeon where is b^ackness of darkness for ever, they
will be made sensible of their folly. Therefore we should pity and mourn over
them: They that are Regenerate and made wise unto Salvation, should pity the
folly of unregenerate ones, and the rather because they themselves once were
such. Tit. 3.2, 3. Let us show all meekness toward all men, for we our selves
were sometimes foolish.

USE 2. Let us be Exhorted to practice as the Doctrine calls for. And how is
that? Ans. Instead of many particulars, I shall mention but two.

1. This Doctrine calls upon us to be deeply humbled for Sin. What has a fool
to be proud of? No Sinner has cause to be proud of any thing, but to come down
and sit in the dust before the Lord all his days. It is an humbling thing to
be left to an act of folly, but what then is it to have an heart full of
nothing else but folly? so has the Sinner. Romans 7 18. I know that in me, that
is in my flesh dwells no good thing. They that are only flesh, that have
nothing but nature in them, have nothing but sin and folly dwelling in them;
and they have been guilty of innumerable acts of extreme folly, the thought
whereof ought to humble them. Every Sinner may make Saul's confession. 1 Samuel
26.21. I have sinned, I have played the fool, I have erred exceedingly. Sinners
have been doing nothing but playing the fool all their days. For what have
they been doing? What have they been thinking of? What have their cares been
exercised about all their days? only or chiefly about their Bodies, and not
their Souls; not how they may make sure of Heaven, but how they may live, and
get Estates on the Earth. This their way is their folly. Psalm. 49.13. And they
into whose hearts God has put spiritual wisdom, have cause sad enough to walk
humbly all their days, remembering what fools once they were. Remember what you
were in times past. Ephesians. 2*11. How sinful, how foolish! There was a Time when
you had no spiritual wisdom in you; a time when you were in ignorance; a time
when you knew not God. Let us remember those days. and the folly of them, and
let the thought of them keep us humble as long as we shall have a day to live.
Moreover, there is a great deal of folly still remaining in the wisest and
holiest heart on the earth: We see it in David, a man wise like an Angel of
God, yet what pride and folly did he discover in causing Ioab to number the
people, which he himself was very sensible of afterward, confessing his sin
and folly, and begging pardon for it. 2 Samuel 24.10. Lord, take away the iniquity
of thy Servant, for I have done very foolishly. We see the like in Hezekiah.
What foolish pride did that wise and good man discover to be in his heart, when
the Ambassadors from Babylon came to him. God left him that he might know what
was in his heart; And he saw such pride and folly there, as brought him upon
his knees before the Lord. 2 Chronicles. 32.26. Hezekiah humbled himself for the
pride of his heart. And the Truth is, that the more wisdom and grace any man
has in his soul, the more has he of a deep and humbling sense of the folly
which is in his heart. This we see in the holy Psalmist, who expresses himself
with such humble words as those, in Psalm. 73.22. So foolish was I and ignorant,
I was as a beast before thee. And we see it in Agur. Prove. 30.2, 3. Surely I am
(...) ^ruitish than any man, and have not the understanding of a man, I neither
learned wisdom, nor have the knowledge of the Holy. Such a deep and humbling
sense had he of his own weakness, and want of wisdom.

2. Oh turn from Sin immediately. If Sin is folly, then to turn from Sin unto
the ways of Holiness, is wisdom. Sinners leave your folly. You will never be
wise until you turn from sin. Oh then, cease to do evil, and learn to do well:
And do it now* The voice of the Prophe^s of God in all their Sermons was, Turn
ye now every one from his evil way, Jer. 25.5. You cannot turn from sin too
soon, but you may think of turning when it will be too late. Why will you
retain such an enemy as Sin? If a man should have a Serpent in his bosom,
would he not get rid of it immediately. Sin is such a Serpent; it will fling
thee to death, if thou doft not make haste to get clear of it. To delay this
matter is dangerous folly. If Lot had delayed his going out of Sodom one day
longer, he had lost his life. So has many an unhappy man lost his Soul, by
delaying his Repentance one day. Oh stay no longer lest happily the day of grace
should be ended, and the door of mercy shut against thee. Remember the Foolish
Virgins, who when it was too late cried, Lord, Lord, open to us. What is the
dismal cry of the Damned in Hell for ever? Yea, what is the cry of those that
have gone out of our Congregations, from the hearing of Sermons to Hell? Is it
not this? Woe are we for ever, because we did not Turn from sin soon enough? Woe
unto us for ever, because we delayed our Turning from sin! we thought we would
repent some time hereafter, but before that time came, Death Seized on us, and
now it is too late. Oh that Sinners would consider this* Oh that they would be
wise unto Salvation. Turn now unto God in Jesus Christ, and all your past sins
and follies shall be forgiven. And for your Encouragement in Turning to the
Lord, remember that God has promised, that his Elect shall Turn into the way of
Hol^ness, and the wayfaring men though fools shall not err therein.

The End.
ERRATA. Page 3 l. 12. After you, (...) with. ^. 68. l. 16. r. HOLELIM.


