Acts Passed the 7th Assembly and 3d Sessions, Beginning the first Day of
October, 1700. and ending the second Day of November, Anno Regni Regis and
Regina Gulielmi, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Duodecim.
An Act for punishing Officers and Soldiers who shall Mutiny or desert his
Majesty's Service, and t^ prevent their being Harbored, and Concea^ed by the
Inhabitants of this Province, and to encourage the seizing and securing such as
shall desert his Majesty's Service for the future.
WHereas his most Sacred Majesty, out of his Royal and tender care of the
Preservation and security of this Province, has with great Expense been
pleased to send over and maintain a Body of Troops born on his Majesty's pay,
with their proper Officers. And whereas it will be always necessary that a
competent force should be constantly kept on foot for the defense of this
Province, which is a Fronteer to the rest of his Majesty's Plantations on this
Continent of America, and that the Forces which now are or hereafter shall be
in his Majesty's pay within this Province, should be kept in due discipline of
War. And whereas no man may be fore-judged of Life or Limb, or subjected to any
kind of punishment by martial Law, or in any other manner than by the Judgment
of his Peers, and according to the known and established Laws of England and
this Province, yet nevertheless it being requisite for the retaining such
Forces as already are, or hereafter shall be established in his Majesty's pay
within this Province, in their Duty, and that an exact discipline be observed,
and that Soldiers who shall mutiny or stir up Sedition, or shall desert his
Majesty's Service, be brought to a more Exemplary and speedy Punishment than
the usual forms of Law will allow, Be it therefore Enacted by his Excellency
the Governor and Council, and Representatives Co^ven'd in General Assembly,
and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, That from and after the
Publication of this Act, every person being in his Majesty's Service mustered,
and in his Majesty's pay, as an Officer or Soldier, who shall at any time
hereafter exci^^, cause or join in any Mutiny or Sedition in any Garris^n,
City, Town or Place within this Province where they shall be posted, or shall
desert his Majesty's Service in the same, shall suffer Death, or such other
Punishment as by a Court Marshal shall be inflicted. And it is hereby further
Enacted and Declared by the Authority aforesaid, That the Governor or
Commander in Chief of this Province, for the time being, shall and may, by
virtue of this Act, have full Power and Authority to grant Commissions under
the Seal of this Province, to such Persons as are herein named and appointed,
from time to time, to call, assemble and authorize Court Marshals for punishing
such Offenders as aforesaid. And it is hereby further Enacted and Declared,
that no Court Marshal which shall have power to inflict any Punishment by
virtue of this Act, for the Offenses aforesaid* shall consist of less number
than Seven, ^our whereof to be members of his Majesty's Council of this
Province, whereof his Majesty's Chief J^stice of the said Province, for the
time being, always to be one, and the rest of the said number of Seven to
consist of the Chief Mili^ary O^^^cers, who command the established Forces
aforesaid, under the Governor or Commander in Chief for the time being, and
the place for holding the said Court Marshal to be where the Governor or
Commander in Chief shall appoint and direct.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That such Court Marshal
shall have Power and Authority to administer an Oath to any Witnesses, in order
to the Examination or Trial of the Offenses aforesaid. Provided always, That
nothing in this Act contained shall extend to be construed to exempt any
Officer or Soldier whatsoever from the ordinary process of Law. Provided
always, That this Act nor any thing herein contained shall extend or be any
ways construed to concern any of the Militia Forces in this Province, or
Detachment of the same. And Provided always, and be it Enacted, That in all
Trials of Offenders by Court marshal, to be held by Virtue of this Act, where
the Offenses may be punished by Death, every person present at such Trial,
before any Proceedings be had thereupon, shall take an Oath upon the
Evangelists in open Court before the Governor or Commander in Chief for the
time being, or whom he shall authorize and appoint to administer the same, in
these words (that is to say) You shall well and truly try and determine between
our Sovereign Lord the King and the Prisoner to be tried. So help you God. And
no Sentence of Death shall be given against any Offender in such Case, by any
Court Marshal, unless five or more of the Seven Persons shall concur therein,
by which Majority of five or more so sworn as aforesaid, the Judgment shall
pass, and no Proceedings, Trial or Sentence of Death shall be had or given
against any Offender but between the hours of eight in the morning, and one in
the afternoon.

And be it further Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That the Governor or Commander in Chief for the time being, have
and are hereby authorized and empowered to nominate, authorize and appoint a
fit Person to be Judge Advocate, with all other necessary inferior Officers
proper for such Court Marshal as aforesaid And be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That what^oever person or persons Inhabiting, residing or
sojourning within this Province shall after publication hereof, knowingly
receive, harbor entertain or conce^l any of his Majesty's Soldiers, who shall
desert his Majesty's Service in their Houses, Barns, Stables, or any other
conceded places, in any part of this Province, or shall be in any manner of
ways aiding, helping advising, assisting or encouraging to any of the said
Soldiers to desert his Majesty's Service, or be any ways helping to carry any
of the said Soldiers out of this Province, either by Ship, Bark, Sloop Vessel,
Boat, Canow, Horse, or any other way, shall for each such Offense pay or
Forfeit the Sum of Twenty Po^nds current Money of this Province, to be
recovered by Bill, Plaint or Information in any Court of Record within this
Province, where no Essoyn, Protection (...) Wager of Law, shall be allowed, one
half whereof to the Poor of the Pa^ish where the Offense is committed, and the
other half to the ^nformer, or him that shall sue for the same; which said
Courts are hereby Empowered and Authorized to hear, try, and determine the
same. And that if it shall happen that any Person or Persons, as aforesaid,
that shall be conv^cted, of any of the aforesaid Offenses, and has not
Chattels, Lands, G^ods or Tenements for satisfying the Forfeiture a^oresaid,
shall be ^everely whipped upon his naked back, according to the Discretion and
Direction of that Court of Record where the Prosecution shall be made.
Provided, they do not E^^^^d the number of Forty Lashes save one. And to the
end that all such as shall desert his Majesty's Service aforesaid, may be taken
up and brought to their respective Officers, Be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesa^d That whatsoever person or persons that shall discover any
Soldier L^sted in his Majesty's Service as aforesaid, that are absenting
themselves, or dese^ting the said Service, and bring the ^a^d Soldiers to his
Maj^st^es Garrisons of New York and Albany* or any other Garrisons in this
Province, and in ^^e doing whereof all his Majesty's Justices of the Pe^ce,
(...) Sheriffs, Constables, and all other his M^j^sties Officers, both Civi^
and Military, are hereby required to be aiding and ^ssisting, both in ^he
Di^covery and bringing of such Deserters to his M^jesties Garrisons of New York
and Albany, or any other in this Province, as aforesaid. And be it fur^her
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any persons shall knowingly buy or
exchange or otherwise receive any Arms, Clothes or Accou^erments belonging to
the King, from any Soldier or deserter, upon any account or pretense
whatsoever, the person so offending shall forfeit for every such Offense Ten
Pounds, and being convicted thereof at the Quarter Sessions, the same shall be
levied by Distress, by Warrant under the ^arde^^ two or more Justices of the
Peace upon the Goods and Chattels of such Offender, one mo^^ty thereof to be
pa^d to the Informer and the other mo^^y to the Poor of the Parish where such
offender shall reside. And if any person so prosecuted for harboring,
concealing or assisting a Deserter, o^ ^or buying exchanging or receiving Arms,
Clothes or Accou^e^ments, shall be ^ound not guilty he shall recover T^ble
Costs, to be recovered a^ Costs in any other case where by the Law Costs are
given to defendants. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that
upon the publication of this Act, An Act of General Assembly of this Province
made in the Eleventh year of his Maj^sties Reign, Entitled, an Act for
preventing Soldiers listed in his Majesty's Service in this Province of
New York from deserting his Majesty's Service, be and is hereby repealed,
reversed, vacated and become null and void and of none Effect. And the said Act
and all the Articles and Clauses therein mentioned are hereby declared to be
repealed, reversed vacated and become null, void and of none Effect to all
Intents, Constructions and Purposes whatsoever, any thing contained in the said
Act to the contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding. Provided, that this Act
and every Clause therein contained shall only be of Force for the time of three
years, from and after the publication hereof, any thing to the contrary hereof
in this Act contained in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act for the Encouraging of Seamen.
BE it Enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives Convened in
General Assembly, That whatsoever Tavern keeper, Alehouse-keeper, Victuler or
Victu^ers within the City and County of New York* that shall trust or credit
any Seaman, belonging to any Ship or Vessel that is in or shall hereafter come
into the Road or Harbor of the said City, for any Sum of Money above the Sum
of six Shillings current Money of this Province, shall loose the same, and no
Writ or Process shall go out against any Seaman, as aforesaid, at the Suit of
any Tavern keeper, Ale-House-keeper or Victuler within the City aforesaid and
County, for any greater Sum than six Shillings, as aforesaid, except he be
Master of some Ship or Vessel. And if any Tavern-keeper, Ale-House-keeper or
Victuler within the said City, shall trust or give Credit to any Seaman that
is out of Service for any greater Sum than twelve Pence per day, so long as he
shall be out of Service, shall likewise loose the fame, and no Writ or process
shall go out against any Seaman, at the Suit of any Tavern-keeper or
Ale-house-keeper within the said City and County, for any greater Sum than the
Proportion of 1^ d. per Diem, during the time he shall be out of Service,
except a Master of a Ship or Vessel, as aforesaid. And if any Clerk of the
Courts of Record within the said City and County, shall issue any Writs against
any Seaman, circumstanced as aforesaid, contrary to the intent and meaning of
this Act, shall for his offense forfeit the Sum of five Pounds current Money of
this Province, to be recovered before the Mayor or Recorder, or any two of his
Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the said City and County, the one half to
the use of the Poor of the said City, and the other half to the Informer, or
him who shall sue for the same, without further appeal. And all Masters of
Vessels trading to and from the said City, shall within forty eight hours after
his or their arrival bring unto the Town Clerk of the said City a List of the
Names of all such Seamen as he did Import or belong to his and their Vessels,
and the same Cause to be Registered in the Office of the said Town Clerk, who
shall take no greater Reward for the same^an one Shilling current Money
aforesaid. Provided, that this Act shall not continue in force longer than five
Years after the publication thereof.

A^ Act for the Encouraging the Brewing of Beer and making of Malt within this
Province.
WHereas the Representatives of this Province now in General Assembly convened,
do find that the Brewing of Beer and making of Malt is greatly discouraged
within this Province, by reason of the great Quantities of Beer and Malt daily
Imported to the great Discouragement of the Trade and Manufacture of the same.
Now to the (...) that the Inhabitants of this Province may be encouraged in the
Brewing of Beer and making of Malt, Be it Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted by
his Excellency the Governor and Council, and Representatives now in General
Assembly Convened, and by the Authority of the (...), That the following ^ates
and Duties be paid unto his Majesty his (...) and Successors for and toward
the support of the Government, and (...) contingent Charges ^hereof, from and
during the time and term of five years, commen^ing from and after the first day
of January next ensuing the publication of this Act (that is to say) the Sum of
nine Shillings current Money of this Province on each Barrel of Beer Impo^^ed
into this Province from any of his Majesty's Plantations in America, and to
p^opor^^o^^bly for a greater or lesser Quantity; and the Sum of one Shilling
current Money a^oresaid for each Bushel of Malt ^mported from any of his
Majesty's Plantations in America, as aforesaid, and so propo^tionably for a
greater o^ lesser Quantity. And be i^ further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid* That the Rates and Duties before mentioned be ^evyed, collected and
paid in such manner and under such Regulations and (...), and upon such fines
and forfeitures as is declared in and by one Act of Assembly, entitled, An Act
for granting unto his Majesty several Duties for the defraying the public
Charge of the Government, a^^er the time limited in an Act confirming and
continuing unto their (...) the Revenue established by an Act o^ General
Assembly for de^raying the public Charges of the Government is expired, to all
intents constructions and purposes whatsoever, as i^ the said Act and every
Clau^^ therein contained had been in these presents particularly mentioned and
expressed, any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary hereof in any ways
notwithstanding.

An Act for appointing and Enabling Commissioners to examine, take and state
the Public Accounts of this Province. Expired.

An Act for d^claring the Town of East-chester, in the County of West-chester,
a distinct Parish from the Town of West-chester in the County aforesaid.
WHereas by an Act of the General Assembly of this Province, Entitled, An Act
for settling a Ministry and raising a Maintenance for them in the City of
New York, County of Richmond, West-chester and Queens County, it is among other
things declared and Enacted, that the Township of West-chester, East-chester,
lower J^^c^er^, the Manor of Pelham in the County of West chester, should be a
Pari^^ together, for the better maintaining of a good and sufficient Protestant
Minister. And whereas since the making of said Act, it has been found
Inconvenient, and to the great discouragement of Religion and the public
worship of God, for the Inhabitants of East chester to travel to West chester
aforesaid, to be present at the Preaching of the Word of God, wherefore the
said Inhabitants and Freeholders of the Town of East-chester, aforesaid, have
by their humble Petition to the House of Representatives now convened in
General Assembly, most humbly prayed that it might be declared and Enacted, and
be it declared and Enacted by his Excellency the Governor and Council, and
Representatives now convened in General Assembly, and by the Authority of the
same, That the said Town of East-chester in the County of West chester, be from
henceforth and for ever hereafter separated from the Parish of West-chester,
East chester, lower Jon^ers and the Manor of Pelham to all intents
constructions and purposes whatsoever, the said Act Entitled, An Act for
settling the Ministry and raising a Maintenance for them in the City of New
York, County of Richmond, West-chester and Queens County, or any other Act to
the contrary hereof, in any ways notwithstanding.

And Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Town of
East chester in the County of West-chester, ^e and is hereby declared to be and
remain for ever a Distinct Parish from the Parish of West-chester, Eastchester,
Lowers Jonkers and the Manor of Pelham, by the name and style of the Parish of
East-chester in the County of West-chester, Provided that the Freeholders and
Inhabitants thereof do maintain a good Orthodox Pro^estant Minister in the said
Town of East-chester, any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary hereof in any
ways notwithstanding.

An Act for Repealing an Act of Assembly Entitled, An Act for the better
securing the five Nations of Indians in their fidelity to his Majesty* and for
granting unto his Majesty the Sum of one Thousand Pounds, for building a Fort
for the security of the five Nations of Indians.
WHereas the General Assembly of this Province, at their last Sessions did
think convenient to build a Fort for the securing the five Nations of Indians
at such place as should be thought most convenient for the same, and for the
defraying the charge thereof, it was Enacted by an Act made in this present
year of his Majesty's Reign, Entitled, an Act for the better securing the five
Nations of Indians in their Fidelity to his Majesty, that the Sum of one
Thousand Pounds current Money of this Province, should be raised by way of
several Rates and Duties in the said Act mentioned, to be in force for one
whole year, and so longer. And whereas the Representatives now in General
Assembly convened, have considered that the continuation of the said Act might
prove very inconvenient to the Trade of this Province, and the lessening of
other his Majesty's Revenue, as also that the Sum mentioned in the said Act,
would not be sufficient to defray the Charge of the building completing and
finishing of the said Fort (the building whereof being (...) by his Ma^^sty)
and also considering the Sum of five hundred ^hirty eight Pounds five Shillings
and six Pence, has (...) received by the Commissioners of the Customs, by
vi^tue of the said Act from the publication thereof, until the ^^th day of
October instant, and therefore though fit that the Sum of one Thousand Pounds
be assessed, levied and Raised upon all and every the Freeholders, Inhabitant
and Sojourners of and in this Province, in such manner and proportion as i^
herein after oppressed, to be added to the Sum of five hundred Pounds, part of
the said five hundred thirty eight Pounds five Shillings and six pence, raised
as aforesaid; and the remaining thirty eight Pounds five Shillings and six
pence to be disposed of as by the General Assembly shall be thought fit. Be it
therefore Enacted by his Excellency the Governor and Council, and
Representatives in General Assembly Convened, and it is hereby Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the said Act, entitled, An Act for the better
securing the five Nations of Indians in their fidelity to his Majesty, be from
and after the said 12th day of October Instant, repealed, reversed, vacated and
become n^ll, void and of none effect, and the said Act and all the Articles and
Clauses therein mentioned, are hereby declared to be repealed, reversed,
vacated and become null, void and of none effect, to all Intents. Constructions
and purposes whatsoever, from and after the said 1^^h day of October Instant
aforesaid Provided, and be it further Enacted, That the said Sum of five
hundred thirty eight Pounds five Shillings and six pence be Employed (that is
to say) five hund^ed Pounds thereof, for and toward the building and finishing
of the said (...), and the remaining thi^ty eight Pounds five Shillings and six
pence, to such uses a^ the General Assembly shall think fit. And be it furth^r
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sum of one Thousand Pounds current
money of this Province, be laid assessed levied and rai^ed upon all and every
the Freeholders Inhabi^ants Residents and Sojourners of and in this Province,
for the building finishing and completing the said Fort, and for no other use
whatsoever (that is to ^ay) one Thousands Poun^s over and above the said five
hundred P^unds raised by the said (...), Entitled, an Act for the better
securing the five Nations of Indians in their fideli^y to his Majesty, which
said Sum of one thousand Pounds shall be raised assessed collected levied and
paid, unto his Majesty's Collector and Receiver General for the time being at
the City of New York, at or before the first day of May next, which shall be in
the year of our Lord 1701. in such manner and according to the several and
respective Quotas and Proportions ^ollowing, (that is to say) For the City and
County of New York 285 l. 10 s. current money as aforesaid. For the County of
West chester the Sum of 51 l. 14 s. For the County of Richmond 23 l. 10 s. For
Kings County 147 l. for Q^^ens County 164 l. 10 s For the County of Suffolk 174
l. 4 s. For Vlster and Duchess County of eighty four Pounds twelve Shillings
For the County of Orange 9 l and For the City and County of Albany 60 l. all of
current money aforesaid. And for the due and better assessing levying and
paying the aforesaid Sum of one thousand Pounds, Be it further Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That the Mayors and Aldermen of the Cities of New York and
Albany, the Justices of the Peace for the time being, for the several
respecti^^ Counties aforesaid, for which they shall be Justices of the Peace,
do with^^ forty days after the publication hereof, assemble and meet togeth^^
in the Court Houses for the several and respecti^^ City's and (...) or such
other place or places as they shall agree on, and there order (...) the
Assessors and Collectors for the City's of New York and Albany* (...) the
several and respective Towns Manors or Liberties within their (...)
Jurisdictions, for the Assessing Collecting and receiving of the pu^li^^ Rates,
for the defraying the public Charge of each respective City's (...) Counties
aforesaid, be the Assessors and Collectors for the assessing collectin^ and
Receiving the Sum and Sums of Money herein before mentioned* a^^cording to the
proportions before expressed, as to the said Mayor Alderm^^ and Justices shall
seem meet and reasonable, and for as much as there (...) several Towns Manors
and Jurisdictions within the respective County aforesaid, who refuse neglect or
do not elect annually or once ev^ry (...) Assessors or Collectors whereby the
intent of this Act may be avaded (...) frustrated. Be it therefore Enacted by
the Authority aforesaid, That (...) any of the respective Towns Manors o^
Jurisdictions within the severa^ Countys aforesaid, shall refuse neglect delay
or deny to choose or Elec^ Assessors and Collectors for the assessing of the
several and respective Town^ Manors (...) Jurisdictions, and for the
collecting the same according (...) the true intent meaning and directions of
this Act, then and in such case it shall and may be lawful for the Justices of
the Peace or any two of them in the Counties where such Towns Manors and
Jurisdictions are (wh^ are hereby Empowered and Authorized to nominate and
appoint Assessor^ and Collectors for such Towns Manors and Jurisdictions, as
shall refu^^ neglect delay or deny as aforesaid, which Assessors or Collectors
^o nominated and appointed in manner aforesaid, shall to all intents and
purpose^ be deemed and esteemed the Assessors and Collectors of the said Towns
Manors and Jurisdictions, and observe and execute the directions of this Act.
And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Mayors and
Aldermen the Justices of the Peace for the Respective Cities and Counties have
and shall have by virtue of this Act full Power and Authority each of them by
himself to administer to such Assessor or Assessors that shall be elected or
nominated and appointed in manner aforesaid, an Oath, that they shall well and
truly execute the Office of an Assessor, and well truly equally impartially and
in due proportion Assess and Rate the Estates of the Inhabitants Residents
Sojourners and Freeholders of the respective place for which they shall be
chosen, elected nominated and appointed Assessors according to the best of
their skill and knowledge, and therein they shall spare no person for favor or
affection or grieve any person for hatred or ill will, and the said Assessors
are hereby required to deliver one Copy of their Assesment fairly written and
subscribed by them, unto the said Justices or to the Office of the Clerk of the
Peace of the respective County to which they belong. And the said Justices for
each respective County or any two or more of them are hereby ordered and
required to cause the said several Assesments to them delivered, to be fairly
written and and to sign and Seal several Duplicate or Copies of said Assesment,
and one of them so signed and Sealed forthwith deliver or cause to be delivered
unto the respective Collectors within the several and respective Cities and
Counties aforesaid, and shall likewise deliver or cause to be delivered another
fair Copy so signed and Sealed unto the Cl^rk of the Peace of each respective
City and County to which they shall belong, there to be ^^led and remain upon
Record. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
Person or Persons chosen, elected nominated or appointed in manor as
aforesaid, Assessors or ^ollectors shall deny neglect refuse or delay to
Collect any Sum or Sums of Money in form before mentioned, then and in such
case it shall and may be lawful for any two o^ his Majesty's Justices of the
Peace of the City or Coun^y where such Offender shall happen to re^^de, and who
are hereby required and Empowered to do the same, by Warrant under their hands
and Seals, to commit such Collectors or Assessors so denying, refusing,
neglecting or delaying, or unequally impartially assessing or refusing to
collec^^ as aforesaid, to the com^on Goal, there to remain without ^ail or
mainprize, till he or they shall make Fine and Ransom to his Majesty, for such
his contemp^ as aforesaid, and upon such comitment, the Justices are speedily
required to nominate and appoint other Collectors and Assessors in their room
and stead. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any
person or Persons shall neglect or refuse to pay the several Rates and
Assesments wherewith they are charged by this Act of General Assembly for or in
respect of his or their Goods, Lands, Tenements, upon ^emand of the Collectors
that shall be chosen and appointed to receive the sam^, or within ten days next
after the said demand, it shall and may be lawful to and for such Collectors,
and they are hereby required and Empowered for non payment the^eof, by Warrant
under the hands of two Justices of the Peace to destrain the person or persons
for refusing or neglecting to pay, on his or their Goods or Chattels or
destrain in and upon the Mess^^ges, Lands and Tenements so charged, and the
Goods and Chattels then and there found, and the Distress so taken, to carry
away, and the same to expose to sale in the City, Town or County where such
Distress is made, for the payment of the said Rate or Assessment, and the
overplus coming by the said sale, if any be over and above the Charges of
taking and carrying away the said Distress, to be immedia^ely returned to the
Owner thereof, which charge to be allowed by two J^st^ces of the Peace of the
respective City or County. And moreover it shall and may be lawful to break
open in the day time any House, and upon Warrant under the hands and ^eals of
any two or more Just^ces aforesaid, any Chest, ^runk or Box, o^ other things
where such Goods are, and call to their assistance the Constables and any other
persons within their respective Cities, Counties, Towns, Manors or
Jurisdictions, where any refusal, neglect or resistance shall be made, which
said Officers and Persons are hereby required to be aiding and assisting in the
pr^mises. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid That if any
Mayor* Alder-man or Justices of the Peace within this Province, who are hereby
required, empowered and authorized to take effectual care that this Act, and
every article and clause therein be duly executed, according to the true intent
and meaning thereof, shall deny, neglect, refuse or delay to perform, fulfill
and execute all and every the Duties, Powers and Authorities by this Act
required and empowered by him or them to be done, performed, fulfilled and
executed, and shall thereof be convicted before his Exc^^llency the Governor
and Council, or by any of his Majesty's Courts of Record within this Province,
he or they shall suffer such pain by fine and imprisonment, as by the
discretion of the Governor and Council* or the Justices of the said Court
shall be ad^udged* And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
if any Bill, Plaint or Information shall be brought, moved or prosecuted at any
time hereafter against any person or persons, for any matter, cause or thing
done or acted in pursuance or execution of this Act, such person or persons so
sued or prosecuted in any Court whatsoever, shall and may plead the general
issue Not Guilty, and give this Act and the special matter in evidence. And if
the Plantiff or Prosecutor be nonsuited or forbear further prosecution, or
suffer discontinuance or Virdict to pass against him* the Defendant shall
recover special Costs, for which they shall have the (...) remedy as in case
where Costs by the Law are given to Defendants. Provided always, That no Mayor,
Alderman or Justice of the Peace shall be sued, prosecuted or molested for any
omission, offense or neglect, by virtue of this Act, but within the space of
one year after such omission, offense or neglect, and no^ at any time
hereafter, any thing herein contained to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding. And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
He^drick Hans^^, John Blocker and Peter van Burgh, Esqrs. be and are hereby
appointed mannagers of the building, erecting and finishing the said ^ort, and
providing Materials and Workmen for the same, under the direction of his
Excellency the Governor aforesaid. And that in case of the Death or other
Disability of the Mannagers for the building the said ^ort, that the Governor
or Commander in Chief of this Province for the time being, do nominate and
appoint another or other fit person or persons in the room or stead of him or
them so dying or being otherwise disabled, as aforesaid.


