GODS PROTECTING PROVIDENCE MAN'S SUREST HELP AND DEFENSE In the times Of the
greatest difficulty and most Imminent danger, Evidenced in the Remarkable
Deliverance Of diverse Persons, From the devouring Waves of the Sea, amongst
which they Suffered Shipwreck, And also From the more cruelly devouring jaws
of the inhumane CANIBALS of FLORIDA.

Faithfully related by one of the persons concerned therein JONATHAN DICKENSON

Psalm. 93:4. The Lord on high is mightier than the noise of many Waters, yea
than the mighty Waves of the Sea.

Psalm. 74:20. The dark places of the Earth are full of the habitations of
Cruelty.

Printed in Philadelphia by Reinier Iansen. 1699.

THE PREFACE.
Ingratit^de toward m^n, after signal (...) received, is, amongst all
civilized people, looked upon with a ju^^detestation; insomuch that the moral
Gentiles in ages pa^^, thought they could give no worse a character of a
Person, than to call him ungrateful. How much more th^n (...) C^ristians
(especially in a time o^ such Light, as now shines) engaged, to shun this sin
of ingratitude, toward their GOD, whom the sensible know, to be the Fo^ntain
of all their mercies: And surely, next to the infinite mercy showed them for
Christ's sake, in causing the days-spring from (...) high to visit their Souls;
remarkable outward deliverances, ought in a more than commonly remarkable
manner, to be (...) o^jects of their gratitude, to their great Deliverer. I
must confess, thanks giving (which is what we poor Mortals can return, for the
manifold favors we daily receive from him) has it is rise in the heart; and as
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, how can those who (...)
truly thankful in heart; but render the calves of their lips ^ in telling to
their Friends and acquaintance, how great things GOD has done for them: Nay,
they are so affected, with such eminent appearances of the Protecting hand of
Providence, for their help, preservation and deliverance; that they are not
vvilling to confine it to them only, but to publish it to the World; that the
Fame of their God may be spread from Sea to Sea, and from one end of the Earth
to the other.

The following relation being large, I shall endeavor (...) be short; only,
some of the things which seem to me most remarkable' I would more particularly
recommend to the Readers observation.

1. The hearts of all men are in the hand of God, he can tu^n them as he
pleases. When these Man-eaters fury was at height, their knives in one hand,
and the poor Shipwrakt People's heads in the other; their knees upon the others
shoulders, and their looks dismal; on a sudden; the Savages were struck dumb,
and their countenances changed, that they looked like another People; the
Casseekey (or King) becoming as a safeguard to the distressed, from the injuries
of his own men: Nay, such confidence put he in them, that he would trust them
to remove the money, he had taken from themselves, before he would trust his
own* When they were got from these to another place, where they expected (...)
safety, they found themselves disappointed* fresh dangers presenting
themselves, as dismally as before; Ye^ God prevented any further mischief, than
the stripping them of those poor rags the others had left them, and some other
abuses, which by that time were grown familiar to them, and were looked upon as
light afflictions. The Casseeky's Wife being made an instrument for their
delivery, she and some others having some thing of tenderness of heart in them,
though amongst such an inhumane crew.

2. Many were the particular deliverances upon occasion of injuries offered.
Once, an Arrow shot at them narrowly escaped them. Another time, some going to
shoot Arrows at them, certain of their own company caught hold of their Bows
and arms; Nay, though some of them shot, yet their arrows mist. Not to mention
the frequent dangers they were in, upon every slight suspicion of their being
English* of which more anon: And well might these poor sufferers be in
continual fear of their lives, since about a 12 month before a parcel of
Dutchmen who had likewise suffered Shipwreck, had been killed and devoured;
and moreover, of the many Vessels supposed to be lost on that Coast, these are
the first company, that are known to have escaped. Neither is it so wonderful
that they are thus cruel to strangers, since they are unnatural to their own
aged People; they having no more compassion on them, than to make them Slaves
to the younger. Yet are these Man-eaters as cowardly as cruel; when the
Spaniards came up, the sight of a rusty musket presented toward them, would
make several of them fly.

3. The dangers they were delivered from, arose not only from men, but the
Elements also God permitted to threaten them, and afflict them. One time rowing
in their B^^t, the Sea swelled, so that it was dangerous continuing thereon al
night, and as dangerous, to ende^vour for the shore* yet Providence failed them
not, but conducted them safe th^ther, as though there had been a lane made
through the ^r^^kers. Another time, by reason of a great Flood, they were
forced to remove their lodgings several times, and for diverse days, were in a
continual apprehension of being drowned, at length were preserved upon an
Oyster-hill. Not to mention the frequent dangers they were in, by reason of the
extreme cold, too tedious to touch at here. Wherein this however is remarkable;
that God can both administer strength in the midst of weakness, and also take
away strength, and cause weakness to seize, whenever he pleases: Here was an
old man, a Woman with a sucking child, and another with child Persons,
seemingly, very unlikely to encounter such hardships, all escaped, and diverse
Negro's, used to more hardiness, perished.

^ As to lodging; I shall say little, any discreet person may imagine, how hard
it was to people well brought up, to lie on a floor, swarming with abundance of
many sorts of creeping things, occasioned by the throwing the berry stones on
the floor, and letting all the nastiness they made lie there, which bred these
vermin; and yet perhaps might be accounted good lodging, in comparison of the
cold ground, whereon they often lay afterward unsheltered, exposed to the
bleak blasts of the rigid North-West Wind.

5. Their Food mostly scanty, the best of it such, as (I am ready to think) the
meanest Negro, here would not touch with his lips: Sometimes the gills and
gutts of fish p^^kt off a dunghill, sometimes the scraps the Indians flung
away, and the Water they boiled their Fish in, though never so undecently
handled. At first their sorrows were so great, and their alarms so many, they
could not eat; afterward their diet so uncouth, they could not away with it;
until at length hunger had so far prevailed over them* that they could eat
with an appetite, the Palmetto-berries, the taste whereof was once irksome, and
ready to take away their (...): Nay so fond were they of them, that the getting
(...) a bushel accidentally, was look^d o^ as a great prize.

^. Their being forced to mask themselves under the ^ame (...) Spaniards,
though few of them could speak any Spanish, (...) other hardship: mostly
because the Natives often suspected them to be English, and thereby they were
c^ntinually in danger of their lives. Whether their cruelty against the
English, proceeds from their being under no apprehen^^on of danger from them,
and so may think themselves lawles^, in what they do against our Nation; Or
whether it proceeds* from any particular disgust offer^d them by some English*
I shall not de^^^mine: However it would do well, for those that are not under
their power, to avoid givi^g them any just cause of offense, least their
Neighbors suffer for (...): One of these Savages could complain, that, (...)
past, he had been taken off by some o^ ^ar English (...)* from whom he esc^ped
by swimming, and was therewith disgusted, insomuch, that could he, by his
sitting, have ^ound out that they were English, it might have proved of ill
consequence to them.

7. The courtesy of the Governor of Augusteen, who clothed (...) naked people,
fed their hungry stomachs, and caused them to be conducted safely to Carolina,
is not to ^e (...) by without due notice; especially being a man of another
Nation, as well as of a different Reli^i^n, and what (...) more, of such an
one, as does not teach it^s Votaries, ^o much compassion, toward those they
count Heretics. Neither let me forget the Governor of Carolina, whose
Generosity comple^ted, what the Governor of Augusteen had begun, in assisting
and cherishing these our afflicted Friends and Country folks; With which I
shall conclude these Remarks, to treat more particularly, concerning that
faithful Servant of the Lord Robert Barrow, who was one of this Company.

'This man of God, whose habitation was in one of the Northern Counties of
England, was early convinced of the blessed truth of God, professed by the
People called Quakers, and soon after had a dispensation of the Gospel
committed to him. He lived in his Native Country, in esteem amongst his
Neighbors, for his godly conversation, and honored in the Church of God, as
an Elder who had abode faithful in his testimony, both in preaching the
Gospel, suffering ^or the same, and behaving himself ansvverably thereunto. And
in the Year 1694 the Spirit of God (from whom he first had his commi^sion)
requiring him to come over into these parts, to Preach the Gospel here also, he
was not disobedient to the heavenly call, but gave up to do the will of God,
though in a cross to his own, as appeared by an expression of his, before he
left England, Which was to this effect, That he had rather immediately have
laid down his natural life there, if by so doing he could have kept his peace
with God, than to have crossed the Seas to America. Well* hither he came, and
after he had thoroughly visited these parts, he took ship for the West-Indian
Islands, and at length was returning from Iamaico, to this Town of
Philadelphia, when these calamities mentioned in the ensuing Iournal befell
him. How he behaved himself under them, is therein expressed, with what
patience he was carried through them, with what faith he overcame, even the
very worst of men, so that it may be said, He was more than a Conqueror over
those blood thirsty Canibals, looking to Him Who was invisible, and by his
grace seeing beyond them and their cruelty; by Prayer wrest^ing with God for a
blessing, even the blessing of being delivered out of their barbarous hands,
and laying his bones amongst faithful Friends; and so effectual were his
fervent prayers, that they prevailed with God; and so gracious was his God unto
him, that He sealed an assurance upon his spirit, that his prayers were heard,
and should in due time be ansvvered, before he was yet off his knees. And
doubtless, he was made a strength and a comfort, to his companions in
affliction, whose remembrance will not be easily blotted out of their minds.

One remarkable passage I cannot well omit, Which demonstrates, he had well
learnt of him who is a God of truth, to speak the truth (...) all occasions,
though (...) with the hazard of his life. For as the Reader may observe i^ the
Series of this follovving relation, thiese poor people, for the safegurd of
their lives, had assumed the name of Spaniards, some on that account asserting
what was wrong, others concealing the truth, yet this honest hearted man, being
directly asked the question, Nickaleer, Nickaleer? (the^r wo^d for Englishman)
could do neither; but in simplicity answered, yes; being asked so concerning
another, he again ansvvered, yes. Yet, though for his plain dealing he was
stripped of his cloths, which till then he had saved; God suffered not these
Savages to touch his life, or the lives of any of his company.

Thus he passed through this afflicting trial, and at length arrived at this
place, on the 1st. day of the 2d. month 1697; though in much weakness, having
been taken very ill of the belly ache and Flux at Augusteen, of which he never
recovered, but still grew wor^^ and worse, to his dying day. It was about the
8th. hour in the evening, when the Barkentine he was passenger in, arrived at
this place: Diverse Friends went on board, in order to get him ashore, but he
being in a very vveak condition, they could not remove him at that time. He
declared his great satisfaction, that the Lord had granted his request, that he
might lay down his bones in this place; that his heart was strong, and he hoped
he might first see Friends again at the Meeting. He made mention of the
goodness of God to him, and that his presence had attended him in all his
exercises.

The next morning being the 2d. of the 2d. month, diverse Friends went on board,
to help the Vessel up to a Wharf, in order to get him on thoar, in which time
he spoke as before related, Gods Power attending him. About the 7th. hour,
diverse Friends carried him in a Hammocker (being wrapped up in a blanket and
cloths to keep him warm) to the house of Samuel Carpenter* where he declared
the goodness of God to him, and that his heart was yet strong, and his memory
and understanding good; after whch he was shi^ted and then (...) but that this
place had a great Fame abroad, wherever he (...) been, for an honest, laborious
and good people. Wh^reupon he exhorted us many times " To keep us our same, and
told us the means how By being faithful to God, and keeping in love one whith
another' and by forgiving our trespasses one against another: Often exhorting
us to love one another, mentioning that expression of our Savior ' By this"
shall all (...) that ye are my disciples, if ye love one another. (...) pr^ssed
^s " To meet often together; using (...) a motive thereto, For they that feared
the (...), and spoke often one unto another, (...) ^emembrance was written. He
further said, The (...) given him the desire of his heart in coming hither, and
that, if he dyed here, he was very well satisfied, and be believed his Wife
would also be well satisfied; and that as the Lord had given her to him, and
him to her, so they had given one another up; and that when he came from her,
it was as if he was going to his grave; That neither Gold nor Silver, Riches
nor Honor, should have parted them, but that he did it only in obedience to
the Lord, and to keep his peace with God.

He said, that had been convinced about 45. years; and had born a faithful
testimony against the hireling Priests, and had been in Prison seven times for
his testimony, and the Lord had always been his Preserver and Deliverer, by
ways that he thought not of; And so Friends ( said he) will He be to you, if
you be faithful to him; And that several who had been committed Prisoners with
him, had used indirect means to get at liberty; but it was always my
resolution ( said he) not to bow a knee to Baal; and yet the Lord wrough^ my
^eliverance. And further he said several times, That in his late Afflictions,
he had seen more of the wonders and dealings of the Lord, than ever he had seen
before, or ever should have seen, if he had not gone through them, and that he
felt the Lord with him, which did out bal^ance all.

Speaking of his patient ^earing his sufferings, and how he was supported by
the Lords power under all, and of his inquiry of the Lord about it, the Lords
answer was: LET PATIENCE HAVE ITS PERFECT WORK. Speaking how sick he was at
Iamaica for about twenty weeks, yet (said he) I mist but one meeting. He also
said That he desired of the Lord, that he might not dye by the hands of those
Barbarians; For (said he) They thirsted, (...) much after (...) flesh, a^ ever
we did after Victuall^*

On the 2d. day of the 2d. month, some Friends co^ing into the room to visit
him at the ^ight of them he seemed to rejoice, and putting forth his hand, was
ready to embrace them in much love, and in a very tender f^ame of spirit. The
Friends expressed their gladness to see him, but said, They were sorry to see
him so very weak; to which he replied, Although my body ^e weak, my mind is
sound, and memory good: And further said The Lord has been very good to me,
all along unto this very d^y, and this morning has sweetly refreshed me. And
further added, The Lord has answered my desire; for I desired content, and
that I might come to this place, to lay my bones amongst you. And afterward
said, It is a good thing, to have a conscience void of offense, both toward
God, and toward man.

On the 4th. day of the 2d. month* being the 1st. day of the week, about the
5th. hour in the morning, he desired a Friend to write for him to his dear
Wife, To remember his dear love to her, and to let her know of his travels, and
being here, and that the Lord was with him; That his outward affairs were
settled, and that She had wherewith all to live on. He further said, diverse
Friends being present, That the Lord was with him, and all things were Well,
and that he had nothing to do, but to Dye. And accordingly on this day he
departed, and on the 3d. day following, being the 6th. day of the 2d. month,
was buried in Friends burying ground, in this Town of Philadelphia.

And now having brought my relation concerning this good man, to the last
Period of his life, I might very well here put a period to my Preface; but that
I foresee, some persons may be ready to say: Here is an account of very strange
passages, but of what credit is the Relator? May We depend upon his Authority,
without danger of being (...)? To such I answer. He is a man well known in this
(...), o^ good credit and rep^te, on whose fidelity and (...), those who have
any knowledge o^ him, will read^ly (...), without ^^specting fallacy. But, that
in the (...) of tw^ or thre^ (...) everything may be established; besides him
and his (...), a person whose residence (when at home) is in this Town, viz
Joseph Kirle, the Master of the (...) in which they suffered shipwreck, a man
of an ho^est char^cter amongst his Neighbors, had the perusal of it, before
it went to the press, and approved it. With which I shall conclude; wishing my
Render much satisf^ction in the reading of it: But never the unhappiness, of
experiencing in proper person, the truth of it.

A Iournal of the Travels of several Persons, with their sufferings, being
cast an^ in the Galpa (amongst the Cannabals) of Florida. and. c
Persons Names viz Joseph Kirle Commander of the Barkentine, (...) Mariners.
Richard Limpeney Mare. Solomon Cresson. Joseph Buckley. Thomas Fownes. Thomas
Iemmet. Nathaniel Randall. John Hilliard the Masters Boy. Ben. the Masters
Negro.
Passengers.
Robert Barrow. Jonathan Dickinson. Mary Dickinson. Jonathan Dickinson a
sucking Child six months old. Benjamin Allen.
Belonging to Jonathon Dickinson.
Negroe-Men.
Peter. London. Jack. Caesar. Ca^oe a Child.
Negro Women
Hagar. Sarah. Bella. Su^^na. (...). (...) an Indian Girl.




August 1696* B^ing in Company with twelve or ^hirteen Sail of Merchantmen
under the Convoy of the Hampshire ^rigot (...) Fletcher Commander, Sailed from
(...) in Iamaica, we being bound for (...).

This day about Noon came a Sloop from Port-Royall* meeting us off Portland;
gave an Account of the French-Fleet's being at Cap^-Antonio.

This Evening we lay by off Black Rivers mouth in order to go the next morning
to Blewfield, but it being calm for many Days following, the Current drove to
westward of the Island.

Hampshire-^rigo^^*

Savana La Mar* and lost our Anchor.

Blewfield Road to water.

Blewfields intending our passag^ thro^gh (...) Gulp^.

Cape Antonio and about a League to the ^astwards off the Cape was a ^ire,
making a great sm^ak: At (...) appeared on the Bay* making signs for us to put
on shore; but having a fresh Gale and not knowing who they were, our Master
would not.

This day made the Table land of the Havana and this Evening stood over for
Cape Flor^d^; but about Eigh^ or Nine at night ^e saw two Lig^ts, being about a
Mile from us: we fearing we were got amongst the French-Fleet, ^acked and (...)

Havana; had (...) designed for that ^ort to enquire (...) F^eet: this
afternoon came a Turnado from the Land; and our Master being on the Q^arter
Deck, our boom gibing knocked him down and broke his Leg: which Accident was
grievous to him and us; but I having things suitable, with a ^i^tle experience
se^ it. At this time had I Four of my Family very Sick one whereof ^as a^
Ind^^n Gir^ being (...) as I had bound up the Master's (...) taken with (...)
which continued some hours and then she died. This Evening we s^ood over for
Cape ^lorida, having the wind North-^aster^y.

Cuba, and about Sunrising we espied the two sail that we saw before they
standing as we stood: Therefore we supposed them to be some of our company; we
wrong^^ them in sai^ing and by noon lost sight of them. About Four ^his
Afternoon we espied a Ship to the Eastward of us (^e being about four Leagues
off shore and about Fifteen leagues to Eastward of the Havana) supposing her ^o
be a Frenchman therefore stood in for the s^oar, but she gained on us: when a
Turnado sprang up and a great shower of Rain followed which hid us; ^ereupon we
tacked ^^d stood over for Florida. Night came on that ^e saw no more of that
sail, having the wind fair.







feared the sad Consequences that follow^d: yet having ho^es (...) we go^ o^r
(...) and Lame on shore, also our* ^rovisions, with s^arrs and Sails to make a
Tent. I went with one (...) to view the Land and seek the, most convenient
p^ac^ for that purpose; But the Wild^r^es^ Country looked very disma^l, having
no Trees but only Sand hills covered with shrubby Palmetto the stalks of which
were prickly* that there wa^ no wa^king amongst them; I espied a place almost a
^urlong within that Beach being a Bottom; to this place I with my Negro soo^
cut a Passage, the storm and ^ain continuing: Thither I got my Wife and Sick*
Child being six months and twelve days old* also Rober^ ^arro^ an aged man* who
had been sick about five or six months Our Master* who some days past broke his
^egg and my ki^sman Benjamin Allen, who ha^ be^n v^ry ill with a violent Fever
most part of the Voyage: these ^ith others we got to the place under (...)
mel^er of some fe^ Bush^s which broke some of the wi^^ but kept none of the
Rain from the^; I got a Fire made: the most of our people were getting
Provisions as a shore; our Chests* Trunks and the rest of our Clo^hing ^ere all
very wett and cold.

Abo^^ the ^ight or Ninth hour came two Ind^^^ Men b^ing naked except a small
piece of platted work o^ (...) which just hi^ their private parts and fastened
behind with a Horse-Tai^ in likeness made of a sort of Silk-grass) from the
Southward, running fiercely and foaming at the mouth having no weapons except
their knives; and forthwith not making any stop; violently seized the two first
of our M^n they met with who were carrying Corn from the Vessel to the Top of
the bank where I stood to receive it and put it into a Cask: they used no
violence for the men resisted nor; but taking them under the Arm brought them
toward me. Their Countenance was ^^ry Furious and bloody. They had their (...)
a Ro^e behind in which stuck two Bon^s shaped ^ne ^ike a broad Arrow; the other
a spear head. The re^t of our men followed from the Vess^^; (...) me what they
(...) whether they should get (...) Guns ^o (...) these (...); but I persuaded
them otherwise (...) be quiet* showing their inability to defend as from what
would follow; but to put our trustt in the Lord who was able to defend to the
uttermost. I walked toward the place where our Sick and ^ame were the two
Indian men following me I (...) ^ndian^ were come and ^o ^ing upon us. And
(...) two (letting the men loos^) stood with a will ^^rious Countenance,
looking upon us I bethought my self to give them some Tobacco and ^ipes* which
they greedily snatched from me, and making a Snu^ing noise like a Wild-Beast,
turned their backs upon us and run a^ay.

We Communed together and considered our co^^ition, being amongs^ a Barba^ous
people such as were generally accounted Man-Eater^ believing those two were
gone ^o Alarm their people. We satt our selves down* expecting Cruel^y and
^ard death* except it should please the Almighty God to work Wonderfully for
our Deliverance. In this deep Concernment some of us were not left witho^t
hop^s; blessed be the Name of the Lord in Whom We trusted.

As We were under a deep ^xercise and concernment, ^ motion arose from one of
us that if we should put our selves under the Denomina^ion of Spaniards (it
being known that that Nation had some in^^ue^ce on them) and one of us na^ed
Solomon Cres^on speaking the Spanish Language well, it was hoped* this might be
a means for our delivery: To which the most of the Company assented.

Within two or three hours after the departure of the two Indian^* some of our
people being near the Bea^^ or Strand returned and said the Indians were coming
in a very great number all running and shouting* About this time the Storm was
much abated, the Rain ceased, and the Sun appeared which had been hid from us
many days. The Indians went all to the Vessel taking forth whatever they could
lay hold on, except Rum Sugar* Mo^assoes* Beef and ^ork.

But their Ca^seekey (for so they call their King) with about thirty more came
down to us in a Furious manner, having a dismal Aspect and foaming at the
mouth: Their Weapons were large Spanish Knives, except their Ca^s^^key's who
had ^ ^agganett that belonged to the Master of our Vessel: They rushed in upon
us and cried N^ckaleez Nickaleez; We understood them not at first: they
repeating it over unto us often; At last they cried E^painia or Spaniard* by
which we understood them that a^ first they meant English; but they were
answered to the latter in Spanish yea to which they replied, No Spainia No, but
all cried out, Nickaleez, Nickaleez* We ^itting on our Chests, Boxes and
Trunks, and some on the ground, the Indians surrounded us. We stirred nor moved
not; but satt all or most of us very calm and still some of us in a good frame
of spirit, being freely given up to the Will of God.

Whilst we were thus sitting* as a People almost unconcerned, these bloody
minded Creatures placed themselves each behind one kicking and throwing away
(...) under their (...), the Casseekey (...) placed himself behind me, standing
(...) the Chest which I satt upon, they all having their (...) with their
knives in their hands* (...) their bloody design, some taking hold (...) by the
heads with their Knees set (...) shoulders. In this Posture they seemed to
(...) for the Casseekey to begin. They were high in ^ords which we understood
not. But on a sudden it ^leased the Lord to Work Wonderfully for our
preservation, and instantly all these savage men were struck dumb, and like men
amazed the space of a C^arter of an Hour, in which ti^e their countenances
^ell, and they looked like another People. They (...) their places they had
taken behind us* and (...) in amongst us requiring to have all our Chests,
Trunks and Boxes unlockt; which being done, they divided all that was in them.
Our Money the Casseekey took (...) himself, privately hiding in the bush^^* Then
they went to pulling of our Clothes* leaving (...) of us only a pair of
breeches* or an old Coat* (...) my Wife and Child Robert Barrow and our Master,
(...) Whom they took out little this day.

Having thus done, they asked us again, Nickaleez, Nickaleez? But We an^wered
by saying P^nsilvania.

We began to enquire after St. ^ugusteen, also would talk of St. ^ Luceapunc;
which was a Town tha^ lay about a Degree to the Northward: But they cun^^ngly
would seem to persuade us that they both lay to the Southward. We signified to
them that they lay to the Northward. And we would talk of the Havana that lay
to the Southward These places they had heard of and knew which way they lay.

At length the Casseekey told us, now long it was (...) St. a Lucea* by (...)
^ravel; but cared not to (...) as mention St. Augusteen They would signify by
Signs, We should go to the Southward. We answered That we must go to the
Northward For Augusteen. When they found, they could not otherwise persuade us
(...) that we should go to the Southward for ^he Havana and that it was but a
little Way.

We gave them to understand that We came that way and were for the Northward;
All which took place wi^h them. We perceived that the Casseekey's heart was
^endered toward us; for He kept mostly with us and would the remaining part of
this day keep off the (...) which would have had our few Rags (...). S^m^time
before Night we had a shower of (...) the Casseekey made signs for us to (...);
upon which we got our Tent up and (...) to lie upon.

Abo^^ this ^ime our Vessel lay dry on shore (...) the Indians gathered them
selves together Men and Women, some Hundreds in numbers. Having got all the
Goods out of the Vessel and covered the Bay for a large distance, opened all
the stuffs and Linnen^ and (...) them to ^ry they would touch no sort of (...)
Sugar ^or Molass^es but left it in the Vessel (...) shouted and made great
noises in the time of Plunder. Night coming on the Casseekey put those Chests
and Trunks which he had reserved for himself into our Tent; which pleased us*
and gave an Expectation of his company for he was now become a Defender of us
from the rage of others. The Casseekey were down to the Waterside amongst his
People and returned with ^hree old Coats that were wett and torn, which (...)
^ave us; one wher^of I had. We made a fire at each (...) our selves down* it
being dark: but hearing hideous noises and fearing that they were (...) (...)
offended at it: When he held up his Quadrant to observe; One would draw an
Arrow to shoot him; but it pleased God hitherto to prevent them from shedding
any of our Blood.

One passage I have omitted. Two of our Mariner's named Thomas Fowns and
Richard Limpan^y went fort this morning from our Tent down to the Bay where the
Indians were, and viewing of them at some distance, an Indian Man came running
upon them, with his Knife in his hand, and took hold of Thomas Fownes to Stab
him; but the said Thomas fell on his Knees, using a Spanish Ceremony, and
begged not to kill him; whereupon the Indian desisted, and bid him be gone to
the place from whence he came. The said Thomas at his return acquaint^d us how
narrowly he had escaped.

After We had traveled about five miles along the deep Sand, the Sunn being
extreme hott, we came to an Inlett. One the other side was the Indian-Town,
being little Wig-wams made of small poles stuck in the ground, which they bended
one to another, making an Arch, and cov^red them with Thatch of small
Palmetoe-Leaves: Here We were commanded to sit down, and the Casseekey came
to us, who with his hand scratched a hole in the Sand about a foot deep, and
came to Water, which he made ^igns for us to come and drink: We being extreme
thirsty did; but the Water was almost Salt. Whil^t we sat here We saw great
fires maki^g on the other side of the Inlett, which some of us ^hought was
preparing for us. After an hour's time being spent here at lenght (...) an
Indian with a sma^l Cannooe from the other ^ide and I with my Wife and (...)
Ro^^ert B^r^ow (...) ^r^ered to go in: (...) sam^ Cannoo^ was (...) ^^ough for
us to sit down in. Over We were carried, and being landed, the Man made signs
for us to walk to the Wig-wams; which we did; but the young Indians would seem
to be ^righted and fly from us. We were dir^cted to a Wig-wam, which afterward
we understood to be the Casseekey's: It was about Man^igh to the topp. Her^in
was the Casseekey's Wife and some old Women sitting on a Cabin made of Sticks
about a foot high covered with a matt they ^ade signs for us to sit down on
the ground; which we did* the Casseekey wife having a joung child sucking (...)
her breast gave it to another woman, and would have my child; which my wife was
very loath to suffer; but the would not be deny^d took our child and suckled it
at her breast viewing and feeling it from top to toe; at lengt returnid it to
my wife* and by this time was another parcel of our people come over; and
sitting down by the wig-wam side our Indian brought a fish boiled on a small
Palmeto leaf and set it down amongst us, making signs for us to eat: but our
exercise was too great for us to have any inclination to receive food* at
length all our people were brought over, and afterward came the Casseekey. As
soon as he came to his wig-wam he set himself to work, got some stakes and
stuck them in a Roce joining to his wig-wam and tied some sticks whereon were
these small Palmetoes, tied and fastened them to the stakes about three foot
high, and laid two or three Matts made of Reeds down by this shelt^r; which; it
seem^s he made for us to break the wi^d off us; and ordered us t^ lie down
there; which we di^ as many as ^he ma^s would hold, the rest lay on the gr^und
by us* the Casseekey* went into his wig-wam and seal^d himself on his Cabin
Crosslegged having a Basket of P^lmetoe b^rries brought him which he eat very
(...) some Indians (...) to him and talk^ (...) came on: the moon b^ing up an
Indian, who perform^th their Ceremonies stood out, loocking (...) at the moo^
making a hideous noise, and crying o^t (...) a mad man for the space of half an
hour; all the Indians being (...) till he had done: after which they all ma^e
fearf^ll noise some like the barking of a Dog, woolf, and other st^ange
sou^ds. After this, one (...) a logg and (...) him^^lf down, holding the stick
or logg up^ight (...) ground and sev^rall others getting abo^t him, made a
^id^ons noise, singing to our a (...); at length their Women joined Consort,
making the noise mo^e terrible* this they (...) till M^^^ight. To (...) morning
was great D^^s: Our Fire being expend^d, We ^ere extrea^ cold.

This morning the Casseekey looking on us with a mild Aspect, sent his son with
his striking staff to the Inlett to strike Fish for us; which ^as perfor^ed
with great dexterity; for some of (...) with him, (...) though we looked very
earnestly when he true his ^ta^f from (...) could not see a Fish at which time
he saw it, and brought it on shore on the end of his staff. Someti^es h^ would
(...) swif^ly pursueing a Fish, and seldom (...) when (...) at him. I^ two
hours time he got as many Fish as would serve twenty Men: there were others
also fishing at the same time, so that Fish was plenty: b^t the (...) of our
Conditions stayed our h^ng^y ^to^acks: for some (...) us th^^ght they vvoul^
feed us to feed themselves.

^he Casseekey went this Morning toward our Vessel; in his absence the other
Indians looked very untovvardly upon us* which created a jealousy of their
Cruelty yet to come.

This Afternoon We savv a great fire nigh the place of our Vessel; vvhereupon
We concluded (...) our Vessel and our Boat were burnt: whereupon we were
almost confirmed that they designed to de^^roy us. About Sunsetting the
Casseekey came h^me: we spoke to him he ansvvered us and seemed very affable;
which We liked Well. Night drawing on, and the Wind shifting North Ward We
removed our shelter and added the Ma^ts to it to break the Wind off us, Which
blowed cowld and lay^d our selv^s on the sand. About an hour Within Night came
a parcel of Indians from the southward being all arm^d with Bows and Arrows
and comeing near our Te^^ some of us espy^d them where upon they squatted ^ow^.
This seemed a fresh motive of danger, and we awakened those of us that were
(...) a ^leep and bid them prepare* for things seemed dang^rous we supposing
they ^are come to forward our destruction or to carry us to the Southward: they
sat thus a Considerable time; at length they dis^ribu^ed themselves to the
wig-wam* thus would danger often appear unto us, and almost ^^allow us up;
(...) times we should be set over it, having a s^cret hope that God would work
out ^^liverance having pr^s^rv^d us from so many perils.

Sometime before Night Robert Barrow was exhor^i^g ^s to be (...) and in a
^odly manner ^id he expound that Tex^ of ^cripture: Because thou have kept
(...) my ^atience etc. Rev. 3 Chap: 1^ ver: aft^r which he ^nded with a most
^erv^nt (...) Lord tha^ wher^as he had s^ffer^d (...) be (...) among^t a
barbarous and (...) ^^ople* if (...) ^t was his blessed will, He would preserve
and diliver us from amongst them, that our names might not be buried in
Oblivion; and that he might lay his Body amongst Faithful Friends: And at the
close of his Prayer, He seemed to have an Ass^rance that his ^etition would be
granted. In all which some of us were livingly refressed and strengthened.

7. Mt: 27.1.
This morning we again used our Endeavors with the Casseekey, that we might go
to the Northward for Augusteen. His answer was, We should be all (...); but at
length we pre^ailed, and He said* on the Morrow we should go. Hereupon he took
three Negroemen (one of Joseph Kirle^s and two of mine) and with a Cannoe went
up the sound.

This day the Indians were busy with what they had taken out of our Vessel, and
would have inploye^ all of us to do* some one thing, some another for them;
but we not knowing the Consequence endeavored to shun it, and would deny them
demands

But some of our Men did answer their desires in making and sewing some Cloth
together, stringing our Beds* mending of Locks, of the Chests etc. Whatever
they thought was a miss they would be putting upon us to mend, still we wholly
refused. At which time I heard a sayingh that came from one of the Chief
Indians, thus [ English Son of a Bit^h] which words started me; For I do
believe they had had some of our Nation in their possession, of whom they had
heard such an expression: I passed away from the Wig-wam wi^h much trouble.

This day being the first of the Week, we having a la^ge Bible and a Book of
Robert Barcley^s some one or other was often Reading in them: But being most of
us sat together, Robbert Barrow desired our People to wait upon the Lord: In
which time Robert had a Word in season unto us, and afterwar^s went to Prayer,
all the Indians comeing about us, and some younger sort would be mocking; but
not to our disturbance: The Elder sort stood very modestly the whole time:
After Prayer ended, they all with drew quietly: But some of them (especially
the Casseekey's eldest Son) would take great delight in our Readi^g, and would
take the Bible or other Book, and give to one or other to read; the Sound of
which pleased them, for they would sit (...) and very attetively to hear us.

The Casseekey having been gone most part of the Day with three Negroes in our
Boat comeing over the Bar into the Inlett. We rejoyc't to see our Boat, for we
though^ She had been Burnt. Our Negroes told us; They went up Sound with the
Casseekey and landed near the place where our Tent had been: The chief Business
was to remove the Money from one place to another, and bury it. This Old man
would trust our People, but not his own. After that was done, they went to the
place where our Vessel was burnt; they la^ched our Boat, in which the Old
Casseekey put his Chests, wherein was our Linen and other of our Trade: Also
they got a small Ru^dlett which they filled with Wine out of a Q^arter Cask
that was left and brought Sugar out of the wrack which was not consumed with
the Fire. By this time came the Caseekey and other Negroe in the Cannooe. He
told us, On the Morrow we should go with our Boat: This was cheerful news unto
us. All the time some Indians had been out, and brought home some Oyst^rs,
(...) gave us some, bidding us take what (...) had a mind to. A little before
Nicht the Casseekey ^p^ned his Chest and Boxes; and his Wife came and (...)
what was in them from him: But he seemed very (...) to my Wife and Child and
gave her several things which were useful to Her and our Child.

Our ^^at was very Leaky; so we got her into a Creek to sink her, that the
water might swell her.

7: m^. 28.2.
This morning We waited an Opportunity to get leave to depart, which was
granted (...): Whereupon we asked for such things as they did not make use of;
viz. A great Glass, wherein was five or six pound of Butter; some Sugar; the
^undlett of wine: And some Balls of Chocolate: All which was granted us; also a
Bowl to heave Water out of the Boat. But the Casseekey would have a Negroe-Boy
of mine, named Caesar, to which I could not tell what to say; but he was
resolved on it. We got down to the Waterside, and sent all our People over
that where to travel: And Joseph Kirle, Robert Barrow, I, my Wife and Child
with two of our Mariners went in the Boat, and rowed along shore Northwards;
But the Casseekey would have us to have ^one with our Boat up the Sound: We
supposed the Sound was a great River; and therefore were not willing to take
his advice, having no knowledge; but his Counsel was good, as We found
afterward; for the convenience of passage.

The Casseekey and some other Indians went with our People toward our Wrack,
we rowing along shore, and our Boat very leaky, that one person had Employ
enough to heave out the Water.

just before we left the Indian-Town, several Indians were for taking the
little Clothes and Rags* We (...) got; but calling out to the Ca^seekey, he
would cau^^ the^ to let us alone.

Solomon Cre^son was mightily in one Indian's favor* who would hardly stir
from his Wig-wam, but Solomon must be with him, and go Arm in Arm; Which Indian
amongst his Plunder had a Morning-Gown, which he putt on Solomon, and Solomon
had worn it most of the time we were there; but when the time of our departure
came an Indian unrob^d him, and lo^t only a pair of Breeches, and seemed very
angry.

It was high Noon when We left our Wrack, (she being burnt down to her
Floor-Timbers which lay in the ^and) We setting forward, some in the Boat? the
rest traveled a long ahoar; and a little before Sunnsetting, our People came up
with abundance of small Fish that had been forced on shore, as we may suppose,
by the Storm that drove us a shore, (they lying far from the Water, being much
rainted) covered the shore for nigh a mile in length: Of which our People
gathered as many as they could carry. About Sunn-setting we putt on shore to
refresh our selves, and take a small Respite* also to take my Kinsman Benjamin
Allin (...) to our Boat: For this Afternoon in his Travel he was taken with a
Fever and Ague, and We had much trouble to get him along, he having been Sick
nig^ unto death (being first taken the day before We left Blewf^^lds Road)
until about a Week before we were cast away.

One of my Negroes had saved a Tinder-Box and Flint, and We had reserved two
Knives, by which means We got a Fire, though with much difficulty, for our
Tinder was bad, and all the Wood Salt-water-soaken: which being accomplished,
we broiled all our fish, feeding haertily of some of them and the rest we kep^
not knowing when we should be thus furnished again; for which some of us were
truli tankfull to the God of all our Mercies.

Having a large fire many of us got under the leigh of it, and others buried
themselves in the sand, in hopes to get a little sleep, that we might be some
what refreshed, and there by be the better enabled some to travel and some to
row the remaining part of the night: but the sand flies and Muskettoes were to
exb^am thick that it was impossi^le the Moon shining we la^ched our Boat I and
my wife and child, the Master Robert Barrow my Kinsman Allin, Solomon Cresson,
Joseph Buckley and the Masters Negro went in our Boat; the rest traveled along
shore* about midnight, or a little after our people came by an Indian Town; the
Indians came out in a great number, but offered no violence more than
endeavoring to take from them what little they ^ad: But making some small
resistance, the Indians were putt by their purpose They were very desirious to
have us come on shore, and would have us; but our People would have us keep of.
We were got among a parcel Breakers, and so had much a do to g^tt out to Sea.

7 mo: 29.3.
This Morning about Sun-r^sing We stood (...) for the Land and looked out for
our People; but could not see them, therefore we lay by for the space of two
hours and at lenght saw them com^i^g along with a great many Indians with them:
When they came a br^ast with us, the Indians wafled us a shore; but we refused
perceiving they were wickedly bent; they would be ever and anon snatching one
thingh or other: At which tim^ (...) People would (...) to us in the Boat; but
pe^^eiving they could not g^tt us a shore in some few hours left them.

This Day Noon Io^eph Kirle having his Quadrant and Calend^r, took an
Observation, being in Latitude 27 ^e. 45 min. About one a Clock we saw two
Ind^^ns wi^^ Bows and Arrows running to meet our People; who when they saw
them, at first they made a Halt and afterward Retreated: At which the Indians
let fly an Arrow; which narrowly escaped one of them: Whereupon they stopped; the
Indians looked strengely on them; but our people set forwards, and the Indians
with them until they came to the Ind^an-Town. We saw our People go into the
Wiggwams, but stayed a very short time; for the Indians were for taking those
pieces of Canvas they had from them. They got some Water and set forward
again the two Ind^ans still followed them. About this time We saw a Sail to the
^astward, and We supposeing i^ at first to be a Brig^nteene, agreed to follow
her; but in a small time We made it to be a Cannooe or Boat with two Masts and
Sails: She stood in for the shore; but as soon as they espied us She bore away:
And when She saw we made not after her, She stood a shore again for the
Indian-Town; hereupon a Jealousy got amongst us that She might go on shore
and get strong wi^h Men, and then come after us; whereupon We rowed very hard
and kept an offing for some hours; but finding they came not out, we stood
toward the shore again. This day was extreme hott and We had no Water since We
left the Indian-Town to the Sowth-ward of our wrack, called by the name of
Hoe-Bay; therefore We were desirous to get on shore, (...) when We endeavored
it, We could not; for the Sea^ swelling very much, and came rolling from (...)
Eastward: So that the Seas runn very hollow* (...) almost a mile from the
shore; our Master said, (...) was impossible to get on shore a live: But I
b^ing ^^der some (...) was disirous to be on sho^^ and thereupon did express my
self to the rest of our People* they (...) the danger; all which I was as
sensible of as they, yet I could not rest but insisted on going a (...): The
Master and Men said, We should not (...) our lives; But I gained so far that
they atemp^^^ and were got within half a mile of the shore; (...) the Seas
came on us so large and hollow that one (...) had like to have over-welmed us:
We just got a (...) of it before it broke; There was then no persuading them
to go f^rther, but We stood off, and (...) to keep off all Night our People
being very (...), and the Sunn setting; We divided one half to (...) some
sleep, the other to watch and keep the (...) head to the Sea. The W^ther looked
as th^ogh it would be bad, and the Sea increased; Whereupon I began a fresh to
pers^ade them to go on shore. All were disirous, but thoug^ it ^^^ossible.
(...) length We resolved to venture; And so committing our selves to the
Protection of the Almighty GOD; We stood in for the shore, and made signs to
our people that We disign (...)* And it pleased GOD to order it so that We were
on shore, as though there had been a Lane made through the Breakers, and were
carried to the topp of the Bank, were We got aged Robert Barrow* my Wife and
Child out of the Boat, before ever a (...) to ^ill Us; which did, as soon as
they were (...): But We got our (...) from the wash of the Sea.

The two Indians were for taking off our Clothes, (which would not cover our
bodies) but We (...) being willing to yi^ld, they would snatch a piece (...)
one and a bi^^ from an other, and run away with (...), and then come again and
do the like. These two ^^^dians took away what was given to my Wife and Child
which we knew not how to help, but exercised Patience.

We enquired how far it was from St. a. Lucea (one of them speaking a little
Spanish) and by signs we understood it was not far. They made signs that
when we came there, we should be put to most cruel Death but we hoped
otherwise.

At this place within the Land, and over the Sound our People said, before it
was dark, they saw two or three Houses, which looked white, tho they were
plastered with Lime: which putt us in hopes that there were Spaniards there; so
we set forward as the Indians directed for St. a Lucea. They made Signs that
we should come to an Inlett of the Sea, and on the other side was St. a Lucea.
We traveled about four Miles and came to the Inlett, but saw no Settlement on
the other side; so we concluded to lie ther^ all Night. We saw the tract of a
large Bare and oth^re wildBeasts* whereupon we set to work to get Wood and
then ^ fire: Abundance of Muskettoes and Sand-flyes hindered our rest; to
remedy which we dug holes in the Sand, got some Grass and laid it therein
to lie upon, in order to cover our selves from the Flies; which most of us did;
but it being extreme cold, and fireing scarce, we had little comfort.

About Midnight we sent our People to see if they (...), and bring it into the
Inlett, (...) over to the other side: They went (...), but the Sea was so rough
that there (...) of getting Her off, for She was (...), and putt to Swimm, and
they, Boat (...) ^^iven on shore again.

Whilst our People were gone for the Boat, We (...) Indians in a Cannooe with
their Torch a (...): We sent for Solomon (Who was go^e (...)) expecting they
would come, s^eing (...), and We should not tell what to say to them; (...) did
not. Here We lay watching, for no rest (...) taken.

the 7. Month the 30. the 2. day of the week.
This Morning by break ^f Day We saw a small (...) the ^ther side putt off
shore with two Indians, (...) up the River (or Sound) a Fishing. We (...) in
Spanish* and as soon as they heard and (...), they made to the shore with all
speed, and (...) their Town they runn: We perc^ivi^g they (...) of us, begann
to ^o^bt of their Amity which (...) had so much depended on; where^pon We
counce^^^ our People how to depor^ themselves es^^cially our (...). About
Sunn-rising We saw ^he Indians (...)* running in a very great number with their
(...) and Arrows to the Inlett; where having five or (...) Cannooes* they got
into them as many as those Cannooes could hold: Others too^ the wa^^r, and
Swam over unto ^s; they came in the ^reatest rag^ that po^^ibly a Barbarous
People could. Solomon beg^n to speak Spanish to them; but they answered not,
till they came a (...) some distance from us; and then (...) running upon us,
they cried out, Nickaleer, Nickaleer. We satt (...) Expecting death, and that
in a most Barbarous manner, They that did speak unto them could not be heard:
but they rushed violently, on us rending and tearing thos^ (...) Clothes we
had: they that had Breeches had so ma^y about them that they hardly touched the
Ground till they were shaken out of them, thy tore all from my Wife, and
espying her Hair-Lace, some were going to (...) it hair and away to get it,
but, like greedy Dogs, another snatched and tore it off. As for our poor young
Child, they snacht from it what little it had, as though they would have shak^n
and torn it, Limb from Limb. After they had taken all from us but our lives,
they began to talk one to another, vehemently foaming at Mouth like wild Boars,
and taking their Bows and Arrows with other Weapons, crye^ out Nickaleer,
Nickaleer. Solomon Spoke in Spanish to Them, and said We were Spaniards; but
They would not hear Him, and continued creying out Nickaleer, Nickaleer, with
all drawing their Arrows to the Head. But suddenly We perceived them to look
about and listen, and then (...) to pro^^cute their Bloody Disign. One of (...)
a pare of Breeches and gave to my Wife. We (...) our great Bible and a large
Book of Robert Barclay (...) this Place. And being all Stripped as Nake^ as We
were Born, and en^eavouring to hide our (...) Cannaballs took the Book^ and
t^aring (...) ^eav^s would give each (...) us a Leav^ to cover ^s* which We
took from them: At which time they would d^ride and smit us; and inst^ntly
a^o^her ^f (...) would snatch (...) what the other gave (...) and diriding us
withal.

Robert Barrow with my Self, Wife and Child were ord^red to go in to a Cannooe
to be carried to the other side of the Inlett, being a Furlong over, Four
Indians b^ing in the Cannooe to paddle: when We came to the other side within a
Cannooe's lenght or two of the shore. A number of Indians with their Bows and
Arrows (...) running into the water, some to their knees, some deeper, having
their Bows and Arrows drawn up, Crying out Nickaleer, Nickaleer; which they
(...) without ceasing. The Indians that brought us over leapt out of the
Cannooe, and swam a shore, fearing they should be Shot; But in this J^ncture
it pleased GOD to tender the h^arts of some of Them toward us; especially the
Cassekey his Wi^e, and some of the chiefest amongst them, who were made
Instruments to interceede for Us, and stopp the rage of the multitude, who
seemed not to be satisfied without our blood. The Cassekey ordered some to
swim, and fetch the Cannooe a shore; which being done, his Wife came in a
Compassionate manner and took my wife out of the Cannooe, ordering her to
follow her, which we did some distance from the Inlet-side, and stood till all
our people were brought over, which in a little time was done. But the rage of
some was still great, thirsting to shedd our blood, and a mighty strife there
was amongst them: some would kill us, others would prevent it, and thus one
Indian was striving with another* all being got over, were to walk a long the
s^a shore to their Town: in this passage we most of us felt the rage of some of
them, either by striking or stoneing; and diverse Arrows were shot: but those
that were for preserving us would watch those that were for destroying us: and
when some of them would go to shoot, others of them would catch hold of their
Bows or Arm. It was so ordered that not one of us was touched with their Arrows;
several of us were knocked down, and some tumbled into the Sea We dared not
help one another; but help we had by some of them being made isntrumental to
help us. My Wif^ received several blows, and an Indian came and took hold of
her Hair, and was going either to cut her Throat (...) something like it,
having his Knife ^igh Her throa^; but I looked at him, making a sign that he
should not, so he desisted: At which time another Indian came wi^h a handful of
Sea-sand and filled our poor Child's Mouth. By this time the Cassekey's Wife
came to my Wife seeing her oppressed, and they pulled the Sand out of our
Child^s mouth, and kept by my Wife until we got into the Casseekey^s house,
whith was about forty foot long and twenty-five foot wide, covered with
Palmetoe-Leaves both topp and sides. There was a Range of Cabbins, or a
Barbecue on one side and two ends. At the entering on one side of the house a
passage was made off Benches on each side l^^ding to the Cabi^s. On these
Benches satt the Chief Indians* and the upperend of the Cabin was the Casseekey
seated. A kind of Debate was held among^t them for an hours time. After which
Solomon and some others were called to the Casseekey; and were s^ated on the
Cabin; where the Casseekey talked to Solomon in the Spanish Language: But could
no^ hold a Discourse. In a little time some raw D^^re-^kins were brought in and
given to my Wife and Negro^-Women, and to us Men such as the Indian-Men wear,
being a piece of Platt work of S^^aws wrought of di^^rs colors and of a
Triangular Figure, with a Belt of Four Fingers broad of the same wrought
together, which goes abo^t the w^^t and the angle of the other having a thing
to it, comeig between the Legs, and Strings to the ends of the Belt; All three
meeting together are fastened behind with a Horsetail* or a Bunch of Silk-grass
exactly resembling it, of a flaxen color: This being all the Apparel or
Covering that the Men wear; And thus they clothed Us. A place was appointed for
us, Matts being laid on the Floor of the House, where We were ordered to lie
down: But the place was extreme Nasty; for all the Stones of the Berries which
they eat and all the nastiness that is made amongst them lay on their Floor,
that the place warmed with abundance of many sorts of creeping things; as a
large black hairy Spider, which has two Claws like a Crabb; Scorpions; and a
numberles number of small Buggs. On these Matts We lay, these Vermin crawling
over our naked Bodies. To brush them off was like driving of Muskettoes from
one where they are extreme thick. The Indians wear Seated as aforesaid, the
Casseekey at the upper^nd of them, and the range of Cabins was filled with Men,
Women and Children, beholding us. At length we heard a Woman or two cry,
according to their manner, and that very Sorrowfully One of which I took to be
the Casseekey^s Wife which occasioned some of us to think that something
extraordinary was to be done to us We heard a strange sort of a noise which was
not like unto a noise made by a Man; but We could not understand what nor where
it was; for sometime it Sounded to be in one part of the House, sometimes in
another, to which We had an ear. And in deed our ears and eyes could perceive
or hear nothing but what was strange and dismal; and Death seemed s^rrounded
us. But time discovered this Noise unto us. The occasion of it was thus. In one
part of thi^ House were the Fire was kept, was an Indian Man, having a Pott on
the Fire wherein he was making a Drink of the Leaves of a Shrubb (which We
understood Afterward by the Spaniard, is called Casseena), boiling the said
Leaves, after they had Parched them in a Pott; then with a Goard having a long
Neck and at the Topp of it a small hole which the topp of (...) Finger could
cover, and at the side of it a round hol^ of two Inches diameter, they take the
Liquor out of the Pott and putt it into a deep round Bowl, which being al most
filled contains nigh three Gallons: with this Goard they brew the Liquor and
make i^ froth very much It looks of a deep brown color. In the Brewing of
this Liquor was his Noise made which we thought strange; for the pressing of
this goard gently down into the liquor, and the air which it contained being
forced out of the little hole at topp occasioned a sound; and according to the
time and motion given would be various, This Drinck when made, and cool to
supp, was in a Conch-shell first carried to the Casseekey, who threw part of it
on the Ground, and the rest he drank op, and then would make a loud He-m; and
afterward the Cupp Passed to the rest of the Casseekey's Associates, as
aforesaid, but no other Man, Woman nor Child must touch or taste of this sort of
Drinck; of which they sat sipping Cha^ring and Smoking Tobacco, on some other
Herb instead thereof, for the most part of the day.

About Noon was some Fish brought us on small (...) L^aves, being boiled with
scales, head, and Gills, and nothing taken from them but the Guns* but our
troubles and Exercice were such that We (...) for food.

In the Evening, we being laid on the place aforesaid the Indians made a Drumm
of a skin, covering there with the deep Bowl in which they Brewed their Drink,
beating thereon with a Stick* and having a couple of Rattles made of a small
Goard put on a Stick with small stones in it, shaking it, they began to set up
a most hideous howling, very irksome to us, and some time after came some of
their Young Women, some singing some dancing. This was continued till
Midnight, after which they went to sleep.

the 8 M^h. 1. the 5 of the Week.
This day the Casseekey looking on us pleasantly, made Presents to some of us*
especially to my Wife* he gave her a Parcel of Shelfish, which are known by
the name or Clamms; One or two he roasted and gave her, showing that she must
serve the rest so, and eat them. The Indian Women would take our Child and
Suckle It, for It Is Mother's Milk was almost gone that it could not get a
M^^l: And our Child, which had been (...) D^at ^s-D^^r from the time of It Is
Birth unti^l We were ca^t away b^gan now to be cheerful, and (...) to food; It
had no covering but a small piece of ra^ D^are Skin; not a shred of Linne^ or
Woollen to p^tt on it.

(...) ^^nth hour w^e observed the Indians to be (...) most of the principal
of (...): The Casseekey (...) himself, and so also did the rest: When they had
done, they (...) into the Casseekey's house, and seated themselves in Order. in
a small time after came an Indian with some small Attendance in to the house,
making a Ceremoneous Motion, and seated himself by the Casseekey, the persons
that came with him seated themselves amongst the others, After some small pause
the Casseekey began a Discourse, which held nigh an hour. After which the
Strange Indian and His companions went forth to the waterside unto their
Cann^^^ lying in the Sound, and returned Presently with such Presents as they
had brought* delivering them unto the Casseekey, and those sitting by giving an
Applause. The presents were some few Bunches of the Herb they make their Drink
of, and another Herb which they use instead of Tobacco and some platted Balls
stuffed with Moss to lay their Heads on instead of Pillows. The Ceremony being
ended, they all seated themselves again, and went to drinking Cass^ema,
Smoking and talking during the Strangers stay,

About Noon some Fish was brought us: Hunger was grown strong upon, and the
Quantity given was not much more than each a Mouthfull; which We eat: The
Casseekey ordered the Master Joseph Kirle Solomon Cresson, My Wife and Me* to
sit upon their Cabin to eat our Fish; and they gave us some of their Berri^s
to eat. We tasted them* but not one amongst us could suffer them to stay in our
Mouths; for We could compare the Taste of them to nothing else, but rotten
Cheese steeped in Tobacco. Sometime after We had eaten, some of the Indians
asked us, if We were Spaniards? Solomon ansvver^d them, Yes. Then some off the
Indians would point to those whose hair (...) bl^ck* or of a deep Brown, and
say such a (...) a Spaniard of the Havana, and such of (...): but those whose
Hair was of a light color they were doubtful of; some would say they were no
Spaniards.

About the third hour in the afternoon the Strangers (...), and some small time
after they having (...) themselves that most of us were Spaniards, ^old us
that We should be sent for to the next Town* And They told us that there was
a Nickalcer off, and We understood them [ Englishmen off Bristoll], also the
Number Sin Men and a Woman: And that they were to be put to Death before We
should get thither. We were silent, although much concerned to hear that
Report. They also told us that a Messenger would come for (...) to direct us
to the next Town, thence to (...).

Night coming on they betook themselves to their ^^customed Singing and Dancing.

About ^he Tenth or Twelfth hour in the Night before the Singing and Dancing
was ended, came in a Stranger armed with Bow and Arrows: the Ca^seekey and
his Companions entertained him with half an hour's Discourse, which ended, We
were on a sudden ordered to get up and hurryed away with this Stranger,
they not giving us time to see if we were all together; and a Troop of Young
Indian-Men and Boy's Followed us for about Four miles, all which Way they
pelted us with Stones: At lenght they all left us except Two and our Guide;
but We missed Solomon Cre^son, and Joseph Kirle^s boy, and Negroe Ben.; Which
was no small trouble to us.

We had not traveled above Five Miles before our Guide caused us to stop; and
at some sm^ll distance was an Indian-Town, which I suppose our Guide belonged
to; For Indians came thence wi^^ Fire and Water for Him, and with
Palme^o^-Le^ves they made a blast of Fire: Here We stayed nigh two hours: The
Fly^s were very thick, and the Night very Cold, so that our naked bodies were
not able to endur^ it but with grief. At length we left this place; the whole
night following were troubled with these two young Indians, who at times would
be abuseing one or other of us, singleing them out and asking If they were not
Nickaleer, or English? If they said, nay, then they would hitt them a Blow or
more with a Truncheon, which they had; and said, They were. We traveled all
Night without stopping from the aforesaid place.

8 Month 2. the 6 of the Week.
After Sunrising We came up with the Wrack of the Ve^sell that We heard that
was cast away. She was Staved all to pieces, for her Keeleson was driven a
shore. We saw Sugar-Hogsheads, Ginger and Logwood; which gave us to suppose tha
it was one of our Fleet, and we thought it to be either Buroughs or Smith,
belonging to Bristoll. A Mile or more from hence We came to an Inlett; our
Guide told us, We must Swimm over, except my Wife and Robert Barrow; but We
signified that We could not: He carried Robert Barrow, Joseph Kirle, Me, my
Wife and Child over first; and at lenght the hole Company, for it was a great
way over: By that time We were all got over, the days was hott and my Wife
quite tired faint, as also Robert Barrow and Joseph Kirle, whose Leg was grown
so painful that it overcame him. We got under a Grape-Bush for shelter from
the Sun, I sent one of my Negroes to seek for Water for them; but there was
none to be had; but he got some Seaside-Grapes, which with resting refresht
the Weak and Lam^.

Our Guide was (...) ^orceing us forward; so We traveled about four or five
Miles further, and m^tt with the Casseekey of this Town and Commander of the
Northern part of this Coast. He was an Ancient Man, his Beard and Hair Gray: He
inquired for the Captain, so our People pointed to Io^eph Kirle whom He w^nt to
and embraced him; then he asked for our Ma^e or Pilot. This Man could speak
Spanish better than any we had met with ye^; but not so well as to discourse,
only to ask some Questions, and We had three or four amongst us could make a
shift to answ^r Him for Solomon was kept behind. This old Ca^seek^y (...) to
have Compassion on us, and said, That th^s^ People ho had served us thus in
Stripping of us (...) Rogues. But we were His Comerradoes* or Friends, withal
He said, In Few days, He would carry us ^o Augusteen; and thereupon He told us
of Six English-M^n, and One Women, being at His Town: We inquired if He
intended them for Augusteen? But He would shake his head and point to the
Southward, saying, Nickaleer, no Comerradoe (Englishmen were not his Friends)
Which words were unpleasant to us. This People kept us Company till We came
within a Mile or two of their Town and then they left Us, th^^ going faster
got in before us. Their Town stood about half a mile from the Sea-shoar whitin
the Land on the Sound being surrounded with a Swamp, in which grew ^hite
Mangrove-Trees, which hid the Town from the Sea. We were directed to the
Casseekey's hosue, which were large, and filled with Indians, and then ordered
to sit down. The Old Ca^seekey fetched some Water, and washed Robert Barrows
Feet, and my W^^e's; After which He got some C^nva^s and Cr^^^s Ging^r-b^ggs*
which they had got out of the Ves^ell that was ca^t on Shore* which was
di^^^^buted among^t us. Io^eph Kirle had a Coat given him, which they had taken
from the People of the other Vessel; but it was rent down the Back. My ^ife had
two pieces of S^^l-Canvass given her; and I wi^h others had each a Cro^^s
Gi^^^r-Bagg. They gave a piece of a Barber's old Linen ^hir^ in biggness of a
small hand-k^rchif to cover our Child. This was all our Clothing: Robert Barrow
and my Wife were quite spent with traveling barefoot on the hott Sand, having
bruised their feet, and with ^^umps ^^ones and pric^^^s, their Feet, especially
Robert Barrow's had holes in them, that one might have pu^^ the topp of ones
Thumb in. We were dir^ct^d to lie down on a Cabin. The other Vessel's C^mp^ny
were one John Smith Mast^r of the (...) belonging to ^ristoll, which came out
of Jamaica with us, with five Men and one Woman, (...) Andr^^ Murray Merchant,
Andrew Barnes Mate, Hugh Allen, John Os^er, John Shears and Cornelius To^^r;
Two ^^ys with a Woman Passenger named Penelope. We took an opportunity to
discourse them. They were cast away the same Night We were, and (...) V^ss^ll
b^ing forced by the Storm (they not being able for two days before to carry any
Sail) on shore, they got into their ^oat and so on shore: And in a sm^^l ^ime
was a great part of their Wra^k driven on shoa^; amongst which, was a barrel or
more of Water some Barrels of (...) or Po^k, with their Chests, and many other
things which they got. On the Morrow they designe^ to travel to the
Northward; But A^dr^w Barnes their Mate havnig been a long time afflicted with
a Flux which had wasted his body to Skin and Bone, so that he was not able to
help himself, they left Him and traveled a Mile or more and came to the Inlett
which they could not pass: Whereupon they returned back again to take their
Boat; but a^ their return, before they could get away with their Boa^* they
espied the Indians comeing on them, who soon go^t to them; asked in Spanish
what Nation they were? If Spanjards, English, or French. But the Indians made
Signs to give them their Clothing* which they readily did. But still they
inquired Of what Nation? At first they answered, Spanjards; but the Natives
looked to furiously that they soon Answered them, Englishmen. Thereupon every
one had it, Nickaleer, Nickaleer. And then they very eagerly Stripped them of all
that they had on them: After which they drove them away to the Northward unto
their Town; but Andriew Barnes being not able to stand not go, was left
behind, after they had stripped him, on the Land naked when they were driven
away. Before they got to the Town, the Indian Casseekey gave them some
Clothing, and no violence was offered to their persons. They had plenty of
Fish and Berries to the time of our comeing. John Smith and Andrew Morray had
their being in the Casseekey's House, and the Woman named Penelope: The rest of
Smith^s people lodged in other Indian-Houses. But on our comeing, the Old
Casseekey told them, they must turn out, and make room for the Spanjards: But
Smith and Morray would not go; and the Indian did not force them out. In some
time after We had been in the house, came in Indian-Women laden with Basketts
of Berries, mostly of the Palm, some Seaside Cocco Plumbs and Seaside Grapes:
Of the two latter We could eat; but of the Palm-Berries We could not bear the
Taste in our Mouths. We laid our selves on the Cabin, on that part which was
appointed us; on the other part the young Casseekey or King lay being Parted by
a Chest that stood thereon: Before Night was a parcel of large Fish calleb
Drumm^ brought in: The Old Casseekey told Joseph Kirle, that those were for the
Spanjards, and bidd him let some body to dress them. He also ordered us a
Pott. (...) were soon dressed, and We eat them. (...) come the Old Casseekey
enquired after our losses; which We, as well as We could, gave him to
und^^^tand, that in our Vessel was a grear deal of Clothing and Money, which
the Indians at H^^bay had taken from us. He understood so much of the matter
(...) he grew covetous, and said, He would go and g^tt some of it from them.

About Midnight came Solomon Cresson in a Cann^^^ with two Indians. The Old
Casseekey began to examine him concerning our Vessel Goods and Money, or plate;
which Solomon rendered a further Account unto him of then We could: Which caused
him t^ resolve, on the Morrow to provide Men and Boats, and to go down the
Sound to Hoebay, to (...) part from them; He would have had Solomon to h^v^
gone with him, but Solomon refused.

We inquired of Solomon concerning his (...) of the Negroe Ben. and Io^eph
Kirle's Boy: He (...) (...) was stayed by force; but the Negroe and the (...)
were asleep in another house when We were driven away. They had a design in
staying of Solomon which he could not rightly understand; but supposed that
they doubted that We were not all Spaniards; for the Indians of St. a Lucea
would say to Solomon that he was a Spaniard, and some others* but the most of
us were ^ot Spaniards; and that they (...) stolen Solomon: ^ut Solomon denied
it.

The 8 Month 3. the 7 o^ the Week.
This Morning the Old Casseekey with two Cannooes (...) Tenn Indians with him
went hence for Hoebay. He promised us that as soon as he returned, He would
carry us for Augusteen: which he supposed would be in six days, if he had good
weather. But this Day the Wind was got to the North-East, and it looked as
though the weather would be stormy. The Wind increased, and toward Evening the
Water in the Sound did rise that it began to cover the Land, and came into the
Houses; but We had little or no Rain till Night* Then the Wind increased and
Rain also.

8 Mt. 4. the 1. of the Week.
This Morning the Wind was violent with Rain; the Kings H^use was Knee-deep
with Water, and like to continue riseing. I removed with my Wife, Child, Robert
Barrow and Benjamin Allen to an Indian House that stood on a hill of
Oyster-shells: In this House We remained this day; the Wind continuing at
North-East very violent, and by reason of much Rain, the Water rising every
hour, the Indians began to putt their dry Berries into their Cannooes, and to
seek which way to secure them. Se^e^all Indians betook themselves to their
Boats and carried what they had to some high Land a considerable distance,
where a place was made for their Casseekey or King. But before Day, the house
we were in was a float, and the Indians were for turning us out, bidding us
take an old Cannooe that had a hole in the side of her almost at the bottom
bigg enough for a man to put his hand through; so that she was full of water:
in this Cannooe they would have had us shifted for our selves; but We were not
willing to go: the Indians made signs for us to be gone diverse times: At length
they grew angry, and took my Kinsman Allen into the Cannooe, and carried him
away: In a little time after returned with the Cannooe and bid me and Robert
Barrow be gone. By this time day appeared, the wind and Rain still violent. I
then saw a house on another Oyster-hill that the water was not got over yet;
to which I got and asked by signs if I might be there? The Indians seemed
willing: so thither I got my wife child and Robert Barrow, and remained there.
All this day the wind was violent, it rained and the Flood continued. We
imagined that the Sea was broke in upon the Land, and that We should be
drowned. The houses was almost blown to pieces, and the Ind^ans often a tying
and mending it. The (...) man of this house caused his Wife to Suckle our
Chil^; for it was almost famished, its Mother having no M^lk in her Breast; for
We had received no susstainance since the storm began: Fresh Water was not to
be had* the Land being covered with the Sea. The Indians offered us some of
their Berries, which We endeavored to eat; but could not; the taste was so
irksome and ready to take our breath from us, when we tre^ed to eat them; but
we expected that if the Flood continued longer, We should not need for Water.
Yet nevertheless we enjoying health and strength, (...) hunger growing violent,
we would be tasting the Berries, though we would reap no satisfaction.

the 8 Mth. 6. the 7 of the Week.
This Morning the Flood began to come into this house also; the Indians seemed
much concerned: the ^^orm of wind and rain held till about Midday; at which
time the wind shifted South-west, with the rain* but in some few hours the
Flood began to aba^^.

The 8 mht. 7. the 4 of the Week.
By this day Noon the Water fell many feet, and I went out to see our people
whom I left in the Kings-H^^se: I found them where I left them. All the (...)
had left the house; and our People remained on the Cabin, which was about four
foot from the (...)* The Flood had risen within two or three (...) of the Topp
of the Cabin, and they said, they expected to Dye there. We began to express
our hunger and thirst each to other: But there was no help as yet for either;
We went to the Springs* but they were all salt as the Sea, and we would be
striving wi^h the Berries; but they were so Offensive unto us that we could
reap no satisfacton from them. We went a begging at times to the Indian-women
to Suckle our Child; which they would seldom deny.

the 8 mth. 8. the 3 of the week.
This Day we got some water to drink; but it was very brackish, and at best not
very good.

the 8 mth. 9. the 6 of the week.
This Day the Young Ca^seekey returned to his house with his Chests and other
things.

the 8 mth. 10. the 7 of the week.
This day We got a Meal of Fish the greates (...) we had received since we
were here. We longed for the Old Casseekey's return* and reared that this bad
weather would ^engthen the time.

the 8 mth. 11. the 1 of the week.
This Morning early came a Messenger giving an Account that the Old Cass^^key
was within some few leagues of the Town, and that we might expect him this
Fore-noon; within the time he came in ^^ght: We all drew down to the Waterside
to receive him; We perceived He came in State* having his two Cannooes ^ashed
together with Poles a thwart from the one to the other, making a Flatt form*
which being covered with a Matt, on it stood a Chest, which was belonging to
us, and my Negroe-boy Ce^ar, which the Ca^seekey of Hoe-Bay took from me, whom
he had got from the Indians at Hoe-bay: Upon this Chest he satt cross-legged,
being newly painted redd* His men with Poles setting the Cannooes along unto
the shore. Seeing us, He cried [ Wough] and looked very sternly at us. He was
received by his People with great homage, holding out his hands (as their
custom is) to be kissed, having his Chest carried before Him unto his house,
whither he went the house being filled with Indians. The Old Casseekey (...)
and held a Discourse for some hours, giving an account as We suppose, what he
heard and saw; in which discourse he would often mention Nickaleer; which caused
us to fear that all things were not well. After he had told his story and some
of the Elder Indians had expressed their sentiments thereof* they drank ^^^eena
and (...). The House being clean* the Old Casseekey looking very unplesantly,
showed unto us several things which he had got; as a Hatchet, a Knife, the
Chest and many other things, asking us, if they were not ours? Which we owned;
whereupon he would say, they were Nickaleer (or English): We signified that We
had them of the English, but our Money was Spanish. toward the Evening Joseph
Kirle, My self and Solomon got an Opportunity to discourse him; We began to
urge his promise of carrying us for Augusteen. At First he stated his hardships
and labor to Hoe-Bay and back, and that he must have time to rest, before he
could go out again; then He told us* the way was long and would be tedious, and
that at several places we must draw the Cannooes over Land for a great
distance; He also mentioned how many Towns there were between this and
Augusteen* in number Tenn; But nigh the conclusion, he setti^^ an angry
countenance upon us* told us that at Hoe-Bay he was informed that We should
say, We ^^re all Englishmen; after he said this, in an angry manner he turn^d
from us and went away.

This (...) al our hopes in the Dust, and We soon perc^ived the Indians grew
jealous of us; for they wou^d now daily be asking us, if We were not Ni^kaleer?
or English? And would not seem satisfied with a denya^l. Many days were spent,
and the time drew nigh that we understood the Old Casseekey was int^^d^d for
Augusteen; hereupon (...) applied our selves to him, requesting that if all
might not go, he would carry some of us; but he told us, he would carry but
one. This putt us on Q^erying which of us should be that One. The generality
was for Me: But I and Ios^^h Kirle were for Solomon, because he could speak the
Spanish-Language well, and no other of us could: And should any other of us
have gone and come amongst those Indians to the Northward, who we supposed
could speak the Spanish-Language well, We should be discovered to be what
these People did suppose we were; therefore it might ove^^row all our
Expectations; but Solomon might pass all those Objections. These reasons did
not satisfy our People so that some of them grew Col^rick: of which the Old
Casseekey took notice, and told Solomon, that if they made such a stir, He
would not carry one. If He did, (...) should be either Solomon, Joseph Kirle,
or Me: whereupon we prevailed with Him that Solomon might go, and accordingly
made preparations, the Casseekey appointing the number of Indians to go with
^im; also a Cannooe was sent for, which when it came, We found it to have
belonged to the English, by the maker of her. This Cannooe had a great hole in
the head nigh the bottom with many very great rents and holes in her: Joseph
Kirle and I were required to mend her which with much a do was accomplished,
the Cannooe being much decayed and rotten where the rent^ were.

the 8 mth. 18. the 1 of the week.
This day Morning the Old Casseekey with Solomon and Six Indians in a Cannooe
set out for Augusteen. The Casseekey carried a small Chest, in which was nigh
One hundred Pieces of-^^ght as some of our People did suppose, with some other
matters tha^ were gotten from our Vessel. The Weather was likely for Rain,
which caused us to fear should the Weather prove bad, that Solomon would hardly
live to get to Augusteen; for he had nothing to cover him, exept a pa^e of
Indian-Breeches and a small piece of Skin that covered his breast.

We understood by the Old Casseekey that it would be a Month or next New Mood
before We could expect their Return: All which time We spent in much trouble
and hardship. The Weather began to grow cold, and Provision very short, that is
Palm-Berries, C^ke^-Plumbs and Sea-Grapes, (which are the three sorts before
Expressed) the time of these Fruits-bearing being over, they having no sort of
Fruit till next S^ring.

These People neither Sow nor plant any ma^^er of thing watsoever, nor care for
any thing but what the b^^^en Sand produce, Fish they have as plenty as they
please but sometimes they would make it scarce to us, so that a Meal in a Week
was most commenly our portion, and three Meals a rarity. After the Old
Casseekey's departure our hardships increased, especially my Wife's and
Child^s: For wan^ of Food of any sort, my Wi^e's Milk was gone, and our poor
Child was in great want; the Indians now and then would give it suck, but
rearly to satisfy it; for there was a Woman or two of their own (...) had Young
Children and no Breast to Suckle them. Our Extremity was such that any manner
of thing would go down with us; the Gills and Gutts of Fish pick^^ of a
D^ng-hill, was acceptable; the S^ra^s the Indians threw away, and the Water the
bo^ied their (...) in. We were thankful for, though never so undecently
handled by them. And though my (...) had hardly any Milk for our Child, (...)
an Indian-Wom^n who was lately delivered of a (...)* and had no Milk in her
Breast* would have (...) to Suckle her Child: Which my Wife consented unto: And
this was a means of her and our Child*^ reaping a benefitt; for the Indians
would give her Fish, which means helped to increase Milk for our Child. Many
were our exercises both in body and Mind amongst this People Sometimes they
would look upon us as though they had some ill Intent toward the whole of us:
At other times they would tell us (who were nominally Spaniards) how and in
what manner those of Smith's Company should be putt to Death And thus were We
daily exercised in sorrow and grievous troubles. Sometimes doubts would arise
amongst us concerning what would be the e^d of us* and what manner of deaths
We should pass t^r^ugh. And whom soever these doubts ^id appear i^ it would
be hard for another to help with Counsel; but some there were Whose hope
never failed, they ^r^^ting in the Lord, to Work for our Deliverance. One thing
did seem more grievous to Me and my Wife than any other thing. Which was. That
i^ it s^^uld so happen that We should be putt to Death, We feared that our
Child would be kept alive* and bred up as one of those People; When this
thoughts (...) arise it wounded us deep.

This day b^ing the time of the Moons entering the First Quarter the Indians
have a Ceremonious Dance, which they (...) in about Eight a Clock in the
morning. In the First place comes an old Man and tak^s a S^a^f about eight foo^
long, having a broad Arrow (...) the (...) thereof, and thence half way
painted (...) W^ite lik^ (...) Barbers-Pole; in the (...) of this S^aff is ^ixt
a pi^ce of wood shap^^ like unto to ^^igh* Legh and Foot of a man, and the
lower part th^reof is Paint^^ Bl^^k, and this Staff b^ing carried out of the
Casseekey^s house, is set fast in the Ground standing upreight: This done, he
also brings out a Baskett containing Six Rattles, Which are taken out of the
Baskett and placed at the foot of his Staff; Then another Old Man comes and
setts up a Howling like unto a mighty Dog^, but beyo^nd him for lenght of
Breath; withal making a Proclamation: This ^^ing done, the most of them having
painted themselves some red, some black, some with black and red; with their
^elly girt up as ^ight as w^ll they can girt themselves with Ropes, having
their sh^i^s of Arrows at their backs and their Bows in their hands, being
gathered together about this Staff; Six of the chiefest Men in esteem amongst
them, especially one who is their Doctor, and much Esteemed* taking up the
Rattles begins a hidious noise, standing round this Staff, taking their
Rattles, and bowing, without ceasing, unto the Staff for about half an hour;
whilst these Six are thus employed, all the rest are stareing and scratching,
pointing upwards and downwards on this and the other side every way; looking
like men frighted, or more like Furies: on thus behaving themselves until the
Six have done shaking their Rattles. Then they all beginn a dance, violently
stamping on the Ground for the space of an hour or more without ceasing. In
which time they will sweat in a most excessive manner, that by the time the
Dance is over, what by their Sweat and the violent stamping of their feet, the
Ground is trodden into Furrows; and by the Morning, the place where they danced
was covered with M^ggots: Thus often rea^eating the manner they co^ti^^e till
about Three or Four a Clock in the Afternoon; ^y which tim^ many were Sick and
Fainty. And then being gathered into the Casseekey's House, they sit down,
having some hott Casseena ready, Which they drink plentifully; and give great^r
quantities thereof to the Sick and Fainty than to others: Then they eat
Berries. On these days they (...) not any Food till Night.

The next Day about the same time, they begin the^^ Dance as the day before.
Also the third Day they beginn their Dance at the usual time: At Which time
came many Indians from other Towns, and Fell to Danceing without taking any
notice one of the other.

This Day they were stricter than the other two days, for no Woman must look
upon them; but if any of their Women go out of their houses, they go veiled
with a Matt.

the 8 month 28. the 1 of the week.
This Day was a day of plenty unto us, for We had as much Fi^h and berries as
would serve us two days.

This Week We observed that great Basketts of dried Berries were brought in
from diverse Towns and delivered to the King or Young Casseekey, which We
supposed to be a Tribute to the King of this Town, Who is C^ief of all the
Towns from St. a Lucea to the Northward of this Town of Ie^e.

the 27. the 3 of the week.
This Day was a Bagg of Berries (the Bagg made of Grass) given us, which We eat
in two or three days; and then We fasted as many days before the Young
Ca^seekey would give us more.

About this time John Smith and Andrew Morray were sharply Seized with a Fever
and Ague: When the Fit of the Ague was on them, the Indians would mock and
deride them. This We well observed, that these (...) Compassion on their own
Aged (...) they were past their labor, nor on (...) their own which lay under
any declining (...) ^or the younger is served before the (...) the Elder people
both Men and Women are (...) to the Younger.

(...) We saw many Tokens of some of our (...) having fallen into the hands of
these People. (...), one of Cedar the other of (...), like those of Iamaica*
several Blocks (...) of Lignam-Vit.; several Tools and (...) and more
Particularly, a R^^or on the haft of which was writ the man's name^, (...),
THOMAS ^OSTER. Some of these things looked as though they had been several
years amongst them, some but ^ few. But We never da^ed to enquire; for We (...)
they brought some things in our view to try (...)*

(...) was a Man in this Town who some years past, (...) been taken off by some
of our English-Sloopes, for (...) on the Wrack to the Eastward of Cuba where
(...) was sometime: But the Vessel putting in to Cuba, for Water, this Indian
swam on shore and got to the Havana, thence to St. Augusteen, and so to his
native Town. The greatest Charge this Man had against the English, was, for
taking him and their People away; not but that he was well used amongst them.
This Indian would often call Io^eph Kirle, Solomon Cresson and some of us into
his house seeming very cheere^^ll* Asking if they would eat, withal asking the
name of the Berries, Expecting We would call them after the English manner [
Plumbs]: but perceiving his drift, and having learned the name of them, as the
Spaniard calls them [(...); then he would tell us that the Engli^^ called them
Plumbs]: such sort of discourse we had at times, ^or he would be striving to
trapp us, viz. Joseph, Solomon and Me, in words; but he never (...) an
advantage, for when Solomon was gone, We shun^d all his Invitations and
Argument^*

the 8 month 31. the 7 of the week.
this day came in a Cannoo^ laden with Fish, and it was free, for those that
would* to take as much as they pleased. The Indians put us to go and take* for
it was a kind of a ^cra^ble amongst us and the young Indian men and boys: All
of us got Fish enough to Serve us two or three days.

the 9 month 2. the 2 of the week.
This Morning about Sunrising came two Strange Indians, who had run so hard
that they Swea^ed extr^am^ly, of whom We understood that the Spaniards were
comeing with their Old Casseekey; Which (...) surprised us, doubting the truth
of it, for Solomon had been gone but Sixteen days, and We understood that they
must have an extraordinary passage to be here in a Month: We had not long to
^onsider of the Matter, for in an hour's time We heard four Musketts
discharged* and immediately We looked out, and the Spaniards in their
Perre-Augo were in sight. the Indians were like a people amazed and overcome
with tear: We perceived the Noise of a Gun was terrible unto them. the
Spaniards Landed being in numb^r twelve, One Sebastian Lop^z Commanding Tenn
Soldiers* with one Indian an Interpreter. The Spaniards embraced us very
cheerfully* and express^d their being glad to find us alive. But We were not
able to discourse (...) other, though We had so much Spanish as to ask
Questions, and answer some part of what they asked us. One of the Spaniards
said, they could not speak English, nor could we speak Spanish enough to
understand each other sufficiently: This the Indians perceived and imediately
cried out, Nickaleer Nickaleer, and looked enviously on us, so that, could they
have had their wills, We believed they would not have suff^^ed us to have lived
many hours; but the Spaniards Awe^ them.

We (...) a (...) from Solomon which he writ when he m^^t with Captain
Sebastian Lop^z, signifying the Gouvernment of Augusteen^s great care for our
Preservation, of what Nation soever We were. But how these persons, or the
Gouvernour of Augusteen had knowledge of us* We could not understand; For they
had been Fourteen days from Augusteen, which was nigh the time Solomon went
hence, and they met Solomon about half way, and sent him for Augusteen with
other Guides, bringing the Old Casseekey and his People with them. We observed
that the Old Casseekey seem^d much dejected. We supposed The Spaniards had
taken from him the Money and what other things he had carried with him; Or that
he was vexed he should be so deceived in taking us for Spaniards.

The Spaniards were extraordinary kind unto us, so that We had Occasion to
rejoice, and thank the LORD for this part of our Deliverance by this means.
They were also a Terror unto the Indians; for they Searched their houses and
took all from them that ever they could Find, even to the stubb of a Nail:
which aggravated them, and increased their Dis-affection to Usward; So that we
dared not to sti^r from a Spaniard. The Spanish Captain made inqui^y where We
were cast away, and what was (...) we had in our Vessel? We gave an account so
well as we could to make him onderstand us: which Account made him very
desirous to go down thither; but looking over a paper often, which we supposed,
was the Gouvernor's Order and Instructions to him, we understood they would not
permit him to prosecute that Design: beside we made him sensible of the danger
we should be in, if he and his men should go and l^aeve us amongst these people
who were so bitterly in cer^^d a^aist us.

They inquired what became of the B^at that belonged to Smith^s-Vessel and
ours, We told them that these Indians had taken Smith^s Boat and sunk her some
where in the Sound; but ours was at St. a Lucea. The Spaniards made the Indians
go and show where they had Sunk Smith^s Boat and help our people to get her up:
Which being done* she was brought to the Town: the Spaniards were mightily
pleased with her, and proposed that they in their Cannooe, and our People in
that Boat should go to Hoe-Bay, whereby they might get all from the Indians
which they had gotten from us: But We would not countenance the matter; We were
for a speedy departing from amongst these people as we could, since it had
pleased GOD to open a way for our deliverance.

This Morning the Spanish Captain made the Indians Provide two Cannooes, which
he caused to be lashed together at some distance with S^^c^s a Cross, and (...)
on the Topp: Which being done, with four Indians, Joseph Kirle, John Smith,
Robert Barrow, Andrew Morray, Benjamin Allen, Nathaniell Randall, John Shears,
Cornelius Toker, Joseph Kirle's Boy John Hilliar; four Negroes. viz. Jack,
Ce^ar, Sarah, and (...) were sent away (...) Augusteen: But not one Morsel of
Victuals, except a very few Berries, had they with them; and not one Spaniard
to guard them, but were put under the Government of those four Indians. About an
hour after Joseph Kirle was gone, the Spanish Captain ordered Smith^s boat to
be made ready with two Spaniards, and Four of our Men to Row to the place where
the drift or Smith^s Vess^l was to look for Log-wood or Old Iron: When they
returned, there was not any thing of value.

But our People said that as they were searching about, they found the Bones of
Andrew Barnes: His S^^ll and Iaw-Bone were broken; which occasioned us to
suspect that he was Knocked on the head by the Indians, after they had driven
away Smith and his people.

We told the Spanish Captain tha^ Joseph Kirles Negroe Ben. had been absent
ever since the day after Solomon Cresson went hence, being gone with the (...)
Casseekey's Wife* but we knew not whi^her. The Captain made inquiry of the
Indians (...) gone. They said* For Hoe-Bay; then he order (...) them to send
for him* for he would not leave him behind. The Indians said* he would be here
within a day or two. The Spaniards were continually Searching for what they
could find of such things as the Indians had gotten from us or others: and when
they could find no more, they would offer to buy with Tobacco what they could
Persuade the Indians to bring to Light. A Leaf or half a leaf of Tobacco would
purchase a Yard of Linen or wooll^n, or Silk from the Indians. Such Admirers
of Tobacco are they, that they este^m (...) beyond any other (...). An Indian
of the Town (...) time before the Spaniards came, having a considerable
quantity of Ambergris, (...) when he went for Augusteen with that, he could
purchase of the Spaniards a Looking-Gl^se, an (...) a Knife or two, and three
or four (...) (which is about five or six pounds) of Tobaccoe. The Quantity of
Amber greece might be about Five pound Weight.

the 9 month the 4. the 4 of the week.
This Day We made Oars for Smith's Boat of Sticks and the Cantle-pieces of
Sugar-Hogsheads which were gotten on the Beach where the Drift of Smith's
Vessel came on Shore. And this Evening came the Old Casseekey's Wife with
Joseph Kirle's Negroe (...) and Joseph Kirls^s Boat; which was of great
advantage to help to carry us. We worked all this night to (...) the (...) and
Oars unto her, being intended to go away as soon as We could complete that Jobb.

The Spaniards had brought little Provision with them, so that there was not
much to spare for us; having not above a Rove of Corn, and a little
N^^a-Spain-Bread, which was so bad that it was more D^st and dead We^v^ls than
Bread: An handful of it was an acceptable ^resent to us. We would mix it with
a little Water, making it to a Pa^s't, which would eat pleasantly; But Hunger
was no S^anger unto us, and We knew no^ ^^at We should have any Victuals on
our Jour^ey: But our Deliverance seemed to over ball^nce all. The Indians would
not give us any Berries: But our people watched an Opportunity and took one of
the Casseekey's Baggs of Berries, which might contain about a B^sh^ll; Which
was all that One-and-thirty of us had to depend on.

the 9 month 5. the 3 of the week.
This Morning about three hours before Day We departed from this Town of Jece;
the Weather was grown cold; We had nothing where with to cover our bodies,
besides what the Indians gave us at first, except my Wife, for Whom the
Spaniards got an old Jac^ett (which had been one of Smith^s men's), and gave
her to wear; also a small Piece of cloth to cover our poor Child: but it
pleased GOD to strengthen us in this our Condition, so that we rowed all this
day without ceasing until three hours after it was dark, by which time We got
to an Indian-Town: Here We met with Joseph Kirle, Robert Barrow and the
others, who got thither not above an hour or two before us. They had not
received any manner of Sustenance from the time they left us, until they got
some Berries of us, having lain one Night of the two in a Swa^p: but they were
as Ch^erfull as men could be in this Straight.

Since they left us, amongst their other hardships, Joseph Kirle had like to
have lost his Life several tim^^. The First was thus. Whilst the two Cannooes
were lasht together, having a few Berries that were designd to have been shared
amongst them; The Irish boy Cornelius Toker would ever and anon be taking some
of them, who being often reproved by Joseph Kirle and others; would not desist;
Whereupon Joseph Kirle with the Paddle he paddled the Cannooe along wi^h struck
him; thereupon an Indian took his Bow and Arrow and was going to shoot Joseph,
who seemed little concerned whether he liv^d or died, withal saying, the
^paniards would Justify him.

Another time when he was spent with paddling the Cannooe, and desired John
Smith, Andrew M^^^ey, and others of them as well able as himself to give him ^
Spell, which they refused, and he being not able to paddle further, laid down
his Paddle; Whereupon the Indians commanding him to paddle, he refused, saying,
they might kill him if they would, opening his breast for them to execute their
wills; Which they seemed as though they would have done: But after great
threatening they desisted.

Another time the Wind being high and the Seas rough that they were forced to
^a^lash their Cannooes, by Joseph Kirle^s persuasion, and to go single; Joseph
Kirle taking one Cannooe to his own management, having Robbert Barrow* his Boy,
my Kinsman, Nathaniell Randall, and the Negroes in her; which being th^s single
from the other Company was more satisfactory to him than before, though none to
help but Nathaniell Randall. My Negroe-Woman named Sarah, having beaten and
abused a Girl named Quenza, b^ing reproved often by him and Robert Barrow, She
therefore abused them in an extraordinary manner; whereupon Jose^h struck her
with his Paddle; at which One of the Indians in the other Cannooe took his
Striking Staff and darted at him, narrowly missing him.

This Morning Joseph Kirle with those that were with him were by the Spanish
Captain ordered away at break of day; he not taking any care to give them a
little Sustenance; and about an hour or two after We followed, rowing all this
Day without ceasing until an hour or two in the Night: By which time We got
to an Indian-Town, where not any thing was to be had but Water. About two hours
after us came Joseph Kirle.

(...) (...) Land was not to be seen from side to side in some pla^^^ The (...)
was in the other we came through. Ab^^^ an hour before Sun-sett wegott to an
Indian Plantati^^ ((...) was the first place we saw any thing planted (...)
being still of Pumpion Vines and some small Pumpions (...) but the Spaniards
were too quick for us and got^ (...) before (...): some of us got a few a bigg
as one's F^it: (...) there, yet had not patience to dress them (...) be, but
putt them into the fire, roasted (...) them. The Spaniards used a great deal of
(...) with their Pumpions, and the Perre-Augoe that (...) Augusteen had brought
Bread, Corn and (...); but it was kept from us, Except a piece of (...): the
Captain of the Spaniards gave my Wife (...) a Stick of Sealing-Wax; which we
(...), expecting it must be harder with us when we (...) people. Here Captain
Sebastian Lopaz drew up ^ Writing, and would have had me and Joseph Kirle to
(...); which we refused: For we perceived he had (...) especially against me,
to oblige me to give him some of my Negroes: We answered him short; That I
^^cko^ed my self and Negroes at the Governor of Augusteen's disposal; And we
would Sing no Writing We Borrowed a Pott and boiled Pumpion Leaves, having
nothing to putt to them but Water, which was satisfactory; But this night was
more terrible than the last, the Wind being at North-West; it did not blow
hard, ^et it was very cold, we lyeing in an open field without any shelter; One
side of us would scorch while the (...) her was freezing. Our Negroe Woman
Hagar's (...) boy named Cajoe was seized with Convulsion Fil^s (...) Two in the
Morning which was chiefly occasio^^^ by the Cold and want of food: but help
there was not from us. The Spanish Captain came to see the Child, and supposing
that it would dye, asked If the Child was a Christian? He was answered, As good
a one as he could make it; but he called for some Water, putting some of it on
he Crown of the Child's head, and C^o^sing it, Called, him Francisco. This
Action pacifyed its Father and Mother.

the 9 month 9. the 2 of the week.
This Morning we were to go forward and the Spaniards were to return to the
place where we were cast a way: but our two Boats would not carry us all;
therefore we had the Spaniards great Perre-Augoe to carry us one day's Journey
further to an Indian Town, and (...) Spaiards with us, three of which were to
bring (...) Perre-Augoe back, the other was to be our Guide for Augusteen. We
departed and met with in tricate passage; for sometimes we should be a ground
on Oyster ^^nks, or Shoals, and al most out of sight of Land, about two or
three in the Afternoon we had not water to go any further: The Wind being
North-Westerly drove the Water out of the Sound: but being nigh the Shore where
had been an Indian Town: We went on Shore and found some ripe Berries on the
Palm-shrubbs, which we were very earnest after till such time as a storm of
wind with rain began to come upon us and Night nigh at hand; whereupon we all
got together, considering what we should do, since there was no possibility of
getting Shelter here. Our Indian Guide said, we might get to a Town about two
leagues off; which we were glad to hear, for it rained hard so we with our
Guide set forward and walked over a parcel of scraggy shrubby hills to the
Sea-shoar, along which we traveled till we got to the Indian Town, where we
got plenty of Berries for our Supper. It rained much till toward Morning. The
9* month. 10. This Morning the Indians were not willing to stay any longer; and
we were by our Guide required to depart; which we did, and a great many young
Indian Men followed us some Miles along the Bay, and Offered violence to Robert
Barrow and several others; but were easily stopped by showing them a rusty
Muskett presented toward them, and so they le^t us. We had an untoward passage
from the sea shore athwart the Land to the Indian Town, the ground being
swampey, and scraggey hills, which to our bare feet was very troublesome. This
was a large Town, and there was another large Town about a Mile distant in
sight, thither part of our Company was sent to be Quartered: at which Town
about a Twelve month since a parcel of D^tch M^n were killed who having been
cast away on the Bohemia shoals in a flatt which they built escaped hither, and
were here devoured by these Cannaballs, as we under stood by the Spaniards: The
Hatt or boat our people saw: but they seemed kind to them, giving them Fish and
Berries to eat: We remaned at these two Towns till next Morning The Indians of
the Town I was at, were not so kind as those at the other Town had been: some
of our people were for selling their Rags to the Indians for Fish; but We
thought it was most necessary, of the two Extremes, to defend against the Cold:
For every day grew colder than other; and We feared that if We were much longer
exposed to it, We should not live it out.

the 9 month 11. the 4 of the week.
This Morning leaving this Town, We Embarked in our two Boats, And those of
our People that were at the other Town were to have a large Cannooe to carry
them thence, and were to meet us in the Sound* We rowed several leagues and
did not meet them; it being then about Tenn a Clock; the Spaniard would go on
Shore and travel back by Land to see after them. We being by an Inlett of the
Sea which was a Mile over, the Spaniard ordered us to go on the other side, and
there stay for him; Which We did many hours. At this Place We all went upon the
search to see if any thing was to be had for the Belly, some on the land, some
in the Water: The Land yielded nothing; but in the Water We got a sort of
Shellfish called Water-Soldiers, Which We eat: at length the Cannooe with our
People came, but our Spaniard was not come; but in about half an hour's time he
came with a small Cannooe. This was the place where Solomon met the Spaniards.
The Cannoo'es had each two Indians to set them along: And We had one Indian
for our Guide named Wan-Antonia who the Spaniard said was a Christian, but an
Inhabitant of that Town where tthe Du^h-Men were killed. We set forward in our
two boats and the two Cannooes, and rowed till night* being nigh a place of
thickety Wood, which We made choice of to lodge at for this night: Here was
Wood enough: We made large Fires, Were pleased with the place, and lay down to
rest. About Midnight I had a great loss; having about a Quart of Berries
whole, and as much pounded to mix with water to feed our Child wi^h, the Fire
being disturbed, the Cloth which We had our food in was burnt: All was lost,
and nothing to be had until we could get to the Spaniards, Which was two days
March at least. About an hour after this the Wind rose at North-West, and it
began to rain; But having small Palm to which (...) nigh, Joseph Kirle and I
set to work and made a shelter which would keep Tenn or more of us from the
Weather: We had no sooner completed o^r work, but it rained hard. In this
shower of rain the Four Indians got from amongst us, took their Cannooes, and
away they went back again: When day appeared, We missed them, upon which We
went to the waterside, where We found the two Cannooes gone. And now We were in
a great strait. But the Spaniard said, those that could travel best must go by
Land. The Persons pitched upon were Richard Limpeney, Andrew Murray, Cornelius
Toker, Joseph Kirles Boy, John Hilliard, and Penelope with, Seven Negroes named
Peter, Jack, Caesar, Sarah, B^ll, Susanna and Quenza. The Spaniards and the
Indian-Wan-Antonia went with them to direct them, the Way carrying them over
land to the Sea shore, and then directing to keep the Sea-shoar along to the
Northward.

They returned to us, and We with our two Boats rowed all day without ceasing
till Sunsetting: And when we putt on shore, the place was an old Indian-Field
on a high bleak hill, where had been a large Indian house, but it was tumbled
down. Of the ru^is of this house We made a shelter against the North-West Wind,
which began to blow very bleak. The Spaniard went to the Sea, which was not two
miles off, to see if our People had passed, and (...) his return he said, They
were gone by. We asked if they could reach to any house or Indian-Town for
shelter? For We supposed, should they be without Fire this night, they could
not live. (...) said They must travel all Night. Night cam^ on: We had Fire
and Wood enough, and had gathered a great heap of Grass to lie in, hoping to
have got some rest: But the North-West increased, and the Cold was so violent,
that we were in a lamentable condition, not able to rest, for as We lay or
stood so close to the Fire that it would scorch us, that side from it was ready
to Freeze* We had no other way, but to stand and keep turning for the most part
of the night. We all thought that we never felt the like. The Spaniard that was
clothed was as bad to bear it as we that were naked* at length day appeared
and we must go.

the 9 month 13. the 6 of the week.
This Morning we were loath to part with our fires* but to stay here it could
not be: So we went to our Boats; wading in the water was ready to benumm us*
But we putt forward, and rowing about a Leagues came to an old house, where the
Spaniard told us we must leave the Boats and travel by Land; We had ^ Boggy
Marsh to wade through for a mile to get to the Sea-Shoar, and had about five
or six leagues along the Bay or Strand to the Spanish Sentinall's house: The
North-West-wind was violent, and the cold such tha^ the strongest of us thought
We should not outlive that day: having got through the boggy Marsh and on the
Sea-Shoar, our People, Black and White, made all speed, one not staying for
another that could not travel so fast; None but I with my Wife and Child,
Robert Barrow, my kinsman Benjamin Allen and my Negroe London, whom I kept to
help carry my Child, keeping together; The rest of our Company had left us,
expectting not to see some of us again; especially Robert Barrow, my Wife and
Child. We traveled after as well as we could having gone about two (...)
the ^old so seized on my Kinsman Benjamin Allen that he began to be stiff in
his Limbs, and sta^gered and fell, grievously complaining that the cold would
kill him: Our Negroe having our young Child I and my Wife took our Kinsman
under each Arm and helped him along; but at length his (...) quite stiff* his
speech almost gone, and (...) ^oom at Mouth. In this strait We knevv (...) to
do; to stay with him we must perish also* and We were vvilling to strive
as long as We could. We carried our Kinsman and laid him under the bank, not
being dead. I resolved to runn after our People, some of them not being out of
sight; which I did and left my Wife and Child with the Negroe to follovv as
fast as they could. I runn about two miles, making signs to them, thinking if
they should look behind them and see me running, they would stopp till I got
up with them. I was in hopes that if I could have accomplished this my
design, to have got help to have carried my Kinsman along; But they stopped not,
and I runn until the Wind pierced me so that my Limbs failed and I fell; yet
still I strove, and getting up vvalked backvvards to meet my Wife. As I was
goying I met with the Spaniard comeing out of the Sand-hills and Joseph
Kirle's Negroe Ben. I made my Complaint to the Spaniard, but he not being able
to understand me well, went forward. I than apply^d my self to the Negroe,
making large promises if he would fetch my Kinsman; he offered to go back and
use his endeavor, Which he did. At lenght my Wife and Child came up with me;
She was almost overcome With grief, expressing in What manner We Were
forced to part With our Kinsman, and expecting that she and the Chilh should
go next. Poor Robert Barrow was a great way behind us: I feared We sold never
see him again I used my endeavor to comfort and cheer my Wife, entreating
her, not to let grief overcome her; I had hopes that the Lord would help us in
this strait, as He has done in many since We were in this Land: And if it
pleased God that We might lay down our lives in this Wilderniss, that We might
beseech Him to enable us to do it willingly. Thus striving in a deep Exercise
of Body and Mind We traveled on, admiring Gods goodness in preserving us thus
far through so many eminent Dangers. In the sense of which a secret hope would
arise, (though involved with human doubts and fear) thar the Lord would yet
preserve us. I took my Child from the Negroe and carried him. I had an
Indian-Matt with a splitt in it, through which I putt my head, hanging over my
Breast unto my Wast: Under this I carried my Child, which helpe't to break the
wind off it; but the poor Babe was black with cold from head to foot, and its
flesh as cold as a stone; yet it was not froward. It Is Mother would take it now
and then and give it the Breast, but little could it get at it; besides We
dared not stopp in the least, for if we did, We should perceive our Limbs to
fail. About two a Clock in the Afternoon we came up with our Negroe-Woman Hagar
with her Child at her back almost dead: and a little further we came up with
out Negroe-Girle Qu^nza, being Dead, as we thought, for she was as stiff as a
dead body could be, and her Eyes set; butt at lenght we perceived her breath:
but she had no sense, nor motion. We carried her from the Waterside under the
Bank. This increased my Wife, a sorrow; and she began to doubt she should not
be able to travel much further: But I endeavored to encourage her not to
leave striving as long as any ability was left. All our People were out of
sight exept Four, and those We had gained upon. I sent my Negroe to overtake
them, and to disire them to slacken their pace till we got up with them; being
in hopes that gaining their Company would to cheer up my Wife: But they would
not; so the Negroe stopped for us. We had lost sight of Robert Barrow by this
time: Soon after we overtook John Smith who was one of the Four: he began to
sail, and his Companions left him; whereupon he made grievous Complaints which
I reproved him for, lest he should discourage my wife. The Sun was nigh
Setting; and we began to look out for the sentinalls Post; and my Negroe at
times got upon several of the highest Sand-hills to look out, but could not
see any house, nor the smoke of Fire: This was terrible to us all, for the day
being so cold, the night much more, and we not able to travel without rest,
being a starved People both within our bodies and without, and if we ceased
from traveling, we should instantly be nummed and move no further. In the
midst of these Reasonings and doubtings We were got into. I es^yed a man as I
thought, standing on the Bank but at great distance; I was afraid to speak lest
it should prove otherwise, but he was soon seen by the whole Company, and at
lenght We espied him walking toward the Land; this confirmed us, and so we
took to the hills again to look out, yet could not see the house from thence,
but on the next hill We saw it: this was joy unto us, though we began to have a
sense of our tiredness, for our Resolution abated after we had got sight of the
house.

When we got to the house, we found Four Sentinalls and the Spaniards our
Guide with the three of our Men; viz Joseph Bucklay, Nathaniell Randall, and
John Shires. The Spaniard bid us Welcome, and made room for us to sit down by
the fire. The chiefest man of the Sentinall took a Kersey-Co^^ and gave my Wife
to cover her, and gave each of us a piece of bread made of Indian-Corn, which
was pleasant unto us: after it we had plenty of hott Casseena drink: It was
dark and we endeavored to prevail with the Spaniards to go seek ^or Robert
Barrow and my Kinsman, Offering them considerable, but they seemed not fully to
understand me, yet I could make them sensible that my Kinsman was almost dead,
if not quite; and that the Old Man was in a bad condition. They made me to
understand that the weather was not fit to go out, but they would watch if
Robert should pass by. About an hour or two after one of the Spaniards being
walking out of the Bay met with Robert and brought him into the house. We
rejoiced to see him, and inquired concerning our Kinsman and Negroe Ben. He
said our Kinsman was striving to get up^ and could not: he came to him and
spoke unto him; he could not answer but Cried, and he could not help him; but
comeing along at some considerable distance met Negroe Ben.; who said he was
going for Benjamin Allen so he past him; and some miles further ^e saw Negroe
Ia^k drawing himself down from the Bank* his lower parts being dead, and crying
out for some fire that h^ might save his (...); but he did not see the Negroe
Girl whom we hal^^d out of the way. We were under a great concern for our
Kinsman; the Spaniards we could not prevail upon to go and fetch him, or go
and carry where with to make a fire: Which had they done and found them living,
it might have preserved them* But we hoped Negroe Ben. would bring our Kinsman.
The Spaniards would have had most of us to have gone to the next Sentinall's
house; Which was a League further; but we all begged hard of them to let us lie
in their house in any place on the ground, for We were not able to travel
further: besides the cold would kill us; for We were in such a trembling
shaking condition, and so full of pain from head to foot, that it is not to be
expressed. At length the Spaniards consented that Robert Barrow, I, my Wife and
Child, and John Smith should lie in the house; but to Joseph Buckley,
Nathaniell Randall, John Sheirs, and my Negroe London. They would not grant
that favor: So one of the Spaniards taking a firebrand bid those Four go
with him. He directed them to a small Thickett of Trees and showed them to
gather Wood and make large Fires and Sleep there. These poor creatures lay out,
and it proved a hard Frosty Night. The Spaniard returned and said they were
go^t into a Wood, and had Fire enough. We were silent, but feared they would
hardly live till Morning.

After they were gone* the Spaniards took a pint of Indian-Corn and parened it
and gave part to us, which we acc^p^ed on (...); also they gave us some
Cass^ena-drink. We were (...) extraordinary pain, so that we could not rest*
an^ our Feet were extremely bruis^d, the Ski^ (...) the Sand caked with the
B^ood that we could hardly set our feet to the ground after we had been
sometime in the house. The night was extreem cold though We were in the house*
and by the Fire we could not be warm, for one (...) did scorch whilst the other
was ready to freeze: (...) thus We passed the night.

the 9 month 14. the 7 of the week.
This Morning We looked out, and there (...) very hard Frost on the Ground, so
it was terible (...) go out of Doors. Our People returned from the Wood, but
complained heavely of their hardship in the Night. They had not been an hour in
the house before the Spaniards gave us all a Charge to be gone to the next
Sentinall^s house: This was grievous to us all, but more especially to my Wife*
who could not raise her self when down; but go We must, for though we
entreated hard for my Wife and Robert Barrow, We could not prevail that they
might stay still We could get A Cannooe. As We were all goeing one Spaniard
made a ^ign for me and my Wife to stay* which We did; and it was to have a
handful of parcht Corn: As soon as We had received it they bid us be gone to
the next Sentinall's, where was Victuals enough for us. The Sunn was a great
height, but We could not feel any Warmth it gave, the North-Wester beginning to
blow as hard as it did the Day before. And having deep Sand to travel through,
which made our Traveling this one League very hard, especially to my Wife and
Robert. The Spaniards sent my Wife a Blankett to be Left at the next
Sentinall^s house.

At lenght We came to an Inlett of the Sea; on the other side was the Look-out
and Sentinall^s house: here were all ou^ People sitting waiting to be ^^rri^d
over and in a little time came one of the Sentinalls* with a Cannooe and
carried us over.

This Sentinall would not suffer us to come into his house, but caused us to
kindle a fire under the Leigh of his house and there fit down: About half an
hour after he bid us be gone to the next Sentinall's, which was a League
further, giving us a Cup of Casseena and two Quarts of Indian-Corn for us all,
bidding us go to our Company at next house and our Corn dressed there.

I understood that our Negroe-Woman Hagar got hither late last Night having
her Child dead at her back, which the Spaniards buried.

One of the Spaniards went with us to the next Inlett carrying a Stick of Fire
to set Fire of some Trash to make a signal for them on the otheiside to fetch
us over the Inlett being very wide. When the Cannooe came over for us, our
Guide took the Blankett from my Wife; but the Negroe which brought over the
Cannooe lent my Wife one of his Coats, so we got over, but before We got to
the house we had a shower of hail. At this house We were kindly received, having
such a Mess of Victuals as we had not had in a long time before, which was
very pleasant to our hunger-starved Stomachs. Our People went hence; this
Morning for Augusteen, having a Guide with them: but John Hosler and Penelope
were left here, not being able to travel. We remained here till the Morrow,
but the Night was so extreem cold that we could not rest.

the 9 month 15. the 1 of the week.
This Morning the Spaniards bid us prepare to travel* for they were not able
to mantain us. We understood that it was five or six Leagues to Augusteen, and
We could not travel so Far, being all of us lamed and stiff: We entreated
them to let us go in a Cannooe, but they deneyed us: We entreated for the two
Women and Robert barrow; At lenght we prevailed that they should go up in a
Cannooe, for the Cannooe was to go whether we went or not.

While all this discourse was, came in a couple of Spaniards, one being the
Sentinall that went with our people the day before, the other was a Person the
Governor had sent with a Cannooe and four Spaniards to fetch us, This was
cheerful News; for had we gone to have trav^^^ed without a Guide, we should
have P^rished. The man that came for us brought two Blanketts, one for my Wife,
the oher for Penel^^^: He desired us to be goeing. About a League distance from
the place he left the Cannooe, which we parted with very unwillingly; for some
of our people, had they had a Mile further to have gone, could not have gone
it: The Wind still continued at North-West and blowed very Fiercely; and
extreem cold it was: We had such a continual shivering and pain in our Bones
that we were in violent anguish.

Our poor Child was quiet, but so black with cold and shaking that it was
admirable how it lived. We got to Augusteen about two hours before Night;
Being putt on shore, we were directed to the Governor's house: being got
thither we were had up a pare of Stairs, at the head whereof stood the
Governor, who ordered my Wife to be conducted to his Wife's Appartment. I and
John Smith went into a Room where the Governor asked us a few Questions; but
seeing how extreem cold we were, He gave us a Cup of Spanish-Wine and sent us
into his Kitchen to warm our selves at the Fire. About half an hour afterward
the Governou^ sent for John Smith and Me and gave us a Shirt and Sliders, a
Hatt and a pare of Silk (...), telling us, he had no VVollen Clothes as yet,
but would have some made: We put on the (...) and made all have into the
Kitchen to the Fire. Robert Barrow was quartered at another house: The Persons
came to the Governors house and took such as they were minded to quarter in
their houses; So that Joseph Kirle, John Smith, I, my Wife and Child lodged at
the Governor's house. All our People that came up with Joseph Kirle came to
see us. We perceived the People^s great kindness; For they were all ^ell
clothed from head too foot with the best the People had. Joseph Kirle began to
tell us of his Travel after he left us on the Bay, and how that they all
concluded That they should never see my Wife and Child and Robert Barrow any
more, if they did my Kinsman and Me. Richard Limpeney and those that went with
him had a hard Travel for thirthy six hours without ceasing, in which Travel
three of our Negroes that went with them were lost, (viz Jack, C^^sar and
Quensa, by sitting down to rest themselves they were in a little time so numed
that they could not go, and there Perished. So that we lost five in that day's
Travel, and began to doubt that Negroe Ben. Perished also* Joseph Keirle said
that he thought he should have lost some of our People in their Travel from the
last Centinall's hither, For they were much tired, and the Cold Violent and the
Latter part of that day^s Jorney they VVading for many miles through much
Water, and deep Sand-hills, and when they came in sight of Augusteen they
stayed for Boats to Fetch them, in which time some were nummed with the Cold.
Joseph Keirle applied himself to the Governor on our behalfs to send us help,
for he doubted wether We were all living; the Governor readely Assented and
fortwith sent for a Person fit for his purpose; Chargeing him to get a
Perre-Augoe and Men, and go forthwith and fetch us, but the Tide fell out, so
that We could not go till Midnight: The Governor was so concerned that he
would not go to Bed till they were gone; when the Tide served he went to the
Waterside and saw the Men putt off, giving them a Strict Charge.

Solomon Cresson began to tell us of his Travells from Ie^e, having most part
of the way much Rain: The Indians were very kind unto him until thy came to
the Indian Town where the Dutch men were killed; at which place some of those
Indians made a discovery of him to be no Spaniard. They said nothing to him
thereof, but were very dogged to him, giving him no Food, and causing him to
lie on the Ground Amongst Vermin. On the Morrow he was to go with his former
Company; Who were grown so extremely bitter and envious to him that when they
did but look upon him, they were ready to smite him; having gone until about
midday, passing an Inlett, the wether being extreme bad with Wind, Rain and
much Cold, they putt on shore; (this was the place where We putt on shore and
got Water-soldiers and stayed for the Spaniard when he went back to look for
our People that were to follow us in a Cannooe) but the Rage of these bloody
people was such that he expected to dye; being on shore they readely kindled a
Fir^ about which time he heard a noi^^ of a (...) and (...), and presently the
Spanish Perre-Augo pu^t on Shore upon them: the Indian were extraordinarily
Surprised and stood Amazed but Solomon was glad to see them, and they him: the
Spaniards took the old Casseekey's Chest and whatever (...) had from him,
Comanding them to return to the Indian Towns from whence they came* staying all
Night the next morning the Spaniards sent Solomon under the Conduct of two
Indians belongingh to these Towns who were commanded by the Spaniards to Carry
Solomon unto the Sentinall's house, but these two Indians carried him a little
beyond the place where We putt on shore to travel, and they seemed as though
they had mischief in their hearts against him: He asked if they would go
forward? But they looking untowardly on him, answered him not: so he went
himself and was glad when he saw they did not follow him.

But We were desirous to know how the Spaniards had knowledge of us, Which it
seems was thus.

When We got to Iece where Smith and his Company were, and We going under the
Denomination of Spaniards and the other English, the report of us runn from
Indian-Town to Indian-Town to the Northward unto the Northernmost Town, at
which Town were two or more Indians that were converted to the Romish Faith.
These or one of these went to the next Spanish Sentinalls and gave an account
that he heard that there were two Vessels cast away to the Southward of Iece,
one being a Spaniard, the other an English Vessel, the Spaniards having two
Vessels gone for the Havana to seek for supplies feared it was those Vessels:
And the same day as this News came to the Governor of Augusteen came also News
of one of their Friars, being murdered by some of the Cape Indians. After this
manner we understood it; viz. Three Friars being under a vow to go amongst the
Indians on the Cape to C^nvert them, they went to a certain Town to the
Northward of where we were cast away, but it lay within the Sound. The
Casseekey of this Town they gained on to Embrace the Roman-Faith, but all his
people were much incenced against the Friars, and therefore would have their
Casseekey renounce his faith, and put the Friars to death; but he would Assent
to neither: therefore they killed him and one Friar; the other two eshaped.
Hereupon was a Perre-Aug^^ forthwith sent for us of what Nation soever we mi^ht
be, also a party of Spaniards and Indians we^^ sent against that Town where the
Friar was killed. (...) had a plentiful Supper, and We fedd lik^ people that
had been half starved, for We eat not knowing when We had enough: and We found
our Palats so changed by eating of Berries that We could not relish the Taste of
Salt any more than if it had no saltness in it: We had lodging provided, but
few Beds.

the 9 mt. 16. the 2 of the week.
This Morning We had Ice half ^n Inch thick, and it had been so for some
Mornings past, but as the Sun riset it is gone.

The Governor came this Morning to our Apartement, inquiring how We did? We
having had Chocolatta for breakfast he asked if We would have any thing else
that his house could afford: If We would but ask it should be brought us* but
we modestly answered That this was sufficient althoug our Appetites were not to
be satisfied. The Governor stated the poverty of the Country unto us. The
place is a G^rison maintained one half by the King o^ Spain, the other half by
the Church of Rome. The Male Inhabitants are all Soldiers, every one receiving
Pay according to their Post. A Sentinall's Pay is 150 pices of Eight a year.
And all their supply of Bread, Clothing and Money comes from the Havana and
Porto Vella. And it is a going on of three Years since they have had a Vessel
from any place whatsoever, which makes their Wants very great: All things being
expended except Ammanition and Salt, of which they said they had enough. The
Governor offered us the freedom of what his house afforded, withal gave us a
Charge to be careful in going abroad, especially of some persons that did not
effect our Nation: We promised to be ruled and submitt to the Governor's
pleasure for our Liberty. Our people came in and We told them the caution; but
they said They had been all over the Town and in many houses where they were
kindly received, and such as the people had they would give them. They told us
of some English that lived here, and they had been at their houses; the
chiefest in esteem was one William Carr of the Isle of Man, who about thirty
years ago was in a Vessel bound for South Carolina, but missing their Port were
cast away nigh this Port* many were drowned, but he and some others were brought
hither by the Indians, some of them got away in Spanish Vessels* others died
here: This man turned Roman Catholic and Married a Spanish Woman, of whom he
had Seven Children, and is an Officer in the Garrison: He was chief Interpreter.

This Day came Joseph Kirl's Negroe Ben.: He gave us this Account that after he
had sent him back, he having looked and not finding my Kinsman went to se^k
(...) a place to shelter himself from the Cold, and some place he found to
creep in where he lay down and continued there all Night, but by Morning was so
stiff with Cold that he could not use his Legs, but halled himself toward the
Bay. The Spaniard our Guide from the first Sentry house the Morning after we
went thence returned along the Bay to (...) if any of our people were living,
but he found all dead except Negroe Ben.: and he getting a fire made Negroe
Ben. was recovered and got the use of his Limbs.

William Carr the Interpreter acquainted us that the Governor and two Royal
Officers would examine u^ concerning our being cast away and what goods and
Moneys was lost in our Vessel, and concerning our hardships amongst the
Florida-Indians etc. Which was done, and every one did Sign it. This took up 2
or 3 days time to Complete it. After this was done the Governor told us, That
he expected Capt. Sebastian Lopas in some few days, and after his Arrival he
would provide for our going to Carolina with Cannooes and Men to Guard us.

This Week my Wife was taken with a Fever and Ague which held her three days
and then left her. The Governor ordered his own Docter to administer such
things as were helpful. The Governor kindn^ss to us all was extraordinary,
for he would daily en^^ire of us if We wanted any thing which he had, of which
he gave us an Account, and We eat no worse than he did daily.

The Town We saw from one end to the other: It is about three quarters of a
mile in length, not regularly built, the houses not very thick; they having
large Orchards, in which are plenty of Oranges, Lemmons, Pome-Citrons* Lymes,
Figgs and Peaches* the house most of them old building and not half of them
inhabited. The number of Men being abo^^ three hundred that belong to the
Government and many of them are kept as Sentinalls at their Look-outs. At the
North end of the Town stands a large Fortification, being ^uadrangel with
Bastions, Each Bastion will contain thirtheen Guns; but there is not passing
two thirds of Fifty two mounted. In the Cur^in they can not mount any Gunns
being only for small Arms. The Wall of the Fortification is about thirthy foot
high built of sawed Stone, such as they get out of the sand between the Sea
and the Sound. This Stone is only ^and and small shells connexed together being
not very hard till exposed to the Sun. The Fort is moated round, The would not
admit us to come near the Fort; but Joseph Kirle took an Opportunity and
walked round about it.

the 9 mt. 23. the 2 of the week.
This day Joseph Kirle and I considering that the latter end of this week was
talked of for our setting Forward toward Carolina (Which the Spaniards call
St. Georges,) We concluded to endeavor to provide our selves, if We could,
with Clothing; cosidering We should be exposed to all the weather that might
happen, and have no shelter but what we carried with us. therefore We were
incl^ined to sell, He his and I one or two of my Negroes to provide us
Chlothing and Provisions. We addressed our selves to the Governor and withal
offered him if he pleased to accept the choice of my Negroes; but he denied our
Offer. We stated our matter to Him and asked if we might dispose of our
Negroes? He said, No, we should not, neither could we sell them to any person
but himself for the King's Account without a special (...). Therefore he would
Consult the two Royall-Officers and give us his answer.

the 9 mt. 24. the 3 of the week.
This day the Governor sent for us, and told us. That he would give us Credit
for what We and the rest of the Company would. I told him that my Wife and
Child would want some warmer Clothing, also Joseph Kirle and my Self should
want some, if to be had. He ordered us to give in an Account of what We should
Want, and if to be had, he would get it: And Joseph Kirle and I should give
our Obligation to pay the Governor of Carolina what the Sum amounted unto;
which We were willing to do: But We disired that our People should give us
their Obligation for what We were engaged for on their Account; Which the
Governor thought reasonable. I gave in an account of particulars for Joseph
Kirle, Robert Barrow, Myself and Family: Also the quantity of Indian-Corn,
Peace, Stringed Beef, Salt and Earthen Potts for the whole Company: But
Clothing was not to be had except as much Stuff as made a Suit for my Wife and
Child, and a few Skins Joseph Kirle and I got: I got also seven Blanketts tho
the price was great. These served Joseph Kirle, Robert Barrow, Myself and
Family. We had Five Roves of Ammonition Bread, so full of Weavel that Corn was
far better. Twenty Roves of strung Beef: Sixty Roves of Indian-Corn. Ten Roves
of Peace. One Rove o^ Salt, Jarrs For Water, and Earthen Potts to boil our
Victuals in.

the 9 mt. 25. the 4 of the week.
The Governor sent for Joseph Kirle and Me to certify that all that was to be
got he had got for us. And (...) further signified unto us that he did expect
Sebastian Lopas before this time, and he would not have us (...) go till he
came, for whatever he could get of our (...) and Goods We should receive it
every Doit. (...) We said We desired not to be detained on that (...), for we
had given that already over for gone from us. And as it had pleased God to make
them the Instruments of our preservation, so we did freely give any thing of
that which was or may be deemed ours to the Governor and those persons that
were sent for us. The Governor said He would not have any thing to do with
it, for what ever he did was for Charity's sake. Then We desired the Soldiers
should have it if any thing shoul be got, Which we doubted. And hereupon we
considered That should those poor men got nothing We ought to allow them
something in general; Therefore Joseph Kirle and I offered the Governor That
We would allow Capt. Sebastian Lopas and his Men an hundred Pieces of Eight
for bringind us up from amongst the Indians. The Governor was well pleased
with our Offer and said the should have it.

About this time Robert Barrow was taken with a grievous Belly-Ach, after which
he fell into a violent Flux. Several of our People also were taken with the
B^lly-Ach and great Scouring, all which was chieflly Occasioned by our
unreasonable Eating and not governing our selves therein. Our chief Dyett was
Hommoney, Herbs and Pumpions, having not much Meat; Which mean dyett was our
preservation: For had it been all Flesh, We should have distroyed our selves;
But We had the best the Place afforded.

the 9 mt. 26. the 5 of the week.
This day We Signed our Obligation for four hundred Pieces of Eight, and We
were ^o be gone the 28 or 29 (...), after which our People signed their
Obligation (...) to pay their proportion of what was Provided for them in
Provisions and their part of what should be paid for their Passage from the
Indians to Carolina* Whereupon We made the best Provision we could: I had got
some Wine and Brandy for my self and Fam^ly and some small Necessaries for our
Child, with a great Resolution to go through.

the 9 mot. 29. the 1 of the week.
This day after we had Dined* Cannooes being got ready, One Capt. Francisco De
Roma with six Soldiers was to go our Conduct; the Governor walked down to see
us Embarque, and taking our Farewell He Embraced some of us and wished us well,
saying, WE SHOULD FORGETT HIM WHEN WE GO IT AMONGST OUR OWN NATION, And also
(...) THAT IF WE FORGOTT, GOD WOULD NOT FORGET HIM. Thus in a courteous manner
We parted; which was about two or three a Clock in the Afternoon. Taking our
departure from Augusteen, we had about two or three Leagues to an Indian-Town
called St. a Cruce, where being landed we were directed to the Indian
Warehouse: It is built round having Sixteen Sqares; on each Sqare is a Cabin
built and painted which will hold two People; the house being about Fifty foot
diameter. In the Middle of the Topp is a Square opening about fifteen foot.
This house was very clean, and fires being ready made nigh our Cabins. The
Spanish Captain made choice of Cabins for him and his Soldiers and appointed us
our Cabbins. In this Town they have a Friar and a large house to worship in
with three Bell's, and the Indians go as constantly to their devotion at all
times and seasons as any of the Spaniards. Night being come and the time of
their Devotion over, the Friar came in and many of the Indians both men and
women having a Dance according to their way and custom. We had plenty of
Casseena drink and such Victuals as the Indians had provided for us, some
bringi^g Corn boiled, another Pease, some one thing, some another, of all which
We made a good Supper and Slept till Morning.

the 9 mot. 30. the 2 of the week.
This Morning early We left this Town having about two Leagues to go with the
Cannooes, Then We were to travel by Land: But a Cart was provided to carry our
provisions and Necessaries; in which Cart those that could not, tra^ell were
carried. We had about five Leagues to a Sentinall's house, where we lay all
Night, and next Morning traveled along the Sea-shoar about Four Leagues to an
Inlett: Here We waited for Cannooes to come for us to carry us about two miles
to a Town called St. Wans, an Indian Town, being on an Island. We went through
a kirt^ of Wood into the Indian Plantations for a Mile. In the middle of this
Island is the Town of St. Wans, a large Town and many People. They have a
Friar, and a Worshipping Hou^e: The People are very Industrious, having plenty
of Hoggs and Fowls and large Cropps of Corn, as We could tell by their
Corn-houses. The Indians brought us Victuals as at the last Town, and We lay
in their Warr-house, Which was larger than that at the other Town.

the 10 mot. 2. the 4 of the week.
This Morning the Indians brought us Victuals for Breakfast, and the Friar
gave my Wife some Loaves of Bread made of Indian-Corn, Which was somewhat
ex^raordinary: also a parcel of Fowls.

About Tenn a Clock in the Forenoon we left St. Wans, walking about a Mile to
the Sound Where were Cannooes and Indians ready to transport us to the next
Town. We did believe that We might have come all the way along the Sound, but
the Spaniards were not willing to discover the place unto us.

An hour before Sun set We got to the Town called St. Marys. This is a
Fronteer and a Garrison Town: the Inhabitants are Indians with some Spanish
Soldiers. We were conducted to the War house, as the custom is, for every
Town has a War house. Or as We understood these houses were for their times
of Mirth and Danceing, and to lodge and entertain Strangers. This house is
about 81 foot Diameter built Round, with 32 Sqares, in each Sqare a Cabin about
8 foot long of a good height being Painted and well matted. The Center of this
building is a Quadrangle of 20 foot being open at topp of the house, against
which the house is built thus In this Quadrangle is the place they dance having
a great fire in the Middle: One of the Sqares of this building is the Gate, Way
or Passage in. The Women natives of these Towns cloth their themselves with the
Moss of Trees, making Gowns and Petticoats thereof which at a distance or in
the Night look very neat. The Indian Boys we saw were kept to School in the
Church, the Friar being their Schoolmaster. This is the Largest Town of all.
About a Mile from this is another Town called St. Philips. At this Town of St.
Mary's were we to stay till the 5th or 6th Instant; Where also We were to
receive our Sixty Roves of Corn, and Tenn Roves of Pease; Wh^le (...) stayed we
had one half of our Corn beaten into ^^eal by the Indians, the other we kept
whole, not knowing what waether we should have: For the Friar of this Town some
Years part was at Charles Town i^ South Carolina, and he had a Months Passage
in goeing about this time of the Year. This News was very unpleasant to think
of lying out a Month at this season, having been so weather beaten before; But
we endeavored to shun looking back, considering how great our Preservations
had been hitherto.

While We stayed here we were willing to make all the Provision we could for
Back and Belley: We got of the Indians plenty of Garlic and long Pepper to
season our Corn and Pease, both which were griping and windy: And we made us
Wooden Trays and Spoons to eat with; We got Rushes and made a sort of
platted Rope thereof; the use we chiefly intended it for was to be serviceable
to help us in building Hutts or Tents with at such time as we should meet with
hard VVeather.

The time drawing on that we were to leave this Town, We had Seven Large
Cannooes Provided to carry us being in all about Sixty Persons; Eighteen of us
and 6 of Smiths Company, Seven Spaniards and thirty add Indians, Which were to
row the Cannooes and be our Pilotts. We had some Indians from all the Towns
and two Cass^ekey's.

We understood that the Carolina Indians called the Yammasees which are
Related to these Indians were here about a Month since Trading for Deer Skins.

I have Omit^ed a considerable Passage that happened in Augusteen; The Woman
named Penelope being bigg with Child, by the Spaniard's persuasion stayed with
them: Also Joseph Kirle's Boy named John Hilliar, was detained by the
Spaniards. Joseph Kirle strove hard with the Governor that he might have his
Boy* but the Lad was conveyed out of Town and not to be found. The Governor
promised that he would send him after him if possible; but the Boy came not to
us* and We were to depart hence on the Morrow.

the 10 mot. 6. the 1 of the week.
This Morning we Embarked and departed this place and put in to the Town St.
Philips where the Spanish Captain inveited us on shore to drinck Casseena,
which We did: The Spaniards having left somethingh behind, We stayed here about
an hour and then set forward. About two or three Leagues hence We came in
sight of an Indian town called Sappataw; But We went about a League to the
Northward of it to a Sentinall^s house, where We putt our Boats on shore and
had Casseena brought us, making no stay We went hence rowing till next
Morning: In the Night We had lost our way, but got to rights in a little time.

the 7. the 2 of the week.
This Morning we putt on shore having past an Inlett of the Sea, and here we
dressed some Victuals and got a little Sleep until the Tide Served. Some of
our Indians went out a Hunting for Dear and Hoggs of Both which the Spaniards
said there was Plenty, and when the Tide served We were to go to the
Northernmost end of this Island and stay for the Hunters. One of the Indians
brought a Deer which he throwed down amongst the other Indians, and he went out
again to Hunt to the North end of the Island, where We were to randevouse for
this Night. We set Forward about Tenn a Clock and got to the place appointed
an hour or two before Sun-sett, It being a fine lofty VVood, We employed our
selves in getting Firewood for the Night and Moss to lie on, of both which ^e
got plenty, having a large Oak to lie under.

The Indians brought in several Hoggs and Dear, of which we had Part, so that
we Fared richly; having a pleasant Nights repose; We got up to be gone about
an hour before Day.

the 10 mot. 8. the 3 of the week.
This day having rowed from the last place until two hours before Sun-sett We
putt on Shore at a place where had been an Indian Settlement* it being on a
high bank, from whence We had a Prospect of the Sound. Here We employed our
selves to go and fetch Bushes to make shelter against the Wind and Dews of the
Night, and in Cutting of dry Grass to lie on, and getting of Wood which was at
considerable distance; But we resolved to have it if labor would purchase it.
Those that were not employed in these services were providing of Water and
Victuals, For we had alwais enough to do. We had a pleasant Night and ^ested
well.

the 10 mot. 9. the 4 of the week.
This Morning about Sunrising we saw a Cannooe of Carolina-Indians a going to
the Southward a hunting: They kept the Western side of the Sound, being
fearful of us; We had a Cannooe manned with Indians and Spaniards to go after
them to speak with them, being desirous to get them to carry Letters to inform
of our Comeing' not knowing but we might Alar^m the Out-Settlement of Carolina.

This Cannooe of ours pursued the other, but the Carolina Indians putt on
shore, runn into a Mash and Fired at our People. The Spanish Indians who could
Speak the Yammaw's Language, called onto them, and told them their (...),
withal entreating them to come unto them; But they Answered That they were
going a hunting for the Season, therefore desired them to be gone, for they
would not come near them: Thus our People returned unto us. The Carolina
Indians went their way, and We Prepared to go forward. We having the Casseekey
of St. Wans with us Sent him away last Night, to see if he could meet any of
the Yammaws^e Indians of Carolina, he being acquainted with and related to
them: But this Cannooe passed him, We set forward and rowed all the day till
about an hour before Sun-sett, and then we putt on shore at an Indian-Field
which was overgrown with Sedge. It being low wett Land. Here we made our
Accustomed Provision for Lodging, lying this Night in a Wood, having dressed
Victuals for this time and to morrow; And having rested well this Night, about
Daybreak or sooner We left this place.

the 10 mot. 10. the 5 of the week.
This Day about Tenn a Clock we crossed an Inlett, butt the Tide being against
us we putt on shore at an Old Indian Field. At this Place under the shelter
of some Trees was the Casseekey of St. Wanns. Here we stayed and dranck some
Casseena. There was Abundance of Rabbetts* but we made no stay. Not passing
two hours, the Casseekey was sent before to make discovery, and we followed
rowing until an hour before Sun-Sett, by which time we got to the place
called St. Catalena, where has been a great Settlement of Ind^ans, for the
Land has been cleared for planting, for some Miles distant: Here also We met
the Casseekey, also a Cannooe of Carolina Indians being a Man his Wife and
Children having his Dogs and other hunting Implements for to lie out this
Winter Season. The Spanish Captain by this Interpreter discoursed him (...)
Carrying our Letters, which he readily assen^^^ unto* Whereupon the Spanish
Captain set himself to writing to the Governor of Carolina.

We had a Large Field to lie in and no manner of shelter but what was a Mile
distant or more; But We sp^r^d not pains, but some fell to Cutting of Boughs
and (...) at that great distance, some to Carrying it to the place, some to
get fire wood; so that by Night we had a brave shelter.

The Spanish Captain sent for me to write to the Governor of Carolina; which I
did: I Write also to a Person of my Acquaintance there: The Letters being
finished and Night come on I delivered my Letters to the Captain and returned
to my Company. By this time they had completed our Booth which we thought was
sufficient, if no Rain fell. We provided our Victuals for our Supper and for
the next Day's Travel, as also some dry Grass to lie on in hopes of resting
well this Night. About Tenn at night the Carolina Indians went with our Letters
for Carolina.

the 10 mot. 11. the 6 of the week.
This Morning about two hours before Day we had a Gust of Wind at the
North-West and the Sky was overcast and looked as though we should (...)
abundance of Rain: In a little time the rain fell against which we had no
shelter, but our Blanketts: The Rain held until break of day, at which time
begann the North-West wind to ^low violent hard and Cold: Our sh^lter was
fronting the North-West; and we ^ell to work to shift our Booth and to getting
more boughs, Brash and Grass: the Grass was to fill and keep up a bank of Earth
which we raised about three or four Foot high to break the wind from us: All
this Day were we employed in enlarging our Booth and getting of VVood for
fireing; The North-West blew extreme hard and this night was hard, getting but
little rest. the Cold pinching us.

the 10 mo 12. the 7 of the week.
This Day the wind what continued without ceasing. We begann to mend wath the
wind had put out of order by Night, and haved up more Earth on our Booth, and
made some Enlargement, for we were not negligent by Day to provide for the
Night, which pinched us with Cold especially aged Robert Barrow, who having a
violent Flux that had held him from Augusteen hither, and by the violent Cold
being Grown on him so that he could no^ Govern his weakness, not get natural
Rest; he was extremely racked with the Cold, that in this Juncture of
hardship we could get no warmth in him; but he was contented with our mean
help although he received little benefit by it. This Day at times we went out
to get vvood, having a long way to go in an Open Field and the Cold almost
numming us by that time we could g^tt to our ^ooh.

This Eveaing the Wind was some what abated and we were in great hopes it was
over, but it blowed fiercely the latter part of the Night.

the 10 mo 13. the 1 of the week.
This Morning the Wind was something abated and the Sun ga^^ fo^th a little
Warmth: Joseph Kirl bo^roborrowed a Gun^, Powder and Shot of the Spaniards*
and went to kill some wild Geese or what other Game he might come up with, but
he had no success, comeing home without any Game: And We were w^ll content with
a Dinner of Indian-Corn and Strung Beef. The Spanish Indian hunted all these
three days and killed several Dear, but they eat them as fast as they killed
them; having little or no other Provision, their Corn being spent.

The latter part of this Day the wind was very moderate and we hoped to be
going the next Morning. Whereupon we Provided for the next Days Travel.

the 10 mo. 14. the 2 of the week.
This Morning we Embarked and set Forward having fair Weather, the Wind down:
We rowed all Day until three a Clock, being come to a great Inlett of the Sea;
but the Weather looked as though we should have Wind and Rain, and to cross the
Inlett would be dangerous, it being about Two Leagues over, and a little Wind
makes a rough Sea: So We putt on Sh^ar, it being high Land and lofty Woods,
mostly Pine and Live Oaks: here we made all the Expedition we could to get a
shelter against the Weather. The Indians set to work to build themselves
little Hutts or Wigg-wams, which they had not done till now. They got small
Palmetto-Leaves and covered their Buildings; but ours were covered mostly with
Boughs, which would not keep out much Rain. By Night we had a great deal of
Rain and Wind. And it being the Evening o^ the Spaniards Christmas they used
some of their Ceremonies with tinkling on a piece of Iron, and Singing, begg^ng
for somewhat for the day following: They begg^d of the Indians, and the Indians
in like manner begged of the Spaniards, and what the Indians gav^ the
Spaniards, that was returned to the Indians.

the 10 mo. 16. the 4 of the week.
This Morning was very Foggy and proved a rainy day, but we kept rowing until
two in the Afternoon, the Rain being hard and the Wind increased at N E. We
putt on shore, but the Capt. told us we should not stay here long, he intended
further, and if the Weather permitted* would go all Night; but the Weather was
likelier to be worse than better, and we sat in the Rain until Night was
come, Then we entreated the Captain that we might stay all Night, and that we
might provide against the Weather; but he pretented the weather would break up
and he would be gone: But there was no likelihood of it: The Rain was increased
and we all wett and shram'd with Cold; At length he assented to stay; then were
we hard putt to it, (being Night) to provide shelter: But in the dark did we
work until we had made us a shelter that would keep the Rain from us; having
fires we putt off our wett clothes and dried them as well as we could. Toward
Morning the Rain broke up.

the 10 mo. 17. the 5 of the week.
This Morning at Sunrising we set Forward and Rowed until Noon; at which
time we came to an Inlett and putt a shore: There we stayed all this Afternoon
and dried our Blanketts and what was not dried last Night. We also dressed
Victuals, and as soon as it was dark went hence designing to Row all Night,
but having an intricate Passage amongst Marshes, Where were diverse Creeks and
ways, that we rowed sometimes in a wrong one, then Back again, and Rowed in
another; and about Midnight our Pilotts were at a loss not knowing which way
to go, nor where to find any dry Land that We might go on shore: But three
of our Boats rowed until We found a dry Napp to get on shore, where we lay
until Day, having good (...). As soon as it was light we got our Boats and
went to look for the rest of our Company whom we found having made their
Cannooes fast to the Sedge and sitting therein until we came to them.

the 10 mo. 18. the 6 of the week.
The Night was extreem Foggy, and so was this Morning; but we searched about
and found our Passage, being a little Channel just broad enough for our Boats
to pass, and a Mile in length. After we past this, we came into a great Sound
which went down into a large Inlett that the Land could not be seen from the
one Side to the other. Into the Sound comes down a great River called the
Sabbina-River, which when we got into the Course of it, the water was fresh
though in this great Sound. The Spaniards called it the Cross-Barr, or St. a
Cruce: About Noon we got over this Sound, and here we rowed out to Sea for two
Leagues to get into another Sound; and about three a Clock the Wind began to
blow at North-East, and it looked very black, so that We feared a Storm. We
desired to get on shore to Provide against it, but the Captain said, About a
few leagues further We should get near Port-Royall, but in the Interim We saw
a Cannooe on the shore: we made to her and there we found some Indian Wig-wams.
Here We went on shore. This was a Cannooe laden with Skins that belonged to
Merchants at Carolina, having four Indians belonging to her; but three of them
runn away fearing the Spaniards, and One stayed.

The Indians VVig-wams were in a bad condition no^ fit to keep out the
Weather; So We set to work to mend them: Here was plenty of Palmeto-Leaves
with which We covered them and made Addition to them, ^ut the Storm of Wind and
Rain came Violently before We could complete our work and held all Night, yet
We lay indifferent dry though the Storm was ver^ great.

the 10 mo. 19. the 7 of the week.
This Morning the Storm of Wind continued at N E. wit^ Rain We being likely to
stay some time here inlarg^d our Wig-vvam fearing a North-wester, which about
tenn a Clock this day began to blow fiercely with (...) for some hours. The
Wind was so Violent that (...) lest the tall Pines should be blown on u^* (...)
the Carolina India^ out to bring his th^^e (...) in; but they would not. The
Spanish Indians (...) ^reat Complaint for Food. We gave amongst (...) our Rove
of Corn, not being willing to spare (...), not knowing how long We should be
(...) the Weather. Some of our people had (...) up their shares, and We
expected, should (...) long, we must supply them with (...) to spare.

the 10 mo. 20. the 1 of the week.
This Day the wind continued at N. W. and extreme (...) was, but we in our
Wig-wam were well enough (...) from cold. About Noon our Mariners Wig-wam (...)
Fire and was burnt theirs was the lewardmost of (...) (for we had Eight
Wig-wams) otherwise the wh^^e had been in danger. We understood that we (...)
not passing two or three days Journey from the Eng^ish Settlemen^s; but the
Spanish Indians told us that it was more till We were better informed by this
Indian who belonged to that place.

the 10 mo. 21.
This Day early we set forward and passed Port Royal Sound, being some
Leagues over; and about two a Clock in the Afternoon we putt on shore, the Tide
being against us: Here was a close Wood where we lay indifferent well all
Night, and early in the Morning we set forward and rowed all day until One a
Clock in the Afternoon* of the 22. day. At which time we got to the first
settlement in Carolina, belonging to one Richard Bennet, who received us
kindly, and provided plentifully for us of good food and good drink, showing
the Spaniards all kindness possible he could for our sakes, which the Spaniards
did acknowledge: We stayed here all Night.

the 10 mo. 23.
This Morning having eaten plentifully, and drank also, we went hence in
Company of some of the Inhabitants about ten a Clock, and rowed until two
hours within Night, having passed by several Plantations, we putt on shore on
a point of land to wait a Tide, having a Wood to shelter in and making good
fires we stayed until Midnight, at which time we went thence and rowed until
an hour or two before Day, by which time we got to Governor Blake's House.

24.
This morning when the Governor arose he sent for Io. Kirle, John Smith, Andrew
Murrey and Me making Inquiry of us concerning our Passage and on what account.
the Spaniards came with us. We rendered him an account of the Governor of
Augusteen's Generosity toward us, and that he sent us freely without any
demands except what we had freely Contracted. The Governor sent for the Spanish
Captain. in, and received the letters that were sent from the Governor. of
Augusteen, also our Obligation, which the Governor accepted. The Governor
showed a great deal of kindness toward us, made Inquiry into all our
Conditions. Robert Barrow he sent to his Neighbor Margarett Bammers, who, he
said, would be careful and nurse him: She was an Ancient Friend, about 2 miles
distant; so he went on horseback. The Governor clothed Ios. Kirle, John Smith
Andrew Murrey; Me, my Wife and Child. To the (...) of our People he gave each
of them a Dunel Blankett which would keep them warm: And plenty of Victuals
and Drink was provided. We Obtained Leave of the Governor to permit the
Spaniards to go to Charles Town with us being willing to gratify them according
to our Abilities.

the 10 month 25. the 6 of the week.
This Day in the Afternoon, Joseph Kirle, John Smith, I* my Wife and Child went
to Margarett Bammers where Robert Barrow was; staying all Night till next
Morning, when the Spaniards called for us as they came by Water.

26.
This Morning we went hence with the Spaniards for Char^es-Town, where we
arrived about an hour within Night*

The Gentlemen of the Town appointed a public house of good Credit to
entertain the Spaniards with meat and drink and lodging; which was done to the
Spaniards admiration, they stayed here 8 days. We got our People together and
agreed Jointly to give the Spaniards a 100 pc. of 8, which Io: Kirle and I
divided amongst them according to their degrees, we two adding to the sum.

the 11 mo. 4. the 2 of the week.
Joseph Kirle and I provided a small Present to send to the Governor of
Augusteen, and this day we went with the Spaniard to Governor Blakes, staying
there One day, the Governor treated the Spaniards, and having Completed his
Letters gave the Spanish Captain a considerable Present and sent him homewards,
Ordering them to call on (...) Yam masse^ Indians, where they might have as
much Indian Corn, as they pleased, to carry home with them, the Towns of these
Indians being about two or three days rowing from Charles Town.

the 11 mo the 9. the 7 of the week.
This Day I returned with my Wife and Child to Charles Town, leaving Robert
Barrow in a weak and low condition with Margarett Bammer. I, my Wife and Family
with Joseph Kirle were entertained by Captain James Ribee the time of our stay
in Carolina. Our Seamen were mostly employed, some in one Vessel, and some in
another that belonged to the Por^.

the 12 mo. 6. the 2 of the week.
Joseph Kirle went hence to the Island of (...) of gaining speedy passage for
Pensilvania the place of (...) abode.

Toward the beginning of this Month Robert Barrow was (...) to Charles T^^n
being extrem Weak and was (...) at the house of Mary Cross who nursed him.

the 1 mo. 18. the 5 of the week.
This Day I with my Family and Robert Barr^w (...) Set Sail from this place
for Pensilvania, and had (...) days Passage to Philadelphia.

the 2 month 4. the 1 of the week.
This Day in the Evening Robert Barrow departed this life and was buried the 6
Instant having passed through great (...) in much Patience; And in all the
times of our great^st Troubles was ready to Counsel us to Patience and to wait
what the Lord our GOD would bring to pass. And he would often express That it
was his belief, that on^ Lives should be spared not be lost in that Wilderness
and amongst those People who would have made a Prey of us. And so this good Man
having finished his Course with Joy Laid down his Body, and is with Him who
rewards the Just.

Thus having Completed our hard Passage hither, wh^rein Gods great Mercy and
wonderful Loving kindness has been largely Extended unto us in delivering and
preserving (...) to this Day and time, I hope that I with all those of us that
have been spared hitherto, shall never be Forget ^ll nor unmindfull of the Low
estate we were brought into; But that we may dou^le our Diligense in serving
(...) Lord GOD, Is the breathing and Earnest desire of my Soul. Amen.

Jonathan Dickinson


