A Seasonable ACCOUNT OF THE Christain and Dying-Words, Of Some Young Men; Fit
for the consideration of all: But Especialy of the Youth of this Generation;
viz: William Fletcher, 17 Years of age, Tudor Brain, 17 Years of age, and
Richard Manliffe.

With a short Epistle Prefixed.

Published for Instruction and Caution to the Youth, among Friends, called
Quakers.

Prove. 8. 17. They that seek Me early shall find Me. Eceles. 12. 1. Remember
now thy Creator in the days of thy Youth. Printed at Philadelphia by Reynier
Jansen. 1700.

Some of the Words and Exhortations of a Dying Youngman near Seventeen Years of
Age who was an Aprentice to Jacob Usher of Philadelphia Carpenter his Name was
William Fletcher Son of William Fletcher; Deceased.
THe first time he was observed to open his mouth on this manner, his Mother
was sitting by, and his heart being much overcome, he Expressed himself thus:
Dear Mother I have ever been a bashful Lad, but now the Lord has loosened my
Tongue, and now can I sing praises to his Holy name: Oh! how good has the Lord
been to me in this my visitation and has Answered my Prayers; yea he has
answered my desire, for which my Soul shall praise his name forever. I have
often desired that I might have my punishment in this Life that so I may Rest
with the Lord hereafter; for I knew that I deserved punishment for my sins.
Since I came to this place my Soul has been much Bowed to see the Looseness,
Pride, and vanity which is therein, both amongst those that Profess the Truth
and others: But I pray thee O! Lord if it be thy will, pardon on all their Sins
and reach them to do better; and if it be thy will let them have their
punishment in this life, that they may have peace with Thee here-after; not
that I desire any should have the like Punishment as I have, though in my
Extremity I can Praise the Lord for his mercyes toward me: Oh! Praises,
Praises be to thy name O Lord! can my Soul say. Now I desire that all, both Old
and young may always live in the fear of the Lord while they are here, that so
they may have peace with the Lord hereafter; and not that any may go on and
say, it is time enough, I will take my pleasure while I am young, and when I am
Old, I will do better; for they know not whether they shall live to be old:
For many are taken whilst they are young. And he did advice the young People
very much that they would live in the fear of the Lord, and his Prayers were
often to the Lord for them, that he would be pleased to pardon their sins, that
so they might have peace with him hereafter; for said he the Lord will Pardon
those that do forsake their Sins and do call upon him with their whole hearts,
and that all have Sinned (as said the Apostle) and come short of the glory of
God. And further he said if we are without Chastisements then are we Bastards
and not Sons; wherefore he had often desired his Chastisements in mercy; not
that he knew any gross Sin that he had committed; but sometimes he had played,
and spoken vain words for which he was in secret reproved by the Spirit of the
Lord: And that many times he did get into secret places and did pour out his
Soul before the Lord, desiring that he would pardon his Sins, that he might
have peace with him hereafter. And now (said he) the Lord has answered my
request, for which my Soul shall praise his holy name. Oh! Praises, Praises be
to thee O Lord! For thou have and answered my Prayers, which I prayed to thee
in secret; and now Lord I beseech thee, keep me in thy fear all the days, I
have here to spend; that I may never offend thee; and I beseech thee O Lord!
though thou Afflict me never so much; yet take not thy mercy from me. And he
often Blessed and praised the Lord for his Afflictions, which were very great;
yet in the midst thereof He would Sing Prayers to the Lord for his mercyes to
him. One of his Brothers and his two eldest Sisters came to visit him, whom he
did tenderly exhort, that they would live in the fear of the Lord all ways,
that when they Die. they may enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. At another time,
being taken with an extraordinary Fit, he said to his Mother (several others
being likewise in the Room) how do I ly? She answered, well Child, if it be for
thy case; He Replied, I think I am a Dying; but I know not well whether it be
so or no; but I am so lifted up with the Power of the Lord; that I know not,
whether I am in the body or out of the body; farewell dear Mother, farewell.
And also to another that stood by, he said, farewell; and also said I hope to
see you again in Heaven uttering many, precious exhortations which we cannot
fully remember: And for near half an hour, singing Praises to the Lord in an
extraordinary manner saying I never delighted in vain Singing; but now I can
sing Praises to the Lord, feeling his mercies; and such singing I ever loved;
For says the Apostle admonish one another in Psalms, and Hymns and Spiritual
songs; singing with grace in your hearts to the Lord, and hearing some talking
in the room, he said, cannot ye wait upon the Lord with me one hour. Oh! how
me thinks I see my Relations standing about me: O Praise the Lord with me! I
beseech you. And uttering many more precious words often desiring the Lord
would receive him, that he might be with the Lord in Heaven, when the Lord's
will and pleasure is saying not my will but thine be done O! Lord; Then he
called for a young Maid of the House, and when thee came he said, I have been
much concerned for thee, though thou may think me a poor contemtable
instrument to speak to thee; yet I have been much concerned for thee, desiring
the Lord would change thy heart if it be his Heavenly will, and teach thee to
do better; though thou may think thou will Repent when thou art old; yet
thou art not sure to live one hour: Adding further, leave of thy vain Company
and thy Pride and Lying-singing and vanities, and obey thy mother and keep good
Company, and fear the Lord, and he will Bless thee. Some of his Relations and
Friends being by him he said how shall I Requite you for your kindness to me;
his mother said, dear Child, we Expect none from thee, but I hope said he the
Lord will Requite you all: And further said, my Master an Mistress have been at
much Charge and trouble with me, I have nothing to give them; but I Pray the
Lord And a Blessing to their store; he desired that his dear love might be
Remembered to all his Relations, Friends and neighbors; desiring that the Lord
will keep them all in his fear. And many that came to visit him, he did Exhort
to live in the fear of the Lord, for those that did so should enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; and that those that did the contrary, should go to Hell. And
that night after he came out of that Extraordinary Fit, he lifted up his hands
and sung Praises to the Lord; and then uttered to us these verses:

When in the Morning you do Rise,
Lift up to God your hands and Eyes,
And Praise his Name who did all night,
Keep you until the morning light,
And then betimes see that you Pray,
That God will keep you all the day,
From those great dangers that befall,
To young to old both, great and small,
These verses (said he) I learnd not to say them vainly but to do According to
them. Another time he said, I was accounted a dull foolish lad; but Blessed are
those that are fools for Christ's sake. An other time when his heart was
overcomed, he Praised the Lord, and said, every Son whom the Lord loves he
Chasteneth; and now can I say Abba Father Blessed and Praised be thy Holy name
for thus Chastening me; often saying in his great Extremity Oh! what a small
matter is this to the torments of Hell. Surely this is for but a moment; but
that will, be forever; but blessed be thy name O Lord! For though thou have thus
chastened me, I have cause to Praise thee in the midst of my Extremity,
desireing often, that he might always Praise his Holy name, even to the end;
and that it might be his last words; which was measurably an severed: For
litting up his hands, he Prayed to the Lord, that he would receive his Spirit:
And so immediately Expired the twenty-third Day of the Eleventh Month 1700.
About the Eleventh hour in the forenoon.

We whose Names are here subscribed have caused the above Written to be set
down as we respectively could collect and Remember the same as witness our
hands.

Hannah Willmerton his Mother. Elizabeth Grissith his Aunt. John Knowles his
Kinsman. Ruth Ducket. Jacob Usher. Ruth Usher.

FINIS.
AN EPISTLE TO Friend's Children, And other Young People.
Friends,
REmember, that they, Prove. 8. 17.
who early seek Divine Wisdom, shall find Her; and that Psalm. 111. 10. Prove. 9.
10. and 1. 7.
the Fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom to them. And seeing that Psalm.
8. 2.
out of the Mouth of Babes God has ordained strenght; and you here have an
Eminent Instance of God's Early and Gracious Visitation, Tender Mercy and Great
Love in this Tender Young Man; let his Example of Sobriety, Faith and
Obedience, with his Serious Advice and Christian Testimony, Warn and Excite you
to the Fear of the Lord, Humility, Sobriety and Watchfulness in his Pure Divine
Light and Grace, against the Temptations and Pollutions of the World, and
Snares of Death, wherein the Soul's Enemy has caught many, to their Ruin,
Destruction and Misery; That in Life, Conversation and Testimony you may be
good Examples, and Ministers of Righteousness as this Tender Youth before he
Died, was; and that you may be such Sanctified Souls, Wisd. 7.27
as Divine Wisdom enters into, and makes them Friends of God and Prophets.

Oh! Neglect not the Day of your Visitation! Misspend not your Precious Time!
But Walk in the Light of Christ Jesus: Watch and be Sober-minded, that you may
Live and Dye in Christ, to your Everlasting Gain. Which is the Tender Desire of

Your Soul's True Friend, George Witehead.
London, the 1^th of the 10th Month, 1697.
A Seasonable Account of The Christian Testimony and Heavenly Expressions of
Tudor Brain upon his Death Bed.
OUR Dear Child, Tudor Brain was Born the first Day of the fourth Month, 1680.
Was taken very Ill about the tenth Month, 1696. And from that time decayed
daily falling into a very deep Consumption, till the day of his dissolution,
which was the third Day of the tenth Month, 1697. And sixth Day of the Week,
the second Hour in the Morning: Notwithstanding all Endeavors was used for his
recovery at last Doctors advised his removing into the Country; no place
pleasing him so well as Beehive in Essex it being a retired still place, where
we often observed his retirement into the Grounds, and return with wet Eyes;
which we apprehended, might proceed from his Distemper, or else fear of Death;
but his frequent answers were, He was no way afraid of Death, but willingly
resigned himself to the will of God, either for Life or Death: At several times
being advised to prepare for his latter End, for if he Lived it would be well,
and if he Died, it would be his Gain; his answer was, He was not Conscious of
any Action he had done, that he should be afraid of appearing before God
Almighty. After he came from School, he continued a very Sober, Dutiful and
Obedient Child to us, Loving to his Brother and Sisters, Courteous, as well to
Strangers as Relations, nay, so Circumspect over his nearest Relations, that if
he perceived any Inclinations of Stubborness in them, he would be both a
Reprover and Admonisher; his Loving Deportment to all, drew Love and Respect
from them that know him.

It Pleased God, that the seventeenth Day of the ninth Month, he was taken so
Ill, as not able to go out of his Chamber, and so continued, being Daily with a
great Sense of God upon his Spirits, and would often Repeat a full Assurance of
his Future Happiness, and often lay with Spiritual Hymns and Songs to himself,
saying, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly and receive my Soul: Repeating several
such Expressions and Admonitions, which we did not so much mind, not thinking
him to be so near his End: On the last Day of the neinth Month he called for a
Bible, desiring to read, his Mother's answer was, Child thou art Weak, he said,
he could read, and so read the seventeenth Chapter of John with Trembling Lips;
when he came to the twentieth Verse, he took particular Notice, and wept; on
the second Day of the thenth Month in the Morning, he fell very Ill, then we
thought he was smitten with Death; several Loving Friends, as well then as
before, came and visited him, with which he was very much refreshed and
Comforted, saying, Oh Mother! how merciful is the Great God to me, that had put
it in the Hearts of Good Friends to visit me, for there are Younger and
Healthier Lads than I, that is gone before me a Poor Consumptive Lad, be has
speared me, surely I shall never forget his Mercies, Oh! Glory, Glory and
Praises; for they are thine for evermore; then sitting still a little, says.
Oh thou Merciful God, thou art Merciful, I can say, that I have found it so,
that when I have had no breath I have sought thee, and it has been given me:
His Father and Mother hearing him, could not forbear Weeping, he made answer,
Wherefore are ye Troubled, my Dear Parents be not Troubled for me, for I am
going to a better Place if it be the will of the Lord he can raise me, but if
not his will be done; it may be he may spare me two or three Days he may have a
greater Work for me to do. Turning his Eyes upon us, said, You are the Nearest
in the World to me; but yet there is a Nearer that is above. Then sitting still
a little, said. I can say that, in my younger Years, I have gone by my self
down in the Meadows, and have Cried unto the Lord: But knew not where he was,
and when I heard his Voice, I Trembled, and as I gave up, the Lord Jesus made
himself known to me; then I knew what I sought for: He smiling, said Oh Mother!
I will tell thee my Dream, I thought I was in a Fine Place, and one brought me
a rare Applepye, and there came another and took me away, and told me; there
was better Dainties for me, and I was carried where the Dainties were; there
was a great many would have gone, but they could not, and then he said, he
thought his Dream was for his further good, and that there was a Pretty many
Steps thither.

Then sitting a little while, and fixing his Eyes upon the Chimney Piece, he
said, Take away those Images, for they are to be trodden under foot: His Mother
asked him what Images he meant? he answered, Those Lions; so they were ordered
to be taken away; then there was another Piece Of China, which had several
Hands; then said he, take away that Piece that is Covered for it has Eyes and
sees not, and Ears and hears not. Then that was taken away also; and there
was a pair of Gilded Tea-Pots: After the others were taken away, he said You
may take away the other things that are Gilded, and wash it off: And after
they were taken away he was at Ease.

Then his Aunt, Elizabeth Brain, coming in, he further proceeded, being about
twelve Hours before his Death, several of his Relations and Friends being
there, weeping over him, he said, He was going out a little before us; his Aunt
said Thou art so, and the Lord grant that we here may be so fitted, and
prepared to go to the Place thou art going to; for we, many of us are Older
than thee, and have more Sins to answer for; he said, Ye must Pray, and Hing,
and Lean upon the Lord Jesus Christ, for it is of him, and through him, that we
must expect Salvation, for without him ye can do nothing, for he Died for
Sinners, and he is very Merciful to forgive for he has forgiven me, Blessed be
his Holy Name; although some be Hardened and Stubborn, yet the Lord is very
Merciful, he can forgive and may forgive, but you that are in the Truth keep in
the Truth.

After this he ceased a little while, and his Grandmother said, Oh Lord! That
this Young Branch should be a Teacher unto us old Ones; his Mother and some
others, desired that his Grandmother might walk out of the Room for fear of
Disturbing him, he hearing them, said, Give Liberty, give Liberty; then sitting
still a little while; said, The Young must go as-well as the Old; therefore
said he, it was said, Remember thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth, that the
Evil Day comes not, in which thou shall say, I have no Pleasure in them. The
next that he said, was, I would not have you to be like the Foolish Virgins,
that kept no Oil in their Lamps; but keep ye Oil in your Lamps, that ye may be
ready, when the call comes to slip in: Then sitting a little while still, he
said, Death was very hard and none knew it, but they that has gone through it.
For said he. There is nothing so much like Death as Shortness of Breath: And
said he, I have Prayed to the Lord at Night going to Bed that he would give me
Breath and Strength; as he has done in a wonderful Manner thanks be to his
Holy Name far I have gone into the Meadows when I was Young and cried but to
whom I did not know; but the Lord has made known himself to me; it is said
faith he; Oh Death where is thy being and O Grave where is thy Victory? And
there is one that has made way through all, and it was said by one, they had
sought the good Fight of Faith: This he said in a very Sweet quiet Frame of
Spirit, and many other Sensible Expressions; which he spoke in his Weakness at
other times in his Aunts hearing.

Then he cried out, about two hours before he Died, Lord God be Merciful thou
art Good, thou art Bountiful Lord have Mercy on me [Oh Death] come Lord Jesus
have Mercy, thou Dyed for Sinners Glory to the God of Heaven, Oh! Praises to
thy Name, Lord Jesus receive my Soul: He called for his Father, and when he
came, he was asked whither he knew his Father, he answered, Yea it is Benjamin
Brain my Father, and then said, I have another Father, and then lay Glorifying
God: Just before his departure he called out, Oh Mother! Do but see what a Swee
Child there is upon the Bed, Oh! the Sweetest that ever I saw, then he said,
Lord wash me, Clean some! and I shall be Clean; lying still a little, he said,
Oh! what a Glorious, Glorious Kingdom I am going to? There is Dainties enough:
Lord Jesus thou bast pardoned me, Oh what a numerous Army has God, he has a
great One! And so lay Singing and, Praising the Glorious God until the last;
and then Finished his Life like a Lamb, about two in the Morning, on the Third
Day, of the Thenth Month, 1697.

Published at the desire of his Parents, and other Friends.

FINIS.
A Testimony given forth by Richard Manliffe, while the Lords Judgments were
upon him, for his running out and forsaking the Way of the Lord, as professed
and walked in by the People called Quakers; now made public for a warning and
caution to all who are convinced thereof, not to slight the Reproofs of Gods
Spirit in themselves, or Advice and Exhortation of his People.
A Warning to Friends Children and Young People that profess the Truth, to be
warned of Backsliding, and be sure, whatsoever you do, to take your Parents and
Friends Council and Advice; for if you backslide from the Lords blessed Truth,
He will overtake you with his heavy Judgments: And so, dear Hearts, I desire
you to take warning, and live in the Lords Truth whatsoever you do. For if you
will not be guided by that pure principle in your own Hearts, nor by the advice
of the Lords People, you may expect the Lord will meet with you in his sore
displeasure as He has done with me: For in the First place, I let out my mind
to keep Bad Company, which was given to much drinking, and swearing, and
running after Young Women; and in continuance of time I let my Mind out after a
Young Woman, and went to a Priest to be Married, which was a grief to my
Mother, and all honest Friends; for which Disobedience the Lord is pleased to
lay his Hand in judgment upon my Inward-Man and Outward-Men; but in Judgment he
has remembered Mercy: and so I desire that this may, be a warning to all Young
People and Old that, profess the Blessed Truth, that the People in scorn called
Quakers do profess. Much more might be written as to my condition; but being
weak of body, this may serve at present, desiring that it may be read at the
Meeting, when Friends think fit, that so Friends Children, and others, may take
warning by me

Given forth at Timullen in the County of Wickloe, the 20. day of the 2 Mo.
called April, 1693. in the presence of Richard Manliffe. Eliz. Manliffe, his
Mother. Ambrose Judd. Sarah Williams.

POSTSCRIPT
WHEN the Author of the foregoing Lines first began to let out his mind after
Youthful Vanities, and so backslide from the way of Truth (wherein the daily
Cross is to be taken up) and to take more liberty then the Principles of Truth
(according to which he had been educated and trained up) would allow of: Some
of his Friends went to admonish him (according to our Christian Duty) of the
evil that would follow his so doing, if he would not be reclaimed; and I being
one of them that went to him, I remember we found him in such an obstinate and
willful condition, that be would not come to speak with' us, although often
desired; which was a Grief to his Mother, and a trouble to Us that went in love
to seek to reclaim him; so he staying with some aerie Young Men that were
working in a Shop (which we thought was not a fit place to discourse of such
serious matters in, especially before such persons; yet he not being prevailed
with to come to Us, we were forced to go to Him, and after giving Him to
understand what we came about, and what we had heard of Him, we desired to know
his Reasons; but he was stubborn and would give us little answer but bid us let
him alone, and not trouble our selves with him; we told him it was matter of
Conscience to us, and we could not be clear in the sight of God without seeking
him; and being he would give us no other account, we desired him to tell us
before those Young Men, whether he had any dislike to our Principles, Practice,
or Doctrine, it not being reasonable for Him or any other to decline or fall
off from a Society of People without showing some Reasons for it; and if it
were matter of Faith and Conscience we should leave him to his liberty, but he
would give us little or no answer: But we urged it again; at last he said, He
had a mind to take more Liberty then we or our Principles he knew would allow
off, with words to that purpose; so we cleared our Consciences to him, in
telling him of the danger of his so doing, and the evil that would follow, but
he then seemed to set light by all reproof, but it became his burden, as did
appear; for after he had taken his swing for a while, the Lords hand took hold
of him in Judgment, and then he had no satisfaction, as he told his Mother,
until he saw those Friends who sought in love to reclaim him. And when his
Mother sent me word of the great desire he had to see us, Ambrose Judd and I
went to visit him, and we had not been long together before Gods great Power
seized our Hearts and Spirits. which humbled us all before him, and tendered
our Hearts, and brought many Tears from our Eyes: and in this frame I was drawn
forth to supplicate the Lord in Prayer in his behalf; after which his Mouth was
opened in great contrition of spirit, to acknowledge his sinning against God,
and disobedience to his Mother and the slighting and rejecting the Counsel of
his friends which was then a greater grief to him then the Afflictions of his
body that he was under, he being content with the will of God in that, with
many other sweet penitent Expressions he delivered to this purpose, which I
thought sit to annex to his Testimony being an Eyewitness to his backsliding.
and also to his earnest desire of returning. which I believe the Lord did
accept of and that he laid down his head in peace, which was in few Weeks
after. Given forth by one that desires the preservation of all, both Young and
Old, from the Snares Of the Wicked One.

Thomas Trafford.

FINIS.

