SATAN'S HARBINGER ENCOVNTERED, HIS FALSE NEWS OF A TRUMPET DETECTED, HIS
CROOKED WAYS IN THE WILDRNESSE Laid open to the view of the Impartial and
Judicious.

Being Something by way of Answer (...) DANIEL LEEDS his book entitled, NEWS
OF A TRVMPET SOVNDING IN THE WILDERNESS etc.

Wherein is shown, How in several respects he has grievously wronged and
abused diverse eminent, worthy and painful Laborers in the work of the Gospel,
in many places by false Citations out of their books, and in many other places
by perverting their savings and expressions; besides his otherways basely
reflecting upon several ancient Friends by name.

By C: P.

And the men of Israel said, Have ye seen this man that is come up? Surely to
defy Israel is he come up:

1. Sam: 17.25. Behold he travaileth with iniquity, and has conceived
mischief, and brought forth falsehood,

Psalms. 7.14. Printed at Philadelphia By Reynier Jansen 1700.

THE PREFACE
Friendly Reader.
A^^^ough (...) true which Solomon says, Eccles. 12:12, Of making many books
there is no end, and much (...) is a weariness to the flesh: Yet I hope none
can ^astly b^ame me for publishing this, when they seriously consider, that the
dr^ft of it is only to clear the truth and those many good men grossly
a^persed, from the envious insinuations c^st against it and them, and the wrong
inferences pretendedly drawn from their writings by our present Adversary
Daniel Leeds, who has, hand over head, in a very palpable manner, to his own
shame, ventured to abuse our friends at a very shameful rate; not only by
wrong meanings put upon their words and doctrines, but also by false Citations
out of their books, thereby endeavoring to make them speak, what they never
spoke, nor (I believe) ever thought; in order to represent them to the people
greatly contradictory to one another. Of which fa^se Citations I shall in this
place produce one, and b^t one, referring thee to the following book for a view
of many ^^re of them; It is in Number 58, where he quotes William P^^^ his
Sandy Foundation p 20, saying; W. P there ca^^s the man Christ, The finite
impotent Creature: Whereas there is no such saying or irreverent expression in
the whole book: for where W. P. uses the words. Finite and impotent Creature,
The subject he was there treating of plainly shows, th^n be meant it of us
sinners that need forgiveness; but not of the Man Christ who never sinned. Than
which, what greater abuse could be put upon any man's writings?

Reader, The substance of this book was wrote near two years ago, but being
backward in my self to appear in print, as also the press being long expected
here before it came, and when come taken up with other important matters
intervening, occasioned the delay of its publication till now.

As for the Errors of the press, which are many, especially in the former part
of the book; and more especially in one place, which is very material to be
corrected, without which it will read so, as will m^^e it look very gross, and
appear to be false (...); it is in p. 17: l. 9, where after, works sake the
Printer has omitted, but for his sake, which words are in the written copy by
which ^e printed it. I must desire thee ( Reader) upon occasion to take the
trouble of turning to the Errata, where I hope thou will find the most material
collected. The chief occasion of there being so many errors, was, the Printer
being a man of another nation and language, as also not bred to that
employment, consequently something unexpert both in language and calling, and
the corrector's not being so frequently at hand as the case required, all which
I desire thou would favorably consider.

The Intent of publishing this, was chiefly to prevent any from being deceived,
and also to undeceive those that may have been already deceived by this unfair,
man's abusive book; for such it is, and as such, let it be added to the
Catalogue of those many envious and abusive writings, that have been sent forth
into the world, from time to time, to hinder the spreading of truth, and the
progress of Gods people in the way of it: all which will surely be accounted
for one day, and not witstanding all which, the truth remains the same, and I
am satisfied will more and more spread it self, and prevail, in and upon and
the hearts spirits of people, notwithstanding the various and restless attempts
of its Opposers, to hinder it. And as the way of its working, is to cleanse and
purify mankind in soul, body and spirit, and make them fi^^ temples for God to
dwell in, by virtue of his holy spirit in us and also entitle us effectually,
to partake of the great and unspeakable benefit, that accrues to mankind, by
that one offering of our Lord Jesus Christ, on the tree of the Cross: So it is
highly necessary that we more and more come to experience this cleansing work
to be wrought in us, in order to be entitled to those before said benefits. For
although our blessed Lord Jesus Christ then offered up himself for the sins of
the whole world, yet we read of none, who by that offering are for ever
perfected, but those who are sanctified. Heb. 10:14.

Caleb Pusey.

SATAN'S HARBINGER ENCOUNTERED etc.
Before I come to the Book it self, I shall touch a little upon the Preface,
and begin with an expression or Daniel Leeds's, which runs thus. It is my real
belief, That the Quakers at first came forth in life and power, and made a good
beginning.

Answer. Did they so? How comes it then to pass, that the first Instruments of
that good beginning in life and power, as G. Fox, G. Whitehead, E. Bourough, R.
Habberth^rn, Is. Pennington etc. and their ancient works and Writings, must be
thus brought upon the stage, by this Dan^el Leeds himself, even in this very
book, endeavoring thereby to prove their doctrine false, inconsistent, and
little less than a mere heap of confusion? Can such things be an effect of life
and power? And if he say, They lost that life and ^^wer again, before those
books were written: It may then be observed, how in the same Page he
insinuates, as if the loosing of it again, was through their contending with
one another about trifles and Ceremonies, instituting this and that order, and
getting into form etc. Whereas it is well known, that many of the above named
Friends Books were written before the Institution of those Orders, (as he calls
them). Besides, I find in a Paper entitulad A brief Admonition etc. (delivered
to Friends here at the yearly meeting in the year 1696., Which as I am credibly
informed) was written by Daniel Leeds, there being also the two letters of his
name, with two letters more subschribed to it) after having expressed what an
healthy flourishing Country this was about eight years before, this passage,
viz Doubtless it might have so continued, if the kernel of life and love had
not took wing etc. Now hence I observe, That (according to this aknoledgement
(for such it is implicitly at least) the kernel of life and love had not took
^^ng before the Year 1688; yet most of the books he quotes were written long
before that time. But surely no orderly sensible man will imagine, that order
and form amongst God's People, will occasion the life and powet to withdraw,
whilst the power is not denied: Is not God a God of order? And does not the
Apostel say to the Corinthians? Let all things be done decently and in order 1
Cor. 14:40. Moreover if the life and love took Wings, but about or since the
jear 1688, how could those Orders which were established above twenty years
before be the occasion of it? Again, what Orders have We that they disown? Have
We Montly meetings? So have they. Have We Yearly meetings? So have they? Have
We Women's meetings? Daniel Leeds says, Those Meetings are certainly of service
in Deeds of Charity and Hospitality, page 66.

But to proceed, he concludes that page and begins the next with this passage
viz, When my intentions were first set on this ensuing work, I had taken G,
K's. books in equally with the rest or else I should have been partial as Caleb
Pasey has been [ being blinded with prejudice, as his term is] in only faulting
G. K's books, but not his Opposers; but as I proceeded on, at lenght I found G.
K. (according to the example of good men in all Ages) has publicly
acknowledged himself guilty of Errors in diverse of his former books, and
promised a correction of the same; and now of late we have his Retractation
come over in Print.

Answ. A mere flam: For among all the contradictions that we have charged and
proved upon him, he has been so far from retracting any part of them, though
they contradict his present doctrine, that he boasts in the very Retracting
book it self, That for the most part they are the soundest passages in all his
book, and that he can show a good consistency of them with his present faith.
See pa. 42:43. And now, since Daniel Leeds in the close of his Preface asserts
his proceedings in his book to be honest and sincere; I appeal to all impartial
people Since G. K's doctrines as charged by us, do greatly contradict each
other; and ^et he refuses to retract (...) part of them, Whether I said G. Ks.
re^rac^^ion (...) sca^e other things* which probably D. L. had no thought about
wh^^ he wrote his book, can be any argument in sincerity and truth, for his not
taking in G. Ks. books, as well as others, (...) this wrangling piece of (...).

As for his counting me Partial, because I have not (...) G. K's. Opposers, as
well as G. K. I answer, ^f by G. K's. opposers, he mean our Friends, I never
had seen cause to be so scrutinous, as D. L. has been, in searching, either
into our Friends books or G. K's. either, till since that time any farther than
what related to the Controversy which G. K. had raised amongst us here; and
chiefly that about the universal neccessity of the knowledge of Christ in the
outward, in order to salvation, without our acknowledging of which I found he
would not own the most upright amongst us, to be any better than Heathens. Now,
upon a time, looking into G. K's. Universal free Grace of the Gospel, in pa.
117 I found, that he there would not grant, That outward knowledge, or the
knowledge of Christ in the outward was universally necessary to salvation;
which I presently showed to an honest Friend, and then a late Friend of his, at
Philadelphia; and when I came to town again, he told me, he had showed G. K.
the passage, and said his answer was to this purpose; That if h^ was in his
senses upon his death bed, he would leave it as his last testimony to his
Friends about him; That if they should find any thing in his former books,
contrary what be now held, they should scrach it out, where they met with it.
Now, had he not presently after this, and after his so uncharitably counting
honest Friends to be but Heathens, gone about to persuade his over credulous
followers; That he was not changed in his Principles, thereby deceiving and
deluding them, should have had no occasion on that account, to have put Pen to
Paper, as I did: But I suppose he warily considered in time; That if he should
acknowledge a change in his principles, his New and raw disciples, who ^alued
themselves at that time much upon their being accounted Quakers, and that o^ a
primitive stamp too, would have forsaken him, and his notions also. Well, th^n
he finds out a way to gloss over this place, and would have us believe, That
when he denied, as aforesaid, the knowledge of Christ in the outward to be
universally necessary to salvation, his meaning was, that it was not so
necessary to salvation begun; as if that difference betwixt our Friends, whom
G. K. was then vindicating, and other people, was about salvation began only:
Yet least that would not do, We must also be told of a distinction, betwixt the
express, and the implicit knowledge of Christ, and that the express knowledge
was not universally necessary, yet the implicit knowledge was. Now these
things put me into a farther search, into both his former and latter books, and
in his former I still found, where he was concerned to treat of the subject, he
alvvais denied that knowledge to be essentially necessary to salvation,
particularly in his Umiversal free Grace etc., p. 117, and Light of truth
triumphant, p. 6. By his former books, I mean such as bear date before the year
1681. or thereabouts, Which is supposed to be about the time that he wrote (as
he acknowledged) 199 of the 200 queries concerning the Revolution of humane
souls etc. But by his latter books it appears, that he is clearly changed in
principle as to the point of doctrine; and I finding things thus, and also how
he was receded from his principles in some other matters, wherein he differed
with Friends, as About the sufficiency of the Light without something else, and
about Preachers being Magistrares, and o^ the confused work he had made about
his strange notions of the Resurrection, as in my said book is shovvn: This I
say, Was the occasion of my Writing that book, that thereby I might show to
them, especially to the most sincere amongst them, how he went about to
deceive them, by drilling them on, and persuading them, we could never prove,
he was chainged in his Principles, as his own words are, see, Some
Fundamental T^uths p: 13. Printed about the year 1692* Wherein he further says
thus; I can prove a good consistency of my present doctrine with all [mark all]
my former and latter books. Behold now the man; for if this be true, what need
he now at a pinch have put out his book of Retraetations: why he was driven to
it, he must either do it, or else some of his followers might have fallen out
with him about it; for some of them were not satisf^ed with him in that
respect; Nay, if we can believe this D. L. he himself was one of the
dissatisfied persons else what makes him say, He had taken in G. K's. books
equally with the rest, but that he found G. K. had promised a Correction of
them, and that of late his Retraction was come over in prent, See D. L.'s.
Preface as before is shown. But there is one thing more, which I am sure he
ought not only to Retract, now his hand is in, but alse deeply to lament, and
that is; His so abusing his poor bigoted followers Cas I have already hinted)
in his thus deluding them, by so often persuading them, at the first, that he
was not changed in his Principles; and when he has done this, I know not, but
as to this point, he may pretty well pass, for such a kind of an honest man, as
is so with good looking to: But before he dos thus much, I do not see how he
can be afforded the appellation. And now to conclude, I do say; that suppose I
had seen, and took notice of some passages in our Friends books, which might
seem to me like inconsistencys, especially in relation to things not then in
controversy, I do not look upon my self equally obliged to expose them, as I
did his, which were so palpable, and done for the reason aforesaid.

The next thing I shall take noice of, is, Daniel Leedss' pretenses in this his
Preface now be fore me; that His proceeding, here in to expose and publish what
follows [in his book] was by emotion heavenly. Yet I question not to prove him
in his thus doing not only an Accuser, but a very false Accuser of the
Brethren; which to be sure could not proceed from a motion heavenly, and scarce
think he can be so infatuated, as to think it did, unless his meaning be; That
he was influenced in this action, by the motion of the stars, that are placed
in that firmament of huven, and yet if his meaning be such, it will by no means
deserve the credit, that was given to his Idle prediction, publi^^ed in his
Almanac for the jear 1695, where he says; All lovers of truth are to take
notie, that from and after the 25. of January, no person shall find it safer
shrouding under the name and denomination of a Quaker, than under the name of
any other profession of Christianity what soever etc. For we have all along
known* that no person not only from and after the month he calls January, but
at no (...) else, has been, is, or will be any thing the safer, ^or their
being under the denomination of a Quaker, and more than that D.L.s words be
true, were he says, his pr^ceedings in this his book was from a motion
heavenly and that is not at all.

I come now to his book, which he begins under the title of an Introduction, in
p: 3. D. L. fearing that such lick seeming contradictions as he alleges
against our Friends books might be found in the scriptures, he strugles hard
before hand to guard against it, by telling us. They, themselves in their books
gave that reason why it is so with the scriptures bringing reasons to prove them
not the same as given forth, but altered and corrupted. Now this cannot be
alleged of their books, decause we have the first impression of them, and
there fore they cannot be altered or corrupted.

Answ. Is he there At 'this rate then ^s abouts; if he should charge seeming
contradictions upun us, for saying this on the one hand, and that on the other,
and we can prove the both sides are according to scripture, yet it seems the
must not be allowed, because our Friends, have told, how some scriptures have
been altered and corrupted, which few professing Christianity I suppose will
deny to be true; never the less, if for the reason the Quaker must not bring
scriptrre to prove what he has written, why may not any one else be denied
so to do, in defene of any truth what soever, and so at this rate, any
Opposers of the ^l^^rest truths, may deny any scripture that may be urged to
convince him of his Error. Well but do our Friends say that some scriptures
have been altered and corrupted* What does D. L's. friend G. K. say less in a
passage in one of his books, not yet reracted; where he has it thus viz I
hope it may be without offense not only queried but also concluded, that the
translations of the scripture have diverse additions, which men have added
without any pretense to divine inspiration: Nor are there wanting diverse, both
judicious and learned men, so accounted, of good repute, even among Protestants
who do acknowledge, that some particular words have dropped in to the Greek and
Hebrew text, since their first writing etc. All which being granted, yet do not
hinder but that the purity of the scripture is sufficiently preserved, viz, in
respect of the main and necessary things: See Truths Defense p: 59 and 60 etc.

And so we say too, see W. p 's Rejoinder q: 38:39. Now if D. L. can make
appear, that any scripture that we have brought, or may bring, to prove any
truth, be altered or corrupted, he may do it, or else what he has said (...)
affects us more than it does G. K. and (...) Christianity. I shall there fore
proceed to put D. L. in mind that at this rate all Protestants may be deprived
of what proofs they usually bring against Popish Innovations. And suppose a
Friend, upon any occasion, should exhort people to serve the Lord with fear
etc, and upon another occasion should tell them, they might serve him without
fear all the days of their lives, and should bring Psalm. 2:11. for the one,
and Luke 1.74* for the other: Now I would know of D. L., whether he would dare
to call this a contradiction* Likewise in John 16.24 is said, Ask and ye shall
receive; but in James 4:3 Ye ask, and receive not* Christ says in one place,
(...) bear witness of my self, my witnes^ is not true, and in an other place he
says, Though I bear record of my self, yet my record is true, see John 5.31
and 8:14. Again, says Christ to his discipels, I go to my Father, and ye see
me n^ John. 16.10. yet John says, When he shall appear, (...) shall see him as
he is 1 John. 3:2. Many more instances might be brought, but these I have
menttioned I scarce think D. L. will dare to call contradictions,
notwithstanding some scriptures may have been corrupted and altered. I remember
what ado they made of late, because a Friend had said The wicked Jews never saw
the Worlds savior; Though the scripture says expressly, Whosoever sins has
not seen him 1 John. 3.6. and surely the wicked Jews were sinners: Now by his
rule, it is but saying, This scripture may be altered and corrupted, and thus
this proof will be rendered invalid* And likewise, suppose the Jews should
bring such an argument against any Chris^an, endeavoring to prove to them out
of the old testament, that Jesus must needs be the promised Messiah; or an
Atheist against us, when we prove ou^ of the scriptures that there is a God, at
this rate because our Friends, as well as GK and other Professors do say, some
scriptues have been altered, therefore our proofs out of them aganst^ Jews and
Atheists yea and Papists too, will be of no Authority, and but as a mere nose
of wax.

Besides, this suppositious excuse of D. L's. suggested in the name of some
preachers of late, with his paraphrases therein, will not cover his dishonesty,
nor cloak his gross perversions and corrupt citatiens. Do the Quakers say that
the scriptures in some places are alterred and corupted? What then? Will it
therefore follow, that they must excuse D. L's. alteration and corruption of
their writings? No such matter. Is the scripture in English a translation out
of other language, consequently but a copy, liable to mistakes in transcribing
and translating, as well as printing; And the Quakers books the original
impression? Will it therefore follow, that D. L. may mangle and misrepresent
the Quakers writings, at his pleasure, without control? I know no reason for
it and therefore shall take liberty to tell him of his faults whether it please
him or no And this further I dare undertake to prove, if any reasonable man,
after perusal of what I have here offered to his view* can doubt it; that,
should I suppose the scrrptures to be wholly clear of any errors, either of
Transcriber, Translator or Printer, and D. L. had the confidence, to make as
bold with them, as he has done with our Friends writings, he might make a far
bigger News book, than that which he trumpe^ed out in the Wilderness against us.

I come now to his quotations out of our Friends books, which he has placed in
two columns, under the notion of contradictions, which, how far he proves them
so to be, or how far he falls short of proof, as also how honestly or how
dishonestly he deals with them, will appear in the following examination of
them (or at least of so many of them as may give the Reader a sufficient taste
of the rest; I not having all the friends books quoted on both sides by me) and
my remarks thereon, by way of answer thereunto.

I begin first which page 7 (it should be 6) where he quotes W P's Sandy
Foundation p. 22. thus. Since Christ could not pay what was not his own [Debt]
it follows, that in the payment of his own, the case still remains equally
grievou^, since the debt is not hereby absolved or forgiven, but transferred
only. Now to this D.L. opposes G.W's Divinity of C^^^st in answer to Tho Danson
p. 16 thus; How false and blasphemous this charge is against Christ, I appeal
to all sober Professors of Christianity, viz. That when God required
satisfaction of Christ, it was due from Christ. Upon which D. L. makes this
observation, viz. That as before (Says he) W. P. renders Geo. Whitehead's
head's doctrine ridiculous and shameful, so here G.W. renders W Penn^s doctrine
blasphemous* for holding, that Christ had a debt of his own to satisfy to God
etc.

Answer, It were well if D. L. would be ashamed as he ought to be, of his thus
ridiculously and shamefully (...) W. P, by his so basely adding in crotchets
the word, [De^^] to W. P.'s. words, which is neither W. P's. word (...) much as
deducible from his doctrine or argument: So th^^ is but a mere crotchet of D.
L's. envious brain, to (...) G. W. and W. P. inconsistent with each other, and
(...) to misrepresent W. P, as if he believed, that Christ (...) of sin, when
he suffered for our sins; which, as that passage of W. P's. shows no such
thing; so the same page proves the contrary; for the whole Page is chiefly to
show the ridiculous consequences that attend the rigid Presbyterian doctrine,
of it is being impossible for God to pardon sins upon repentance, without a
plenary satisfaction made by another, which consequences W. P. calls
Irreligious and Irrational in 9. respects, the 3d. of which is That it was
unworthy of God to pardon but not to inflict punishment on the innocent, or
require a satisfaction where there was nothing due. Now mark, These words
plainly imply that W. P. counted Christ innocent* and that there was nothing of
debt due from him, which spoils D. L's. pretended contradiction. Besides, was
it likely that W. P. must needs, by his own, mean Christ's own debt, and so
render Christ a sinner? A very idle construction; for suppose Christ had a debt
to pay, according to the Presbyterian strict rigid sense, must it needs follow
from thence, that the debt was his own* and so paid it as being due from him?
Nothing less: For is it not common among men, for a man to pay a debt for his
Friend, which though he pay with his own, yet the debt was not due from him;
Even so, Christ laid down his live for our sins, but yet not to pay any debt of
his own, for as W. P. there says there was no such thing due from him; no, he
laid down his live its true, but it was for us, he was wounded but it was for
our transgressions, and Christ him self says, Greater love has no man than
this, that a man lay down his life for his friends John. 15.13. Nay though it
had been to pay a debt in the Presbyterian, strict and rigid sense (which as I
said was what* W. P. there discussed) yet it was not his own debt, though it
was his own life he paid it with, as he himself said, I lay down my life for
the sheep John 10.15. and if for the sheep, then not to pay a debt of his own,
and that that is W. P^s. genuine sense in that place, I suppose no unprejudiced
man will deny; and I charge D. L. with most base forgery in this place, for his
adding the word [debt] to W. P's. words, thereby quite altering the true and
real intent of them.

But again, He has as basely rendered, well as falsely quoted VV. P. p. 5.
where he has it thus Sandy Foundation p. 14. VV. Penn. says, I^ the only God
is the Father and Christ be the only God, then is Christ the Father; which is
ridiculous and shameful. Now here again I flatly charge him with most grossly
perverting VV. P's. words sense and meaning, for though VV. P. says If that
the only God is the "Father and Christ be that only God, then is Christ the
Father: yet that he there called this ridiculous and shameful I absolutely
deny, and it lies upon D. L. to prove, for the place proves it not, and if D.
L^ write again about it, I would advise him, to insert the whole paragraph,
that it may be seen, whether any such thing be so much as deducible from what
VV. P. there says. And now let me tell him, there needs no carious wire
drawing mincing nor mangling as he in p, 43. insinuates we should be forced to
in our answer to him, to manifest his abuse to W. P. in this matter. Neither
was there any occasion for D. L. to (...) agreeing upon a consistent Creed, but
if he write again, let it be what is agreeable with honesty, and consistent
with truth, that honest men may stand by him in it.

In p: 4 (it should be 7) DL saith^ v In Dirinity of Christ "by G. W. and G.
Fox, they begin in the Epistle with commanding and charging Professors to
bring express scripture for their Doctrine saying, Whether do the scriptures
speak of three persons in the Godhead, in these ^xpress words? And where does
the scripture speak of a humane nature of Christ in heaven? etc. A little lower
D. L. says Now may not the Professors say, Come G. W. Come Quakers where does
the scripture say, the distinction of Father and Son is not only nominal, but
real. He having in p. 4. cited these as G. W 's^ words.

Answ. We know that those Professors would have tied our friends up to those
very terms of three persons, and also human nature of Christ in heaven etc. And
yet at the same time, blamed them for not calling the scriptures the only rule
of faith. So that since they would needs tie our Friends up to those very
words, it was but reasonable they should be held to their Rule to prove them by.
But as for G. VV.'s saying, the distinction of the Father and Son is not only
nominal but real; I question not, if the Father Word and Spirit be owned to be
one God, but G. VV. will rest satisfied, without disiring to impose the words
nominal and real on any man, though he might use them to satisfy the enquirer.
But since D. L. would make us believe he is impartial in relation to G. K, why
must the Quakers be thus struck at, and G. K- passed by in this matter: For
does not he in his book called Pres^yterian and Independent visible Churches
etc. p 87, say of the scripture; That it is not safe to leave the scripture
words, and go to words of man's wisdom, and thereby declare our faith of
Christian doctrine. And yet does not the same G. K, make abundant use of other
words in managing of Controversy, and plead for it too, as in his book called
Antichrists and Sadducees detected etc. in p. 19. Where he says, I see not why
I should be so confined to exspres scripture words in things that I require no
man to own or believe as Articles of faith, but leave them to their liberty
etc. And now I dare say G. VV. and all sensible Friends will say as much.

The next quotation or D. L.'s I take notice of is out of G. F's Great M^stery
p: 264 etc. cited by him in his p: 10 thus; Priest says, A man by his own
power cannot get into regeneration, for they are dead in sins and trespasses G.
F. replies, some are sanctified from the womb, and some children are holy; so
all are not dead in sins and trespasses etc. Now to this he opposes G VV's
Divinity of Christ in answer to T. D. p. 20: thus; G: VV: says, Condemnation
came upon all men -- Death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned p: 21:
Again, Christ died for all, so all were dead in sins and trespasses etc. Answ:
That some are sanctified from the womb according to G: F: is but according to
scripture, see Jerem: 1:5: Luke 1:15: and 1 Co^ 7:15: And also that
condemnation and death came upon all men according to G* VV: is also according
to scripture, see Rom: 12:18, and so according to D: L. may not the scripture
be charged with contradiction in that respect, as well as G: F: and G: VV:
Then; whereas G: F: said, all are not (mark [are not] which is in the present
tense) dead in sins and trespasses, it does not at all contradict what D. L.
produces as G. VV's, that all were dead in sins and trespasses [were, being
the time past] (tho by the (...), let the Reader take notice, that I can find
no such words (...) ^he place cited by D. L, as G. VV's, though I have (...)
for them) For those words of scripture being taken in the strictest sense viz,
If one died for all then [were] all dead 2 Cor. 5:14 yet it does not follow
that those which we^e sanctified from their Mothers womb, nor those which were
passed from death to life [are] still dead: For as G: F' s following words are,
hwich D. L. has left out, and hwich, had he inserted them, would have better
explained G: F.'s; meaning They that are so are but unbeleivers. And where as
it is said, death passed upon all men, if this be to be understood strictly,
and with out any exception, how is it said of Enoch, That he was translated
that he should not see death Hebr. 11:5.

In his p: 12 he quotes W: P's Christian Quaker, thus, Now nothing can bruise
the head of the Serpent but something that is also internal, as the Serpent is;
^ut if the body of Christ were the seed, then could he not bruise the serpents
head in all, because the body of Christ is not so much as in any one etc Whom
he would make T. E^^wood to oppose in Foundation of Tithes etc p. 2^8.240*
thus, Nor do the Quakers ascribe salvation to the following the light within,
but to Christ Jesus, to whom the light leads -- If any one expect Remission of
sins by any other way than by the death of Christ renders the death of Christ
useless.

Answ. I do affirm if D: L, or any other, comes to know the serpents head
bruised in any measure, it must be ^y some thing internal, neither does what T:
E. has said as above, any ways contradict it: For though we ascribe not our
salvation [to our own following of Christ] who is the light of the world,
according to: The Ellwood, yet that follows not, but thath Christ the Light of
the world is he thath bruises the Serpents head, and to ascribe our salvation
to Christ the light of the world, who appears internally, in order there to, is
one thing, and to ascribe it to our works, which Tho. Ellwood and all sound
Friends deny, is another thing. For allthough the Apostle know nothing by him
self (which is a large degree of growth) yet there by he was not justified 1
Cor: 4:4. Nevertheless the same Apostle says, By grace ye are saved and thath
not of Your selves it is the gift of God Ephesians: 2:8. Yet this is no
contradiction. And though the Apostle says We are reconciled by his death, yet
he also says, we are saved by his life Rom: 5:10, which life is internal: For
in him was life and the life was the light of men John. 1:4. Neither do we read
of any whom Christ has forever pefected, but those who are sanctified Heb
10:14. Now thath this doctrine of Christ the seed's bruising the head of the
serpent inwardly, is owned by D. L's great Friend G: K, as well as by W: P, is
clear from his Way cast up p: 99. not yet retracted, thus expessed, Though the
outward coming of the man Christ, was deferred according to his outward birth
in the flesh, for many years, yet from the beginning, this heavenly man, the
promised seed, did inwardly [mark inwardly] come in to the heart, and bruise
the head of the serpent. Come now D: L, if thou art impartial, as thou
pretendest, and art not blinded with partiality and prejudice, lay this which
thou idly call a contradiction in VV: P. and T: E, at G: K's door also: For
here he owns the seed which bruises the serpents head to be inward, as well as
VV: P; and that he owns the very same passage of T: E, may appear, by his
bringing those two very quotations, to prove his doctine consistent with
Friends doctrine, in his book called Heresy and Hatred p: 9.

His necxt lash is upon the matter answered by the foregoing: For as Christ the
light is the salvation of all that believe, according to G: F; so we ascribe
our salvation to him alone, according to T: E, and this is no contradiction,
Alas poor Daniel! How far is he gone in to prejudice and blindness, to
represent these things as unreconcilable: For upon this, he calls and cry's out
"Come, let us see if T: Ellwood with all his sophistry and false glosses can
reconcile these two assertions. Alas poor man! does he want to h^ve Sophistry
and false glosses reconcile sound assertions, while he with his pretended
motion heavenly counts them contradictions^ But for the sake of some, I shall a
little illustrate this matter, with this comparison: Suppose a subject were
sentenced by his Prince, to be cast in to prison, for some great misdemeanor
committed against his person, yet the Prince commiserating his poo^ condition,
Finds out a way to save him, but upon this condition, that he humbly and
thankfully receive the same, and no more live in disobedience to him. Now is
not his Prince, in this case, by saving him from his deserved punishment, his
Savior, though he live for the future in all obedience to his Prince's
commands; Yet he can not ascribe his being saved from the punishment incurred,
to any thing but his Princes clemencey and goodness. Even so, We Who Were
once dead in our sins and trespasses, and had incurred the displeasur of God,
ascribe our being saved out of that state, and from the punishment due thereto,
to the mercy of God alone through Jesus Christ, but not to any of our own
works. And now I must needs say, all this is more than D: L's. cevill deserved,
and is indeed more in respect to others, than from any hopes I have of it is
working much effect upon him.

I now follow him to his p: 14, were he cites Chr. Quaker by G: VV: p. 212, The
man's mistaken if he suppose that we plead for the Righteousness of a creature,
[i: e: Christ as man] or man's own Righteousess* which he himself is enabled to
perform, as the cause of our justification etc: To which D. L: opposes VV: P'
s: Serious Apology p: 148 Death came by actual sin, not imputative, therefore
justifcation unto life came by actual Righteousness, not imputative: Upon which
D: L: makes this Note, whether is the error of both th^se, (...) the
contradiction greater:

Answer, Whether in this matter, the palpable Forgery or ignorance of D: L: be
the greater, is not hard to demonstrate, for my part, I cannot think he can be
so ignorant, and therefore can count him no less rhan a bas^ Forger, thus to
^oist in words of his own, thereby to misrepresent the words of G: VV; as if
when he Speaks of the Righteousness or a creature, he meant the Righteousness
of Christ as man, Which words [ Christ as man] D, L, has added; for ^s they
are not G: VV's words, So neither are they coherent with the rest of the
matter: Now what is this less than forgery? and a contrivance to render G: W,
erroneous, as well as inconsistent with VV: P: But to show that he is
neither, I shall transcribe the passage as it is laid down in the book it
self, that thereby it may be seen, Whether G, W's error or D. L's forgery be
the greater: G: W's words are thus, 4thly The man's mistaken if he suppose
that we plead either the Righteousness of a creature, or man's own
Righteousness, which he himself is enabled to perform, as the cause of our
justification: for Christ the strengthens us or enables us, by his power and
spirit dwelling in us, to do the Fathers will, he is the ground and cause of
our justification, and in him who is the beloved are we accepted, not merely
for our own works or obedience, but for (...) sake, who works in us, and
enables us to do those things which are well pleasing in his sight, Now is
it not strange that D, L, should be so infatuated, as to abuse and find fault
with such sound doctrine; and so at present I shall leave it as such, but the
forgery at Daniel Leeds's door, and come ne^t to examine, whether it
contradicts W: P: or not; for as he has not shevvn us wherein, so I cannot
see how he can find out his pretended contadiction, For as G: W: ovvns not
man's own Righteousness which he is able to perform of himself, to be the
cause of our Justification; so neither does W: P. say o^ own that a man of
himself is able to perform that actual Righteousness, which is necessary to
justification, therefore no contradiction: But is it not as found doctrine, to
say justification comes by actual richteousness, as it is to say, that Abraham
our Father was justified by works, when he of^ered up Isaac his Son James 2:21.
Now was not this his offering up his Son, an actual work, and is not Faith
without works dead, v: 26? And surely a man is not justified by a dead faith:
Now although a man is said, and that in a schriptural sense, to be justified by
works, yet it is not for his works sake who works all our good works in us,
and for us.

I now must again call upon D: L. to be impartial, for if W: P. be guilty of
error here, how can his Friend G: K. be sound? For it is one of the false
doctrins he charges the New England Professors with; That justification is
only by Christ's righteousness without us, imputed to us, and received by faith
alone, and not by any righteousness of god and Christ infused into us, or
wrought in us, see Presbyterian and Independent etc. p: 204, not yet retracted,
and in his Looking glass to the Protestants p: 21, he says this is our faith,
that we are justified by an inward righteousness wrought by the Spirit of God
in our hearts. What Say thou now Daniel? Can W: P. be heterodox in this
matter, and G: K. orthodox? Be impartial; for this of G: K's. is so far from
being retracted, that it is by him implicitly justified in the Retractation
book it self; For there he denies, that he has retracted or renounced any one
assertion in any one of his former books, that was judged by him an Article of
faith, of which this about justification is one; for says he: this is our
faith, that we are justified by an inward Righteousness etc.

His next flingh is grounded chiefly upon his abusing G: W's. words and
meaning, as well as that he there in abuses his Reader, by his forging words
in G. W. s name which are not G. W's. words; but his own as before is shown,
and so I shall leave both these misrepresentations of G. W. charged to D.L.'s.
account under the one head of Forgery.

In the same 14th. page he cites W. P's Rejoinder p: 287, thus, No present
work, how good soever, can justify any man from the condemnation which is due
for the guilt of sin, that is past; To which he opposes Sandy Foundation p: 16,
thus, God's remission is grounded on our repentance.

Answer, Though W: P. says in the one book, No present work how good s^ever,
can justify any m^n from the condemnation which is due for the guilt of sin
that is past. Yet there is nothing in the other book, that (so much as
consequentially) does say it can: For though it is there said, That Gods
remission is grounded on our re^e^^ance; yet yet is to be observed, that it is
called Gods remission, and so no present work how good soever, of o^rs can
either ^^mit or justify us; for it is Gods remission, and so called by W: P.
And although W: P. says, it is grounded upon our repentance, yet it is to be
understood in a scriptural sense, and one of the scriptures which VV: P.
brought to prove what he asserted was 2 Chr. 30^9. For if ye turn again unto
the Lord, the Lord your God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away
h^s (...) from you. Where (says W: P.) how natural is it to observe that Gods
remission is grounded on their repentance; and not that its impossible to
pardon, without a (...) satisfaction which was his then Ant^gonist's doctrine;
and the several scriptures brought by W: P. prove (...), that it was upon the
wicked's returning again to the Lord, that he remitted them, had mercy on them,
and abundan^ly pardonned them.

Again p. 15 he quotes G. F 's. Catechism p: 2 The light that shows to every
man his evil deeds, is Christ. In opposition to which he produced W. P s
Christian Quaker p. 91 "We do not say that the light in every man is Christ,
but of Christ.

Answer: Tho G: F. says, The light that shows to every man his evil deeds is
Christ, yet W. P. says nothing to the contrary, so no cnotradiction. And this
is certainly true, that the great Light that shows to every man his evil deeds
is Christ, according to G: F., tho the measure that is contained in every man,
W: P. chooses here rather to call the light of Christ, than Christ in fullness.
And G: K. himself in a late book entitled Heresy and Hatred p: 14 says The
light within being God and Christ; and yet in the same page he calls it A real
measure of the eternal word Christ Jesus. No question but this is sound enough
in G: K. though it would scarce be so in us.

He adds a citation out of G: F's Great mystery p: 185 viz The Devil teaches
them, in whom he sows his seed, not to have the light within them, the seed
Christ, the Root of God. Upon which D: L. notes, Who must we believe, G: F. or
G: W. and W: P.? For here G: F. holds the light within to be not only Christ,
but even the Root of God.

Answer, This is partly answered by the foregoing: And whereas G: F. calls the
light, the seed Christ, it is according to Scripture, which says Christ is the
Light of the world John 8:12, and also it is said Gal: ^^16 that the Seed is
Christ; and whereas G: F. says so o^ the ^ight within (...) is no more than to
say, and that in a scriptural sense, Christ within the hope of glory Coll.
1:27. and yet in (...) ^:7. it is said But unto every one of us is given grace
according to the measure of the gift of Christ; and surely D: L. will not say
this is a contradiction. Besides, I remember that G. K. in a letter to John
Delaval, which I have by me in G. K's hand writing, in the year 1692, says; To
say the man Christ is in us, or the light in us is the man Christ, I do not
contradict it in a true scripture sense, as he is called the hidden man of the
heart, and the new man, but this is a figurative expression, and that in a
twofold respect: First by a Metaphor, or Allagory, as he is called a Lamb, a
Lion. 2dly By a Sydechdoche of the giving the name of the whole to the measure.
Now I say, if G.K. be thus allowed to distinguish, why may not G^ F., G: W. and
VV: P. and as for G: F's. using this expression The ROOT of God? I ask Does not
Paul also use this expression? viz The Foundation of God? 2 Ti^^. 2.19, and as
Christ is Gods Foundation for us to build upon; so also he is according to Rom:
11:16:17:18 the root for us to grow upon. And G: K. (...) his Way cast up p:
114 sais, That Christ is the Root and vine into which the Saints are grafted.

As to the next clash, It is also partly answered by the foregoing; it relates
to something G: F. said in answer to a Priest, who commonly in those days
denied God and Christ to be in men according to scripture: Though in this case,
I do confess the Priest's words were true in a sense, viz "That whole Christ,
God and Man is not in men; yet that God is in men is clear according to
Scripture, and that Christ is in men is clear according to Scripture, and that
Christ is in men, not only as he is God, but also as man, is clear according to
D: L.'s. great Friend G. K. who in his Way cast up p. 123 says That Christ is
really present in and among us, not only as he is God, but also as he is man.
Now since Christ as he is God dwells in us according to Scripture, and as he
is man he dwells in us according to G.K. as he is God and man is he not the
whole Christ. Yet that he does so dwell in us, as that the whole fullness of the
Godhead and manhood is contained in men; I believe, neither G.F. not G.K. did
own, any more than W.P. Besides, G.F. answer to the Priest was but by way of
query, which does not always conclude a judgment* For when Christ asked the
Pharisees, what think ye of Christ? whose son is he? they said unto him, The
son of David; Christ answered by way of query, How then does David in spirit
call him Lord Matt. 22.42:43. Now by this his answer, Christ did not deny
himself to be the Son of David; for that would have contradicted the scripture,
which calls him the son of David etc. Matt. 1:1. And so G.F^s. asking a
question, cannot be said to be a denial of W.P^s. assertion, therefore no
contradiction.

I come now to his p: 17:18, to what he cites from G.F about the soul. To which
I say, 1st. It has been often answered by our Friends, particularly G.W. and
W.P. 2dly Though D.L. ^lights their answers* counting them fallacious etc. Yet
his peculiar Friend G.K. has but in the year 1692 vindicated, both G.F.
doctrine about the soul, and also W.P's. answers to the Professors, about the
very same subject of G.F's., which D.L. cites; see his Serious appeal p: 60,
not yet retracted, where it may be seen, that what D.L. calls in G.W. and W.P.
Fallacious equivocation, his Friend G.K. calls a Sufficient vindication. Now
what curious wire drawing will D, L. use* here, to clear himself from
contradicting his great Friend G.K. But since among so many learned and Wise
men, there have been so many opinions about the Soul, unless he could define
better than other folks what the Soul is, and what the Breath of life is which
God breathed into man, by which he became a living Soul, his raking up seeming
contradictions about it tends to no bodies profit that I know of. As fot what
he tells us of the Ranters saying, "The Soul is a part of God; therefore to
talk of going to hell is an idle story; is very idle in (...) to cite. For I do
believe, as man continued a living soul to God, by virtue of that life which
God breathed into him, and as he is restored thereto again by Christ, in that
(...) Hell is not his portion: Yet till then the Soul is not living to God, but
death and hell is it is portion; for the (...) simply is one thing, and its
being a living soul to God, is surely another thing.

In p: 18:19 he cites G, F, again thus, Great Mis^ery, p, 205 and p 6^. The
Saints came to se the end of Sabbaths and New Mons, and witnessed the body,
Christ, before the day was made -- for the body is the light of the world, the
body is the life given for the life of the World, in whom there is (...) --
Christ gave himself, his body, for the li^e of the World; he was the o^^ering
for sin. Now D. L, to make W.P. contradict G F quotes out his Serio^ Apology p.
146 as follows, But that the outward person that suffered was properly the Son
of God, We utterly deny -- A Body have thou prepared me, said the Son; so the
Son was not the Body, though the body was the Son's Upon which says D L Let W
P. reconcile these, and also tell us who is the Father of that outward person.

Answ Easily reconciled: For as W: P. denies the outward person to be properly
the son of God; so G: F*s words, as here laid down by D: L, do import the same:
For he being there answering a Priest, who was mightily crying up the outward
Sabbath, which according to scripture, was a shadow of things to come Coll
2.16:17 derected him to Christ the substance, or body of that shadow, and said,
the body is the life of the world, and the light of the world etc.

Now what is this to W: P's. saying, The outward pers^n is not properly the son
of God: For surely, the body, which is the substance of the shadowy things
under the law, is Christ indefinitely, which G: F. calls the light of the world
etc. But what W: P. meant, was restricted to his outward visible person only;
which surely none will say, that that of its self was properly the light and
life of the world: so that what W: P. and G. F. both do say is true, and
therefore no contradiction. And does not D. L. know, that the words [body of
Christ] have various significations in scripture? As, first his Church is
called his body Coll 1.18. The bread of the passover is called his body by
Christ him self Matt 26.26. And that which suffered on the cross was also his
body. Again the substance of shadowy ordinances (which is Christ is called the
body, which was the body in G. F s. sense, in this place mentioned by D. L.

And where as D. L. would know of VV. P, who is the Father of that outward
person? I pre^^suming that VV. P has matters of more weight to exercise him
self in (...) to answer such sort of cavilling folks, shall therefore undertake
to tell him, and that according to scripture, He was the son of David Matthew. 1
1 and as Paul said to the Romans 1:2 He was made of the seed of David according
to the flesh; which was the outward person VV. P. meant Well! but how was hethe
son of God: why the ^ext verss show, viz And dedared to be the son of God, with
power according to the spirit of holiness etc. And now I cannot but often
o^serve, how D. L. by his striking th^s against the Quakers, does often hit his
Friend G. K. a grievous box on the ear; for in The Way cast up p. 10^. G. K.
says, He was the son of Mary, David and Abraham according to the flesh; but
according to his heavenly nature, even as man, he was the son of God. And in p.
102 he says, It is not the outward flesh and blood, that is the man -- but it
is the ^ould or inward man, that dwells in the outward flesh and blood, that
is the man most properly, such as Christ was from the beginng. Surly now if D.
L. be impartial, he must take in in G. F's. errors in his next anniversary
book.

D. L. fa^ls upon VV. P. again p. 19. quoting his Reason against Railing p. 91
as follows Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our Debtors, were, (says he)
nothing can be more obvious, than that which is forgiven, is not paid; and if
it is our duty ^o forgive without a satisfaction received, and that God is to
forgive us, as we forgive them, ^hen is a satisfaction totally excluded. Now to
make as if he contradicts him self he cites Rejoinder p. ^84 where says D. L.
VV. P. cites and defends, We believe that Christ in us does offer up a living
sacrifice to God for as, by which the wrath of God is appeased to us. Where
upon says D. L. Note a self contradiction, for in the one he totally excludes
a satisfaction, and in the other he grants it

Answer.

Can D. L. be impartial here in? Does he not know, that where VV. P: denies it
as a payment of a debt, it is in the Presbyterian, rigid sense, to wit That man
having transgressed the righteous law of God, and so exposed to the penalty of
eternal wrath, it is altogether impossible for God to remitt or forgive without
a plenary satisfaction; and that there was no other way by which God could
obtain satisfaction, or save men, than by inflicting the penalty or infinite
wrath and vengeance on Je^ss Christ the second person of the Trinity, who for
sins past, present and to come, has wholly born and paid it, to the offended
infinite justice of his Father. see W: P 's: very words Sandy Foundation p: 16,
of which I shall speak more when I come to his Numb: 30: But as to Christ
offering up in us, by which the wrath of God is appeased to us, VV, P, expleans
in the next paragraph, to wit that Christ offers himself in his children in the
nature of a Mediatory Sacrifice; And further says Christ as a Mediator can
atone in the consciences of his People at what time they fall under any
miscarriage if they unfeignedly repent according to 1 John 2, 1, 2. etc. Now it
is one thing to appease the wrath of God or man in a Mediatory way, and quite
another thing to pay the debt that is due in such a strict sense as aforesaid.
So that though W, P, denied such a satisfaction to be made in one book; yet he
did neither expressly nor consequently own it in the other; therefore no
contradiction.

Now whereas D, L. asks How many thousand offerings this new Scripture makes
of Christ; as many Saints, so many times Christ offers himself up a Sacrifice,
For this I shall refer him to his great Friend G. K, for satisfaction, if any
thing besides abusing the Quakers will satisfy him, see G, K's Way Cast up
not yet retracted where in p, 157, 158, he holds that Christ is a Mediator in
the Saints, and that his Spirit as man, prays and makes intercession onto
God in the Saints, and cites Rom, 8 for it, Now dare D. L. say, that the
praying of Christ is not an offering and living Sacrifice to God; and G, K.
says Christ has done so from the beginning, by whom the children of God in
all ages have received grace from God, And in p, 109 G, K. tells how Paul
Preached Christ to the Galatians, in the time of their Heathenism, cruicified in
them, and cites Gal, 3 5 6 Now let G. K. tell D, L. how many crucifyings of
Christ there is, so many heathen, so many times Christ crucified, But I say
again, prejudice blinds man,

Well now to make G, F, contradict W, P, in this matter, in his Numb, 30, he
quotes Great Mystery p 63, thus Christ gave himself, his body for de life of
the world, he was the offering for the sins of the Whole world, and paid the
debt, and made satisfaction, To which he implicitly opposes W, P. as before,
to wit, that a satisfaction is totally excluded, and what is forgiven is not
paid.

Answ. What G: F. said was in answer to a Priest that said, Every man should
not have his sins pardonned; Which G.F. did not deny, but told, how Christ gave
himself an offering for the sins of the World, and that he had enligthned every
man coming into the World, that all through him might believe and (which was
enough to show, that though all man had not their sins pardonned, yet all were
put into such a capacity, as that they might have their sins pardonned, in as
much as) Christ had offered himself for all (which many of the Professors at
that time dinyed) and which offering the Father was well pleased with, and
satisfied in, and so in that sense he made satisfaction, according to G: F.,
and which W:P. in that very book viz Sandy Foundation p: 32 did really own viz
That Christ in life, doctrine and death, fulfilled his Fathers will, and
offered up a most satisfactory Sacrifice, but not (said he) to pay God, or help
him, as being otherwise unable to save men. So that (...) find W:P. owns
Christ's satisfaction, as well as G: F., therefore still their faces look not
contrary (rightly understood) as D: L. would, and does represent them.

Well but G: F. says, Christ paid the debt, and W: P. says, what is forgiven
is not paid. Now to this I say, That Christ paid the debt, so far as that in a
scriptural sense, the Father for his sake was satisfied, and well pleased whit
it on our account, is true; For he gave himself a ransom for all. 1 Timothy 2:6.
this is Scripture: But, that God could not pardon, except he was fully paid the
debt, by a plenary satisfaction made by another; and which was what W.P. did
deny, is unscriptural. For it is said Micha 7:18 Who is a God like unto thee,
that pardons iniquity, and in Exody 34.6:7. The Lord God, merciful and
gracious, ^ong suffering and abundant in Goodness and Truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving iniquity* transgressions and sin. So that it is not
rational, to say, that a Transgressor is pardo^ned, and yet the transgression
fully satisfied ^or by anoth^^, who the Presbiterians said, was the second
Person in he Trinity: For then mankind would be obliged only to the second
person, because the first was fully paid, and it was only against this Notion
that W.P's. struck, and I do not see that he contradicts G. F. in it, unless
the scripture contradicts it self; for (...) scripture abundantly speaks of
Gods forgiving us and pardoning our sins, according to W.P. and the scripture
says also in plain words, that Christ has redeemed us and given him self a
ransom for all, and in this sense it is according to G. F, viz made
satisfaction. His Numb: 55 being to the like effect which the foregoing, I
account sufficiently answered by what I have already said upon this subject: I
shall now take notice, how in many places of his book, he idly and sillily
slants at G. W* about these words of his viz I may see cause otherways to word
the matter, and yet our intentions be the same; for which he cites Counterfeit
Convert p: 72, and then he crie^ out in p. 21 Is this like the ancient
simplicity of a Quake^^^ Pray who knows when such a man is sincere, or how to
^eleive him in what he says, that thus hides his meanings says one thing, an
means another?

Answ. Truly I think D. L. has not been enviously poring all this while in our
Friends books for nothing. Pray, who but a man m^dled in his senses would make
such a palpably ridiculous use of G: P*s: innocent words? As if to say, I may
se ecause other wise to word the matter, and yet intend the same thing, be
equivalent which D: L's, application, viz, to say one thing and mean another:
For since he ( G: W) intends the same thing, how does he mean another thing?
But what a doltish man is this? Is it not common for men (yea have not the best
of men done it) to word a matter other wise, and yet intend the very same, as
they did at first wording? Let him see how Luke words the matter, in giving
account of some of Christ's. last words to his diciples, where he says thus,
And behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in the city
of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power ^romon high Luke 24:49. Now
compare this with the account he gives of the same thing Acts. ^^, and see if
he do not otherwise word the matter, and yet intend the same thing, for there*
he has it thus, And being assembled together with them, commanded them that
they should not depar^ from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father
which, says he, ye have heard of me. And many such like instances may be found
in scripture; but least D.L. should dislike scripture instances under pretense
of their being corrupted* I will give him one out of his Friends G.K's. late
book of Explanations and Retraclations, not again retracted as I hear of yet,
let him Look in p. 5. where G. K. says Though I cite scripture and make use of
them in arguing this point, yet (...) truly say I have not my knowledge from
them. Note, this he cites out of his book entitled Immediate Reve^^^ion p. 54.
which he here explains, by other wi^e wording the matter, thus Here note, I say
from them, as being the efficient cause etc. Now though he here otherwise word
the matter, yet his intention are still the same; For he says himself in the
same place, "What I then hold; meaning, what he held in 1668, he held in 1697,
though he have other wise worded the matter. But what Author shall I fetch to
convince D. L. better than him self: For in this very ^ook of his, p. 33 he
finding fault with and ridiculing G: W, about his charging a contradiction upon
John Newman, says D: L, Pray judge if this (meaning Newman's assertions) be
any more then to say four pence in one place, and a groat in another:
Importing, that to be one and the same thing, and so indeed it is: There fore,
wether to say four pence in one place, be not one way, and agroat in another
place, be not another way of wording the matter, and yet intend the same thing?
We see D.L. has resolved in the affirmative.

I come next to his p. 25* where he cites G. W. again Divinity of Christ p. 83.
in these words while we were sinners, Christ died for us, it was Christ that
dyed. To which he sopposes John Whitehead^s Ref^g^ Fixed p. 38. thus Nothing
that was mortal was called Christ.

Answ. What John Wite head wrote, he declares (...) as being eclxasive of the
soul and spirit of Christ, and we know, exclusive from the sold and spirit,
his flesh was called the body of Jesus, as it is said Joseph of Ar^mathe^
begged [the body] of Jesus; and this was mortal and dyed: But as whilst living,
his Godhead soul and spirit was united to that body, to when that body dyed, it
was called the death of Christ, though his Godhead soul and spirit dyed not* so
that if exclusive there from his body was properly and entirely the Christ,
then Christ was not from the beginning: But (...) ^elie^e according to
scripture, that Christ was from the beginning, and that the Rock that followed
Israel in the Wildern^ss, was Christ 1 Cor 10:4. and yet also, according to
scripture, he took on him the body that was mortal, (...) that which he
suffered in that body, was also called the sufferings of Christ; For as much
(says the Apo^^le) then as Christ has suffered for as in the flesh etc. 1 Pet
4:1. And though the scripture calls it^s suffering, the death of Christ; yet it
also implies, that Christ was that day in Paradise Luke 23 43, though that
which was mortal was in the grave till three days after.

As to his comparing our Friends writings to those Priests, whom Samuel Fisher
in his Rusticus p: 773. for their inconsistent arguments against our Friends,
twits with his ^ounds of No* so: so: no etc.

I shall only say thus much, that I hope I have showed, and yet shall show here
in that there is no comparison to be made between them: For the occasion of
Samuel Fisher's ^o treating the priests, was the so different terms they at
times gave to the light (which D: L. may disprove if he can) whereupon (says
S: F. One while he calls it meaphorical not proper, another while proper not
metaphorical, one while natural as opposite to civil and not moral, spiritual
not supernatural, another while, and in other respects he makes it civil, moral
and spiritual* one while common to all, universal, but then not saving, other
while sufficient and saving, but then particular only, and particular to a few.
This with much more was what S. F. grounded his No. so. so. No. etc. upon,
which D. L. should not have concealed from his Reader; But it is no wonder a
man should do so, who strives for victory more than truth.

Again. in p 30.31. he cites G. F's Great Mystery p 289. thus God was in
Christ, and they are one, the Creator; the father in the son and the Son in the
father, and Christ in you, and God in Christ, the Creator. And Quakers
Plainness p 24. by G. W, The son is co -- worker with the Father. To these he
opposes G. W's Light and Life p. 47 as follows viz What nonsense is this to
tell of God being co -- Creator with the Father? Where upon D. L. makes this,
Note Does not G. W. here accuse both G. F. and himself also, with Non sense?
for what is the difference between Co -- worker and Co -- Creator?

Answ. As blind as D: L. renders me in his p: 45. about the Resurrection, yet I
shall show him, that I can see a great de^e of difference may be betwixt a Co --
worker and a Co -- Creator. For the saints were Co -- workers together with
Christ; but surely they cannot be said to be Co -- Creat^^s with him; And
though Christ being man as well as God may be said to be Co worker with the
Father; yet to (...) of God being Co Creator with the Father does (as G.W.
says) imply two Gods. And what G.F. said of Gods being in Christ, and they are
one, the Creator; the Father in the son and the Son in the Father etc. is true
and scriptural and it brings him no ways under accusation of G.W. as this
quarrelpicker would render him.

In his p: 37. he quotes R.B.'s Apology p: 95. in these words viz Wherefore as
we believe he ( Christ) was a true and real man; so we also believe that he
continues so to be glorified in the heavens in soul and body. Upon which D.L.
notes W.P. says, Christ as man was finite, viz. came to an end. But here R.B.
says, he continues a real man in soul and body and so is not finite. And the^
D.L. says "Choose which of these you will believe.

Answ. Not D.L. to be sure That Christ continues a real man etc. is true
according to scripture, as well as according to Robert Barclay: But that
therefore he as man is not finite, it follows not. For D.L. continues^ to be a
real man for ought I hear, yet he is finite; But to be sure R B's. meaning was
that Christ as man was to continue without end: Well the same is believed
likewise concerning the Saints, yet are they finite for all that: But whereas
D.L. tells us that W. P. says, Christ was finite viz came to an end, it is a
great abuse upon W: P* and great untruth in D. L, for W: P, has no such words,
vis came to an end, as D: L, wickedly renders it to insense the world, as if W:
P, believed that the man Christ was come to an end, An Abominable Forgery I
come In The last paragraph I conviected D L of a great forgery, and now in this
I am about to convict him of another, as great. In his Number* 58 he cites G
VV^s, Divinity of Christ p: 27 'thus, The God whom we serve and believe in, is
infinite, the only wise God, and nothing relating to him, or his being, finite*
Against which he brings VV, P* thus Sandy Foundation p: 20 VV*P, there calls
the man Christ The finite impotent creature.

Answ. I must needs desire the Reader to take notice of the great heat D.L.
has imposed upon him, and the great abuse he has put upon VV.P, here in, in
saying that he calls the man Christ, The finite and impotent creature, and
there upon in diverse places bestowing his discanting sort of vaunts and taunts
upon W.P. after such a rate, as if he had a license to abuse men at pleasure.
As first, in the same page he says, Here I cannot but take notice, that though
VV: P. blasphemously calls the Man Christ, the finite impotent creature etc.
And in p: 39 he speaks again of VV: P's "calling Christ's whole man, the finite
impotent creature. And in p. 29. he speaks again of W. P's "calling Christ's
whole man, the finite impotent creature. And a little lower, he ironically has
it thus The man Christ must be called, The finite impotent creature, by this
high and elevated dust and as his W. Penn. Nay he is so fond of the lie, that
when he comes to p. 24. he has it again, thus, "I cannot but mind VV: P's
devised distinction, and unscriptural expression [if it were no worse] "in
calling the man Christ The finite and impotent creature etc. Now Reader do but
behold how this D: L. "has made a man of straw, and then fights with it* For I
do affirm there is no such saying, or irreverent expression, in the whole book,
as that the man Christ is a finite and impotent creature, No, neither
expreslly, nor implicitly, nor so much as consequentially* By which it may be
clearly enough seen, that D.L. was not influenced to this work by a Mo^ion
heavenly; and well would it have been for him, if he said no more in the case,
than what by a little otherwise wording matter, he could have made out to have
been (in the main at least) the truth: But Alas poor Daniel! The case is
otherwise with him; for no otherwise wording the ma^ter will do here, he can do
no less in justice, than according to the example of his friend G: K. (who his
retracted will our cause) to openly and freely retract it (he having so much
cause so to do) or else it will assuredly lie hard at his door, and likewise
prove as (...) to make good his assertion in the close of his preface that his
proceeding here in (viz in his book) were good and sincere.

We^l in p: 140 he again cites G: F's Great Mystery p: 222 thus Priest sais,
Christ is without the saints, in respect of his bodily presence G: F. answers,
How then are they of his flesh and bone. And the D: L. brings in VV: P. thus,
Christian Quaker p. 9^ The body of Christ is not so much as in any one. Upon
which D: L. notes, That VV: P. is still clashing against G: F, al most on every
hand.

Answ. It is clear that the body meant by VV: P. was the visible body of flesh
and blood etc. (in which sense I can hardly believe D: L. thinks that G: F,
meant that that visible body is in us; however G F's* following words she^ that
purport of this passage, to wit, And eat his flesh and drink his blood, and how
have saints his mind and spirit, and he with them, and they with him, and sit
with him in heavenly places, and he is the head of the Church: How then is he
absent? etc. Thus G.F. by which it appears to me, that the reason of this his
answer was, because the Priest would not allow that Christ was in us, by reason
his bodily out^^ard presence is absent from us. Besides, G F, did but query,
and G.K, says in his Truth Defense p. 59. That to query a thing will not
conclude the Questionist does positively affirm or deny.

In the same page he offers a quotation out of W.P. s. Rejoinder p. 13., viz
That [ Christ] his coming was but [(...) but] to bring the World to a more
improved knowledge and large enjoyment of that divine power, wisdom, life and
righteousness which former ages had, compar^tively, but an obscure sight and
imperfect sense of. To oppose which ^e cites Truth's Principles by I Crook; If
Christ had not dyed, man must have perished in sin this being the way, found
out by God, to recover him. Upon which D L, notes Here Is one Christian he
grants the merit of Christ's coming and death: But W.P, makes the benefit of
his coming, to be no more but to show man more plain what he savv before as
through a glass etc.

Answ. O strange! How soon has D.L, forgot himself? For in his quoting W.P, he
makes him to own and assert* that Christ's coming was as well to bring the
World to a more large enjoyment of life [mark enjoyment of life] as well as
power and Rightousness; But in his Note she says, W, P* makes the benifit of
his coming to be no more [mark no more] but to show man more plain what he saw
before (...). As if there were no difference betvveen seeing and enjoying. I
think what W P, said in the matter is very (...), as to the end of Christ^s
coming, to wit* to give the World a more clear knowledge of him, and to cause
us to enjoy life by him, ^or I am come [saith Christ] that they might have me,
and that they might have it more abundantly (...)

And surely Christ did not intent by this, that we (...) have life without
respect to his dying for us, and (...) etc. Neither did W. P. So D. L. is here
again (...) ^oo hard, to squeeze out a Contradiction.

Again in p 41. he cites W. P^s Address to Protestants p: 119 Let us (says he)
but soberly consider what Christ is, and we shall the better know whether moral
men are to be reckoned Christians: What is Christ but meekness, justice, mercy
patience, charity and virtue in perfection? Upon which D. L. makes this note
viz Tho; W. P. allegorizes Christ, and makes him nothing but virtues, yet his
Brother G. W. tells W Har^^th (as above) that Christ is something else, viz, a
man, consisting of spirit soul and body, the same body as dyed etc.

Answ. The more wickedly done then of D. L. in his p 2^, very falsely to accuse
G. W. of saying, Christ has not the body of man, yet now rather than he will
want any thing that may make up his pretended contradiction to W. P, he now
freely assents, that G: W. owned Christ to have both spirit soul and body,
which surely make up a complete man. And W: P's enumerating what Christ is as
to virtues, and that he has all those virtues in perfection, does no waie^ deny
him to be a man, consisting of body, soul and spirit, according to G. W: No, it
was only to show, that those who are in measure thus Christ like qualified, are
not to be denied all share in Christianity, as the book plainly shows, And
though he says What is Christ but meekness, (...) etc. denies him not to be a
man consi^ting of spirit soul and body, any more than Paul^s saying, Who then
is Paul^s and who is Apollo? but ministers [mark, but ministers] (...) ye
believed, Cor. 3:5, denies him sel^ to be a (...) Acts 18.3 But D: L^s design
is (...) mischei^, and (...) to act it, at what ra^e he pleases

In p. 44 he quotes (...) by (...), follows, viz* That this thing (...) make
men Atheists, viz other men's self confidence in asserting things contrary to
re^^on and manife^^ experience, and in particular, in their affirming that
these self same ter^estrial bodies of flesh and bones shall be made spiritual,
immortal and incorruptible.

It Is true (says G: W) He^ More had finer and more excellent notions about the
Resurrection, than many other learned men, and aimed at the truth and
spirituality there of, from the vision of the holy men recorded in the
scriptures.

And then in order to make G: W. oppose him self, as he would seem to suppose,
he offers a quotation out of p. 37^ of the same book viz this manner, viz G: W.
cites H^ More about the Resurrection, saying, Flesh and blood can not inherit
the kingdom of God; and I think (says he) there is the same reason of flesh
and bones, viz.

I understand natural flesh and bones, not glorified. Thus he cites G: W. and
then adds this Note, G: W. commends this notion of H: More, as savouring of
truth and spirituality, and yet renders those Atheists that believe the same;
for H: More does not here deny the Resurrection of the same body that dies,
only understands it must be glorified.

Answ. Here he has abused G: VV. by leaving out the last part of his words; for
after the words immortal and incorruptible G: VV. adds, and yet the same for
matter and substance, which words he has skipt over I suppose because they did
not suit his purpose.

Then he says in his note G: W. commends this notion of H^ More as savouring
of truth and spirituality; Whereas G^ VV. says no such thing of him, as appears
by Daniel Leeds own quotation before produced. It is true, he said, he had
finer and more excellent notions, and aimed at the truth etc.

Which much differs from savouring of it; a man may aim at a thing, which he
may never come so near to, as to ^^ste of o^ savor. And where as he says, H
More does not deny the Resurrection of the same body that dies. Neither does
he show that G. VV. does so; It Is true, G. VV. seems to oppose the notion of
the self same terrestrial body of flesh and bones being made spiritual,
immortal and incorruptible, and yet be the same for matter and sapstance, as
now they are (which last words [and yet be the same ^or matter and substance]
D^ L. has very unfairly left out, to pervert G: W's real intentions* Besides,
how does it ^ppear, that Henry More does not deny the Resurrection of the same
body that dies; Hear what G: W. has cited out of his works in p. 373 of the
Christian Quaker viz I dare challenge him to produce any place of scripture,
out of which he can make it appear, that the mystery of the Resurrection
implies a Resuscitation of the same numerical body. The most pregnant of all
is, Job 19 which later Jnterpreters are now so wise as not to understand at all
of the Resurrection: The 1 Cor. 15, that chapter is so far from asserting this
curiosity, that it plainly says, it is not the same body; but that as God gives
to the ^l^des of corn grains quite distinct from that which was sown, so at the
Resurrection he will give the soul a body quite different from that which was
buried, as different as a spiritual body is from a natural body, or an heavenly
from an earthly. Thus far Henry More as cited by G^W. in the said Christian
Quaker. Now how far H: M. does own or deny the Resurrection of the same body
that dies, may be easily g^ess^d at, not witstanding D: L^s confident
^sser^ion that he does not deny it.

And now having traced and detected this dis ingenious, unfair envious and
conceited man through the diverse quotations before specified, wherein he would
charge our Friends with contradictions, I think this sufficient with any
reasonable man to invalidate the credit of the res^: Neither, in deed, have I
all the books he offers his pretendedly contradictory quotations out o^ to
examine, and he having ju^^ly forfeited his credit, in diverse passages before
mentioned, I think it not worth my while to set pen to pap^r, to enervate those
suppositions citations, wherein his (...) must be relied upon, for the faith
(...) quoting thereof: I shall therefore only further take notice of three very
obvious abuses put upon G: W. and W: P, as a corro^ocrating proof of my above
charge, and then leave this chapter of pretended contradictions, and proceed to
the next.

The st. in his ^3d. page, and is this G* VV's. Nature of Christianity p. 29
Christ has not the body of man.

Answ. Now, as there is no such word, so neither can any such thing be justly
deduced from what G: VV. there wrote: that subject of which he treated in that
place being not at all ^^ether Christ had the body of man or not, but about the
manner of his saving and just^ying men, which G: VV. would not have R. Gordon
to expect, should be as he imagined in his book p: 30, viz, That Christ as the
Son of Mary should outwardly appear, in a bodily existence, to save: But here^s
not one word of denying Christ to have the body of man, as D: L. falsely cites
him, and sure it^s one thing for Christ to appear to save men by his ingrafted
word, which ^s able to save the ^oul, James. 1.^1, which the Quakers press
people to come to witness; and an other thing to say, Christ has the body of
man, outwardly to come on the last day, to reward every man according to his
works, which the Quakers also believe.

Then 2dly in the same page D: L. cites the same book in p. ^1; thus,
paraphrasing upon it. "And in p. 41. he denies Christ^s bodily existence
without us.

Answ. There is no such word neither; But G: VV. speaking of R^ G^s pretended
adoration, and claim of salvation, being to Christ, only as the son of Mary,
existing outwardly and bodily without us: There upon G: VV. says I ask him if
he have so considered God the savior, or the Son from the substance of the
Father; and the^^ he asks him What scripture proof he has for Christ's
existing outwardly bodily without us at Gods right hand. By all which it
plainly appears, that G.W. only opposed those term (viz) Christ existing
outwardly bodily without us, because, that would seem to exclude his being as
he is God, and as he is in men; and therefore says to R.G. And is Christ the
savior as an outward bodily existence or person without us distinct from God,
and upon that consideration to be worshipped as God, yea or nay. etc. Now
though G.W. opposes R.G 's. doctrine of Christ's being or existence to be
outwardly and bodily without us; yet it does not at all follow from thence,
that he believes, Christ has not a body, that has a being or existence
without us. It is one thing to maintain, that Christ the Savior of the World
has a body existing whithout us which G.W. denied not; and another thing to
hold or maintain, that that bodily existence it self is Christ the savior of
the world, which (and no less) R.G 's. words seem to import. The outward bodily
existence of a man cannot be said strictly to be the man, for them when it
dies, and the bodily existence is put off, the man would, cease to be. And
where it is said of Christ, that he bare our sins in his own body on the three
1 Pet. 2.24; It might as well be said, that the body bare our sins on his own
body on the tree. So that to conclude, I say it is a manifest falsehood in D.L,
to say that G.W. denies Christ's bodily existence without us. Christ's body
does exist without us: Yet that bodily outwardly existence is not the Christ,
without his soul spirit and God head.

And 3 dly D: L. in p. 25 falsely charges VV: P. in these words; And says VV:
P. We deny that person that (...) at Jerusalem to be our Redeemer: Referring to
VV P^s Apology p: 146. Answ. These are not the words of W P, but of his
Adversary Jenner cited by W.^. in the aforesaid book. Jenner having thrown it
upon the Quakers as their principle, W. P. in answer thereto calls it a hor^^d
(...) ^a^ion, and then acknowledges in these express words: That he who said
down his life, and suffered his body to be crucified by the Jews, without the
gates of (...), is Christ the only begotten son of the most high God. And
though he there denies the outw^rd ^erson that suffered properly to be the son
of God, (...) the (...) of the (...) only upon the word [outward] ^y which W.
P. (...) his outward body; as is clear from his following words, (...) A body
have thou prepared me, said the son, the said W. P. The son was not the body
though the body was the sons. (...) should say The body was the son then this
(...) will follow viz Christ bare out sins in his own son (instead of his own
body on the tree. And if D.L. say, the out^^^d person was properly the son of
God* and yet will ^e imp^^ttial, then let him fall upon G.K. for asserting;
That it is not the outward Flesh and Blood that is the man -- ^ut it is the
soul or inward man that dwells in the outward flesh o^ ^ody that is the man
most properly such as Christ had from the beginning: As his express words are
in his (...) Cast up p. 102. not yet retracted. B^t whether he will believe his
peculiar friend G. K. or not, to be sure he has belyed W. P, as above is shown,
and it is not his pleading a little failure in Syntax, a thing he ^anteringly
accuses G.W. within his book; no, nor otherwise wording the matter neither,
will do, without an open and free Retractation of these his abuses.

Furthermore; h^ving (after I had proceeded a good way in this work) met with
the ^ook called. The Quakers Plainness I have therein found fresh cause to take
a little f^rther notice of D.L^s. perfidiousness, which I purpose ^ little more
to detect before I proceed to any other matter; see News of a Trumpet Numb 5.
where he has it th^s* S^ndy Fo^n^a. p: 15 W. P. says In the fullness of time
[G^d] sent his son, who so many hundred years since in pers^n te^tified the
virtue etc. Now to make G.W. cot^adict this, he q^otes Quakers Plainess p. 24.
(affirming that G.W. says The tale person is too low and unscriptural to give
to the Christ of God.

Now Reader, that thou may see how unfairly D.L. has laid down G.W* words*
take them as ^^id down by himself, thus That Christ is not a person without as
p: 21 is our doctrine or phr^se that (...) of or remember; only (...) too low
and unscriptural, to give to the Christ o^ God, ^any men having gross
apprehensi^ns (...) the ph^^se [ ^erson without] But Christ is confessed (...) as
without us, and within us Well! Where is the contradiction in all this? Why
here; W P, says, Th^^ God sen^ his son so many hundred years ago in person;
and G W, says The title [person witho^t] is thought t^o, low and unscriptural
to give to the Christ of God* Mark, person without us, was what was thought too
low to be spoken concerning the son of God, it was not thought too low for it
to be said of him, that so many hundred year since he appeared in person: For
it is one thing to say, That the son so many hundred years ago appeared in
person, and another thing to say, That the son, or Christ of God is a person
without us, especially when it is spoken in opposition to those who deny him to
be within us For though we sincerely believe Christ to be in heaven without us,
yet we also believe, according to scripture, that he is within us the hope of
glory and that if Christ be not in us we are Reprobates.

^ow whether D L, will reckon the title [person without us] too low to give to
the Christ of God or not yet to be sure it is unscriptural; For though it is
clear the scripture speaks of Christ in us in more express words than it does
of Christ without us, yet we believe him to be without us also; But to sum up
the matter, two omissions of D L's, in this quotation out of G Was book
manifest his baseness as any intelligent Re^dar may observe, the rectifying of
which by inserting them very much alters the case, as if he leaves out the words
[without us] and 2 dly He makes G W, to say

The title personis too low, where as his words are, The title personis thought
too low, so that that qualifying word [thought] being here omitted it is unfarily
done of D.L. I come now to his secon^ chapter entitled Oppositio^ (...) Unity,
and having (as I hinted before since I finished my answer to what he calls
Contradictions met with G Was, book Sti^^d The Quak^^s Plainness I shall
examine the use he makes of some of it in the said Chapter In p^ 47.48. he
brings in G.W, laying down some (...) doctrines and then endeavors to (...) G
W, holds the same, my present business (...) show D L^s, folly in so doing.

(...) o^ Muggletons doctrines that he brings out is (...) took Christ^s soul
into it, and that Christ's (...) when the body dyed. Now to show that we (...)
the same he turns us to his Numb, 37.38, 39, Where (s^ith he) they deny the
body to be Christ, and that it was (...) that dyed -- And that both body and
soul was sac^if^^ed see Numb. 42.

Answ. First, If the body was properly the Christ how was it said, That by
Christ God made the Worlds, Heb. 1:2 since it was many thousand years after the
world was made ere Christ took up that body* 2dly If the body was properly the
Christ how is it that Christ said to the Thie^ on the Cross To day shall thou
be with me in paradise Luke 23.43: Since Joseph begged his body and laid it in
a Sepulcher v. 52:53: from whence it rose not until the third day chapter 24, v. 6,
And as for their saying, it was Christ that dyed, it is no more th^n the
Apostle says in express, words How that Christ dyed for (...) sins 1. Cor:
15:3: So that D L is as really quarrelling with the scriptures as with us. And
what if G W declares, That Christ's soul was sacrifized? does not Isaiah speak
of God^s making his soul an offering for sin see chapter 53. v* 10? What can be a
plainer proof? Yet it does not follow, that his soul dyed; But if D L say
otherwise, then it is he and not we that holds those Muggletonian doctrines;
however I am sure we do not And so having done with this, I shall pass the rest
of this chapter all is it being pretty much of a so^t, and it being not my
intention to answer ever^ paragraph in the book, as I have already told my
Reader, (...) given him a very good reason too, viz because (...) not many of
the books by me out of which he (...) to examine them by; neither would it be
(...), since with any unbyass^d persons I must (...) his credit, in laying open
the unfairness and forgeries he is guilty of in the beforegoing.

I shall now proceed to his third Chapter, which I find much like his former,
it being grounded upon his not being willing to distinguish, in ascriptural
sense, between Christ as he was from the beginning, and as he came in the body
in the fullness of time.

As for what he here says of John Whitehead, I refer the Reader to Tho.
Ellwood's book, Called Truth Defended etc. p. 124.

As for his saying, That "The true Chrstians believe that the true Christ has
a body of flesh and bones etc. To this I answer, That how, or after what
manner, Christ's body is now in heaven I shall by no means undertake to
determine' it being (I believe) above the capacity of us Mortals so to do: But
I shall tell D.L. that he hereby brings his great friend G.K. under his censure
of not being a true Christian; for G.K. expressly says of Christ's body, that,
It is no more a body of flesh blood and bone, but a pure Ethereal heavenly
body, see Way cast up p. 131 not retracted.

Then, for his bantering W: P. about his calling Christ's body holy: saying Can
this be other than hypocrisy? "for as is noted at Numb 49 50, he holds the body
to be earthly and perishing, I would have the Reader note, it proceeds from W:
P's vindicating this saying so Jsaac "Peningtons' That which Christ took upon
him was but the garment of our nature, which is of an earthly and perishing
nature.

To which I answer, That Christ's body was a holy body according to W.P. Surely
D.L. will not deny; Yet that it was the garment of our nature is not (me
thinks) hard to make out: For it is said Heb: 2:14 For as much then as the
children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part
of the same [Mark of the same] Now how it is the same, if not of the same
nature, for my part I know not; though Christ defiled not his nature by sin, as
we have done ours, is Certain; and therefore a holy body according to W^P: Yet
in as much as he took on him the seed of Abraham, he surely took on him our
nature, unless the seed of Abraham be not of our nature, and that this is the
garment which Is. P meant, I suppose D.L. will not deny: Nay the scripture
says expressly v. 17. In all things it behoved him to be made like unto his
brethern Yet though Christ was in all things made like unto his brethren,
though he took hold of the seed of Abraham, and took part of the same flesh
and blood with us, which flesh and blood of ours is surely of an arthly and
perishing nature; Yet I utterly deny D: L's inference, that W: P. renders
Christ's body earthly and perishing: For though he took part of the same flesh
and blood with us which flesh and blood of ours (as I said) is of an earthly
and perishing nature; yet by the mighty power of God, Christ's body was raised
from the dead, and saw no corruption, and so he dies no more; death has no
more dominion over him, but he ever lives to make intercession for us, in his
soul and spirit and glorious and heavenly body.

I come next to touch upon one passage in his Chap. 4, where he thinks he has
gotten I know not what advantage against W: P, He cites VV: P's. Reason against
Railing p. 165. where D.L. says "W.P. justifies and declares that he abides by
there ill names given by E. Borough, p. 30. etc. to wit, Thou Jesuit, thou
Sot, thou Sorcerer, thou art a Serpent etc. And yet (says D L) in Address to
Protestants p. 242, he at once unchristians himself and all his Brethren, for
so doing, for says he, Men that call names for Religion, may tell us they are
Christians, if they will, but no body would know them to be such by their
fruits, to be sure they are no Christians of Christ's making. Upon which D. L.
cries out Good Reader take notice of it; Alas. how has the man forgot him self!

Answ. Alas! how has D: L. abused VV: P. and his Reader too; For VV: P. does
not declare, that he abides by any ill names given by Edward Borough: for the
word [ill] is not Will. Penn's, but added by D: L, which was ill done of him:
VV: P's. words in the page quoted by D: L. being these, viz, But let it suffice
that Edward Burrouge gave no harder names than the scriptures by Rule allows.
We read of dogs, bears, wolves, swine, serpents, vipers, foxes, childeren of
the Devil and such like: And as that nature to whom they were then given,
thought them hard, so does Thomas Hicks now; But the same power that then gave
them, has now used them to the same end and purpose, and I abide by it. Thus
far W: P; where observe W: P. does not declare that he abides by any ill names,
for he uses not the word [ill] but hard names. 2dly He shows how such like
names have been given of old by good men (yea it was by the best of men) and
says, that E: B. doing it to the same end and purpose, he abides by it, and
since D: L. finds fault with it, we may easily guess at his reason for so
doing, viz, "it was W: P. that wrote it; For of all the hard names his friend G:
K. has given his opposers, I cannot, if it were for my life, find that he
blames him for one of them, and to show, that not only the scriptures and our
friends, as above, but that also G: K. has given hard names to his opposers, I
shall instance (for brevity sake) but one place out of but one of his books
entitled, The true Christ owned, see p. 104.105 thus His false accusations;
his beast with seven heads, that he has coniured out of the sea of his trobled
imagination; his Atheistical and blasphemous creed; I have proved him
manifestly guilty of Socinianisim, Arrianis^um, Anthropomorphitism,
Muggletonism, Antichristianism, and last of all gross Atheirsm. Now where will
D: L's sincerity and impartiality be, if he deal not with G: K, as he has
dealt with us in this matter.

Then as to what he offers to prove that W: P. unchristians him self and
Brethren at once, because he says (as D^ L. quotes him) "Men that call names
for religion may tell they are Christians if they will etc.

I answer Here he has very unfairly left out that part of VV: P's. words which
would unquestionably have shown such men he there discreyd to be no Christians;
For VV: P. being there treating concerning and speaking against persecutors, he
has it thus, viz, Men that call names for religion and fling stones and
persecute for faith, may tell us they are Christians, if they will, but no body
would know them to be such, by their fruits.

Now these words [and fling stones and persecute for faith] D: L. has
concealed from his Reader, and I am sure, that is a worse error than a little
failure in Syntax. But by inserting them, my Reader may see what sort of men
they were, whom VV: P. rejected, as unworthy of that honorable name, viz
Persecutors for faith, flingers of stones as well as callers of names for
relig^n; And it is well known, that such persecutors, in formers and others,
would not only fling stones, but throw dirt too, and also call such names as
these; You Quaking Curr, You Anabaptist Rogue, You Fanatic Dog, and the like;
Now it is clear, that this was the calling names for Religion which W. P.
meant, and not the calling of names after the manner as the Prophet did, when
he called a sort of men, Greedy Dogs etc. nor after the manner as E: B. did,
when he called such like men, Sot Sorcerer etc.

But perhaps D: L. will say in vindication of G. K, that he has retracted the
hard names by him given to his Opposers.

Answ. That Retractation is but a mere flam like some of the rest: For how far
has he retracted this? Why his words are of so large an extent, that is that I
know no Professor of Christianity but both might and would say as much and yet
retract just nothing at all, neither would there be any service in it in order
to give the least satisfaction to any concerned who might suppose themselves
abused by hard names published; for his retractation is only in general terms
(viz He retracts in general all the hard names that he has given to such as
did nor deserve them) without discharding any particular person or society from
the scandal of those hard names. For instance G.K. in his Antichtists and
Saducees detected has bestowed many hard names upon me, as Antichrist, Saducee
or rather Atheist, Bold Ignorant, Miller Philosopher etc. Now since there is
great probability that he does not mean me to be one of those upon whose
account he has retracted the hard names given; So also any of his former
Opponents to whom he has given hard names may say I know not that he means me
to be one of them who have not (in his Judgment) deserved them, and now
although he seems to make an acknowledgment and blame himself for bestowing
hard names on diverse, yet since he names none of those diver what satisfaction
to me is his pretended retraction in this more than his charging them on me in
his former, and what sincerity does he manifest in it? For those diverse he
hints at either did occur to his memory at the writing of his book or thy did
not: If they did, and he sincere i^ his pretension he should have named them;
but if they did not then it is a sign he put down what he published by mere
rote and in short, he had as good have said nothing about it since every
particular person concerned in those hard names may say they are never the more
satisfied there by and so all of them still lie at G: K's door.

Upon pruisal of his 5th. Chapter about prophesies I find not above one that he
has mentioned which has failed: For those he speaks of who have of late
prophesied against several towns and places, I never heard that any prefixed a
time, nor otherways than upon condition, viz unless they did repent, which
whether there was not so much repentance in so many of them as might move the
Lord to a farther compassion on them is surely more than this D: L: knows.

(As for D: L's ridiculing G: VV. about his prophecy concerning G: K. viz And
thus says the Lord, because thou have poured out contempt, scorn and reproach
upon my servants and people, I will assuredly pour out and bring great contempt
and scorn upon thee.

I answer, What farther scorn and contempt may yet come upon him, than what is
already come and manifest to the world, even since those words were written by
G: VV. let time show; and days to come make yet more manifest: For scorn and
contempt is certainly come upon him, even beyond the conceit which D.L. speaks
of. And although he may slight what G.W. said of G.K, because as he says, it is
The fate of all men, less or more; yet that is no more than those might have
said, whom the Apostle compared to Jannes and Jambres, and of whom he said,
Their folley should be manifest to all men 2 Timothy 3:9.

In his 6. Chapter he flings out his scoffs and taunts about Infallible
discerning, and in particular reflects upon our Friends about Delaware, that
they want this spirit of discerning, and to prove it instances the case of
Robert Ewer.

Now to this I say, Though G: F. (as quoted by him) speaks of a Minister of
Christ's having an infallible discerning of a man's state and condition, Yet he
does not say it is without any respect had to the fruit he brings forth: And
(Christ says Matt. 7:16 By their fruits ye shall know them. So that I do
believe, to know any man's condition without this token, must be an
extraordinary and particular gift of God; But by the fruits brought forth, I do
believe, according to the words of Christ, people may be known, and that
infallibly too, for what is short of that, is not properly knowledge, but
barely conjecture. And as for Robert Ewer There was not so near an unity bewixt
him and our Friends, a considerable time before that business of that Woman at
Philadelphia, was talked of, as D: L. may possibly imagine; But it is not the
Churches place to disown any Member, before proof be made, of some evil done by
him or her, and to prove what I say, I hope I have an Author very sufficient in
D: L's eye, for it is no less person than his great friend G: K, who in his
late book of Retractations etc. (not yet retracted again that I hear of) has
it thus in p. 3; We find no warrant from scripture to receive an accusation
against any, far less a positive judgment, without plain evidence of matter of
fact against them, by credible witnesses etc. Well then; so far as matter of
fact was thus made appear against Robert Ewer, he was dealt with according to
Gospel order too. But for D: L's telling us, of Late ill example of diverse of
our Preachers, especially of their being unlawfully concerned with women: He
should either have let us know who they were, or else have been silent about
it; for for my part I know them not, but do believe it is a great slander.

In his p. 64 he banters W: P. for saying, We ascribe not infallibility to men,
but to the grace of God, and to men so far as they are led by it: Here upon he
makes this reflection, viz Behold Reader, and note this Rhetoric well! For
are not other Professors, yea, all men in the world so far infallible, as well
as Quakers.

Answ: Yes. But does not D: L. know, that there are multitudes of men in the
world, who are so far from being led by the infallible grace, or spirit of God,
that they make a mock at, and deride it, and surely, such are very far from
being infallibly led by it. But what need was there for D: L. to say [ as well
as Quakers] since W: P. according to D: L's own citation, does not restrict
infallibility only to the Quakers, but to men indefinitely, for says he [ and
to men so far as they are led by it].

As for his telling, how friends "admit none to travel upon Truth's acount
without certificates, I think it is very commendable; but pasting by his
mocking, viz, his saying, it is "to help our spirit of discerning, I take
notice of what he says of G: W. quoting him out of Quakers plainness, thus We
have a Record in Peoples conscience; as if there fore there was no need of a
Certificate, which he Ishmael like, calls a Pocket Record.

Answ. Though he so tauntingly, yet groundleslyt, represents us to be a sort of
people, who think grea things of our selves, as to our spiritual attainm; ants
yet, I do believe, our Friends do not think they have attained to a greater
degree of discerning spirits, than the primitive Christians had, and the
Apostle Paul intimates, their approving by their letters, such as went to
Jerusalem about the Churches service, see 1 Cor. 16.3. And the same Apostle,
speaking to the Corinthians, as though he and Timothy needed not epistles of
commendation to that Church, as some others 2 Cor. 3:1 there by intimated, that
though such very eminent laborers needed not such commendations, yet others
did. And let D: L. observe, that though G. K. in his late book of Retractations
p: 3 etc, says, To know men by their fruits is a gift of the spirit and
proceeds from a true spirit of discerning, that is given universally in some
measure to all the faithful: Yet it seems, he himself must have that, which D:
L. calls A pocket Rec^rd, with him to England, and that signed not only by his
own faction, but also by -- perhaps D: L. knows who besides.

In p. 66 D: L. tells us My old friends often bless them selves thus, viz We are
redeemed from a vain life and conversation, more than any society in
Christendom; We are the only Professors of truth etc. And says D: L. so says
the Pharisees, We are not as other men etc.

Answ. What then? though the proud Pharisees were boasters, and cried, They
were not as other men, etc. Yet I hope he will not say; The saints of old were
Pharisees, who said, We know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in
wickedness 1 John 5.19; Yet there were some amongst them, who appeared to be
very scandalous in their lives and conversations. Neither do we bless our
selves, as D: L. falsely alleges, because we are in measure redeemed from a
vain life and conversation; but it is our very principle, which D: L. cannot be
ignorant of to abase self for ever, and only to bless and priase the Lord, who
through his Son Jesus Christ, enables the faithful, to perform what is
acceptable in his sight.

The next thing I shall touch at, is to make some small reflection upon what he
urges against us in his 7th. Chapter, under the head Of the Scriptures, though
the substance has been often answered by our friends; and that very fully, in
these books amongst many others, viz, The Christian Quaker, W.P s. Invalidity,
Reason against R^^ing etc. so that I shall need to say the less about it, yet I
cannot wholly pass it by, because I have therein an opportunity offered of
discovering his folly, as well as great envy, manifested in his so ridiculously
bantering that faithful labourer in the Lords vineyard, G.F. who I believe is
now at peace with the Lord, where the wicked ce^se from troubling: and the
weary be a^ rest; Whom he puts his profane joques upon in P. 74, as if, because
G.F. said Dust is the serpents meat, the Serpent feeds upon dust; therefore
G.F. meant, the Serpent was literally to feed upon lime and stone houses,
called Churches, and thereupon scoffingly queries; "Had not the Devil need to
have strong teeth, to gnaw upon steeple houses?

Answ. O gross perverter! I remember he tells me in p. 45. that about the
Resurrection I carnally apprehend G.K. Now I appeal to every judicious Reader,
whether I have not more reason to say, that D.L. carnally apprehends G. F. For
though G.F. tells the world; Their church is dust, a heap of lime and stone
gathered together; it is what is true, and obvious to every one that has eyes:
And though G.F. says; The serpent feeds upon dust, and that is also true, and
according to Scripture, which says, Dust shall thou eat all the ^aies of thy
(...) Genesis 2.14. Yet that the consequence is, that these two expressions,
according to G.F. must be fulfilled in a literal sense, viz, that the Devil is
to feed on the dust of those sort of walls; D.L. may indeed insinuate, but I
know not who will be so weak as to believe him.

And now I shall desire the Reader to excuse my stepping back to p. 70, where I
find D.L. falsely accusing Tho. Ellwood of belying the Common Creed, quoting his
Truth Defended p. 70, on this wise, viz, The common Creed (says he) called the
Apostles, Creed, says Christ was conceived by the holy Ghost, Though born of
the Virgin: where upon D: L. says "Now pray search the Common Creed, and see
if "the word [though] be there to be found.

Answer. These words [though born of the Virgin] which D: L. quarrels with, are
not laid down by T: E, as the express words of the Creed, but rather as
explanatory in order to show the import thereof, which was; That though Christ
was born of the Virgin, yet he was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and that
therefore, his Generation was not by coagulation, of, and from the properties
of man in Mary (as had been s^^gested) since Mary had not known man, but the
holy chi^d Jesus, though born of her, was conceived by the holy Ghost. And I am
sure D: L. will be hard put to it, to prove T: E. a liar in this case; he may
as well prove the Apostle a liar, in a passage Heb: 4:3 where he has relation
to an expression of the Psalmists, Psalm. 9^.11: viz, As he said, As I have
sworn in my wrath, if they shall enter into my rest: although the works were
finished from the foundation of the World. Now these words [although the works
were finished etc.] are not the Psalmist's words, but the Apostles, explanatory
of what he had before said in the same verse, viz, For we which have believed
do enter into rest: And T: E's words were much after the same manner and way of
speaking, therefore how poor, mean and pitiful must it be in D: L, to employ
himself, in prying into, and poring upon our books in order to find matter
against us, whilst, when he has done all he is able, he can produce nothing,
but such weak and silly stuff.

As wretchedly sordid and base is he in p. 71; in abusing G: W. whom he quotes
thus; Counter Convert p. 26 We prefer the holy Scriptures (says he) before all
the Books extant in the world. Whereupon D: L. infers thus. Now observe here
how G: W. carries a double face to deceive his Reader, for he does not say,
that he prefers the book called the Bible, before all books extemt etc.

Answer. This is a most wicked and ^ase insinuation, as if, when G: W. mentions
our preferring the Scripture, he did not thereby intend the Bible. I am
persuaded, it is not only contrary to D: L^s belief, but also to his very
knowledge: Besides, though other books are, and may be written, by the
assistance, and from the dictates of the Spirit of God; yet that does not
hinder the book called the Bible, from having the preference, all things
considered. Gold and Silver money are both stamped with the Kings Image and
superscription, and both are allowed by him to be current Coin, yet the one is
preferible to the other. And, whereas our Friends, amongst many other, have
said, that some Scriptures are corrupted, yet that hinders not, but in the
main, they are preferible to all other books: Gold may have some tincture of a
meaner metal in it, yet in the main it is preferible to all other metals.

Again, what a gross inference has he drawn, from the words he quotes as Sam:
Fisher's viz That were their transcriptions and translations never so certain
and entire, by answering to the first original Copies, yet are not capable to
be to all men any other than a Lesbian Rule or nose of wax; Whereupon D: L.
says, Mark how he affirms, That if the Scripures were never so true, yet they
are capable of being no other than a nose of wax.

Answ. Mark how D: L. belies his own quotation, in his pretendedly marking S:
F^s words; for the quotation himself offers, says of the Scriptures, That they
are not capable to be to all men any other than a Lesbian Rule or nose of wax:
But in his mark, to render S: F. odious, he makes him affirm, they where
capable of being no other than a nose of wax. Oh Insincere man! Can he be so
ignorant, as not to know the difference betwixt saying, The Scriptures can not
be to all men of service (which was S: F's meaning, in as much as multitudes of
mankind never had heard one word of them) and his own saying; That they are
capable of being no other (indefinitely) than a nose of Wax.

Well! upon this perversion of the above quotation D: L. comments, saying; Now
I dare affirm, there is no sort or people else in Cristendom, except Papists,
will speak this of the Scriptures. But experience tells me, That all sensible
Christians who protest against this Popish principle, cannot but have an
evidence in themselves to the wo^th and purity of the Scriptures etc.

Answ. And what of all this? The question is not about what evidence sensible
Christians have of the Scriptures; nor whether they are to them as a nose of
wax; But chiefly* about what they are to hal^ the world, which have them not.
And what service they can be of unto such, D: L. we^e best to inform us, if he
can.

In p. 75 D: L. says; But before we conclude this head, take one verdict more
from W: P^s Spirit of Truth p. 36, The Scripture (says he) is much like the
shadow of the true Rule. Now all men know, That the shadow is a vain empty
uncertain thing etc.

Answ. That Is D* L's great mistake; For Paul, who said Heb, 10.1 The law having
a shadow of good things to come, surely did not count the law, a vain, empty
and uncertain thing. And in chap. 8.5, speaking of the Priests who offered
gifts according to the law, says, That they served unto the example and shadow
of heavenly things; then surely, those things, which by Gods own appointment,
served to the example and shadow of heavenly things, were not vain, empty or
uncertain; consequently, it may be easily seen, that this observation of D: L's
is both vain and empty.

I am now come to his 8th Chapter, entitled Of Magistracy and Government; to
which I shall give a little touch, and begin where he begins, with a passage he
quotes out of Samuel Jenings's State of the case p. 73. viz Magistracy and
Government we always owned to be the Ordinance of God. To which he objects in
p. 78. thus Now observe, here S: Jenings deals deceitfully and dishonestly in
pretending to be what they really are not.

Answ. A high charge indeed! and that too to be fo^nded upon such an honest and
innocent expression; ^or what though (as D: L: quotes him) W. S. says, We own
Government and Magistracy that stands in the power of God, and executes true
Judgment within the gates, casting down sin and evil doers, and setting up
Righteousness, and those that walk therein? Yet it does no ways follow, that
therefore we own no Government to be such (so as to be subject to them in all
things, by yielding either active or passive obedience to their commands) but
the Government of those who witness Christ to rule and reign in them, as D. L.
asserts: For both William Sm^th's, and the rest of our friends practice, in
general from the beginning, has proved the contrary; they having therein
followed Scripture precepts, and the examples of the Saints of old, in owning
Government and Magistracy to be appointed of God, and that to them subjection
was due, as aforesaid. Yet surely none will think; that they so owned them,
as to own that in them which was corrupt: No, they were so far from that,
as they did not spare to tell them of it; Isaiah says, Thy Princes are
rebellious, and companions of thieves etc. see chapter 1:23, and Ezekiel says chapter
22:27. Her Princes in the midst thereof are like wolves ravening the prey, to
shed blood etc. But to sum up the matter; if D. L. own such a Government as W:
S: speaks of, it is so far well; hovvever, whether he do or no, it is such,
an one as the God of Israel, the Rock of Israel instituted, 2. Sam. 23:3. when
he spoke by his Servant David on this wise; He th^^ rules over men must be
just, ruling in the fear of God. And if D. L. do own such a Government, then I
would ask, whether he cannot say also with S: J* That he owns Magistracy and
Government to be an ordinance of God, and yet justify the aforementioned
Prophets, in so smartly reproving the Princes of their People? and next,
whether in so doing, he would, or ought to be accounted one that pretends to be
what he really is not? Let him well consider this.

As to what D: L. produces against G: F, out of a book entitled, Papers given
forth to the heads etc; wherein, amongst other expressions, D: L. makes G: F.
to say; They are out of the Life and Power that make such work for an Earthly
King, and Earthly Powers.

I Answer. Though I know not that ever I saw the book he refers to; yet it
really seems to me, to be written upon the occasion of so much contending,
fighting, killing and destroying one another, in striving who should ^e
uppermost, in and about the time of the civil Wars. But that this contradicts
W: P, or that W: P. contradicts this, by his peaceably obtaining a grant from
the King, of the Government here, as D: L. seems to insinuate in these words,
viz; Come mark that W. Penn, with they industry, in getting Grant after Grant
for Kingly and Earthly power is quite wide of the mark; they being no ways
parallel; For W.P. made no such work to obtain his Grant. (As G: F. condamnes
in the above cited passage) Then pray observe how false he is, in thus telling
W. P. of his getting Grant after Grant for Kingly power; where, as if he had
Kingly power, surely he would be a King, at least his power would not be
subordinate to the Kings, which it is well known W.P^s. is.

It is from the like ignorance or worse, that he makes such an use as he does,
of W.P's. words, quoted by him out of Address to Protestants p. 334. thus, If
we will give ancient story credit, we shall find, the wordly weapons were never
employed by the Christian Church, till she became Worldly, and so ceased to be
truly Christian etc. Upon which D. L. says: I Confess, had not ancient story
informed me, that all Chtistian Societies have apostatized, when they grew
numerous, I should have admired at this Passage, that the same W. P. should in
so few years after he Wrote it; not only fall into that Apostasy himself, but
also draw many more with him.

Answer: But pray What is the Apostasy, which D. L. accounts, that W. P. and
those many more drawn in by him, are fallen into? Why the most I can make of it
is, That People are so far degenerated from Christ's commands given to his
followers, viz to let the Tares grow up with the Wheat, etc. that they who now
pretend to be his, do not make use of worldly weapons, so much to pluck up the
tares, as the good wheat, as the diverse Persecutions of late years can
testify. And that this was it that W. P. meant, by their making use of worldly
weapons, is clear, from the very subject matter he was upon, and treating about
in that place. Now if W. P. has never done so, as I believe he never did, then
to be sure, in that respect he is clear from being an Apostate.

And since D. L. is so well informed, that all Christian Societies have
Apostatized as they grew numerous; surely, the Church of England having grown
very numerous, they must needs according to D. L. be apostatized also: and yet
in his Almanac for the year 169: he prays, that she may be a blessing upon
Philadelphia; As if an Apostate Church could be a blessing upon any place.

Then whereas he observes, that Ancient story has informed him, that all
Christian Societies have apostatized, when they grew numerous: I shall now
observe likewise, and put him in mind too, how the scene is altered; and that
modern story can now inform him of a Society of People lately founded in
Pensilvania, and his great Friends who (like those that ancient story informs
us of, though they were apostatized from the light, life and spirit of Christ;
yet would still retain to themselves the honorable name of Christians; so
those of this new Society) though they were gone from the unity and society of
the people called Quakers, at the first, would by all means value themselves
much, upon their retaining that name, and that forsooth of the most pure and
most primitive sort too, and therefore must be distinguished by the name of
Christian Quakers. That these are so apostatized, within the space of about
seven years, notwithstanding their not growing numerous, that scarce any of
them will own the name; But like Babels Builders are strangely divided amongst
themselves; and truly look upon it as a judgment befallen them for their lo^ty
tower building: some being gone to the water, (...) some to dipping one
another; and some to sprinkling with the old popish Ceremony of God Fathers and
God Mothers: some staying at home, and leaving all Christian Societies* others
running into strange notions, as that there are two Gods, and that one of them
dyed etc. Some (though very few) now and then keeping a meeting, possibly
pretty near the manner of their primitive practice. And ^hus is the Language of
these Babel Builders confounded, and themselves scattered abroad, so that they
have already almost left often to build the City and the Tower. God grant they
may be a warning to all others, for the future.

But to wave any farther digression, I come again to the point, and do say,
That as it is clear, that what W.P. wrote there, was intended against those who
used such like worldly weapons, in the carrying on of Religious matters: So it
is also clear, that he never thereby meant to insinuate, as if Christ upon his
coming into the world, or offering up himself, had put an end, or commanded an
end to be put to all outward Government in matters Civil: For in the same page,
W.P. intimates; That Christ came to reform the lives of men, and to make them
better subjects to obey Caesar etc, So that if subjects be owned, Princes, etc.
must be owned likewise; And seeing W P owned, that Christ came to make men
better subjects to obey Caesar, by consequence he must needs have owned, that
Christ did allow of a Caesar to command such obedien^e; And I dare say,
Whosoever shall read that, or any other o^ W. P's, books, shall find nothing to
the contrary: But for him to charge W: P: with Apostasy, because of his being
concerned in civil Government, is preposterous; and I further say, for Friends
to be concerned in the civil Government, is no ways inconsistent with their
ancient principles, or practice either, when they have been called to it by
Authority, without an oath: therefore D: L's. insinuation against W:P: and us,
as if we were ceased to be Christian, because concerned therein, is groundless,
and a mere begging of the Question.

Another fling D. L. has in this 81st* pa. against W: P, as follows, viz But
some think W: P: has wit enough to make out to all that see with his eyes, that
the sword of the Magistrate viz Constable's staves, Sheriff's weapons, Stocks,
Prisons and Gallows* are not worldly weapons, ^ut spiritual weapons, when used
by Quakers.

Answ. An idle story: One would think he were violently seized with the itch of
scribbling, For where did W: P: ever take upon him to prove or make out to any
man any such thing? Besides, I never u^derstood, that a Constable's staff was
counted a weapon, he being but a Civil Officer, and his place to keep the
peace; but rather that it is a mark or badge of his office, whence it is common
with people, when a Constable comes to serve a Warrant upon any person, and
brings not his Staff with him to ask him, where it is? And I my self was once a
Sheriff, but neither before, then, nor since, did I ever understand, that such
a thing as a weapon, peculiarly belonged to, or was essentially needful in, the
due execution of that Office. Then as for Stocks, Prison and Gallows, he may
call them weapons if he please, but for my part I do not think them so; much
less that they come under the Apostle's denomination of carnal, when he says
2. Cor. 10:4, The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty trough God
to the pulling down of strong holds etc. For the weapons which the Apostle here
opposes to carnal, being such wherewith they pulled down strong holds, seems to
me to allude to such outward weapons, with which the warriors of old did
fight, and pull down outward strong holds; Consequently, did not allude to the
strong holds themselves, which (in a sense) Stocks and Prisons are. So then,
where the Apostle speaks of the weapons of their warfare not being carnal, he
(...) thereby ^e supposed to intend or allude to stocks, prisons, or the like,
but rather to those weapons, with which they of old used to pull them down. As
for his sly insinuation about W: P's making out to the people, that Stocks,
Constable's staves, Prisons, Gallows etc. are spiritual weapons, when used by
the Quakers; I shall only say thus much, I can not think, but that he knows
better, than he writes, in this Case, as well as in many other matters; and
surely the greater will be his condemnation in the great day of Acco^nt, which
they (though fal^ly) so much accuse us of denying.

In his 9th. Cha^ter, entitled Of Persecution, and Prosecution, the fir^^
thing I shall take notice of, is the great do he ^akes, about some o^ his
^riends in (...), ^eing called to account for ^^lying and (...) the
M^gi^^rates, and Authority o^ the pla^e, (...) purely Religions, and (...)
difference (as they falsely alleged) (...) have been troubled for it, and the
like; which I have p^^tly answered in Modest Account, from p: 39 to p: 43. Yet
when G: K: got into England, and into the Bishop of Londons favor, how quickly
did he himself there fall to that work really, which but a little before, he
had falsely objected against others in Pensilvania, by instigating, stirring up
and endeavoring to prevail with Authority in England, to give order, not only
to enter into our Meeting houses; but also to search for our Books, and when
found, to have them diligently searched and examined by the most pious and
jud^cious etc; and if found guilty of vile and gross errors o^ which, no
question, but ^e and the Clergy must be ^udges to suppress them by public
Authority; and that for no other reason, but pretended errors in doctrine
contained in them? And now it this do not arise from a Spirit o^ Pers^cution* I
know not what does; for pretended errors in Doctrine, have been the (...)
a^g^ments alleged, for stirring up all the persecutions, which have infested
Cristendom, for about these 100 Years. Let us also c^^sider, what may be the
effect of such a work, if G. K. (...) but obtain his end, in having his
proposal effected; W^y then, it would be but getting some such persons, (...)
^erhaps himself, and chief friends shall call pious and judicious, to fall to
the work, and the business might soon go on briskly: And then our peaceable
Meetings, and by conseq^nce the Nations peace in some measure, would be
disturbed again; our Shops and Houses might with violence be entered into, and
the Booksellers might possibly have many hundred pounds worth of books seized
at once, without any evil committed by them, as well as without trial, before
either Judge or Jury, except G: K: and such as he shall call pious and
judicious. So that this Suffering proposed by him, would not be on a like
ground with their pretended suffering he complains of here, viz, for calling a
Governor Impudent man, telling him, He was not fit to be Governor; for
belying Magistrates (as they did here) in print, about their proceedings in the
administration of Justice, also for falsely insinuating against Magistrates,
that one was so drunk, that he was ^ain to be carried to bed; and that another
was so drunk, that he could scarce get over the ships side he was in, with
such like stuff, which G: K: and his company here (in their impetuous heat to
vent their malice on some then in authority in this place, and to render them
as odious, as well they could) did not stick to publish, to their great abuse.
But alas! the case (on such an occasion as aforesaid) would be far otherwise
with the Quakers in England: For having no such like things as these, justly to
lay to their charge there, their suffering would be only on the score of
pretended errors in Doctrine, which (as I said) is the common pretense of most
Persecutors. Yet since D: L: and G: K: flout so much at infallible descerning,
I would ask them, Upon what pretense they would undertake to pass judgment upon
our books? If they say, by the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, Who then (say
I) must be Judge of the Comment? For it is about that, that Persecutors
generally differ with the Persecuted. Therefore were D: L: sincere and
impartial a^ he pretends to be; since he takes upon him to inveigh so much,
against the pretended persecution of those ^^re, why should he ^e so mute, as
not to rebuke, or so much as take one word of notice, of G: K's real endeavors
to stir up those in Authority in England, to a real persecution there: Since
(although the book wherein those passages are contained, was published before
the Retractation book came forth, yet) he has not (there in) retracted them:
And yet D: L: pretends, he would have taken in G: K's books, together with
ours, if he had not re^^^cted hi^ errors: but his Cloak is too short, and his
covering too narrow, to hide his exceeding great partiality under, as in
several places of this book I have shown, particularly in this case.

The next thing I shall take notice of, is his mentioning our Friends ancient
Testimony concerning ^earing in^^ries, so as being reviled not to revile again;
and also their crying against those who caused people to be p^t in prison, and
took away their goods upon a religious account, and the like, comparing it with
George Keith, Thomas Budd, John Mc Comb, William Bradford and Peter Boss their
being called to account for their abuses to the Government, see p: 81 to 86.
Now this is fallacious, for they hold no parallel, and therein at most he does
but merely beg the Question, they being not called to account about any
Religious Difference, as I have already shown.

For I do believe, had any other Persons (though they had been such as had
never in the least differed with us about Religious matters*) done as G: K: and
his Company did, they would not have escaped the notice of the Government, any
more than G: K: etc. I would therefore have them, and all others, duly, and in
sincerity and truth, weigh this matter in the right balance; for although our
Friends h^ve te^^ified, That we ought to hear injur^es etc. and accordingly
have born the injurious Revilings, Imprisonments and Spoiling of Goods,
acknowledging it o^ Principle so to do, when inflicted on any of us for
Conscience sake; Yet on the other hand, we always owned Magistracy to be an
Ordinance of God, and that it was for the punishment of evil doers, and to
preserve men's Lives, Liberties and Properties; see Edward Burroughs's Works p:
784: 785. And likewise it has been the practice of our Friends from the
beginning, to endeavor to recover their just Rights, by due course of Law from
those who were not under the regulation of our Church discipline, nor would
otherwise be persuaded to do the thing that was just and right, notwithstanding
D: L's undue and strained construction of our words relating to bea^ing
Jnjuries etc.

And whereas in his p: 82 he gives us a quotation, said to be taken out of Sam.
Jennings his State of the Case, p. I know not what, which he makes to speak to
this purpose viz "That they could do no less than prosecute, and fine G: K: and
T: B: without the violation of their Trust to the King.

I answer, Since he has not mentioned the page, I cannot tell wether or no he
has laid down S. J's words fairly; he is not a man fit to be trusted in such
cases, for reasons already shown: But be it as it will, it appears from D. L's
citation it self; that it was not self revenge they sought, but to prevent the
violation of their Trust.

And therefore D. L. had no manner of ground, to caution our Preachers to keep
their Hearers from reading that part of Robert Barclay^s Apology, which he has
quoted in his p: 89; For R. B. is not there treating at all of Civil
Government, but of Revenge and War, as his express words are, and therefore he
complains that "The Christian world is fallen in to contempt of Christ's Law,
not only as to oaths, cursings, ^^^phemous prophanations and horrid perjuries;
but also* now the world is filled with violence, oppression, murders,
ravishing of Women and Virgins, spoilings, dep^edations, burnings, va^^ations
and all manner of l^scivio^^ness and cruelty. But not one word has he against
the Civil Magistrates appointing the just Laws to be executed upon Evil doers;
nor that it is unlawful for men to recover ther^ just Rights, by due process,
according to the just and equal laws of the Government, under which they live.
And as I could produce several instances out of our ancient Friends writings,
to prove, that from the beginning, it was against our Principles to be
concerned in outward Wars and Fightings; So I could also produce diverse
instances, that from the beginning it was not against our principles to be
concerned in outward Government. I shall at present only mention two.

First, Edward B^rroughs, in his book entitled A ^ust and righteous Plea,
presented to the King of England etc. declares to the King and Council, in the
name o^ the (...), as may be seen in p. 784 785 of his Collection (...) above)
that, We do acknowledge Government (...) Rule and Magistracy to be an Ordinance
of (...) and instituted of him, to be exercised among the (...) of men. And we
believe rhere ought to be Rule and Government and Authority, exercized and
executed in every Kingdom, Nation, City and Country, for the end aforesaid; to
wit, that Evil doers may be made afraid and corrected, limited, restrained and
subdued, that sin and transgression may be suppressed, and truth and
righteousness promoted, and them that do well praised, and strengthened. And
this is the very end of outward government of Kings, Princes, or other amongst
men upon the Earth; even that the outward man may be kept in good order and
subjection, in his conversation in the world, and may be limited and
re^^rained, from all wrong doing or speaking, against his Neighbors Person or
Estate; and if he do, he is punishable by such just Authority. 2dly. The
exercise and execution of this just Government* (...) the outward (...) before
described* ought to be committed into the hands o^ ^aithful, just and (...)
Men, (...) the Lord, and h^^e covetousness, and every evil way, and not to
drunkards* (...), covetous or evil minded persons, ambitious or vain glorious
persons, in any Nation etc. And in p. 751. he has it thus viz I have before
mentioned, what kind of Rulers and Governors we would have; even such as are
just men, and men of Truth and Righteousness, that hate covetousness and every
evil way, and such are of us etc. [Mark such are of us].

The second is Richard H^^bert^^rn, who was also an ancient Preacher and Writer
amongst the Quakers, and who (as did also Edward Borough) dyed so long ago, as
in the year 1662. In his discourse with King Charles the second, the King asked
him thus, as may be seen in the* printed account p. King. How do you own
Magistrates and Magistracy? R. H. Thus we do own Magistrates. Whosoever ^s ^et
up by God, whether King as Supreme, or any set in Authority by him, who are for
the punishment of evil doets, and the praise of them that do well, such we
shall submit unto, and assist in righteous and civil things, both by body and
estate; And if any Magistrate do that which is unrighteous, we must declare
against it, only submitting under it, by a patient suffering, and not rebel
against any, by insurrections, plots or contrivances. King: Then the King said,
That is enough. Now in this discource there are two things observable; First,
That we owned Magistracy etc. and Secondly, We then declared, We should submit
to them, and assist them in righteous and civil things [Mark assist] both by
body and estate. So that here we see he declared, we could assist the
Government in righteous and civil things, not only with our Estates; but also
with our Bodies: therefore, so to do is not contrary to our ancient Friends
Testimonies.

In p. 85. mentioning Peter Boss's trial, he has a fling at David Lloyd; on
this wise In the trial of which (says he) D. Lloyd, being Attorney, pleaded
for S. J. and read a case out of an old Law book, to this effect, That though a
Bishop was seen to be drunk, yet he was not to be reproved. In answer thereto,
David Lloyd denies, that he brought any such instance, or that he so much as
knows of any such case in any Law-book whatsoever.

In p. 86. he gives us a pretended speech of Arthur Cook's on this wise, viz;
Well, seeing Friends that you are not like to agree, you are absolved ^^om your
Test (or Oath) and are discharged; and we will have another Jury that shall
agree, and find the bill. To this, Arthur Cook and others then concerned, whom
I have discoursed with, say, that No such expression dropped from him, so far as
they can recollect; But that he did deliver his opinion; That seeing the Jury
could not agree, another inquest should be awarded, as the law in that case
directs. So that I have sufficient reason to conclude, that this great noise,
is no other than a false, as well as base insinuation, against both the Court
and Arthur Cook, in order to represent them all, to be such manner of persons,
as were resolved to have the bill found in that case, right or wrong.

In p. 87. mentioning a law made in England; That no Quaker or reputed Quaker
shall serve on any Juries, or bear any Office or Place of profit in the
Government; he makes this reflection, They may see what their ill manners in
Pennsilvania has brought on them etc. To which I answer, This I take to be as
idle an insinuation, as any one in his whole book; As if the clause, in that
Law made in England were added, because of G. K. Peter Boss etc. their being
prosecuted here, a very silly groundless story.

In p. 88. he publishes a letter (or at least part of one) in the name of G.
F. relating to a book of Tho. Budd's. Now that letter I know not that ever I
have seen, therefore, for diverse reasons before given, I shall not credit his
quotation, so much as to take any farther notice of it.

In p. 90. he produces a quotation, said to be taken out of Richard.
Hubberthorn's. Works, wherein the said R. H. blaming a Priest, says, Thou do
allow of going to Law which the apostle did not etc. Now to what end should he
produce this against us? The most probable sense and intent of Richard
Hubbertho^^^ words, being, to set the Apostles doctrine (...) the Priests head,
in reproof o^ the common practice of their Church Members going to law with
each others, allowed by the Priest, and that t^^^efore those, who in the
Apostle's sense, might be (...) unjust; the Apostles dri^^, being to prevent
Brothers going law with ^^other, and to reprove therefore: A practice, which
the Quakers allow no more of now, than they did in the beginning.

I am now come to his Chapter 10th. entitled; Friends suffering, to be
recorded by London Meeting; Which mos^ly concerns those of West-Jarsey side to
speak to, which they may do, if they see any need for it, and if they do, it
may be added in a Postscript, where also I intend to publish John Wood^s
vindication of himself from the aspersions cast upon him in this chapter,
tes^^fied bo^^ ^y himself and Neighbors. Only something o^ what he says about
Ralph W^rd, I shall take notice of in the ne^t (...) t^ke as follows. (...) p.
92.93 he has it th^^ ^n the years 1694 and 95 Ralph Word, a poor friend at
Phi^^delphia, was several times fi^ed for conscientio^^ly re^^sing to serve on
^^^ies* and had goods taken from him to the value o^ 4. L. 6 of which he
complained to the Governor and Council, but had no releif. The Members of
Counsel present were S. Carpenter, S. Richardson, Amorris, C. P^sey, D. LLoyd,
all Quakers.

Answer. This is very silly, like the rest of his stuff: For first, Though
those members were present at Council, yet if they would, they could have
granted him no rele^^, without the consent or the Governor, who was no Quaker.
2dly. Whether the Governor, and all the Members of Council, had been Quakers
or no Quakers, yet they could nor have ^^leived him because, the Laws of this
Government impose a (...) on all that shall refuse to serve on a J^^y, which
laws (according to the orginal frame of Government* and Constitution o^ this
place) the Governor and Council are to take care that they be ^ll dut^ and
diligently executed; therefore consequently are not to be violated by them.
2dly. Though

there might be so much goods taken from him, as might amount to the value D.
L. mentions, yet so far as it did appear to us, the Sheriff was always very
ready to deliver him the overplus of his fine. However, me thinks any man,
though never so conscientious, should in no wise object scruple of conscience,
in relation to serving upon a Jury, thiir chief office, being, to find out the
truth ar^ faelsehood of any matter brought before them, or what any of their
own Members may inform them of.

For as to what any man may suffer, either in Cases Criminal, or Civil after
the I^ry have found ^ainst him, it is the business of the Law to direct, and of
the Judge or Justice, to pronounce the Judgment of the Court.

His 11 Chapter Of Swearing he begins thus, viz In W. Penn's book called,
Reason against Railing, p. 41. the question is put thus, How could you know
that swearing in any cas^ were unlawful, if it had not been written, Swear not
a^ all? Is not then the Scripture your R^le in this Case? W. Penn there
answers, This shows the ignorance of Tho: ^^icks in the writings of the best
Gentiles (...) his acknowledgment of the lights sufficiency, in case we are
able to prove swearing disallow th^e before Christ came in the (...). The seven
wise men, (says he) famous among ^he Greek^ 500 years before Christ came in
the flesh esteemed swearing but a remedy against corruption. Upon all which D:
L: Comments thus* Now observe, does not this plainly show, that they held
swearing not only allowable, but also good to be used etc.

Answ. No it does not; For though they esteemed it as a remedy against
corruption, yet it follows not from thence, that they esteemed it good to be
used. For, to make a law to massaere all the Jews, Papist, Maggletonians etc.
in ^^e Kings dominions, who spread up and down their (...) doctrines therein,
would be of as tendincy to remedy that corruxtion; yet it would not be good to
be used: To h^ng men for telling lies against their honest Neighbors o^ others
would (doubtless) remedy that corruption, as much as wearing would be a remedy
giving against in false evidence; yet that would not be good to be used, and
indeed I know not what is better to be used, to prevent false speak^ng, than to
keep close to him who is the truth it se^^, and who has commanded us not to
swear at all

D: L: proceeds in his p: 98 asking Was not W: P: dotish when he brought this
instance to prove the light in sufficient etc.

Answ. Why Dotish? Does it not prove clearly enough, that the light showed
them, that to falsify their words was corruption? Why not sufficient then, to
show them, that unless they kept to their words without any oath what soe^er,
it was corruption also?

He queries farther thus, viz, Was it likely that the light or law in the best
Gentiles would forbid all swearing at the same time when the law (outward) was
in force, that allowed and commanded swearing?

Answ. Why not? For the outward law, under that dispensation, allowed of hating
enemies Matt 5.4^. and of wars and fightings; but it is evident, some of the
best Gentiles at the same time did not; but were taught more evangelical
precepts, to wit of loving enemies, and ceasing from wars and fightings* of
which I shall give one or two instances" cited in G. K's Universal free grace
of the Gospel; see in p. 126 the advice of D^ndimus King of the Brachmans to
Alexander the great, viz To cease war^ing against men without: and engage
himself in another war^are, against then, ^emi^s within himself, his lusts, his
affection, his desi^es i^ he de^^^ed to be rich: indeed and to be a true
Victor-assuring him that all his power, all his hosts, all his riches, all his
pomp, would at last not ava^l him any thing; But (says he) if thou will
hearken to my words, thou shall possess of my goods, who have God to my
friends, and whose inspiration I enjoy within me. ^hus thou shall overcome lust
the mother of penu^y which never obtain^ what it seeks. Thus thou shall, with
us, honor thy self, by becoming such as God had Created Then next, as to
loving enemies, which the law allowed to hate* see p. 133 how Lycurgus that
famous Spar^an Legis^^t^r, who, for making wholesome laws to reduce his people to
good manners was hated and stoned, and among many other insolences sustained,
had one of his eyes smote out, with a cudgel, by a certain young man called
Alexander, for which he being apprehended, and comdemned to dye, Lycurgus
redeemed him, took him as a friend into his own house, and there taught him to
live well, so that it is said he became a good man. Much more might be
mentioned, which, though the outward law, under the legal dispensation, allowed
and commanded other things to the Jews; Yet G: K: himself says p. 124 of the
same book That that in them (the Gentiles;) which taught and enabled them to
obey the truth in these things, was supernatural and Evangelical.

Well in p. 99 he alleges, that To say, I solemnly promise to declare in the
presence of Almighty God etc. is a calling upon God to be a witness to the
truth of the testimony given etc.

Answ. Whether it be so or not, yet it is not swearing by God, or by any other
thing. Neither is the practice of our Friends in America, in Courts or
otherwise, contrary to the primitive principles of our Friends, as mentioned in
their writings; which since D. L. is so good at searching, let him satisfy
himself, if he please; where he may find sufficient to clear us, ^^om his false
charge of Apostasy, ob^ected against us.

In p. 99.100 he says In their Courts about Delaware I have seen Quakers give
and command the Engl^^h ^o^mal oath to be given to those that were not Quakers.
And mentioned Dav. LLoyd as a person gulty of the charge.

Answ. It is admirable, how a man who pretends to write by a motion heavenly,
can have the face thus to be^y^ men However Let him see to the proof of the
truth of this accusation, least, i^ he should happen to be called to an account
for it in time to come, he might happen to fall under the temtation, of adding
another lie to all the rest, by miscalling such a prosecution, by the name of
persecution. But to sum up the matter, the law is good, and was made for Liars,
as well as for perjured persons, see 1 Timothy 1:10 and David LLoyd unterly denies
his charge.

His 12 th Chapter entitled Of fighting, Swearing and paying Tithes, he begins
with a notorious falsehood, in telling of which, he is fain to beg the question
too, on this wise viz The Quakers having denied Jesus of Nazareth to be the
Savior of the world, and to be in heaven glorified in the true nature of man
both in their ancient books, as is before showed (this is false; for our books
sufficiently show the contrary) and now being charged with the same, and the
persons so accusing or charging them having proffered to prove the same upon
them at any public meeting they shall think fit to a point, yet they refuse to
hear with that ear etc.

Answ. And why a public meeting? Has not late experience shown the little
service there is in that? Therefore, since they have o^ late, by their numerous
prints, endeavored to the utmost of their power, to prove this upon us,
although to no purpose, as by our friends answers from time to time it may be
seen; and seeing they a^e so uncharitably hardened against us, as that nothing
of our explanations of such passages as they have found ^ault with, nor our
solemn confession to the Lord Jesus Christ, both within us and without us will
suffice: What hopes can we have, that public meetings should have (...)
sucess. Neither would the most public meeting that co^^d be gathered, ^e near
so effectual a way for us to (...) thruth we profess, and our selves, from the
false (...) published in print, by them against us, and (...) abro^d into so
many places of the world, as our (...) answers, also in pri^t, are, or may be.

B^t that it may be seen, how wicked this (...) thus belying us; himself in the
(...) contrary, I shall now transcri^e a passage (...) he himself has cited,
out of the writings of G. Whitehead. an^ T. Ellwo^d. who are (...) be A^thors
approved amongst us. D. L. in his p 22 and N^m^. ^3 has it thus; " Answ. to
Dr. Lancaster, by G: W: and six other, We sincerely believe in Jesus Christ,
^^th as he is true God and perfect man; our Immanuel and Mediator; and as in
the fullness of time he was conceived by the holy Ghost, ^or^ of the Virgin
Mary, and was crucified and put to death, was buried, rose again, and visibly
ascended into heaven -- And that this same Jesus Christ that was crucified,
shall so in like manner come (as he was seen to go into heaven) at the last and
great day of Judgment* The ^ext I shall puoduce is a passage of Tho, El^wood^s,
in his F^rther Discovery, in answer to G: K, p: 72, G: K: alleging, that This
gross and vile (...), that Christ is not to come without us, in his glorified
^ody to judge all mankind* I find too many in England guilty of T: E: says, I
es^eem as a vile slander, if, by many he intend many of the people called
Quakers:

And now, since I know they are apt to tell us, that these kind of confessions
we had never come to had ^ot G. K. driven us to it; and that we now preach
Christ (...) of envy to G: K, because we would ^e^der him a false accuser etc.
I do say, as this is very uncharitable, so I shall make it appear to be very
false, by D: L^s own Citations. For 2.1st in p. 23 he cites G* Was answer to W.
Haw^rth, p. 23 (wrote I suppose above 20 years ago, thus) Christ did rise in
that body where in he suffered, and in the same assended in to the heavens --
and it is so far circumscribed in the heavens as ^tis capable of and as is
proper to it; and though it be spiritual and glorious, yet a body, and
therefore not in every place where God is. Likewise in sin p 12 he cites
^oundat. of Tithes p 2^8 2^0 by T. Ellw^^^ thus, viz Nor do the Quakers ascribe
salvation to the following the light within, but to Christ Jesus, to whom the
light lead^ -- If any one expect remission of (...) by any other wa^ th^n by
the death o^ Christ useless ^enders the death of Christ

Thus far out of this very book of D: L^s, as quoted by himself, out of our
friends former Books.

Likewise G: ^, one o^ the most ancient as well as most ^minent of the Quakers,
in his Iournal, p 25^, has it thus We do own and believe in Jesus Christ, his
beloved and only begotten Son, in whom he is well pleased; who was conceived by
the holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary; in whom we have redemption, through
his blood, even the forgiveness of sins -- And we do own and believe, that he
was made a sacrifice for sin; who knew no sin neither was guile ^ound i^ his
mouth. And that he was crucified for us in the ^^e^h, without the gates of
Jerusalem; and that he was buried, and rose again the third day by the Power of
his father, for our justifiation: And we do believe, that he ascended up into
heaven, and now sits at the Right hand of God etc. This have I produced here
(omitting a great number more of testimonies which might be one^ed to the same
effect) to show, first, D. L's un^^^sonable perfidiousness, in his thus
knowingly accusing ^s (...). 2dly. To manifest over his head, that we do not
deny, but really own Jesus of Nazareth to be the Savior of the World, and that
he is true God, and perfect man.

And now I am speaking of these things, I think it not amiss, to clear our
Friends from alate false accusation brought by G. K. and his company against
them, which is; That we own no other resurrection, but what is witnessed in
this life of the new birth; or that we get the resurrection ^^lly immediately
after death etc. But to show the contrary of this I shall bring, 1st. Tho.
Ellwood's Farther Discovery p. 72. in answer to G. K. thus, viz "He says, Many
^old, to my certain knowledge, That the Resurrection is the new birth, and
nothing else: Others say, Immediately after death we get the Resurrection
fally. I^ many by that hold th^s, he means many of the People called Quakers, I
neither own nor know any that hold such docttines. 2dly. Likewi^e in the book
called ^he Chr^st^^n D^^trines etc. by G. W. and others, it is thus expressed,
(...), We since^^ly ow^, not only ^ Res^r^^ction i^ Christ, (...) the fallen,
sinful state ^ere; (...) to glory with him herea^ter, that when he at last
appears, we may appear with him in glory (...) 2.^. ^c. -- ^t the last t^^mp o^
God, ^^d voice of the (...) ^ngel, the dead (...) The d^^d in Christ (...) 1 Thessalonians. 4.1^ etc. Thus ^ar G. W.

And now again, least they should (as (...) they have do^e) still tell ^s, we
have (...) of that ^^e have been o^ l^te ^orced to it (...) G. K. (...)
therefore show one or two plain proo^s to the contrary. (...) Ed^ard.
Barrough. who died in the year 1662. ^ho in his Wor^s p. 440. speaking
con^^^^ing the Resurrection, expresses himself th^s viz And we believe, eve^
that he that was dead, is alive, and lives for evermore* and that he comes,
and shall come, to judge the wo^^d with righteousness, and all people (...)
shall give every man according to (...) the day of judgment, when all shall
(...) he that has done good, shall (...) he that has done evil, to
everlas^ing condemnation. In the next place I shall produce a quotatio^ (...)
book o^ S^ephen ^ri^^s, entitled, (...) to the simple hearted, for the
answering (...) and objections, etc. where in his p. 12. he (...) th^s
concerning the Resurrection, viz, For he that (...) Resurrection after this
manner* to (...) dead to (...) be risen with Christ Jes^s in the new (...),
even while they (...) in this earthly tabernacle* before ^t is dissolved* such
will never question their appearing ^t the Judgment* (...) o^ God, after it is
dissolved; but do believe it with joy and gl^dness, and have a fervent hope
(...) Resurrection o^ the de^d, and have their expectation ^^to God in that
m^tter, that he will a^^ording to his (...) raise them up at the (...) day, and
will give unto (...) Seed his own body, even as pleases Him; and the creature
is not careful then about such foolish questions and doubts, as to inquire
about what manner of body God will give them; but leave it to the Lord, in full
Faith, that he will raise them up according to the Scriptures. Thus far S. C.
And now lastly, what Authors shall I bri^^^, to convince these our new
opposers, that we do not deny, but own the Resurrection, according to the
Scripture? Surely, none more fit, than their great, original Sect Master G. K,
who in Presbyterian and Independent visible Churches etc. not yet retracted,
which was written but in the year 1689* p. 3.4, in answer to Sam. Norton's
charging us with denying the Resurrection of the dead, says thus, viz, That
they deny the Resurrection of the dead, this is also a most false charge, which
they can never prove; but because we deny their carnal conceptions of the
Resurrection, and hold us to scrip^re words, which is most sat, there fore
they have so belyed us. And for the more satisfaction of the Reader (says he)
I refer him to a little book, called Truth's Principles published by some noted
men of the Quakers. In which book, it is expressly affirmed, That we, to wit,
the Quakers, believe that the same body which is laid down shall ^e raised up
at the Resurrection of the dead, as much as a natural body can be the same with
a spiritual body, or an earthly body can be the same with a havenly body,
according to the Scripure testimony; It is sown natural but raised spiritual:
And the glory of the heavenly is one, and the glory of the earthly is another.
And this may satisfy any sober enquirer etc. Thus far G. K. To all which I say,
though this was so lately cited by G: K, out of a former book of our Friends,
and laid down by him, as one of our priciples, which he counts might satisfy
any that inquires in sobriety; Yet, it seems, it will not satisfy him now, for
which I fear the chief reason is, for that he himself is gone into Apostasy and
bitter enmity.

Having a little digressed upon this occasion, I now return to D: L 's 12 th*
Chapter, where I find him in his p. 103, alleging against J. Dickenson and S.
Jenings, in particular, as follows, viz, Where fore some preachers,
particularly J. Dickenson and S. Jenings have now found out a new a^gment to
prove to their hearers that they are indeed baly^d ((...) in being acco^sed for
denying Jesus of Nazareth etc. as before mentioned) and that is, That their
^e^^sing to pay Tithes, to fight and to swear, are three proofs that they (...)
^^sus to be Christ, and therefore they are falsely accused.

Answ. Though hereupon he vaunts at no small rate, yet (...) from a grand
mistake, at (...) they nor we do say, that our refusing to pay Tithes, to fight
and to swe^r, are proofs of our owning Jesus to be Christ, but the reason for
which we refuse to pay Tithes, to fight and to swear, and our suffering so
deeply on those accounts, is, because weilest Christ was in the flesh, he
forb^de, and at his offering up himself, he put an end to these things; and yet
our thus refusing to comply with those things, because of his commands and
prohibitions, then given, is a good proof, that we own Jesus to be Christ: Did
not Paul bring such manner of reasoning, to prove his hope and expectation of
the resurrection of the dead? see 1 Cor. 15.^2, where he said, If after the
manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what advantage^^ it me, if
the dead rise not? let us eat and drink, for to morrow we die. Even so may we
say; If Jesus be not the Christ, that offered himself up, and put an end to the
ceremonial law of Tithes etc; Let us pay Tithes and keep our selves out of
prisons, and our goods from being spoiled. On! but this we can not do, because
our souls are satisfied, that Jesus is the Christ, and has put an end to these
things.

In the next place, he falls foul upon us about Government matters. He begins
first with West Iersey, the Province he lives in; but with what truth he
relates things a^ done there, I refer to them selves to answer, if they think
it worth their while.

But since in his p 104.105 he pretends to give a relation* with reflections,
upon some affairs relating to our Government of Pennsilvania, I shall not pass
over that, but detect his abuses of us therein. He has it thus, viz. Next, let
us step over into the Government of Pensilvania, where in the year 1695 we find
Coll. Benjamin Fletcher, then Governor of that Province, pressing upon the
Assembly to raise a fund for his Majesty's service to wards securing the
Province from the French and Indians, but this they could not do, No, it was
against their tender consciences, contrary to their ancient testimony and
principle; and so no fund was raised.

Answer. This is not so, for Governor Fletcher's power here, expired before
any Assembly sat, or was so much a chosen in the year 1695. Neither did hein
1694 press the Assembly, to raise a fund, toward the securing the Province
from the French and Indians: So that allowing his one years mistake, as to
time; yet his charge in the main is utterly false. Neither was the reason why
no money was reised then, because we pladed (as he falsely incinuates) it was
against our tender consciences; for at that time the Assembly was satisfied,
they had a very reasonable and sufficient plea, for their not complying with
his desires, without alleging matter of Conscience in the Case.

He goes on saying, But the next year W: Penn got the Government into his hands
again, and then the Assembly meets again, and now they must do something
toward maintaining the Frontiers at Albany, or lose their beloved honor of
having the Government: for the Queen had commanded it, and W: P: had engaged to
comply therewith.

Answ. A very idle story; for though the Queens commands to all the
Neighboring Colonies, ^s to maintaining in part the frontiers at Albany,
affected us amongst the rest; and though, for Conscience sake, the Assemblies
here could not perform ^ll things therein mentioned: Yet it does not ^t all
follow from thence, that the Assembly must therefore lose their share in the
Government. Had they not the same power of Government under Governor Fletcher,
as now, m^^ have? Yes surely; Neither was the maintaining any thing of the
frontiers at Albany, a condition of our Proprietary^s original gr^^t, or his
restoration either. However I shall venture to say (as knowing these matters
better than D. L.) That the Assembly's here, during the war, were very
respectfull at all times to the Queens commands, and so for as their Religious
persuasions would admit thereof, were ready to perform them. But what ashame is
it for this D: L: to insinuate* if we so much loved the [honour] of having the
government in our hands, as that for he s^k^* thereof, and to keep that up, we
would not stick to act against our principles. Whereas I would have him to
know, we were never so fond of it, as, I am credibly informed, he is: Who,
notwithstanding his parties exclaiming against us for these 5 or 6 years past,
as not living up as^we^^^^ to the Gospel dipens^tion, because we were concerned
in Worldly Government, yet when an opportunity of a place in the Government; of
West Jersey lately presented (whether for the sake of honor, or revenge, or
both, I know not) he presently falls in with it, embraces it, and becomes a
Justice of the peace; and then who but he for being concerned in Worldly
Government, and it^s beloved honor too, such as it is; though, how far his
accepting o^ a Commission at that time, tended to the subversion of the
original rights and privileges of the people of that Province (I suppose) he
could no ways be ignorant. Besides me thinks it looks poorly, meanly and
pitifully in him, to accept of a Commission, especially upon such a foot as he
did, so soon after his Keithian company had so much exclaimed against others,
and given caution to all professing the truth, and who were in scorn called
Quakers etc. That they should not be concerned in Worldly Government; They were
not to be Justices, Sheriffs nor Constables; nay nor Iury-men neither, in any
criminal cases, see their book entitled, A Testimony and Caution etc, p 1 and
2, which was given forth from their Monthly Meeting at Phi^^^p James his house
in Philadelphia in the year 1692. I say* that he should accept of, and embrace
a Commission, especially upon such a foot, as he did, after their having thus
exclaimed against others, for acting in the like capacity, tho upon a basis
that is just and right, and upon a foot that is firm and honorable, is a great
argument to me, of his insincerity and perfidiousness.

He further says Well, to work they went, and soon found a new name for their
Act, and then courageously raise three hundred pounds for the Indians at
Albany, and ^ra^^ht Da. LLoyd is sent to New York with it, to pay it to
Governor F^etcher, for the use aforesaid; for now it was not against their
tender consciences, why so? because they had Otherways worded the Act, yet
intended it for the same use,

Answ. This is also false; for, first, It was not the next year that any was
raised. 2 dly What was done afterward, was to relieve the Indians, in habiting
beyond Albany, who where at p^^ce with the Crown of England, and having been
robbed by the French etc. and forced to desert their dwellings, were left in
great distress And it is well known to some here, that if the Assembly at that
time, had not agread to have raised money for them, by saw there was an Essay
intended to have been made, to have raised a sum for their relief, by
charitable subscriptions* after such a like manner, as there was some raised
here; for the relief of the distressed English in New England, and who were
under almost the like circumstances, as the Indians were, and which I suppose
D: L: was not ignorant o^ therefore hi^ ^out of Otherwise wording the Act, and
yet intending it for the (...) use* is ^^rtterly false* neither has he so much
as attempted to produce any proof of it, but unfairly imposes upon his Reader
without it. As he also does, in what he ai^h concerning W P^s engagement. Then,
as for what he says about David LLoyd, whom he ( Ishmael like) calls St^^^ht
Da: LLoyd, that he was sent to New York with ^t, is also false: So that there
is little else in this whose paragraph but lies and false hoods. I shall
further add before I leave this head; that either D: L: had seen the
proceedings, Resolves and Acts of these Assemblies, before he wrote his book,
or he had not seen them. If he had seen them, the more base man he, thus,
contrary to his own knowledge, to misrepresent them. If he had not seen them,
then may the Reader easily observe, at what a random rate, he ventures to
bespatter us; as also it may be perceived, that as h^s proceedings therein
could not be honest and sincere, as he says they were, so neither could they
proceed from a motion heavenly, as in his preface he pretends to.

But this mischief maker does not end his envious lying here, for in the same
page, speaking of one Babi^ and his company's stealing a sloop from
Philadelphia, says thus; "Upon notice of which the Quakers very speedily got a
company of men together, searched the Town for arms, supplied them with gunns,
swords, powder and le^d and gave them a Commission, and hired them for 100 L.
to recover the sloop from said Privateers, which they did, and Sam. Carpeter
paid down the 100 pound to the men, and the Assembly has since voted it to be a
debt of the Province.

Answ. Possibly some may think this to be a very strait story, and as certainly
true, as he is cofidently false in it. As first, his affirming that the Quakers
searched the Town for arms, this I am credibly informed is false, and that it
was not the Quakers who did so, but others. 2.dly Supplied them with guns,
swords etc. This was not likely to be true; for, though perhaps, there might be
here and there one, that had a fowling piece (not that I have cause to s^spect,
that any person furnished them with so much as one) yet, I question whether
they had any swords at all, to furn^sh them with. The 3 dly, is a third lie;
For he says, they gave them a Commission, which was not so, but a Warrant, to
bring them back to justice in their own way, they being not Friends that went
by virtue of that Warrant after them.

Then he adds, and hired them for 100* pound Whereas this was not to neither;
it is true, after the men that followed them were agreed to go, and in order
thereto were got into the boat* Sa^* Carpenter, to encourage them, (...) to
them, and promised to give them 100 pound, if they would bring back the sloop
and men. And if Sam. Carpenter was to blame in it, why did not G^ K^ instead of
commending him and others, for what they did in it* deal of with Samuel about
it, and say his evil actions (if they were such) before him, in order to have
recovered him? No, not a word of that then, it was Dear Samuel with him many
months after that, after till he began to di^^er with, separate from Friends;
and then Samuel not joining with him, he spared him no more than others.
Moreover, whereas D: L^ said, Sam: Carpenter paid down the 100 pound, and that
the Assembly have since voted it a debt of the Province; Now this is not so
neither, for there was no such sum voted; out the man will be meddling with
things he knows nothing of. Then, as for his saying, that ^t was those whom the
Quakers got to gether, and furnished with guns and swords and who had
Commission, and were nired for 100 pound to do it, that recovered the sloop;
here in it is worth one's observation, how prettily he contradicts his friend
G. K. in the matter; who says, It was Peter B^ss and one or two more with
him, that retook the sloop, having neither gun, svvords nor spear, see
Antichrists* and Sad^cces detected p. 7. Yet in their Appeal to the Yearly
Meeting in 1692, G: K: among others, says as D. L. here says, as to those
who took the sloop. Th^s though they both bear false vvitness, yet their
witness agrees not together.

I shall next take notice of a passage of his relating to Tithes, which may be
seen in his p 107. thus, I know none in Christendom, no, not the Priests
themselves but they will deny that they take Tithes, as Tithes, but only as
maintenance for preaching, and not as any other part of the Ceremonial Law.

Answ. It may be so; For what other part of the Ceremonial Law did Tiths belong
to, except to give part to the Stranger, the Fatherless and the widow; tho that
part our Priests do not care to perform, to be Sure. But ne^ D. L. says, he
knows none that say, they take Tithe as Tiths, I shall take Leave to tell him,
That he seems to have pored so long on G. F's. Great Mystery etc. as to have
bemudl'd himself, or dulled his sight, else he might have there seen, and so
have known, That the Priests take Tyths as Thyths; for which I referr him to
the following Passages. First in page 87. G. F. quotes the expression of a
Priest thus, The Lord has given Tyths for the maintenance of the Ministry of
this Nation. And a littte lower he says. The Priesthood is Changed, but not
the Tyths abolished by the coming of any Substance. Secondly in Page 245. he
quotes Gawin Eaglesheld Thus The Law is not changed that gave Tyths etc. Now I
hope from henceforth D. L. may be satisfied, That the Pries^s did not deny
their taking Tyths as Tyths; Besides, to talk of not taking Tyths as Tyths, is
Just as good sense, as to say, D. L. dos not tell Lies as Lies. But it is yet
further observable, That D. L. ackowledged That Tyhts for the Maintenance for
Preaching, being part of the Ceremonial Law, and consequently put an end to by
Jesus Christ's. Offering up himself; And that being the chief Cause why our
Fniends refuse to pay them, must needs be an Argument to any sensible Man 's
understanding, That we own Jesus to be the Christ And we know the Apostle
says, The Priesthood being changed there is made of necessity a Change also of
the Law Heb: 7:2.

I shall now proceed to his 13. th Chap: about Miracles, wherein he seems
resolved to Act the part of one that would be Retrogade to any thing acted or
done by a Quaker, especially if he thinks he has found out a way to redicule
it; thereof I think I shall not need to say much to it only some passages I
shall hint at as follows. He begins his Cavills against some passages in G.
F's Iournall to which I need ^ay no more than thus; That I am satisfied, That
where at any time G. F. in his Journal has mentioned any Miracle, which God
had wrought by him; the Intent was not to set up or applaud the Creature, nor
to bo^st of the work, but to give the praise and honor to God the Worker, to
whom it belongs.

As for what he says in page 110; about G. F^s. being called The Father of
many Nations etc. I answer, this has been Answered so often already,
particularly by W. P. in Judas and the Jews etc. and in Invalidity etc. and
that to my satisfaction above twenty years ago, that I shall say no more of it
in this place, than to refer the Reader to the Books, for his satisfaction also.

A little lower in the Same page, he Insinuates, that G. F. should pretend to
the Gift of Tongues, to Interpret all Languages: which I am persuaded he shall
never be able to make appear; But if he can, let him.

In page 111. He pretends to object something worse against G. F. which, take
as follows. But which is yet worse, if true, I have seen a sheet, called, An
Essay, etc. lately put out by one T. C. wherein he shows that G. F. in
answering Priests and Professor's Books, falsely quoted their Words and
perverted them, etc. Which he would have W. P. to appear and clear G. F. from
etc.

Answ. If there be such a Book written by T. C. so accusing G. F. I question
not but it is, or will be Answer^d; in the mean time, I will ^ssent to D. L's.
^aying, if (...) i^ must needs ^e judged wicked etc. But I shall likewise and,
if it be false, the reporting it must ^^eds be wicked, in his Author T.C., and
Idle and wicked in himself also, thus to rep^^t it, only upon the uncertain
report, of (...) an open and unwearied Enemy or G. F. as T.C. ha^h been known
to be for many years.

In page 112.113. he (...) mean Argument ou^ (...) quotation he produces out o^
G* ^'s book, Intitul'd Quakers P^a^^ness. page 14. on this wi^e It seems they
have ^ow lo^^ this [visi^le mir^cles] and other Evidences of the Spirit, i^
^ver they had them; For he there says, and wha^ ^f God will not (...) such
Gifts and Signs n^w, must we therefore be n^ Christians? etc.

Answ. D: L's conclusion will not hold; first, G* W: did not in the least
grant, that God would not bestow s^en Gifts now, but only asks, what if he
will not? secondly, but if he had granted it, it does not therefore follow,
that the Quakers had lost other Evidences of the Spirit; for surely the Spirit
of God witnessing with our S^^rits, tha^ We are ^e Children of God* may be
known (...) as well as of old; and this can never ^e without such suitable
works, as may be sufficient Evidence (to the People of God at least) that they
are the Children of God, whether the Lord ^e pleased to bestow such Gifts, as
were allways perculiar to ^ew, or not. And to such as had such Gif^s bes^owed
on them, Christ Said In this rejoice not, that (...) are subject unto yo^^ but
rather re^oyce, because (...) names are written in Heaven Luke. 10.20.

His 14. Chapt. Entitled, Of Life and Doctrine, he begins with a Base
Insi^^^tion (viz) Much more (...) formerly do my old Friends the Quakers cry
out, This Life is the Only thing that is our all in all; it is no (...) for
Doctrine or Knowledge in this or that Principl^ (...) way with Creeds and
points of Faith, so that we (...) L^^e in our Bosoms, and flowing from Vessel
to Vess^^.

Answer. Herein D. L. shows himself to be a (...) than Ordinary Scoffe^, a M^re
Ish^ae^^e, and a false (...), as i^ we opos^d Doctrine rel^ing to, and
knowledge in the things of God, to the Life that we feel (...) times in our
Bosoms O ungodly man: Let him prove (...), that eve^ one owned amongst us, thus
expressed himself. B^t by his thus flouting at us, about the feeling of (...)
if ever he knew what it (...) he is ^ow much (...) those, of whom the Apostle
speaks, who were Alienated (...) past ^eeling Ephesians. 4:18, 19. And (...): 115,
he Co^^a^es (in some sense) our (...), with an ^^^ecting sermon of a (...)
which caused weeping eyes on every hand: yet (...) will prove ^ut lame; for
since we read, that (...) is transformed in than Angel of Light 2. Cor: (...).
is it therefore a great wonder, that his ministers (...) be sometimes
transformed, in to the Likeness of (...) of Righteousness. But does not this as
much re^^ect (...) Peter's preaching, mentioned in Acts 2; where so ^any were
pricked in their heart, in so much that they said unto Peter and the Rest, What
shall we do? And might (...) such as D. L. with this kind of Arguing, as well
have incensed the minds of the People, against what the Apo^tle delivers, when,
speaking of the powerful e^^ect their Ministry had upon the people, He says,
But if all Prophecy, and there come in one that believes not or one unlearned
[mark unleaned] he is Convinced of all, he is Judged of all: and thus are the
secrets of his heart made manifest; and so falling down on his face, he will
worship God and report that God is in you of a Truth. 1. Cor: 14.24, 25. And
doubtless were those hearers now alive, D. L. would say of them, as he does to
us; Even such is the Devotion of all Zealous (but Ignorant) people. Yet of this
we are well assured. That though God gives the Increase upon the Labors of his
Ministers, and that Paul may plant; yet there are also Apollo's that water, as
truly now, as of Old.

As for what he says of Thomas M^sgroves Preaching at many Meetings about
Delaware, That the flesh of Christ was a Constant enduring Paitence, and his
blood a Lively operating Spirit of Life, or Divine operating Living Love I
Answ; I have been at many Meetings with him, but never heard any such thing as
D. L. expresses (as I remember) from him, nor of him before, neither can I
hear, upon Inquiry, of any one that ever heard him speak so.

I am now come to his 15 th. Chapt. Entitled, Sabbath day wheel turned round;
where, speaking of some Quakers formerly having opened their shops, and
followed their usual employments, on the first Day, both in Old England and
else where, he Cries out: But behold how the wheel is now turned! for the
Quakers at Delaware being the Commanding Party of the Assemblies, have lately
made Law to prefer the first Day before others, calling it the Lord's Day etc.

Answ. We never preferr^d the first day above others, for any holiness in it
self, as a day: Not do we commonly call it the Lords Day, though in the Law, he
mentions, we used that Word as the most proper of those that are generally
given to it* to explain more clearly to all what was (...) by the preceding
word the first day, But if D:L: will have the Ins^^nce of two or three, who in
the Beginning opened their Shops on a first day, to be a proo^ of our
Degeneracy, because none do so now: we may, certainly, much more reasonably
allege the Practice of all our Friends from the beginning, except those two o^
three, in keeping their Shops always shut on that day, till this very time, as
a stronger Argument to prove, we are not degenerated in that point. The
o^c^sion of making that Law, he ^i^ts at, amongst ^s will be (...) spoken in
its own words as follows To the end that Looseness, Irre^^gi^n and Atheism may
no^ creep in, under pretense of Conscience in this Province* Be it enacted --
That according to the Example of the Pr^^^tive Christians, and for the ^ase of
the Creation. Every First day of the week (called the Lords day) People shall
absta^^ from their (...) and com^^^ To^l and Labor, tha^ whether Masters,
Parents, Children o^ Servants, they may the (...) themse^ves to read (...)
Scriptures of Truth at home, or frequent such Meetings of Religious worship
abr^ad, as may (...) their (...) Persuasions. And truly notwithstanding the
Clamor D. L. makes about it now, I love Cla^^^ so (...) that I should not have
been vvilling to have (...)* made n^ exchange with him, for the Clamo^s he
would have made, ^f there h^d ^een no Law at all made here abo^t (...), I
^ee, there is s^^h (...), and (...) of them, that we (...) never expect to
(...) such such stepps, as will prevent their finding fault with us.

In page 119. he brings in G: W: querying thus, where do thou read in the
Scrpitures, that men must do no work on the first day of the week? Now to this
I shall say, That G: W: proposed this Querie, to one who accounted the first
Day, the Sabbath day, and that it was a sin in it self to work thereon, which
we say it is not, there being no Command of God to be produced, requiring it so
to be kept. But, as it is no sin to work on that d^y; so it is no sin to
abstain from work on that ^ay: For if it had, surely, the Primitive Christians
would m^^y times have sinned, in meeting to gether on that Da^. It is no sin in
it self* for the free People of West Jersie, to Choose their Magistrates and
Officers, on another Day, and in another manner, than by their Laws and
Constitutions is appointed: Yet, inasmuch as it is no sin, to Choose them on
that Day, and in that manner, and it being according to their Law, and the
Peoples Rights and Privileges, it ought to be kept (Let D. L. take notice of
that) and so it is in the Case of abstaining from Labor on the First Day of
the week.

In page 120, he produces a Prophecy of W: P: against J: ^, which he would
have to be fal^e; but not withsta^^i^g his pretendi^g, he a^wayes believed
plainness and honest simple hearted dealing to be best; Yet, rather than he
(...) the Advantage, of making W: P: look like a false Prophet, he has
Craftily, as well as knavist ly le^t out those words, which would have show^d,
that the Prophecy was ^ut Conditional, although (as laid down by D. L.) it^s
absolute. For proof whereof I shall transcribe it, first, as cited by D. L. and
then as published by W. P. -- D L. (...) it thus; So sure as God Lives -- the
Lord will ma^e thee ^n example of his ^s^ry, and thy head shall not go down
(...) the Grave in peace and by this shall thou know ( says he) that not (...)
nor Delusive, but a true and Infalli^^e spirit has spoke by me: See Reason
against (...) 1^1. No^ (...) W. P. did not there (...) the spirit o^ God? For I
do under^tand that T. H. d^ed at Peace in his bed, and with great s^tisfaction.
Thus far D. L. Now hear the passage as it comes from W. P. As (...) lives,
Great will be the Wrath that shall follow (...)* Yea, God will visit for these
unrighteous dealings* (...) I testify to thee from God^s living spirit, if
(...) not, and come to deep Repentance, the Lord will ^^ke thee an example of
his fury etc. Now observe (...) words [if thou desist not and come to deep
Repentance] D. L. has (far unlike to a man that loves honest simple hearted
dealing best) very dishonestly left out, bec^^se it rendered the Prophecy but
Conditional, which Conditions, if performed, render also the Prophecy
neverth^less true, though the Judgment did not come upon him. ^ow desist, I do
believe, he did; and whereas D: L: says, he understands he died at Peace in his
bed, and with great satisfaction: I may possibly as truly say, he repented of
h^s ^o Grievously abusing our Friends, before he Died; for I have been told so,
by full as credible an Author [I suppose] as D. L 's was: but to say he died
with great satisfaction, if D. L. mean without Repentance, I am satisfied his
state could be never the better for that: For although he might reckon us no
Christians (as Indeed he did) and so without the Pale of the Church; yet he
ought to have walked hones^ly toward them that are without 1 Thessalonians. 4.12.
which T. H. did not do by the Quakers, but by his misrepresenting them to the
world, in his Dialogues, he did certainly do very dishonestly by them, in
giving those for the Quak^rs Answers, and saying, they were no other but w^^t
the Quakers give both in words and practice; see Dialogue page 63, which he
could never prove to be such; But (to thy knowledge) when called upon for his
proofs, used pitiful shifts to evade them, and at last wholely absented himself
from the Meeting appointed for trial thereof. And that (...) Reader may see I
do not misrepresent T. H. now (...) D^^d, I shall recite a few of his
questions, and also (...) he gives for the Quakers Answers, and says it is (...)
than what they give forth etc. see his page: 72.

Question. Are you th^^ as perfectly happy, a^ ever you ^x^e^^ to be?

Answ. We Witness Perfection.

Q. What proof is that to another man?

A. We say we witness it; is not that proof Sufficient?

Q. But what if I believe o^herwise?

A. We shall not spa^e to Stigmatize, and Comdemn that person, that questions
the truth of our sayings.

Q: Will this Convince me, or any other of your Perfection?

A: Though it do not; yet thereby we shall render you so odious to our Friends,
that they will believe nothing that is spooken by Y^u against us?

Q. Then may I not conclude, that the Reason whey you so freely ra^^ against,
and reproach your Opposers, is only to secure your Credit with your own
Procesy^es?

A. I cannot deny but that there may be something of that in it.

Q. Will you be so liberal of your Revilings whether your Adversaries give
Occasion or no?

A. It concerns us to render them as ridiculous as we can etc:

Q. But does not this Signefie a very dishonest and maliciou^ mind in you?

A. We care not what you think, provided our Friends think not so.

This, with a great deal more that might be mentioned, was contained in the
Book, which, as he was never able to prove, to be as he wro^t; so let every
Impartial man Judge, whether these were like to be the Quakers Answers, or no,
and i^ notwiths^anding all these Grievous abuses of us by T^. H, he could lay
down his head in peace with the Lord (which doubtless was the Peace intended by
W. P.) without repentance; I think people need not much mind that Command of
our Savor, As you would that men should do ^o you, do you also to them
likewise Luke 6.31. Which I would have D: L: to mind.

As for D: L^s Appendix, I see little need to speak to it, the most of it being
very much like his other rambling stuff, up and down throughout his whole Book;
yet not willing wholely to pass it by, I shall make some few Observations, as
follows:

In his page: 129: under the head Of infallibility, He quotes a passage out of
G: Was Voice of Wisdom page: 33 That they, that want Infallibility, are not true
Ministers* Now, several of the Books he quotes I want, and this among the rest:
Therefore, whether this be fairly quoted or not, I know not; Yer I believe the
thing to be true (viz) That where any Minister, is not Infallibly assured, that
what he ministers to the People, is from the movings, and guidings of the holy
Spirit of God, so far he is not a true Minister; If any man speak, (says the
Apostle) let him spea^ ^s the Oracles of God 1: Pet: 4:11: then to be sure, it
must (...) from the Spirit of God, which is Infallible: And as God's Spirit is
Infallible, so are it is teachings and guidings:

Now, that G: K: (as well as G: W: etc:) has wrote in defense of Infallibility
is clear; for in his Book, Inti^^led Divine immediate Revelation etc: p: 13:
[not retracted] we have it thus, We place not an absolute Infallibility upon
any person or persons whatsoever, but we say, the spirit of God in all it is
Leadings, Teachings, and Motions, is Infallible, and men only Conditionally,
so far as they receive, and are in unity with those Leadings, Teachings, and
Motions, are Infallible: We say further, that every True Christian has an
Infallible Knowledge and Faith, of all such things as are absolutely necessary
to salvation* But as to other things he may Err, if he be not watchful to
follow the Infallible Guidance o^ God's holy Spirit: But if this Author
thinks, he has no Infallible Faith or knowledge of any point of Doctrine, he
is a mere sceptic^ and unbeliever: for all true Faith is infallible; That which
(...) ^allible is but mere Opinion, and Conjectural: Likewise in his Help in
time of Need he says Are not ye as bad, ((...) as bad as the Papists) who
openly (...), th^^ ye (...) not led by the Infallible Spirit, and consequently
(...) the spirit of God. Now here we see, that G:^: (...) as well as Friends,
viz. So far as they are led by the spirit of God, and no Farther. And i^ D. L.
be as Impa^tiall as he pretends to be, since he has in his p. 62. and 6^. so
much ridiculed W. P. about this very matter, which is exactly according to G.
K's. own sentiments in the poi^t, h^w can he let G. K. escape his censure, or
else send to him to retract it; But doubtless he had better let it alone, least
by undertaking to mend one hole, he make two; For, in the Retractation Book it
self, G. K. says He is no sceptick in Religion, but that he, and all sincere
Christians, ha^^ an Infallible Faith and persuasion, in things, Relating to the
Fundamental and Essential Doctrines of Christianity.

In his foresaid p. 129. He offers a quotation, out of W^ P's. Rebuke to twenty
one Divines p. 22. thus We are horribly abused in saying, We pretend all our
Ministers to (...) ^nfalible. Now I am sure D. L. has horribly abused W. P. in
this matter; for he has le^^ ou^ the explanatory part, which is this We
ascribe not an ^nfallibility to men, but to the Grace of God; and to men, so
far as they are Led by it.

Tho I want several of the BooKs, quoted by him, in that part under the Head
of Temporizing; Yet I shall speak a little to it, to show what a meddling Man he
is.

He begins it with a Passage, he says to be G^^. P's. taken ou^ of a paper
Entitled, To the Parliament of the Common Weal etc. Thus, Let all those Abey
Lands that are given to the Priests, be given to the Poor of the Nation. To
which he opposes a Passage, out of W. P's. Pr^face to his Persuasive to
Moderation Thus Fa^ be it from me to ^oli^^tit any thing in diminution of the
Just rights of the Church of England; Let her Rest protected where she is.

Answer. I cannot see, how G. F's. Advice to the Parliament, about bestowing
abbey Lands upon the Poor of the Nation, or W. P's. moderation, in not
soliciting, for any Diminution of the Church of Englands J^st Rights; can be
said to be either Temporizing or Contradictory. For unless he can prove all
those Abbey Lands, that were given to the Priests, either in the year 165^.
(the time of the Date of that Book) or before, to be, ^^ that time, the just
Rights o^ the Church of England, it will not do any of his business at all: ^or
the Church o^ England has her Rights, in such respects, derived from the
Authority of the Nation: And so, that which may be termed her Rights under one
Authority, may not under another; for I suppose they are not hereditary to her,
but as Alterable as the then present Authority still pleased, Else how should
they be now Imagined to be the Church of England^s Rights, and not ^ather the
Church of Romes? Besides, how comes W. P^s. moderation toward the Church of
England to be Constru^d Temporizing under the Reign of a Popish Prince?

He proceeds to Cavil against W. P. and offers a Quotation out of England's
Interest Page 36. in these words: We say Holy Writ is the Declared Fundamental
Law of ^e^ven. whereupon D. L. says Note, how W. P. Con^ounds himself or
deceives his Readers, or both, for in his Rejoinder (as aforesaid) he takes up
several pages to prove the Scripture Corrupt and uncertain, so much slighting,
it that he terms it J. Faldo's uncertain Word of God, page 39. and yet here
calls it, The Declared Fundamental Law of Heaven.

Answer. What W. P. says in Englands present Interest; as nere cited by D. L.
is either true o^ false, if D. L. will say it^s false, he Contradicts the
Protestant part of the Christian World, who hold and have declared holy Writ
to be the o^tward Rule both of faith and Life, and if D. L. says it is true*
then he says as W. P. says: besides W. P. did not lay it down as his own
^udgment only, but as the be^^ef of the Protestants in General* whom he was
then personating, in opposition to the Popish Arrogance of Ass^^^ing a Power,
to Impose upon People in points of Religion, tho Contrary to Scripture and
Reason. And whereas W. P. says, some scriptures are Corrupted, Let D. L. deny
that, if he can, his friend G. K. ownes it, as I have already shown: but who
unless a prejudiced Adversary would find fault with two such Expressions, which
he himself cannot deny to be true, and almost all Christendom do own, and yet
surely they do not mean that corrupt part, to be either holy Writ or the
fundamental Law of Heaven. But how D. L. comes to be so senseless, as to bring
in this under the head of Temporizing, I must Confess he is wiser than I, or I
beheve himself either, that can tell.

Next in his page 131. he cites an Epistle of E. Burruughs, bearing date 1661.
as follows, Keep close to the Lord, and to the measure of himself, made
manifest in your own hearts; for unto that you are directed, in the beginning,
and in it is your safety and preservation to the end, but says D: L:
afterward, W:P: controules this plea of E. B. in his Brief examination page
11. saying, The Enemy is at work to scatter the minds of Friends, by that loose
plea, viz. what have thou to do with me? leave me to my freedom, and to the
Grace of God in my self etc.

Answer. To keep Close to the Lord, and to the measure of himself in our hearts
according to E. B. is too good Counse^ to be disputed against. But now here we
may see, what need there is of having the Books on both sides, to examine D.
L's. quotations by: for who not knowing the occasion of W. P's. Writing thus,
(as D. L. has Cited him) but would have thought he had thwa^ted E. B. Now, though
I have not the Book by me, yet I p^etty well remember the Subject of it, which
was to show, what was real spiritual Liberty, and what was then only pretended
as such, and was Chiefly levelled against a Faction, stirred up at that time,
by John Story and John W^^^^nson; who did not only oppose the Women, in their
Meetings of Service (which D. L. says are certainly of service p. 66.) in
deeds of Charity and Hospitality; but also, to escape sufferings, would Drop
the Testimony that they came forth with, in the beginning (which as D. L. says
was in Life and Power) Now as some of old ^urned the Grace of God into (...),
Jude. 4. so these turned from that grace which had called them, and brought
them ^orth in lif^ and power in the beginning, and into the liberty of the
spirit, unto a libe^^i^e spirit of ease in the ^eth, o^ ^hunning the cross, and
let^ing ^all the testimony which they came forth in, when they came forth in
li^e and power, much like those with whom Paul was excercised, when he th^s
expostul^ted with the Gal^^hians* v^z Are ye so foolish? h^^ing beg^n ^n the
spirit, are ye now made ^ersed by the flesh* Have ye suffered so many things in
vain? Gal. 3.^.^. And although Paul commended the beleivers (...) God and the
word of his grace, Acts 20.23 telling them; it was able (...) them up, and
(...) give them (...) in^eritance among all the^ which are sanctified: Yet he
did not think that inconsistent with his telling this Church, who seemed to
lean to circumci^ion, on the account of avoiding persecution, see chapter ^. v. ^^
If ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing v: 2. For he was so
Zealous in the case, as to say; I would they were (...) which trouble, you v:
12. Now, might they not have said to Paul, Thou have commended ^s to the grace
of God; James has ^old us, The engra^^ed word (...) able to save our souls,
James 1:21^ and John says, The anointing which ye have received of him,
abides in you: and ye need not that any man teach you: But as the same
anointing teaches you of all things 1 John 2:27. Can not thou therefore
leave us to our freedom therein? It may be we think it best to be circumcised
etc. But can any think, that such a kind of a ple^, would have recommended them
any thing the more to the Apostles, as men or truth, and of a so and mind?
Surely no. It is true, Paul told them, Ye have been called unto liberty; but he
also added further, Use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh Gal. 5:13. And
that has been our ^riends care with those people, for which they h^ve made so
much a do.

In p. 135 he finds fault with some Quakers for praying for King James, with is
so far from being condemnable, that it is very agreeable to the Apostles
exhortation 1 Timothy* 2.1.2 That supplications, prayers, intercessions and giving
of thanks ^e made for all men: For Kings, and for all that are in Authority.
B^t (no doubt in his ^ancy) to hit the Quakers home, he says; As affectionate
as they were to King James, they could not by their prayers (mark how he soons
at prayers) help him in those troubles that followed, nor did they by their
spirit of discerning tell him of it before hand etc.

Answ. A very foolish observation, and a sort of an Atheistical taunt! I do
tell him, that as the Quakers are no unseemly boasters of what they can effect
by their prayers; neither is it my design to compare them with the Apostles:
Yet this scoffing reflection, may (if he dare make so bold wi^h (...) as well
affect the Apostles, as the Quakers, who proved for Kings, and all that were in
Authority, and exhorted the beleivers so to do, and yet how many troubles did
the Kings and Governors in their days undergo, and perhaps, many times it
might be for their good too. (...) a spirit of discerning, I deny that ever it
was the Quakers principle, or indeed that they are so conceited, as to Imagine,
much less to declare, that they can always dis^^^n, beforehand, what
particular troubles, Kings and Princes, o^ any others shall meet with in this
world. To pray for them is but ou^ Christian duty; but as for what troubles
they may here after meet with, God who only is omni -- scient knows, and none
else, unless, at any time he is pleased to reveal it to any particular person
or persons* But to bring the matter a little (...) more home upon D. L. I shall
produce an example of one of his great friends applicable to this case, which
take as follows; I remember when a paper was published by Authority at
Philadelphia, to show among other things, that G: K: had traduced the
Magistracy and Authority of this place, we were told, that G: K: went on the
same day to the Barbados house, where amongst a mixed Auditory, he read an
answer pulickly to the said paper, and when he had done (possibly that he might
be thought not to disown Authority) went to prayer, wherein ^e prayed for King
William and Queen Mary. Now what would he or others have said, if we had
f^^^ted ^t him as D: L: does at us, and told him, that by all his prayers he
could not help the King and Queen out of the great troubles which they were
then, and conti^^ed many years after to be involved in nor could he tell before
hand of the Queens death etc. But thanks be to God, he has tought us better
ways to answer those who oppose the truth, than such ^orroy ones as this our
Adversary makes use of against us.

He proceeds thus, "But rather that he was secure and got through all his
troubles.

Answ. By what D. L. himself has cited of their words, it pleanly appears,
that it was only such troubles as he had then already met with, particularly in
Scotland. And though they might use the words [all his troubles^ that does not
always conclude past, present and to come, neither did it at all in this case,
any more than Paul^s saying (after he had mentioned the troubles he had met
with at Antioch, ^conium and ^ystra thus) B^t out of them all the Lord
delevered me does imply, that he should meet with more. Ftrthermore, the
Apostle speaking of the troubles he met within Asia, says, For we would not,
Brethren, have you ignorant of our, trouble which came to us in Asia, that we
were pressed out of measure, above strength, in so much that we d^spaired even
of life: Bu we had the sentence of death in our selves, that we should not
trust in our selves, but in God which raises the dead. Who delivered* us from
so great a death, and does deliver: in whom we trust that he will yet delive^
us, 2. Cor. 1.8:9:10. Yet at last he was put to death at Rome.

In the next place I shall take some notice of D. L's. Postcript. In his p.
137.138. he asks, Why this following doctrine, so frequently preached formerly
by ancient friends, is now let fall, and not preached by any of you, viz I the
Light will overturn nations, Kingdoms and Gathered Churches etc. and citing
many books as News out of the North, etc: p: 15: I am the same do^^ than ever
was ( says G: F: the same Christ, to day, yesterday and fo^^ver etc.

Answ* This is but a mere begging the question: For as he has not proved, so I
deny, that the doctrine of the light was frequently preached by ancient friends
i^ those terms: And ^s ^or those words in the above cited News out of the
North; with several others cited ^y him, I cannot sufficiently speak to them
having not the books, and by what is before written, it is easy to see, that he
ought not to be trusted in his quotations, he is so exceedingly perfidious in
them: As a farther confirmation of this ch^rge, I shall produce another proof
as follows.

I happening to have one of the books he cites in the abovesaid page (...)
Great Mystery, out of which he pretends to prod^^e a quotation, th^^, And the
that same spirit that (...) Jesus from the dead, is equal with God viz the holy
Ghost, see Great M^stery p 66:127 I diligently se^rched bo^^ those places, and
do affirm* there are no such wo^ds to be found in either o^ them: B^t I find in
p. 127 that a Priest changed G* F: with professing equality with God* whereupon
G* F: tells ^s that the Assembly of Div^^es in their ^^^chisia, say, The holy
Ghost is equal in ^^wer and glory with the Father. Now (says G: F: ^ every one
that comes to witness the son of God, and the holy ghost, etc: by your account
they witiness that which is equal in power and glory with God, and that his
words were spoken beyond all creatures and out of all ceratures, that he did
^ot say G: Fox* Now is it not as clear as the su^* that D: L: h^th ^gain
g^ieviously abused ^oth G: F: and also his Reader: (...) it is o^e thing to
witness the holy Ghost wi^h is equal in ^^wer and glory with the Father to be
in us (according to G* F:) even beyond (...): and another thing to profess our
selves equal with the ^ather Son or holy Gho^t either, as this abusive D: L:
would render us.

In p: 138:139: he asserts this falsehood, viz, It Is the faith or belief of all
your preachers in general. That when you preach or pray, it is not you, but
Christ in you that prays: I prove this to be your belief by these two reasons:
First, You do never in your meetings pray for pardon or forgiviness of sin (Not
that I have heard in twenty years due attendance) for seeing it is Christ in you
that prays, there is no need of it, he being without^ ^in.

Answ: He may as well charge all those holy men of old, who have prayed to God,
and yet hea^e not in all their prayers asked pardon for sin, with the same as
he falsely charges us with here, viz, with believing, that it is Christ in us
that prays: And in order to prove, that what he objects against us, was not the
common practice of the primitive Church, I shall produce an example, which at
this time occurs to my mind, as it is rela^^d Acts. 4.24. to 31. where we find,
that the Church then assembled together, lift up theie voices with one accord
in prayer to God; in which prayer, there is not one word of confession of, or
begging pardon for sin: And if D: L: be so blind, as that he can perceive no
difference or distinction to be made, between Christ by his spirit helping our
infirmities, in our prayers, which we say he does, and without which we cannot
pray as we ought see Rom: 8:26: and saying, that it is Christ in us that prays,
which we say not* we cannot help it: Then what, or how due his attendance has
been, for twenty years, I know not, but sure I am, I have heard earnest cries
and fervent supplications put up to God in our public meetings, for pardon and
remission of sins, many times in less than ten years.

His second reason is this You do not pray to Christ, becaiuse it being Christ
in you that prays, it is absurd ^or Christ to pray to himself.

Answ. This is again a mere begging of the question, for we say no such thing,
as that when we pray, it is Christ prays in us; but as above, it is Christ by his
spirit that assists his children in their prayers, who said, Without me ye can
do nothing John 15:5.

He continues in his p. 139. to cast many unjust reflections upon us, in
relation to these two heads, of not^praying for pardon of sins, and not praying
to Christ at all; which is partly answered already, but in order to the more
full clearing the latter objection, I shall take notice of one passage more in
the same page. After he has opposed the Apostles, Saints and Martyrs to us, he
concludes that paragraph thus, viz, Both Apostles and other Christians
frequently prayed to Jesus Christ, as well as to God the Father.

Answ. This affects not us at all, as to what he insinutates, that we do not
pray to Christ, because it is neither against our principle nor practice, and
if he will not believe us in relation to this assertion, yet methinks he might
credit his Friend G. K. in the matter, who in p. 121.122. of his Way cast up
says; He has not only himself done so, but also has heard others expressly
naming the wo^ds Jesus Christ: Although (says he) when we express not these
words, yet if we pray by the movings of his (...) and Spirit, we pray in the
name of Jesus etc. And he farther says; I have heard expressly such petitions
put up in our prayers at our meetings unto Christ, as, Jesus son of David have
mercy upon us. O! thou blessed Jesus that were crucified and dyed for our sins,
and shed thy precious blood for us, be gracious unto us -- O! thou our
merciful High Priest, whose tender bowels of compassion, are not more
straightened, since thy ascension, but rather more in-larged -- Thou art our
Advocate and Mediator in heaven with the Father, our merciful High Priest --
Thou blessed Jesus, thou know our most secret desires and breathings, which
we offer up into thee, in the inablngs of thy blessed life and spirit, that
thou may present them unto thy Father, and our Father, that in thee we may be
accepted, and our services also; and for thy sake, our de^ects and short
comings, our sins and transgressions; that we have committed may be forgiven
us. These and such like expressions, frequently used by us in prayer, ^oth in
secret and also in public, in our assembly's, plainly demonstrate, that we
worship and pray unto the Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus.

Thus far G. K. All which affords us matter suff^^ient against D. L. in
relation to his false charges, and unjust insinuations against us. As first,
Whereas in p. 102. he says, we deny Jesus of Nazareth to be in heaven
glorified in the true nature of man: Here G* K: says: He has heard expressly
such expressions to Jesus, and that they are frequently used by us in prayer,
as, Thou art our Advocate and Mediator in heaven with the Father, Our merciful
High Priest; and which (says he) plainly demonstrates, that we worship and
pray unto the Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Christ Jesus.

dly 2 That twhen we pray, we do not pray to Christ, as D: L: charges us in his
p. 139: Whereas here G: K: confesses, that we frequently pray to Jesus
expressly, and that as he is in heaven our Advocate and Mediator, the man Christ
Jesus etc.

And 3 dly. That we frequently pray, that our sins and transgressions may be
forgiven us; expressly contrary to what ^ L* falsely alleges against us in the
aforesaid (...) Now either it is true that G: K: has heard these expressions,
and that they have been frequently put up (...) Friends in prayer; or it is not
true. If it be true; the^ is D. L. by G. K^s own free confession concerning our
pr^ctice a false accuser of us. If it is not true; then will it ^all heavily
upon G. K, not as a thing that he has been mistaken about in point of opinion;
but as a thing he has published against his own knowledge and conscience, in
pretending that he heard such expressions, and that not now and the^ only; but
that they have been frequently used in our prayers. Neither do I know how G. K.
can retract these testimonies concerning our friends when they pray, without
giving the down right lie to himself For it is not a little otherways wording
the matter; (...) pleading a little failure in syntax; nor any curious (...)
drawing neither, that will help either of them out at this dead lift.

As to his charge upon G. W. in p: 140. That of late years -- in answering
books -- he has not taken notice of scarce a twentieth part of a book, but
only sends out something, and to please -- people and that they may have
something to say, when people cry, where is the answer to such or such a book.

I Answer, First, he should have told us what book that is which G. W. has
given as a full answer to a Book, and yet scarce that twentieth part of the
book taken notice of, or else to be sure he does nothing to the purpose. 2dly.
There may be the same reason showed by G. W, why he took no notice of many
particular pass ages in some certain books, which he has answered, as G. K.
showed, why he did not answer to many things in Cotton Mather's book, see his
Serious Appeal p. 8: thus, Because Cotton Mather had not distinctly answered my
former book against him: As also that the said Mather's book was filled with
manifest falsehoods, perversions and abuses, sufficiently replied unto, partly
by others, and partly by me (sath he). Which may serve for an answer to D. L.
in relation to G. W's. late answers to Opposers (especially Backsliders and
Apostates) books.

At the latter end of the book D. L. publishes a letter, said to be sent to him
by a person of note. Now whoever this person of note be, as I know not; so I
matter not; but however, A person of note I will grant him to be, in that he so
abominably abuses both the Quakers and his Reader, and like a man infatuated,
imposes such palpable falsehoods upon them, of which I shall take some notes
though he has deprived me of the opportunity of taking a note of his name.

First. That the thoughts of the sudden stop the Philadelphia Quakers met
with, when they were so hot at persecuting G. K. and his friends, may in some
degree check them, and hinder them from doing what otherways they would p.
142.143.

Answ. 1st. That which they call persecution was not so, but only a calling
them to account for their abuses to Authority here, as may be seen in the book
called A Modest account etc. And 2dly. It is false, that they met with a
sudden stop when they were doing of it: For our friends were in the Government
above four months after the trial and fining of G. K. etc. In all which time, I
do not remember that any of them were so much as examined upon any account
whatsoever by the Authority of the Place, and possibly if they had not given
fresh occasion, there ^ight have no more have been said about it to this day:
For that business was not so delightful to those then in Authority as he and
others may imagine.

2 dly. He imposes upon his Reader a kind of a miracle, in these words Since I
was with thee at Burlington in 1692. I have thought that God Almighty was then
fitting th^^ for some purpose, because of the sudden and miraculous recovery,
in great Part, of thy speech, from the extreme, impediment of stammering, which
thou had when I was with thee two years before; and I remember I heard thee
then say, thou had it from a Child etc.

Answ. In this observation of this person of note, I note two things observable
1 st. Though I know not that I ever saw D: L: yet by what I have heard, it
seems to be the greatest miracle of the two, that he should be thus recovered
of his stammering tongue, and yet his Neighbors and others who often converse
with him, know nothing of it 2 dly. After this person had told D: L: that in
this book, he had discovered and laid open the Mystery of iniquity more clearly
than he had seen it done by any other: for which he prayed God of his bounty to
reward him etc: he tells him as above, that Since he was with him at Burlington
in 1692, he had thought that God Almighty was fitting him for some purpose,
because of the sudden and miraculous recovery of his speech etc. As if God had
intended him for some great work to be performed with his tongue; Wereas the
great work that has appeared (whether it be the work of God or the Devil, let
the Reader judge) has been the writing of a few scandalous and reproachful
books, all which might have been done, if his speech had been so totally taken
from him, as that he could not have spoken one word.

2 dly. He falsely as well as without proof asserts these falsehoods, Such things
as are indeed fundamentals of the Christian Religion, they account ^icities,
circumstantials, and smaller matters, and care not how confusedly they preach
them. But what are really circumstantials or smaller matters, as Tithes, Mint
etc: (and not of necessity for a Christians practice) they make the
Fundamentals of their Religion. All which suggestions I deny as false, and had
he but a name, I should require him to prove them.

4thly As groundless as well as proofless is his insinuation, That it seems
People may sing the Quakers writings, but not David's, by their allowance. For
we allow the singing of David's Psalms, full as much, to say no more, and in as
true a sense, as the singing of Quakers writings; but we see no sevice in
either, to be sung in that formal way, as is commonly and customarily used
amongst people.

5thly His flurt about bowing the body, to which he joins, that of the Quakers
in England, that live in great Towns and cities, Causing their apprentices to
stand bare headed before them etc. I shall take no farther notice of, than to
tell him; If he had named them, and proved his charge, perhaps he might have
received a farther answer to it.

6thly His story about Walter Clark, Walter Clark denies, as stated by him; so
that I cannot but esteem him false and abusive in this also. To which I may
add, as all of a piece, his envious reflection surmised after this manner, viz,
I question whether ever they^ll be able to wrestle down the worldly Governors
with only little guns, till they get "great ones. Scoffingly insinuating, as if
we were for throwing down wordly Governors with guns. A notorious slander.

7 thly He taxes W: P: with being turned Painter and seems to charge him, with
denying, that G: F: was ^ shomaker; because in his preface to G: F's Io^rnal,
he declares his outward vocation to be a shepherd. As if it were impossible for
him to have been a Shepherd and a Shomaker both; which if this scribler
imagines, I would query, how his esteemed Friend D: L: come to be a Surveyor
and Planter, as well as a Justice of the Peace and Almanack-maker, which are
four vocations to the others two.

8 thly His story of G: F's having the midwife so long attending on his wife,
expecting her delivery of some child of wonder (she being near 59 years of age)
bu^ at last brought forth no child, and the midwife dis mist. And the reason he
pretends to give why this was not put in the Journal, viz, It would be enough
to give the lie to his pretended spirit of discerning. I believe I have heard
the truth of, from as credible an Author, and from one that know the business,
perhaps better than this person of note, or any that informed him; who told me,
that G* F: never did believe that his wife was with child, and consequently did
not expecte a child of wonder. Neither would the inserting the thing in the
Journal, as it really was, have given the lie to the spirit of discerning, G:
F: was endu^d with.

9 thly As to his saying, "I dare engage the Quakers will never print a
Collection, of them [ G: F 's] He had books best have a care what he ingages
upon it, least if he live a few years longer he lose his engagement.

10thly. What he produces out of Edward Burrough's Works about the sufferings
of Christ, as to the substance of it, has been answered by our Friends
already, particularly by G: W: in his book called A Sober Expostulation etc. p:
65.

11 thly. He says, Their books of controversy are so stuffed with gross lies,
grand forgeries, wicked perversions, false insinuations, and shameful
calumnies, as are the the late books of S. Jenings, T. Ellwood, the
Penington^s, G. Whitehead; C: Pusey and others etc. To which I shall only say,
These are very high charges; but the proofs not made to appear, and therefore
refer the Reader to the books of the Friends mentioned by him, both their
answers to G: K: and Reply^s to G: K's: answers to theirs.

12 thly. As to his saying, They thrust in the Revolution of souls into the
present controversy, though it be no part of the Controversy. I answer. If G:
K: will limpose such doctrines upon us, and controvert such points with us, as
he cannot (at least to our understandings) make out without introducing this
notion of the Revolution of souls; This very practice makes the said notion
become a part of the Controversy. But that G: K: has so done, is made appear,
in the book styled A Modest Account etc. therefore the Revolutions is part of
Controversy.

And now being about to conclude, I shall take notice of an expression of D:
L's: in his p. 140, which is this, Now I sincerely profess, that I have done
nothing herein but with an honest design, not having wilfully or knowingly
wronged either books or Authors, in any one passage.

Answ. Therefore I having detected him, and hereby given him to know, that he
has wronged both books and Authors, and that in many passages, he ought now to
acknowledge it: For if we could believe his design to be honest and sincere;
yet we must needs conclude, that he has woefully mist it in the management; and
to make it the more observable to the Reader, as well as to himself, I shall
here present to his immediate view a summary collection of a few of the many
which might be produced out of this book, he is chargable with.

1 st. ^^lse it is which he ^^^es out of p. 66. and 127. of G: F's: Great
Mystery in his p. 138. viz. "He that has the same spirit that raised Jesus
from the dead is equal with God etc. For there is no such thing to be found in
either page.

2 dly. False it is which he objects against G: W: in his p: 30, where he
affirms, that G: W: quarrels with the word God-man For according to the place
he refers to as cited by himself, G: W: speaks thus As for those expressions
God man being born of Mary, we do not find them in the scriptures, nor do we
read that Mary was the Mother of God, but in the Popes Canons etc. So that the
word God^man is not what G: W: objects against, but God^man born of Mary; which
much alters the case; for to say, God as well as man was born of Mary, was too
like the Pope's calling Mary the Mother of God; for that which was conceived in
her was of the holy ghost but not the holy ghost. Matt. 1:20.

3 dly. False it is which he quotes in the same page out of G: W's book styled
Quakers Plainness, viz, That Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, That he is God
man, etc. Whereas there is no such thing said there for G: W: in that place
giving some account of our faith, says, Which is that Jesus Christ is come in
the flesh, and that he is God man the son of God; yea and God manifest in the
flesh etc. But not one word of his being God man. No, it only looks like a
trick of D: L: to render G: W: opposite to himself in relation to the former
passage, possibly thinking we were so ignorant, that we could not find out
these his unfair and unjust dealings. For that which G: W: makes two words of,
with a right disstinguishing* stop D: L: makes but one with a dash between,
thus* God man, without any distinguishing stop as G: W: has it thus, God-man.

4 thly. False it is that W: P: (as he affirms p: 5:) says Sandy Foundation p:
14. If the only God is the Father, and Christ be the only God, then is Christ
the Father, which is ridiculous and shameful.

5 thly False it is that W: Ps says (according to his quotation p. 6. out of
Sandy Foundation p. 22) that Christ could not pay what was not his own [debt].

6 thly False is his assertion in the same page* that W: P: holds, that Christ
had a debt of his own to satisfy to God.

7 thly False it is which in p. 14. he pretends to cite out of G: W's Christian
Quaker p. 212, That we plead for the Righteousness of a creature [i. e. Christ
as man] or man's own righteousness. For there is no such word as [Christ as man]
as I have a fore shown.

8 thly False it is which he produces p. 2^* as an expression of G: W's in his
Nature of Christianity p: 29, viz, Christ has not the body of man.

9 thly False it is which in the same page he alleges against G: W, viz that
He denies Christ's bodily existence without us.

10 thly False it is which he offers in p. 37. as W: P's Sandy Foundation p:
21. Christ as man was finite, viz. came to an end. For these words, viz: came
to an end, are not W: P's.

11 thly An abominable falsehood it is, that in Sandy Foundation p. 20. W: P:
calls Christ, The finite and impote^^ creature, see p. 38. and many other
places of his book.

12 thly False it is which in p. 40. he says of W: P, viz But VV: P: makes the
benefit of his coming to be no more but to show man more plain what he saw
before as through a glass. It being also contrary to what he himself has cited
as his wo^ds in the same page.

13 thly False it is which he asserts in p. 102, viz, That the Quakers have
denied Jesus of Nazareth.

14 thly False it is* which he affirms in p* 1^9, That we do not pray to
Christ: and as false; That we never in our meetings pray for pardon or
forgiveness of sin. His Friend G: K's acknowledgment concerning us, as a fore
cited, shows the contrary in both respects.

Thus have I collected some of the palpable lies and falsehoods ^e is guilty
o^, as by the books which I have ^y me cited by him may appear; what more there
might be found especially if we had all the books he mentions to ^^spect and
examine, can only (...) have ^ound in those books which I have examined.

As for what untruths and falsehoods (...) has in p 9^ and 95 told of John
Wood, the said* John (...) with certificates under his neigh bours hands, as
also h^s a^uses put upon some others of his Neigh bou^s in his own Province of
West^Jersey, in relation to the (...) of some public affair; may be made to
appear in their proper colors in the Po^tscript.

And now Reader, Is it not strange that after all this D: L: should be so
confident, as to call upon Sam. (...)* John (...), John Rodman etc. to come
forth and appo^^t a public meeting, to prove our charges in the face of the
world, of their abasing us and our books in falsely citing passages out of the
same, and wronging their sense. Whereas in this very book of his he is guilty
of such abundance of it.

But D. L. (...) not he^e; for in p 141 he manifests his impudence yet f^rther
in these expressions, Therefore I WILL give the world a sign, by which they may
know that you do not only abuse, belly etc. charge us falsely in this case: But
also, that your own consciences tells you that you are guilty of so doing. The
sign is this; If you know and are conscious to your selves that you have and do
so belly us, etc. then you will not come forth, according to this proposition; But
if you find you can get the lea^^ advantage of us, by out witting or otherways
wording the matter (tho (...) never so much falsity) then you^ll come forth,
and be glad I give you this opportunity. And by this sign shall you be proved.

Answ. It is easier to prove, this his sign to be a sign of his great
confidence and impudence, than a sign of what he would pretend to make out by
it; for this sign falls in all its marks, as thus; If we were guilty of ab^si^g
them, it does not at all follow, that therefore we would not comforth according
to his proposition* ^or the same (...) to wrong and abuse their neighbors, may
make (...) so confident* as to come forth with open face, to endeavor the
jus^ification thereof, especially when called (...), and when the case is as
this is, viz, (...) punishment is like to ensue. The pl^^nly appeared (...) the
case of Tho. Hicks, who though (...) the Quakers, as is (...) shown, yet had
the confidence to come forth (...) the first meeting to (...) it. 2 dly It
likewise appears as plainly in this very case of D: L^s; who not with^^anding
his many abuses put upon us in this his book, yet in the same he has the
confidence to challenge a me^ting with us, to put us upon proof of what is so
plainly (...) appear above* Therefore this is no infallible sign (...) of his
change, that we came no^ (...) according to his proposition. And then the other
part of his sign, relating to a supposition of our coming forth; is as
evidently (...); for we have got, not only a little, but a great deal of
ad^antage against him, and that very simply too, not only without any falsity,
but also without straini^g matters beyond what they will naturally bea^, and
yet (...) we do not come forth acco^ding to his proposition; and therefore both
his signs are fallible, and not to be he^ded, unless it ^e from them to make an
observation, how strangely men are in^^tuated, who draw back from, and rise up
against the tr^th.

Well, now I shall give D: L: and the world a plain and argumentative sign*
whereby he and they may know that he h^^self h^th (...) both the Quakers and
their books; which is this. If ^* L. have given that for the Qua^ers (...) in
their books, etc. in order to render them and their books odious thereby to the
world, which is not in their he books, then he has abused the Quakers and
their books: But so has D. L. done, as I have herein plainly manifest^^,
particularly in the summary collection of his falsehoods; Therefore he has
(...) the Quakers and their books. The first proposition I suppose he will not
deny, and the second he may see (if he be not blind) as plain as his face in a
glass; The conclusion then must needs be that D. L. has abused the Quakers and
their books. The evil of which (I can sincerely say) I heartly desire he may
come to a sense of, and true repentance for, before it be too late.

And now, if not withstanding what has been here so plainly manifested, of D:
L's abusing our Friends and their writings, any shall yet be so exceedingly
prejudiced against us, as not only to continue to vindicate him in such an evil
work, but also to bestow such large encomiums on him, as some have done, both
by word of mouth and writing, as well in verse as prose; We can then do less
but conclude tha^ it proceeds not from any Christian like desire to (...) in
defense of the truth, but that it is mee^ envy and prej^di^e against the
doctrine, way and practice which we profess and are found in, as well as
against us their honest and peaceable neighbors, which own and profess them,
that has done, and does animate them to such proceeding. Which if they shall
yet continue to do, as sure as truth is Truth, and falsehood is falsehood, in so
doing they can never please God who is just, no^ obtain credit with any
impartial man of right understanding: Therefore if after all, they do or shall
continue to vindicate him as aforesaid, we can then do no less than look upon
them to be such as are here described; and so as I said near the conclusion of
my other book, with the same expres^ion I shall conclude this, viz; We must
leave our cause with God who judges righteously.

POSTSCRIPT. John Woods Vindication of himself from the abuses put upon him by
Daniel Leeds.
It is not because I delight in controversy, or disire to be seen in print that
I have put pen to paper, but for the clearing of truth and my self, from those
lies and false aspersions published against me Daniel Leeds, in a book called
News of a Trumpet so^nding in the Wilderness.

In the 91 page of his book, he seems to write to London meeting, with pretense
that my actions with others may be Recorded, and in the 94 page. he pretends to
give account of my actions, and thus he says.

John Wood, one of your Brethren, a Preacher in Gloucester County in
West-Jersy, being Sheriff of that County, came with men armed to take goods
from John Roberts at P^nsoaken^, and sent two men before, who pretended they
had lost their way, of which the said John Roberts and his wife took pity and
gave them meat to eat. Soon after they espied VVood coming with his company,
wherefore Roberts made fast the door, but VVood told him, he had those within
that would do his business; they seeing him so treacherous, opened the door;
this VVood when come in offered his hand* Roberts said, if he came as a friend
it was well. But said Wood I come not as John Wood the Preacher, but as the
Sheriff of Gloucester. [Now by the way observe, that in the case between G: K:
and the Magistrates at Philadelphia, those Magistrates could not find how to
distinguish between Magistrates and Quakers or Preachers, but here you see
their Brother J. W. had the art to do it.]

But this I Wood proceeded, and took of several sorts goods use in the house,
among which was a warming pan, which the Woman earnestly desired him to leave,
by reason of the great use themselves and the Neighbors had of it, in case of
sickness or Child bed (there being none there about except that) But she could
not prevail with this Wood, but away he carried it, and soon after this Roberts
fell sick, and beginning to recover again, he sat up one day; but at night
going to his cold bed (for want of the pan to warm it (being winter) the cold
bed made such impression on him, that his speech was soon taken away, which he
did not recover again, but dyed in a few days; and what trouble this was to
the Widow, the Neighbors can tell how much she imputed the death of her
husband to the want of the p^n, which she could not persuade this Wood to
leave, though she offered him to take any other thing instead of it.

No* to the occasion of this dis^ress was only, for not answering a Summons to
G^^^cester Court, when the (...) at Burlington required the (...) the place
having (...) some years in co^test between the two Co^^ties (...) bounds, not
decided which County it (...) which I suppose is two.

Now Reader ^e pleased to peruse the following Certificates, and then thou will
be informed how he has (...).

This may certify whom (...) concerns (...) written, being dep^^ed as Sub
Sheriff, by John Wood* ^^gh Sheriff for the County of Gloucester) for the (...)
of a Warrant of distress, granted per order of (...) ^lo^^^ster the 1 st of
Se^^ember Anno 1694, (...) by a Justices of (...) Peace, upon the goods and
ch^^^e^s of John Ro^^^^ one of the Inhabitants of (...) the jurisdiction of
Gloucester Court aforesaid, and (...) to I accordingly went and (...) with the
said Roberts near his dwelling house, who understanding my business, h^stily
went into his house and put to the (...) against me, pu^^ing in the (...), and
denied me entrance; So that by reas^n hereof I was prevented of executing that
Warrant above said. I also offered that ^f he would pay the (...) many I would
forbear making any distress, which he also re^^s^^; so I returned the Warrant
back unexecuted to the High Sheriff again. To the truth of all w^i^h I
subscribe (...) ^his 26 th. of May Anno Domini School.

Thomas Bull

Now upon return of the Warrant as before. I applied my self to the
Magistrates, who commanded me to have the Warrants executed, that thereby the
Oppo^e^s might bring the Controversy to a trya^, that it might ^e decided to
which County they did belong, and in order th^^^ to I deputed Joseph Tom^inson
to execute the Warrant at John Roberts's: Therefore hear him.

Whereas John Roberts of Pensoaken was fined at a Court held at Gloucester on
the first day of September 1694, and a VVarrant Issued out of the Court for
^^^ying the said (...), John Wood High Sheriff depa^ed me, and by virtue of the
said VVarrant I and Edward Eglington did quietly enter the house of the said
Roberts, without any arms, so much as a horse ro^^, and also without any advice
from or stratagem contrived by John Wood, and we staid an hour at least, ^ntil
word was brought by a boy that the Sheriff was at a Nigh-^^^rs ^^^se, and
desired John Roberts to go thither; Then Ro^ert went out and sh^^ the door and
us on the inside. As (...) was done, h^s children carried the most of the goods
thy set the ^^st store by, some^ (as they said) in to the b^rn, and some other
where; and after a while came John Roberts and John Wood, William Chester and
William D^^kinson, and upon discourse between John Wood the Sheriff and John
Roberts and his wise, I heard John Wood say; As John VVood I would ^ather pay
the ^^ne than distrain but as I am he Sheriff I cannot for betraying my trust
to the County: By that John Wood should say, I come not as John VVood the
Preacher, but as the Sheriff of Gloucester, (...) false. But when John Wood
could not prevail then I distr^^ned a warming ^an and a little brass kettle,
two pe^^er ^i^hes and one pewter p^a^e, all which I did without the advice of
John Wood, only I asked him, If he thought that distress would satisfy the
Court and I would give them my sees, and he too me, he thought they would. And
further I heard John Woo^ desire John Roberts to lay down the fine in money, in
any Place of the house, and I should make distress of that as on other goods,
and would not take it as p^^d, to h^rt their cause, and said he would freely
give them his tr^ble; which said Roberts refused. And at last John Wood told
them, If they could use any means with the next Court to remit their fine, he
would send the goods back again at his own charge. And then I took the
aforesaid goods and brought them to Gloucester, and delivered them to Matthew
Metcalfe, where they remained till the first of December next, and then I made
the return to the Court, and not to John Wood. And I do here by further
certify, that John Wood, William Chester and William Dickinson when they came
from home, and also when they came thither, had no arms at all, and though I am
no Quaker, yet knowing (...) to be abused in the relation of what was done
concerning the said distress, was willing to certify the truth of my knowledge.
In testimony whereof I here unto subscribe my name.

Joseph Tomlinson

Having seen a book, called News of a Trumpet, wherein I find John Wood to be
falsely accused, though I am no Quaker, can in good conscience do no less than
certify whom I may concern, That I was with Joseph Tomlinson, when he being
deputed by Jo^hn Wood then Sheriff of Gloucester in W^^ Jersey) made distress at
John Roberts of Pensoaken. By virtue of a Warrant, Joseph Tomlinson and I
(without arms (...) advice or contrivance of John Wood's) did qu^e^^y enter the
house of John Roberts, and there stayed at ^east one hour, then a boy bringing
word that the Sheriff was at their house and disired John Roberts to go there,
and he went forth, and shut the door after him, and his children carried out a
gun and several other goods they set most store by, and after some time came
John Roberts, the Sheriff John Wood, William Chester and William Dickinson,
without any arm^ at all, and after some time of discourse, John Wood desired
John Roberts to lay down the fine in money, in some place where his Deputy might
distrain on it, and he would give them his trouble, and take ^t as paid, to
hurt cause* but they might come to a trial, and (...) be their least loss. The
Deputy I. Tomlinson said, he would give them his due; ^ut I. Roberts refused,
then J: T: said, I must distrain, and I would do you as little kurt as I can,
will you tell me what you can best spare; and laying his hand on a warming pan
said, Can you spare this; They at first said, as well as any thing, he ^^ok it
and other goods, afterward they desired him to (...) the p^n; both the Sheriff
and Deputy said; If they would ^^y down the money as beforesaid he would; But
they ref^^^ng (and brought again none of the goods they had carried ^ way)
(...) brought the goods to Gloucester, and there le^t them, (...) John Wood did
not meddle with them. Giv^^ forth by me all eye witness.

Edward Eglington

Now Reader, If thou truly comparest these Certificates with his charge, thou will find, that his contains several lies. First, In saying, I came with men
armed. Also, In charging me with treachery in sending men before. Also, In
saying. I proceeded and took several sorts of goods, in use in the house. Also,
in saying, A way I carried it. Also, In saying, she offered me to take any
other thing instead of the Pan. Also, In charging me with saying I come not as
John Wood the Preacher, but as the Sheriff of Gloucester. Now it plainly
appears, that in this charge there are six untruths. But if he or any other (to
cover his baseness) do say; Because my Deputy did it I did it: They may as well
say, The Magistrates did it, because they granted the Warrant by which it was
done If the Deputy exceeded the Warrant, I am ready to answer it; If not then
Daniel Leeds has manifested his envy against me, in laboring by falsehood to
render me ridiculous. For in obedience to Warrants under the hand of 3 Justices
of the peace I came into those parts. But, it appears, D. L. takes little
notice of Government. I know no fairer, or more easy way than I offered, for
John Roberts to have come to a Trial in which of the two Counties he dwelt.

In the 95 th. page of his book he has this expression; And what trouble this
was to the Widow, the Neighbors can tell how much she imputed the death of her
Husband to the want of the pan etc. Therefore be pleased to hear her Neighbors.

Soon after death of John Roberts, we whose names are underwritten, being with
Sarah Roberts the Widow, asked her, If she had said, That she did lay the death
of her husband to the want of the warming pan? She answered; She (...) hadpunc;
One of (...) asked her, If she did lay it to the (...) of the Pan? She said,
No, Nor (...) not for all the World.

Thomas Thackery Thomas T Shackle his mark Esther Spicer

In the same 95th page of his book he says thus. Come you Londen Friends [to
say no more of the inhumanity of this action of a Preaching Quaker] can you
parallel this in the whole world that ever a pretended Gospel Minister took the
Office of Sheriff before etc.

Now, I hope, both London Friends and all other Impartial Readers, by what is
before said, will say, there was no inhumanity used; but that D. L. has
manifested his envy. Then as to the acceptance of the Office of a Sheriff, I
ask; Whether it be more inconsistent with Christianity, to execute the laws
made, or to make laws to be executed?

Reader Thou may observe by one of the before going Certificates, that I said;
If they could use any means with the next Court to remit their fine, I would
send the goods back again at my own charge. But they used no means, Yet
sometime after I engaged the fine to the Magistrates, and got the goods, and
sent them as a free gift to the Widow and her Children. And this was nea^ two
years before D. L's book came forth; But he is silent as to that; It Is like it
suited not his envy.

Thus having laid open some of his lies, I think it not worth my time to
enlarge, being that what is done is sufficient to invalidate his Charge.

John Wood

ADVERTISEMENT
Whereas in several places (at least two) of this book, an expectation is
given, that in the Post Script, the West-Jersey friends would add something in
vindication of themselves, against the false suggestions and misrepresentations
of some public proceedings in that Province as are contained in D. L's
Preface, as also in his Chapters 10.11. and 15. Now the reason why it is not
done at this time, is, because diverse being concerned in the transactions there
reflected on (though by conference, as well as by his abusive treatment of
others, I am ready to conclude, they are much wronged, yet) they have hitherto
neglected to draw up any thing to clear themselves; and the book having been
long in the press, it is judged not fit to forbear the publishing of it any
longer. Therefore shall leave them (if they think fit to do any thing of that
nature) to publish some thing by themselves, when an opportunity presents that
may suit with their inclinations, to embrace.

FAREWELL.

