Acts made the 7th Assembly and 7th Sessions.
Beginning the second Day of March, School. and ending the 16th day of May, 1699.
Anno Regni Regis Gulielmi Tertij. Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae,
Vnd^cim.
An Act for granting unto his Majesty several Duties for the defraying the
public Charge of the Government after the time limited in an Act, entitled,
An Act confirming and continuing unto Their Majesty's the Revenue established
by an Act of General Assembly for defraying the Public and Necessary Charge of
the Government, is expired.
WHereas the Act of Assembly, entitled, An Act confi^ming and continuing unto
their Majesty's the Revenue established by an Act of General Assembly made in
the fourth Year of their Majesty's Reign, for defraying the Public and
Necessary Charges of the Government, five years longer than the Term therein
mentioned* does expire by its own Limitation upon the 18th day of May, which
shall be in the year of our Lord 1700. And whereas the great Happiness which
has attended this Province since his Majesty's auspicions Reign, does call for
the grateful Acknowledgement of all the good Subjects of this his Majesty's
Province, for so great a blessing, which by the goodness of Almighty God this
and all his M^jesties Kingdoms, and other Dominions, do enjoy under his
gracious and vigilent Government. In most humble sense whereof, the
Representatives convened in General Assembly, having also in their
Consideration the extraordinary Care which his Majesty has at all times taken
for the S^fe^y and Welfare of this Province; and being willing to give such
fresh Demonstra^ions and Assurances of their constant and unshaken L^yalty, and
most Dutiful Affections unto his most Excellent Majesty, do therefore freely
and heartily give and grant unto his most Excellent Majesty, for and during the
time* term and space of six years, from and after the 18th day of May, which
shall be in the year of our Lord 1700. the Rates, Duties, Excise and Sums of
Money herein after mentioned, for the defraying the nec^ssary Charge of the
Government. And do most humbl^ pray that it may be Enacted, and be it therefore
Enacted by his Excellency, the Governor, and Council, and Representatives
convened in General Assembly. And it is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the
same, That there shall be rai^ed, levied, collected, paid and satisfied unto
his Majesty, for the time, term and space of six years, from and after the said
18th day of May, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1700. for the U^e
aforesaid, the Rates, Duties, Impositions and Excise upon the Goods, Wares,
Merchandises, Furs, Wines and other Liquors herein after mentioned, in manner
and form following, that is to say,

For every Gallon of Rum, Brandy, and Distilled Liquors, that shall be Imported
into this Province, and D^pendencies aforesaid, the Sum of Four Pence current
Money of this Province. And for every Pipe of Madera, Malmsey, Fyal, St.
Georg^s, Passedo, Canary, Mallego, Sh^rry, and all other sort of sweet Wines,
the Sum of For^y Shillings, current Money a^^resaid; and so in proportion for
greater and s^^ller Quantities Imported as aforesaid. And for every Hogshead of
Red, White and Rhenish Wi^es the Sum of Twenty Shillings current Money
aforesaid, and so in Proportion for all greater and smaller Quantities,
Imported as aforesaid. And upon all other Merchandises imported into this
Province and Dependencies afore^a^d, the Sum of Forty Shillings, current Money
aforesaid, for every h^ndred ^ounds prime co^t, except these her^a^^er
s^ec^fied, viz. Salt, Brick* Pa^tiles Coals, Fish* Sugar* M^llosses* Cott^n
Wool, Gin^er Log-wood Br^z^lletto, ^ustick, or any other s^^t o^ D^ing W^od,
West India H^des* Tobacco, B^ll^on, Plate, Cocco, Pork* Oil ^ar* Flax* Soap,
Candles, Tallo^, Ch^^se, Butter, B^ef, Whale-bone, Hops, Apples, Pears, ^^der,
Fire wood Plank* Boards, Pipe staves, Timber, Pel^ry B^aver, Sheeps Wool,
Onions, Dressed and Undressed Deer-Skins, Honey, B^es W^x, Bay Wax, Indian
Corn, Wheat, Barl^y, Rye, Fease, or any other sort of G^ain, or any other thing
of the Growth and Production of our Neighboring Collonies and Plantat^ons in
America.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be also given
and granted unto his said Majesty, for the intent aforesaid, upon all
Merchandise commonly called by the Name of Indian Goods, as Duff^lls, red, blew
and black, Strouds, Blankets* ^lains, half Thicks, Woollen Stockins, White
O^enbrugs, Mellish Kettles, Hatchets, Hoes, Red Lead, Vermillion, Cotton, Red
Kersies, Knives, Indian Habbardasbery, and other Indian ^oods, the Sum of Five
Pounds current Money aforesaid, for every hundted Pounds prime cost, which
shall be imported into this Province and Dependencies, aforesaid, over and
above the Forty Shillings for every hundred Pounds prime Cost, before given and
granted unto his Majesty by this present Act; and that the Value of the prime
Cost shall be at the Rates hereafter mentioned, viz. Indian Duffiills to be
valued at two Shillings and four pence per Yard, Indian Strouds, half a piece*
four Pounds, a whole piece eight Pounds; ^ndian Blankets, each piece four
Pounds, Indian plain Cotton, eighteen Pence per yard; half Thicks, two
Shillings and two pence per yard; Indian white Ozenbrugs Mellish, the English
Ell eight Pence, Indian Kettles, under eight Gallons, six Pounds per hundred
weight; Indian Hatchets, twelve Shillings per dozen; Indian Hoes, twelve
^hillings per doz^^; Red Lead, twenty Shillings per hundred weight; Vermil^ion,
four Shillings per pound; Cotton, sixteen pence per yard; Red Kersies, two
shillings six penc^ per yard; Knives, three shillings per dozen; Indian Shirts,
twenty shillings per doz^n; Indian Drawing Knives, Looking Glasses, Indian
Wooden Con^^s, (...) ^eads, Tobacco in Rolls, Indian B^lls, Sci^^ars, Jews
Harps, ^ndian Po^^ts, Drills, Tobacco Pipes, li^^le painted Boxes, Awls, Sword
Blades, Copper Tobacco Boxes, Tincey Lace, Indian Gimp Lace, Needles, Tobacco
Tongs, Indian Powder Horns, Indian woollen Stockins, and Indian Steels, the Sum
of six Pounds, current Money aforesaid, over and above the Two per Cent.
aforesaid, for every hundred Pounds value at prime Cost.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that there be also given
and granted unto his Majesty, for the intent aforesaid, for every Barrel of
Powder six Shillings; for every hundred Pounds of Lead* six Shillings; for
every Gun with or without a Lock, six Shillings, that shall be carried up
Hudson's River in any Vessel, Sloop or Canow, or by any other way whatsoever

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be also given
and granted unto his said Majesty, for the purpose aforesaid, the Duty of
Excise upon all Liquors retailed throughout the Province and Dependencies
aforesaid, under the Quantity of five Gallons, the sum of twelve Pence, current
Money aforesaid, for each Gallon so retailed Beer and Syder only excepted) and
likewise the sum of six ^hillings for each Barrel of Beer and Syder sold by
Re-tail through-out this Province

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That there be given and
granted, and there is hereby further given and granted unto his said Majesty,
for the Use aforesaid, a Rate and Duty upon the Furs and Pel^ry hereafter
mentioned, that shall be exported out of this Province and Dependencies, that
is to say* For every Beaver Skin, commonly called a whole Beaver, the sum of
Nine Pence, current Money aforesaid; and that all other Furs and Peltry be
rated accordingly, (that is to say) For two half Beavers the sum of 9 d.
current Money aforesaid; for four Laps, 9 d. for three D^^llings, 18 d. for ten
Raccoons 9 d. for ^our Foxes 9 d. for four Fishe^s 9 d. for five Ca^s 9 d. for
six Minks 9 d. for one O^^er 6 a for two Bear skins 9 d for twenty ^our Musk
Rats 9 d. for ten Martins 9 d for every twenty four pounds of Deer and Muse
skins 9 d. and for every Ox Cow and Bull Hide slaugh^ered in this Province and
Dependencies, 6 d. And all other Peltry to be valued to a whole Beaver, 9 d.

And for the due and orderly collecting of the aforesaid Rates, Duties and
Excise, and also for preventing of Frauds and Imbezilments of the said Rat^s*
Duties and Excise, Be it further Enacted by the Authori^y aforesaid, That all
Ships and Vessels whatsoever, that shall come to any Port, Creek or Harbor
within this Province and Dependencies, to trade or traffic, the Master, Ma^e
or Purser shall come to such place or places as shall be appointed by the
Governor, for the time being, and there make Report of all such parcel or
parcels of Merchandise, or other things, that he or they have on boa^^ such the
said Ship or Vessel, and also declare upon their ^o^poral Oaths, That ^e or
they have not broke bulk since his arrival within this Province, before he or
they made such Report, as aforesaid. And also, all Merchants that have any
Goods or Merchandise on board such Ship or Vessel, as aforesaid shall at such
place or places as is above directed, make a true and distinct Entry of all
such parcel or parcels of Good, or Merchandise he has on board such ^hip or
Vessel, according to the prime cost. And if any Difference shall arise about
the Value of the said Goods, his Majesty's Collector, for the time being, is
hereby authorized to administer to all or any such person or persons, making
such Entry; their corporal Oath, That the said Entry is according to the
Invoice or Invoices sent to them from the place or places from whence such
Goods or Merchandise did come.

And it is furth^r Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Master, Mate
or Pu^^^ro any Ship or Vessel whatsoever, or any Merchant, Factor, or other,
shall, contra^y to these Rules above directed, break Bulk or land any Goods or
Merchandise whatsoever, before he or they make Report or Entry, and pay such
Duties as is required by this Act, then and in such case the Master of such
Ship or Vessel, that shall b^eak Bulk before making such Report, as aforesaid,
shall upon proof made thereof by two sufficient and lawful Witnesses, forfeit
his said Ship or Vessel, with all her Tackle, Furniture and Ammunition* one
third to his Majesty, one third unto the Governor, and one third unto the
In^ormer, to be sued for in any Court of Record within this Province, by Bil^
Plaint o^ Information, wherein no Essoyn, Protection or Wager of Law shall be
allowed. And also, all such Goods as shall be landed without Entry made, as
aforesaid, shall be in like manner forfeited, one third unto his Majesty, one
third to the Governor, and one third to the Informer, to be sued as aforesaid.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Masters of
Ships or Vessels that are within this Province, and do not belong unto the
same, or any part thereof, and bound to any part within or without this
Province, shall, before they take any Merchandise, above expressed, come to
such place or places as shall be appointed for the Collecting the Rates and
Duties established by this Act, and there make their Entry and Report of their
Design, and enter into Bond, to the value of one Thousand Pounds, current Money
of New York, with sufficient Sureties, that they shall not take on board
directly or indirectly, any Goods or Merchandise before recited and expressed,
without such permit or Certificate from the Collector, or any having authority
under him, for the same. And if they do take on board any Goods or Merchandise
before recited and expressed, contrary to the true intent and meaning of this
Act, then they shall forfeit their Bonds, to be sued within three Months after
such fact committed, or otherwise to be void, and of no force and virtue.

And all Masters of Ships, Sloops, Boats, or any other Vessel belonging to this
Province, and its Dependencies, shall once in the year repair to the Custom
House, or to other place or places that shall be appointed for that purpose and
there enter into Bond, to the value of One Hundred Pounds current Money
aforesaid, that they shall not directly or indirectly take on board and carry
out of this Province, any of the aforesaid Goods and Merchandise, without first
making Entry thereof, and paying such Rates and Duties as are before recited
and expressed; and if they do take on board any of the aforesaid Goods and
Merchandise, without making Entry thereof, or paying of the Rates and Duties
aforesaid, then the said Bond shall be forfeited.

And for the due and orderly Collecting of all Duties of Excise hereby given
and granted, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all
Retailers of Wine, Rum, Brandy, or any other strong Liquors, within this
Province or Dependencies, shall, upon their purchase and receipt of all such
Liquor or Liquors before expressed and exciseable, come to the Office or
Offices of the Excise, and there, or with him make Entry of all such Liquor or
Liquors as they shall buy or receive, and pay such Duties as are hereby
appointed, within twenty four hours, or at such convenient time as the Officer
of Excise shall appoint; and on Default thereof, all such Liquors as shall be
found in any Retailers House or Warehouse, Cellar, or other place belonging
unto him, within this Province or Dependencies, and have not been duly
entered, and paid the Duties of Excise, as aforesaid, then and in such case,
upon Conviction by Oath of one or more cred^ble Witnesses, before any Justice
of the Peace within this Province and Dependencies, the said Retailer or
Retailers so offending in the premises shall forfeit all such Liquors, and
three times the value thereof, one third to his Majesty, one third to the
Governor, and one third to the Informer who shall prosecute the same before any
Justice of the Pe^ce throughout this Province and Dependencies, who are hereby
Authorized and Empowered to hear and determine the same, and i^ need be, to
issue out their Warrant for the seizing and condemning of all such Liquors
forfeited as aforesaid, and for committing to Goal all such Retailers of
Liquo^s who have not entered and paid the Duties of Excise in manner aforesaid,
there to remain without Bail or Main prize until they shall satisfy and make
payment of three times the value of such Liquors seized and forfeited as
aforesaid. Provided, That he or they have liberty to appeal to the next
S^ssions of the Peace, giving S^curity to answer the same.

And be it further Enacted by Authority aforesaid, That if any Person or
Persons within this Province and Dependenc^es, not being duly lisenced, shall
at any time here-after presume to sell by Retail any the liquors aforesaid,
that is to say, a less quantity at one time than five Gallons, the Persons so
offending shall forfeit and pay the sum of five Pounds, current Money
aforesaid, for every such Off^nce, being thereof convict by the Oath of one or
more credible Witnesses, to be sued as aforesaid, before any Justice of the
Peace thoughout the Province, and to be employed in such manner and proportion
as aforesaid.

Always provided, and it is the true intent and meaning of this Act, That no
Retailers of Liquors, under five Gallons, or any other that shall sell any
Liquor or strong Liquors, shall take any such Liquor into their Houses, Cellers
or Warehouses, or into any other place belonging unto them, in New York and
Albany, but by the hands of the sworn Porters under the Penalty aforesaid, to
be sued and recovered, for the Uses aforesaid, in manner and form aforesaid.
Always provided, and it is hereby understood, That there shall no Duty be paid,
nor forfeiture made upon any Goods or Merchandise that are not sold or landed
within this Province and Dependencies. Always provided, That all Merchants
qualified to Trade, by Acts of Navigation and R^gulating the Plantation Trade,
coming into this Province, or any part thereof, be well and honestly treated
and demeaned for such things as by this Act is granted, without Oppression to
be done to them, paying the Duties aforesaid.

An Act for the Restraining and Punishing Privateers and Pirates.
WHereas nothing can more contribute to his sacred Majesty's Honor than that
such Articles as are concluded and agreed on in all Treaties of Peace, should
by all his Majesty's Subjects, according to their Duty, be most inviolably
p^eserved and kept, in and over all his M^jesties Dominions and Territories.
And whereas not only against such Treaties of Peace made by his Majest^ with
his Allies, but al^o contrary to his Majesty's Royal Proclamation, several of
his Subjects have and do con^inually go off from this his Majesty's Province of
New York, into foreign Princes Services, and sail under their Commissions,
contrary to their Duty and go^d Allegiance, and by fair mean^ cannot be
restrained from so doing*

Be it therefore Enacted by the Governor, Counci^ and Assembly, and it is
hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, Th^^ from (...) Publication hereof
(...) shall (...) ^e^ony for any Person which no (...) or within four years
last part, here^ofore has, or hereafter shall (...) to this Province, to serve
in America i^ an hostile manner, under (...) foreign Prince, State or
Potentate, or any employed under any of them against any other foreign Prince,
State or Po^entate in (...) with his Majesty o^ Great Britain, without special
Lysence for so doing, under the ^^and and (...) of the Governor or Commander
in Chief of this Pr^vince, for the time being; and that all and every such
Offender or Offenders contrary to the true intent of this Act, being thereof
duly convicted in his Majesty's Supreme Court of Judicature within this
Province, to which Court Authority is hereby given to hear and to determine the
same, as other Cases of Felony, shall suffer Pains of Death, without benefit
of ^l^rgy. Provided always nevertheless, That this Act, nor any thing therein
contained, shall ex^end to any person or persons which now a^e or have been in
any Service or Employment of any foreign Prince, State or Potentate
whatsoever, that shall return to this Province, and leave and desert such
Service and Employment before the first day of May, in the Year of our Lord
1700. next ensuing, rend^ing themselves to the Governor or Commander in Chief,
for the time being, and give him such Security as he shall appoint, for their
future good Behavior; and also, that they shall not depart this Province
without the Governor's Ticket.

And for the better and more speedy Execution of Justice upon such who having
committed Treason, Pyracies, Fellonies, and other Offenses upon the Sea, and
shall be apprehended in, or brought Prisoners to this Province, Be it further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Treasons, Fellonies, Pyracies,
Robberies, Mu^thers or Confeder^cies committed, or that hereafter shall be
committed upon the Sea, or in any Haven, Creek or Bay where the Admiral has
Jurisdiction, shall be enquired, tried, heard, determined and adjudged within
this province, in such like form as if such Offense had been commi^ted in and
upon the Land; and to that end and purpose Commissions shall be had under the
Kings great Seal of this Province, directed to the Judge or Judges of the
Admiralty of this Province, for the time ^eing, and to such ^^her substantial
Persons as by his Majesty's Governor or Commander in Ch^e^ of this Province
for the time being, shall be named or appointed, which sa^d commissioners or
such a Quorum of them as by such Commission shall be thereunto authorized,
sha^^ have full power to do all things in and about the enquiry, hearing,
determining, adjudging and punishing of any of the Crimes and ^ffences
aforesaid, as any Commissioners to be appointed by Commission under the great
Seal of England* by virtue of a S^atute made in the 28^h year of the Reign of
K. Henry the 8th, are empowered to do and execute within the Kingdom of
England; and that the said Offenders which are or shall be apprehended in, or
brought Prisoners to this Province, shall be liable to such Order, Process,
Judgments and Execution, by virtue of such Commission, to be grounded upon this
Act, as might be awarded or giv^n against them, if they were proceeded against
within the Realm of England, by virtue of any ^ommission grounded upon the said
S^atute. And all Trials here-to fore had against such Criminal or Criminals,
before such Judge or Judges, by virtue of such Commission or Authori^y at any
time heretofore g^an^ed; and all Proceedings thereupon are hereby ratified,
confirmed and adjudged Lawful; and all such Judges, with all and every the
inferior Officers that acted the^e^y, are hereby indemnified to all intents
and purposes whatsoever; and in case they or any of them shall at any time
hereafter be sued, vexed, molested or troubled for any such their proceedings,
as aforesaid, he or they so sued, vexed or molested shall plead the general
Issue, and give this Act in Evidence, any Law, S^atute, Custom or Usage to the
contrary in any wise notwithstand^ng.

Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every person or
persons that shall any way knowingly entertain, harbor, conceal, trade or hold
any correspondence by Letter, or otherwise, with any person or persons that
shall be deemed or adjudged to be Privateers, Pirates, or other Offenders,
within the Construction of this Act, and that shall not readily endeavor, to
the best of his or their Power, to apprehend, or cause to be apprehended, such
Offender or Offenders, shall be liable to be prosecuted as Accessaries and
Confederates, and to suffer such Pains and Penalties as in such case by Law is
provided.

And for the better and mo^e effectual Execution of this Act, Be it further
Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all Commission Officers in their
several Precincts within this Province, are hereby required and empowered, upon
his or their knowledge, or Notice given, that any Privateers, Pirates, or other
Persons suspected to be upon any Unlawful Design, are in any place within their
respective Precincts, to raise and levy such a Number of well armed Men, as he
or they shall think needful for the seizing, apprehending and carrying to Goal
all and every such person and persons; and in case of any Resistance, or
refusal to yield Obedience to his Majesty's Authority, it shall be lawful to
kill or destroy such person or persons; and all and every person or persons
that shall oppose or resist by striking or firing upon any of the commanded
Parties, shall be deemed, taken and adjudged as Fellons, without benefit of the
Clergy; and every such Officer that shall omit or neglect his Duty herein,
shall forfeit Fifty Pounds current Money of this Province, for every such
Offense, to be recovered in any of his Maj^st^es Courts of Record within this
Province, by Bill, Plaint or Information, wherein no Essoyn, Wager of Law or
Protection shall be allowed, one moiety thereof to be to our Sovereign Lord the
King, his Heirs and Successors, for and toward the support of the Government
of this Province, and the contingent ^harge thereof, and the other moiety to
the ^nformer. And all and every Person and Persons, that upon Orders given him
or them, shall refuse to repair immediately with his or their Arms well fixed,
and Ammunition, to such place or p^aces as shall be appointed by the said
Officer, and not readily obey his Commands in the Execution of the Premises,
shall be liable to such Fine or Corporal Punishment as by a Regimental Court
Marshal shall be thought fit.

An Act for Preventing Soldiers listed in his Majesty's Service in this
Province of New York, from Deserting his Majesty's said Service.
FOrasmuch as sundry of his Majesty's Soldiers in his Garrisons of New York
and Albany, have absented themselves, and deserted the said Garrisons of
New York and Albany; For the prevention of the like for the future. Be it
therefore Enacted by the Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in
General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That whatsoever Soldier
that is now listed in his Majesty's Service, for the security of this Province,
as aforesaid, or hereafter shall be listed, that shall desert or forsake the
said Service without leave first obtained from the Governor, Lieutenant
Governor or Commander in Chief, for the time being, under his Hand and Seal,
shall suffer the Pains of Death, according to the tenor of an Act of Parliament
passed in his Majesty's Kingdom of England, entitled, As Act for punishing
Officers and Soldiers who shall Mutiny or Desert their Majesty's Service, and
for punishing false Masters. And to the end that none of the Inhabitants within
this Province shall knowingly harbor, receive, entertain, or in any manner of
way be helping, aiding, assisting or encouraging to any of his Majesty's
Soldiers, listed as aforesaid, to Desert his Majesty's said Service, Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whatsoever Persons inhabiting,
residing or sojourning within this Province, shall, after publication hereof,
knowingly receive, harbor, entertain or conceal any of his Majesty's
Soldiers, listed as aforesaid, who shall desert his Majesty's Service without
leave obtained, as aforesaid, in their Houses, Barns, Stables, or any other
concealed places, in any part of this Province, within three Miles of York,
Albany, or any other Garrison or place where any Number of such Soldiers shall
be hereafter posted, or shall be in any manner of way aiding, helping*
assisting or encouraging to any of the said Soldiers to desert his Majesty's
Service, or be any ways helpful to carry any of the said Soldiers out of this
Province, either by Ship, Bark, Sloop, Vessel, Boat, Canow, Horse, or any other
way, shall for each such Offense pay or forfeit the Sum of Twenty Pounds
current Money of this Province, to be recovered by Bill, Plaint or Information
in any Court of Record within this Province, where no Essoyn, Protection or
Wager of Law shall be allowed, one half whereof to our Sovereign Lord the King,
his Heirs and Success^rs, to be employed for the (...) the said Companies
completely full, and the other half to the in^or^^r, or he that shall sue for
the same. And if it shall so happen that any person or persons, as aforesaid,
that shall be convicted of any the afo^^said O^f^nces, and has not Goods and
Chattels, L^nds or Tenements for the sati^sfying the F^rfeiture aforesaid,
shall he severely whipped upon his naked back, according to the discretion and
direction of that Court of Record where the Prosecution shall be made, provided
they do not exceed the Number of (...) save one, and shall likewise be li^ted
in the Company where such (...) was, and there serve until s^^e other
su^^^cient person he li^^ed in his room to (...) the said Company so complete
as it was before such D^sertion hap^^ned

And to the end that all such as shall desert his M^^^^ties Service, as
aforesaid, may be ^^ken up and brought to their respective Officers* He (...)
by the Authority aforesaid* That whatsoever person or persons that shall (...)
any Soldier listed in his Majesty's service, as aforesaid, that are (...)
themselves, or deserting the ^a^d Service, and b^ing the said Soul^iers unto
his Majesty^^ Garrison^ of New York or Albany, shall have for his Reward five
Pounds current Money aforesaid over and above the (...) shall (...) in bringing
him to his Majesty's said Garrisons o^ New York or Albany, (...) the doing
whereof, all his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, Sheri^^^, (...) Sheriffs,
Constables, and all others his Majesty's (...), such Civil and Military, are
hereby required to be (...) and assi^ting, both in the disc^very and bringing
of such D^ser^ers to his Majesty's Garrison (...) Albany, as aforesaid*
Provided. That nothing contained in th^^ (...) continue or remain in force
lon^er than two years next and after the (...) hereof, any thing contained
herein to the contrary (...) in any ways notwithstanding.

An Act for the Regulating and Returning Able and Suffi^ient Jurors in Trials
at Law.
WHereas great hurt and damage does arise to the Inhabitants of this Province,
by reason of the great Abuse^ in the returning (...) not sufficiently qualified
to discern the Causes in que^tion (...) Trials between party and party. That
the same for the future may ^e rem^di^d, and that able and sufficient Jurors
for Trials, hereafter to be ha^, may be duly returned by the Sheriff, and other
Officers authorized for th^^ service, Be (...) Enacted by his E^cellency the
Governor, and Council, and Representative^ (...) in General Assembly, and it
is hereby Ena^^ed by the Authority of the (...), That all Jurors who are to be
returned for the Trials of Issu^^ joined in any of his Majesty's supreme or
inferior Courts, or Courts of Mayors and A^der^^^, within this Province, who
shall have cognizance of any (...) Majesty's Courts of Kings He^ch, (...) Pl^as
or (...), or before any Justices of Ass^^e, N^^^^rius, Over and Terminer, Goal
Delivery or General or Quarter Sessions of the Peace, from and after the
Publication hereof, in any City or County in this Province, shall every of them
then have in their own Name and Right, a good House or Mess^^ge, with ten Acres
of Land, of Free-(...) in the respective Counties wherein they do reside; and
in the Cities of New York and Albany one dwelling House free from a^l
Encumbrances, or a personal Estate to the value of Fifty Pounds cu^rent Money
of this Province, ^ree and clear from all Debts and lawful Demands whatsoever,
in the same City, Town and C^utr^ where such Jurors shall reside, (...) which
Persons, having such Estate, in manner aforesaid, are hereby enabled and made
liable and sufficiently qualified to be returned, and to serve as Jurors for
the Trials of Issues, before the Justices and Courts aforesaid, an^ Law or
Statute to the contrary notwithstanding. And it any person of a lesser Estate
and value shall be re^^ectively returned upon any such Jury or Ta^es, in
default of such Jurors it shall be a good cause of Chal^enge, and the party
returned shall be discharged upon the said Challenge, or his own Allegation and
Oath thereof. And that the same hereafter may be duly observed, the Writ of
Venire facias which shall hereafter be awarded and directed for the
Impannelling of Juries, in cases aforesaid, within any City and County within
this Province, shall have mentioned, in the Body thereof, Twelve free and
lawful men of the Neighborhood, of which each of them shall have in their own
Name and Right a good House or Message, with ten Acres of Land of Free hold in
the County and in the Cities of New York and Albany a d^elling House free from
all Encumbrances, or a Personal Estate to the value of 50 l. free and clear
^^om the Debts and lawful Demands whatsoever; and the Preamble and residue of
the said Writ sha^^ be after the usual manner. And that upon every such Writ
and Writs of V^nire facias the Sheriff, Coronor, and other Minister of each
respective City and County in this Province, unto whom the making of the Panel
shall appertain, shall not return any person in any such Panel, unless he
shall then have the Estate, as aforesaid, respectively in the same Cities and
Counties where the Issue is to be tried.

And that Jurors may the better appear upon Trials at the Courts aforesaid, Be
it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Sheriffs of the
respective Cities and Counties of this Province, for the time being, shall from
hence forth cause twelve good and lawful men, qualified as aforesaid, to be
duly summoned or warned two days, at least, before the beginning of the
respective Courts aforesaid, to be and appear at the first day of the sitting
of the said respective Courts, and there to attend during the Sessions of the
said Courts, to perform their Duty and Service to the Court, as Jurors or
Jurymen, in such cases between party and party, wherein they shall be
respectively returned and impannelled, upon pain that every of them that shall
make Default to appear and attend at and during the Session of the said Court,
unless they have leave from the said Court to depart, to forfeit the sum of 13
s. 4 d. current Money of this Province, to such use as the said Court shall
appoint, and the same to be levied, recovered and had by the Sheriff or his
Deputy, in such manner and ways as Issues of Jurors are used to be levied
formerly. Provided also, That there shall not be returned any person to serve
as a Juror aforesaid, who is under the Age of one and twenty years, any thing
to the contrary notwithstanding. And this Act to remain in force for two years
next after the Publication hereof, and no longer.

An Act for the Regulating Elections of Representatives in General Assembly in
each respective City and County within this Province.
WHereis of late the Election of Representatives to serve in Assembly, in the
respective Cities and Counties of this Province, have been managed with great
Out rage, Tumult and Deceit, to the grievous Opp^ession, and depriving the
Subject of his chiefest Birthright, in choosing of his Representatives in
Assembly. For Remedy whereof, for the time to come, and that the Subject may
freely enjoy his undoubted Right of Electing his Representatives, without
Disturbance or Molestation, Be it Enacted by h^s Excellency the Governor and
Council, and Representatives convened in General Ass^mbly, and it is hereby
Enacted by the Authority of the same, That the Representatives of the Cities
and Counties, to be chosen within this Province, to come to the Assembly of our
Lord the King, in this Province, hereafter to be holden, shall be chosen in
every City, and County, and Manor within this Province, who have right to
choose by People dwelling and resident in the same Cities, Counties and Manors,
whereof every one of them shall have Land o^ Tenements improved, to the value
of Forty Pounds in Freehold, free ^ro^ all Encumbrances, and have possessed
the same three M^neths before the (...) of the said Writ; and they which shall
be chosen shall be dwelling and resid^nt within the same Cities, Counties and
Manors; and such as have the greatest Number of them, who shall have Lands or
Tenements improved to the value of Forty Pounds in freehold, free from all
Encumbrances, as aforesaid, shall be returned by the Sheriffs of every City,
Counties and Manors. Representatives for the Assembly, by Indentures sealed
betwixt the said Sheriffs and the said Chu^ers, so to be made. And every
Sheriff of this Province shall be hereby empowered to have Authority to examine
upon Oath every such Chuser, whether he be qualified, by having such an Estate,
as aforesaid, to choose. And if any Sheriff shall return Representatives to come
to the Assembly, contrary to the intent of this Act, and thereof be convict in
the supreme Court of this Province, shall incur the Pain and Forfeiture of
Fifty Pounds, to the Use of our Lord the King, his Heirs and Successors. And
the Representatives returned contrary to this Act, shall not be qualified to
sit in Assembly, and shall loo^e their Wages.

And whereas the Freeholders, and others, in their right of Election, as also
the Persons by them elected to be their Representatives, have heretofore been
greatly injured and abused. Now for re^^dying the same, and preventing the like
for the future, Be it further Enact^d by the Authority aforesaid, That when any
New Assembly shall at any t^me ^e^eafter be summoned or called, there shall be
forty days between the Test and Return of the Writs of (...); and that the
Secretary or Clerk of the Crown of this Province, shall issue out the Writs,
for the Election of Representatives to serve in the same Assembly, with as much
expedition as the same may be done; and the Writs shall be sealed and delivered
to the respe^tive Sheri^f, of the Cities and Counties aforesaid; and that every
such Sheriff, upon the Receipt of the same Writ, shall upon the back thereof,
endorse the day he received the same, and within six days after he has
received the said Writ of Election, shall cause public Notice to be given of
the time and place of Election; and give six days Notice, at least, of the day
appoin^ed, to the Constable of each Town within his Bailw^ck, to be by the said
Constables affixed to the most public place of each Town, as aforesaid, for
the Election.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That neither the Sheriff
nor Undersheriff in any City or County within this Province, shall give, p^y,
receive or take any F^e, Reward or Gratuity whatsoever, for the making out,
receipt, delivery, return or Execution of any such Writ or Precept.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That upon every Election
to be made of any Representative to serve in this or any future Assembly, the
Sheriff of the City or County where such Election shall be made, shall hold his
Court for the same Election at the most public and u^ual place of Election
within the said City or County where the same has most usually been made. And
in case the said Election be not determin^d upon the view, with the consent of
the Electors there present, but that a Poll shall be required for the
Deter^ination thereof, then the sa^d Sheriff* o^ in his absence his
Undersheriff, with such others as shall be deputed by him, shall forthwith
there provide to take the said Poll in some op^n or public place or places by
the same Sheriff, or his Undersheriff, as aforesaid, in his absence, o^ others
appointed for the taking thereof, as aforesaid.

And for the more due and orderly proceeding in the said Poll, the said
Sheriff, or in his absence, his Undersheriff, or such as he shall depute,
shall appoint such number o^ Clerks as to him shall seem meet and convenient
for taking thereof, which Clerks shall all take the said Poll in the presence
of the said Sheriff, or his Undersheriff, or such as he shall depute; and
before they begin to take the said Poll, every Clerk so appointe^, shall, by
the said Sheriff, or his Undersheriff, as aforesaid, be sworn, Truly and
in^ifferently to take the same Poll* and to set down the Names of each Elector,
and the place o^ his Freehold, and for whom he shall poll, and (...) poll no
Elector who is not sworn, if so required by the Candidates, or any of them then
and there present (Which Oath of the said Clerks, the said Sheriff or his
Undersheriff, or such as he shall depute, are hereby empowered to administer)
And the Sheriff, or in his absence the Undersheriff, as aforesaid, shall
appoint for each Candidate such one Person as shall be nominated to him by each
Candidate then and there present, to be Inspectors of every Clerk, who shall be
appointed for taking of the Poll. And every Elector, before he is admitted to
poll at the same Election, shall, if required by the Candidates, or any of
them* f^^st cake the Oath herein after-mentioned, which Oath the said Sheriff
by himself, or his Undersheriff, or such sworn Clerk by him appointed for
taking of the said Poll, as aforesaid, are hereby authorized to administer,
viz. You shall swear, th^^ you are a Freeholder for the County of, etc. and
have improved Land or Tenement to the value of Forty Pounds, lying at (...)
within the said County of (...) Freehold. And that you have not been before
po^ed at this Election, nor have you procured this Freehold to gain your Voice
in this Election. So help you God.

And in case any Freeholder, or any other person taking the said Oath, shall
thereby commit willful corrupt P^rjury, and be thereof convicted, or if any
Person do unlawfully or corruptly procure or subborn any Freeholder, as
aforesaid, or other person, and shall be thereof convicted, he and they for
every such Offense shall incur the like Pains and Penalties as are in and by
one Act of Parliament made in the 5th year of the Reign of the late Qu.
Elizabeth, entitled, An Act for punishment of such persons as shall procure or
commit any willful Perjury, enacted against all such who shall commit willful
Perjury, or subborn or procure any person to commit any unlawful and corrupt
Perjury, contrary to the said Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Sheriff,
or in his absence his Undersheriff, or such as he shall depute, as aforesaid,
shall at the same place of Election, proceed to the po^^ing all the Electors
then and there present, and shall not adjourn the Poll, then and there ^^ld, to
any other Town or place within the same County, without the consent of the
Candidates then and there present; nor shall by any unnessary Adjournment in
the same place of Election, protract or delay the Election, but shall duly and
orderly proceed in the taking of the said Poll, from time to time, from day to
day, without any further o^ other Adjournment, without the consent of the
Candidates then and there present, until all the Electors then and there
present shall be polled* and no longer.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Sheriff,
Undersheriff, or other deputed by (...), to whom the Election shall belong,
for the electing of Representatives to serve in Assembly, shall forthwith
deliver to such person or persons as shall desire the same, a Copy of the Poll,
taken at such Election, paying only a reasonable Charge for writing the same.
And every Sheriff, Undersheriff, or other person depu^ed by him to whom the
Execution of any Writ or Precept for electing Representatives to serve in
Assembly, does belong, for every willful Offense, contrary to this Act, shall
forfeit to every party so grieved the Sum of Thirty Pounds* to be recovered by
him or them, his or their Executors or Administrators, together with full Costs
of S^it, and for which he or they may sue by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or
Information in any Court of Record within this Province wherein no Essoyn,
Protection, Wager of Law, Privilege or Imparliance shall be admitted or
allowed*

And be it further Enacted by the Authority ^foresaid, That no person
whatsoever, being under the Age of Twenty one Years, shall at any time
hereafter be admitted to give his Vote for Election of any Representative or
Representatives to serve in this or any future Assembly. And that no person
hereafter shall be capable of being elected a Representative to serve in this
or any fu^ure Assembly, who is not of the Age of Twenty one Years And every
Election or Return of any Person under that Age, is hereby declared to be null
and void. And if any such Minor, hereafter chosen, shall presume to sit or vote
in Assembly, he shall incur such Penalties and Forfeitures as if he had
presumed to sit and vote in Assembly without being chosen and returned Al^a^es
provided, That the Freemen in the Corporations of the Cities of New York and
Albany have liberty to vote in their respective Corporations, provided that
they have been Freemen of the said Corporations, and have actually dwelt there
three Months before the Test of any such Writ of Election, in manner
aforesaid, shall be issued out* any Usage, Custom or Law to the contrary hereof
in any wise notwithstanding. And always provided, That nothing herein
con^ained shall be construed to bar any Representative of this Assembly of his
right of sitting therein, so lo^^ as the same shall continue, any thing to the
contrary hereof in any wise ^^^withstanding.

An Act for the raising of an Add^tional Duty for the defraying the Debts of
the Government.
THe Representatives convened in General Assembly having under their
Consideration how much the Credit of the Government has been exhausted for want
of having the Debts of the Government paid and satisfied, as in justice they
ought to be* and being willing that the Credit of the Government should not
sink, but the same may be supported, and those who have been forward to credit
and assist the Government upon sundry Emergencies, may be lawfully recompensed
and satisfied for such their Service, and that the Contingent Charge of the
Government may be susta^ned, have agreed that the Additional Duty and Rates
herein after-mentioned, should be levved, collected and p^id, and pray that it
may be Enacted*

Be it therefore Enacted by his Excellency and Council, and Representatives
convened in General Assembly, and be it Enacted by the Authority of the same, I
had there shall be raised, levied, collected and paid unto his Majesty, for and
during the space and term of two years, from and after the Publication of this
Act, and no longer, the several Rates and Duties herein a^ter-mentioned, over
and above all other Duties, Charges, Impositions, Rates and Customs by any
former Act and Acts set, established and imposed, That is to say, the Rate,
Duty and Custom of Six per Cent. upon all Goods, Wares and Merchandise of the
Growth, Production or Manufacture of Europe, that shall, from and after the
Publication hereof, be imported into this Province and Dependencies, from any
other part or place than his Majesty's Kingdom of England, Dominion of Wales,
and Town of B^rwick upon Tweed. And also, the ^ate, Duty and Custom of ^en per
Cent. upon all Woollen Manufactures made in our neighboring Collonies, which
shall be imported into this P^ovince and Dependencies, from and after the
Publication hereof. And also, the Rate and Duty of Ten Shillings current Money
aforesaid, for each Pipe of Wine that shall be imported as aforesaid, and so in
proportion for a greater or lesser Quantity. And the Sum o^ Thirty Shillings,
current Money aforesai^ for each Pipe of Wine that shall be imported, as
aforesaid, from any other part or place than the part and place where the said
Wine was made, and so in proportion for a greater or lesser Quantity. And the
Sum of One half Penny, current Money aforesaid, for each Gallon of Rum
imported, as aforesaid. And the sum of Two Pence, current Money aforesaid, for
each Gallon of Rum that shall be imported, as aforesaid, from any other part or
place than the part and place where the said Rum is made and distilled. And the
sum of Three Shillings current Money aforesaid, for each Barrel of Beer that
shall be imported as aforesaid, and so in proportion for a greater or lesser
Quantity.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the several Rates
and Duties hereby imposed on the Goods, Wares, Merchandise and Liquors
aforesaid, shall be raised, levied and collected, recovered and paid unto his
Majesty's Collector and Receiver General for the time being, during the term
beforementioned, in the same manner and form, an^ by such Rules, Allowances,
Ways and Means, and under such Penalties, Fines and Forfeitures as are
mentioned, expressed and directed in and by an Act of General Assembly made in
this present Session of Assembly, entitled, A^ Act for granting unto his
Majesty several Duties for the defraying the public Charge of the Government,
after the time limited in an A^ confirming and continuing unto their Majest^es
the Revenue established by an A^t of General Assembly, (...) defraying the
public and necessary Charges of the Government, is expired, in as full and
ample manner as if the same were particula^ly recited in this said Act, any
thing to the contrary hereof in any ways notwithstanding.

An Act for granting unto his Majesty the Sum of Two Thousand Pounds, Fifteen
Hundred Pound, whereof to be allowed to his Excellency Richard Earl of
Bellomont, and Five Hundred Pounds to Capt. John Nanfan, Lieut. Governor.
THe Representatives convened in General Assembly having in their Consideration
the extraordinary D^ligence and Care that has been used by his Excellency
since his arrival, for the suppressing of Pyracy and Inlawful Trade; and at the
same time knowing that nothing can more effectually redound unto the Prosperity
and Advantage of this Provin^e, than that the Trade thereof may be d^ly
regulated and maintained, according to those most excellent Rules and Methods
prescribed and directed in the Acts of Parliament made in England for the
Regulation of the Plantation Trade, and making the sam^ more serviceable to the
Interest of England. In the sense whereof, and in humble acknowledgment of that
great Obligation done unto this Provice by his most excellent Majesty, in
appointing a Person of so great Integrity to rule and g^vern this Province, who
makes it his chiefest End to promote the Honor, Interest, Dignity and
Advantage of his Majesty's Crown of England, become most hum^le ^upplicants
unto his most Excellent Majesty, and pray that his Majesty would be graciousl^
please^ to accept of a Demonstration of their Lo^al, D^^^ful ^ sincere
A^fections unto his Majesty's Ro^al Person and Governmen^ e^tablished here, the
^um of Two Thousand ^ounds current Money of this Province, to be levied upon
all and every the Estates real and personal, belonging to any of the Free
holders, In^abitants and Reside^ts within this Province, etc. in such Q^ota's
and Proportions as are hereafter men^ioned. And with the great^st of Affection
do most humbly pray that your most excellen^ Majesty would be most graciously
pleased to give and allow the ^um of Fifteen Hundred Pounds thereof unto his
Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, your Majesty's Capt. General and
Governor in chief in and over your Majesty Province of New York, and
Territories depending thereon in America; and the Sum of Five Hundred Pounds
thereof, being the residue of the said Sum of Two Thousands Pounds unto Capt
John N^^fan your Majesty's Lieut. Governor of the some; and humbly pray that
it may be so enacted.

Be it therefore En^cted by its Excellency the Governor and Council and
Representatives convened in General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted by the
Authority of the same That the Su^ of Two Thousand Pounds current Money of this
Province be laid* assess^^^ levied and raised upon all and every the
Freeholders Inhabitants, Residenters and Sojourners of and in this Province,
to the Uses aforesaid, that is to say, 1500 l. part of the said Sum of 2000 l.
for the use of his said Excellency Richard Earl of Bellomont, his Executors,
Administrators and Assigns; and 500 l being the residue of the said Sum of 2000
l. as aforesaid, for the Use of the said Capt. John Nanfan, Lieut. G^vernour,
his Executors, Administrators and Assigns, and to no other use, intent or
purpose whatsoever. Which Sum of 2000 l current Money aforesaid, shall be
raised, assessed, collected, levied and paid unto his Majesty's Collector and
Receiver General for the time being, at the City of New York, at or before the
29th day of Septem^er next, in this instant Year of our Lord 1699. in such
manner, and according to the several and respective Quota's and Proportions
following, that is to say, For the City and County of New York the sum of 571
l. current Money aforesaid. For the County of West-Chester, the sum of ^03 l. 8
s. For the County of Richmond, 47 l For Kings County, 294 l. For Queens County,
329 l. For the County of Suffolk, 348 l. 8 s. For V^^er* and Duchess Coun^y*
169 l. 4 s. For the County of Orange, 18 l. For the City and County of Albany,
120 l. all of the current Money aforesaid.

And for the due and better assessing, levying and paying the aforesaid Sum of
2000 l. current Money aforesaid, Be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That the Mayors and Aldermen of the Cities of New York and Albany,
the Justices of the Peace, for the time being, for the several respective
Counties aforesaid, for the several Counties respectively, for which they shall
be Justices of the Peace, do within forty days after the publication hereof,
assemble and meet together in the Court house for the several and respective
Cities and Counties, or such other place or places as they shall agree upon
among themselves, and shall there order that the Assessors and Collectors for
the Cities of New York and Albany, and the several and respective Towns,
M^nn^rs o^ Liberties, within their several Jurisdictions, for the assessing,
collecting and receiving of the public Rates for the defraying of the public
Charge of each respective City and County aforesaid, be the Assessors and
Collect^^^s for the assessing, collecting and receiving the Sum or Sums of
Money here^^ before mentioned, according to the Proportions before expressed,
as to the said Mayors, Alder-men and Justices shall seem meet and reasonable.

And forasmuch as there are several Towns, Manors and Jurisdictions within the
respective Counties aforesaid, who refuse, neglect, or do not elect annually or
once every yea^ Assessors or Collectors, whereby the intent of this Act may be
evaded and frustrated, Be it therefore ^nacted by the Authority aforesaid, That
if any of the respective Towns, Manors or Jurisdictons within the several
Counties aforesaid, shall refuse, neglect, delay or deny to choose or elect
Assessors and Collectors for the assessing of their several and respective
Towns, Manors and Jurisdictions, and for the collecting the same, according to
the true intent, meaning and directions of this Act, then and in that case it
shall and may be lawful for the Justices of the Peace, or any two of them, in
the Counties where such Towns, Manors and Jurisdictions are who are hereby
empowered and authorized to nominate and appoint Assessors and Collectors for
such Towns, Manors and Jurisdictions, as shall refuse neglect, delay or deny,
as aforesaid. Which Assessors and Collectors, so nominated and appointed, in
manner aforesaid, shall to all intents and purposes be deemed and esteemed the
Assessors and Collectors of the said Towns, Manors and Jurisdictions, and
observe and execute the Directions of this Act.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said Mayors and
Alder-men, the Justices of the Peace for the respective Cities and Counties,
have, and shall have, by virtue of this Act, full Power and Authority, each of
them by himself, to administer to such Assessor or Assessors, that shall (...)
elected or nominated and appointed in manner aforesaid, an Oath, That they
shall well and truly execute the Off^^e of an Assessor, and well, truly,
equally impartially and in due proportion assess, and rate the Estates of the
Inhabitants. Resi^ents, Sojourners and Freeholders of the respective places
for which they shall be chosen, elected* nominated and appointed assessors,
according to the best of their ski^^ and knowledge, and th^rein they shall
spare no person for Favor or Affection, or grieve any Person for Hatred or ill
W^ll. And the said Ass^ssors are ^^reby required to deliver one Copy of their
Assesment, fairly written and subscribed by (...), unto the said Justices or to
the Office of the Clerk of the Peace of the respective County to which they
belong. And the said Justices for each respective County, or any two or more of
them, are hereby ordered and requi^ed to cause the said several and respective
Assessments to them delivered, to be fairly written, and to sign and seal
several Duplicates or Copies of the sai^ Assesment, and one of them so signed
and sealed, forthwith to deliver, or cause to be delivered unto ^he respective
Collectors within the several and respective Cities and ^ounties aforesaid, and
shall likewise deliver, or cause to be delivered another fair Copy, so signed
and sealed, unto the Clerk of the Peace of the respective County to which they
shall belong, there to be filed, and remain upon Record. And the Clerk of the
Peace of each County is hereby required to transmit the sum of the Ass^ssment
of each Town, unto the Receiver ^eneral at New York, for the time being, within
ten days next and after his receipt thereof, under the Penalty o^ five Pounds
for such his Default.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid. That if any person or
persons, who shall be chosen, elected, nominated or appointed in manner
aforesaid, Assessors or Collectors, shall deny, neglect, refuse or delay, or
unequally and partially shall assess, as by this Act is required, or shall
deny, neglect, refuse or delay to collect any Sum or Sums of Money, in form
before-me^t^oned assessed, that then in such case it shall and may be lawful
for any two of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace of the Cities and Counties
where such Offenders shall happen to dwell or reside, and who by virtue of this
Act are required and empowered to do the same, by Warrant under hand and Seal,
to commit such Assessors or Collecto^^ so denying, refusing, neglecting or
delaying, or unequally and partially assessing, or refusing to collect, as
aforesaid, to the common Goal, there to remain without Bail or Main-prize till
he or they shall make Fine and Ransom to his Majesty, for such his Contempt, as
aforesaid. And upon such Commitment the Justices are speedily required to
nominate and appoint other Collectors and Assessors in their stead and room.

And i^ any person or persons shall shut their Doors, or refuse to pay the
Rates ass^ssed by virtue of this Act made and provided, whereby this Act may
seem to be frustrated, Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid. That
if any person or persons shall neglect or refuse to pay the several Rates and
Assessments where with they are charged by this Act of General Assembly, for or
in respect of his and their Goods and Chattels, Lands or Tenements, shall be
neglected or refused to be paid upon demand of the Collectors that shall be
chosen and appointed to receive the same, or within ten days next and after the
said Demand, it shall and may be lawful to and for such Collectors, and they
are hereby required, for Non-payment thereof, by Warrant under the Hand of two
Justices of the Peace, to distrain the person or persons so refusing o^
neglecting to pay by his or their Goods or Chattels, or distrain in and upon
the Messuages, Lands and Tenements so charged, and the Goods and Chattels then
and there found* and the D^stress so taken to carry away, and the same to
expose to sale in the Town or County where such Distress is made, and for want
of Buyers, to carry the said Distress to any other place in the Province for
the sale of the said Distress accordingly, for the payment of the said Rate or
Assesment; and the Overplus coming by the said Sale, if any be over and above
the Charges of taking and carrying away the said Distress, to be immediately
returned to the Owner thereof. And moreover, it shall and may be lawful to
break open in the day time, any House, and upon Warran^ under the Hands and
Seals of any two or more Justices aforesaid, any C^e^t, Trunk or B^x, or other
things where such Goods are, and call to their a^si^tance the Constables, or
any other persons within the respe^tive Cities, Cou^^^^s* Towns, Manors and
Jurisdictions where any refusal, neglect or resistance shall be made, which
said Officers and Persons are hereby required to be aiding and assisting in the
Premises.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Mayor,
Alder-man or Justice of the Peace within this Province, who are hereby
required, empowered or authorized to take effectual Care that this Act, and
every Article and Clause therein be duly executed, according to the true intent
and meaning thereof, shall deny, neglect, refuse or delay to per^orm, fulfill
and execute all and every the Duties, Powers and Authorities by this Act
required and empowered by him or them to be done, performed, fulfilled and
executed, and shall thereof be convicted before his Excellency, the Governor
and Council, or before any of his Majesty's Courts of Record within this
Province, he or they shall suffer such Pain, by Fine and Imprisonment, as by
the Discretion of his said Excellency, the Governor and Council, and the
Justices of the said Courts shall be adjudged.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if any Action,
Bill, Plaint or Information shall be brought, moved or prosecuted at any time
hereafter, against any person or persons, for any matter, cause or thing done
or acted in pursuance or execution of this Act, such person or persons so sued
or prosecuted in any Court whatsoever, shall and may plead the general Issue,
Not Guilty, and give this Act, and the special matter in Evidence. And if the
Plantiff or Prosecutor shall be Nonsuited, or forbear further Prosecution, or
suffer Discontinuance, or Verdict to pass against him, the Defendant or
Defendants shall recover tribble Costs, for which they shall have the like
Remedy as in case where costs by the Law are given to Defendants. Provided
always, That no Mayor, Alder-man or Justice of the Peace shall be sued,
prosecuted or molested for any Omission, Offense or Neglect, by virtue of this
Act, but within the space of one year after such Omission, Offense or Neglect,
and not at any time hereafter, any thing herein contained to the contrary
hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act for the enabling the City of New York to pay their Debts, and to Erect
and Repair their Public Buildings, and de^r^y their Necessary and Public
Charge.
WHereas the City of New York, by reason of the excessive Charge they have been
at, during the late War, is become con^i^erably in Debt, and their City-Hall
and Ferry-House are ^allen into such a Decay, as there is an absolute Necessity
for the Re-building o^ the same, as well as other necessary and public
Buildings for the good, weal and accommodation of the said City. To the end
therefore that the said City of New York may be the better enabled to erect a
new City-Hall, re build their F^rry H^u^e, and other necessary Public
Buildings in the said City, and pay their just (...), and defray the other
contingent public Charge of the same, Be it therefore Enacted by his
Excellency and Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly, and
it is hereby Ena^t^d by the Authority of the same* Tha^ the Mayor, Reco^der,
Alder-men and Assi^tants of the said City* for the time being, or the major
part of them, whereof the Mayor or Recorder of the said City to his one, shall
yearly, in the Week before the Fe^st Day o^ St. Michael the (...) Angel, elect
and appoint six good and sufficient Citizens, inhabiting (...) the said City,
who shall be called. The Overseers of the public Works and Bu^ldings of the
said City, and they, o^ any three of them, by and within* (...) of the Mayor or
Recorder, Alder-men and Assistants of the said City, are hereby authorized,
empowered and enabled annually, and once every year, at the time aforesaid, to
raise a reasonable Tax upon all (...) every the Inhabitants, Freeholders and
Sojourners within the said City, toward the erecting a new City-Hall,
re-building their Ferry-House, an^ the other necessary public Buildings in the
said City, as well as for paying their just Debts, and defraying the other
contingent publ^ck Charge of the said City.

And for the better raising and levying the said Tax, for the Uses aforesaid,
Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Mayor or Recorder,
Alder-men and Assistants of the said City, or the major part of them, whereof
the Mayor or Recorder of the said City to be one, with the Overseers so to be
nominated, as aforesaid, or any three of them, shall meet together, at the
least once in every three Months at the City-Hall of the said City ^ or such
other place as the Mayor shall appoint, and there to consider how much Money
will be needful to be raised for one year, for the defraying the Charge, as
a^oresaid, and the Estimate thereof they shall cause to be particularly
expressed in writing* that is to say, the particular Sum or Sums that they
shall judge needful for the erecting a new City-Hall, and so respe^tively for
al^ such other Buildings, Debts and necessary Charge which shall be needful to
be ^mployed for one year. Which Sum and Sums of Money so particularized and
estimated, as aforesaid, shall be by the Assessors of the said City, equally
and proportionably assessed upon the Real and Personal Estates of all and every
the Inhabitants. Freeholders and S^journers within the said City, for one
year, for the purposes aforesaid; which being allowed or confirmed by the Mayor
or Recorder, or any two or more of the Alder-men of the said City, shall be
collected by the respective Collectors of the said City, and quarterly paid by
every respective Inhabitant, Freeholder or Sojourner within the same City,
upon Demand made thereof by the respective Collectors aforesaid, appointed to
gather and collect the same. And in case of Refusal or Neglect of any person or
persons paying the same they shall be so assessed, when thereunto demanded, as
aforesaid, then it shall be lawful by Warrant of the Mayor or Recorder, and any
one or more of the Alder-men of the said City, under their hands and seals, to
cause levy the sum assessed by Distress and sale of the O^^endors Goods, all
which Sum or Sum^ of Money collected, paid and levied, as a^oresaid, shall be
paid unto the Treasurer of the said City quarterly, and there shall remain
until the same be ordered for the purposes aforesaid, by order of the Common
Council of the said City, and by Warrant under the hand and seal of the Mayor.

And be further Ena^ted by the Authority aforesaid. That if the Mayor or
Recorder, Alder-men and Assistants shall refuse, delay or neglect to nominate
and appoint Overseers yearly, as is before appointed, that then each of them
shall loose and forfeit for every such Default the sum of five Pounds current
Money of New York, to be employed for the Re^ie^ the Poor of the said City, and
to be levied by Distress on their Goods, by Warrant from the general
Quarter-S^^sions of the Peace of the said City. And if any Ove^-^ee^* ^ss^ssor
or Collector shall refuse, neglect or delay to serve and execute the respective
Duties beforement^oned and required, shall, for each default that shall happen,
loose and forfeit the sum of five pounds current Money aforesaid, to be levied
by Distress, and employed as aforesaid* by Warrant under the hand and seal of
the Mayor or Recorder, and any two of the Alder-men of the said City. Provided,
That this Act, nor nothing herein contained shall continue or remain longer in
force than the space and term of three years next and after the Publication
hereof.

An Act to enable the City and County of Albany to defray Their Necessary
Charge.
WHereas there is an Act of General Assembly made in the 9th year of his
Majesty's Reign, entitled. An Act to enable the City and County of Albany to
defray their necessary Charge for two years from the publication thereof, which
Act does terminate by its own limitation upon the first day of July next; and
the Representatives of the said City and County of Albany humbly praying that
the said Act may be renewed and continued for two years longer after the
expiration of the said Act. Be it therefore ^nacted by his Excellency, the
Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly, and it
is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, That the Imposition or Rate of
Two per Cent. shall be raised and levied upon all Indian Goods that are brought
up to the said City and County of Albany and there sold and consumed. And also,
that the Impost of Three Pence be raised and levied upon each Gallon of Rum
that is sold (...) consumed within the City and County. And for the due and
orderly collecting of the respective Imposts and Rates, the Treasurer of the
said City, for the time being, or any appointed by him, and the Mayor of the
said City, under the public Seal of the said City, are hereby empowered and
authorized to appoint, constitute and establish a Collector or Receiver of the
Rates and Imposts aforesaid, who shall have power to receive the same, and to
enter in a fair Book, kept for that purpose, all such Sum and Sums of Money as
shall be so entered and received for the respective Duties aforesaid; and the
said Collector or Receiver appointing certain convenient Times and places for
the keeping of the Office, as shall be directed by the Court of Mayor and
Aldermen, and Assistants of the said City, all persons that trade and bring up
to the said City and County the aforementioned Indian Goods and Rum, are
hereby required to make a Report of the Quantity and Value of such Goods and
Rum they so bring up and sell in the City and County aforesaid, and pay the
Duties and Imposts hereby established, without being at any further charge than
the said Duty; and in default hereof it shall be lawful for the Mayor,
Treasurer, or any other Officer hereby authorized, to issue out his or their
Warrant, under his or their hand and seal, for the seizing all such Goods and
Rum as shall be imbeziled, and not pay the Duties aforesaid, one third to the
Imformer, one third to the said City and County of Albany, and one third to his
Excellency the Governor or Commander in chief, for the time being. Provided,
That all the sum and sums of Money that are hereby received, shall be only
appropriated and applied to the defraying the necessary Charge of the City and
County aforesaid; and that the Treasurers, Collector or Receiver for the time
being, shall not pay any of the Money received, as aforesaid, but by Warrant
from the Mayor of the said City, and approved by the Justices of the Peace of
the said County. Provided, That this Act shall only remain in force for the
space of two years, and no longer, and to commence upon the expiration of the
former Act, any thing contained to the contrary hereof notwithstanding.

An Act to enable the respective Towns within this Province to Build and Repair
their Meeting Houses, and other Public Buildings.
WHereas the several and respective Towns within this Province are at a great
loss for want of public Buildings for the Worship and Service of God, as well
as for other necessary public Services. To the end therefore that each
respective Town within this Province may be enabled to erect public Buildings
for the Worship of God, and other public Services, Be it Enacted by his
Excellency and Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly, and
it is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, That the Trustees of each
respective Town within this Province, or such other persons who shall be yearly
elected by the major part of the Freeholders of each respective Towns within
this Province, shall be hereby empowered annually, or once a year, to make a
yearly Rate, either for the erecting of a public Edifice or Church for the
Worship and Service of God, where the same is wanting, or for any other public
Buildings, Town-houses and Goals, for the public Service of the Town; which
Rate shall be laid upon all and every the Free holders, Inhabitants and
Sojourners in each respective Town aforesaid, according to such manner, and in
such form as the other public Rates are established, for the defraying the
public Charges of each respective County within this Province. And the
Assessors and Collectors of the respective Towns aforesaid, are hereby required
to execute their Duties accordingly. And if any person or persons within any of
the said respective Towns, who shall be rated, ass^ssed, as aforesaid, shall
refuse to pay or contribute their proportion so rated and assessed, then it
shall be lawful for the Collector of the said Town, where such Refusal shall
happen, to levy the same by Distress upon the Goods and Chartels of them or him
so offending, by Warrant under the hand and seal of the Justice of the Peace of
the Town where the Offense shall be. And all and every of the public Rates
hereby established, shall by the Trustees, or such other persons who shall be
yearly elected by the major part of the Freeholders, as aforesaid, be only
employed to the Buildings and Repairing of the said public Edifices and
Buildings, and to no other use, purpose or intent whatsoever, any thing to the
contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding*

Provided, and be it Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Precin^t of
Bridge-Hampton, commonly called Sagaboneck, and M^^one, within the Town of
Southampton, shall so ever hereafter be esteemed a di^tinct Parish from the said
Town of Southampton, and have and enjoy all the Privileges and Benefits of a
distinct Parish, for the building and erecting of a public Edifice, with its
appurtenances, for the public Service of God, according to the true intent and
meaning of this Act; and they are hereby empowered and authorized to lay Rates
upon their respective Freeholders, Inhabitants and Sojourners within the said
Precincts of Bridge-hampton, in as f^ll and am^^e manner as if the said
Precincts were a separate and distinct Town within his Province, any thing
contained in the Grant of Southampton to the contrary hereof in any ways
notwithstanding.

An Act for Preventing of Trespasses.
WHereas great Damage and Waste is made upon the Commons and particular
Free-holds belonging to the Inhabitants of this Province, by a number of Idle
Persons, who enter upon other Persons Estates, and cut down their Timber, and
carry it away clandestinely, to the great loss of the Owners thereof. For the
preventing of such Practices for the ^uture, Be it Enacted by his Excellency
and Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly, and it is hereby
Enacted by the Authority of the same, that if any person or persons shall cut
or carry off any manner of Wood, Under-wood, Timber, Poles or Trees standing,
lying or growing on the Land which to them does not belong, but is in the Right
and Possession of any other, or cut off or from the Commons of any Town within
this Province, other than that to which he does belong, or if within the same
Town, having no right or privilege there, without leave or lysence from the
major part of the Propriety, or the Trustees of such Commons, or the Owner or
Owners, Possessor or Possessors of the Land whereon such Wood, Under-wood,
Timber, Poles or Trees were standing, lying or growing, every Person so
offending shall forfeit and pay unto the party or parties injured or trespassed
upon, the sum of Twenty Shillings current Money of this Province, for every
Tree of one foot over, and the sum of six Shillings current Money aforesaid,
for every Tree or Pole under that bigness; and for other Wood or Under-wood the
value thereof; to be recovered by Action, Bill, Plaint or Information before
any Justice of the Peace in the County where the Offense is committed, if the
forfeiture exceed not 5 l. but if it be above that value, then before the
inferior Court of Common Pleas, within the same County: And if any person
shall be convict a second time of such Offense, he shall forfeit and pay to the
use of the Town, where the offense is committed, the sum of forty Shillings
current Money aforesaid, or suffer one Months Imprisonment over and above the
forfeiture abovesaid, or Damages to the party injured.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That when in Action of
the Trespass brought before a Justice of the Peace, the Denfendant shall
justify, and demur upon the Plea of Title, a Record shall be made thereof, and
the matter of fact taken, pro Confesso, and the party making such Plea shall
become bound with one or more Sureties, by way of Recognizance, unto the
adverse party, in a reasonable sum not exceeding 20 l. on condition that he
shall pursue his Plea, and bring f^rward a Suit for a Trial of his Title at the
next inferior Court of Common Pleas, to be holden for the County in which such
Trespass is alleged to be done, and pay and satisfy such Damages and Costs as
by the said Court shall be awarded against him; which Recognizance the Justice
is hereby empowered to require and take, and shall be paid for the same by the
Recognizor, the sum of 18 d. and for entering his Plea 9 d. and at the char^e
also of the same party, shall certify the Process and Record of such Plea,
together with the Recognizance, unto the said inferior Court of Common Pleas.
And if such Recognizor shall neglect to bring forward such Suit at the
inferior Court, according to the Tenor of his Recognizance, the Default shall
be entered in the said Court, and a Writ of Scire Fa^^a^ shall issue out of the
Clerks Office of the same Court, in manner as by Law is directed, for the
Recovery of the sum or Penalty in the said Recognizance mentioned of him the
said Recognizor his Surety or Sureties Or if upon Trial before the said Court
he shall not make out a Title to the Land or Tenement on which the Trespass is
alleged to be done, paramount to the Possession or other Title of the adverse
party, Judgment shall be rendered for the party upon whom the Trespass has been
done, for tribble Damages and Costs of Suit. But if the Defendant in Trespass,
justifying on Plea of Title, shall refuse or neglect to become bound in manner
as aforesaid, then his Plea shall abate, and the Justice, notwithstanding the
same, shall proceed to try the Cause, as aforesaid, and upon due proof of the
Trespass committed by him, shall award Damages against him accordingly, to what
shall be made out, and cost of Suit. And if upon the opening and pleading of
any Action of Trespass, there be proved any Force or Violence, and Breach of
the Peace, the party or parties guilty thereof shall be also fined to the King,
or otherwise punished, as the Law in such cases does provide.

Always provided, That the City and County of Albany and the County of Vlster
be exempted from the Privilege of this Act, any thing herein contained to the
contrary hereof notwithstanding.

An Act for Indemnifying of all such Persons as were Excepted out of the
General Pardon, made by Act of General Assembly in this Province in the Year of
our Lord 1691.
WHereas the General Assembly of this Province did by an Act* entitled, An Act
for pardoning such as have been active in the late Disorders, except against
several of his Majesty's good Subjects, viz. Jacob Leyster, Jacob Millbourn,
Gerrardus Be^kman, Abraham Governeur, Abraham Bral^ier, Thomas Williams,
Myneart Coerte^, Johonnes Vermelse, Nicholas Blank, Garret Duyking, Hendrick
Jansen, J^hn Coe, William Lawrence of East-Jarsey, Cornelius Pluvier, William
Churchill, Jost Stoll, Samuel Staats, Jacob Mauritz Robert Lecock, Michael
Hansen, Richard Ponton, Joseph Smith, John Ba^ly Roelof Swartwont, Anthony
Swartwont, Johannes Provost, Jacob Mely^n, Benjamin ^lagg, Joachim Staats, and
Richard Pretty, who had been forward in the late happy Revolution, from having
the benefit thereof. And the Representatives now convened in General Assembly
taking into their serious Consideration the ill consequences that have already
accrewed, and yet still may ensue by the aforesaid Exceptions, to the great
Damage and Ruin of such as declared for his pre^ent Majesty at the time of the
said happy Revolution, as well as the continual Disturbances which Persons ill
affected to the Peace of this Government, do thereby insinuate, create and
foment. And whereas her most sacred Majesty, the late Queen Mary, (of blessed
Memory) by her order in Council, dared the 13th day of May, 1692. was
graciously pleased to discharge all Recognizances and Proceedings thereupon,
for any matter or thing committed in the assisting of Capt. Jacob L^yster,
whilst he had the Administration of the Government of this Province. And
whereas by Act of Parliament, made in the 6th and 7th years of his Majesty's
Reign, for the Reasons and Motives in the said Act at large expressed, the
Judgments and Attainders of Jacob Leyster, deceased, Jacob Millbourn, deceased,
and Abraham Gouverneur, (three of the Persons mentioned and excepted in the
said Act or Assembly) were Reversed, made and declared to be null and void to
all Intents, constructions and purposes whatsoever, as if no such Convictions
or Attainders had ever been had or given. And now whereas Gerardus Beekman,
Thomas Williams, deceased, Mynart Coerten, Abraham Brashier and Johannes
Vermelse, deceased, were together with the said Jacob Leyster, and for the
joining with and assisting of the said Jacob Leyster, and holding of the Fort
against Major Ingoldsby, were severally attainted and convicted at the Supreme
Court of Judicature in this City of New York, of Treason and Murder, Be it
therefore Enacted by the Governor, Council and Representatives in general
Assembly convened, and by the Authority of the same, That the said several
Convictions, Judgments and Attainders of the said Gerrardus Beekman, Thomas
Williams, deceased, Mynart Coerten, Abraham Brashier and Johannes Vermelse,
deceased, and every of them be and are hereby repealed, reversed, made and
declared null and void to all intents, constructions and purposes whatsoever,
and that no Corruption of Blood, or any other Forfeiture of Lands, Tenements,
Hereditaments, Goods and Chatte's be by the said Convictions or Attainders, or
either of them incurred, any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary
notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every of
the abovenamed Gerrardus Beekma^, Abraham Bra^bier, Thomas Williams, Myneart
Coerten, Johannes Vermelse, Nicholas Blank, Garret Duyking, Hendrick Jansen,
John Coe, William Lawrence of East-Jarsey, Cornelius ^l^vier, William
Churchill, Jost Stool, Samuel Staats, Jacob Mauritz, Robert Lecock, Michael
Hansen, Richard Ponton, Joseph Smith, John B^^ly, Roelof Swartwont* Anthony
Swartwont, Johannes Provost, Jacob M^lyen, Benjamin Blagg, Joachim Staats, and
Richard Pretty, be and are her^by forever indemnified for all and every of
their actings in the late happy Revolution, as aforesaid; and all Judgments and
Executions had against their Persons or Estates, for or by reason as aforesaid,
are hereby declared to be null and void* and the same are hereby Repealed and
Reversed, any Law, Usage or Custom to the contrary notwithstanding.

An Act for Repealing an Act of Assembly, entitled, An Act for the Regulating
Damages done in the time of the late Disorders, and for Uniting the Minds of
their Majesty's Subje^ts within this Province, and for calling h^me such of
their Majesty's Subjects that have lately absented themse^ves from their
Habitations, and the usual places of their abode.
WHereas an Act of Assembly, made in the third year of his Majesty's Reign,
entitled, An Act for the Regulating Damages done in the time of the late
Disorders, etc. is found grievous to many of his Majesty's good Subjects within
this Province, and has not in the least measure answered the design for which
it was made, and the continuance thereof would be very prejudicial to all his
Majesty's said good Subjects. For Remedy whereof Be it Enacted by his
Excellency the Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in General
Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, That the
aforesaid Act, entitled, An A^t for the Regulating Damages done in the time of
the late Dis^rders, etc. be repealed, reversed, vacated, and become null and
void and of none effect. And the said Act, and all the Articles and Clauses
therein mentioned, are hereby declared to Repealed, Rever^ed, Vacated and
become null, void and of none effect to all intents* constructions and purposes
whatsoeve^. And all Process Summons, Judgments, Sentences and Decrees,
Determinations and Executions heretofore had against any person or persons, his
or their Estates, Lands and Tenements, Goods or Chattels, for or by reason of
any Power or Authority granted unto any person or persons ^s Commissioners for
the Execution of any of the Powers or Authorities mentioned in the said Act,
are hereby declared to be null and void, and of no force and virtue, and shall
forever hereafter cease and determine to all intents and purposes whatsoever,
in as full and ample manner as it no such Act had ever been in being, or of any
force or virtue, any thing contained in the said Act to the contrary
notwithstanding.

An Act to prevent Vexatious Suits, and settling and quieting the Minds of his
Majesty's peaceable Subjects within this Province.
WHereas upon the News of the late happy Revolution, and his Majesty's glorious
Enterprise to rescue the Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging, from Popery, Slavery and Arbitrary Power ^everal
persons well affected to his Majesty's Person and the Protestant Religion, and
the good of their Country, in this Province, did according to the most noble
Example of the great People of England, declare for their Deliverer, and for
his Service took upon them the Government of this Province, and appointed Capt.
Jacob Leyster Commander in chief thereof, until his Majesty's pleasure should
be known therein, who was afterward confirmed in the said Command by his
Majesty's Royal Letter dated the 30th of July, 1689 and by virtue thereof kept
the Administration of the Government until the arrival of Coll Henry Slaughter,
his Majesty's late Capt. General of this Province And whereas the persons
aforesaid, through the exigence of the War, and the continual Troubles raised
by persons disaffected to his Majesty's Person and Government, were by
inevitable necessity constrained, for the preservation of this Province, to
take, seize and secure several disaffected Persons, and enter into the
Possessions and Houses of several M^rchants, and others, and there took several
Goods, Wares and Merchandise which were employed for his Majesty's Service, and
the Defense of this Province, in all which Force, Violence and defect of Form,
was unavoidable, which in a time of Peace and common Safety would not have been
warrantable yet were neccessary and allowable in regard of the Exigence of the
public Affairs, and ought to be justified, and the Persons therein concerned
indemnified, yet nevertheless some persons ill affected to his Majesty's
Government, and the safety and welfare of this Province, have commenced and
prosecuted, and threaten to commence and prosecute Actions and Suits against
his Majesty's good Subjects for and by reason of their actings and doings
aforesaid. Therefore for preventing the Trouble and Charges which the said good
Subjects might be put to, by the means of such vexatious Suits, the
Representatives convened in General Assembly taking the same into their serious
Consideration, and an Act of Parliament made in the first year of William and
Mary, entitled, An Act for preventing vexations Suits against such as acted in
order to the bringing in their Majesty's, and for their Service, and the
effectual Remedies therein prescribed would be of great use in this Province,
Be it therefore Enacted, and it is hereby Enacted by the Governor, Council and
Representatives in General Assembly convened, and by the Authority of the same,
That all Personal Actions, S^its, Molestations or Prosecutions whatsoever, and
Judgments and Executions had thereupon, for or by reason of the premises, or
any matter or thing advised, commanded, appointed, happened or done in the late
happy Revolution in this Province for their Majesty's Service, and the safety
of this Government, be and are hereby discharged. And if any Action or Suit
hereby declared, or intende^ to be discharged, shall be commenced or
prosecuted, every person so sued may plead the general Issue, and give this Act
and the special matter in evidence; and if the Plantiff shall become
Nonsuited, or forbear further prosecution, or suffer Discontinuance, or if a
Verdict pass against hi^, the said Defendan^ shall recover his double Costs,
for which he shall have the like Remedy as in case where Costs by Law are given
to Defendants.

An Act for settling the Estate of Jacob Millbourn, Esquire Deceased.

An Act for Reviving an Act of Assembly expired by its own Limitation,
entitled, An Act for the Regulating the retaining Attorneys at Law.
BE it Enacted by his Excellency and Council, and Representatives convened in
General Assembly, and by the Authority of the same, That an Act of Assembly,
entitled, An Act for the Regulating the Retaining Attorneys at Law, which is
expired by the Limitation therein mentioned, be continued, abide and remain in
full force and virtue to all intents and purposes whatsoever, and all the
Articles and Clauses therein mentioned, are to abide and continue in like force
and virtue to all intents and purposes whatsoever, in as full and ample manner,
for the space of seven years, next and after the publication hereof, as if the
same were particularly recited in this Act, any thing therein to the contrary
hereof in any ways notwithstanding.

An Act for Continuing the Act for Encouraging of the Post Office Two Tears
longer after the Expiration of the last Act made for Continuance of the same.
WHereas the Act for continuing the Act for encouraging the Post Office, did
expire by i^s own Limitation on some day of April last, and the advantage which
the Inhabitants of this Province daily have, the mutual Correspondence they
have with their neighboring Collonies and Plantations, and for me promoting of
Trade and Wealth of each other, encourages the continuance of the same, Be it
therefore Enacted by his Excellency the Governor and Council, and it is hereby
Enacted by the Authority of the same, That an Act entitled, An A^t for the
Encouraging of the Post Office, which was continued by another Act three years
longer than the time limited in the said Act, shall be, continue and abide for
the space of two years longer next and after the expiration of the time therein
limited in full force and virtue; and all the Rates and Sums of Money
established, by virtue of the said Act, upon Letters and Pacquets that shall be
received and dispatched by the Office and Offices, contained in the said Act,
shall be paid by the space of two years next and after the expiration of the
term limited in the said Act, according to such Rules and Directions, and under
such Penalties and Forfeitures as is contained and enjoined by the aforesaid
Act; and the said Act, entitled, An Act for encouraging the Post Office, and
every Article, Rule and Clause therein mentioned, shall be, abide, remain and
continue in full force and effect to all intents and purposes during the said
time, as fully, and in full and ample manner as if the same were particularly
and at large recited and set down in the Body of this Act any thing contained
therein to the contrary hereof in any ways notwithstanding.

An Act for Committing of Ebenezer Willson and Samuel Burt, Farmers of the
Excise of the Island of Nassaw, for their contemptuous Refusing to render an
account of what they farmed the same for to the respective Counties, Towns and
Manors on the said Island, for the last year.
WHereas all just improvement of his Majesty's Revenue in this Province is not
only highly important to his Majesty's Service, but tends to the good,
welfare, benefit and behoof of all the Inhabitants therein, and his Excellency
the Governor and Council met in general Assembly, having the same under their
consideration, upon a due inspection into the several Branches thereof, do find
that the Excise for several years last past let to farm, either by fraud,
collusion or great Negligence in those who have been empowered to let it, has
rendered this last year in one County, much le^s than in former years it has
been let for, and that the Excise of the Island of Nassaw has not pro^uced what
might reasonably be expected, in proportion to the other parts of this
Province, that in order to discover the Truth of such ma^nagement past, as well
as to enable them how best to improve the same for the future, have thought fit
to require such Farmers of the said Excise of Nassaw Island to lay before this
House, upon Oath, the most plain and perfect account they are able to give, of
what they have let the Excise of the several Towns, Manors and Jurisdictions
within the said Island of Nassaw the last year of their Farm aforesaid; and Mr.
Samuel Burt and Capt. Ebenezer Willson of this City having owned they did farm
the same, and being often required, for the Reasons aforesaid, to render to
this House, such Account, so necessary for his Majesty's service, and in order
to detect all fraud and negligence in all those who have let the same, as well
as for the better improvement of that Branch of his Majesty's Revenue for the
future, the said Burt and Willson, without giving any sufficient Reason, in
contempt of his Majesty's Authority, with which this House, in the Quality they
are now sitting, is invested wilfully, and stubbornly have done, and do refuse
to give any such account as required, Be it therefore Enacted by his Excellency
the Governor and Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly,
and it is hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, That the said Sam. Burt
and Ebenezer Willson be and stand committed into safe Custody without Bail or
Mainprize until they shall exhibit under their hands, upon Oath, the most plain
and perfect account they are able to give, of what they let the Excise of the
several Towns, Manors and Jurisdictions within the said Island of Nassaw, for
the last year of their Farm aforesaid, as in Duty they ought to do, any Law or
Statute to the contrary hereof notwithstanding.

An Act for the Vacating, Breaking and Annulling several Extravagant Grants of
Land made by Coll. Fletcher, late Governor of this Province under his Majesty.
WHereas their Excellencys, the Lords Justices of England, have by their
Instructions unto his Excellency the Governor, ^^aring date the 10th day of
November. School. directed his said Excellency to use all legal means for the
breaking of extravagant Grants of Land in (...) Province. And whereas there is
an extravagant Grant of L^^d, se^led with the Seal of the Province, made by
Coll. Fletcher, late Governor of this Province un^er his Majesty, unto M.
God^ry Dell^us, bearing date the 3d d^y o^ S^ptember, 1696. and Registered in
the Secretary's Office, containing a certain Tract of L^^d lying upon the east
side of H^dson's River between the Northmost bounds of Saragh^ogo and the Rock
Ross^^n, containing about seventy Miles in length, and goes backward into the
Woods from the said H^dsons River twelve Miles, until it comes unto the Wood
back, and so far as it goes, be it twelve Miles more or less from H^dso^s River
on the ea^t side, and from said Creek by a line twelve Miles distant from said
River. To have and to hold said Land and Appurtenances unto him the said Godfry
D^ll^us his H^irs and Assigns forever, under the Rent reserved of one Raccoon
skin per ^nnum. And whereas there is another extravagant Grant of Land, made ^s
aforesaid, unto the said Godfry Dellius, William Pinhorn and Evert Banker, etc.
sealed also with the Seal of the Province, bearing date the 30th of July, 1697.
and likewise Registered in the Secretary's Office, containing a certain Tract
of vacant Land, lying upon Mo^aques River, above a place commonly known by the
Name of Orra^ke^, beginning from a place called by the Natives O^endiere, and
runs up along the said River about fifty Miles, more or less, to a place called
Arach Soch^e, and extending in breadth between the said places O^endiere and
Arach sochne* two Miles on each side of the River, as it runs. To have and to
hold the said T^act of Land and appurtenances unto the said Godfry Dellius
Evert Banker, William Pinhorn etc. their Heirs and Assigns forever, under the
reserved Rent of the Beaver skin for the first seven years, and five Beaver
skins yearly forever thereafter. That it having appeared before the House of
Representatives convened in General Assembly, that Mr. Godfry Dellius has been
a principal Instrument in deluding the Mohaque Indians, and illegal and
surrepitious obtaining of said Grant, that he ought to be, and is hereby
suspended from the exercise of his Ministerial Funct^^n in the City and County
of Albany. And whereas there is another extravagant Grant of Land, made in
manner aforesaid, unto Coll. Nicholas Bayard, bearing date the 12th day of
December 1695, 6. and Registered in the Secretary's Office, containing a
certain Tract of Land, situate, lying and being upon the Creek commonly called
and known by the Name of Skohaar^, which runs into the Mohaque River about
twenty four Miles above Schenectady, beginning at the mouth of the said Creek
from the Indian fields called, Jeandarage, and extending upwards on both sides
of the said Cre^k to the head o^ first spring thereof, where it ends, at or
near the Hill commonly known by the Name of Kanjearago^e, the whole being
bounded on the ^orth by the said Indian fields of Jeandarage, on the East and
West by the Ridge of Hills, and South by the Hill Kanjearagore; and the same
erected into a Lordship or Manor, by the Name of the Manor of Kingsfield. To
have and to hold the said Tract of Land and Lordship, or Manor of Kingsfield
and appurtenances unto him the said Nicholas Bayard his Heirs and Assigns
forever, under the reserved Rent of one Otter skin per ^nnum. And whereas there
is another extravagant Grant of Land, made in manner aforesaid, unto Capt. John
Evans, bearing date the 20^h day of September, 1694 Registered in the
Secretary's Office, containing all that Tract and parcel of Land, situate,
lying and being upon the west side of Hudsons River, beginning from the south
side of the Land called the Palse, now inhabited by Frenchmen, and extending
thence southerly along the said Hudsons River to the Land belonging to the
Indians at the Murderers Kill, and extending Westward to the foot of the high
Hills, called, Pitkiskaker and Aiaska wasting, and thence extending southerly
all along the said Hills and the River called Peakadasank to a water Pond lying
upon the said Hills, called Merclary, comprehending all those Lands, Meadows
and Woods called Nescatonck, Chawang^n, Memora sinck, Kakogh, Getawan, Annuck
and Gillatawagh, and all and every of them, and the same erected into the
Manor and Lordship of Fletcherdon. To have and to hold the said Tract of Land
and Manor of Fletcherdon, with Appurtenances, unto the said John Evans his
Heirs and Assigns forever, under the Rent reserved of twenty Shillings and one
fat Buck per annum. And whereas there is another extravagant Grant of Land,
made in manner aforesaid, unto the said John Evans, bearing date the 9th of
August, 1694 Registered in the Secretary's Office, containing a certain Swamp
and fresh Pond, called* The Fresh Water, and adjacent to the Kings Farm,
formerly called the Dukes Farm, on the Island Manhattans, beginning at a stake
set in the ground on the south side of the said Pond, and at the north east
corner of the Land belonging to William Merit, thence it rangeth along the
south side of the said Swamp and Pond by the upland, to the Beech, on the east
side of Hudsons River, so along the Beech to the upland, thence crossing a
small gut of said Swamp to the Land on the East side thereof, thence by the
said Land, as it runs, to the east side of the Tan-yard, and thence to the
place where it begun. To have and to hold the said certain Swamp and Pond and
Appurtenances unto him the said John Evans his Heirs and Assigns forever, under
the yearly reserved Rent of one Pepper Corn. And whereas there is another
extravagant Grant of the Kings Farm, in manner aforesaid, being a Lease or
Demise of the said Farm unto the Church wardens and Vestry-men of Trinity
Church, for seven years from the date thereof being the 19th of August, 1697.
Registered in the Secretary's Office, To have and to hold the said Farm and
Appurtenances unto the said Churchwardens and Vestry-men of Trinity Church,
their Sucessors and Assigns, for the term of seven years from the date
aforesaid, until the said term of seven years be fully ended, under the yearly
reserved Rent of sixty Bu^hels of Wheat. And whereas there is another
extravagant Grant of Land out of the Kings Garden, in manner aforesaid, unto
Coll. Caleb Heatheote, bearing date the ad of April, 1696. and Registered in
the Secretary's Office, containing a certain Lot or Toft of ground lying
without the Stockadocs of the City of New York, near adjoining to the Locust
Trees, which were formerly pa^^ of the Kings Garden, containing in breadth
forty one foot, and in length (...) ^oot. To have and to hold the said Lot or
Toft of Ground unto him the said Caleb Heath^ote his Heirs and Assigns forever,
under the yearly reserved Rent of one Shilling. And whereas there is another
extravagant Grant of Land out of the said Kings Garden in manner aforesaid, and
of the date aforesaid unto the said Caleb Heathcote, being a Demise or Lease of
another part of the said Kings Garden for the term of forty one years, which
lies vacant and unimproved, being bounded by the Stockadoes or Fence of the
said Garden, so far as the said Garden, in the rear, does extend, and from the
said Fence of Stockadoes so far into Hudsons River as low Water Mark, To have
and to hold the said other part of the said Garden unto the said Caleb
Heathcote his Heirs and Assigns, for the said term of forty one years from the
date of the said Demise, under the yearly Rent reserved of four Shillings.

And whereas it does appear unto his said Excellency and Council, that all and
every of the above-recited several and respective Grants and Demises of Land
and Premises, to all and every the Person and Persons aforesaid, their
respective Heirs, Successors and Assigns, are in fact and deed absolutely
extravagant Grants issued ^^ the said Coll Fletcher, late Governor of this
Province under his Majesty, contrary to and against the Trust reposed in him by
his said Majesty, and are extravagant Grants according to the true intent,
meaning and construction of their ^xcellencies the Lords Justices of England
said Instructions, and as such ought to be broke, vacated, annulled and made of
none effect forever. Be it therefore Enacted by his Excellency the Governor
and Council, and Representatives convened in General Assembly, and it is hereby
Enacted by the Authority of the same, That all and every of the several and
Respective extravagant Grants of Land and P^emises, granted, demised and
sealed, in manner aforesaid, and heretofore recited and mentioned, within all
and every of their several and respective limits and bounds aforementioned and
expressed, are hereby brake, vacated and forever annulled, and of none effect.
And all and every the afore-recited Grants and Demises, in manner aforesaid,
for all and every the several and respective Tracts and Parcells of Land, Farms
and Garden, with Appurtenances within all and every of their several and
respective limits and bounds aforesaid. And all the Lordships, Manors,
Jurisdictions, Powers, Authorities, Rights, Benefits, Profits, Advantages
belonging unto them or either of them shall forever hereafter cease, determine
and become null and void, and of none effect, to all intents, purposes and
constructions whatsoever, as if no such Grants, Demises and Registers of the
same in the Secretary's Office had ever been done. And they the aforesaid
Grantees, Less^es, and every of them, their and every of their Heirs,
Successors and Assigns are forever hereafter divested of any Right, Title or
Claim unto h^ same, or unto any part or parcel thereof within the several and
respect^ve Limits aforesaid, any Law to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding. And his Majesty is hereby fully and immediately Re-seized and
Reposs^ssed of all and every of the before granted and demised Premises, in as
full an^ am^le manner as if the same had never been granted and demised.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every of
the (...) Demises for the several and respective Tracts of Lands, Swamps, Farms
and Gardens, as aforesaid, which are Registered in the Secretary's Office,
shall upon the Publication hereof be obliterated, razed defaced, and the Memory
or Record of all and every of the aforesaid Grants shall be reduced into
Oblivion and Forgetfulness, as if no such Grants had ever been made or
registered in the said Office, any thing to the contrary hereof in any wise
notwithstanding. And to the intent that it may not be in the Power of any of
his Majesty's Governors or Commanders in chi^^, for the time being hereafter,
to make for the future any such extravagant Grants of Land, as aforesaid. Be it
further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That it shall not be in the Power
of any of his Majesty's Governors or Commanders in chief, which shall
hereafter be Governors or Commanders in chief of this Province under his
Majesty, his Heirs and Successors, to grant or demise for any longer than for
his time in the Government, any of the Lands hereafter mentioned, that is to
say, Natten-Island, The Kings Farm, the Kings Garden, The Swamp and Fresh
Water, as they are now limited and bounded, being the Denizen of his Majesty's
Fort at New York, and for the benefit and accommodation of his Majesty's
Governors and Commanders in chief for the time being; and if any such Grants
or Demises for the future shall be made longer than for the time
aforementioned, than all and every of such Grants shall, ipso facto, become
null and void, and of no use to all intents and purposes whatsoever, any Law,
Custom or U^age to the contrary hereof in any ways notwithstanding. Saving to
the City of New York ^he Right they have to the Fresh Water, and Lands to low
Water Mark behind the Kings Garden.

The End of the 1st Sessions of the 7th Assembly.
Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, in the City of New York, 1699.


