The 2d Sessions of the seventh Assembly.
Beginning the 29th Day of July, 1700. and ending the 9th of August, Anno Regni
Regis and Regina Gulielmi, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae and Hiberniae, Duodecim.

An Act for the better securing the five Nations of Indians in their Fidelity
to his Majesty.
WHereas nothing can more contribute to the Safety of this Province than the
Fidelity and Friendship of the five Nations of Indians. And whereas the said
Indians have, by reiterated Instances to his Excellency the Governor, desired
the building of a Fort amongst them, which being thought necessary by the
Representatives in General Assembly,

Be it therefore Enacted by his Excellency, the Governor, Council and
Representatives now in General Assembly convened, and it is hereby Enacted by
the Authority of the same, That the Sum of One Thousand Pounds current Money of
this Province be raised and levied in such way and manner as is herein after
expressed, for and toward the speedy erecting, building and finishing a Fort
amongst the Indians, in such convenient part of the Country as by his
Excellency the Governor, by and with the advice of the Managers herein after
named, for the Security of the Indians, shall be thought fit.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for the satisfying
and paying the Sum of 1000 l. aforesaid, that there shall be raised, levied,
collected and paid unto his Majesty, for and during the space and term of one
year, from and after the Publication of this Act, and no longer, the several
Rates and Duties herein after mentioned, over and above all other Duties,
Charges, Impositions, Rates and Customs by any former Act and Acts set,
established and imposed, (that is to say)

The Rate and Duty of Twenty five Shillings, current Money of this Province,
for each Pipe of Wine, that, from and after the Publication hereof, shall,
during the Term aforesaid, be imported into this Province or its Dependencies,
and so proportionable for a greater or lesser Quantity.

Two Pence half Penny on each Gallon of Rum imported as aforesaid.

The Sum of Two per Cent. to be on the first cost of all European Goods
imported as aforesaid.

The Sum of Twenty Shillings on each Hogshead of Mallossos imported as
aforesaid.

The Sum of Three Pence on every empty Barrel imported as aforesaid.

The Sum of Two Pence on every empty half Barrel imported as aforesaid.

The Sum of Three Shillings on each Barrel of Syder imported as aforesaid.

The Sum of Twenty Shillings for every Tun of Logwood imported as aforesaid.
And the Sum of Six Pence on each half Barrel of Flower that shall be Exported
out of this Province, to be paid by the Exporter.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the several Rates
and Duties hereby imposed on the Goods, Wares, Merchandises and Liquors
aforesaid, shall be raised levied, collected, recovered and paid unto his
Majesty's Collector and Receiver General, or to the Commissioners for executing
the Office of Collector and Receiver General of this Province, for the time
being, during the Term before mentioned, in the same manner and form, and by
such ways and means, and under such Penalties, Fines and Forfeitures as are
mentioned, expressed and directed in and by an Act of General Assembly made in
the 11th Year of his Majesty's Reign, entitled, An Act for granting unto his
Majesty several Duties for the defraying the public Charge of the Government,
after the time limited in an Act confirming and continuing unto their Majesty's
the Revenue established by an Act of General Assembly for defraying the public
and necessary Charges of the Government is expired, in as full and ample manner
as if the same were particularly recited in this said Act, any thing to the
contrary hereof in any wise notwithstanding.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That Hendrick Hansen,
John Bleeker and Peter van Burgh, Esqrs. be, and are hereby appointed to be
Mannagers of the building, erecting and finishing said Fort, and providing
Materials for the same, in such way and manner as by his Excellency the
Governor, by and with the advice of said Mannagers, shall be from time to time
thought fit.

An be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Collector or
Receiver General of this Province, or the Commissioners of the Customs of this
Province for the time being, be, and are hereby required to keep a particular
Book of all the Duties and Rates accruing and paid by virtue of this Act. And
that the said Receiver General, or the Commissioners for executing the Office
of Collector and Receiver General of this Province, shall every three Months
send up to the Mannagers aforesaid, the Sum or Sums of Money which he or they
have received by virtue of this Act, until the said Sum of One Thousand Pounds
shall be paid unto them; and if any Surplusage remain over and above the one
thousand pounds aforesaid, in his or their hands, the same is to be disposed
of, as by the General Assembly shall be thought convenient.

And be it further Enacted, That whatsoever Sum or Sums of Money shall be paid
for any Materials or Workmen, or any other matter relating to the said Fort,
shall be by Warrant from his Excellency the Governor, by and with the advice
of the Mannagers, or any two of them aforesaid.

An Act for appointing and enabling Commissioners to examine, take and state
the Public Accounts of this Province.
WHereas this Province in the late long War have been at great Expense of Blood
and Treasure for the Defense thereof; and whereas some Persons pretend great
Sums of Money yet to remain unpaid, and that the Funds granted in General
Assembly have been not sufficient to defray the same. Therefore for the better
knowledge, examination and stating the Accounts of the Receipts, Issues and
Distributions of the public Revenue of this Province, and such Taxes raised
and imposed upon the People thereof, by Acts of General Assembly, for the
Defense of this Province, in the late War with the French and their Indians;
and other the Incidental Charges thereof, as well within the said time of War,
as also at any time since. Be it Enacted by his Excellency and Council, and
Representatives convened in General Assembly, and it is hereby Enacted by the
Authority aforesaid, That Leonard Lew^, Esquire, Abraham Gouverneur, Esquire Speaker of
the honorable House of Representatives of the Province of New York, Rip van
Dam of the City of New York, Merchant, Cornelius Sebran, Esquire and David
Provoost, Esquire shall be and are hereby constituted Commissioners for examining,
taking and stating of the Accounts of all Money of the said public Revenue of
this Province, and all the Accounts of Taxes, Subsidies or Aids granted unto
the late King Charles the second, and the late King James the second, his
Majesty, and the late Queen Mary (of happy Memory) and since to his Majesty,
from and after the arrival of Coll. Thomas Dougan, late Governor of this
Province, until the beginning of this present Sessions of the General Assembly.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Commissioners, or any three of them, are hereby empowered from time to time, to
issue forth their Warrants, under their hands and seals, to order the Collector
or Receiver General, or the Commissioners for executing the Office of Collector
and Receiver General of this Province, for the time being, ordering them to lay
before them the Accounts of the public Revenue, and all the Accounts of Taxes,
Subsidies or Aids granted unto the late King Charles the second, the late King
James the second, unto his Majesty, and the late Queen Mary, (of happy Memory)
and since to his Majesty) from and after the arrival of Coll. Thomas Do^ga^,
late Governor of this Province, until the beginning of this present Sessions
of the General Assembly, together with the Accounts of the Issues and
Distributions of the same, and every part thereof* to any Person or Persons
whatsoever, or for what use or uses soever.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Commissioners,
or any three or more of them, are hereby ordered to make Return of their
Proceedings herein, the first day of the next Sessions of the General Assembly,
unto the House of Representatives, to the end such further Consideration may be
had in the Assembly, of the matters aforesaid, as for the Peace and Welfare of
this Province shall be thought convenient.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That all and every the
Commissioners aforesaid shall take the Oath hereafter mentioned, before the
Governor of this Province, for the time being, Viz. I A. B. do Swear, that
according to the best of my skill and knowledge, I shall faithfully,
impartially and truly, without favor or affection to any, demean my self, in
taking, stating and examining all the public Accounts of this Province,
brought and to be brought before me, in execution of an Act entitled, An Act
appointing Commissioners to examine, take and state the public Accounts of
this Government, according to the Tenor and purport of the said Act. So help me
God.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the said
Commissioners shall have such Sallaries for and concerning their Trouble in the
matter aforesaid, as to the General Assembly of this Province, at their next
Sessions, shall seem meet. Provided, That this Act, and every clause therein
contained, shall be of force until the first day of the next Sessions of
General Assembly, and no longer, any thing to the contrary hereof in this Act
contained in any wise notwithstanding.

An Act against Jesuits and Popish Priests
WHereas diverse Jesuits, Priests and Popish Missionaries have of late come, and
for some time have had their residence in the remote parts of this Province,
and other his Majesty's adjacent Colonies, who by their wicked and subtle
Insinuations, industriously labor to debauch, seduce and withdraw the Indians
from their due Obedience unto his most sacred Majesty, and to excite and stir
them up to Sedition, Rebellion and open Hostility against his Majesty's
Government. For prevention whereof, Be it Enacted by his Excellency the
Governor, Council and Representatives convened in General Assembly, and it is
hereby Enacted by the Authority of the same, That all and every Jesuit and
Seminary, Priest, Missionary, or other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical Person, made
or ordained by any Authority, Power or Jurisdiction derived, challenged or
pretended from the Pope or See of Rome, now residing within this Province, or
any part thereof, shall depart from and out of the same at or before the first
day of November next, in this present year Seventeen Hundred.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid* That all and every
Jesuit, Seminary, Priest, Missionary, or other Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Person, made or ordained by any Authority, Power or Jurisdiction derived,
challenged or pretended from the Pope or See of Rome, or that shall profess
himself, or otherwise appear to be such, by preaching and teaching of others,
to say any Popish Prayers by celebrating Mass, granting of Absolutions, or
using any other of the Popish Ceremonies and Rites of Worship, by what Name,
Title or Degree soever such Person shall be called or known, who shall
continue, abide, remain or come into this Province, or any part thereof, after
the first Day of November aforesaid, shall be deemed and accounted an
Incendiary and Disturber of the public Peace and Safety, and an Enemy to the
true Christian Religion, and shall be adjudged to suffer perpetual
Imprisonment; and if any Person, being so sentenced, and actually imprisoned,
shall break Prison and make his escape, and be afterward retaken, he shall
suffer ^uch Pains of Death, Penalties and Forfeitures as in cases of Felony.

And it is further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That every Person that
shall wittingly and willingly receive, harbor, conceal, and, succor and
relieve any Jesuit, Priest, Missionary, or other Ecclesiastical Person of the
Romish Clergy, knowing him to be such, and be thereof lawfully convicted before
any of his Majesty's Courts of Record within this Province, which Courts are
hereby empowered and authorized to hear, try and determine the same, he shall
forfeit the sum of two hundred Pounds current Money of this Province, one half
to his Majesty, for and toward the support of the Government, and the other
half to the Informer who shall sue for the same in any Court of Record within
this Province, wherein no Essoyn, Protection of Wager in Law shall be allowed;
and such Person shall be further punished by set in the Pillory on three
several days, and also be bound to the good Behavior, at the discretion of the
Court.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority afo^esaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for every Justice of the Peace to cause any Person or Persons
suspected of being a Jesuit, Seminary, Priest, or of the Romish Clergy, to be
apprehended and convented before himself, and some other of his Majesty's
Justices; and if such Person do not give satisfactory account of himself, he
shall be committed to Prison, in order to a Trial; also, it shall and may be
lawful to and for any Person or Persons to apprehend, without Warrant, any
Jesuit, Seminary, Priest or other of the Romish Clergy, as aforesaid, and to
convent him before the Governor, or any two of the Council, to be examined and
imprisoned, in order to a Trial, unless he give a satisfactory account of
himself. And as it will be esteemed and accepted as a good Service done for the
King, by the Person who shall seize and apprehend any Jesuit, Priest,
Missionary or Romish Ecclesiastic, as aforesaid, so the Governor of this
Province, for the time being, with the advice and convent of the Council, may
suitably Reward him, as they think fit. Provided, That this Act shall not
extend, or be construed to extend unto any of the Romish Clergy who shall
happen to be shipwrack't, or through other adversity shall be cast on Shore or
driven into this Province, so as he continue or abide no longer within the same
than until he may have opportunity of Passage for his Departure; so also as
such Person, imm^diately upon his arrival, shall forthwith attend the
Governor, if near to the place of his Residence, or otherwise on one or more
of the Council, or next Justices of the Peace, and acquaint them with his
Circumstances, and observe the directions which they shall give him, during his
stay in the Province.


