A Brief narration of the sufferings of the People Called Quakers; who were put
to death at Boston in New England.
ALSO An account from their own hands, of their Coming to Boston, and of their
staying in their Jurisdiction after Banishment.
WITH A Precious Epistle of William Robinson, to us his Fellow Prisoners, and
other Epistles hereunto Annexed.
It has been thought, that there had been some Remorse (...) or Repentance in
the People of New England; for what they had done in Hanging the People called
Quakers: for some of this after Generation does not Care to hear of it, neither
would they be Blamed for what their Fathers or Predecessors have done.

Howbeit we find in a Little Book of Late Date, by four Priests of Boston in
New England, namely James Allen, Joshu^th (...), Samuel Willard, and Ca^ton
mather: who seems (...) to (...) what they have done in Hanging the said People
(...) say; They are not abused: But dealt ^ustly with (and also say) The Crime
which occasioned their suffering, was, They came purposely to undermine the
evil Government: And to Persuade the People to Renounce it.

(The Book is called, The Principles of the Protestant Religion maintained by
the ministers of the Gospel in Boston.) Page 63. 64.

Now, some People of the Country, and Priests also (upon Discourse) have made
as if they were sorry and Troubled for what they had cone, in Hanging the said
People.

But these four Priests seem Bloody still, in saying they were not abused, but
Dealt (...) with etc. Covering themselves under this falsehood, and for a Refuge
make this Lie.

That they came Purposely to undermine the Civil Government, and to persuade
the People to Renounce it.

This is a high Charge, founded unto the world: And what is it? But to make the
world believe, that we are a seditious People not worthy to Live, and to stir
up Nations and People against us, to destroy us from the Earth. The charge is
high, and Positive.

That they came Purposely to undermine the civil Government and to Persuade the
People to Renounce it.

But where is the proof? Let them bring forth their witnesses; yea, Let them
bring forth the People that will say - The Quakers that were put to death at
Boston, ever persuaded them to deny o^ Renounce the civil Government: I say
again, bring forth the People, that will say. The Quakers that were put to
death at Boston persuaded them to renounce the civil Government; or that they
came Purposely to undermine it.

Indeed, there were that suborned men to witness against Stephen, which said.

We have heard him speak Blasphemous words against Moses and against God: And
cease not to speak Blasphemous words against this holy Place and the Law: For
we have heard him say, This Jesus of Nazereth shall destroy this place and
shall change the customs which Moses Delivered to us. Acts. 6. 11. 12. 13.

These were of the Synagogune of the Libertines, who took great Liberty (in
their malice and Envy, to sound out Lies, to make Sthephen, that Blessed and
Good man,) to Look as criminal as ever they could: As if he were purposed to
Destroy the place and change the Customs etc. That the^^ by they might seem the
more Justified in the minds of People in what they did: as if he were not
abused, but dealt Justly with (...) killing of him.

And this was for his faith and Testimony's sake^, in Testifying to the truth;
That they thus shamefully, and wickedly, turned things against him: So now* It
must not be said, the Quakers where put to Death upon a Religious account for
Testifying to the Truth: That will Look hard, and of an ill (...) the World,
that they who came to New England Upon the account of Religion should now
Persecute others, for the same: No, no, Let it be (...) abroad, and said.

They came purposely to Undermine the civil Government, and persuade the People
to Renounce it.

And this it may be will take with the People, that they were not (...), but
dealt Justly with.

And as it is (...) to see, and know, who were the chief in stirring up the
People* and Rulers to this great evil in killing the Quakers: so also you may
see who are the chief in (...) the Country and World with a lie for their
excuse: That (...) they had hanged the Quakers, and many of the Country sorry
for it; Yet, These ^oure Priests stand up to Justify the act, In saying They
were not abused but dealt Justly with. O New England! may it not be said of
thee, as was said in Daves of old?

O! my People* they which lead the cause the to err, and destroy the way of thy
paths. Isa. 3. 12.

And (...) path of the Just you may Read. Pro. 4. 18. unto which, People are
called to walk. Isa. 2. 5 And in which, the Nations of them that are saved
shall walk. Rev. 21. 24.

And they that lead, or (...) People out of this path are destroyers. Isa. 9.
16. For the leaders of People cause them to err; and they that are led of them
are destroyed.

Now is to the two first that were put to death, at Boston to (...)) William
Robinson, and (...) Stevenson after they were Bannished upon (...) of (...),
they went from Boston to Salem: And I hearing of it, that they were Bannished
upon pain of death was much (...); having knowledge of them (...), and that
they were men fearing God, was minded to see them; so (...) them at Salem: And
People were much Exercised in their minds concerning them: and some willing to
hear: But by reason of their cruel Law, People were afraid to have a meeting in
their houses; They had a meeting in the woods not far from Salem-Towne, and
great stockings there was to hear: And the Lord was (...) with them, and they
sp^ke of the things of God boldly, to the affecting and ^ndering the hearts of
many; some of whom are alive a^ this Day, that can bear witness to the Truth of
their Testimony.

And after we had been while at Salem, no man meddling with us there: we went to
(...) and found the People as we went very tender and loving; though mix^ with
fear by reason of their wicked Law: And after we had been a while at Piscalaw.
(...) we (...) again to Boston, and several Friends from Salem with us; And as
soon as we were got over Charls-Town^-ferry on Boston shore; (no Town nor
People meddling with us nor offering us any abuse) Till we came to Boston.

There meets us the Constable, and a Company of Rude People with him, and Takes
us all up, which were About Ten or a Dozen of us, besides the two Banished
Friends: And after some mocking, and scoffing Examination, all of us had to
Prison

And God does know, who is a last rewarder of all, how harmless Innocent, and
peaceable* we came into the Town; and behaved our selves in much fear, and
Humility of mind; yet notwithstanding being Quakers, to Prison we must all go;
where we remained some Days, It may be three or four, or a week; And then the
Counsel, or Court, sent searchers to us, to search our pockets; and took our
Papers and what else they pleased, and Carried away; amongst which W. R's.
Journal of places where he had been: After this that our pockets were picked, we
remained still in prison till the Courts pleasure was to send for any of us;
for sometimes they would send for several of us together and sometimes for one
alone: For I was once sent for alone: sifted, and Tried; being Examined about
many things: And seeing they were like a Company of fowlers to Drive the Bird
into their net* I was sparing of speech: then they called me Dumb Divil and
could not speak: And some said I was simple and Ignorant and had no great harm
in me. But as I was beguiled and led away by others that were more subtle: then
I said to them again; If you think I am simply (...) and not will-ful in
Error; How have you showed kindness to me? or where has your Love appeared to
help me out of this Ignorance and (...) you suppose I am fallen into? how his
your endeavor appeared o^ open my Understanding to show me Better? Do you
think your Prisons whips, and hard Usage is the way to do it?

Is that the way to begin with, for the restoring of Any from the (...) of
their ways?

Then some again Cried out and said, he is more Knave then (...).

Then I answered again and said, if I hold my tongue to your (...) questions: I
am a Dumb Devil, a fool, and Ignorant; And if I speak, I am a knave.

After this, the Deputy Governor, Richard (...) being fall of (...), said to
me well Could you shall be severely whipped, which afterward was do^^, with
(...) stripes upon my naked back, (...) to the Carriage of a Great Gun: And
this is my Comfort at this day; and I Bless the Lord for it, that my suffering
was in Great Innocence.

There were five more whipped at the same time, two men and three women, each
having ten stripes a piece, only one man fifteen: And for no other cause, but
for Bearing the name of Quakers. And after we were thus whipped, we were all had
to Prison again, where our (...) was, with our sore Banks, upon the hard
boards: where we remained till after the Execution: That they (...) hanged
those two Innocent and (...) of the Lord. William Robinson, and M^rmudu^e
Stevenson who were Excuted upon a Lecture Day after the Priest had sharpened
the People for the Service

(But that Priest is gone to his place) In the morning before the Lecture began
I here came a (...) of People about the Prison, and we being in an upper Room,
William Robinson put forth his head at a window and spoke to the People
concerning the things of God: At which, the People flocked about, the more
Earnest to hear, and gave serious Atention: But quickly it was noised in the
^own that much People was about the Prison to see the Quakers, and that the
Quakers were speaking to them: Upon which, came James Oliver, a very fit man
for their purpose, with a Company with him to Disperse the People, and to drive
them away from hearing the Quakers; But they being so many, and willing to
hear, could not get them away. Then James, in a fret, left the People without,
and came to us within, and being in a heat that he could not master the People
without, was the more furious to us within: Hurling some of us very un^ivily
down stairs and left us not till he had brought us down, and shut us up in a
Little Low dark (...) where we could not see the People, nor they us; where we
remained till their Lecture was done: In which time; Though the hea^s of the
Ignorant were hardened against us to shut us up in dark solitary place, where we
sat together, during their Lecture time, waiting upon the Lord: for we had no
helper in the Earth, our Relyance was only upon him: And this was a time of
Love; for a^ the World hated us, and Dispitefully used us: So the Lord was
pleased in a wonderful manner, to manifest his supporting Love, and kindness
to us, in our innocent suffering.

And Especially the two worthy's, who had now near finished their course: They
standindg faithful in their Testimony to God: by which they obtained witness:
For God had said unto them, and given them a sure word: That their souls
should rest in Eternal peace, as you may see hereafter by their own writings:
And this Comfort they had in their sore Trials, near unto death for God was
with them, and bore them through with a heavenly cheerfulness: And many sweet
and heavenly sayings they gave unto us; being themselves filled, with comfort;
for so also said the Apostle: I am filled with comfort, I am Exceeding joyful
in all our Tribulations 2 Cor. ^: 4.

And now their Lecture being ended, the Priest having sharpened and hardened
them for the service: the Officers and Soldiers being now ready at the door:
And while we where embracing each other, and taking leave, with full and tender
hearts* (God know's) the Officers, and Men appointed (like Friends Butchers)
came in and took the two from us, as Sheep for the Slaughter, and had them away
to the Execution, where they were Hanged to death whose Blood lies still at
their door, And will, until repentance, and their law repealed, Cry as the
Blood of Abel, to the Lord from the ground, Gen: 4: 10.

Yet not withstanding their innocent and patient suffering, The trouble and
dislike of many sober and well minded People, then in the Country, and since,
many has Expre^t their sorrow and trouble for the same.

Yet these four Priests has ventured to say, They were not abused, But dealt
Justly with.

And for a Covering, hide themselves under this falsehood: The crime, which
occasioned their suffering was: They came purposely to undermine the civil
Government and to Persuade the People to renounce it, which* [say they] is
Every where Accounted sedition. P. 64.

This is still to possess the Country with falsehoods, and to harden the hearts
of People: That they were not abused etc.

And to cloak the cruelty and murder of the murdering and to make as fair
weather for them as they can; And to render the Innocent sufferers as odious as
they can, they say.

The Rulers used their utmost (...) toward them and all fair (...) to have
them depart; yea, they banished them sent them away But they will sadly
returned; yea, (...) and daringly affronted them. P: 64. a notorious falsehood:
(...) not a witness of the manner of their coming into the Town of Boston, I
should have been (...) at these things: But being a witness of their innocent
(...), I cannot hold my peace and where these four Priests were in those days
of their return and suffering, I know not: But this I know, they were not of
that spirit, which they have (...) them to be, neither did they in the Least at
their return, behave themselves daringly, as they Ignorantly if not maliciously
render it: For the fear of the Lord was upon them: And there are witnesses yet
Living that can (...) of their civil, Lamb like, and peaceable return, being
under the Command of God and in his pease fear, and Humbleness of mind.

And as to the ^enity and fair persuasions of the Rulers; It may very well
stand with the persecuting Priests and Rulers of old; whose persuasions were
Threats and Commands; not to speak at all, nor reach in the name of Jesus: But
if they did, to obey God rather then man, Prisons, and Stripes, were their
portion.

Peter and John, In the cause of God were very bold, knowing they had the
Command of God for what they did: And when by their Persecutors, they were
Commanded the contrary: They answered.

Whether (...) be right in the sight of God to hearken to you, more then (...)
God, judge ye. Read Acts. 4: 13: to 20. So now these had a command from God* as
does plainly appear by their own writings a little before their death: And they
knowing, that in their obedience, their sufferings would be great, therefore
God gave them strength and boldness to go through as you shall see anon from
their (...), the promises and comforts of God in their obedience.

And now, because they were faithful unto God in their obedience unto death;
to be rendered.

Wilful Resolute, and D^ringly to affront them, is gross perversion, and
wickedness in a high degree and be tokens still of a Bloody mind: That after,
they have killed the Innocent, to say, they were not abused. But dealt Justly
with: And for a Covering say -- They came purposely to undermine the civil
Government, and to persuade the People to Renounce it.

Thus you may see what a spirit still continues in these Priest's
notwithstanding the many great and notable Judgments of the Lord upon the
Country ever since; who Pharaob like still harden their hearts -- not only
against them that were put to death -- In saying, They were not abused etc. But
against them also that yet remain: For I have been informed, that one of these
four Priests have been heard to say* It is pity they should be suffered etc.

Haman-like; who, for the Envy he had to (...) because he bowed not not did him
Reverence; would have all the lews destroyed and to bring his Envious purpose
to pass he mealts a fair show to the King as if they without question, deserved
to be destroyed; and went to the King and said:

There is a Certain People scattered abroad and (...) among the People, in all
the provinces of thy kingdom, and their Laws are divert from all People,
neither (...) they the Kings Laws; therefore, it is not for the Kings Profit to
suffer them. Est. 3: 8.

He does not nakedly, and plainly tell the King the (...) of his heart, Why he
would have them destroyed: But makes, or invents a notorious lie; to render
them a seditious People: As if they came there, and dispersed themselves on
purpose to undermine his Government: Telling the King, that is was not for his
profit to suffer them.

So now these Priests; instead of preaching repentance for what they have done
in Hanging the Quakers; they say, they were not abused, but deals (...) with.
Oh ^ that People would but see and consider, how that the Judgments of the Lord
has been upon the Country ever since. But some are hardened for the day of
^^aughter; turning Judgment backward; that because New England had been visited
with many sore and grievous Judgments they are ready to say -- It is because
the Quakers are suffered.

Well, I leave all to the Lord who said vengeance is mine, I will repay: Rather
wishing Repent^^^e, to the worst of our adversaries, then their (...).

The Apostle spoke of some; That he bare them Record, they had (...) of God,
but not according to knowledge (that is They being Ignorant of Gods
Righteousness, and going about to establish their own Righteousness, have not
submitted themselves to the Righteousness of God^ To: 10. 2: 3.

And this (...), the Apostle was in, when he persecuted, and yet, touching the
Righteousness which is in the Law, blameless Phil. 3: 6.

And (...) afterward a good Minister: And then (...) his Ignorance, that he
thought, with himself ((...) that persecuting spirit Ruled) that he ought to do
many things contrary to the name of Jesus and And many of the Saints he shut up
in Prisons, having (...) from the Chiet Priests (which was the Author of (...))
And when they were put todeath* he gave his voice against them; But he con^ect
his Madness: And us left upon Record. Acts. 26. 9: 10. 11.

But these Four Priests still continue their voice against them; In that they
say They were not abused but dea^t Justly with. As if they still thought, they
had done God service in ^illing of Them.

Now here follows* First), 2 copy of William Robinsons writing to the Court,
which he (...) in (...) a Little before his dea^^; wherein he shows the (...)
of his coming to Boston which the Governor said should not be read.

The next, in (...) Stevenson's he also gives an account of his call and going
to Boston: whose sayings, and writings we have as good cause to believe, as the
sayings and writings of their Adversaries: For the word of People in their
dying-hours are usually reckoned words of ^eight seriousness and Truth. Watch I
would have (...) and seriously read, in the fear of God; not with Lightness nor
Hardness of heart, for that never ludges, nor favors things (...) wherefore,
friendly Reader; be moderate, and read them considerately, with the following
Epistles, which also were writ in Prison, not in Lightness, nor Hypocrisee, nor
Deceit: But under a Deep Exercise of Affliction a Little before their Death.

DANIEL GOULD

William Robinsons Paper to the Court before he was sentenced to Death,
Concerning the cause of their coming into those parts, for which they were put
to Death; which the Governor in a great rage and fury said, should not be
head, and that the Court would not hear it.
ON the 8th. Day of the 4th. month: 1659. In the after part of the Day, in
Traveling be^wix Newport-Towne on Road Island and the house of Daniel Gold on
the said Island.

The word of the Lord came Expressly unto me which did fill me Immediately with
Life and power and heavenly love; By which he Constrained me and Commanded me,
to pass to the Town of Boston my Life to lay down in his will, for the
accomplishing of his service, that he had there to perform at the Day appointed
To which heavenly voice I presently yielde^ obedience, not questioning the Lord
how he would bring the thing to pass being I was a Child; and obedience was
required of me by the Lord* who filled me with Living strength and power from
his heavenly presence which at that time and (...) overth^dew (...): And my
Life did say Amen to what the Lord required of me, and had commanded me to do,
and willingly was I given up from that time to this day* the will of the Lord
God to do and to perform whatever become of my body* for the Lord has said
unto me. My Soul shall rest in eternal Peace, and my Life shall enter into
Rest, for being obedience to the God of my Life; I being a Child, and (...) not
question the Lord in the least* but rather willing to lay down my life, than to
bring dishonor to the Lord; and as the Lord made me willing, dealing kindly
with me as a tender Father (...) a faithful Child whom he dearly loves; so did
the Lord (...) with me in mi^^string his (...) unto me, which gave and gives
me strength to perform what the Lord required of me, and still as I did and
(...) in need he (...), and ministers more ^ertue and heavenly power and
wisdom, where by I was and am made strong in God, not ^euing what Man shall be
^^ffered to do unto me, being filled with heavenly Courage, which is (...) and
I^nocency; or the Cause, is the Lords, that we go in, and the (...) is the
(...), and thus says the Lord of Hosts the mighty and terrible God, Not by
might nor by strength nor by power of man, but by my Spirit says the Lord of
(...), will I perform what my month has spoken through my Servants whom I have
chosen, mine Elect in whom my Soul delights. Friends, the God (...) my Life,
and the God of the whole Ear^^ did by this thing upon me (...) which I now
(...) unto (...) by (...) Power and everlasting Love, (...) me, and laid this
thing upon me, and truly (...) not deny the Lord, match less resist the Holy O^e
(...) Israel. Therefore, all People, who are ignorant of the motion of the Lord
in the inward parts, be not hasty in judging in this matter, before you hear
the truth of the matter, left you speak evil of the things you know not: for of
a truth the Lord God of the whole (...) commanded me by his Spirit, and spoke
unto me by his Son whom he has made Heir of all things, and in his (...), and
in it I shall depart this earthly (...) if unmercifull men be su^^ered to take
it from me; and her in (...), that the Lord is with me, the Ancient of days*
the Life of the suffering Seed, for (...) I am freely given up, and singly do I
stand in the will of God; for me to live is Christ, but to die is gain: And
truly, I have a great desire and (...) to die herein knowing that the Lord is
with me, whatever ignorant men shall be able to say against me for the witness
of the Spirit I have received, and the presence of the Lord and his heavenly
Life, does accompany me; so that I can say in truth and from an upright heart
(blessed be the Lord, the God of my Life), who has accounted me worthy and
called me hereunto to bear my Testimony against ungodly and unright ous men,
who seek to take a way the life of the U^right without a cause; as ye Rulers of
the Massathusits B^y do intend, if the Lord from you not from your unrighteous
intent. -- O^^ hear ye Rulers, and give ear and listen all you that have any
hand herein, to put the ^^^ccent to death! For in the Name, and Fear, and Dread
of the Lord God, I here declare the cause of my staying here amongst you, and
continuing in your Jurisdiction after there was a Sentence of death (as ye
said) pronounced against me without a just cause, as you well know; that we who
are banished, committed nothing worthy of banishment, not of any punishment,
much less banishment upon death: And now, we Rulers, ye (...) to put me to
death with my Companion, unto whom the Word of the Lord God came, saying, Go to
Boston with they Brother William k^binson: unto which Command he was of (...)
who had said unto him, that he had a great work for him to do: which thing is
now seen, and the Lord is not doing of it, and it is in obedience to the Lord
God of the whole Earth, that we continue amongst you; and that we came to this
Town of Boston again in obedience to the Lord, the Creator of the men Heaven
and Earth* in whole hand your breath is, and will ye put us to death for
obeying the Lord God of the who^e Eart^? Well, if you do this act, and put us
to death, know this, and be it known unto you all, ye Rulers, and People within
this Jurisdiction, whosoever has a hand herein, will be guilty of innocent
blood, not only upon your (...) will you bring innocent blood; out upon this
Town and the Inhabitants thereof, and elsewere within your Juridiction that
has the least hand herein* therefore he instructed ye Rulers of this Land, and
take warning betimes, and learn wisdom before it ^e hid from your eyes; And
know this, if you put us to death, the Lord will arise in his (...) wrath
against you, ye Rulers, in this Land, ye shall not escape the judgments of the
God of Israel who will consume you root and branch if you put us to death.

Written by one who fears the Lord, who is by ignorant (...) A Quaker; and
unto such am I only known by the (...) William Robinson; yet a new (...) I have
received, (...) not.

Marmaduke Stevensons Paper, of his call to the work and service of the Lord,
given forth by him a little before he was put to Death: And after he had
received his Sentence.
IN the Beginning of the Year 165^. I was at the (...) in the Eastern parts of
(...) in Old-England near the place where my outward being (...) And (...) I
walked after the ^low, I was filled with the Love and (...) of the Living God,
which did (...) when I felt it (...) it did Increase and (...) bound in (...)
so did the Love and Life of God (...) through (...) giving (...) which made me
to stand still: And as I stood a Little still; with my heart and mind staid on
the Lord: The word of the Lord came unto-me, in a (...) voice which I did hear
Perfectly; saying to me, in the (...) of my heart and (...): -- I have Ordained
that a Prophet to the nations; (...) at the hearing of the word of the Lord, I
was put to a stand being I was but a Child for such a weighty work.

So at the time appointed (...) was set before me; unto which I was required of
the (...) go, and Leave my Dear and loving (...), and tender Children: For the
Lord said unto (...) his spirit, that he would be as a husband to my Wife, and
as a Father (...) not want in my absence for he would Provide for them when I
was gone: And I believed the Lord, that the Lord would perform what he had
spoken: Because I was made willing to give up my self to his work and service,
to Leave all and follow him, whose presence and Life is with me where I rest in
Peace and Quietness of spirit with my Dear Brother under the shadow of his
Wings who has made us willing to lay down our Lives for his own Name sake if
(...) men be suffered to take them from us: -- And i^ they do, we know that we
shall have peace and rest with the Lord for Ever in his holy Habitation; when
they shall have To^ment Night and Day.

So in obedience to the Living God* I made Preparation to pass to (...) in the
4th Month. ^^. and after I had been (...) the said Island in the Service of God.

I heard that New England had made a Law to put the Servants of the Living God
to Death, if they returned after they were Sentenced away: -- which did come
near me at that time -- And as I considered the thing, and Pondered it in my
heart; Immediately came the word of the Lord unto me, saying, thou know not
but that thou may go thither: -- But I kept this word in my heart and did not
(...) it to any, until the time appointed. So, after that, a vessel was made
ready for Road Island which I passed In; And after a little time that I had
been there, visiting the seed which the Lord has Blessed.

The word of the Lord (...) saying, go to Boston with thy Brother William
Robinson And at his Command I was obedient, and gave up my (...) to do his
will, that so his work and service may be Accomplished for he said unto me,
that he had a great Work for me to do: which now is come to pass and for
yielding obedience, to, and obeying the voice and commandment of the
Everlasting God, which Created Heaven and Earth and the Fountains of Water, do
I with my Dear Brother, suffer Bonds near unto Death.

And this is given forth to be upon Record, that all People may know that hear
it, that we came not in near own wills, but in the will of God.

Given forth by me who am known to men by the name of -- (...) Stevenson.

But have a New name given me which the world (...) know not of; written in the
Book of Life.

Written in Boston Person in the 8 month: 59.

Here follows an Epistle of William Robinson Written by him a Little before
he was put to Death.
MY Dear Brethren and Sisters to whom my love abounds; I am filled with love
unto you all, Dear (...), feel it with your Lives, and receive it with your
Hearts, as New Oil; For truly, the Fear of the Lord is our Strength, and the
Blessing of the Lord is our portion, which the Lord does daily give unto us,
Blessed be his ^ame for Ever; Oh Let us all keep, in Loveliness and holiness,
and Meekness and Tender Love one toward another; which is the seal and witness
that the Lord is with us; where the Lord for Ever keep us ^^aid on him, to
receive our Daily Bread, which satisfies the Hungry Soul.

Dear Friends, Brethren and Sisters; This am I Constrained to let you know, how
mightily the love of the Lord my God abounds in my heart and from my Life
toward you all: It runns forth as a living Stream refreshing the spirit and
Life within us all. And Every one, as you feel it* According to your mea^^^
receive it into your hearts to the refreshing and strengthening one another.

Dear Lambs, I was the first that the Lord God our heavenly Father did lay this
thing upon; for which I now suffer bonds near unto Death from the first day
until now; The weight of this thing was laid upon me from the Lord God; and in
obedience to his Holy will and command I gave up, in which obedience, the Arm
and Power of the Lord has been with me to this Day; And the thing which the
Lord has said unto me from the Beginning of it to this day, which still
remains with me: That my Life must Accomplish the thing, and by it must the
Power of Darkness fall; and it will if they seek and Labor, to take it from
me; and through much Difficulty and bus^^ing will they the be suffered, to the
Glory of our God, and to the rejoicing of the Elect.

So my dear Brethren and Sisters, my Love and Life feel in your own hearts, for
I am full unto (...) all in heavenly Love, and my Life is Ever with you. The
Lord for Ever keep us all, as we are now to the Glory of his (...) Amen.

The 16. of the 8. month 1659.

This was I moved to write unto you all; ye my Dear Brethren and Sisters my
fellow Prisoners, that has any part, or does Partake with me herein, your Dear
Brother in holy and heavenly Joy and True Love and Peace.

WILLIAM ROBINSON.

This he sent to us his fellow Prisoners, which were 14. in number, yet two
Days before the Court: And some of us are alive, who are Witnesses of his
Innocent suffering: And also of his Companion, in the same Tribulation, who
suffered Death also at the same time; both of them for the word of God, and for
the Testimony which they bild, as by their own writings, is Plainly Evedenced,
and their Sealing their Testimony with their Blood: Whose Testimony stands sure
forever.

The fore going Epistle, that was writ to us, his fellow Prisoners and this
following General Epistle, were writ a little before his Death; In both which
All that Reads, may understand how Joyfully they stood too, and finished their
Testimony, as these following heavenly Lines, set forth: therefore Read, and
Ponder them well.

THe streams of my Fathers love runs daily through me from the holy fountain of
Life, to the seed throughout the whole Creation; I am overcome with Love, for
it is my life and the Lenght of my days: it is my glory and my daily strenght:
I am swallowed up of Love, and in Love I live -- with it. I am overcome, and in
it I dwell with the holy seed; to which the Blessing of Love is given from God,
who is Love; who has shed it abroad in my heart; -- which Daily (...) me with
Living Joy from the Life, from whence it Comes.

Ye Children of the Living God, feel me when you are Waiting in it, -- When
your minds are gathered into it; when in the strenght of it ye are Traveling;
feel me, when it Runs from the Fountain into your Vessels; when it Isues truly
like New-Wine into your Bossoms; when the strength and Power of it you feel;
when ye are overcome with the strenght of Love, which is God: -- Then ^eell me
Present in the Fountain of Love, the House of Heaven, wherein are many
mansions.

Ye Children of the Lord; feel me wrapped up with you In pure Love. which
destroys the Love of this World, which is Enmity with God; and which wars
against the seed, which proceeds from the Father of Love, the God of Truth.
Let nothing separate you from this Love which is my Life; let neither words nor
thoughts nor any thing else enter between, which is contrary to it; for it
stains the place of its abode. So dear Children who are begotten by Love into
the Covenant of Life and Love: Keep Daily in it; this is the Portion that God
has given to his Children, to continue in his Love, which is the Life of the
seed which is raised by the Power of the Endless Love of God in the Creature.

I am full of the Quickening Power of the Lord Jesus Christ and my Lamp is
filled with Pure Oil so that i^ gives a clear Light and Pleasant Smell --
And I shall enter with my beloved into eternal Peace and (...); wherein I am
swallowed up, with the Life of (...); I am (...), and (...) I shall Depart with
everlasting yoy and praises in my mouth, singing Haleluiah unto the Lord who
has redeemed me by his Living Power from among Kindreds, Tongues and Nations:
-- And now the Day of my Departure draws nere.

I have fought a good fight: I have kept the Holy faith; I have near finished
my Course, and my Travailing is near at an end, and my Course, and my Testimony
is near to be finished; and an eternal Crown is Laid up for me, and for all
whose feet are shed with Rightiousness and the Preparation of Peace; even such
whose names are Written in the Book of Life, wherein I Live and Rejoice with
all the faithful seed for Ever, and Eve^ Amen.

Written by a Servant of Jesus Christ WILLIAM ROBINSON.

A Spot unto New-England's Glory.
OH New England! New England! How near have thou likened they self to
Jerusalem of old! The most famed Place in the World, for Religion and worship
-- As thou also have accounted thy self -- As Cotton M^ther in his Little Book
called, The Serviceable Man, Page 28. (...) are these.

This the Prerogative (...) New England above all the Countries in the World,
that it is a Plantation for the Christian and Protestant Religion etc.

And now you may see what their Christian and Protestant Religion is com to! --
A shame and a h^sting, and a by word to the Nations. -- and the sorrowing of
serious People of all persuasions especially Disenters; Cutting Ears, Whiping*
Prisoning Burning in the Hand, Bannishing; and at last put to Death; Hanging
fewer innocent Persons: -- The Two a sore Mentioned, William Robinson, and
Marmaduke Stevenson, -- As you may see by their Writings -- And many Witnesses
are a Live at this Day -- who knows how sweetly, and Joyfully, they offered up
their Lives for their Testimony sake -- And Two afterward, they also put to
Death: One William L^dra, and the other Mary Dyre.

All well known, to many yet Livig, to be Perform Truly fearing God.

I shall not need to say much, Though I was a fellow Prissoner with the Two
first, and also well aquainted with the Two Last; knowing them to be People
fearing God.

But their own Writings also, may give evedence, to the Tender Hearted of the
Savor of their Spirits: whether they were such (or no) as New England has
recorded them to be ( viz) a Cursed Sect of Heretics -- Therefore, in their
Blind Zeal, they Killed the Servants of the Lord: And many of them that were
Chief Actors therein, are gone to their place -- And not without some mark.

But with the Living, there may be hope; Though they may have been too
Conse^^ting to their Death, as Saul was to Stephen's: Yet afterward repented,
and Confe^t his madness, and became a Good Man; and obtained mercy, for that he
did it Ignorantly: -- Now to such I will say, who are yet Living, and the Lord
having given them Large Time of Repentance, that have had any Hand or
Consenting to the Death of those Innocent People: I say, with the Apostle
Peter: I wot, that through Ignorance ye did it as did also your Rulers --
Repent ye therefore, and be Converted that your sins may be Blotted out. Acts.
3.

And now Concerning William Ledra, that Innocent and meek Lamb; here follows
an Epistle of his, given forth a Little before his Death: wherein all that
reads, may Savor the Tenderness of his Spirit: And the strenght of the Power
of (...) that then Ruled, in their Rulers: Yet all the strenght, and
Inventions, of the Powers of (...), cannot stop the Passage, or (...) of Gods
Love to the Sou^e, which was so Beautifully shed (...) unto him. ((...) unto
the others also before mentioned) in his suffering, set forth in these following
Lines.

To the Society of the Little Flock.
Grace and Peace be multiplied. -- Most Dear, and Inwardly Beloved: The sweet
Influence of the Morning-Sta^r, like a (...) Disstilling, into my Innocent
habitation, has so filled me with the Joy of the Lord, in the Beauty of
Holiness, that my Spirit is as if it did not Inhabit a Tabernacle of Clay; But
is wholly swallowed up in the Bossom of Eternity, from whence it had Its being.

Alas! Alas! What can the wrath, and Spirit of Man that Luster to envy, (...)
by the hea^e and strength of the King of the (...) which came out of the (...)
do unto one that is hid in the secret Piace of the Almighty? Or unto them that
are gathered under the Heating Wings of the Prince of (...)? -- Under whole
Arm^t: of life, they (...) be able to stand in the Day of Trial: having on the
Breast place of (...) and the Sword of the Spirit, which is their Weapon of War
against Spiritual wickedness, Principal^^^ies and Powers and the (...) of the
Darkeness of this World, both within and without. -- O! my Beloved, I have
waited and Dove at the window of the Arc, and have stood still, in that watch,
which the Master of the House did at his Coming reward with the fullness of his
Love* (without whom I could do nothing) wherein my heart did rejoice, that I
might in the life and love of God speak a few words unto you: sealed with the
Spirit of Promise: that the Taste thereof might be a Savor of Life to your
Life, and Testimony in you of my Innocent Death.

And if I had been altogether silent, and the Lord had not opened my Mouth unto
you; yet would he have opened your Hearts, and there have Sealed my Innocence
with the Streams of Life; by which we are all Baptized into that one Body
which is in God; with whom and in whose Presence there is life: In which as you
abide, you stand upon the Pillar and Ground of Truth: -- For the life being the
Truth, and the way; Go not one stepp without it, -- least you should compass a
mountain in the Wilderness: For unto every thing there is a season as the
flowing of the Ocean does fill every Creek and Branch thereof, and leaves a
savor behind it: So does the life and virtue of God, flow into every one of
your Hearts, whom he has made partakers of his divine nature: And when it with
draws (...) a Little (...) a sweet savor be hind it: So that many can say,
they are made clean through the word that he has spoken to them, In which
Innocent condition you may see what you are in the presence of God, and what
you are without him.

Therefore my Dear Hearts, let the Enjoyment of Life alone be your hope, your
Joy, and Consolation; and let the Man of God see those things that would lead
the mind out of the Cross, for then the savor of Life will be Buried (o^
(...) and although that some may speak of things that they have received in
the Life as Experiences, yet the Life being veiled, and the favor that (...)
behind washed a way by the (...) of Temptations, the condition that they did
enjoy in the Life boasted of by the ayrie thing, will be like the M^nna that
was gathered the day before, without either sent or savor, for it was only
well with the Man, while he was in the state of Innocence: But being Daven from
the presence of the Lord into the Earth, what can he Boast of?

And although you know these things, and many of you much more then I can tell
you: yet for the Love and Zeal I bare to the Truth and Honor of God; and the
Tender desire of my Soul to those that are young, that they might read me in
that from which I write, to strengthen them against the (...) of the sub^ill
Serpent that beguilded (...); I say (...) in the watch within, in the fear of
the Lord, (...) is the very Entrance of Wisdom, and the state wherein you are
ready to receive the secrets of the Lord.

Hunger and Thirst Patiently, be not weary, neither Doubt, stand still and
cease from thy own workings, and in due time thou shall enter into thy rest,
and thine Eye shall behold thy salvation, Jesus Christ whose Testimonies are
sure and Righteous altogether, let them be as seals upon thy arms, and as
Jewels about thy neck, that others may see what the Lord has done for your
Souls: Confess him (...) yea, before his greatest Enemies: fear not what they
can do unto you: greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the World:
for he will cloth you with Humility, and in the Power of his meekness you shall
reign over all the rage of your Enemies in the favor of God, wherein as you
stand in faith, you are the salt of the Earth: for many seeing your good (...)
may Glorify God in the day of (...) Take heed of receiving that which you saw
not in the Light Least you give Ear to the Enemy: Bring all things to the
Light that they may be Proved whether they are wrought in God or no, The Love
of the world, the Lust, of the flesh, the Lust of the Eye is without the Light,
in the world; Therefore Possess your (...) in all sanctification and honor and
let your Eye look at the mark, he that has called you is holy, and if there
be an Eye that offends pluck it out, and (...) it from you; let not the
Temptation take hold; for if you do, it will keep from the favor of God and
that will be a sad state: For without Grace Possessed there is no Assurance of
salvation; for by Grace ye are Saved: And the witnessing of it is sufficient
for you. -- To which I Recomend you all my Dear Friends, And in it Remain your
Brother.

WILLIAM LEDRA.
Boston Goal the 13 of the first mo: 1661.
Here follows a Copy of a Paper which Mary Dyre (...) to the Court after
William, and (...) put to Death.
ONce more to the General, Court Assembled in Boston speaks Mary Dyre, even as
before, my Life is not Accepted neither avails me in comparison of the Lives
and liberty of the Truth and Servants of the Living God; which in the Bowels of
Love and meekness I sought you, yet nevertheless, with Wicked Hands have you
put two of them to Death; which makes me to feel that the mercyes of the
Wicked are cruelly: I rather choose to Dye then to Live, as from you, who are
guilty of their Innocent Blood -- Therefore seeing my request is bindred^^ I
leave you to the Righteous (...) and searcher of all Hearts who with the (...)
Light he has given to every Man to (...) all, will in his. Due time let you
see whose Servants you (...), and of whom you have taken Council, which I
desire you to Search into* But all his Council has been slighted, and you
would none of his reproofs, read your Portion prove. 1. 24. 32. For verily the
Night comes on you a pace, which no Man can Work in (...) which you shall
(...) sale to your Own Master. -- In obedience to the Lord whom I serve with
my spirit and pity to your So^^es, which ye neither know nor Pity, I can do
no less then once more to warn you to put away the evil of your doings, and
(...) the Son the Light in you, before his wrath be (...) against you: For
there is nothing without him (to wit Christ) that can help or deliver you at
all, and if these things be not so, then say there has not been a Prophet from
the Lord sent among you, though we be nothing: Yet it is his Pleasure, by
things that are not, to bring to naught things that are.

When I heard your last order Read, it was a Disturbance unto me, that was so
freely offering, up my Life to him that give it to me, and sent me (...) so to
do^ which obedience being his own work, he (...) Accompained me with his
Presence of Peace and Love, in which I rested from my Labor, till by your
order and People. I was so far Disturb that I could not retain any more the
words (...) of then that I should return to (...) and there remain forty eight
hours, to (...) submitted finding nothing from the Lord to the (...), that I
might know what his Pleasure and Council is concerning me, on whom I wait;
therefore, for he is my Life and the Lenght of my Days: And as I said before,
I came at his command, and go at his command.

Mary Dyre.
Boston the 28 of the 8th month 1659.
Now this Mary Dyre, after the two were put to Death, she was brought back
again from the Place of Execution to Prison, though she was freely Given up to
suffer. And how the Lord was Pleased Gloriously to signify his Peace and Love
to her, in her obedience in what she did, as you may Plainly see in her Letter
to the Court. And she having been westward, on Long Island and there awayes, to
visit Friends, in the winter season, and at spring returned again; And after
some Time on Road-Island (where her home was she went again to Boston, and then
they put her to Death.

A Woman fearing God, and well known to many, yet Living.

And as to William Leddra, an Innocent, harmless, Patient man; who had a long
time before he went to Boston, suffered hardships, in Prision, at Plymouth, he
goes to Boston, and there they put him to Death also.

Road Island 1700 DANIEL COULD

FINIS

