The Everlasting Gospel.

The GOSPEL of JUSTIFICATION By the Righteousness of God; As it is Held and
Preached in the Churches of NEW ENGLAND: Expressed in a Brief DISCOURSE on that
Important Article; Made at Boston in the Year, 1699.

By Cotton Mather.

AND, Asserted with the Attestations, of several Reverend and Eminent Persons,
now most considerable in those Churches.

BOSTON, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen for Nicholas Buttolph, and Sold at
his Shop at the corner of Gutteridges Coffee-House. 1700.

The Memorable words of Luther, before he Engaged in the REFORMATION.
MI dulcis Frater, Disce Christum, et (...) Crucifixum; Disce ei cantare, et de
Teipso desperans, dicere ei; Tu, Domine Jesu, es Justitia mea, Ego autem sum
peccatum T^um; Tu assumpsisti meum, et dedisti mihi Tuum; Assumpsisti quod non
eras, et dedisti mihi quod non eram. Ipse suscepit te, et peccata tua fecit
sua, et suam Justitia^ fecit Tuam. Maledictus qui haec (...) credit.

Epist. An* 1516. Tom. 1. The Dedication. TO The Reverend Ministers Of the
Gospel in London, Sometimes Honored with the Name of UNITED BRETHREN.
Reverend, and Honored Syrs,
THE Distance of a Thousand Leagues from You, whereat the Providence of our
Lord Jesus Christ* has placed the Churches of New England, has not rendered
them unconcerned in Your Interests. The same Holy Spirit* which, from our
Common Head, animates both You and Them, with the Influences of His Grace, has
Taught them, to feel with Joy, the Smiles of Heaven upon your Interests, and
with Grief, the ^rowns of Heaven thereupon.

When You were a few years ago, becoming like the Primitive Believers for Your
One Accord, and Embracing each other, with the Honorable Name of, UNITED
BRETHREN; the Tidings were as cold waters to our thirsty Souls, in this far
Country, and the Tidings were proclaimed, and Received with Joy, throughout the
Churches, in these American Colonies. But I will take the Leave to Transcribe
and Report unto you, some words, of the Discourse here published Eight years
ago, on that memorable Occasion. Satan will doubtless endeavor to undermine
this UNION: A certain King of England, holding a Treaty of Peace, with a French
King, in an old Chapel that lay between their two Armies, both came to a good
Agreement; but as they were coming out of the Chapel, a Snake suddenly crept
out of the old Wall, which they seeing, Drew their Swords, and their Servants
at the Door Drew likewise: Upon this, the whole Armies no less furiously than
ignorantly advanced upon one another, and Commenced a Battle, wherein a most
horrid Slaughter was made, before the mistake was Rectified. Alas, it often
thus comes to pass; [ Blessed Unions page 85, 86. Printed 1692.
when the Servants of God have been just Finishing a Reconciliation the Old
Serpent will interpose, and interrupt it all.

And now* Your Friends on this Side of the Atlantic, are with Grief making
Jobs Reflection; The thing which I greatly Feared is come! With a very
condolent Sympathy, we feel the Blows, which the Two Sticks, that we thought
made One, are giving to one another. We flattered our selves with Hopes, of
seeing the Witnesses of our Lord Jesus Christ Risen out of their Graves, when
we still see those very Things upon them, that made our Apostle cry out, Nonne
Cadaverosi estis? We have Heard, and Read, with no little astonishment, the
Contests of United Brethren, and the efficacious Attempts of Satan to break
their Union; Unable therefore to forbear thereupon the Lamentations of the
Great Austin upon the Quarrels between Jerome, and Ruffin, Vae mundo a
scandalis; Ecce prorsus impletur, quod veritas ait, Quoniam abundavit
Iniquitas, frigescet (...) multorum. Quis Amicus non formidetur quasi futurus
inimicus, si potuit inter Hieronymum (...) Ruffinum hec quod plangimus (...)! O
misera et miseranda Conditio!

Our Inveterate Adversary has had experience for more than Five Thousand Years
to teach him, That no Animosities are so fierce and strong as those that are
produced by Differences in Religion; Thundrings and Lightnings, and Earthquak^s
arise with most of Tempest, from the Fire of the Altar; because, in
Controversies, of Divinity* men are easily persuaded that they are Engaged in
the cause of the Deity, wherein it is a Good-Thing for a man to be zealously
affected* But we in these Ends of the Earth have been taught by an experience
more than Fifty Years Old, That the Minds of men are never more prone unto
unjustifiable Alienations, than when their Differences in Religion turn upon
the point of, A Sinners Justification before God: Strange! Nothing raises more
sinful Variance, and Prejudice, in men, toward one another, than their
Opinions about the Doctrines of a Sinners Reconciliation unto God; and the
Controversies, about the Methods of our coming to a Peace with Heaven, cause
most of Strife upon Earth.

Now albeit the Churches of New England, have had nothing to disturb them, in
their Enjoying the Comforts of Union in that Important Article of our Christian
Religion, for many Lustres of years; yet we must humbly crave leave of our
Ever-Honoured Brethren, in the City of London, to inform them, That it is
inexpressibly Uncomfortable unto us, to understand the Shocks of late given to
their Union, in their Controversies upon that Article.

And indeed, Sirs, it is no less Unaccountable unto us, than Uncomfortable. We
can see much Reason that you should Contend earnestly for the Faith once
delivered unto the Saints, in this Great matter; but we cannot see so much
Reason that you should Contend so much with one another.

We find our Worthy and Honored Brethren, who have been distinguished by the
Name of Congregational, [ See, the Declaration of the Congregational Ministers,
in London, against Antinomian Errors: Printed, School.]
Expressly declaring, That the Elect, before they Believe, are not personally
and Actually Justified in the Court of Heaven, but by Believing they are so
Justified: That God sees the Sins of His own People, and is Displeased with
them for their Sins, and when Believers do Sin, it is their Duty to Humble
themselves Confess their Sins, and Pray for Pardon: That since the Sins of
Believers, do Impair their Graces, and Comforts, Harden their Hearts, wound
their Consciences, Hurt and Scandalize others, Grieve Gods Holy Spirit, Expose
to His Fatherly Displeasure, and bring Temporal Judgments upon them; their Sins
Hurt them, and they should be afraid to Commit them: That Saving Faith lies not
in a full Persuasion and Assurance, that our Sins are actually Pardoned; and
Marks and Signs for the Trials of our Spiritual Estate are to be sought after:
and Sanctification Evidenced by the Spirit of God, unto our Consciences, is a
certain Sign and Mark of our Justification; That the Law, delivered by Moses,
continues in its Commands and Curses, Vndissolv'd; and still is of use, to
convince of Sin, that we may see a need of Christ; and therefore is to be
Preached; and we are to look unto it: That though men want Ability to Believe
Savingly, yet its the Duty of Gospel Ministers, to make the Offer, and Testify
unto them, that whoever Believes and Repents shall be Saved; and its the
Peoples Duty, to make use of their Natural Faculties, with such External means
and workings of the Spirit, as God affords them, that, they may Believe, and
Repent, and be Saved: That our Sins were not so laid upon Christ, as to make
Him every way as Sinful as we; and we are not every way as Righteous as Christ:
And none may Expect to be Pardoned in a state of Unbelief and Impenitence; And
continued Repentance with Holiness, are necessary to our possession of Eternal
Life.

Truly, We cannot imagine, why the Brethren of this persuasion, should be
Reproached, or Suspected for Antinomians.

But we also find our Honored and Worthy Brethren, who have been distinguished
by the Name of Presbyterian, on all occasions asserting and adoring the Grace
of the Holy Gospel. It were easy from the writtings of such Great men, as (to
mention only one Fratrum Dulce par,) Dr. Manton and Dr. Bates, to Extract, as
rare Schemes of Evangelical Truth, and Grace, as any of us all can desire. But
what needs it? When besides what has occurred in the Pacificatory Papers,
which the most Eminent among them have signed and sent unto those that have
been Jealous of them, their Confession of Faith, [ Se Dr. Manton, on Heb. 11.4*
And Dr. Bates, on Psalm. 130.4]

[ Conf. of Faith, Agreed by the Assembly of Divines, at Westminster. Chap. 11.
Art. 1]


expressly declares, Those whom God effectually Calls, He also freely
Justifies; not by Infusing Righteousness into them, but by Pardoning their
Sins, and by accounting and accepting their persons as Righteous; not for any
thing wrought in them, or done by them, but for Christ's sake alone; not by
Imputing* Faith it self, the Act of Believing, or any other Evangelical
Obedience to them, as their Righteousness: but by Imputing the Obedience and
Satisfaction of Christ unto them; they Receiving and Resting on Him, and His
Righteousness, by Faith, which Faith, they have not of themselves, it is the
Gift of God. Brethren that are thus persuaded, cannot wit^^out Extreme Injury,
be called, Arminians.

Briefly, We have the Testimony of that Man of an Excellent Spirit, the
Reverend Mr. How: We are all agreed, That a Sinner, can never be Saved, but he
must be Justified, and he must be Sanctified: That such Justification, and such
Sanctification, are both the Effects of most absolutely free and Sovereign
Grace: That the Righteousness is entirely and only Christ's, by which we are
Justified, and the Spirit is most entirely and only Christ's, by which we are
Sanctified: That whoever does sincerely, Evangelically Believe in God through
Christ, Receive Christ, and is United with Him; and by serious Repentance turn
to God, and having been made willing in the day of His Power, does now render
sincere Obedience to Him; Every such one is Accepted with God: others are
liable to abiding wrath: That such Faith, such Repentance, such Obedience, even
in the most entire Sincerity, are not to be considered at all, as any cause of
a Persons Acceptance with God; they Characterize the Accepted Person, but cause
it not; no internal Work of the Holy Ghost can be any part of the
Righteousness, that must Justify us before God.

Reverend Syrs* let it not be a Wonder to you, that your Divisions are so to
us, when we can discover so little, that is left for you to Divide upon. It Is a
frequent Occurrence in the World, Maxima Odia ex levissimis Causis; but when
such a Thing Occurs in the Church, it must certainly be reckoned among the
Devices of Satan, and, why may it not be ascribed unto his Energies? However,
We do not see the least Cause, for You, O ye Men of God, to be suspicious of
Each other, as having a Design to betray the Protestant Religion, and maintain
your Suspicions, with a strong Indisposition to be Cured of those Evil
Surmises: For You, to disparage the Persons and Labors and discourage the
Ministry of Each other, and seem to delight in occasions for Disparagement: For
You, to write against each other, with poinant Invectives; or, do any thing but
that whereby Men may know, that ye are the Disciples of the Patient JESUS; any
thing that cannot stand before the Thirteenth Chapter, in the First Epistle to
the Corinthians.

We do acknowledge, that in Explaining the Illustrious Article of,
JUSTIFICATION, there may be Varieties of Expression among you. But are they
such, we beseech you, as will Justify all the Discord that has arisen
thereupon? The words of the Incomparable Dr. Owen, in his Golden Book, of
Justification, [ page 79, 80]
are worthy to be written in Letters of Gold: Among persons, who agree in the
Substance of the Doctrine, there is some Difference about the Nature of Faith
whereby we are Justified, with its proper Object in Justifying, and its Use in
Justification. And an instance we have herein, not only of the weakness of our
Intellects, in the Apprehension of Spiritual Things, but also of the Remainders
of Confusion and Disorder in our Minds, at least, how true it is, that we know
only in part, while we are in this Life. For whereas, this Faith is an Act of
our minds, put forth in the way of Duty to God, yet many by whom it is
Sincerely Exerc^sed, and that continually, are not agreed either in the Nature
or proper Object of it. And notwithstanding this Difference, (...) do yet all
of them please God, in the Exercise of Faith, as it is their Duty, and have
that Respect unto its proper Object that Secures both their Justification and
Salvation. And if we cannot on this Consideration bear with, and forbear one
another, in our Different Conceptions, and Expressions of those Conceptions, it
is a Sign we have a great mind to be Contentious, and that our Confidences are
built on very weak foundations.

But how mavelous a thing is it, that your Contentions do continue, after one
side has gone so far as to tell the other, If you attentively and deliberately
weigh, what we (...) asserted on the Article of Justification, we are
Confident, it will Evidently and Undeniably appear, that we perfectly agree
with our Brethren, in the Evangelical Doctrine of Justification, even in the
very phrases, and modes of Expression?

Honored Sirs; We cannot conceal from you, some of those Afflictive
Resentments, that your Friends as far off as America, have had upon your
Contentions. We have Mourned, as often as we have Thought, how much the Dove
like Spirit of our Lord Jesus Christ, has been distasted by the over-flowings
of Gall, that we have seen, in some Disputations; and Grieved by your
Bitterness toward one another. That Spirit, in You, (O ye Followers the Lamb,)
it Lusts AGAINST Envy: You need not be told, That Variance, Emulations,
Wrath, Strife, and Envyings, are Works of the Flesh, to be mortified by that
Spirit. We have Mourned, when we have Thought, What Scandal, and what Scoffing,
has been afforded unto our Common Enemies, by the Treats that you have given
unto one another; They have had you greatly in Derision: because you have
declined from the Law of the Lord, whose Dying Prayer, and Charge it was, That
we should Love one another. But we Remember with Horror, what horrible Storms
quickly came upon the Primitive Christians, when the Feuds among them, were
such as to be Exposed upon the Pagan Theaters. We have Mourned, when we have
Thought, what Invaluable Opportunities, to get a Redress of Troublesome
Inconveniences yet remaining upon you, have been Lost, while your Time, and
Zeal has been misemploy'd, in Studying how to Trouble one another. When your
Father Abraham, was making overtures of Accommodation to his Kinsman, God
immediately showed him the Land of Promise, and said, All this Land, unto thee
will I give it. But alas, why should Good men, do any thing to delay the
Enjoyment of Promised, and Expected Salvations! We have Trembled, when we have
se^n our Nation, by a Flood of Wickedness, Ripening apace for the Judgments of
God, and for an Overflowing Scourge; and we have been Afraid, lest the Day of
Temptation, of late upon You, may have produced those miscarriages, that shall
defeat you, of a Share, in any Notable preservation, from the Day of
Destruction, that Some fear to be at hand. Were there any likelihood, that the
Fury of the Caroline Persecution, could be Revived by any future changes upon
the Nation, according to the Good Will, that High Churchmen continue to
Express unto that way of handling you, how likely would be new Sorrows to
Chastise your misimprovement of your wondrously Restored Liberty* and, How
Righteous the Dealings of God! Without such a Supposition, if little Birds will
never leave off P^cking at one another, they may soon find, if they will give
themselves the Liesure to Think, whence there may come a great Kite that may
Devour all. Or, Suppose a Plague (which Mercy forbid) should e're long break
forth, upon the bravest and biggest City in Europe; the Scratches that the
Servants of God, have been giving to one another, (which are indeed,
Abominations to be Sighed for!) would be but poor Marks, to recommend them unto
the Angels of Protection! When the Apostle could say, to the Corinthians, I
hear there be Divisions among you, it was not long before he said, Many are
Weak and Sick among you, and many Sleep. In Short, We want words, to describe
our Agony!

Now, because we hoped, it might have some little Tendency, toward the Cure of
your Dissensions, and Distemper^, to let you know, how uneasy they be to the
Churches of New England, where you are most Highly Esteemed, and where you have
whole Provinces and Colonies, of your United Brethren, the Pastors of those
Churches, that met a while since in Boston, desired some care to be taken, That
their dearest Resp^cts unto you, might some way be signified, with their Hearty
Wishes, That the Glorious Graces of the Lord Jesus Christ which adorn you, may
prevail over the Distempers of your present Controversies, and preserve among
you the Blessed Name of, UNITED BRETHREN.

Wherefore, being very sure of their Concu^rence to such Wishes, ^humbly Take
This Way, My Reverend Fathers and Brethren, to Solicit your Second Thoughts
upon your Controversies, and your laying aside all Strife* but that of Love,
May the Souls of your American Brethren, that ardently Pray and Long for it, be
Refreshed, with the Melody of your Concord; and may all the Symptoms of
Displeasure in you against one another, be forever so extinguished, that there
may therein be no Tokens of Heavens being Displeased at both. May there be so
little of any ^arring like that between Chr^sostom and Epiphanius, or like that
between Peter and Meletius, among any of you, that no man may Set at naught his
Brother, but all may follow after the Things that make for Peace, and add unto
their God^iness, B^^therly-kindness. May you, Walk together in those Greater
Things, wherein you are all Agreed, and in the Lesser ones, wherein you are not
so, yet Value one another, as we afar off do all of you, and not count the
Virtues and the Talents of the most Worthy men, to be Little worth, Except they
violently Espouse a Party.

Amen; My most Honored; and, May the God of Love and Peace hereunto say, Amen.
The God of Patience and Comfort, grant you to be like-minded one toward
another, according to Christ Jesus.

The Opportunity taken thus publicly to Address you, is from the Publication
of a Discourse lately delivered (...), which has been more than once (...) of
me, by some of the Faithful. It was fo^e^old by our famous Old Mr. Cotton, That
he Truth of the Gospel professed in these Churches, being a Pure sort of Thing,
would not be kept but in Pure Vessels; and that therefore when the Professors
of the Gospel degenerated into Impurity of Conversation, the Pure Evangelical
Truth, would soon be given up. It Is therefore but a Godly Jealousy, That in the
growing Degeneracy of our Churches, there is danger lest the Evangelical Truth,
especially, in the Grand Point of, Justification, come to be depraved, with the
manners of the Rising Generation To do something for the prevention of such a
fatal Apostasy, and for the Directing and Confirming of our Flocks in the Faith
which is our Life, this little Treatise is now sent abroad And that it may be
done the more Effectually, THREE of the most Eminent Persons in our Churches,
(One of whom, is an Aged Polycarp, that has been about Fourscore and Four
years a Disciple of the Lord Jesus Christ) have kindly favored the Treatise,
with their Attestations, That it contains no other than the Faith hitherto Held
and Preached in the Churches of New England. As being Such, (and not at all on
the account of the Unworthy Writer,) it presumes to ask a favorable Attention
and Reception, from all that may see cause to Look upon it. And, As no other,
than the poor Messenger, to bring it, You will Consider,

Honored SIRS, Your Unworthy Servant, Cotton Mather.

To the Reader.
THAT Celebrated saying of Luthers, That the Doctrine of Justification, is,
Articulus stantis aut cadentis Ecclesiae, has been found most true. It is the
Crisis, the chief indication of the Churches state, which will Stand or Fall
with this Truth. The Churches in Galatia Embraced another Gospel, when they let
go this principle, That we are Justified by the alone Righteousness of Christ
apprehended by Faith. The parting with this Truth has also proved fatal to the
Romish Synagogue: Without doubt Paul was acted by a Prophetic Spirit, when in
his Epistle to the Romans, he did so largely insist on this Subject.

We esteem the Lutheran Churches to be in several points Heterodox: And in some
things (especially in the Doctrine of Free Will) in which Luther himself (who
was a great Champion) did strenuously assert the Truth, they have deserted him.
Nevertheless, the Substance and Vitals of Religion have been preserved among
them by their steadfast profession of the Gospel, as to this Important Article.
I am sorry to find in the Acta Eruditorum, published at (...), that some of
late begin to be tainted with Notions, as if men's Own works had a Causal
influence into their Justification before God It seems the Translating of some
Books of a famous English Divine into Latin, has proved injurious to the Gospel
among those that are called Evangelicks. The Churches in this Wilderness have
not for these Threescore years been troubled with Controversies of this Nature:
Only one Gentleman many years since, published a Book abounding with Socinian
Errors, which was Judiciously and Learnedly refused by our famous Mr. Norton.

Concerning the Author of the Discourse ^mitted herewith, Or, concerning the
Discourse it self, I have (by reason of my Relation on him) nothing to say,
only that having perused it, I find that it is Consonant to the Doctrine of
Justification formerly Preached and Believed, and (through Grace) still owned
in the Churches of New England.

Increase Mather.

To the Reader.
THE Justification of a Sinner, in the Sight of God, being a matter of greatest
Importance, and Concernment to the Souls of men; it has been the Practice of
the Ministers of New England, (according to my Observation) from the Beginning,
frequently to acquaint their People with, or to insist upon the true Doctrine
of Justification, according to the word of GOD; and the Confession of our
Faith, and concurrence of the Protestant Divines and Churches in other parts of
the World: and for diverse of the most Eminent of the first Ministers to leave
upon record the same Doctrine in their Printed works for the benefit of
Posterity; Such as Mr* Hooker, Mr. Richard Mather, Mr. Chaney, Mr. Shepard and
Mr. Norton: in which Practice they have been followed by the Minister who have
succeeded them: As there was a very useful Discourse of Mr. Willard on
Justification, Published some few years ago; So here is now presented to the
Readers view, another little Treatise on the same Subject* containing no other
Doctrine of Justification, then what has been Preached and Received in
New England from the beginning.

It is true indeed that in our first times and for some few years, the Peace of
these Churches was disturbed by a Company of real Antinomians, who zealously
crying up the free Grace of God, and the Righteousness of Christ for
Justification; but grossly neglecting, slighting and vilifying the Graces and
Duties of Sanctification, they made their folly appear unto all men, and their
Religion quickly came to an end. For by their general removal out of this
Colony to Road-Island (a place where they might every one do what was right in
their own eyes) they showed themselves to be mere Libertines, and downright
Worldlings: contenting themselves with the accommodations of a fruitful Island,
they cast off the very Form of Religion; they and their Posterity (for the
generality of them) living about these threescore years past, without any
Churches, Ministers, Ordinances, or keeping of the Lords Day, only professing
Liberty of Conscience at large, that men might there be of any Religion or no
Religion, as they would themselves: this is notoriously known to all
New England. So dreadfully dangerous it is to turn the Grace of God into
Wantonness, and to pervert the Doctrine of Justification.

After that Storm was over, and ever since (in my Observation) the Ministers
and Churches of New England have retained and maintained the true Doctrine of
Justification, with an equal care of the true Doctrine and Practice of
Sanctification to be forever joined with it; professing also and proclaiming to
all men, that we take the Law of God in his Ten Commandments to be the Rule of
Life; and yet so, as to Fence against the other Extreme of Establishing any
Righteousness of our own, which is equally dangerous to the Souls of men, and
which we all naturally and habitually are inclined to, seeking to be Justified,
either by works without Christ, or some way or other joining them with Christ.
Hence they have constantly affirmed and maintained, that the Righteousness of
Christ alone, ( viz. Christ's Obedience to the Law in our Stead) is the only
Material and Meritorious cause, and Gods gracious Imputation thereof unto
Believers, is the only formal cause of our Justification; whence it is that our
Sins are pardoned, and persons are accepted as righteous unto Eternal Life.

As for the Reverend and Worthy Author of this ensuing work; after he had
published many fruitful Treatises on other Subjects, he has obliged his Native
Country by the Publishing of This, which we have now in our hands; which though
Small in Bu^k, yet is Great in Worth and Usefulness; that in my apprehension it
may be called Medulla Theologiae, in the matter of our Justification, and so
much the rather, because it is not handled in a way of Controversy, but of
clearing the Positive Truth in relation to so great a Concernment to the Souls
of men.

Truly, I am not without some hope but that (through the blessing of God) it
may be a means of some good, not only to our selves in New England, but also
to our Brethren in our Mother England, from whence we came. It has too often
been credibly reported here, that for several years, the dissenting Churches
and Ministers in London, have been under an Hour of Temptation by means of
Controversies raised amongst them, about the Doctrine of Justification,
Preaching and Writing one against another, with personal reflections, and
passionate expressions, causing Animosities, Distances, and Divisions, to the
hindering of Edification: concerning which it may be said, as the Apostle did,
My Brethren these things ought not so to be: it is to be wished they had never
been, and that they may be Ex^inguished as soon as may be, and that all Good
Means may be used for that End. And who knows but that this Servant of God,
though a Junio^ to many of the Reverend Eld^rs now contending (as J^b and his
Friends) may (as another Elihu) by ascribing all the Glory of Righteousness to
his Maker and R^deemer, and by making mention of his Righteousness, even of his
only, contribute something toward the Reconciliation, right understanding, and
good agreement of the Diss^nting Parties.

But when? O when ^ will the Lord persuade the hearts o^ his Servants, to
practice according to that professed Principle, to Bear with and Forbear one
another in different Explanations of the same Truth, when they agree in the
Main Substance thereof, according Phil. 3 15, 16. and Ephesians. 4 2, 3.

I Remember that our good old Mr. Cotton, though he differed from some of his
Brethren in the Souls Preparation for Christ, yet thus Expressed himself; Our
Brethren speak of Preparative Works, now though some declare such works to be
preparations to Conversion, which others take to be fruits of Conversion, yet
we all agree in this, that such works must be, and are, in all that are under
the Effectual working of the Word and Spirit of Christ, and so the Difference
is but Logical, and not Theologica^; for we agree in the same truth for the
main, though we Express it in a different manner. In such cases if we cannot
judge or speak one and the same truth, in one and the same way, we must learn,
Placide far contra Sentient^es, mildly b^ar with difference of judgment one
in another. And Dr Owen in his Preface before that Excellent Treatise of Mr.
Polhill on the Divine Will; though he does exp^ess his own Dissent from some of
his apprehensions in that Book, as, about the Obj^ct and Ext^nt of Redemption,
yet he thus declares himself, Bu^ where there is a^ agreement in the Substance,
and design of any Doctrine (as there is between my judgment, and what is here
solidly declared) it is our duty to bear with each other in things
Circumstantial, and different Explanations of the same truth. (An Expression
worthy to be written in letters of Gold, and graven deep in the hearts of all
good men!)

I crave leave to propound another Instance* Whereas it is clear in Scripture,
that the same Righteousness of Christ which in the Text insisted on, is called
the Righteousness of God, in other Scriptures it is called the Righteousness of
Faith, and that Faith is accounted to us for Righteousness, and its expressly
said, We are Justified by Faith: Now, the Jewish, the Popish, the Arminian and
Socinian gl^ss^s on such Scriptures being rejected as Erroneous; I have
observed many years ago, in the Sermons and Writings of our Ancient Holy and
Practical Divines, that lived in the Age before us, though they agreed in the
same Truth for the main, yet they have gone diverse ways in giving the sense of
the forenamed Scripture Expressi^ns: As now, that*

Faith is accounted to Believers for Righteousness.

Now they have said, Faith is to be understood.

1. Either as the Qualification of the Subject, or Persons to wh^^ this
Righteousness belongs; as R^m. 3 22 Unto all, and upon all that be^ieve, and
ve^se 30. By Faith, and through Faith. It is (...) Unbelievers are Condemned;
therefore (...) qualified with the Grace of Faith (...) and (...) be Justified.

2. Or in relation to its Object, the Lord Jesus Christ. Jer. 23.6. He shall be
called, The Lord our Righteousness: and 1 Cor. 1.30. He is made of God
Righteousness unto us. Hence to be Justified by Faith, and to be Justified by
Christ, are made to be all one, ( Gal. 2.16, 17.) because Faith finds that
Righteousness by and for which we are Justified in Christ alone.

3. Or by virtue of Union with Christ, it being the nature of Faith to Unite
the Soul unto Jesus Christ: Hence the Name of Christ, the Lord our
Righteousness, Jer. 23.6. is given to the Church, [Tho' some indeed choose to
read that place, He who shall call it is, The Lord our Righteousness.]
the whole body of believers, and every believing Soul) Jer. 33 16. She sha^^
be called the Lord our Righteousness. When we are found in Christ, we have his
Righteousness, (we have a Propriety in it, the p^ssession of i^, and the use
and good of it for our Justification^. Phil. 3 9) We are made the Righteousness
of God in him. 2 Cor 5 last not in our s^lves bu^ in him; by Virtue of a
Mar^iage Union with Christ, whence we have Communion with him in his
Righteousness (as all in all other saving good:) it is His to Glorify him, and
ours to Justify us.

4 Or as Faith is an Instrumental Cause (as some) or an Instrumen^ (as ^^hers)
of receiving, apprehending and applying Christ and his Righteousness to our
selves, for the use and good of our own Souls: As the Hand is the Bodies
Instrument to receive a Gift; so Faith is the Souls Instrument to receive
Christ and his Righteousness, as the Gift of God unto us. Joh. 1.12 Phil.
3.9.12 Romans 5 17. we are said to receive the gift of Righteousness.

5. Or as Faith is the Condition of the Covenant of Grace We read the very word
[ Condition] in Luke 14.32 [ Conditions of Peace] And for the thing, it is
evident of it self, because there cannot be a Covenant without a Condition; our
blessed Savior expressed the Sum of the Gospel, or Covenant of Grace, in a
Conditional Promise, Mark 16.16. He that Believes shall be Saved We cannot
partake the Spiritual Good of the Promise, except we perform (...) Condition of
it, though it is the Grace of God that must enable us thereunto. Phil. 2.13.
Ephesians. 2.7, 8. Col 2.1, 2.

Justification is one of the Principal blessings of the Covenant of Grace,
which cannot be enjoyed but in the way and by the means of believing

Now I b^seech you, why may not all these be acknowledged as O^thodox? Seeing
they include one another, and give light one to another, and the last includes
all the former? If some insist more upon one, and others insist more upon
another, why should that be troublesome to any, when they all agree in the same
Truth.

Finally, My hearts desire and Prayer to God in relation to the Learned and
Pious Author of this work is, that he may be graciously preserved in Life and
Health, and enabled by constant Supplies of the Spirit of God, to Write Many
such Useful Books as this, for the Glory of God and Edification of his People,
and that he would Bless this to the attaining of those Good Ends whereunto it
is designed.

John Higginson.
September 28. 1699.
To the Reader.
THough man's fearful Apostasy has not extinguished in him his eager cravings
after Happiness; yet it has not only involved him in Infelicity, but also left
him in the dark, and utterly at a loss about the true way of his recovery: And,
whereas Life and Immortality are brought to light by the Gospel, and men are
pointed by it how to obtain deliverance from Misery, and secure to themselves
Eternal Blessedness; yet such is the folly of the greatest part of them that
sit under the external dispensation of it, that they pervert it to their own
Destruction, and make it to them a Savor of Death, whiles, instead of being
directed by it to the Grace of God, on which alone their Salvation depends,
they seek to turn it into a New Covenant of Works; or else abuse the Grace of
it to encourage themselves in an Vng^^ly Life. How few there are that do at
this day Doctrinally hold the Truth as it is in Jesus, but do verge, either to
Pelagian or Arminian tenants on the one hand, o^ Antin^mian and L^b^^^ine on
the other, is lam^n^ably obvious. And if ever there was a peculiar necessity of
endeavoring to state the Truth right between these, and call upon Christians
to see to their principles and practices in this regard, it is now. It is
certain, that there is but One way for fallen man to be Saved, and that is by
Christ: It is equally certain, that they who would be Saved by Christ, must be
entitled to his Righteousness; and that they may so be, they must utterly
forgo their own: and Christ's Righteousness becomes ours only by Faith on our
part, which is thus derived to us by Gods gracious Imputation, according to the
tenor of the New Covenant. There was a Righteousness required of man, by the
first Covenant, under the penalty of Death on defect; his failing in it brings
him under Condemnation: If he be Justified, it must be consonant to the Law
that Condemns him; he must then be found Righteous, else he cannot be
Justified. That he may be so, there must be a Righteousness that answers all
the demands of that Law; and this Righteousness must be his, else it will not
stand for him: he has none such Personal, nor is capable of it, as the case at
present stands, since there is not only the Command to be perfectly obeyed, but
the forfeiture to be Satisfied for, which he is every way incapable of
complying with in himself. It is therefore only the Righteousness of Christ
that will do; and that this may be his, it must be Imputed unto him by God,
which is only done upon his Believing* this then alone can be his Justifying
R^ghteousness before God. But this di^chargeth him not from the Law as a Rule,
but adds new obligations to his performing of sincere Obedience to it: and
though it be not a Condition of Justification, it is yet a Qualification of one
that is Justified, and without which he cannot be Saved, that he be Sanctified
throughout. A mistake then in this affair, is of no less Consequence than the
loss of a Soul. The ensuing Discourse on this weighty and necessary Subject
will therefore be very welcome to any that are duly concerned about their own
Salvation, and desirous to be guided in the way to it. There is no Justified
Believer but will be able to Seal to the Truths here declared, on his own
Experience; and the Awakened Sinner, who is Sollicitous to be rightly informed
in his greatest concern, will here have a clue to lead him right, and help him
to steer safe between the rocks on the one hand, and the quicksands on the
other. For my own part, I must profess, that I was abundantly satisfied in, and
not a little affected with the delivery of these Truths in the Preaching; the
solidity of the matter, agreeable to the Gospel of Christ, and calculated to
the sound Judgment of our most Excellent Reformers: and the manner, being with
great Solemnity, for the Awakening of men's Consciences, and engaging to a
serious Examination of their Foundation, and careful endeavor not to be found
in any other Righteousness in the great Day: So that I was glad to hear of the
making them more Capable of being a Public benefit. The Doctrine here
Delivered, is what was Declared to the Saints of Old; it is the Faith, in which
alone I have any Hope of Eternal Life: If these Truths fall, the Gospel must
fall with them. If the Errors of the times draw men off from this Foundation,
they will be found on the Sand when the Storm comes, and then Woe to them. I am
satisfied if the Righteousness of Christ were more prized by us, there would be
more real Holiness Practiced among us. My request to God is, that He will
Succeed these Faithful Labors of his Servant, with all his other Industrious
Endeavors, for much Good and Edification: And for the Reverend Author, my wish
is, Serus in C^lum redeas: Let God Bless his indefatigable thirsting to do Good
in his Generation, with a long continuance in his Harvest, and daily experience
of plentiful Success.

The Prayer of one who is, Less than the least of Saints, Samuel Willard.

The Everlasting Gospel.
ROMANS I.17. The Righteousness of God is Revealed from Faith to Faith.


THE mind of man, is never Exercised about a more Impor^^nt CASE than This; How
may Sinful Man be made Righteous? And the Mind of every Reasonable man must by
Thoughts upon this Important CASE, be often cast into Agonies. God, that forms
the Spirit of man within him, has formed in the Spirit of man a Conscience,
which, in all men that are not Stup^fied and Brutified with Senseless
wickedness, does with distress think upon that Great Question, How may I arrive
to a Righteousness, that may Entitle me unto the Favors ^^ God? Unto this
Great Question of every Awakened mind, there is a Satisfying Answer given in
the Gospel of our Lord JESUS CHRIST; and there is no little Demonstration and
Confirmation of the Christian Religion in this Glory of the Gospel, That no
Religion else, gives an Answer to it, that will in any measure Satisfy. The
Superstitions Practiced among the ungospellized Nations of the Earth, to obtain
a Righteousness before God, are indeed so very Ridiculous, that no part of
mankind, except strangely Enchanted, could be contented with such l^e and Fu^il
Practices. The very Recital of them, would be a Comedy. But the methods of
obtaining Righteousness, prescribed in the Christian Religion, are full of an
evidently Glorious Majesty: There is nothing in them, unworthy of a God.

That Renowned Preacher of the Gospel, our Apostle Paul, therefore tells the
Church of Rome, That he is not Ashamed of Preaching the Gospel. I pray, Sir;
Why not? He Replye^, Because it is that which the Salvation of Sinful man, will
Turn upon his Receiving, or his Rejecting of: And this is manifest, because the
only way, how Sinful man may attain unto Righteousness is therein Revealed.

The Righteousness for Sinful man Revealed in the Gospel, is called, The
Righteousness of God; And when it is here said, That it is Revealed from Faith
to Faith, it is an Expression full of Emph^tical and Remarkable Significations.
But the Sum of them all is, That by Faith, we Apprehend this Righteousness: And
that there is to Faith Revealed, the Righteousness, wherein by Faith we are
Interested

In the Epistle to the Church of Rome, the Article of a Sinners being made
Righteous through Faith in the Righteousness of God, is by the Spir^t of
Prophecy most agreeably insisted on: The Holy Spirit foresaw, that the Church
of Rome, would fall into an horrible Apostasy, which would very much ly in
their confounding that very Article. It Is an Article in which lies the very
Marrow of the G^spel! Give Attention, O my Hearers, Give a Great Attention to
this most Glorious Gospel of God; And, Hearken, O People, Every one of You.

That which now Entertains you, is this Doctrine of God your Savior.

The Righteousness of God Revealed in the Gospel is Apprehended by the Faith of
Every Sinful man that is ever made a Righteous one.

That Illustrious CASE; How the JUSTIFICATION of a Sinner is brought about?
must ^e now discoursed and discussed.

The First part of our Discourse must be, to Explain this Gospel in several
Propositions.

PROPOSITION. I.
A man cannot be Righteous before God, and Accepted and Entitled unto Life,
without the Righteousness of God Imputed unto him.

Now, to set this All concerning Truth, in a fair View before you all, it must
be in general premised, That Righteousness is that full conformity and
Obedience unto the Law of God, which gives a Right unto the Benefits, that are
promised unto such Obedience.

More particularly,

We are to know, That God gave unto man, His Commandment in the way of a
Covenant. The Commandment thus given by God unto man, is contained in the Moral
Law God by His Commandment required man to perform all the Duties of Piety, of
Equity, and of Cha^ity, without the least Failure in any circumstance. Love to
God, Hope on God, and Joy in God, with an Observance of Every Thing that He
shall either by the Light of Nature, or by further Command, enjoin upon us; And
all This, without the least, Imperfection, or Interruption* This is the Moral
Law. And this Commandment was put into the Form of a Covenant, by Ratifying it
with Promises, and Threatenings: Promises of Blessedness, as the Recompense of
Well-doing; Threatenings of Misery, upon the least Rebellion. So we read, in
Matthew. 19 17. If thou will Enter into Life, keep the Commandments And so we
read, in Gal. 3.10. Cursed is Every One that continues not in all Things.

We are to know, That the Commandment given by God unto man, in that Covenant,
is the Rule of Righteousness. That Righteousness whereon is our Claim to
Happiness, must needs relate unto some Rule or other. Indeed Righteousness is
but a Regular Acting, an Acting according to Rule. The Righteousness of man,
must ly in his Agreeableness unto the Rule that God has given him. Now the Law
which God gave unto man, at his First Creation, is the Rule of his
Righteousness; yea, It Is an Eternal, (...) Inviolable, an U^^lterable Rule. Is
that Law abrogated! No, Nor never shall it be abrogated throughout Eternal
Ages: God will forever Magnify it, and make it Honorable. The substance of
this Law, is, That man do universally and unchangeably cleave to God, with all
his Faculties, is his Best Good, and his Last End, and his Only Lord; and Obey
His Will in all things that he knows to be so, in which Way soever, and at
what Time soever, it be made known unto him. And as long as God shall be God,
and Man be Man, this Law will be in force; Take away this Law, and we have no
standard of Righteousness left unto us. To imagine this Law so divested of its
Power, to demand perfect Obedience, that What is not so, shall be accepted as
Righteousness according to Law, is to speak Evil of the Law. Hence we thus
Read, in Romans 3.31. Do we make void the Law through Faith? God Forbid: Yea, we
Establish the Law.

We are to know finally, That man by Sinning against the Commandment of God, is
fallen short of Righteousness. Truly, No man is able to come up Exactly unto
the will of God, in any one Point of the Law; but his Carnal mind is full of
Enmity against that Will. And if he could exactly come up to it in every point
of the Law, yet That could not make A^onement for those Violations of it,
wherewith every man is Chargeable. The First man immediately Sinned against
God, in One remarkable Instance, wherein the Sovereign Lo^^ made a Trial of his
Fidelity. Immediately poor man, lost not only his Innocence, but also his
Ability He fell short of the Glory of God; and all his Offspring sell in him
and with him. Hence we thus read, in Romans 5.6. We are without Strength, and
Ungodly.

Wherefore, That the Elect of God may be ^aved from their Sins, and that the
Justice as well as the Mercy, the Wisdom, as well as the Justice of God, may be
glorified in our Salvation; Behold, what a Wonderful Thing is come to pass!

First. There is a glorious Righteousness, which our Lord JESUS CHRIST has
brought in before God, for the use of His chosen People An Angel from Heaven
once told this thing to a man Beloved of God, in Dan. 9.24. The Messiah, shall
bring in Everlasting Righteousness.

Now the Righteousness thus brought in by our Lord Jesus Christ, is not His
Essential Righteousness, or the Holiness, which as He is God, belongs unto Him.
It Is His Mediatorial Righteousness which our Lord brings in for us, or a
Righteousness wherein He acts as a Mediator between God and Us. And yet this
Expression also is too Wide; The whole Righteousness of our Lord, in the
Discharge of His Med^^torial Office never can be made ours. More particularly
then; It Is that part of our Lords Mediatorial Righteousness, which belongs to
His Priestly Office, that He brings in for us. The Righteousness of our Lord as
He is our Prophet, and our King, it is for our Advantage. It Is for our Advantage,
that, as a Prophet, He Speaks in Righteousness, and as a King, He Reigns in
Righteousness. But what He does Righteously in the Execution either of His
Prophetical, or His Kingly Office, is not the Righteousness intended for us. It
is only as He is a Priest, that He brings in a Righteousness for His People.
But still this Expression likewise is too wide. There are some things done for
us, by our Lord, as He is our Priest, as namely, His Intercession with God,
which are no part of the Righteousness, that He brings in for us. But then
still more particularly; This Righteousness is the Sponsory Righteousness of
our Lord, or the Righteousness which our Lord in the Capacity of a Surety, has
wrought out, and so brought in, for those, in whose room He became a Surety.

You are to Remember, That the Foundation, upon which our Lord Jesus Christ
brings in a Righteousness for His Chosen People, is the Eternal Covenant of
Redemption, made between God and Him. Albeit some with Impiety enough, put the
Name of A Fiction, on that Eternal Covenant of Redemption, which God the Father
made with our Lord Messiah; yet we cannot read the Eighty Ninth Psalm, or the
Forty Ninth and Fifty Third Chapters of Isaiah, or a considerable part of the
New Testament, without Believing it. Yea, that Covenant, is the Foundation of
our whole Salvation, and most particularly of our Lords Coming to answer the
Law of God, for our Justification In that Eternal Covenant, our Lord Jesus
Christ is by God Constituted a Surety for us. The Lord-Messiah, is now
Expressly called, in Heb. 7.22. A Surety: Which is as much as to say, That He
came under Obligation, to pay our Debt unto God. And though this Name, is but
once in the New Testament, put upon our Savior, yet the Thing thereby
intended, is ^ss^rted the whole Bible over* Well; That our Lord, in pursuance
of this Covenant, might actually appear in the Quality of our Surety, He became
a Man. His mere becoming a Man, or, His Incarnation simply Considered, seems
therefore no part of the Righteousness, which our Lord has provided for us.
But in short, That Righteousness is, His perfect Conformity to the Law of God,
which in becoming a Man, born of a Woman, He became Subject unto. Now, there
are Two parts of this Righteousness. We owe a Double Debt unto the Law: A Debt
of Satisfaction, and a Debt of Observation. As Criminal Creatures, we Owe a
Debt of Satisfaction: as Rational Creatures, we Owe a Debt of Observation, to
the Law of our God. Both the Penalty and the Precept of the Law, are alike
Requisite now to be complied withal, for the Honor of that glorious Governor
of the world, who gave the Law. Accordingly our Lord Jesus Christ, has
answered the Law for us, and in Answering it has fulfi^led all Righteousness.
Our Surety had a most Holy Heart, and led a most Holy Life* The Exceeding Broad
Law of God, could never tax Him for any thing amiss: And He then endured a most
bitter Death, even the Substance of that very Curse, which was by the Law of
God, our due for our Sin. Instead of all other Sacrifice and Offering, our Lord
Messiah said, in Heb. 10.7. Lo, I Come to do thy Will, O God. Our Lord Jesus
Christ, has Endured the Paenalty of the Law for us. The Sufferings of our
Lord, made a full Satisfaction, for all the wrong done by our Sin to the Law of
God We are advised in 2 Cor. 5.21. God made Him to be sin for us, who knew no
sin. And our Lord Jesus Christ, ha^h performed the Praecept of the Law for us.
The Actions of our Lord, have been a complete Observation of the Law, and of
all that is Forbidden, and all that is Required, in it. We are advised, in Joh
8.29. He did always the Things that pleased the Father. The Law which condemns
man to Die, still commands him to Do. Through the Sufferings of our Lord, our
Sins are pardoned; but through the Doings of our Lord, we recover the Heirship
of a Kingdom. Indeed mere Sufferings, as such, are no obedience. Take the
Testimony of Grotius, about the Faith of the primitive Church in this point:
Cum duo nobis peperisse Christum dixerimus, Impunitatem et praemium, illud
satisfactioni, hoc merito Christi, distinct tribuit vetus Ecclesia. According
to Law, Happiness is due to Righteousness Well; we are sure [from Gal. 4 4.]
That our Lord Jesus Christ, was made under that very Law, from the Curse
whereof we are delivered by His answering of it. And the Righteousness of the
Law, we are sure [from Romans 8 4] was fulfilled, by the Son of God, coming in
the likeness of sinful F^esh. Our Lord Jesus Christ, by His perfect
Righteousness, may then lay claim to Happiness. For whom? Even for those, for
whom God has Admitted Him to stand as a Surety. God put our Lord under the Law,
that He might thus furnish us, with a Righteousness, in all things answering
the Law; a Righteousness, which Fallen man condemned by the Law, could by no
means furnish himself withal; a Righteousness wherein the Honor of the Law,
and of the God that gave the Law, is consulted infinitely.

Secondly. The Faithful People of the Lord Jesus Christ, have His Glorious
Ri^h^eousness by God Imputed unto them. Thus we a^e taught, in Romans 3.22. The
Righteousness of God, is by the Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all, and upon all
them that beli^ve. And how comes it so to be: It Is by a Gracious Imputation of
God. The Phrase, as well as the Thing, is all over Scriptural: it is derided
indeed, and blasphemed, by an Unrighteous Generation: but those men do Err not
knowing the Scriptures; or, which is worse, do Sin against their Knowledge of
the Scriptures. Is it not expressly written, in Romans 4 6, 11. God Imputes
Righteousness unto a man without works: And, Righteousness is Imputed unto all
that believe? Now, when we say, The Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ, is
Imputed unto us, the meaning of it, is, That God, our Judge, Looks on it as
belonging to us, and pleadable by us, in order to our being Judicially dealt
withal, according to the merit of it. It is an Act of mere Grace, in our most
Gracious God, by which He makes unto us, an Effectual Grant, of that
Righteousness, which our Lord Jesus Christ, in Answering the Law, under which
He voluntarily put Himself, has provided for us, A Righteousness, which
antecedently to the Imputation was not ours, is now so made ours, that for the
sake thereof, we are both Absolved from the Curse of the Law, and Adjudged unto
the Reward of the Heavenly Inheritance. This Imputation proceeds not on a wrong
Judgment, That our Lord Jesus Christ has done what we did in our Rebellion, and
that we have done what He did in His Obedience. But the Imputation makes that
become ours, which was not so till, and which is not so, but by, the Imputation
Through such an Imputation was brought about the Justification which is the first
whereof we have any Express Record in the Book of God. [Gen. 15.6.]

And it is the Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ it self, that is Imputed.
It is not enough to say, That the Benefits of it are Communicated unto us: For
that is no Imputation. How can there an Imputation of a thing, and the thing it
self not Imputed: Either the Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ must be
Imputed unto us, Conferred upon us, Reckoned as ours, when we are made
Righteous; or else a Righteousness of our own Operation: But God knows we have
None of our own. The Oracles of God have therefore told us, that herein, We
receive the Gift of Righteousness through Jesus Christ. And by this Gift of God,
the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, becomes as really our Propriety, as
if we our selves in our own persons had wrought it. The Right of Inheritance,
the Lawyers tell us, is the best Right, that any can have; when God has made
over to us the Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ, it is as much ours, as
if we came to it, by the Right of Inheritance. Hence we read, in Heb. 11 7 Of
an Heir of the Righteousness by Faith. But by the Gracious Imputation of God,
the Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ being made ours, we now stand
Righteous before God: And as we read, in Romans 5 19 By the Obedience of One,
many are made Righteous. In that Righteousness, we stand before that Righteous
God, who Loves the Righteous: And in it, we not only have a Release from the
Sentence of Death, and Hell, which belonged unto us for our Sin, but we have
also a Title to all the Blessedness of the Righteous: And, Grace Reigns through
Righteousness unto Eternal Life, by Jesus Christ our Lord. As the Names of all
the Twelve Children of Israel were Engraven on the Two Stones which were set in
the Shoulder-pieces, of the High Priests curious and costly Ephod; thus our
Lord Jesus Christ, appearing before God, in the Ephod of His Righteousness, His
whole Israel, do by Name also appear in that Righteousness. But because the
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ is made the Christians, it is an
impertinent Cavil, that then the Christian is made a Savior of others, as is
the Lord Jesus Christ Himself It Is the Righteousness of our Savior, so far as
we may claim ou^ own B^essedness upon it, and not the Saviorship it self, that
is Imputed unto us. The Saviorship, and Suretiship, is proper to our Lord
Himself, and because the Virtue which is in the Head is conveyed unto the
Members, it is frivolous thence to argue, that every one of the Members is
thereby made an Head unto the rest.

Thirdly. Their Righte^usness is of me, says the Lord JEHOVAH; The
Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ, by the Imputation whereof His people
are made Righteous, is, The Righteousness of God. It is often, and just^y
called so But why called so? Why; par^ly* because it is a Righteousness
contrived by God, Appointed by God, and Approved by God. The Illustrious
Contrivance, of, Man made Righteous in Christ, is therefore styled, in Luke
7.30. The Counsel of God. The way of Saving men from Guilt and Wrath by the
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, no man durst, or could have thought of
it, if God Himself had not first proposed it; And if we have the Confidence to
come unto God, in any other way but This, God will Reject all our Confidence,
we shall not prosper in it. But chiefly; Because the Lord Jesus Christ, who
has prepared for us this Righteousness, is God, very God, even by Nature God A
man who Denies the Godhead of the Lord Jesus Christ, cannot but miss of
Righteousness, and miserably Die in his Sins. They that Follow after
Righteousness, must Seek a JEHOVAH for it, or they do nothing. We are therefore
informed, in Jer. 23.6. This is His Name whereby He shall be called, JEHOVAH
our Righteousness. The Taghmical Art so happily of late Revived, and Improved,
will demonstrate, from the Rules of the Hebrew Accentuation, that this Text, is
thus to be read; and not as the Modern Jews would have it, Jehovah shall call
Him, Our Righteousness An Inexpressible Dignity is now put upon the
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ: It is Jehovah, that has wrought it.
The Man that has got Ready a Righteousness for us, is God as well as Man. It
must needs be a Righteousness above all available to purchase our Everlasting
Blessedness; He that wrought it, is God over all Blessed for ever. We have now
a Righteousness, arising from the Tenor of a Life, that was, The Life of God,
and from the Shedding of a Blood that was, The Blood of God; namely, Of that
Man, who is God, the True God, the Great God, and God the Mighty.

There is therefore a Transcendent Excellency in the Righteousness of our Lord
Jesus Christ. The Hebrews, when they describe Things of a Surpassing
Excellency, set them forth by setting the Name of God upon them; The
Righteousn^ss of our Lord Jesus Christ, may well be called, The Righteousness
of God; for, There is none like it; It has a Divine, and a Matchless
Excellency. Let men invent never so various, and never so curious ways, for
the Reconci^iation of a Sinner unto God, I may say unto you, I show unto you a
more Excellent Way A man that is made an Owner of this Righteousness, will one
day go to be among the Angels of God; and at his first coming among those
Bright Angels of Heaven, he may say, Syrs, Here is one come among you, that was
as abominable a Sinner as ever any in the world, and yet I have as good a
Righteousness as any of you!

Certainly, Those Men do not Act like Men, that are not now solicitous to be
possessed of such a Righteousness. How to become the Actual partakers of this
Possession, is now to be declared unto you.

PROPOSITION II.
The Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ is Apprehended by Faith, in order
to our being made Righteous by it.

Such a Grace as Faith, is produced in the Heart of every Elect person, when
God Effectually Calls that person home unto Himself. A special Design and
Business of this Faith, is, To Apprehend the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and that Rig^teousness is Actually made Ours, in and by Faith so
Apprehending of it. A Justifying Faith does many Glorious Things; But Faith as
Justifying does consist, in the Hearts Approving and Admiring the way of a
Sinners coming to Righteousness and Sa^vation by the Lord Jesus Christ, as it is
propounded in the Gospel, and Acquiescing in it; And it is to be D^fined unto
this purpose, It Is a Receiving of, and a Relying on, the Gift of Righteousness
from God, by our Lord Jesus Christ. Or, if we bring you the D^finition of it,
given by some famous French Divines, It Is the Flight of a penitent Sinner to the
Mercy of God, in Christ; I know who will tell us, There is more Sense and Truth
in it, than in Twenty other, that seem more Accurate. It is only as doing This,
that Faith, and no other Grace, but Faith does Justify u^.

There are these Conclusions, that now call for an Acknowledgment.

First, Mere Natural Reason, without Revelation, both External, and Internal
Revelation, would never understand the Mystery of a Sinners being made
Righteous, by the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ. For the Righteousness
of God, wonderfully to become the Righteousness of a Sinner; It is most
Reasonably called, The Wisdom of God, in a Mystery; and, The Mystery, which
has been Hid in God. It is unto Humane Reason Incomprehensible. The Reason of
Angels does Admire it, and Adore it, That God should be Manifest in Flesh, to
bring it about, for Sinful Flesh to be Justified before God. Much more then it
is above the Reason of silly, shallow, sinful Mortals! If a man come to
understand any thing of this Mystery, it may be said unto him, as in Matthew.
16.27. Flesh and Blood has not Revealed it unto thee. We are beholden to a
Revelation from Heaven, for all that we know, of the way to become Righteous.
It Is an Impious Thing, to imagine, That without the Gospel, a man may Learn how
to be Righteous. No, If our Gospel be Hid, it is Hid unto them that are Lost.
Poor man in his Fall, cast himself into such a desperate and complicate
Wretchedness, that nothing Understood by man could Rescue him: He must
Eternally perish, if the Infinite Understanding of God alone, did not put forth
it self to Rescue him.

The way for a Sinner to be made Righteous, is laid so High, that no Humane
Reason could Ever have reached it. When this Mystery come^ to be discovered in
the Gospel, no man can say I thought afore^^^d that this would be the (...)
This Mystery wa^ adjusted in the Breast of (...) Almighty God alone. And its
being laid (...) High, is to lay man Law; it is that Man (...) be kept in the
closer Dependence on God ^^lone, for the Discovering of it. Yea, Thoug^ the
Gospel do discover this Mystery, yet no thir^^ will satisfy the Heart of a
Sinner in it, unto the Spirit of God, which Dictated this Gospel* assure him of
it, with a Supernatural work upon him. The Righteousness of the Lord Jesus
Christ for an Unrighteous and Self-Ruin'd Sinner, is one of those Things,
whereof (...) are told, in 1 Cor. 2.14 The Natural man cannot know them, for
they are Spiritually Discerned Humane Reason Illuminated by the bare
Dispensations of the Gospel, may take in many Things, about the way of a
Sinners being made Righteous by the Lord Jesus Christ. But Reason alone, will not
persuade a man of this Thing, That God can find in his Heart, for to Save a
Sinner on the Account of the Lord Jesus Christ, and of His Righteousness alone.
Vain men may talk, It Is the Easiest thing in the World for a man thus to cast
himself on the Righteousness of Christ, and multitudes of them that are gone to
Hell have done it! But these men have sad cause to Search their own Hearts over
again, Whether they have ever done it themselves? I re^member, I have Read of a
carnal man, who having a Friend in Despair, flouted at it, saying* The person's
well Enough, only they wont Believe. The man soon after this, fell into Terror
of Conscience himself; and being then bidden, To ^^lieve; What? cannot you
Believe? with Anguishy Despair, he cried out, Oh, There are Millions of ^in^
that I have been guilty of, and God has let ^^^se all the Devils of Hell upon
my Soul; and how, (...), how can I Believe? When a Sinner comes to be
Enlightened and Affrightned, and in horror of Soul for all his horrible Sins, it
cannot enter i^to his Heart now, that God should be free to Forgive him, and
Relieve him, only for the sake of what Another has done for him. Such an
Astonishing Mercy of God, cannot be conceived by a Distressed Sinner; and he
will not be pacified without some Righteousness, and Worthiness of his own, to
Commend him unto God. Hence it is said, in 1 Cor. 1.18. The Preaching of the
Cross, is to them that Perish, Foolishness. A Sinner will count it Foolishness,
for a man to venture himself wholly upon the Righteousness, of one who dyed
upon a Cross, and who made a Righteousness for us by doing so. It Is the Almighty
Spirit of God alone, who can do that Thing in Joh. 16.10. Convince the World of
Righteousness, and Convince a man that the Righ^^^usness of the Lord Jesus
Christ will be sufficient for him.

Secondly, A Sinners Prejudice against being made Righteous, by the
Righteousness of the Lord ^^sus Christ, will never be removed, until Faith
(...) infused into his mind, by an Operation of God. There is a Cursed Pride in
the Hearts of men* and our Proud Hearts will not easily submit unto the way of
being made Righteous, by the Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ. This (...)
the Crime that a vast part of mankind is to be Indicted for; in Romans 10 3. They
have not sub^mitted themselves unto the Righteousness of God* The First Sin of
man, was a setting up himse^^ instead of God; and the Pride whereinto man has
Damned himself, ever since disposes him to Self-Exaltation. Unregenerate man
has the Disposition of him, that said, Cae^um gratis non accepiam; I Will not have
Heaven, except I may pay something for it my self. About the Heart of a Sinner,
we may say, as in Isa. 16.6. We have heard of his Pride, He is very Proud: And
there is nothing wherein it appears Prouder, than in ^ffectations of Saving
himself. That Hateful an^ Hellish Lust, of Spiritual Pride is marvellously
gratified, by a Sinners opinion of making himself Righteous before God. But for
a Sinner to cast himself upon the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ alone,
in a way* where All Boasting is Excluded, alas, his Pride will not let him come to
that. There is abundance of Submission and Self-denial, which in the many
Changes of our Lives, we are put upon; but the Proud Heart of a Sinner will
sooner Submit unto any Penan^ whatsoever, than unto being made Righteous, by
the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ alone* and by none of his own. The
Antipathy (...) the Heart of man against it, cannot in an^ words be Livelily
enough painted out. (...) amazing to see, how far in Devotions, how far in
Austerities, the Disposition in men, to make a Righteousness for themselves
will carry them. And Satan setts in, to inspire and influence, and invenome the
Proud Heart of man, with yet more of this Antipathy to the way of God. The
Serpent beguiles men, by alienating them from the Simplicity of this Gospel.
When once a Sinner is made Righteous, by the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus
Christ, he is forever delivered from the Dominion of the Devil; he is now a Son
of God, and no more a Slave of the Devil* The Devil is therefore Extremely
concerned, that the Sinner may never fully close with the true way of
Righteousness. He Will be willing that the Sinner should come to any thing, and
Reform a thousand Ill Things, and Perform ten thousand good ones, and live like
an Angel; so he may but be kept from This One Thing after all. We find in 2 Cor
4 4. The God of this world has Blinded the minds of them that believe not,
lest the Light of this Glorious Gospel of Christ, should shine into them. How
many Objections, what Subtle Evasions, does the Devil insinuate into the minds
of men, against this way of coming unto Righteousness! Learned Writers have
therefore Labored with Exquisite Compositions, to confound the Gospel Truth,
of our being made Righteous, by the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ
alone. Their Elaborate oppositions to this Truth of God, are not easily
Refelled: But, There Is the Hand of Joab in them! The Sinner cannot bear to let
go all that is Laudable in himself, because if that be gone, he must be very
Vile indeed: but man don't Love to be Vile! Wherefore, like a Drowning man, he
will catch at any Straw. First he will Try to fetch out a Righteousness from
the Works of the Law. When that fails, he will Try whether the Works of the
Law, and the Grace of the Gospel together will not help him, to a
Righteousness. If that fails, he will Try whether the Works of the Gospel, may
not be joined unto the Righteousness, of the Lord Jesus Christ, and come in,
upon His Account, as the Matter of our Righteousness. Those Things, which want
to be Justified themselves, must needs be brought in (...) the matter by which
we are Justified! Thus he will turn, and wind, and make all the Shifts imaginable,
rather than come to the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ alone. Thus it
will be, till Faith be wrought in the Heart of a Sinner, by the working of the
mighty power of God.

Thirdly. We are not made Righteous by the Righteousness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, before, or without, but upon our Faith Apprehending of it. By Faith and
on our part only by Faith we come to be made partakers of the Righteousness,
which our Lord Jesus Christ has provided for us. It is therefore called, The
Righteousness of Faith. Why, God never gives the Righteousness of the Lord
Jesus Christ unto any man, without giving him Faith to Take the Gift of
Righteousness. The Righteousness is indeed got ready for us, without and before
any Act of ours, but we are not actually Invested with a Power to claim the
Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ for us, until with the Heart man Believe
unto Righteousness. We are told, in Romans 4 24 It shall be Imputed, if we
Believe. This is the Everlasting language of that Book of Life, our Bible. And
we are all over the Gospel taught that thing, in Romans 5.1. Being Justified by
Faith. Indeed he that weighs, what are the properties of a Condition, in the
sense of the Civil Law, will easily decline saying, That Faith is the proper
Condition of our Justification. However, in the sense that it is commonly
taken, Even That also is to be Asserted. But it will suffice, if we say, That
Faith is the Instrument of our Justification. By Faith we Accept and Apply the
Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ, for our Justification before God: And
God will not permit us to be called, Righteous, until the Faith to do This, be
given us Faith does not Justify us, as it is a Work; No, It Is Instrumentally,
and Relatively, and because it carries us unto the Righteousness of our Lord
Jesus Christ alone, for our Justification. By Faith, according to the
Ordination of God, our Union with the Lord Jesus Christ, is accomplished. In
that Union, the Lord Jesus Christ and Believers coalesce into one Mystical
Person; The Holy Spirit in that Glorious Head above measure, does inhabit
Believers in a measure, and produce between them the Union, that is between the
Head and the Members. In this Union is founded the Imputation by which, He that
knew no Sin, having been made Sin for us, we are made the Righteousness of God
in Him. Accordingly, Our Lord Jesus Christ, with a wonderful prevention of His
Holy Spirit first lays Hold on us, to make us Prize Him, and Choose Him, and
Trust in Him for His Righteousness. And then we by Faith lay Hold on Him,
crying, In this Lord let me have Righteousness! And now the Lord Jesus Christ
Himself, with His Righteousness is made over unto us forever.

It Is true; We sometimes read, That Faith is Imputed for, [or, To]
Righteousness. It Is not unlikely that one Thing intended in it, may be This;
That though Faith be the Gift of God unto us, yet God Reckons this Faith our
own; for except the Faith be Reckoned our own, how should it be subservient at
all, to bring unto us the Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ. But the main
thing intended is, That the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ apprehended
by Faith is Reckoned, for our Righteousness: Faith is here put for the Object
of it. There is nothing more usual, than to speak that of the Instrument, which
is meant of the Object, that is by that Instrument applied unto. Does any man
Scruple to say, The Hand feeds the Body? why so? Because the Hand is that which
takes the Meat, that Feeds the Body. Faith Justifies a man, even as the Hand
Feeds the Body. Our Faith is not the very Thing, that God Reckons to be our
Righteeousness! For, our Faith is our own; but the Righteousness, whereby God
is rendered propitious to us, is not our own. Our Faith at best is not Perfect;
but it is an affront unto Heaven, to dream of standing before it, in any but a
Perfect Righteousness.

Now, as the Covenant of Grace is Ordered in all things, there is an Order of
things here fixed by God. If we are Justified by Faith, sure we are not
Justified Before it, or, Without it. There is this Orderly Connection, in the
Golden Chain of Salvation. Romans 8.30. First Called, [and Faith given to us,]
and then Justified. We are no more Justified from Eternity, than Sanctified
from Eternity, and, Glorified from Eternity. To speak of being Justified from
Eternity, is to say, That we never were in any state of Sin at all. While a man
is an Unbeliever, how is it with him? We are told, in Joh. 3 36. The Wrath of
God abides on him. That Wrath abides not on the Justified. Believers once
were, it is said in Ephesians. 2.3. The Children of Wrath. When was this, but before
they were Justified. Every Justified man does most certainly please God. Yea,
but we find in Heb 11.6. Without Faith it is Impossible to please God. Which is
as much as to say, Without Faith it is Impossible to be a Justified man.

Fourthly, and Lastly. Upon Faith Apprehending the Righteousness of the Lord
Jesus Christ, the Sinner is in that Instant by the God of Heaven pronounced
Righteous. If it be now Enquired, How and where the Sinner is upon his Faith
pronounced Righteous? We may thus conceive of it.

First, the state of the Believing Sinner, is Changed from Guilty, to
Righteous, before the Eye of the Unchangeable God. There was a Transaction
between* God the Father, and our Lord-Messiah, from all Eternity, wherein it
was Engaged, That such and such Elect Sinners, coming to Believe, should ever
after that be dealt withal as Righteous before the Throne of Heaven* When the
Ever-blessed Spirit brings a Sinner to Believe, though now there be no Change
in the Almighty, yet the Almighty now ^ees a Change in the Sinner. Every person
in the Adorable Trinity, now takes Notice, of a Sinner becoming a New Creature;
and this is more than if all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth took Notice of
it. But then, in the Next place, the Word of God, even the Written and Sacred
Word, puts upon a Believing Sinner, the character of a Righteous Believer. In
this Word of God, is the Justification^Office. The Voice of God, is in the Word
of God. This Word pronounces a Believing Soul, to be a Righteous one. The
Promises of the Gospel, are Exhibited in this Word; and the Language thereof
is, The Lord Jesus Christ, has purchased a Right unto all these very great and
precious Promises; They are all a Recompense due to the Obedience of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and now, they are all thine, O Believer, upon His Account they
are all thine forever.

And, in fine; It seems not Unscriptural, That the Righteousness of the
Returning Penitent, is pronounced and proclaimed, unto the Angels of God. Upon
the Repentance of a Sinner, we are sure, from Luke 15.10. There is Joy among
the Angels. It Is thus then, upon the Righteousness of a Sinner; They go
together. Why may we not judge, That upon a Sinners being brought unto the
Obedience of Faith, God the Judge of all then calls upon His Angels: q d. Let
all the Court of Heaven, and all you Ministers and Attendents of this Heavenly
Court, Look upon such a Sinner, as Righteous ever after This He has Believed
upon my Christ, and I have Bestowed the Righteousness of my Christ upon him
forever!

THE Second part of our Discourse, must be to Apply the Gospel, which has been
thus Explained.

It is to be deplored, even with Tears of Blood, that the most of men, yea, of
those men, who sit under the Gospel, which Reveals the Righteousness of God
from Faith to Faith, do miserably fall short of this Righteousness. But How,
but Why, do they fall short of it? We have a full Account given of it, in Romans
10.3. Going about to Establish their own Righteousness, they have not submitted
unto the Righteousness of God. Wherefore it is as needful, as natural, an
Exhortation, that is now to be given you.

Beware, O our Evangelised People, Beware, l^st by Endeavoring to Establish
your own Righteousness, you loose the Righteousness of God, which has been
Revealed in the Gospel. Beware, lest you loose the Everlasting Righteousness,
which the Lord Jesus Christ, has brought in for His Chosen people, and with
that Righteousness, Everlasting Happiness.

You are frequently and constantly Warned of it, That the End of all Ungodly
men, will be Destruction. But it is, of infinite Consequence, that you take a
further Warning from God; Even This, That Self Righteous men are Vngod^y men.
Souls, Beware lest you fall into a Lamentable Snare; Be able to say,
Destruction from God is a Terror to me. We are Jealous, Lest when you are
Awakened by the Holy Spirit of God unto some sense of your own Sinfulness, the
Evil Spirit lay you asleep again, by your own Righteousness, and Smite into
your Temples the deadly Nails that shall fasten you down to the floor of the
Eternal Prison. What Satan cannot accomplish as a Profane Devil, he will
endeavor as an Angel of Light: And he will Secure to himself the Possession of
an House, by finding it, Empty, Swept, and Garnished.

We are to lay this down, for a Thing Assured; That Vnregnerate men do essay,
and may attain, to do many Works of a very Laudable Character. Indeed all the
Externals of Religion may be done by a man, that his no right Principles of
Religion within him, and no Saving Acquaintance with the Lord our*
Righteousness. It is an amazing thing, to think, how far a man may go in
Religion, and yet not be found among the Righteous at the last. Ha^k, how it
Thunders, in Matthew. 7.22, 23. Many will say, Lord, Lord, have we not Prophesied
in thy Name, and in thy Name done many wonderful (...)? And then will I profess
unto them, ((...) our Lord,) I never knew you, Depart from me, ye that work
Iniquity. Even so, many will be able to say, Lord, Lord, we have done many
Religious Works for thy Name; and yet our Lord not own them for any o^ His A
man whose Heart still is under the power of Sin, may yet visibly Reform and
Forsake every Sin: He may yet be Equal in his Dealings with his Neighbors, and
Sober in his government of himself, and Liberal in his Alms to pious Uses. He
may Pray constantly, with every kind of Prayer; and Fast as well as Pray. He
may spend the Lord's Day devoutly; and seriously approach to the Tabl^ of the
Lord He may be very Useful to the Pub^^^, and Join himself unto the purest of
Churches; and frequent the Meetings of the Faithful, and be at much pains for
the Conversion of others, and Suffer many Things, yea, Death it self in the
Cause of Christianity. What shall I say? There may be many savoury Frames in an
Unregenerate man, and mighty pangs of Mourning and Fearing, and Joying, and
Hoping, about the Affairs of the Eternal World; yea, and he may continue in
these Frames all his days, and be in some sort a Religious man to his Dying
Day. All this may a man do, and be but a Pharisee after all. There is no
Regenerate man, that makes to himself a Righteousness, by any Doings of his
own. Regeneration cures this Folly, and makes a man afraid and ashamed of such
Foolish Attempts. But the Unregenerate seek to make up a Righteousness for
themselves, by their own silly Doings: And they Loose the Righteousness of God,
by attempting this Impossible Thing. Wherefore, O Beware of this Unbelief!

And give Attention, to a few Necessary Admonitions.

Admonition I.
Many, Many, and some of them very Curious, are the ways wherein the Deceived
Souls of men, go to Establish their own Righteousness. In that Soul-undoing
Vanity, whereby men go to Establish their own Righteousness, there is a Mystery
of Iniquity. Original Sin, which is Deceitful above all Things, indeed spins a
fine thread in this Mystery. A world of caution is necessary to preserve a man,
from this path of the Destroyer, it is a path so fine, so fair, so clean! and
yet it leads a man down to the Chambers of Death.

We all have occasion for this Admonition* but none have more occasion for it,
than those who under the Influence of a Good Education, have been visibly
Blameless, and perhaps Pious, from their Early Childhood: The Young man that
could say, I have kept all the Commandments from my Youth, was one that yet
Lacked this One Thing; A Faith in the Obedience of the Messiah, as his only
Righteousness, after all. It may be there (...) those among us, that have Lived
free from ^^y known Scandal all their days: They have known the Holy
Scriptures from their Childhood, and worshipped God, and Honored their
Parents, and abhorred every thing that looked vicious, and been full of concern
about their Salvation, ever since they can remember. You, O Souls in Peril, You
above any under Heaven, have cause to beware, lest by a Reliance on some
Righteousness of your own, you fall short of Heaven at the last. O follow the
Pattern of the Excellent Psalmist, who could say, Psalm. 7^.5, 10. O Lord God,
Thou art my Trust from my youth: And yet, I will make mention of thy
Righteousness, even of thine only.

But after all, What we say unto you, we say unto all; Be Jealous of a
Self-righteous Disposition, submit therefore to some Examination.

First; It may be, you are prone to think, that you are in less danger of
Establishing your own Righteousness, than of any other Mistake or Mischief
whatsoever. I sometimes hear Unexperienced Christians, thus express themselves;
Methinks to Establish my own Righteousness is the least of all my Temptations;
Methinks, I see so much amiss in my self, that I find my self scarc^ Tempted in
any Degree, to dream of being Justified by my own Righteousness. Indeed! Say
thou so? Man, There is more cause to be Fearful of Thee, than of any man, in
all the Assembly. That man, who is not aware of his Danger, to Trust in his own
Righteousness, is very much in Danger of it. As it was said of some, in Rev.
3.17. Thou say, I have need of nothing, and know not that thou art
wretched and miserable; So it may be said of some, Thou say, that thou
know thy self to be wretched and miserable, while thou art yet vainly
conceited, that thou have need of nothing. There is an innate propensity in
every man to seek a Justification by his own Righteousness; This Foolishness
will not leave a man, till a terrible Correction from God, force him unto it; A
man must be dragged through the Flames of Hell, by the Terrors of God, before he
come to a Right mind about it. A man that is not aware of this propensity, it
may be feared, is yet under the Dominion of it. He Will Die; and his Epitaph must
be that of his Brother-Idolater, in Isa. 44.20* A Deceived Heart has Turned
him aside, that he cannot deliver his own Soul; nor say, Is there not a Lie in
my Right Hand?

If this discover no Self-Righteous Persons, I have another Question for it.

Secondly. Don't you utterly Despair of any Compassion from God, merely because
you have no Righteousness of your own? All Despairing Sinners, what are they,
but Self-Righteous wretches: There are none, who more go to Establish their own
Righteousness, than some that are least apprehensive of their doing so: And
such are they, who Despair of Gods being Merciful to them* only because they
are not. Righteous in themselves. A Sinner seeing he has no Righteousness of
his own, falls into utter Despair, It Is impossible (says he) that He who made
me, should have any Mercy on me, or that He who formed me, should show me any
Favor. Tell such a Sinner, That he is all this while, built upon his own
Righteousness, he will not Easily Imagine it. But it is easy to Demonstrate it.
The Sinner does frowardly thrust away all the Mercy of God; he concludes, it is
impossible the Mercy of God ever should reach to such a Sinner. But why not?
Sinful Soul; what is the Bottom of thy Despair? Truly, It Is all because thou
do not, and thou durst not, lay Hold on the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Thou can not Believe* That the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus
Christ, is enough to D^fend thee* from the Revenges of Heaven. Un^il thou
can see some Righteousness in thy self, thou can not Believe it possible,
that ever God will do thee Good. Who are Invited unto the Mercy of God? We read
in Matthew. 9.13. I call Sinners. We read in Isa. 55.1. Ho Every one that
Thirsts, Come without Money. But some dare not come unto this Mercy: Why?
Because they are all over Sinners, and because they have no Money, or Merit of
their own, to Buy it for them. What is all this, O thou Unhumbled Sinner, but a
lothness to Trust any Righteousness, but thy own for thy Justification?

If this also discover no Self Righteous persons, let a Third Question be
seriously thought upon.

Thirdly. I pray, Deal Impartially; Do none of you fall in Love, with your
selves, and with what you have done, in your own Righteousness? Those persons
go to Establish their own Righteousness, who are Taken with any Thing, that
they themselves have done, or set it so High, as to give or ask Applause, unto
it. Says the Apostle, in Phil* 3.8, 9 I Count all but Loss and Dung, that I
may win Christ, and be found in Him, not having my own Righteousness. Man, if
thou do not count Loss, and, Dung, to be a Name Good Enough for the best
Thing that ever thou did, thou art in thy own Righteousness to this day. You
have done these and those commendable Things Do you now set a Price upon the
Things you have done, as if God were thereby Ing^atia^ed? Said the Pharisee in
Luk* 18.12. God, I thank thee, that I am not as other Men are, I Fast, and I
give Tithes: How the Self-Righteous Pharisee is taken with it! Perhaps, you can
call to mind, I have Prayed with such Frequency, I have Heard with such
Affection I have given Alms with such Liberality; And I have done such and such
a Piece of Service in my Generation. Don't you now set an High Account upon
what you have done? Even so High, as to fall into some Discontent, when God
seems to take no Notice of what you have done. If God visit you with Crosses,
and Sorrows, and Refuse to Comfort you, after all that you have done to pacify
Him, are not your Souls distur^ed within you, as if you were hardly dealt
withal? You bring your Offerings to God, but God Hides His Countenance, and
gives you no Comforts to Require your Offerings: Are not you now very wroth,
and with a wrathful Countenance are you not ready to Resolve, That you will not
any longer wait upon Him? Truly They were a sort of People, seeking
Justification by their own Righteousness; of whom it is Reported, in Isa. 58.2,
3 They are as a Nation, that did Righteousness; wherefore have we Fasted, say
they, and thou see it not?

Are no Self Righteous Persons, yet Convicted? Let a Fourth Question then do
its part upon us.

Fourthly. Deal Sincerely; Is it not merely some little piece of your own
Righteousness, that serves to quiet your Minds, when your own Guiltiness does
astonish you? We Establish our own Righteousness, if our own Righteousness, be
that which does Establish us. When our Souls, and Hopes are shaken with an
horribl^ Tempest, from the Eternal Anger of God, what is it that settles our
Souls, and allayes the Horro^ and Fury of the Tempest? The Thoughts of a Sinner
usually run in that Channel; As I have Provoked God by Sinning, so will I now
Appease Go^ by Mending. The Rowsed Conscience of a Sinner, will sometimes Roar
upon him, That he has been a Rebel against God, all his days, and that the
Damnation due to him, for his Rebellion, Slumbereth not. But then the Sinner
throws his Conscience into a Slumber, with purposes to be a New Man, and lead
a New Life, and he fancies, that his Reformation will quit scores with the
Almighty, and make amends for all his former Disobedience. As we read in Hos.
5.13. When Ephraim saw his Sickness, and Judah saw his Wound, than he went unto
the King that should plead for him; yet he could not heal you: Thus, when a
Sinner sees himself Sick and Wounded, by the Wrath of God, for Sin, he goes
unto his own Resolutions and Reformations, to plead for him; so the uneasiness
of his mind, is as by an Opiate, a little checked without ever being Healed at
all. Such a Sinner, let him alone, to tell the Story of his own pretended
Conversion, his Relation will be, That he saw himself a Sinner, and was in
Trouble of Spirit for his own Sinfulness; but God helped him to set upon
Religious Du^ies, and keeping better Company: And so, all is now come to
Rights, without one word of being driven to the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus
Christ in all. And thus, when a Sinner falls into New Acts of Sin, that set his
Conscience all on a light Fire, and the Sparkles of the Fiery Indignation of
God begin to Pierce and Scald his very Soul within him; He hears the Thunder of
the Wrath of God Cu^sing of him, and the Curses of the broken Law, rattling
like so many Heated Bullets from the Cannons mouth about him; what is now the
next course of the Sinner to shelter himself? It may be some Vow, or some ^ast,
or some other Extraordinary Act of Devotion, shall do this business for him:
Nothing of the Lord Jesus Christ, and His Righteousness, no, Nothing of That!
They that of old, were for Justification by their own Righteousness, did thus
manage it, in Jer. 7.^, 10. They would Steal, and Commit Adultery, and come and
stand before God, in His House, and say, we are Delivered (that is to say,
Discharged, Purified, Forgiven) to do all these Abominations. They would come
with some Devotions and Sacrifices into the House of God, after their
Abominations, and they counted themselves Discharged from the Old Score; they
might run on upon a New Score of Abominations, till they Renewed their
Sacrifies. This is the very Spirit of Self-Righteous Persons.

And are none of them Detected yet? A Fifth Question then shall fall upon us.

Fifthly. Deal Thoroughly: After what manner is it, that you come unto the Lord
Jesus Christ, for His Righteousness! A man may Establish his own Righteousness,
even then when he is going to the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
seeming to forego his own. Are you not Laboring after some Goodness in Your
selves, to prepare you for the Lord Jesus Christ? When the Lord Jesus Christ
calls upon you, to Rely upon Him, for His Righteousness, don't you Excuse your
selves, That you are not fit for Him; It will be a presumption in you to come
as yet, unto His Righteousness, while you are so full of Sin; or till your Sin
be a little better Mortified? And now, are you not seeking after more Sorrow
for Sin, more Contrition, and more Compunction, and more Humiliation; that you
may come Garnished and Purified unto the Lord Jesus Christ? Hereupon, does this
at last Embolden you, and Encourage you, to come unto the Lord? It may be, you
durst not have cast your selves upon the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus
Christ, if you had not first perceived some Symptoms of a Mended Heart and Life
upon you Is it so? Then, O man, Thou art a Self-Righteous man. It was said, in
Matthew. 11.5. The Poor are Gospellized. A man is then Gospellized, when his mind
is brought by the Gospel, unto the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ,
Revealed in the Gospel. Now a man must come altogether a Poor man, unto that
Righteousness. Without an utter Poverty of Spirit, the Righteousness of the
Lord Jesus Christ, cannot be aright Received. The man that will bring any thing
of his own unto the Lord Jesus Christ, is not Poor enough, to have the
Righteousness of God put upon him. He will needs bring something of his own to
Eclipse the Grace of God!

Is every body still clear? Then,

Sixthly, and Lastly; Be it known unto you, That if you Live in your own
Wickedness, it is very certain you Live on your own Righteousness. A man must
have some Righteousness, to preserve the Peace of his own Soul. There is no
man, but what knows, that God is a Righteous God, and that none but a Righteous
Man can be Accepted with Him The worst of men will therefore patch up some
Righteousness or other for themselves; they would not else be able to bear the
furious Reflections of their own Guilty Minds. Hence you shall see a Silly
Creature, that is an horrible Drunkard, and Swearer, and Liar, and as Wicked a
Debauch as can be, yet flatter himself with Assurance of Heaven; why? Because
he pays his Debts with Honesty, and is in Charity, he says, with all the
world. This Honesty and Charity now, that Sinner makes his Justifying
Righteousness. But, Sirs, if you don't Entirely Dedend upon the Rig^^eousness
of the Lord Jesus Christ, you certainly go to Establish your own Righteousness.
Now, it is most certain, That if you Entirely and Savingly Depend on the
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, this would Effectually Engage you to
leave every way of Wickedness. The Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ has
purchased this Blessing for all them, to whom it is given, That they (...) be a
peculiar People, zealous of Good Works. The Faith which does Receive the
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, will Purify the Heart. A Justified man,
cannot find in his Heart, to Sin at such a rate as he did before the
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ was applied unto him. If a man be not
thereupon Sanctified, it is apparent he was never Justified. A man who does not
press after an Inherent Righteousness, that shall sweetly conform to the
Imputed Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, makes it Evid^nt that this
Imputed Righteousness was never bestowed upon him. As when we derive Guiltines^
from the First Adam, we derive Cor^uption also, thus we receive not
Righteousness from the Second Adam, if we don't Receive Holiness with it. Not
only is Guiltiness removed, but also Corruption is mortified, in all that the
Second Adam saves from the Deadly Iflnuences of the First. It follows now, that
whatever man does allow himself in any way of Wickedness, this man does go to
Establish his own Righteousness. Of such a man, we read, in Ezekiel. 33.13. He
does Trust unto his own Righteousness, and commit Iniquity; all his
Righteousness shall not be Remembered, but his Iniquity that he has committed,
he shall Die for it. How often may you see the sad Experiment! There is many a
man does commit Iniquity: Upon his Iniquity he falls into a grievous
Consternarion; To allay his Consternation, he betakes himself unto Religious
Duties: In all his Duties he flies not unto the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus
Christ. This man will strangely Return to Commit Iniquity; And his Return to
Commit Iniquity, proves that all this while, he has Trusted unto his own
Righteousness He is a Dead Man, if he continue so to do! These are some of
those Points, wherein men go to shame the Counsel of the Poor, as the Psalmist
Expresses it; For what is the Counsel of the Poor? It Is the making the Lord his
Refuge; that is, a^ the Ancients took it; His looking to be Justified, only by
Faith in the Lord. Now, Examine we our selves, whether we are not thus Ensnared
in the wo^k of our own Hands? It Is a Similitude that has been sometimes used;
The Soldiers took the Coat of Christ, and Four of them did cast Lots for it*
but only One of the Four, did obtain it. So, says One, scarce One in Four, of
those that are called Christians, do obtain that Spiritual and Illustrious
Garment, the Righteousness of Christ, for their own; and then, they have none
at all. It is an Expression of Austin^, Ego sor^^ Perveni ad Tunicam Christi.

Admonition. II.
Our own Righteousness will prove but out own Confusion, if we Expect thereby
to be Justified. What shall we call the Man, who builds upon his own
Righteousness? We have the Name, and the Fate of that Man, in Matthew. 7.26, 27.
A Foolish Man, who built his house upon ^^e Sand: It fell, and great was the
Fall of it. Should men Live wholly without Religion, they would indeed not be
able to Live: the very Bars of the Pit would break, and the smoke of Hell would
fly in their faces, and they would walk about as Cain, with ghastly marks of
Reprobation upon them. Wherefore, like Herod, men will do many things: but,
alas, while they go to make a Righteousness, of these things, they still fall
short of Entering into Rest.

O our Beloved People; may we say it of you, That you are Striving to get rid
of Sin, Striving to have more broken Hearts, and Striving to lead more exact
Lives! We wish, we may say it. But then, we must also say, W^, Oh! Woe, unto the
man that shall rest in these things. Men may go far, very far, in shows of
Piety; but after all, if they go to make a Righteousness out of all, they are
still among the Unrighteous, that shall not Inherit the Kingdom of God.

Be advised;

First, Your own Righteousness, is far from coming up to the Demands of God in
His Holy Law; and God will not Annul, or Alter that Holy Law. It is the voice
of Heaven unto us, in Gal. 2.16. By the works of the Law shall no Flesh be
Justified: And in Romans 3.20. By the Deeds of the Law, there shall no Flesh be
Justified in the Sight of God. I have known some to Live in gross Immoralities;
and yet they would say, Their Peace was made with God. Why so? They owe no man
any Malice; they say. Poor Soul; Is this all thy Righteousness? Man, Thou may
go ten thousand times farther than this, and yet be altogether distitute of
Righteousness after all. I tell you truly; As it is said, Job 20.6, 7. Though
his Excellence mount up to the* Heavens, and his Head reach unto the Clouds,
yet he shall perish for ever like his own Dung; Even so, Though you Lived like
men in Heaven upon Earth, and though you Spoke with the Tongues of Angels, and
Shed Rivers of Tears for your Sins, and poured out Prayers that should pierce
the very Clouds more than Seven Times a day, and give all your Estates unto the
poor, and your very Bodies unto the Fire: yea, though you were Prophets of God,
and could Remove Mountains; Yet if you go to make any of This, your Justifying
Righteousness, I earnestly testify unto you. The Holy God will abhor you after
all, and at last make you the Abhorring of all Flesh. To speak in the Language
of the Prophet, I will declare thy Righteousness and thy Works, for they shall
not profit thee. Man, Thou art Condemned by the Law of God; Thou have lost thy
Ability to keep the Law: And if thou were it Able to keep it, would this make
amends for thy former Breaches of it? No, would it not. Some indeed speak much,
of Washing away their Sins by the Tears of Repentance: But it is an unsafe
Speech; Men's Tears in this point, are but Soap and Nitre, which however
multiplied, will never wash away their Sins. Yea, Though thou should ly,
like a glowing Iron in the Fires of Tophet, for a thousand Million Ages, it
would not make a Compensation unto the Great God, for the Smallest of thy
Offenses: God has Sworn by His Holiness, that nothing but the Blood of His own
Son shall make Him a compensation.

Secondly. The Righteousness of your own Doings, if it be insisted on, will but
keep you at ^n Undoing, and an Eternal Distance from your Only Savior. Our
Lord Jesus Christ, our Only Savior, said once unto some Self-Justiciaries, in
Matt. 21.31. Verily, I say unto you, The Publicans and Harlots go into the
Kingdom of God before you. Matthew the Publican, and Mary the Harlot came in
unto the Lord Jesus Christ, when the Self-Righteous Pharisees most Unjustly
Rejected Him. The man that counts his own Righteousness worth pleading, will
never go aright unto the Lord Jesus Christ for His: Of such it is said, in Romans
9.31, 32. They attained not unto the Law of Righteousness; wherefore? Because
they sought it, not by Faith, but as it were by the works of the Law. While men
have any Hope of Righteousness by their own doing the Works of the Law, they
will have no Faith in the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ. Austin long
since Remarked it; That multitudes of the more moral Heathens, would not become
Christians, as being by their own Virtuous Living already well-provided for:
Nullum Homicidium, nullum Furtum, nullam Rapinam facio, said they; Let any
wickedness be found in me, Et qui me reprehenderit, faciet me Christianum; I
shall be forced then to turn a Christian immediately. A man will not come unto
the Lord Jesus Christ; It were as easy to break the Rocks in pieces, and pull
down the very Stars from Heaven, as to make a man come unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, without being brought off from his own Righteousness. Nor if a man
could come, would he be welcome unto the Lord Jesus Christ, without it. For our
Lord says in Matthew. 16.24. If any man will come after me, Let him Deny himself.
And Righteous-Self, is a Self to be Denied, as much as Any Self. It Is a
Scandalous Omission, when in, A Treatise of Self^denial, the Denial of our own
Righteousness, is an Article altogether Omitted. There are To^^e, that will
take no Poor into their Collection, so long as they have a Penny to help
themselves. Nor will our Lord-Redeemer take any into His Righteousness, that
think to help themselves by any of their own. Who shall obtain this Treasure?
He that shall Sell all his own. Who shall obtain this Pearl of great Price? He
that shall Sell all that he has. Whom will the Lord Jesus Christ rescue from
sinking down into a Bottomless Ocean of misery? None but the man that has
Thrown overboard all that a Selfish Heart is ready to dote upon. The G^ory of
Justifying a Sinner before God, our Lord Jesus Christ challenges, as His own
Peculiar Glory; and says, My Glory I will not give unto another.

Thirdly. Shall your own Good Works afford you a Righteousness? Know it; You
can do no Good Works at all, not so much as Evangelically Good, until you are
fairly come off your own Righteousness, unto the Righteousness of the Lord
Jesus Christ. For a man to think of bringing in his own Good Works, as a
Righteousness before God! why, Never did such a man do any Good Works at all,
in all his Life. It was Prescribed, in Tit. 3.8. Affirm constantly, That they
which have Believed in God, should be Careful to maintain Good Works. And I
will affirm Con^tantly; That a man cannot perform Good Works, until he have
Believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, our God. There are no Good Works, but what
have several Ingredients of Hearty Respect unto God, through the Lord Jesus
Christ, adorning of them. Now without and before Union with our Lord Jesus
Christ, it is not possible for a man, to do any Works, that Ingredients of
Sincerity, have rendered Good. Our Lord Jesus Christ says unto them, who are
not Vni^ed, unto Him, in Joh. 15.5. Ye can do nothing. Until the Spirit of the
Lord Jesus Christ, has Infused a New Principle into men, their Best Works are
Dead Works, and not Good Works. No Vnjustified man, can do any Works, pleasing
unto God. It is a Great Article of our Christianity; That Works done before the
Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Inspiration of His Holy Spirit, are not
pleasing unto God, because they do not Spring from Faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ. Until you have plainly thrown up your own Righteousness, and come unto
the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ alone, all your Works, I say unto
you, Your very Prayers are an Abomination unto God. But then, what shall we do?

Admonition. III.
The Righteousness of God is now set before you; Take that, and Live. Oh, let
this wonderful Grace of God, have a due, and a deep Impression upon our Minds!
Even unto the Chief of Sinners among us, there is now made an Offer of that
Righteousness which out-shines the Righteousness of all the Angels in Heaven,
and which Entails upon the Subjects of it, all the Blessings of Heaven. We are
all of us Drowning, yea, D^^^ning, in the black Floods of Infinite Wrath: And
the Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ, is cast out, as a sufficient Cord,
for us to lay hold upon. Who, Oh! who takes Hold of it?

If you Enquire, May I Venture to take the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and Plead it before God, and Hope in it for the Mercy of God? I answer,
Venture! Yea, Thou art a Gone man, if thou do not Venture. What? After all my
^nfulness, and Filthiness! Yes, Though thou have been the most Sinful, and
Filthy wretch in all the Town, and though thou have been as wicked Creature, as
any one in all those Towns, upon which God once Rained Fire from Heaven for
their Wickedness. Venture to Accept and Apply the Righteousness of the Lord
Jesus Christ. If God help thee to do it, Venture by the Help, and in the Name
of God; Venture, until thou can say, with him, in Gal. 2.16. Knowing that ^
man is not Justified by the works of the Law, but by the Faith of Jesus Christ;
we have Believed in Jesus Christ, that we may be Justified. I remember what
they said, unto Naaman, My Father, If the Prophet had bid thee do some Great
thing, would thou not have done it? How much rather than, when he says unto
thee, wash and be clean* Thus let me say, O Sinner, would any thing be too much
to Save thee from the Tremendous Vengeance of God? Thou art every Hour, liable
to be Siez'd by the Vengeance of God, and cast into the Torments, and Sorrows
of the* wrath to come. If the Lord should now bid thee, do some Great Thing, to
be made Righteous and Happy, would thou count any thing too Great? How much
rather then, when it is only said unto thee, Thou have a Righteousness provided
by another for thee; Only Accept and Apply that Glorious Righteousness.

Be Counseled.

First. Despise, and ^^nounce, all your own Despicable Righteousness. The Best
Things that ever you did, What are they? There Is Badness enough in them, to
make you Ashamed of them. Said they of old, in Isa. 64.6. All our
Righteousnesses are as Filthy Rugs; Even like the Nasty Plasters, that are
laid upon loathsome* Ulcers* Art thou willing to appear clothed with none but
such Nasty Plasters? There are Blemishes enough, in the most Splendid of all
our Duties, to Defile them, to Deform them, to render them very Faulty* The
Holiest of men may say, as indeed some of them have with much Reflection said,
I never did any Good work in all my Life, but the Lord showed me some Sinful
circumstance attending of it* Christian, There are Motes in thy brightest
Sunbeams; there are Spots in thy whitest Garments; there is a world of Dross
and Alloy among thy finest Gold: If thou art a Christian, thou art sensible of
it. Yea, and when we have with Tears bewailed our own Defects, we have cause to
Cry out with him, of old, Lava meas Lacrymas, Lord, My Tears themselves want
washing! We read of, The Iniquity of our Holy Things. When we have been waiting
upon God, in our most Holy Things, we may after all say with that Perfect and
Upright man* in Job 40 4* Behold, I am Vile! The Exceeding Broad Law of our
God; Let us Consider that, and all our pretenses to Perfection in the most
glorious Action that ever we did, will all come to an End at once. Luther
speaks of one who had Lived very Holily; which when some Applauded him for;
True, said he, In your Eyes: But the Eyes of man are not like the Eyes of God!
That man, who pretends to have answered the the Law of God in any One Action,
is, to speak truly, An Ignorant and an Arrogant Fool. Man, Single out any One
Action, even the most Exact, that ever thou did, and if thou dare to put thy
Everlasting State upon a Decision by the Exactness of That, thou art a Lost
man, against the world; All the Angels in Heaven cannot Save thee from Confusion
world without End. When one told the Dying Arch Bishop of Magdeburgh, That the
Merit of his Good Works would procure a place in Heaven for him, he Cried out,
Nul^o Modo; O by no means: But the Good Works of Christ are sufficient for me.
And when Bellarmine had been Essaying to maintain Justification by our own
Works, with an Astonished Soul, at last he Cried out, After all, the best way
is to plead the Mercy of God, through Christ alone. What said the Psalmist, and
Servant of God! In Psalm. 142.3. O Lord, Enter not into Judgment with thy
Servant, for in thy sight shall no man Living be Justified. One of the Ancients
has this Note upon it, Non dicit, cum Host, sed cum Servo. It is not said,
Enter not into Judgment with a Rebel, but, with a Servant. When we have Served
God never so Faithfully, and Zelously, none of our Services will serve to
Justify us.

Secondly. Repair now to the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, as the
only Refuge, by God set before you. In the Gospel, you have the Tenders of the
best Righteousness made unto you. Make now your Echo's to those Tenders of the
Gospel. As when, the Tidings of Grace, were brought from Heaven unto Mary, Luke
1.38 Mary said, Behold the Handmaid of the Lord: Be it unto me according to thy
Word! Thus, when we are told of a Righteousness wrought out by the Lord Jesus
Christ, which we that have none of our own, are all called upon, to take for
our Own forever, let our surprised Souls thereupon say, Behold, a Poor Sinner
against the Lord; Be it unto me according to this Mavelous Word. Souls, Be
not stout-hearted, which is to be far from Righteousness. The Avengers of Sin
are pursuing of us; Fly, O Sinner, Fly for thy Life. Whither shall I Fly? Say
Thou. The Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, is a City of Refuge, that God
has set open for thee: Fly into that, saying with him, in Phil 3.9. Let me be
found in Christ, [the Expression seems to allude unto the City of Refuge, (if
not unto Isa. 61.10.] not having my own Righteousness, which is of the Law, but
that which is through the Faith of Christ, the Righteousness which is of God,
by Faith. It was foretold in Isa. 45.24 Surely shall one say, In the Lord I
have Righteousness. Oh! That many an One would now say so; And say, as all Good
men use to do, When I Look on my self, I Sink, I Die, I Perish; but when I cast
an Eye on my Lord Jesus Christ, I am alive again.

To proceed aright in that Great Action, of Repairing to the Lord Jesus Christ,
for His Righteousness, is indeed a Point of no small Importance. It Is therefore
needful, that in the first Place, you Cry to the God of all Grace, for that
Grace which will Enable you to Believe in the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Be sensible of that Glorious Truth, in Ephesians 2.8 By Grace are ye Saved,
through Faith; and that not of your selves: it is the Gift of God. And, then
let your cry to Heaven be, Lord, let thy Grace bestow that Gift of Heaven, a
True Faith upon me. Never did any man aright Believe in the Righteousness of
the Lord Jesus Christ who only in his own strength Attempted it Seeing then,
That no man can Come unto the Son of God, Except the Father Draw him, Let your
Eye, and your Cry be to God, with that Petition, Draw me, O Lord, that I may
Run unto thy Righteousness. But then, it is needful, that in the next Place, you
Cry Mightily to God, for that Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, on which
you would now Believe. It is an observable Expression, in Isa. 45.25. In the
Lord shall all the Seed of Israel be Justified. Israel was one, who came to be
so called, by Wrestling for a Blessing. Them that would be Justified by the
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, God will have to Wrestle for it, with
Importunate Supplications. With Agonies of Importunity then Wrestle with God,
Oh, most Merciful God, I am Justly and Sadly undone, if thou do not grant me
the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ; whatever thou deny me, Oh, Deny me
not that Righteousness. Faith first breathes, its First Breath is, in Prayer.
Your Prayer for the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, must be the first
Essay and Salley of your Faith unto it.

And then finally, Profess, Try whether you cannot with a Triumphing Soul
profess, That you do Believe in the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ,
alone. God now demands of you, Whether you do indeed Believe on His
Righteousness? Try, O Try, whether you cannot make this Answer to the Demand, in
Mar 9 17 Lord, I believe, Help thou my Unbelief. Place thy self, O Sinner,
before the Judgment Seat of that Holy God, unto whose Judgment thy Sin has
made thee obnoxious: and let His Infinite Holiness, fill thee with
Astonishment. See that Holy God passing a Terrible (...) of Eternal Death upon
thee; and Hea^ Him demanding of thee, what thou have to say, Why this Doom
should not be fulfilled, and this Death inflicted, or, why thou should be
accepted into His Favor! Justifying Faith is no where found, but in the Soul
of a Convinced Sinner, beholding himself by the Law of God, a Condemned Sinner,
and pursuing his D^liverance by the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ from
the Condition, which he is by the Law of God cast into. Faith is not
understood, by them who describe it, altogether without respect unto the
previous work of the Law on the Conscience of a Sinner. Now having felt this
work, Then let thy Reply be, Lord, I have nothing, nothing at all to plead, but
only the Righteousness of my Lord Jesus Christ* That Righteousness has answered
thy Law in all things Thy Grace has made me an offer of that Righteousness: In
that Righteousness therefore I place all my Hope for ever-more.

In fine; We will describe the solemn Transaction of a Soul Repairing to the
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, from the Heaven-taught Experience, of
those who have thus left on Record, the way of their proceeding in it.

Their Spirits being exceedingly distressed, at the view of their own manifold
Vilenesses, which they bitterly bewailed before the Lord, they have thus at
length concluded.

And yet after all this, Lord, By the Help of thy Grace, I Believe, that my
precious Lord Jesus Christ, our Immanuel, has fully obeyed and suffered thy
will, as a Surety, in the room of Elect Sinners. I Believe that the
Righteousness of this our Surety, is tendered unto me for me to Depend upon it,
that for the sake thereof, I may become Accepted with God. I Believe that
whenever thou do enable me to Depend upon this Righteousness, thou do
immediately Absolve me from all my Guiltiness, and pronounce me a dear Son, a
pleasant Child, whom thou will surely have mercy upon. Yea, I Believe that the
horrible and prodigious Greatness of my Sins, does nothing to render me
incapable of this Great, and Free, and Rich Grace of Heaven. Oh my God, in this
Belief, I cast my self at the Feet of the Lord Jesus Christ; There will I now
ly Waiting, Looking, yea, Assured, There to Receive thy Favors. Now I know,
That my Debts to the Dreadful Justice of God are all paid. All that my God will
now demand of me, is to Love Him, and Praise Him, and Glorify my Glorious
Redeemer for ever-more.

Syrs, Upon a Transaction thus managed, there presently issues from the Throne
of God, that Order concerning you, that there was about Joshua in the Vision,
Take away the filthy Garments from him: The Almighty declares unto you; Behold,
I have caused thine Iniquity to pass from thee, and I will cloth thee with
change of Raiment.

Very far toward such a Transaction, did seem disposed, when he came to Die,
that Great Emperor Charles V. one of the greatest men that ever lived. He
thus, according to the Account of De Thou, then Reasoned with himself.

That in himself, he was altogether unworthy to obtain the Kingdom of Heaven,
by his own merits; but that his Lord God, the Lord Jesus Christ, who Enjoyed it
on a double Title, by an Heirship from His Father, and by the Desert of His
Passion, was content with the former Himself, and had freely grantest unto Him
the latter Title: That accordingly on His Free Grant, he laid claim thereunto,
and in the confidence thereof he should not be confounded: for the Oil of Mercy
is poured into the Vessel of Faith; and this is the Faith of a man Despairing
in himself, but Relying on his Lord; Alioquin proprijs meritis fidere, non
Fidei esse, sed perfidiae.

Lastly; Being thus invested with the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ,
count not your selves Released from the Good Works required in the Law of
Righteousness Grievous Confusion and Vexation, has arisen in the Church of
Christ, by the corrupt minds of men, Abusing the Evangelical Doctrine, of
Justification by Faith in the Righteousness of God. The^e (...) Ungodly men,
who Turn the Grace of God into wantonness; and Libertines, Who because our Lord
Jesus Christ has answered the Law for His people, count themselves at Liberty
from the Law to all intents and purposes. Our Justification by the
Righteousness of our lord Jesus Christ, must be defended in the sound and safe
sense of the Glorious Gospel, against the Depravations of Ungodly
Antinomianism. We must come to the Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ,
sound* in this Faith: The Mystery of our being made Righteous, by God manifest
in Flesh, is a Mystery of Godliness: It has all over a Tendency to Godliness.
It is very certain; That our having an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ
the Righteous, when we Sin, is written to us, that we may not go on to Sin. If
any man be so vile, as to make this Inference, It Is only the Righteousness of
the Lord Jesus Christ, by which I am to be Justified; and therefore I am at
liberty to go on in the way^ of Unrighteousness: Ah, Deceived Soul, It Is plain,
that thou art not yet Justified; Thy Spot is not the Spot of the Justified;
Such a venomous Inference is Incompatible to a Justified man: Thou art yet
among the Unrighteous, that shall not Inherit the Kingdom of God.

Wherefore,

First. Remember, I beseech you, That the Moral Law, is to be Received by every
Christian alive, as the Everlasting Rule of his Life. That Law which the God of
Heaven Epitomized in the Ten Commandments, written by Himself on the famous
Tables of Stone; it is a Law which all Christians are forever bound unto the
Observation of It is a Caution, that our Lord Jesus Christ has given us, in
Matthew 5.17. Think not that I am come to Destroy the Law And accordingly, both
our Lord Jesus Christ, and His Apostles, often direct us unto the Law, as
obliging us, to Love the Lord our God, and Love our Neighbors. When Moses went
up to Receive the Two Tab^es, on which the Decalogue was written, he was
attended with Joshua, when he Received the other Precepts, he was attended with
Aaron and his Sons Might not this import, That the Decalogue was to be observed
under the Gospel, in the Times of Jesus, as well as of Moses: The other
Precep^s (...) during the Priesthood of Aaron? It is well Expressed by
Tertullian, Libertas in Christo non f^cit Innocentiae Injuriam, manet Lex ^ota
Pietatis. It Is not possible, That men should be se^ free from their Obligations
to Glorify God. The ways in which we are to Glorify God are prescribed in the
Moral Law. To Abolish this Law, would be to say, That men shall cease to be a
Creature, and owe nothing to his Creator. Indeed, we have a Complete
Righteousness in our Lord Jesus Christ, who has Answered the Law for us. Yea,
but for all This, in whatever we come short of Answering the Law our selves, we
must Mourn for it as a Sin, and Loath and Judge our selves for it. Although we
are, In Christ free from Condemnation, Yet upon our falling short of doing what
is Enjoined in the Law, we must Condemn our selves, and Exclaim, O wretched man
that I am! It Is true, the Law is, by the Accession of the Gospel, brought into
some New Circumstances of Grace; but still, that Law is a Rule of Life unto us,
and it will be in Force, till the very Heavens be no more. Is it not the
Definition of Sin, in 1 John 3.4. Sin is the Transgression of the Law. If we
have no Law, we could have no Sin. But they that are Justified by the
Righteousness of God, yet, alas, do fall into Sin every day: If we say, we have
no Sin, the Truth is not in us: And a Sin is not at all the less a Sin, but it
is rather an aggravated Sin, for being done by One whom the Lord Jesus Christ
has Justified from Sin. When the Lord has showed thee, O man, what is the
Good Thing, even His Messiah, and His Righteousness, He then Requires thee to
Glorify* His Messiah, by Doing Justly, by Loving Mercy, by Walking ^umbly with
thy God.

Secondly. Our Good Works, or Sincere Essays, to observe the Moral Law, are
necessary to Justify that Faith in the Righteousness of God, by which our
persons are Justified. Every Jewel has a Counterfeit. And, How shall we know
that our Faith in the Righteousness of our Lord Jesus Christ for our
Justification, is not a Counterfeit? Now the Marks of a Justifying Faith are
the Works, whereto a Believer is thereby disposed. Says the Apostle, in Jam 2
20 Will thou know, O Vain man, that Faith without Works is Dead? Christians, a
Workless Faith is a Worthless Faith* It is an Incautelous and a Dangerous
passage, that I have Read; Men are too apt to think their Peace depends on the
subduing of Sin. If their Sins be subdued, then they may have Peace, and if
they cannot be subdued, then no Peace; Let subduing of Sin alone for Peace.
But, will thou know, O Vain Antinomian? If thy Faith do not subdue thy Sin, it
is a False Faith; And, if a man go to Bless himself, saying, I shall have
Peace, though Sin remain unsubdued in him, There is no Peace, says my God,
unto that Wicked man. We are to Try our Justifying Faith, by This; Is our Sin
subdued by this Faith? And, through Faith are we always abounding in the works
of the Lord?

It will be of great use, to have this a little more clearly stated. Mind it
then;

The Apostle Paul, teaches us. That no man is Justif^ed by works, but a man is
Justified only by Faith. But the Apostle James teaches us, That a man is
Justified by Works, a man is not justified by Faith alone. And yet, however
some of the Ancients, as well as Luther, stumbled at this Appearance of
Contradiction, they are far from Contradicting one another. Paul treats of our
Justification before God, and the Right unto Everlasting Life, thereon granted
unto us. This is only by Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. James treats of that
which may manifest our Justification unto Men that See and Hear our Profession
of our Faith. Here Works are Significant. The Conscience of a man may be
distressed with a Twofold Accusation. First, A man may be Accused of Iniquity
It may be said, Thou have broken the Law, and wronged the God that gave the
Law, and the dreadful Curse of that Law, now belongs unto thee. Our Answer to
This Accusation is, My Lord Jesus Christ has fully Obeyed the Law of God, and
Suffered for my Disobedience; and I do by Faith Rely on this Righteousness of
my Lord Jesus Christ, for Eternal B^essedness. But next, A man may be Accused
of Hypocrisy It may be said, Thou Talkest of thy Faith, but is it not mere
Talk? How can thou prove, that thy Faith is any more than what is in the very
Devils themselves? The Answer to this Accusation must be, The Works of a
Sanctified man, which I am doing every day, are the proof of my Faith*
Accordingly, It is asserted by Paul; That a man is Justified alone by Faith;
but it is asserted by James, That a man is not Justified by a Faith which is
alone. The Question discoursed by Paul is, How a Guilty person may come to be
Acquitted by the Lord, from all the Guilt that lies upon him? The Answer to
this Question, is, Not by any Works of our own, but only by the Righteousness
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which is, on our part, only by Faith applied unto us.
The Qu^stion discoursed by James, is, Whether a man pretending to Faith in the
Righteousness of the Lord Jesus Christ, shall be Saved, though he continue
without the Works of an Holy Life agreeable thereunto? The Answer to this
Question, is, No, such a man has no Saving Faith at all. Will thou know, O
Vain man? It Is a Vanity in any man, to Profess, that he has a True Faith in
the Lord Jesus Christ, if his Faith be not Fruitful in those Good Works, which
may Justify the man's Profession. In short, A True Faith, will be a Divine
Principle in the Soul, inclining and assisting a man, to Live unto the Glory of
that Lord, who has made him Righteous* And particularly, our Forgiving the
Trespasses of others against our selves, is a thing of Great Note, among those
Good Works, which are to demonstrate the Faith, and the State of One whose
Trespasses against God, are Forgiven, through Faith in the Righteousness of the
Lord Jesus Christ. Soul, If thou can not Forgive, it is a sad sign upon thee,
Thou never wast Forgiven. It was well said therefore by John Hus, Vbi bona
opera non-apparent ad Extra, ibi Fides non est ad intra: Faith is not within,
if Good Works are not without. A Vain Faith it is, that becomes not Visible,
and Incarnate, by Good Works upon it.

Thirdly. A Justifying Faith cannot but from the very Nature of it, have a
Sanctifying Force, upon the Heart of the Believer. For, the same Faith, which
Embraces the Lord Jesus Christ, as a Priest for Atonement, (and As doing this,
it Justifies!) embraces Him also as a King for Government. Faith has other
Designs besides that of Justification, for which it is equally concerned. To
Receive Christ in one office, and Exclude Him in another, is not Faith but
Unbelief. A Justifying Faith, Receives Christ the Sacrificer, and the
Intercessor, and in that Notion, it Justifies. But is this all? No, It also,
according to Col. 2.6. Receives Christ the Lord. And so, it Receives a Law from
that Lord. A True Faith, is for a whole Christ. The Holy Spirit of God, Infuses
not the Habit of Faith into us, without Infusing the Habit of Every other
Grace. To imagine a Dead Faith infused by the Spirit of Life, would be a black
Reflection, on the conduct of Heaven. Yea, at the Infusion of this Grace, that
Holy Spirit Himself comes to dwell in the Hearts, of His People; And will not
He make them Holy, think you? Be assured, Sirs, There is no man made Righteous
but what is therewithal made Holy, and what Groans, and Longs, and Strives to
be made more Holy. Though God Justify the Ungodly, yet He lets no Justified man
continue an Ungodly one. Faith wrought by the Holy Spirit of God, will never
Indulge the Believer in Unholiness.

More than so; A Justifying Faith, Propounds and Obtains the Salvation of the
Soul. Now, our Sanctification, is no small part of that Great Salvation. Our
Lord Jesus Christ has Redeemed us by His Righteousness. What for? We are
informed in Tit. 2.14. To purify unto Himself a peculiar People, Zealous of
Good Works. A main Thing bought for us, by the Righteousness of our Lord Jesus
Christ, is, that we may be made Happy, by our Enjoying a Resemblance of that
Righteousness, in our own Obedience unto God. And Faith aims at this Benefit,
in coming to the Lord Jesus Christ. Let no man be mistaken; Our Salvation is
not merely the Fruition of the Good Things Reserved for us, in the Unseen and
Future Bliss: but it is also the Sanctity and Obedience that makes us meet for
those Good Things. To be set at Liberty from the Devil, and have a Will and a
Strength to do those Good Works which are contrary to the Works of the Devil;
This, This is the Beginning of our Salvation; And Faith Esteems it so: The
Faith, which cannot be disappointed, Esteems it so! Faith cannot be persuaded,
that it has Received a Pardon of Sin, Except it may also Receive a Power
against Sin. A Power against Sin, is an Everlasting Token and Effect, of our
having the Pardon of Sin. Should Sin be left unmortifyed, Faith would cry out,
Lord, I am not Saved, I am not Saved, while I remain in this Condition!
Obedience to God, is Liberty and Happiness to a True Faith; Sin is the worst
Slavery in the World.

We may add; A Justifying Faith, is an Ingenuous Thing. If a man have the least
Grain of True Faith in him, he will make that Enquiry, in Psalm. 116.12. What
shall I render to the Lord, for all His Benefits! And upon this Enquiry, Faith
Resolves as the Lord Himself Directs, By Obedience to show its Thankfulness,
unto the Lord, who has Loved us, and Washed away our Sins, in His own Blood.
That Obedience that was once to have been our Justifying Righteousness, is now*
Endeavored by Faith, as a Piece of Thankfulness, to our Lord Jesus Christ, for
Justifying us, by His Righteousness. We read, in Gal. 5.6 Faith works by Love.
Christian, Thy Faith will Discern and Admire the Love of God unto thee, in
helping thee to the Righteousness of thy Lord Redeemer. The Faith of this Love,
will Work upon thy Heart, until it has Raised an unquenchable Flame of Love in
thee, unto Him that has so Loved thee. And if thou Love the Lord, thou will
then Hate the Evil: All Sin will become Hateful to thee, as the worst Evil in
the World. Yea, Thy Love to God, will set thee to Work, in Cleansing thy self
from all Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and perfecting H^liness in the Fear of
God. If they that are made Righteous, by the Lord Jesus Christ, should continue
Wicked in their D^sposi^ions and Conversations, This Would be an horrible
Reproach unto our Lord Jesus Christ, as if He were, A Patron of Sin; and as if
He were. A God that had Pleasure in Wickedness. But a True Faith, will never
let a man be so Foolish and Unwise, as thus Reproachfully to Requite the Lord.
The Return, which our Lord Jesus Expects, for His Mercies unto us, is, That we
Devote our selves unto the Service of our Lord: And Faith owns* That this is
now, a most Reasonable Service* Faith of the Right sort, cannot but argue after
such a sort as This; What? Has my Lord Jesus Christ made me Righteous? Oh, then
let me Glorify Him, with my Spirit, and my Body, which He has bought for
Himself with such a price! Where Faith has Ennobled the Heart, of any man,
there is no motive to Good Works more powerful than This upon him: If he could
think* I shall escape Hell, yea I shall merit Heaven, by well-doing; this would
not so powerfully move him, as to think, By well-doing, I shall Glorify my Lord
Jesus Christ; who has done so much for me! That man has no Faith in him, on
whom this Thought has not a very Constraining Efficacy.

Fourthly. A Sanctified Heart, in this World, is a needful Qualification and
Preparation, for a Glorified State in another. There is no passing into the
Holy Heavens, without being, as it is Expressed in Col. 1.12. Made meet to be
partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. But without a Changed
Heart, a New Heart, and an Holy Heart, a man is not made meet for that Holy
Inheritance. None but the Pure in Heart, are fit for the Beati^^ck Sight of the
most Holy God. The Holy Employments, and the Holy Enjoyments of the Heavenly
World, would be for ever distastful unto us, if we should not carry Holy Hearts
into that World. Except God here, Work us for that Self-Same Thing, every Thing
in Heaven will be disagreeable unto us. The Unclean may not enter into the
Temple of God. The Satisfactions of Heaven, must here first be Inlaid into the
very Frame of our Souls, or else they will never Satisfy us. Were an
Vnsanstifyed man, on that Holy Mountain, he would not be able to say, It Is Good
to be here! Heaven it self, would be rather a Torment, than a Content, unto an
Vnsanctifyed Soul. It Is a Solemn, and a certain Admonition* in Heb. 12.14.
Without Holiness no man shall see the Lord. Though we shall not Go to Heaven,
For our Good Works, we cannot Go to* Heaven Without them.

We are all horribly depraved with Original Sin, derived from our First Father
unto us A Time is here allowed unto us, to get a Deliverance from that Image of
the Devil. Such an Union with the Lord Jesus Christ, as is Productive of a
Likeness to Him, helps us to our Deliverance. Now, O man, if thou art, a^ thy
Death, found utterly uncured of the Distempers, and the Disorders in Original
Sin brought upon thee, and utterly distitute of a Principle of Holiness, the
Characters of Hell upon thy Soul, will become Eternally Indelible* and
Intolerable Griefs and Fears, and Hellish Horrors, must unavoidably attend a
Soul, that has those Characters, and Impressions of Sin upon it, until the very
Heavens be no more.

Fifthly; and, Lastly: It must not be Forgotten, and I wish it were more
clearly Understood, That even Justified Persons, if they do not Walk with God,
and Walk very Circumspectly, may Expose themselves, to the Fatherly, and the
Terrible Displeasure of God. Some clear Thoughts of this matter, are greatly
wanting among the People of God, and would prevent Great Errors and Follies,
that me^ on both sides do frequently fall into.

I pray your Attention.

You are to know, That upon Faith in the Righteousness of the Lord Jesus
Christ, a Sinner is Perfectly Justified. The Law of God, no more binds him
over, to suffer the Wrath and Curse of God, which is Threatened in the Law. The
Curse of God, no more can take hold upon him; and he has a Formal Pardon of
all his Former Sins, with a Vertual Pardon of all his Future Sins. The Act of
God, as a Judge, in thus Justifying of a Believing Sinner, Admits of no
Repetition, and no Intercision. Let a Sinner be once Justified, and Absolved
from the Sentence of the Law upon him, he is then wholly so, and ever so.

But for all this, Let it not seem Strange unto you, if I tell you, That there
is what we may call, a Filial Guilt, wherein a Justified Person may become
obnoxious to the Fatherly Wrath of God. It is an unsound Position in certain
Sermons too much cried up, among Injudicious Readers; Though a Believer, after
he be a Believer, do Sin often, yet God no longer Stands Offended and
Displeased with him.

You may thus Conceive of it.

The God of Heaven has in the Gospel, Required us to Adorn the Doctrine of God
our Savior, by Endeavoring utmost Obedience to that Law, which our Savior
has answered for us. And He has Threatened our Grosser Neglects of that
Obedience, not with Eternal Confusion, as He did in the Law; but with Paternal
Correction. The Paternal Correction whereto our Scandalous Faults, will now
Expose us, lies in a Variety and Severity of Divine Judgments, to be dispensed
in this World unto us. The Divine Judgments, under which we may fall, by our
Falls into Rebellion against our Heavenly Father, are both Spiritual and
Temporal* The Spiritual Judgments, which Godly men may by their Sins bring upon
themselves, are Internal Desertions, wherein the Spirit of God witholds
Influences of Grace and Joy from them. The Temporal Judgments, are External
Afflictions; And especially such as carry Notable Retaliations in them. One End
of these Judgments, is to Amend, and Reform, and cure the miscarriages of Godly
Men, and promote a Due Repentance in them: And yet another End of these
Judgments, is, to vindicate the Holiness of our Lord Jesus Christ, and make all
that saw the Miscarriages of those Godly men, to see that the Lord of the Holy
Angels, will allow no such Things, in any that belong unto Him. When Godly men,
have by any piece of notorious Ungodliness, Laid themselves open to these
Judgments of God, their way to be Saved from the Judgments, is to plead the
Sacrifice of the Lord Jesus Christ over again, and thereon penitently to
Confess and Forsake all that has been Amiss. They that already have what we may
call, A Legal Pardon, may yet want, what we may call, A Gospel Pardon, or the
dissolution of their obligation to suffer the Judgments of God upon Earth; and
by penitent Prayer, they are every day to seek such a Pardon. These Thoughts,
are all over Countenanced in the Oracles of God. Wherefore, Let those that have
Believed unto Righteousness, yet learn to Pass the Time of their Sojourning
here in Fear.

Know, First, That if you don't Live Exceedingly Watchfully and Fruitfully, and
Holily, God will withdraw much of His Holy Spirit from you* And among other
Consequences full of Darkness, that will follow upon the Withdraw of the Holy
Spirit, one will be, That you will not Enjoy the Seal of it. The Seal of the
Holy Spirit, is a special Operation thereof, producing a solid, powerful,
wonderful, and well-grounded persuasion of our Justification. Our
Justification, may be Hopefully, but will not be Joyfully Eviden^^ unto us,
without such a Special Operation of the Holy Spirit giving Evidence thereunto.
When we set our selves to prove our Justification from our Sanctification, we
do Well, we work Right, we are in an orderly way of proceeding* But yet we
shall not well see our Sanctification, except a Special Operation of the Holy
Spirit, help our sight. And if we do see out Sanctification, yet our Sight of
our Justification* will be but feeble, except a Special^Operation of the Holy
Spirit shall comfort us. Our own Argument may make us a little Easy, and we
ought to be found in that Rational Way^ of Arguing; but this mere Argument will
not bring us to that Joyful peace of Soul, that will carry^ (...) Triumphantly
through the Dark Valley of the Shadow of Death, and make us Triumph over our
Doubts, our Fears, and all our Discouragements. It is the Spirit of God
Gloriously Coming in upon our Hearts, that will Seal unto us our Justification,
and cause us to Rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of glory: Which when He
does, the Symptoms of a Regenerate Soul, do always accompany it. Now,
Christians, If you don't maintain a very strict Walk with God, that Seal of the
Holy Spirit will be denied unto you. Though you may be Justified, yet the Holy
Spirit of God, will not let you see that you are so. The Holy Spirit of God
being sadly Grieved by your Sins, will Retire from you; and the Evil Spirit
shall then smite you either with Terror, or ^ith Slumber. Man, If thou do not
look upon this Calamity, as more Dreadful and Bitter than Death, it is very
sure, Thou wast never yet a Justified man; Thou art yet in the Gall of
Bitterness, and the Bond o^ Iniquity. And let me freely say unto you. To see a
man wallowing in Loathsome Filthiness, and yet Enjoying the Peace of Justified
man; Oh, It Is a doleful Spectcle! It Is impossible to see a man with a ^lacker
Brand of Reprobation upon him.

Kno^, Secondly; That if you don't use ^^^n^rous care, to keep a Conscience
void ^ffence, you may Incurr such Disasters upon your selves and your Houses;
as may be (...) Astonishment, of all Spectators. Oh, Think (...) the Things
that in the Providence of a provoked God, befell David and his Family; Think on
Vzzah; Think on Hezekiah; yea, on Moses and Aaron. Think on the House of
Gideon, Think on the House of Eli; (They were Justified men, I believe, every
one of Them!) and beware, Lest for Sins like Theirs, the burning Indignation of
God break forth upon you, in amazing Instances. Mark what I say; Do you grow
remarkably Remiss in your Devotions? Then if you belong to God, some very sore
Humiliation is probably hastening upon you. Or, Do you wrong any of your
Neigbour^, especially the Widows, or the Orphans, or such as are Eminent
Servants of the Lord Je^us Christ? You Will find God the Avenger of al^ such. It Is
not your being Justified for the Life to Come, that will secure you from very
Calamitous Chastisements in this Life, if you Despise any Commandments of God.
If the Name of God come to be Blasphemed among others by your Misdemeanors,
God will make others to see his Dislike of those your ^isdemeanours, by
Exemplary Chastisements, though you may be Justified from the Vengance (...)
Eternal Fire. God will never deal (...) you as Prisoner^, but as Children; and
yet (...) ha^ Rods for you; and He Expects that (...) should Fear His Rods.
Consider these (...) And Walk in the Fear of God.

I conclude with the words of our Christian Tully; Hactenus de Imputatione
Justitiae Christi, sine qua nemo unquam, aut Salvatus est; aut Salvari queat.
Thus far we have discoursed on the Imputation of the Righteousness of Christ,
without which, no man was ever Saved, or can be.

Boston Lecture: 27. d. 5. m. and 24. d. 6. m. 1699.

FINIS.
Divine Hymns.
[I.] The Song of the Pardoned. Luke VII. 47.
THE Sin of my First Father is
Mine, the Just Law does say,
The Sin of a Vile Nature, This
Does unto me Convey.
Innumerable Sins I do
Hence madly Perpetrate;
Sins, which the Good I Have and Know,
Does sadly aggravate.
But, O my Precious CHRIST, I see,
THOU art my Surety made:
A Full Obedience was by Thee
To Thy Great Father Paid.
Thy Vast Obedience is by Him
Now freely Reckoned mine;
And me does unto Life Redeem
That Righteousness of Thine.
O may I Love that Glorious One:
Lord* Thou deserve my Love;
Such Things Thy Love has for me done,
Things all my Thoughts above!
My God, I Love Thee; And I Grieve
That I Love Thee no more:
I Love Thee, and that I may Live
Thy Praises, I Implore.
[II.] Good Inferences. Romans VIII. 32, 33, 34, 39.
GOD, in His Love to man, don't spare
His own Beloved Son;
But gives Him up, the Curse to bear,
For man's Redemption.
Since He has now for Sinners done
That Greatest Thing, we know,
On us, He will not count any One
Too Great, for to bestow.
Gods chosen who now can Arraign
Whom God has Justified?
And who shall dare Those to Condemn,
For whom His Christ has Died?
Died! Yea, and Rising from the Dead,
At the Right Hand of God,
He Sits in Glorious Power, to Plead
The Merits of His Blood.
Us from such Love of God as This,
A Love so Free and Great,
In our Lord Jesus Christ, there is
Nothing shall Separate.
[III.] The Lessons of the Gospel. From Tit. 2 11, 12, 13, 14.
THE Gospel of Gods Glorious Grace,
Which with News of Salvation
Shines every where, Ungodliness
And Worldly Lusts, bids us to shun*
(...) bids and binds us, all to take,
A Sober, Righteous Godly Way,
And Conscience of all Duty make,
While in this present World we stay:
Hoping and Looking daily for
The Blessed Promise of this Word,
That the Great God our Savior,
Shall come in Glory: Come O Lord!
Even JESUS CHRIST, who freely gave
Himself to Death, for us, that we
Might thorough Him Redemption have
From that Worse Thing Iniquity:
And He Himself so Purify
A People, His own Choice, and Rare,
Who Zealous of Good Works shall be,
And in that Zeal peculiar.
[IV.] Evening Thoughts. Phil. I. 21.
THy CHRIST is now my Life: I fly
To CHRIST with an Enlivened Faith.
And now 'twill be my Gain to Die,
To CHRIST fetched by a Stingless Death*

