A Warning to the FLOCKS Against WOLVES in Sheeps-Cloathing. OR, A Faithful
ADVICE, from several MINISTERS of the Gospel, in and near Boston, unto the
Churches of New England, relating to the Dangers that may arise from Impostors,
Pretending to be Ministers.

WITH A Brief HISTORY of some Impostors, Remarkably and Seasonably detected;
Written, by One of the Ministers in Boston, to assert that Advice, and prevent
future Mischiefs.

Matthew. 7.15. Beware of False Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps Clothing,
but inwardly they are Ravening Wolves.

Rev. 2.2. Thou have Tried them, which say they are Apostles, and are not, and
have found them Liars.

Boston, Printed for the Booksellers. 1700.

A Faithful Advice, FROM Several MINISTERS of the Gospel, in and near Boston,
unto the Churches of New England; relating to the Dangers that may arise from
Impostors, pretending to be Ministers.
IT is not without some Concern upon our Minds, that in the late Writings of
our Presbyterian Brethren in England, we find awful Complaints, about Bold
Intruders into the Work of the Ministry, and the swarming of that Vermin, with
an hideous Noise, not in Corners and Chambers, but in the very Pulpits; likely
to prove an Egyptian plague; upon which they add, If these Illiterate Usurpers
are not speedily and effectually discountenanced by Ministers and People too,
they who are already the Blemish of Nonconformity, will quickly prove the total
Ruin of it. But it satisfied us more than a little, to hear of their care that
the Confusions thus complained, may be prevented, by a Vote of this Importance,
That they would Employ none to Preach in any of their Pulpits, but such as
either arrived unto them with credible Testimonials, or submitted themselves
unto a solemn Trial of their Qualifications for the Evangelical Ministry. Our
Congregational Brethren in England, being alarumed with a clamor of the
Dangers hence arising to the Interests of our Holy Religion, we do with a like
satisfaction find, they have lately published a Declaration, wherein,
signifying, That inasmuch as they count none meet to dispense the Oracles of
God unto others, who are not themselves Qualified for Communion in all
Ordinances, their joining themselves to a particular Church of Christ, would be
a good Expedient to prevent Ignorant and Rash Intruders into the Ministry;
seeing then, it would be the Duty of Particular Churches and their Officers, to
take special care, that none of their Communion, who are not Qualified, may
enter on that Work; they thereupon (...), We Express our Dislike, and witness
against all Ignorant and Scandalous persons, Entering on the Ministry; and we do
in the Bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ, pray and beseech all such as fear God,
that they give not the least Encouragement unto the Preaching of men, either
Ignorant or Erroneous in the Great Articles of Faith, or Scandalous in their
Lives and Conversations, or otherwise Unmeet for this Holy Employment, Lest
they bring the Guilt of these men's Sins on their own Souls.

In Conformity to this Watchfulness of our United Brethren, we cannot but in
the most public manner, call upon our Churches, that they beware of all undue
Precipitancy, in their Admitting Unqualified persons, to be Received and
Employed, in the Character of Preachers unto them.

We have indeed often wished, That the Young men brought up in our own
University, might appear with Testimonials, under the Hands of the Praesident
and Fellows, That upon Trial, they are found Able and Pious, and likely to be
Blessings unto the Churches; before the Churches venture too far in setting of
them up for Preachers.

But inasmuch as there have sometimes arrived among us, Deceitful Strangers,
who have set up themselves for Preachers, and many unwary people have
discovered much sinful Folly, in suffering themselves to be strangely Deceived
by those Impostors, it obliges us unto a further point of Pastoral Vigilance
over the Churches, whereof we are made the Overseers.

It Is well known, That Worthy Ministers of the Gospel, Retiring to New England,
from other Countries, have all along met with Respects from our Churches, Equal
(to say no more) unto what they have shown unto any of the Pastors bred among
themselves; Heaven is witness, to the Injustice of the Slander by some uttered
against us, That we have been ever uncivil to Strangers; and the Strangers
themselves have been Witnesses, that no where under Heaven could they expect
more Civility, than that wherewith we have ever treated them.

Nevertheless, we have, upon sufficient Occasions Resolved, That for the
future, no Stranger coming as a Preacher among us, without sufficient
Assurances of his being what he pretends to be, shall be Employed in our
Pulpits, without a solemn Examination of his Capacities, for the Tremendous
Work, of Preaching the Glorious Gospel of God. And we earnestly Request, the
Reverend Ministers of the Gospel, in the several Associations and Vicinities
throughout the Country, to join with us, in such a necessary Resolution.

We do also Solemnly Advise, all our People, to beware of Running after New
Preachers, of whose Endowments and Principles, they have not had a Reasonable
Attestation; lest they unawares run themselves into shameful and woeful
Reflections. The Apostolical Injunctions, To prove all Things, does not invite
Unstable people, to Run after all Preachers, (as they too often pervert the
sense of it,) but it only directs people* to Examine by the Word of God, the
Doctrine, which they hear, from those that in an orderly way are to be heard as
their Teachers.

The Preaching of the Gospel, being that Grand Institution, whereon depends the
Everlasting Salvation of men, Satan seeks it as a mighty Triumph, to pervert it
unto their Everlasting Destruction. And a people, that having Itching Ears, do
after their own Lusts heap up Teachers to themselves, do miserably render
themselves, obnoxious unto the Impressions of those New Preachers, that will
seduce them unto damnable Heresies. Or, suppose the New Preachers, do broach no
New Errors, yet if they shall prove Cheats, that have made the Preaching of the
Gospel only a Cloak, for their Covetous, or Lascivious, or other profane
Designs, they that shall have too suddenly improved those men, will be
partakers of their Sins. And the Glorious Ordinances of God will be likely to
fall into a loathsome Contempt among the people, if Contemptible Fellows can
Easily prostitute them unto their pernicious purposes.

The Sermons, wherein the Everlasting Gospel is Preached, as well as the
Prayers made in our Congregations; are to be Considered, as a principal part of
the Worship of God among the People of God: they are to Glorify God, and our
Lord Jesus Christ, with agreeable Confessions of the Truths He has Revealed
unto us; and, as in the Peace Offering of old, God has His part in them, as
well as the People theirs. Hence, whether the people that are the Hearers, be
many or few, learned or weak, froward or meek, the Preacher must prepare an
Offering, as far as he can, Suitable for that God, who is a Great King and
whose Name is Dreadful. But if Every piece of Ignorance, and Arrogance, be set
up for a Preacher, the Name of the Holy God, will be profaned, with an
Offering, that is made a Ridicule in the Repetition.

We are not unsensible, that one thing, which has much Exposed some
Injudicious people among us, is, An opinion that Illiterate Men, may be
Serviceable and Admirable Preachers. Now, inasmuch as the Jesuits, have given
this among their Instructions to their Emissaries, To teach that Learning is
needless in a Minister, and if they understand the Gospel, it is Sufficient, we
are sorry that any of our people should be so Besotted, not to say, Bejesuited.
When the Knowledge of the Tongues and Arts Revived, Religion had a Revival with
it: And though some Unlearned men have been useful to the Interests of
Religion, yet no man ever decried Learning, but what was, an Enemy to Religion,
whether he knew it or no* When our Lord, chose Fishermen to be Ministers,
(which often is impertinently pleaded) He would not send them forth, until they
had been a considerable while under His Tuition, (a better than the best in any
College under Heaven!) and then also He Miraculously Furnished 'em with more
Learning, than any of us, by seven Years Hard Study can attain unto. If God,
should be provoked by the Unthankfulness of men, to send the Plague of an
Unlearned Ministry upon poor New England, soon will the Wild-Beasts of the
Desartly there, the Houses will be full of doleful Creatures, and Owls will
dwell there. Ordinarily, that man, who undertakes the Ministry of the Gospel,
without some Education for it, is, we doubt, in as presumptuous an Error, as
the unhappy Uzzah, that perished in his Error: though we also allow different
measures, and places, for that Education. And that man was never worthy to
Preach one Sermon, who did not feel, and would not own, that all the Learning
that can be had, is little enough to accomplish an Able Minister of the New
Testament.

Upon the whole, As Luther observed, That God punished the Primitive Churches,
with False Teachers, for their starving, and sleighting of their Faithful
Ministers; Thus, we fear the Churches of New England may suffer mischiefs in
Time to come from False Teachers; and we see cause to Admire the Compassion of
Heaven unto this Land, that such Dangerous Things have all this Time done so
little Damage, unto any of our Churches. But as the Church of Ephesus, having
been warned by the Apostle, That grievous Wolves would enter in among them, was
afterward commended by our Savior, for so taking the warning, that they Tried
them who said, they were Apostles when they were not so, and found them liars:
Even so, we would hope, that after this Day, no Untried persons will be
Entertained for Preachers, in any of our Colonies.

We lay this Advice before our Churches, purposing to do our part, in attending
to it.

Increase Mather James Allen Samuel Willard Moses Fiske Benjamin Woodbridge
Nehemiah Hobart John Danforth Cotton Mather Nehemiah Walter Jonathan Pierpont
Joseph Belcher Benjamin Wadsworth Benjamin Coleman.

Boston, December. 28. 1699.
An HISTORY, Of Some IMPOSTORS, Remarkably and Seasonably detected, in the
Churches of New England; Written to maintain the Advice Published by some of
the Pastors in those Churches relating to Impostures, and prevent all future
Mischiefs from them.
IT was a notable Discipline, by which the Reformed Churches in France,
preserved themselves, from the Intolerable Mischiefs, arising by the allowance
of Unworthy Preachers: Their National Synods every Time they Sat, would publish
a Roll of those Unworthy Preachers, that could be found creeping in among them,
and with a description of their Feature, and Stature, and other circumstances,
like what uses to be given in an Hue in Cry, this Roll would notify the Crimes
laid unto their charge, and admonish all People to beware of Entertaining them.

The Churches of New England, have Heretofore been in such Good Order, that no
man could be Ordained and Received as a Pastor in them, without the Concurrence
of the Churches in the Vicinity, and a very solemn and public Action. But a
Good Order has never yet been provided among us, that no Untryed, and Unfit
person, shall set up for a Preacher, and run about from Town to Town, getting
into the too much unguarded Pulpits, and threatening our Holy Religion, with no
little Inconvenience. Now to prevent and redress, this Inconvenience, it has
been by some Considerate persons desired, That something like the French Roll
may be Exhibited unto the Churches of New England, which may Exemplify some few
of the many Cheats, that have gone to Impose upon them. It is unreasonable to
complain, That the Crimes of those Cheats are thus openly Exposed; for, I
beseech you, Sirs, are they not as openly Committed? Men are too insensible, of
the horrible Villainy and Blasphemy, in the Crimes of those Fellows, who set up
for Teachers to the people of God, when God knows they are wicked Vagrants and
Varlets, designing to abuse the Honest people; if they imagine it, a severe
Thing, to stigmatize them, in the view of all the affronted Churches. The
Faults of the Paenitent, indeed should be Concealed; but these pretended
Preachers of Repentance, are not known to practice the Repentance which they
Preach A Pillory were a very gentle punishment for the Wretches, who wholly
unqualifyed Steal into a Pulpit, and Forge a Commission from the King of Heaven
unto His Churches. Our Laws not providing such a punishment for them, they that
would be faithful to the Churches, will do well (for did not the Apostle as
much to Hymenaeus, and Alexander?) to set them up in an History, instead of a
Pillory, with a Writing, as it were in Capitals, to signify, THESE WERE
IMPOSTORS THAT WOULD HAVE BEEN ESTEEMED MINISTERS.

The Consequence and Advantage of this Action, it is hoped, will be, That both
Pastors and People, will be more wary of being too sudden, in asking to Preach
for them, those to whom they are utter Strangers: That needy and profane
Strangers, will no more venture to Preach in a Country, where their detected
Wickedness will be proclaimed for the Terror of all that shall come after them:
That all pious minds will give glory to the Lord Jesus Christ, who Walks in the
midst of His Churches, when they see what Quick Work, He has ordinarily made in
these Churches, to discover those Atheistical Preachers, that have so horribly
mocked Him: and admire His Gracious and Watchful Providence, in still
delivering His Churches, from those Little Foxes, that would have spoiled them.
And now, we will Address our selves to do that, which when it is done, what will
they merit but the Cardinals Blessing, who will take no warning?

1. THE very First Minister (one Lyford) that ever came into New England,
(which was in the Year, 1624.) at his first coming did Caress the good people
at Plymouth, with such extreme shows of Affection and Humility, that the people
were mightily taken with him, nevertheless within a little while, he used most
malignant Endeavors to make Factions among them, and confound all their Civil
and Sacred Order. At last there fell into the Hands of the Governor, his
Letters home to England, filled with wicked and lying Accusations against the
people, of which things being shamefully convicted, he did publicly in the
Church confess with Tears, That he had slanderously abused the good people, and
that God might justly lay innocent Blood unto his Charge, for he knew not what
hurt might have come through his Writings, and that Pride, Vain glory, and self
love had been the causes of his miscarriages. These things he uttered so
pathetically, that they again permitted him to Preach among them: And yet in
two or three months be so notoriously renewed his miscarriages, which he had
thus bewailed, that his own Wife, through the Affliction of her mind at his
Hypocrisy, could not forbear declaring her Fears, that God would bring some
heavy Judgment upon their Family, not only for these, but some former Impieties
by him committed, especially in fearful Breaches of the Seventh Commandment,
which he had with an Oath denied, though they were afterward Evinced. Being
thereupon Banished, he went unto Virginia, where he soon ended his Days.

The Disaster thus befalling of this Country in the First Minister, that ever
came into it, seems to have been an Intimation from Heaven unto the Country, to
beware in all after times, how they suffered Cheats in the Evangelical Ministry
to be Imposed upon them. Nevertheless, there have Crept in several Cheats,
among the Churches, which have been speedily, and notably Detected. It will be
neither Needful, nor Useful, that they should be all Enumerated: Some of them
shall.

2. MAny among us, do still Remember, a Fellow that made himself Memorable, by
Preaching Zelously on that Text, Let him that Stole, Steal no more; when he had
at that very Time a parcel of Stolen Money in his Pocket. The Sum, as I
remember, was Five Pounds, but in the dozed Conscience of the Thief, hardly
made the weight of a Scruple.

3. I Have been informed, That a certain Gentleman in the Southern parts of
this I and, having with much pains, taught an Irish Servant in his Family, to
be almost able to read English; this fellow, after his Time was out, set up for
a Preacher in a Neighboring Plantation: But the Gentleman his Master,
happening some Time after to meet our Preaching Teague, Severely Chid him, for
his presumpteous Arrogance, and among other Expressions, bestowed this pretty
Satirical Scourge upon him; If such Fellows as thou art, may set up for
Preachers, there will be one Text impossible ever to be Preached upon, or to be
fulfilled or understood: The Almighty in one Text, threatens as a Judgment, A
Famine of Hearing the Word of the Lord; But if such Varlets as thou art, may be
Preachers, it is impossible, that such a Judgment should ever be Executed!

4. MAny of those persons, who have gone to Insinuate themselves into our
Churches, with Spirits in them, that were for their Coveteous, or Contentious,
or Ambitious, or otherwise Evil Inclinations, displeasing to the God of the
Spirits of all Flesh, have been immediately and remarkably confounded, by their
being left unto the Crimiminal Folly of Preaching Stolen Sermons. The detected
Plagiaries, have gone off, as a Thief is Ashamed when he is found. One happy
Hindrance to the Designs of the Fiery Serpent have been this way afforded among
us.

Others Remember Instances; I shall not mention them.

5 A Young Fellow, (one Dick Swayn) that had been Servant unto a Captain of a
Ship in Boston, after a thousand Rogueries, had his Time given him, by the
Widow of the Captain, when she became so, because that she would not be
troubled with so Thevish, Lying and Wicked a Villian. This Fellow was
afterward detected in Villainies, enough to fill a Volumn, which procured his
going in miserable circumstances to Virginia; from whence he got through
several Stages, at length unto the Island of Providence! There the Monster set
up for a Preacher of the Gospel, and putting on a Mighty show of Religion, he
was Mightily followed and admired; and the people treated him with a more than
ordinary Liberality. Percieving that it was Time to be gone from thence, he
forged Letters of his Fathers Death in England, by which a vast Estate was
fallen to him; under the umbrage of that Forgery, he gets off immediately by a
Vessel, that must first carry him to New England. Having Preached several
Sermons in the Southern parts of New England, he comes to Boston, in the year
School. Where in private Houses, he would be ridiculously forward in thrusting
himself upon Prayer, which he would manage with a Noise, that might reach all
the Neighborhood. He began to Court Opportunities of Preaching among the
Neighbors; but forgetting to change his Name, the Gentlewoman to whose
Deceased Husband he had been a Servant, accidentally coming in to the House is
here he lodged, and hearing one of that Name exceedingly cried up, as a worthy,
able, eminent man, asked for a sight of him. When to her Astonishment she found
it was Dick, even that very Scandalous Dick, that had played for many abominable
Pranks in her own Family some years ago. The Gentlewoman could Scarce believe
her Eyes; and finding the Vagrant not give her any intelligent Account how he
became a Christian, it was yet more unintelligible to her, how he became a
Minister. He begged her Pardon for all his old Knaveries, but she being advised
that he was now practicing of New ones, took a course that the people should be
deprived of so Charming a Preacher, as no doubt, some of the Giddy Populace
would have counted him. So without any more Disturbance, but only the cheating
some credulous Folks, of considerable Sums of Money, he marched off.

6. A Fellow, in this present year, 1699 appeared in Boston, pretending to be a
Minister: concerning whom, an Honest and a Discreet man, in the Country having
a just Fear, lest our Charity should unjustly, and unawares* take too kind
notice of him, wrote me the following Account.

This day, a man, whose Name is Eleazer Kingsberry, (...) in discourse with
him, (...) me, He had Preached the Gospel four Months; He showed me a
Certificate to prove it, with about Twelves Names to it, all Written by his own
Hand, (the Instrument was drawn by another,) He also told me, he Preached the
last Sabbath, between Tanton and Freetown, before a considerable Assembly;
which was confirmed by a man of Tanton then present. Considering how God is
likely to be dishonored, and the Gospel scandalized, by him, I thought it my
Duty to undeceive you, by giving you, the following Relation. He was born, and
brought up in Wrentham, and bound prentice to a Tailor, but so Vicious a
Servant, that his Master could do no Good with him. He gat Free, and Married a
Wife; but not long after Stole, and left her; and adding to his Felony several
other Vicious Tricks, he went to the Westward. From thence he wrote a Letter to
Wrentham, which consisted chiefly of Lies and Curses. When I now spoke with
him, I advised him to follow his Calling, and provide for his Wife, and not
seek to Dishonor God, and deceive his People. He replied, As for his Wife, she
was a Devilish Jade, and he would never take her more; but when he was
Settled, and had an House, he would take her as a Servant; and if she would not
obey him, he would kick her into the Fire; but he would go on in Preaching, --
and he would wage twenty pieces of Eight, he would get Money, and Credit in a
short Time. -- I could fill a Sheet of paper, but I hope, I have said enough to
prevent his having any Encouragement from you; and what further ought to be
done concerning him, I leave to your Consideration.

One of the Ministers, in Boston, immediately sent after him, a Letter under a
flying Seal, Solemnly charging him, to leave off the presumpteous and
Blasphemous course, that he had thus taken up, and return unto his Family and
Employment; and giving him to understand, that the Justices every where should
be informed of him, as being, A Vagabond. Hereupon, the Vagabond, as I am told,
changed his Name into Berry, and Ran away to a place called, Cape May, where I
am also told, the people were so Bewitched with him, that they were almost
ready to tear in pieces any man, that should speak diminutively of him.

7. BUT though this Bird flew away to the Southward, unto Cape May, another,
whose pretended Name was May came upon this Coast about the same Time. And on
that Occasion, an Excellent and Ingenious person, wrote unto me such passages
as these.

May uses to prove Pleasant and Healthy; but the Mob are wont to Dance, at the
Entrance of it, let it prove how it will. Mr. Parker used to say, The people
love to Tap a New Barrel. I think, I once told you of E. F. and M. J. but lest
I have not, I Will give you a word of each.

E. F. Sometimes of Salem, coming to New Haven, on Saturday* Even, being
Clothed in Black, was taken for a Minister, and was able to Ape one, and
Humoured the mistake, like him that said, Si vult populus decipi, decipiatur.
Word being carried to Mr. J.T. that a Minister was come to Town, he immediately
procured him to Preach both parts of the Day. The First was to Acceptance; but
in the Last Exercise, he plentifully showed himself to be a why msical
Opinionist, and besides Railed like Rabshakeh, and Reviled the Magistrates,
Ministers and Churches, at such a rate, that the people were ready to pull him
out of the Pulpit.

8. THe same Worthy Person goes on* M. J. A Welsh Tanner by Trade, some time
Servant unto Capt. P. at Salem, left Salem, went to Say-brook, workt at his
Trade, and Stole Mr. W.'s Leather Breeches. Thence he went to Staten Island, by
New York, and Set up for a Preacher, being a ready Prater. At the Information
of a pedling Trader, he had an Invitation by some few of Killingworth, to visit
them* and Preach in order to Settlement. He came; but happening to speak
irreverently of something in the Scripture, before some of the people, it
occasioned such Division and Tumult, that he was not suffered to Preach, before
Mr. Buckinghams Advice and consent was obtained; which when sought, he advised
them to Enquire first whether this were not the Fellow that Stole the Leather
Breeches. This proving even so, prevented him at Killingsworth. Thence he went
to Brainford, the night before a Fast, and making known his pretended Function
it was counted a good Providence; for they had no Minister, and he was
earnestly desired to Preach, and as readily accepted it. But one Peter Stent, a
Brother that used to Pray and Read a good Sermon among the People, when they
had no Minister, knew nothing of this, (for he lived at a Farm,) but in the
morning came provided, to Read one of Mr. A. Grayes, Sermons. But he found
Morgan at it, when he came; and when he named his Text, it was the same his
intended Sermon was on: and out of Curiosity, to see how men's wits jumpt in
prosecuting the same Text, he turned to his Book, and found Morgan the same
with Mr. Gray, word for word. He followed him while he was weary, and at length
run before, to a place in the Sermon, that spoke of Glasgow Sinners, and there
Lay wait for Morgan* but when he came there, he turned it, New England Sinners;
and that was all the variation in the whole Sermon. The people were mightily
affected with the Sermon, and were hot upon calling Morgan to the Ministry. But
S^^nt discovered the Cheat. So they dismissed him, and the Tanner departed with
Liberty to go as far as a New pair of Shoes would carry him.

9 FAscination is a thing, whereof mankind has more Experience than
Comprehension. And Fascination is never more notoriously sensible, than in Men's
Running after False Teachers of Religion. When False Teachers Imposed on the
Galatians, the Apostle said, O Foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you! One
cannot easily ascribe unto a Truer cause, than a Satanick Energy, the strange
Biass upon the minds of a multitude, forceably and furiously sometimes carrying
them into Follies, from whence the plainest Reason in the World will not
Reclame them. What, but such an Energy could be upon the minds of many people
in Boston, after the Arrival of one that went by the Name of Samuel May, about
the Beginning of July, 1699. The wonderful Success of Mahomet upon a World
where Christianity was to another Degree lost, than it is yet in Boston, was no
longer a wonder unto us, when we saw the Success of May, in a place of so
Christian a Character as Boston. It was all over pure Enchantment! He showed
unto one Minister at his first Arrival, a Testimonial of little but some hopes
of his being a man of a sweet Gospel Spirit, Signed with two Names, whereof one
was of a man, that once had been a Scandalous Fire Ship, among the Churches in
this Country: Which when this Blade understood, he would never after show his
Testimonial to any more of our Ministers, though they earnestly and frequently
asked him for it. So Silly and Shallow a person he was, that it was impossible
for any but such to be many miputes in his Company without being sensible of
it. The first thing that made some to suspect him was, his using to Lift up his
Eyes and Hands, with strains of Devotion used by none others in the Assembly,
after he had first looked about to see who looked upon him. Numberless marks of
a Cheat, were daily more and more discovered in him; nevertheless, he was able
to imitate a plausible Utterance and Action, and seemed so zealously set upon
Inviting men to Christ, that after Sermon was over, he would make another
Speech, to put 'em in mind on it. Abundance of the people became so fiercely set
for him, that they poured out a thousand expressions of Rage, upon the Faithful
Pastors of the Town, that thought not such an Illiterate Creature, (who by his
own Confession, had never been one year under any Education,) worthy to be set
up in the public Pulpits. Though the bigger and wiser part of the Town, were
not seized with this Bigotry, yet a multitude became so Furious, that making it
their business, to solicit all sorts of persons, to go a Maying with them, if
any Refused, they could hardly escape some Reproach for it. The Jews were
hardly more engaged for their Sabatai Sevi. The Disciples of this Money
Catcher, became so Exceeding Fierce, many of them, that some sober men, became
afraid of Passing by that way, where one must Encounter them. Though he were
detected in several Crimes, as, pretending to Languages which he knew nothing
of, and this in the special Service and Presence of the Lord; and Preaching
Stolen Sermons, wherein he could not produce one material Sentance of his own;
and horrid Lying, in very Repe^ed Instances* Yet his Followers would go on,
making Ridiculous Apoligies for him; and Malicious Invectives against any that
would not yet believe him an Eminent Saint. Yea, they began to throw Bibels
into the Houses of the Ministers, the most insolent that ever I saw. The
Anabaptists Employed him at their Meeting House, which was now filled with
great Congregations: and it was an undeserved, an astonishing, a very memorable
Mercy of God unto the Town, that this man, was now kept from venting any
Heresies among a people, that made themselves to become such Tynder, for any
Sparks, that he might strike into them. And yet it was another Mercy as great
as This, that the Young Women in the Town, were not betrayed and debauched into
fearful Whoredoms. For, at length, Witnesses, Good, Virtuous, Credible
Witnesses appeared, that showed him, to have been as dangerous a Devil, as the
poor Young Women could have met withal, when, by a certain Reverence for him as
a Minister, they were prepared for his vile Solicitations. He perceived these
things beginning to break out; and away he new: none of the Endeavors used by
his Admirers, to make him stay, could stop him. The Pastors of the Churches,
had before made this Reflection, That after men of the of most unspotted Piety,
have spent whole Prentice-ships of Years, in the faithful, watchful, painful
Service of the Churches, and have served them Day and Night; with Prayers, with
Tears, with Fastings, with their most studied Sermons, and Writings, and have
never such a Reputation with the Churches in Countries afar off; yet if any
Wolf in Sheeps Clothing do come with a few Good Words among them, the simple
Souls of many* will not only follow the Wolf, but on his Account bark at the
Shepherds. This is a Vanity, that I have seen under the Sun. But the People had
now this Reflection to make; That since they had Sinfully slighted their most
Serviceable Pastors, who never craved after the Riches of this World, they
should by the just Judgment of God, be left unto such an Infatuation, as to
Enrich a Craving Beggar, with many Pounds of their Substance; which Beggarly
Stranger, immediately applied himself, (not to instill the Fear of God, and Love
of Christ, into your Children, O Injured People, as your Pastors do, with a
most indefatigable Application! but) to teach them, that Fornication and
Adultery is no Sin, and to watch oppotunities of making them, like himself, the
Children of the Devil. Repent, O Infatuated People; Repent, of what you have
done; and let the Ensuing Letter, help you more thoroughly to consider the
occasions for your doing so.

Religio Contaminata ad omnium Pertinet injuriam.
Boston, 25 d. 10 m. 1699. A LETTER, Containing a Remarkable HISTORY, OF AN
Impostor.
SIR,
I Am going to Entertain you, with a very surpising Story, by the Communication
whereof, the Wisdom, and Goodness, and Justice of Heaven, will become
Observable to many Christian Minds, and the Devices of Hell against the
Interests of Heaven, be a little more fully understood, and by being
understood, for the future prevented.

The Last Summer, in the very Ship that brought us Letters from our Friends i^
(...) to the Nonconformists from (...) fellows, that pretended unto the
Preaching of the Glorious Gospel, there arrived unto us a man, that pretended
the Name of Samuel May, and the character of a Preacher; having with him a
Woman whom he call(...)d his Wife, but used her with an Unwifely Crabbedness,
that gave Scandal to the people aboa(...)d. Albeit this man gave me much cause
to be suspicious, Lest he might be one of those whom our Letters complained of,
yet my compassion toward a Needy Stranger, whom I saw, in ragged, wretched,
forlorn circumstances, caused me among other ways of being Helpful unto him,
to seek that he might be twice Employed in, and Requited for Preaching at our
Private Meetings; hoping thereby to have a little Trial of him His Plausible
Delivery, presently Enchanted abundance of Honest people, who thought all was
Gold that glistered; but many Days passed not, before I found several Things,
which made me say, I doubted, he was a Wolf in Sheeps Clothing They that now
say, They followed this man, because I commended him, wrong me very much; for
though it is not my manner to speak ill of men, till I know what I speak, and
that it is my Duty to Speak, yet I let fall words from the very first, that any
Intelligent Hearer might see I had some Fear about him. The cause of that Fear
was this; I found, That although it is no time of any Persecution, that should
force any but Ill men to Conceal themselves, yet he came Aboard the Vessel
under some Concealment, not professing, nor supposed, for to be a Minister* but
rather a Mendicant, until they had Sailed many Leagues. I found that he could
mention the Name of no one Minister in London, with whom he durst say, that he
had any Acquaintance; Lest, as it should seem, he should happen to mention one,
with whom we should be better Acquainted. I found, that he was unaccountably
Shy, of giving us any satisfactory Account of his Original, his Education, his
former circumstances; by no means, could I get him, to tell me, in what
Employment, he had spent the first six or seven and twenty years of his Life.
What appeared most probable (and since, more probable) was, That he was a
Barber. A blind Charity, would still have persuaded me, to keep alive some
hope, that Folly rather than Design, might ly at the bottom of his odd conduct;
but I soon observed something that made me say to some of my Intimate Friends,
That I feared, he would prove at last, a smutty, filthy, wanton Fellow.
However, Things not being yet come to that maturity, I contented my self with
calling to mind, the Rule which the Old Briton gave his Countrymen, to
discover whether Austin the Monk were a Man of God or no. Thought I, If this be
an Honest man, he is an Humble man: If he be a Faithful Servant of Christ,
he will plainly let his Fellow Servants know what he is, what he intends, what he
can do, and humbly refer himself to Them for Direction and Assistance. We found
nothing of This; but though he were wholly Illiterate, and not able, even to
write a little Common English. (for instance, there were Eighteen horrid false
Spells, and not One point, in one very short. Note, that I received from him,)
yet this proud Thraso, would in his Preaching, Ostentate skill in Latin, and in
Greek, yea, and in Hebrew; But God left him to such Folly in his pride, that he
frequently pronounced the Exotic Words, in a manner so ridiculous, as to render
it plain, that he kn^w nothing of them: and in one of those two or three
private Preachments, by which 'twas hoped, we might have some Taste of his
Faculties, he was under such an Infatuation, that he would needs give some
Hebrew to us; but what he gave us, might be Welsh or Irish, or the Vagabonds
Cannot, for ought I knew; One Minister present, knew it was not in six or seven
Languages, in all which himself had in various Writings Addressed the world,
and others of his Hearers besides I, knew that there was no such Hebrew in the
Lexicon. Who, but one Hypocritically disposed would have done so? If he were a
Shaver, 'twas plain however, he was not the most Cunning in the world: In the
mean time, 'twas a strange Enchantment upon the people, that they should after
these things, put themselves into his Hands. But that his Humility might be the
more notorious, I was presently informed, that the Blade with an Arrogance
equal to his Ignorance, began to complain, That the Ministers of the Town, did
not immediately Invite him, into their Pulpits; and upon his Complaints, many
sinful people, (who have great cause to take no little shame unto themselves,
for their causeless and shameless Iniquity) began to Defame the Ministers, with
Slanderous Outcries, That they were always uncivil to Strangers; and some
could bestow this Comparison upon them, That here was come, a better Workman
than themselves, whom therefore they would not suffer to stay in the Town, if
they could help it. The Pastors of the Churches, being desirous to answer the
Expectations of the people, as far as they could, in Conscience unto the people
themselves, and with credit unto the Evangelical Ministry, they sent unto this
man, in as Loving and as Tender Terms, as they could, a Message to this
purpose, That they being sincerely desirous to Encourage him, in doing all the
Good he should be found Able to do, and he not having brought Satisfactory
Testimonials into the Country with him, they prayed a visit from him, in which
they would inform themselves of his Abilities, for the Evangelical Ministry,
and with all possible Easiness proceed in their Examining and Advising of him.
To this Message there was brought us from him, an Answer of this purport, That
he knew no Authority the Ministers had to Enquire after him, and he was not
bound to give them an account of himself, and more to that Effect. The
Ministers had now done but the Duty of Watchmen, that would be found faithful
to the Churches and Neighbors; but none of their Watchfulness could hinder
many of the people, from the great fault of running themselves into Temptation,
by giddily running after the Instructions of a Fellow, that had Shunned the
Light, because his Deeds were Evil. The people, (whose Charity has been for the
most part so Exemplary, that, methinks it is pity it should ever be misplaced
and perverted) some of them not only made a large Collection, to pay the
Passage of this mischievous Beggar, and put Money into his Pocket; but also
filled the Town, with so much Lying and Outrage against their faithful
Ministers, for not counting such an Un-Lettered Thing, a fit Instructor for
their Flocks, that I could not but think an hundred times of the people
Bewitched by Simon the Sorcerer, and say, That the greatest Blemish, that ever
befell the Town, was in the madness, which th^^ now discovered. Who would have
believed it, that in a Town so Illuminated as Boston, there should be any
people of such a principle, That if the greatest Villian in the World, should
arrive a total Stranger among us, and for his True Name, give us perhaps only
the first Syllable of his Name, and of a Barber turn a Preacher, the Pastors
here must immediately Set him up in the public Pulpits, or else the people
justly load them with all the Calumnious Indignities that can be thought of?
However, the Ministers bore with patience all the Contempt which their Great
Lord, saw the people foolishly cast upon them; and no two of them that ever I
heard of, ever let fall one word, publicly to Rebuke their Folly; But, Sir,
You shall see anon, Whether the Lord Himself will not Rebuke it, and make the
people wish, They had hearkened unto the Voice of their Teachers.

We have in our Vicinity, a Small Congregation of Anabaptists, with whom I had
always Lived in a Good Correspondence. Forgive me the vanity, if I say,
without judging it proper in this place, to prove what I say, That never any
Minister so distant from their persuasion, carried it with more civility, and
Affection toward persons of their persuasion, then I made it my Endeavor to
do Because, I believed, there were Godly persons among them, I offered them,
that if they should come (as they were likely) to have the Divine Institutions
fail among themselves, I would freely accept them to Communion with my own
Flock; and though they should be so scrupulous as to Turn their Backs as often
as an Infant was Baptized, it should not be made an offense. This Offer I made
them, I hope not out of a sinful Affectation to Enlarge my Flock; The most
undeserved Favor of Heaven, has Employed my poor Services, in such Assemblies,
that I have cause to Study how I may Serve them better before I go to get them
Larger; but it was purely from a Spirit of Charity. Indeed, I had no Answer but
this, We look upon you, as an Unbaptized man, and therefore we cannot hold
Communion with you: But though this New-Comer were in their Opinion, An
Unbaptised man, yet they now took this opportunity, to Invite him, unto public
and constant Preaching every Lords Day, and Lecture besides, in their
Meeting House. Indeed, I must so far Vindicate these Brethren, as to tell you,
That they do not seem to me, so much in Fault, as diverse other people of my own
profession, who Solicited them, and Instigated them, to Set up a Preacher for
them, which their own Pastors had Refused; and it was on some Accounts a Time
of Temptation with them. Nevertheless, I cannot wholly Justify this Faulty
Action: And their Setting up such a Fellow, under all these Ill Circumstances,
to be their Public Teacher, looked the worse, because they could not but see,
that it nourished in his Numerous Proselytes, not only the sleight of a Learned
Ministry, but also a disposition which ordinarily Inspired those that were
proselyted by him, to become Enemies and Revilers of the Ministers of the Town.
One of those Ministers beholding the Spirit, which this thing was done withal,
freely told the Anabaptists, That the Lord Jesus Christ, who saw what
Principles they acted upon, would certainly make this very man, the Occasion of
the greatest Confusion that ever befell them: And at the same Time, saw cause to
Foretell unto many others, That the Devices of Satan in this matter were, for
this man, to Engage many of our weaker People, to be his Hearers, by his not
professing himself an Anabaptist, but when he had them fast, then about three
or four months hence, to profess himself an Anabaptist, and lead them, who
could say, whither? with him. Unto the man himself also, that person having
signified his Dislike of what he had seen in him, Concluded, The Ministers of
this Town, who have by your means been greatly and ungratefully Reviled, will,
I suppose, trouble themselves no farther about you, Except some remarkable
Occasion oblige them to it: but they will carry their Flocks to the Lord Jesus
Christ, and they will carry their Names to the Lord Jesus Christ, and they will
carry You also unto the Lord Jesus Christ; but I believe, the Consequence of
This, will very speedily be unto You, very uncomfortable. He, and his
Creatures, went on filling the Town with Slander, in Instances, which I desire
to Forgive and Forget: Only one of them, I will mention, because they made more
than ordinary Noise about it. Having too just cause to fear, that this Insolent
Fellow, would Steal an Admission to the Lords Table, in my own Church, I went
unto his House, on purpose to Forbid him from it; but they spread a story over
the Town, that I came to Invite him to it. Many Days did not now pass, before
I did by a singular Accident, meet with a Book of Dr. Samuel Boltons, wherein
there is a Discourse about, The Royalties of Faith; and this Discourse, to my
Surprise, I found so very much the same, with what I had my self heard this man
deliver, that I thought the two Boys in Plautus, were not more alike, Dixitqu^
sibi sua C^ncio, Fur es. I sent for many other of the Hearers, who had better
Memories than my self, and offered them, to give them a considerable Price for
every Sentence they could call to mind, in their Dr. Samuel May's Discourse,
that I could not show them in my Dr. Samuel Boltons; which offer they some of
them took, but could not find One Sentence for their Advantage: The Exact
Agreement, between Samuel the Doctor, and Sam the Dunce, was a diverting
Surprise to all that saw it. Hereupon, a Minister of the Town, visited the man
himself, and proffered him a Piece of Eight, for every material Sentence, that
he could produce, of his own Discourse, about, The Royalties of Faith, which
could not be produced from the Author, and in the Order, and with his
Flourishes, and Expressions, that were most Peculiar; and he set before him the
Cheat and the Crime, that there is in Preaching Stolen Sermons. Indeed,
because the man had no Academical Education (Except one should suppose at
Samourgan, a certain famous Academy in Lithuania,) it was to no purpose, to
quote unto him the saying of Synesius, Magis impium esse mortuorum
Lucubrationes, quam vestes furari; but I did in Plain English tell him the
Dishonesty of the matter. He not only Denied, that ever he had used or seen any
of Dr. Boltons works, (though he was also detected of Stealing Three or Four
more Sermons, out of this very Book!) but he also called the Great and Dreadful
God to Witness, That the Discourse he delivered, was the pure effect of his own
Industry and Invention; adding, That he had no other way to give Satisfaction,
but by Preaching on any Text, that Minister should give him. The Minister told
him, That he was astonished at his horrid Wickedness and Atheism, and that if
he were to be believed in this thing, all Humane Proof of any thing must come
to an End. He proceeded; That he had out-gone, all the Cheats that ever had
appeared among us, for being so hardened in Impiety and Stupidity, as to Deny a
Fact, wherein he was as plainly Detected, as ever any Thief, that was taken
with the Stolen Goods about him. And he concluded; Miserable Man, Do you ask me
for a Text to Preach upon? I have a Text, more than one, for you, to Think
upon. Go Preach, if you dare to do it, upon that Text, Psalm 101.7. He that
tells Lies, shall not tarry in my sight. Preach, if you dare to do it, upon
that Text, Psalm. 50.16. Unto the Wicked God says, what have thou to do, to
declare my Statutes? Preach, if you dare to do it, upon that Text, Rev. 21 8.
All Liars shall have their Part in the Lake. And if you dare carry on your
Impiety so far, Preach upon that Text, Rev. 2.23. All the Churches shall know,
that I search the Reins and the Hearts. But let me faithfully and Solemnly, and
as a Minister of God, and as one speaking to you in the Name of God, and in the
Fear of God, Admonish you to Repent of your Wickedness. I doubt, you will not
Repent, and therefore, I tell you, I am verily persuaded, the Lord Jesus
Christ, who knows, your Secret Wickedness will bring it out. I verily Believe,
That in your Detection, the Glorious Lord Jesus Christ, will make all the
Churches to know, that He searches the Reins and the Hearts of the Children of
men. Remember, I told you so, and that many Months will not pass, before this
come to pass: It may be, I may Live to see it. He Trembled and Quiver'd, when
the Minister spoke these things unto him; yet he Repented not, but in a few
Hours, he set the people a Railing at that Minister, in many Corners of the
Town, for, Abusing a Precious, Godly, Worthy man. Some Advised, the Arresting
of that Minister, in Great Actions, for Defaming of this Excellent Person; And
others had the Fear of God, so little in Exercise with them, as to cry out,
That if this man had been guilty of all that was charged on him, yet for that
Minister to speak such Things to him, was as great an offense as his.

I had reason, to desire, That the Truth might now appear, a little more
irrefragably; and therefore I went unto the Officers of the Anabaptist Church,
declaring, That I apprehended my self able to convict the man whom they
Employed as a Public Teacher among them, of being a Cheat, and of having
horribly Ly'd against his Conscience, in several repeated and Notorious
Instances; and that I desired on my own behalf, and on the behalf of the other
Ministers in the Town, that they would appoint a place, the next week, where I
might prove my Charge to his Face, and they should be Judges of it. I could not
have Imagined it; But the Church being informed of my Demand, immediately
Renewed (as I am told) their Call unto him, to continue his Preaching among
them; and by their Minister and Another, there was an Answer of this Importance
brought unto me, That inasmuch as this man was not a Member of their Church,
they did not apprehend themselves concerned, to take any notice of what I had
offered. Whereto my Reply was, Well, I have done my Duty, and I hope, you have
considered, Whether it will be for Christ's Honor, or for your own, to Employ
a man, as a Public Preacher, against whom such a Charge is urged, and may be
proved, if you will but hear it. And thought I, How much will Christians act
besides themselves, when Led into Temptation! From this Time, even from
September, (I think) to December, I concerned my self no further: being
satisfied, that it would not be long before the Lord Jesus Christ, who saw how
impiously this man mocked Him, would Search him out, and cloth with perpetual
Confusion, those that would persist in Assisting such a Mocker of Heaven. One
would have thought that considerate people after this warning would have been
as much afraid of seeing such a Spectre in a Pulpit, as if he had been the
Holder forth, which they say, sometimes appears in the Coper Mines of Sueden.
But many people, instead of taking the warning, went on still, under the
Influences of this Ignis Fatuus, to treat me (and much better men) with
Numberless and Furious Abuses for giving it; and with a practical Commentary
upon the Distempers mentioned in the Beginning of the first Epistle to the
Corinthians. I praise the Lord, for His making me unwilling to Remember them,
and I pray Him to cast them out of His Remembrance. At last the malice went so
far, that they began to throw into my House, insolent, bitter, bloody Libels,
wherein, albeit the nameless Writers Confess A great Esteem for me, for my
moderate Spirit toward them that differ from me, yet they now in most venomous
Terms of Rage, flew upon me for my Reviling an Eminent Worthy Stranger, (as
they express it) and Persecuting one who had the Root of the matter in him, and
one who had now the Liberty of a more Unstained Pulpit, than any of those which
had been denied him. All these, and many more such things, wherein I heard the
Defaming of many, I bore, I hope, I may say, Silently, and Patiently, and it
was a great Fault in me, if not Prayerfully: and if I did not set my self, to
consider, What Holy Lessons were to be Learnt out of such Temptations: In which
Lessons I should have been sufficiently Requited Good, for the Cursing of all
the Shimei's in the Town. But, thought I, what Spirit possesses these Touchy
Folks, that they cannot let me be quiet? I do nothing to Disquiet them: Or, Does
that Spirit see, that his Time is but Short, e're the Displeasure of Heaven,
put this Boutefeu and his Disciples, to the Blush, which had been foretold unto
them? Truly; Sir, I had no Remedy, but humbly to carry my Complaints unto the
Lord, who knew my Faithfulness.

This Evil Worker now applied himself unto the Anabaptists, with private
Intimations, That for four or five years, he had been convinced in his
Conscience, that their way was the Right way, and that he was now in some
Trouble of Conscience for his having Delayed so long to Declare himself, but it
should not now be long before he did. When Things were now become just Ripe,
for the Devices of Satan, to take effect; behold, how the Wonderful Providence
of Heaven defeated them! The Lord sent an Evil Spirit, between this man and the
Anabaptists that had adhered unto him. Even They began to find their Eminent
Worthy Stranger, Guilty of such Lying, and such Lewdness, and such Damnable
Coveteousness, (especially, when upon their not carrying Money to him, on a
Lord's Day, wherein he Preached not, he flew out as I am told, like a Dragon,
spitting this among other Fire, at them, I see, no longer Pipe, no longer
Dance!) that they came to fear, he was a Cheat, and wished, they had never seen
him. While things were thus operating, the Guilty Fellow having bubbled the
silly Neighbors of incredible scores of Pounds, and thinking that the Answers
of my Letters to Europe about him were not far off, all on the sudden, he will
be gone; and none of the charming offers that were made him, if he would
continue, could procure his continuance any longer in the Country. He that had
often told us, his coming from England, was with a purpose to see his Uncle in
Virginia, whom it may be, no man else ever saw, now without one look toward
Virginia, Ships himself to Return for England. But, God will no longer be
mocked!

A Virtuous and Laudable Young Gentleman, in the Neighborhood, Lets fall a
word unto one of his Friends, That he was informed, this man had used some
uncivil carriage toward a Woman that belonged unto one of the Churches in the
Town. Some of the Hearers go and complain, that this Gentleman said, The man
had got such a Woman with Child, whereupon some of the man's Friends began to be
obstreperous. The Ingenuous Young Gentleman, was too well beloved, by all that
knew his constant piety, to be suspected of speaking a Falsehood; and the
Trouble on the minds of his Friends for him, immediately made several Discreet
and Honest Women, to speak out more plainly, how able They were to Assert the
Truth, of what he had really spoken. Horrid Things began to be muttered about
this Wretch, for diverse weeks before, and no doubt, the Apprehension of their
taking Air, hastened his Flight: but a ^^dest Woman, especially if she don't
know of any one else, to sustain with her the weight of the Testimony, appears
with no small Reluctance to testify an affront offered unto her. It had been
Remarked by some, That this Villian, though in Public Prayer he were
extraordinarily Devout, yet he had a strange Indisposition to Private Prayer.
And there was enough to render Prayer uneasy to his Guilty Soul; for while he
was Feasting with the Abused Neighbors, he had Eyes full of Adultery, that
could not cease from Sin. The Burning Jealousy of the Lord Jesus Christ, will
now bring out the Villainy of this man, and Make all the Churches to know that
He searches the Reins and the Hearts. The Hypocrite had made such a show of
zeal, in his performances on the Stage, that every one said, This man must be
either a great Saint* or a great Rogue; and as to one of these, I question,
whether a greater ever came into his Land.

Sir, I durst not blot my paper, with all the Abominable Things, that are
testified upon Oath, against this Eminent Worthy Stranger. But the Sum of the
Testimonies, deposed upon Oath, before the Magistrate, December. 7. 1699. by
several Women of unblemished Reputation, is. That he would often watch
Opportunities of getting them alone, and then would often affront them with
Lewd, Vile, and Lascivious Carriages, which rendered it a dangerous Thing to be
alone with him, and abundantly assured them, that he was a great Rogue, and
that, if they had been for his Turn, he would have stuck at no Villainy toward
them. That he would also talk at a vile rate, and among other things, he would
plead, That there was no Sin in Adultery.

The Testimonies after T^is, increased on our Hands, which assured us, That on
a Saturday, with his Bible in his Hands, he could solicit Young Women to
Wantonness; Yea, and Endeavor to Intoxicate them, that he might pursue his
vile Purposes upon them. Yea, That when he heard of a Young Woman affected with
his Ministry, he would find her out, and spend several Hours together in rude
actions and speeches, to her, and urging her to Ly with him, which he said, was
no Sin, for David and Solomon did as much; and adding, They need not fear being
with Child by him, for none ever were so! More of this prodigious Devillism was
testified against this Eminent Worthy Stranger; and other horrid stuff begins
to come to Light, and I suppose would soon be found, if sought for: but I abhor
to rake any further in such a Dunghill.

They that filled the Town with other Impiety, by setting up this Filthy
Dreamer, have now a Time to Admire the Favor of Heaven, (more than their own
prudence) That there was not Set up a Congregation of Nicolaitans, in the Town,
and that the Young People, have not been debauched into fearful Whoredoms, and
Led away to the Unclean Spirit, like the Transylvanian Children, which danced
after the Pied Piper, into the Cave of Hamelen.

But I have observed, That whereas grievous Times of Temptation are ever now
and then, sent upon our Churches, if the Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ can,
for a while bear to be buffeted by the Foolish Rage of those Times, and apply
themselves to Humble Prayer, and Faith, before the Great Lord, who holds the
Tempter in a Chain, and if instead of answering to Reviling with Reviling, they
are only quickened unto more of Holiness, and Usefulness, the Times do not
prove Days of Temptation, but mere Hours of Temptation; and Nubeculae cito
transiturae, presently at an end. And so it was, in the Storm of Temptation,
which by Satan, was now Raised in our Neighborhood.

It has in some former years commonly happened unto me, That when I visited in
the way of my Pastoral Duty, persons Possessed with Evil Spirits, the persons
though they knew every one else in the room, yet through the unaccountable
Operation of the Evil Spirits upon their Eyes, I must appear so Dirty, so Ugly,
so Disguised unto them, that they could have no knowledge of me. I have a
thousand times thought, That the Lord ordered This for some Intimation unto me,
that when Times of Temptation come, wherein Evil Spirits have as much Operation
on the Minds of many people, as they have upon the Eyes of Energumens, a
Minister of the Lord Jesus Christ, that will be faithful unto His Interests,
must look to be all over Disguised, by misrepresentations, unto the Minds of
them that are under the power of Temptation. A Minister shall strictly Impose
that Law of Kindness upon his Lips, to speak not one Intemperate or Injurious
Word, on the greatest provocation; and yet be Represented, as a man full of
Bitterness. He shall be always Devising Things to Relieve the miserable, and
Spend more than many others do imagine possible to be spent in Pious Uses, and
scorn to take many Little Gains, that might lawfully be taken, and yet they
shall cry out of him, for Uncharitableness and Incivility. He shall never once
in his Life, ask a Salary from his Flock, nor agree with them about a Salary,
nor have his Dependence on the Lord's Day Collections for a Salary, nor be in
any Likelihood of seeing the Lord's Day Collections to fail, and yet they shall
flout at him, as one afraid of Loosing his Contribution. A Minister, shall be
of such a Temper, that perceiving a considerable and valuable part of his
Flock, to put themselves unto a deal of Trouble to attend upon his Ministry (by
passing a large Ferry every Lord's Day,) he shall one year after another call
upon those Beloved Christians, to Leave his Ministry, and set up a New Church
by themselves, and set a Worthy Pastor over them, to support whom, he shall
offer to contribute not a little, and part with some of his own Salary; and yet
this Minister shall be represented as Afraid of nothing more than Loosing his
Hearers. He shall -- But I don't love to mention these Things; The Lord of
Heaven, Teach us by these Things, to Long for Heaven, and even while we are on
Earth, to Live in Heaven.

You will doubtless make some Advantage to your Holy Thoughts from this
Remarkable Story; and my other Neighbors will make, I hope, at least this
Advantage from it, That if another Barber, instead of the other Courses, that
bring so many to Tyburn, come over from London hither, to recruit his Broken
Fortunes by the Blasphemies of Stolen Sermons, plausibly and fervently
delivered, the people have now Learnt a little more Wit, than to pamper such a
Fellow with their plentiful Cookery, and Equip, him with scores of Pounds in
his Pocket, and send him to London again, to Laugh at the Folly of them that
will permit themselves to be so Abused.

It Is time for me now, to Subscribe my self, (inasmuch as I am not Writing a
Libel)

Sir, Your Sincere Servant, Cotton Mather.

Postscript.
THE Country has been so filled with Lies, on the occasion of the Things which
have been truly Represented in this my Letter, that I suppose, I shall publish
the Letter unto the Country: And if any blame the Publication, I think they
will forget, What is required in the Ninth Commandment: and I fear, they will
but Expose themselves unto the censures of Wise and Good men, as the Friends of
this Impostor, not out of Charity (as diverse worthy Christians before they
knew him, were) but from a principle of Impiety and Malignity. Among the
ancient Israelites when a False Prophet, or an Unclean Priest, was found, every
man had a Commission, in the presence of Ten men, to Execute the Law upon him,
(as Grotius tells us,) Non Expectato Judice. But when one of those Wretches
received his punishment, it was the Custom, That a Letter concerning it, should
be dispatched unto all the Cities of Israel. As for this Unclean Prophet, the
Letter it self, that is now dispatched unto all the Churches, is the chief
punishment hitherto inflicted on him.

Something to be known, by all the Churches.
OR, Short Remarks upon the Remarkable Dispensations of the Lord JESUS CHRIST,
unto His Churches, discovering Secret Offenders and Impostors, among them.
At Boston Lecture, 14. d. 10. m. 1699.
REV. II.23. All the Churches shall know, that I am He, who Searches the Reins
and the Hearts.


THE Vilest of Creatures, do sometimes creep into the purest of Churches. Yea,
some that set up for Zealous Teachers of Godliness, are Secretly the most
Ungodly Wretches in the World. Our Lord Jesus Christ, in His Holy and Wondrous
Providence, often detects these Woeful Hyprocrites. But when such Hypocrites are
detected, He so orders the Detection, that His Churches, not only Should, but
Shall take Notice of it.

There was at Thyatira, One that set up for a Teacher, and was marvellously.
Approved, Admired, and Followed, by many of the People; at whose Giddiness the
Lord Jesus Christ, was therefore Exceedingly offended. But this Teacher was in
the Issue proved an Horrid, Filthy, Lascivious Wretch, and fell under the
dreadful Judgments of God. Our Lord Jesus Christ now declares the Use, that He
will have to be made of such a matter; And His Doctrine unto us, is This.

The Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, who Searches the Reins and the Hearts
of men, will by wonderful Dispensations of His Providence, make all the
Churches to Know, that He is indeed an Heart-Searching Lord. It is from hence,
A CASE to be now discoursed on.

What are the Apprehensions, and what the Dispositions, with which the Churches
of the Lord Jesus Christ, are to Consider Him, Searching the Reins and the
Hearts of men? I. The Churches of the Lord Jesus Christ should know, That He is
very GOD, and the Son of God. Who is it that says, All the Churches shall
know, that I am He, who Searches the Reins and the Hearts! We find it here,
These Things says the Son of God. It is the prerogative of God alone, to
Search the Reins and the Hearts. To say, I am He that Searches the Reins and
the Hearts; it is no Language for the Mouth of a Creature. It was said, in Jer.
17.10. The Heart, who can know it? -- I JEHOVAH, Search the Heart, I Try the
Reins. When our Lord Jesus Christ says, I am He that Searches the Reins and the
Hearts, He alludes unto that very Oracle; it is as much as if He had said, I am
the Lord JEHOVAH. Thus we read in Jer. 11.20. O Lord of Hosts, who tryest the
Reins and the Heart. We cannot be sensible, That our Lord Messiah Tryes the
Reins and the Hearts, if we are not sensible, that He is, The Lord of Hosts.
The Incommunicable Attributes of God, are ascribed unto our Lord Jesus Christ.
The Godhead of our Lord, is fully asserted, in the Things thus ascribed unto
Him. And this All knowledge, to be a (...), one that Knows the Heart, is one of
those Incommunicable Attributes. It Is the peculiar Glory of God, in 1 King.
8.39. Thou, even Thou only, know the Hearts of all the Children of men. But,
this Glory belongs unto our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory. The Godhead
of our Lord Jesus Christ, is then to be Known and Owned in all His Churches.
Indeed, they are no True Churches, which do not own the Godhead of our Lord
Jesus Christ. If this Confession of Faith, be not laid in the Foundation of
Churches, they are not Founded upon a Rock, and the Gates of Hell, will prevail
against them.

The Scriptures of God, have called our Lord JESUS CHRIST, Expressly, The True
God, and, The Great God, and, God over all: And the Churches of God, must
accordingly acknowledge Him. This is indeed a Great Mystery; but with every
Godly man, it is a Mystery beyond all Controversy, That our Lord Jesus Christ
is, [1 Timothy 3.16.] God manifest in Flesh. Yes, The New Testament speaks at this
rate, will a Jew say; But give me the Old Testament; where will you find any
such passage in the Old Testament. Well, To the Old Testament thou have
Appealed; Thither thou shall Go! If the Messiah were not God, why did Job say,
In my Flesh I shall see God? I can find you a Jewish Rabbi, who gathers from
hence, That the Word of God, shall one Day take Flesh in a Woman. Or, if this
be not plain enough, I am sure, it is plain in Psalm. 45.6, 7. Thy Throne, O God,
is for ever and ever: God, thy God has anointed thee. It Is plain, in Isa. 9.6.
To us a Child is born, to us a Son is given, His Name shall be called, God, the
Mighty. We are very certain, That the Name JEHOVAH, is peculiar to God alone;
yet even this peculiar Name, is given to the Messiah, (who is therefore called,
He which was, and is, and is to come:) You have it, in Zech. 12.10. JEHOVAH
says, They shall Look on me, whom they have pierced; It may be there is
nothing more worthy of Note in all the Jewish Talmuds, than that Note on this
Text, Peace be on him, who says, That these things are to be said of Messiah.
Several of the Rabbi's own, That the Messiah is meant, when it is said, JEHOVAH
shall build up Jerusalem. Thus, when we read in Jer. 33.16. This is the Name,
whereby He shall be called, JEHOVAH our Righteousness: And in Jer. 33.16. He
that shall call it, is, JEHOVAH our Righteousness: The Ancient Jews themselves
Expound it of the Messiah: They ask, What shall the Messiah be called? They
Reply, The Eternal JEHOVAH. The Objection which the Modern Jews make against
this most comfortable Article of our Creed, is, That the Messiah is Man, and
therefore cannot be God. But let them Answer one Question; Is not the Second
person in God able to Unite a Man unto Himself? They dare not say, but God is
able to do such a Thing. And there is a Sentence in the Bible, which Expressly
affirms, That there should be a Man in the World, who should be God, as well as
Man. You have it, in Zech. 13.7. Awake, O Sword, against the Man, that is my
Equal, says JEHOVAH, the Lord of Hosts. There was a Man, whom the Jews did
Stab with a Sword; but of this Man it is said, He is an equal to the Lord of
Hosts; He must therefore be God as well as Man.

The Churches of the Lord Jesus Christ, must preserve this Faith among them:
it is their very Life; all their Hope, and all their Joy, is Enwrapped in it.
But the Faith of our Lords Deity, cannot be preserved, without the Faith of the
Trinity. We don't know God, if we don't know Him as One God in Three
Subsistences. It is therefore maintained by some Learned Christians, That the
God of the Spragogue, is not the God of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. The
Three Subsistences are so Exhibited unto us; in 1 John 5.7. The Father, the
Word, and the Spirit; and in Psalm. 33.6. The Lord, and the Word of the Lord,
and the Spirit of the Lord. Now, in Believing the Trinity, the Churches of the
Lord Jesus Christ, must particularly Believe, That their Lord is the Son of
God. That person in God, which is usually called, by the Name of, The Word, is
also called by the Name of, The Son. Why? Because He proceeds from the Father,
by an unutterable, an Inconceivable, an Eternal Generation. The Jews have a
Tradition, that when the Messiah comes, He will tell us the Right Name of the
Eternal God; He has done it, in Mat. 28.19. His Name is, The Father, and the
Son, and the Holy Spirit.

Except the Churches, thus acknowledge the Lord Jesus Christ, as the Son of
God, they cannot call God their Father, they cannot propose to be themselves by
Adoption, the Children of God.

II. The Churches of the Lord Jesus Christ, should Know, That the Lord Jesus
Christ has an Exact Knowledge of all men, and of all that is in Men* More
particularly;

We are to know, That the most Hidden and Secret, Things are known unto the
Lord Jesus Christ. It Is the Voice of our Lord Jesus Christ, whom without
falling into the Ubiquitarian Error, we must call our Omnipresent Lord, in Jer.
23.24. Can any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him? says
the Lord Reins and Hearts are things altogether Out of sight. But the Things
that are most Out of sight, are Seen by the Lord Jesus Christ. Men may see the
Face of other men; but the Lord Jesus Christ sees the very Reins and Hearts of
all men; there is nothing to be Hidden from him, though it be never so secret. Be
it Known among the Churches, That (Job 34.21, 22.) His Eyes are upon the ways
of man, and he sees all his goings; Neither is there any Deadness nor Shadow of
Death, where the Workers of Iniquity may hide themselves.

Again; We are to Know, That all our Thoughts, and the very Thoughts of all
men, are fully known unto our Lord Jesus Christ. Let our Minds be constantly
kept Awake, by that word of our Lord, in Ezekiel. 11.5. Thus says the Lord, I
know the things that come into your mind, every one of them. The Reins and the
Hearts of men, are the Forge wherein their Thoughts are minted. The Thoughts
are free, we say; but they are not free, either from the Law, or from the View,
of our Lord Jesus Christ. There are neither Good Thoughts, nor Ill Thoughts in
the Souls of any men, but our Lord Jesus Christ is infallibly acquainted with
them; He will Requite the one, and Revenge the other. The Scribes of Old, were
not the only persons, of whom it might be said, The Lord knew their Thoughts.
No, Let it be known and said, by every man in all the Churches, [Psal. 139.2.]
Lord, Thou know my Thoughts afar off.

Moreover; We are to know, That the most Secret Conditions of men are known to
our Lord Jesus Christ. The Interior, and Spiritual State of men, the Lord
Jesus Christ knows what it is, It Is said, He Tries the Reins and the Hearts:
How? As men Try Metals, whether they be Counterfeit or no. Our Lord Jesus
Christ Knows all the Members in His Churches; which of them are Sons of Zion,
comparable to fine Gold, and which of them are base Metals, only guilt over
with Gold. Many a man does not know himself; but there is no man whom the Lord
Jesus Christ knows not. If there be Sincerity in the Soul, the Lord Jesus
Christ knows the Sincerity. Hence an Ambassador of God, that had been greatly
Defamed, among those who did not know him, cheerfully made his Appeal to his
Heavenly Lord, in Jer. 20.12. O Lord of Hosts, who triest the Righteous, and
see the Reins and the Heart, unto thee I have opened my cause. There is no
where an Israelite indeed, of whom our Lord Jesus Christ may not say, I have
seen that man! If there be Hypocrisy in the Soul, the Lord Jesus Christ knows
the Hypocrisy. Hence, when there were some, who seemed such Strict Preachers,
that every one said of them* They are either great Saints, or great Villians,
our Lord Jesus Christ so knew them, that He could say what they were; in Mat.
23.27, 28. Hypocrites, Ye are like whited Sepulchers, which indeed appear
beautiful outwardly, but are within full of all uncleanness: Ye appear
outwardly Righteous unto men, but within ye are full of Hypocrisy and Iniquity.
Hypocrisy may carry a very fair Show of Sincerity. A Devil may appear as an
Angel of Light: And the Children of the Devil, may be so like the Children of
God, Pray so like them, and Speak so like them, and Look so like them, that no
man may know them asunder. Yea, but they are known to the Lord Jesus Christ,
every man of them all!

Furthermore; We are to know, That the most Secret Intentions of men are known
unto the Lord Jesus Christ. The Counsels of men, these may have the Reins and
the Hearts, for the Seat of them. Our Lord Jesus Christ knows all that is in
them; that is to say, All that we Consult, and Resolve with our selves. If we
have any Holy purposes to Glorify the Lord Jesus Christ, and Edify His people,
the Lord Jesus Christ Himself knows all that we have purposed. When there was
in the Heart of a Good man, a Design to do a Service for the House of God, we
read, in 1 King 8.18. The Lord said unto him* Whereas it was in thy Heart, thou
did well in that it was in thy Heart. And if there are any Wicked purposes,
that men have taken up within themselves, what is purposed cannot be so (...)
but the Lord Jesus Christ will know (...) It Is no rare thing, for men to
pretend one thing, and intend another; but the Lord Jesus Christ sees through
all pretensions. We read, in 1 These. 2.3, 4, 5. Our Exhortation was not of
Deceit, nor of Uncleanness, we speak not as pleasing men, but God, which tries
our Hearts, neither used we at any time a cloak of Coveteousness, God is
witness. There were those that Preached the Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ,
and yet they drove a filthy Trade of Uncleanness and Coveteousness, in what
they did: Now, says the Apostle, the Lord Jesus Christ, who tries our Hearts,
He knows, who did, and who did not so: There is no putting a Trick upon the
Lord Jesus Christ; it is said of Him, He weighs the Spirits of men.

Yet once more; We are to know, That the most Secret Affections of men are
known unto the Lord Jesus Christ. In the Reins and the Hearts of men, do their
Affections operate. Our Lord Jesus Christ knows, how the Souls of men do Stand
Affected. Have we any Desires? The Lord Jesus Christ knows them all. We may say
with him, in Psalm. ^8.9. Lord, all my Desire is before thee. Have we any
^^^rows? The Lord Jesus Christ knows (...) all. It was said by Him, in Exodus
2.7. I have heard their cry, I know their (...). Do we Love the Lord Jesus
Christ? Our Love is not unknown unto the Lord whom we Love. It may be said, [
Joh. 21.17.] Lord, Thou know all things, Thou know that I love thee. If
Carnal Affections [even those of the very Reins] are flaming and raging within
us, they are known to Him that is, The God of the Spirits of all Flesh. And if
our Affections are set upon the Things that are above, where our Lord Jesus
Christ is, they are known unto the Lord, that we have chosen for the Object of
them.

Yea, Finally; The Knowledge which our Lord Jesus Christ has of all these
Things is a very Exact and Perfect Knowledge. It Is said, He Searches the Reins
and the Hearts. The Exactness of the Knowledge, is implied in the Expression of
Searching. Our Lord Jesus Christ Searches to the Bottom of all things. [See
Heb. 4.12, 13.] We are therefore informed concerning our Lord Jesus Christ He
has Eyes like a Flame of Fire. He needs no other Light, but His own Eyes, to
discover the most Secret Things in the World. There is nothing so Secret, but
the Eyes of the Lord Jesus Christ, will penetrate like swift Lightning, into
the Bowels of it. When the Wretches of old, heaped their Ludibrious and Abusive
Treats upon our Lord Jesus Christ, one Abuse with which they treated Him was,
They Blindfolded Him, as they imagined. Poor Fools! To imagine, that they could
extinguish or intercept the Sight of Him that made the Eye! A little Atom, as
well might put out the Sun! Be it known unto you, O ye Churches of the Lord;
There is nothing unknown unto your Glorious Lord.

III. When the Wonderful Providence of the Lord Jesus Christ, by Discovering
Secret Sinners in His Churches, makes it Evident, that He Searches the Reins
and the Hearts of men, it becomes the Churches, to take much Notice of that
Wonderful Providence. When are the Churches to know, That the Lord Jesus Christ
Searches the Reins and the Hearts of men? They are Then especially to Know it,
when the Lord Jesus Christ, by strange Discoveries of Cheats in His Churches*
gives a Demonstration thereof. But then, the Knowledge that the Churches are to
have implies, that they take due Notice, a Serious, Notice, and an Awful Notice
of it.

At the Great Day of Judgment indeed, the Lord Jesus Christ will most Eminently
make all the Churches to Know, that He Searches the Reins and the Hearts of
men. There will a Day come (the Day of our True David's Kingdom, the Day wherein
the Creation shall be delivered from the Vanity now upon it.) When, as we are
told, in Eccl. 12.14. God will bring every Work into Judgment, with every
Secret Thing, whether it be Good, or whether it be Evil. Not only will all the
Churches that ever were found among mankind, then find that the Lord Jesus
Christ Searches the Reins and Hearts of men, but all mankind will be with all
possible Solemnity convinced of it. In that Illustrious Day of God, when God
shall Judge the Secrets of men by Jesus Christ, and when God will bring to
Light the Hidden Works of Darkness, Cunctaque Cunctorum Cunctis arcana patebunt;

Heaven and Earth shall then know, and it shall be terribly proclaimed from the
Rising of the Sun to the Setting thereof, and as far as the Trumpet of an
Archangel can sound the Proclamation, That every thing is known unto our Great
Lord Redeemer.

But before that Last, and Great, and Notable Day of the Lord, there do
oftentimes fall out, most amazing Things, to show the Churches, That the Lord
Jesus Christ Searches the Reins and Hearts of the Children of men. The Word of
the Lord Jesus Christ, has particularly Cautioned us, against being too Quick
and Rash in receiving men as Ministers of the Gospel, for fear, lest it quickly
appear that those pretended Ministers, are secretly Rotten, Profane, Unclean
Creatures; and then we partake in the Guilt of the Miscarriages that are found
chargeable upon these Intruded Ministers: Now, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5.22,
24. Lay hands suddenly on no man, neither be partaker of other men's Sins; some
men's sins are open before hand, going before to Judgment, and some, they follow
after: The Sins of some Candidates for the Ministry, are not open before Trial
and Judgment is past upon them, and they are Judged fit for Ordination, but
however it will not be long before their Sins do break out, unto the Astonishment
of all the Churches, that were too sudden in setting of them up.

Consider of it, O ye Churches of the Lord.

First; The Wonderful Providence of the Lord Jesus Christ, in discovering, of
Secret Sinners, does plainly discover, that He Searches the most Secret Sins,
in the Reins and Hearts of men. By various and curious and exquisite Methods,
does the Wonderful Providence of the Lord Jesus Christ, bring about the
Discovery of Secret Sinners. And those Methods of Providence do confirm This;
That our Lord Jesus Christ knows the Sinners, and all their Secret Sins. Men
must with some Agony of Soul, now cry out, [Psal. 90.8.] Lord, Thou have set
our Iniquities before thee, and our Secret Sin, in the Light of thy
Countenance. Men may Cover their Sins a long while; but they don't prosper in
their doing so: God makes a Discovery of them. Sometimes the Holy God smites
them with such Horror of Conscience, that as it is said, in Psalm. 64.8. They
shall make their own Tongue to fall upon themselves. An Achan is brought into
such Distress and Horror of Conscience, that he shall not be able to forbear
Confessing, Thus and thus have I Sinned, and thus has my Sin found me out. And
sometimes the Holy God leaves them to such horrible Scandals, that all the
Neighborhood shall with Abhorrence gaze upon them. There was an Impostor, that
had bewitched the people; he seemed very pious, until God left him unto that
Impiety, which made every one to say, as in Acts 8.21, 23. Thy Heart is not
Right in the sight of God, I perceive thou art in the Gall of Bitterness and
the Bond of Iniquity. A Wolf in Sheeps Clothing will go on, perhaps many
months together, until God permits the Claws and the Teeth of a Wolf to be
discerned upon him in some Scandalous Actions. The Lord Jesus Christ knew the
Secret Villainies of these men, from the Beginning; but now he makes all men to
know them; and when that which was done in Darkness is heard in the Light, when
that which was done in Closets, is proclaimed on the House tops, Then it is
proved, That the Lord Jesus Christ knew all along, what was done in Darkness,
and in the Closets. The Lord Jesus Christ says upon such occasions, as He said
concerning those infamous False Prophets of Old, in Jer. 29.23. They have
committed Villainy in Israel, and have committed Adultery with their Neighbors
Wives and have spoken Lying Words; even I know, and am a Witness, says the Lord

Secondly; It Is most Remarkably in Evangelical Churches, that the Lord Jesus
Christ, who Searches the Reins and the Hearts of men, does by His Wonderful
Providence discover the Secret Sins of men. In Congregations formed according
to the Will of the Lord Jesus Christ i^ is that Secret Sinners run the greatest
hazards of that Vengeance, in Prove. 26.26. His Sin is covered with Deceit, his
Wickedness shall be showed before the whole Congregation* Churches of a pure
Constitution, represent the Kingdom of Heaven unto the world: Men cannot Sin at
so cheap a rate in the Kingdom of Heaven, a^ they may in a dark World, or in
Churches that are undistinguished from the World. The Pure Churches of the Lord
Jesus Christ, are Golden Candlesticks: Can men think to Sin undiscovered in the
midst of such Candlesticks? There are Angels burning in the Heads of them*
There is a special and a dreeadful presence of the Lord Jesus Christ, in
Churches, that maintain the Order of the Gospel. Hence there are stupendous
Dispensations of His Providence in His Churches, to bring out those that shall
there provoke his Infinite Majesty. Men may go on in a Course of Profanity,
under a Cloak of Piety, for some while among the Churches of the Lord Jesus
Christ; and they may applaud their own Contrivance, as long as* they can Enjoy
the Applause of the Deluded Neighbors. The Jealous Lord Jesus Christ beholds
their Heaven daring Abominations, but with a Day of patience, He gives them a
Space to Repent of the Abominable Things, by which they thus dare the Justice
of Heaven. It may be said of them, They consider not in their Hearts, that I
remember all their Wickedness, though their doings are before my face, says the
Lord. At last, the Jealousy of the Holy Lord breaks forth like Fire against
them, and abandons them to some Follies that fully discover them. The Lord
Jesus Christ, in His Burning Holiness, gives them up to an Unclean Spirit, a
Lying Spirit, a Thieving Spirit, or some other Evil Spirit, and the Infatuated
Wretches are exposed with Consternation and Execration to all the World; As it
was said, in Psalm. 52.6, 7, 8. Thy Tongue devises mischiefs: O thou deceitful
Tongue, God shall take thee away, and root thee out; the Righteous also shall
see and fear, and laugh at him; Lo, this is the man, that strengthened himself
in his wickedness; but I am a Green Olive Tree in the House of God. Thus, it is
an Exclamation made in all the Churches; Lo, this is the man, that would needs
appear some body among the Churches of the Lord Jesus Christ; but the Lord
Jesus Christ has made all the Churches to know, that they were Deceived in him.

Thirdly. When the Wonderful Providence of the Lord Jesus Christ in His
Churches, by Discovering the Secret Sins of men, shows that He Searches the
Reins and Hearts of Men, it is the Duty of the Churches to take much Notice of
it. The Providence of the Lord Jesus Christ, sometimes does very Tremendous and
Surprising Things, in His Churches, for the Discovering of Secret Sinners. The
Advocates of Sin, will do all they can, to Resist that Providence of Heaven,
and make nothing of That, which is plainly, The Finger of God. By such Doings,
men bring upon themselves the Guilt of all the Sin, they go to Smother and
Shelter, and the Providence of Heaven remains irresistible. Such Partners with
Sinners, will do well to Tremble before that Word of God, in Psalm. 28 5.
Because they regard not the works of the Lord nor the operation of His Hands,
He shall Destroy them. In the mean time the Churches of the Lord Jesus Christ,
are to Take Notice of what He does in His Notable Providence. When our Lord
Jesus Christ gives us to see, That He takes Notice of His Churches, and of what
is done among them, it becomes His Churches to take Notice of His Providence.
Why, There are Lessons of Great Consequence, which the Churches are to Learn
from that Providence, wherein they see Him Searching the Reins and Hearts of
men. It Is a most Observable Thing, that is done by our Lord Jesus Christ in His
Providence, when Secret Sinners are discovered. Now all the Churches are to
Observe what is done: For, [Psal. 107.43.] Whosoever is Wise, will observe these
things.

IV. The Churches of the Lord Jesus Christ, when they see Him Searching the
Reins and the Hearts of men, in the Memorable (...) of His Providence, they
should make a Good Use of what they see. All the Churches are to Know, That the
Lord Searches the Reins and the Hearts; But how are they to Know it? Words of
Knowledge, in the Sacred Language, import Suitable Resentment. Now,

First. All the Churches are to Know, That the Lord Jesus Christ Searches the
Reins and the Hearts, for the Comfort of such Hearts, as are Sound before Him.
Christians, Are your Hearts Vexed with any Temptations, or grieved for any
Corruptions? I may say unto you, Let not your Hearts be Troubled: But Know for
your Comfort, under your Uneasiness, That the Lord Jesus Christ Knows all that
renders your Hearts uneasy, and is ready to Succor you. Can you say with him,
in Psalm. 57.7. My Heart is Fixed, O God, my Heart is Fixed? It is Known to the
Lord Jesus Christ, who indeed was He that Fixed it. Yea, If there be but the
least Spark of Grace in thy Heart, O man, It Is all Known unto the Lord Jesus
Christ. There is not one Good Motion, but it is the Lord Jesus Christ that
Moved it, and He knows what it is. Have any of us been Accused and Reproached
by an Angry Generation of men, and are Ill Constructions made of our
Faithfulness? What a comfortable Cordial may this be to our Hearts, That our
Lord Jesus Christ Knows how Faithful our Hearts have been unto Him? As he said
in Job 16.19. Behold, my witness is in Heaven, and my Record is on high; though
my Friends do Scorn me: The Servants of the Churches cannot Escape the Severe
censures of men, if they do what the Lord Jesus Christ would have them to do:
But since all the Churches Know, That the Lord Jesus Christ Searches the
Hearts, how Joyfully may we apply unto Him, Lord, Thou know my Heart, I have
said nothing, I have Writ nothing, I have done just nothing, but what my Heart
assured me, it was my Duty to do!

Secondly. All the Churches are to Know, That the Lord Jesus Christ Searches
the Reins and the Hearts, for our Caution against Regarding Iniquity in our
Hearts. What a Caution have we, Sirs, What a powerful Caution against all
Attempts, to Mock the Lord Jesus Christ, with Hearts that are Deceitful above
all things, while they are Desperately Wicked? Let us in our Churches labor to
approve our Hearts unto our Lord Jesus Christ, and let us not go to Mock our
Lord Jesus Christ, with any mere Shows in Religion. What said the Man of God,
in Job 13.9. Is it Good, that He should Search you out? Or as one man mocketh
another, do ye so mock Him? Let it be Known, Oh, let it be Known to all the
Churchers, That the Great God, who will not be Mocked, will thoroughly Discern,
and will terribly Confound, all those that go to Mock Him.

There are some such Cautions as these to be set before us.

I. Since our Lord Jesus Christ Searches our Hearts, Let us make sure, that our
Hearts have the Religion, that we seem to have in our Lives. Let no man among
us, be that man, in Jam. 1.26. A man that seems to be Religious, but
Deceives his own Heart. Make no Empty Profession of Religion; Let us
Internally, and Practically be, what we Profess. Do we give our Names to our
Lord Jesus Christ in His Churches? Let us give our Hearts unto Him, as well as
our Names. We Profess that we Believe; But we must* Believe with all the Heart.
We Profess that we Repent: But we must Repent with the whole Heart. Make sure
of New Hearts, and of True Hearts, and of Souls Renewed with a real Principle
of Religion Especially, when you join your selves unto the Churches of the
Heart-Searching Lord, be careful, O my Hearers, be careful to Search your own
Hearts, and by an impartial Self Examination, assure your selves, of your being
by an Heart-work of real Conversion prepared for it.

II. Since our Lord Jesus Christ Searches our Hearts, Let us Bring our Hearts
unto Him, in all the Exercises of Religion, and offer the Inwards, as well as
the Outward. Let us not be like those, of whom it is said, in Isa. 29.13. This
People draw near me with their Mouth, and with their Lips do honor me, but
have removed their Heart far from me. Remember we, that the God whom we
worship, is a Spirit; and He will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth; if we
do not worship Him in Spirit, we do it not in Truth. It is not Enough, that we
serve the Lord Jesus Christ, with External Appearances: The Righteous Judgment
of God, is not according to such Appearances. What said the Psalmist, Bless the
Lord, O my Soul? In Praying, Let us be able to say, Lord, I Lift up my Soul
unto thee. In Hearing, be able to say, Lord, I hide thy Word in my Heart. Oh,
do not go to put off the Living God, with a Dead Carcass of Devotions.

III. Since our Lord Jesus Christ Searches our Hearts, Let not our Hearts, in
declaring for the Interests of Religion, have any Indirect Glances at inferior
Interests. For persons to put on a Cloak of Zeal for the Lord Jesus Christ, but
aim only at Advancing of themselves, and their own Corrupt Humors, it will
provoke Him that Searches the Hearts, to say unto them, as in Act. 5.4. Why
have thou conceived this thing in thine Heart? Thou have not Lied unto men, but
unto God. When we attend the Means of Grace, the Lord Jesus Christ Searches our
Hearts, whether it be merely for Credit, or Custom; or, whether it be to Draw
Water out of the Wells of Salvation. When we seek after Church Fellowship, the
Lord Jesus Christ Searches our Hearts, whether it be to Gain a Good Esteem
among men; or, whether it be to build up our selves in our most holy Faith*
When we give our Alms, our Lord Jesus Christ Searches our Hearts, whether it be
to avoid Contempt on Earth; or, Whether it be to Lay up a Treasure in Heaven.
When we are forward in prosecuting Offenders, the Lord Jesus Christ Searches
our Hearts, whether we have a single Respect unto the Honor of God; or,
whether we Respect a piece of Revenge upon our Adversary. Oh, Let nothing be
done in the Churches, on By Ends, or for Self Ends; because the Churches are to
know, the Lord Jesus Christ Searches our Hearts, for the Ends which they are
acted withal.

IV. Since our Lord Jesus Christ Searches our Hearts, and makes the Churches to
know, that He does so, Let none in our Churches, under seeming Sanctity indulge
any Secret Villainy. The Pharisees of old, were a very demure, and precise kind
of men; yea, there were notable Preachers among them: and yet! [see Joh. 8.9.]
Their Consciences flew in their faces, that they were secretly, Lewd, Wanton,
Filthy Satyrs* and the Abhorred of the Lord. For persons to carry a Face of
more than ordinary strictness and fervor in Religion, and yet for these
persons to be very Devils in secret, what is this to be indeed, but even Devils
Incarnate? All Temptations with which the Devil urges you to Sin, from the
notion of Secrecy, repel with this Answer, It Is impossible there ever should be
a Secret Sin. As one solicited unto Lewdness, with this Argument, The Doors are
shut, replied, No, but you have not shut the Lord Jesus Christ out of Doors! We
read, God is terrible out of His Holy Places. Why, Churches of the Lord Jesus
Christ, are Holy Places: Church Members are in Holy Places If you that are in
these Holy Places, will secretly allow your selves in Unholy practices, be it
known unto you, O ye Mockers of the Lord that knows what you do, it is a
Terrible Thing, that He will do upon you. Especially, Let the Ministers of the
Gospel* beware, that they Seek not the oversight of a Flock of God for filthy
Lucre; and beware that while they Prophesy in the Name of the Lord, they be not
the Workers of Iniquity: Lest the Judgments of the Lord Jesus Christ, should
Thunder strike them, as He did those Young Ministers, upon whose Tragical Death
He said, I will be Sanctified by them that come nigh me, and before all the
people I will be Glorified.

In fine, Let us all make that Petition, unto the Lord, who Searches the Reins
and the Hearts, in Psalm. 139.23, 24. Search me, O God, and know my Heart; try
me, and know my Thoughts: And see if there be any wicked way in me, and Lead me
in the way Everlasting.

Lumina quis fallet semper ^perta Dei?
FINIS.
Advertisement.
THere is prepared for the Press, a very Seasonable Book Entitled. The Order
of the Gospel: Professed and Practiced by the Churches of Christ in
New England; Justified by the Scripture, and by the Writings of many Learned
Men, both Ancient and Modern Divines: In Answer to several Questions relating
to Church Discipline.

By the Reverend Increase Mather, Praesident of Harvard-Colledge in Cambridge,
and Teacher of a Church in Boston, New England.


