His (...) THE Earl of BELLOMONT HIS SPEECH To the Representatives of his
Majesty's Province of New York, the 21th of March, 1699.
Gentlemen;
THere had been no occasion for calling you at this time, if the last Assembly
had answered the good ends I proposed to my self for the Kings Service, and
that of the Province. But having sat a whole Month and done no business, I
thought it advisable to Dissolve them; and the rather, because there were
great Heats and Divisions among them, which I found Impracticable for me to
compose and put an end to.

You need not be told to what a degree Faction and Sedition have taken Root in
this Town, it is a thing so generally known. And there has been the utmost
Industry used by some ill Men to spread the Infection all over the Province,
and to alienate the Affections of the People by false Suggestions and Notions
of their Independance from the Crown of England, and that it is a Violence and
Wrong done 'em that England should put a Limitation on their Trade. How
extravagant and wild is this Notion; does not England put a Restriction on its
own Trade, in some Cases? And as for Pyracy, which some People are so fond of
here, it is held in such Abomination as not to be known or practiced there.
People must not be so deceived, this Province is subject to the Crown of
England, and it is its greatest Glory and Happiness that it is so. For by that
means the People are entitled to the Protection of the Crown, and are under
the best Constitution of Laws, and that in fellowship with the best and bravest
People in the World, the People of ENGLAND; and they must be obedient to
English Laws, it is their Duty and Interest so to be. And the Angry Men of
New York must not expect from me that Connivance at their ill Practices that
they were accustomed to some years before my coming to the Government: The Oath
of a Governor, the Laws of England, and the King's Instructions which are made
to square with the Laws, are sacred Ties and Obligations with me.

I have observed great Marks of Irreligion and Immorality in this place, and I
take it to proceed from a long Habit of breaking the Laws, which has introduced
Liscentious and Dissolute Living: And nothing can rectify and reform our Lives
and Manners but Religion. Religion is of that admirable frame and temper, it
inflames us with a true Devotion to our great Maker, which is our most
reasonable Service. Then it fits us for all the ends of Civil Society, by
uniting our Minds, Affections and Interests; it makes us good Men: And good Men
will of course be good Friends, good Neighbors, good Subjects; and good
Patriots, that is, Lovers of their Country, and obedient to its Laws.

Now that I have stated to you the unhappy Circumstances we are in by the
contrivance of ill Men, I shall proceed to recommend to your Thoughts a few
things which are necessary for the Support and Peace of the Government, and
will be a manifestation of your Duty and Affection to the KING.

I therefore Propose to you, Gentlemen of the House of Representatives, the
Continuance of the present Revenue (which will otherwise shortly expire) for
what Number of Years you shall think fit. I found the Government very
considerably indebted when I came to it, and it cannot be expected that Debt
should be much lessened in so short a time as I have been here: And I could
wish you would put the Government on a clear foot, by finding a way to
discharge that Debt The Public Accounts I have ordered to be prepared for you,
with an estimate of the Debts of the Government. I promise you I will be as
good a Husband of your Money as it is possible for me to be: and when it is
either mis-apply'd or mismannag'd by my means, I shall not take it amiss if you
put me in mind of m^ want of Care therein. To induce you to the continuance of
the Revenue to the Crown, I cannot set before your Eyes a better Example than
that of the great and glorious People of England, who out of a sense of the
inestimable Advantages they were restored to by the King, freely, and without
the least murmuring, supported him in a long and expensive War, well knowing he
bravely fought for the Liberties of all the Christian World, and that they had
as great a share as any others in that Quarrel; wherein also his Majesty often
ventured his Royal Person with the meanest Soldier in his Armies. Besides the
KING considering this Province as a Barrier between the French of Canada, and
his other Plantations, and therefore most exposed, was pleased to take a
peculiar Care of you, having been at great Expense this last War, in paying for
four Hundred Men, and maintaining a Man of War for your Defense, and constantly
supplying you with Stores of War. These are such Obligations as I hope you will
not only remember in the manner I have now recommended, but also with your
earnest Prayers to God for his Majesty's long Life and prosperous Reign over
you.

The next thing I recommend to you, is the Reconciling of People and Parties,
which will be a glorious Work and will, I doubt not, be easily accomplished by
your prudent Care. You all know the (...) public and private, that Feuds and
Divisions bring on a People or Nation. They cause an Interruption in Trade, by
the (...) they make in private Families and Friendships: and next to a Civil
War, it is the most Unhappy state and Condition a Country can be in. I will
heartily join with you in such Methods as shall be thought advisable for the
procurement of a through Reconciliation of Parties. And that you may induce
others to be peaceably and charitably minded, I earnestly recommend to you,
Gentlemen Representatives, that you manage your Debates and Proceedings in
your House with that Calmness and Moderation that becomes the Prudence of Men,
that are under such a Trust from their Country. The present Conjuncture
requires it at your hands; The King will thank you, the World will applaud you
for it, and God will bless and prosper you and your Affairs.

I must acquaint you with the Circumstances of our five Nations of Indians,
with whom I had a Conference this last Summer at Albany and then fixed their
Friendship and Fidelity to the Crown by extraordinary Presents and kind Usage;
and they parted with me in all the good Humor imaginable. But I am lately
advised they are grown very uneasy and dissatisfied at the French Governor of
Canada's detaining some of their Friends prisoners, notwithstanding the late
Treaty of Peace, which is a very unfair Practice in that Governor. You shall
have all the Memorials and Proceedings with our Indians laid before you, that
you may advise me what measures to take for preserving them firm to the
Interest of the Crown and this Province, which is a thing of very great
consequence, and deserves as much as any thing whatsoever to be the subject of
your Thoughts and Determination

I am ordered by the Kings Instructions to prepare and offer you two or three
Bills for your passing, which will be for the Service of the Province And such
other Bills as you shall judge proper to offer me for securing your Liberties,
and advancing your Trade, I promise you my assent to their passing into Laws,
provided they be not Repugnant to the Laws and Interest of England.

BY Order of the House of Representatives, I do Appoint William Bradford to
Print his Excellency's Speech.

Ja. Graham, Speaker.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, Printer to the King's most Excellent
Majesty, in the City of New York, 1699.


