A Family Well-Ordered.

OR An ESSAY To Render Parents and Children Happy in one another.

Handling Two very Important CASES.

I. What are the Duties to be done by Pious Parents, for the promoting of Piety
in their Children.

II. What are the Duties that must be paid by Children to their Parents, that
they may obtain the Blessings of the Dutiful.

By COTTON MATHER.

Mal. IV.6. He shall Turn the Heart of the Fathers to the Children, and the
Heart of the Children to their Fathers.

Boston, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Michael Perry, at his Shop over
against the Townhouse: and Benjamin Eliot, at his Shop under the West End of
the Townhouse. 1699.

THE Duties of PARENTS To their Children.
GENESIS XVIII.19. I know him, that he will command his Children and his Household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord.


AS the Great God, who at the Beginning said, Let US make man after our Image,
has made man a Sociable Creature, so it is evident, That Families are the
Nurseries of all Societies; and the First Combinations of mankind. Well-ordered
Families naturally produce a Good Order in other Societies. When Families are
under an Ill Discipline, all other Societies being therefore Ill Disciplined,
will feel that Error in the First ^oncoction. To Serve the Families of our
Neighborhood, will be a Service to all our Interests. Every serious Christian
is concerned, That he may be Serviceable in the World; And many a serious
Christian is concerned, because he sees himself to be furnished with no more
Opportunities to be Serviceable. Bu^ art thou not a Member of some Family? If
that Family may by thy means, O Christian, become a Well-regulated Family, in
that point thou will become Serviceable; I had almost said, Incomprehensibly
Serviceable. They that have the Government of some Family, do make up no Little
part of this Great Assembly* And, Syrs, are there any of you, that would
forfeit that Honorable Title, of all the Faithful, The Children of Abraham.
Give your Attention, ye Children of Abraham, while I set before you, the
Example of your Father, for your Imitation.

Our Glorious Lord-Messiah, is here going to Communicate unto Abraham some of
His Heavenly Counsels. And we have a Text before us, that assigns a Reason for
that gracious Communication. The Reason is, the care which this Good man, would
thereupon take to bring up his Family in the Fear of God. In this Text there
are some Remarkable Things: and things that some Wise men have often Remarked.
There was an Excellent man, sometimes a Preacher of the Lord Jesus Christ, in
this very place; whose custom it was, not only to Read a portion of the
Scripture before his Prayers with his Family, but also to In^er and Apply brief
Notes out of what he Read. He professed, That he found none of all his weary
Studies in Divinity, so profitable to him, as this one Exercise, for the Rare
and Rich Though^s, which he therein found himself supplied withal* And he
Declared, That ^e Looked on it, as an Accomplishment of this very word; Shall I
hide from Abraham, the thing which I do? I know him, That he will command his
Children, and his Household.

Moreover, You may here Observe a most comfortable Connection, between, He will,
and They shall. Says the Lord, He will Command his Children, and They shall
keep the way of the Lord. It seems, If every one that is Owner of a Family,
would faithfully Command, and manage those that belong unto him, through the
Blessing of God, they would generally Keep His Way, and His Law. I find a
famous Writer in the Church, therefore thus expressing himself; If Parents did
their Duties as they ought, the Word publicly Preached, would not be the
ordinary means of Regeneration in the Church, but only without the Church,
among Infidels: God would so pour out His, Grace upon the Children of His
people, and Hear Prayers for them, and bless Endeavors for their Holy
Education, that we should see the Promises made Good unto our Seed.

We will now Dismiss these Reflections; and Repair to that Grand Case, which
hence offers it self unto us.

CASE.
What may be done by Pious Parents, to promote the Piety and Salvation of their
Children?

The Case Enquires, What may be done? You Will take it for granted, that the
Answer to it, will tell you, What should be done? For you will readily grant, that
in such an Important Case as this, All that may be done, should be done.

In the Case, We Enquire after what is to be done, by Pious Parents. Other
Parents will take no due Notice, of the Injunctions that God has Laid upon them
concerning their Children. Parents, If you don't first become your selves
Pious, you will do nothing to purpose to make your Children so. Except you do your
selves walk in the Way of the Lord, you will be very careless about bringing
your Children to such a Walk. It is not a Cain, or a Cham, or any Enemy of God;
that will do any thing to make his Children become the Children of God. The
Psalmist, in Psalm. 34.1, 4, 11. could first say, I Will bless the Lord, and, I
sought the Lord, and then he says, Come ye Children, and I Will teach you the
Fear of the Lord. O Parents, In the Name of God, Look after your own miserable
Souls; How should those wretched people do any thing for the Souls of their
Children, that never did any thing for their own?

In the Case, we Enquire, after what is to be done by Parents for their
Children. But let it be Remembered, That our Servants are in some sort likewise
our Children. Our whole Household, as well as the Children that are our
Offspring, are to be taught the Way of the Lord. An Abraham will have his
Trained Servants. We read concerning a certain Person of Quality, in 2 King.
5.13. His Servants came near and spoke unto him, and said, My Father. Let not
those of my Hearers, that are without such Invaluable Blessings of God, as
Children, count themselves unconcerned in our Discourse, if they have any
Servants under them. A considerable part of what is to be done for our
Children, I pray, Masters, Think, as we go along; Think, without our particular
Inculcation, whether nothing of This may be done for your Servants: And, God
make Eliezers of them for you!

Attend now to the Counsils of God.

I. Parents, Consider the Condition of your Children; and the Loud Cry of their
Condition unto you, to Endeavor their Salvation! What an Army of powerful
Thoughts, do at once now show themselves, to beseige your Hearts, and subdue
them unto a just care for the Salvation of your Children!

Know you not, That your Children have precious and Immortal Souls within them?
They are not all Flesh. You that are the Parents of their Flesh, must know,
That your Children have Spirits also, whereof you are told, in Heb. 12.9. God
is the Father of them; and in Eccles. 12.7. God is the Giver of them. The Souls
of your Children, must survive their Bodies, and are transcendently Better and
Higher and Nobler Things than their Bodies. Are you sollicitous that their
Bodies may be Fed? You should be more sollicitous that their Souls may not be
Starved, or go without the Bread of Life. Are you sollicitous that their Bodies
may be Clothed: You should be more so^lici^ous, that their Souls may not be
Naked, or go without the Garments of Righteousness. Are you Lo^he to have their
Bodies Laboring under Inf^mitie^, or Deformities? You should be much more Loath
to have their Souls pining away in their Iniquiti^s* Man, Are thy Children, but
the Children of Swine? If thou art Regardless of their Souls, truly thou do
call them so! One of the Ancients, namely Cyprian, has a pungent comparison
for this matter; Pray, Consider; (said that Great man,) He that minds his
Child's Body more than his Soul, is like one, that if his Child and his Dog were
like to be drowned, should be sollicitous to save his Dog, but let the Child
perish in the water. How deaf art thou, that thou do not hear a loud cry from
the Souls of thy Children in thine Ears, O my Father, my Mother, Look after me!

But more than so; Don't you know, That your Children, are the Children of
Death, and the Children of Hell, and the Children of Wrath, by Nature: And that
from you, this Nature is derived and conveyed unto them! You must know,
Parents, that your Children are by your means Born under the dreadful Wrath of
God: And if they are not Newborn before they Die, it had been Good for them,
that they never had been Born at all. The law of aequity was, in Exodus 21.19.
If one man wound another, he shall cause him to be through^y healed. Your
Children are born with deadly wounds of Sin upon their Souls; and they may
Thank you for those wounds: Unjust men, will you now do nothing for their
Healing? Man, thy Children are dying of an horrid poison, in their Bowels; and
it was thou that poisoned 'em. What! will thou do nothing for their Succor!
Thy Children are thrown into a Devouring Fire; and it is from thee that the
Fiery Vengeance of God has taken Hold of them. What! will thou do nothing to
Help them out! There is a Corrupt Nature in thy Children, which is a Fountain
of all Wickedness and Confusion. The very Pagans were not insensible of this
Corrupt Nature; they Styled it our C^ngenite Sin, and our Domestic Evil, and
cried out* with Tully, Simul ac Editi s^mus in Lucem, ac suscepti, in omni
continue pravitate versamur. The Jews have been yet more Sensible of this
Corrupt Nature; they have Styled it, our Evil Frame, and, The poison of the old
Serpent; and This they understand by The Enemy, so often mentioned in the
Scripture; And, The Heart of stone, and, The Wicked that watches the Righteous.
Will not you that are Christians, then show your Christianity, by Sensibly
doing what you can, that your Children may have a Better Nature infused into
them?

What shall I Say? I may say, The Time would fail me to mention a thousandth
part of what might be said. But, in short: Is it not a sad Thing to be The
Father of a Fool? Alas, man, till thy Children become Regenerate, Thou art the
Father of a Fool; Thy Children are but the Wild Asses Colt! I add; would it not
Break thy Heart, if thy Children, were in Slavery to Turks, or Moors, or
Indians? Devils are worse than Indians, and Infidels: Till thy Children are
brought home to God, they are the slaves of Devils. In a word; Can thy Heart
Endure, that thy Children, should be Banished from the Lord Jesus Christ, and
Languishing under the Torments of Sin among Devils, in outer Darkness
throughout Eternal Ages? Don't call thy self a Parent; Thou art an Ostrich!
Call not these, the Children of thy Bowels; Thou have no Bowels! I will not
say, That Zipporah called her Husband, A Bloody Husband. But all the Angels in
Heaven call thee, A Bloody Father, and, A Bloody Mother; and are astonished at
the Adamantine Hardness of that Bloody Heart of thine; and those Heartstrings
that are Sinews of Iron!

II. Improve the Baptism of your Children, as an Obligation, and an
Encouragement unto you, Parents, to Endeavor the Salvation of your Baptized
Little Ones. Of your Children, you may say, with Jacob, in Genesis 33.5. These are
the Children, that God has graciously given to me. Now, Will not you Heartily
give back those Children to God again: Their Baptism is to be the Sign and Seal
of your doing so. You generally bring your Infant Children unto the Baptism of
the Lord: I suppose, it is because you are satisfied, That the Children of
Believers were in Covenant with God, in the Days of the Old Testament; and,
That the Children of Believers Then had a Right unto the I^^ial Seal of the
Covenant; and, That in the Days of the New Testament, they have not Lost this
privilege. Well, But when you bring your Children to the Sacred Baptism, what
is it for? Oh, Let it not be done, as an Empty Formality; as if the Baptism of
your Children, were for nothing, but only a Formal and a Pompous putting of a
Name upon them. No, but let the serious Language of your Souls, in this Action,
be that of Hannah, in 1 Samuel 1.28. I have given this Child unto the Lord, as
long as he Lives he shall be given unto the Lord. I find in the private
Writings of an Holy Man, who dyed in this place, not much above a year ago;
That the Day before one of his Children was to be Baptized, he spent the Time
in giving up himself and his Child unto the Lord, and in Taking hold of the
Covenant for both of them, and in praying, that he might on the morrow, be able
in much Faith and Love, and Covenant Obedience, to do it, at the Baptism of the
Lord On which he writes, It is not easy though common, to offer a Child unto God
in Baptism.

Syrs, When you have done thus, for your Children, you have a singular
Advantage to plead for the Fulfillment of that word upon them, in Isa. 44.3. I
will pour my Spirit upon thy Seed, and my Blessing upon thy Offspring. You may
go before the Lord, and plead, Lord, Was not the Baptismal Water poured by thy
Command upon my Children! Oh, Do thou now pour upon them the Heavenly Grace,
which that Baptismal Water Signified. And now, no sooner let those Children
become able to understand it, than you shall make them understand, what the
Design of their Baptism was. Parents, I am to tell you, That if you Let your
Children grow up, without ever telling them, That, and, Why, they were Baptized
into the Name of the Lord, you are fearfully Guilty of Taking the Name of the
Lord in vain It was the manner of an Excellent Minister, upon the Baptising of
a Child, Solemnly to deliver the Child into the Hands of the Parents, with such
words a those, Here, Take This Child now, and bring it up for the Lord Jesus
Christ, I charge you. God from Heaven speaks the like words to you, O Parents,
upon all your Baptized Children. And that you may bring up your Children for
the Lord Jesus Christ, You must as soo^ (...) you can, Let them know, That in
Baptism, they were Dedicated unto Him. Show them, That when they were Baptized,
they were Listed among the Servants and Soldiers of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
that if they Live in Rebellion against Him, Woe unto them! Show them, from, Mat.
28.19, 20. That since they are Baptized, into the Name of the Father, and the
Son, and the Holy Spirit, they must observe all Things, whatsoever the Lord
Jesus Christ has Commanded them. Show them, from Romans 6.4. That since they are
Baptized, they are Buried with Christ in Baptism, and must Live no longer in
Sin, but be Dead unto all the Vanities of the World. Show them from Gal. 3.27.
That since they are Baptized, they have put on Christ, and must follow His
Example, and be as He was in the World. Show them from 1 Pet. 3 21. That being
Baptized, they must now make the Answer of a Good Conscience, to all the
proposals of the New Covenant: and God propounding to them, Shall my Christ be
thine, and will thou be His? they must conscientiously answer, Lord, with all
my Heart! Put this very solemnly unto your Children; My Child, Shall God the
Father, be thy Father? Shall God the Son, be thy Savior! Shall God the Spirit,
be thy Sanctifier; And art thou willing to be the Servant of that one God, who
is, Father, Son, and Spirit? Leave them not, until their little Hearts are
conquered unto That for which they have been Baptized. It has been the Judgment
of some Judicious men; That if Infant Baptism were more Improved, it would be
less Disputed, O that it were thus improved.

III. Instruct your Children in the Great Matters of Salvation; O Parents,
don't let them Die without Instruction.

There is indeed, an Instruction in Civil Matters, which we owe unto our
Children* It Is very pleasing to our Lord Jesus Christ, that our Children should
be well formed with, and well-informed in the Rules of Civility; and not be
left a Clownish, and Sottish, and Ill bred sort of Creatures. An Unmannerly
Brood is a Dishonor to Religion. And there are many points of a Good
Education, that we should bestow upon our Children; They should Read, and
Write, and Cyphar, and be put unto some Agreeable Callings; and not only our
Sons, but our Daughters also should be taught such Things, as will afterward
make them Useful in their places. There is a little Foundation of Religion laid
in such an Education. But besides, and beyond all this, there is an Instruction
in Divine Matters, which our Children are to be made partakers of. Parents,
Instruct your Children, in the Articles of Religion; and acquaint them, with
God, and Christ, and the Mysteries of the Gospel, and the Doctrines and Methods
of the Great Salvation. It was Required, in Psalm 78.5. He commanded our
Fathers, to make known to their Children, that the Generation to come might
know, who should arise and declare them to their Children, that they might set
their Hope in God, and keep His Commandments. It was Required in Ephesians. 6.4.
Fathers, bring up your Children in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord.
Would you have your Children to be Wise and Good? I know not why you should
expect it, unless you take abundance of pains, by your Instruction to make them
so. There was a Wise and a Good Son, who gave that Account, how he became what
he was; in Prove. 4 3, 4. I was my Fathers Son, and he Taught me. O Begin
betimes, to Tell your Children, who is their Maker, and who is their Savior,
and what they are Themselves, and what is like to become of them; and by no
means let them want that Advantage, in 2. Tim. 3*15 From a Child thou have
known the Holy Scriptures, which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation.
Cause them to look often into their Bibles, and here and there Single out some
special Sentences from those Oracles of Heaven for them to get into their
memories. And for the better management of their Instruction, there are
especially Two Handles, to be laid Hold upon; the one is, a Proper Catechism,
the other is the Public Ministry. Be sure, that they Learn their Catechism
very perfectly; But then content not your selves with hearing them say by Rote,
the Answers in their Catechism; Question them very distinctly over again about
every clause in the Answers; and bring all to ly so plain before them, that by
their saying only, Yes, or, No, you may perceive that the sense of the Truth is
Entered into their Souls. And then, what they hear in the Evangelical Ministry,
do you Apply it unto them after their coming Home; Confer with them familiarly
about the Things that have been handled in the Ministry of the Word: Go over
one Thing after another, with them, till you see they have got clear Idoeas of
it; Then put it unto them, Are not you now to Avoid such a thing; or, to
perform such a thing! And, must not you now make such and such a prayer unto
God? Bid them then, go do accordingly. Hence also, 'Twere very desirable, that
you should watch all opportunities, to be instilling your Instructions into the
Souls or your little Folks, They are narrow-mouthed Vessels, and things must be
drop after drop instilled into them. It was required in Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. The words
which I command thee, Thou shall teach them Diligently unto thy Children, and
shall Talk of them, when thou sit in thine House, and when thou walk by
the way, and when thou lie down, and when thou risest up. How often in a
week, are we Diverting our selves, with our Children in our Houses? There they
stand before us; There is nothing to hinder our saying some very profitable
Thing for them to think upon; Well, can you let fall Nothing upon them, that it
will be worth their while, for them to think upon? What, Nothing of God, and
Christ, and of another World, and of their own Souls, and of the Sins that may
Endanger them, and of the Ways* which they may take to be Happy? Doubtless,
you may say something. And who can tell* It may be, after you are gone to
behold the Face of the Lord Jesus Christ in Glory, these your Children will
Remember Hundreds of profitable Instructions, that you have given 'em; and Live
upon them when you that gave 'em, are Dead. With Two Strokes I will clench this
Advice. The one is that in Prove. 22.6. Train up a Child in the way he should
go, and when he is old, he will not Depart from it. The other is that in Prove.
17.25. A Foolish Son is a grief to his Father, and a bitterness to her that
bare him.

IV. Parents, With a Sweet Authority over your Children, Rebuke them for, and
Restrain them from, every thing that may prove prejudicial unto their Salvation*

Syrs, You can do little for the Welfare of your Children, if once you have
lost your Authority over them. Would you bring your Children to the Fear of
God? Your character then must be that, in 1 Timothy 3.4* One that Rules well his
own Bouse, having his Children in subjection, with all Gravity. Don't by your
Lightness and Weakness and Folly, suffer them to Trample upon you; but keep up
so much Authority, that your Word may be a Law unto them. Nevertheless, Let not
your Authority be strained with such Harshness, and Fierceness, as may
discourage your Children. To treat our Children like Slaves, and with such
Rigor, that they shall always Tremble and Abhor to come into our presence,
This will be very unlike to our Heavenly Father. Our Authority should be so
Tempered with Ki^dness, and Meekness, and Loving Tenderness, that our Children
may Fear us with Delight, and see that we Love them, with as much Delight. Now,
Let our Authority, effectually keep in our Children, from all their unruly
Exorbitancies and Extravagancies. If we let our Young Folks grow Headstrong,
and if we grow Afraid of compelling them to the Wholesome Orders of our
Families, we have even given them up to Ruin. God brought that Son to an
Un^imely and a Terrible End, of whom it is reported, in 1 King 1.6. His Father
had not Disp^eased him at any time, in saying, Why have thou done so? I beseech
you, Parents, In^erpose your Authority, to st^p and check the Carrier of your
Children, when they will be running into the paths of the Destroyer. Gratify
them with Rewards of Well-doing, when they Do well; but let them not be
gratified with every Ungodly Vanity, that their Vain Minds may be set upon.
Wherefore keep a strict Inspection upon their Conversations; Examine, How they
spend their Time? Examine, What Company they keep? Examine, Whether they take
no Bad Courses? Be not such Foolish Enemies to your selves, and your Children,
as to count them your Enemies, that shall Friendlily advise you of their
Miscarriages. That wretched Folly, is a very Frequent One! When you Find out
their Miscarriages, effectually Rebuke them, and Restrain them. Incurr not the
Indignation of Heaven, once Incu^^'d by a Fond Father, in 1 Samuel 3.13. I will
Judge his House for ever, for the Iniquity which he knows; because his Sons
made themselves vile, and he Restrained them not. Ah, Thou Indulgent Parent; If
thou can not Cross thy Children, when they are disposed unto that which is
for the Dishonor of God, God will make thy Children to become Crosses unto
thee. Syrs, When your Children do amiss, call them Aside; set before them the
Precepts of God which they have broken, and the Threatenings of God, which they
provoked. Demand of them, to pro^ess their Sorrow for their Fault, and Resolve
that they will be no more so Faulty. Yea, There may be occasion for you, to
consider that Word of God, in Prove. 13 24 He that spares his R^d hates his
Son, but he that loves him, chasteneth him betimes; and that Word, in Prove.
19.18. Chas^en thy Son, while there is Hope, and let not thy Sou^ spare for his
Crying; and that word, (...) Prove. 23.13, 14. Withold not Correction from the
Child; for if thou beatest him with the Rod, he shall not Die; Thou shall beat
him with the Rod, and shall deliver his Soul from Hell. But if it must be so,
Remember this Counsil; Never give a Blow in a passion. Stay till your passion
is over; and let the Offenders plainly see, that you deal thus with them, out
of pure Obedience unto God, and for their true Repentance. One of the Ancients,
has this Ingenious gloss; In the Tabernacle, Aarons Rod, and the Pot of Manna,
were together; so (says he) when the Rod is used, the sweetness and goodness
of the Manna must accompany it: and Mercy be joined with Severity. Let me leave
that praemonition with you, in Prove. 29.15. A Child left unto himself, brings
his Mother to shame.

V. Lay your Charges upon your Children; Parents, Charge them to Work about
their own Salvation. The Charges of Parents have a great Efficacy upon many
Children; To Charge 'em vehemently, is to Charm 'em wonderfully. Command your
Children, and it may be they will Obey. Let Gods Commands be your Commands, and
it may be your Children will obey them. Lay upon your Children, the Charges of
God, as David once upon his, in 1 Chronicles. 28.9. My Son, know thou the God of thy
Father, and serve Him with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind; if thou
seek Him, He will be found of thee, but if thou forsake Him, He will cast thee
off for ever.

Now, Syrs, You will do well, to sin^gle out some singular Charges of God, and
calling your Children one by one before you, Lay those Charges upon them, in
the Name of the God that made them, and obtain from them, if you can, a promise
that they will Observe those Charges, with the Help of that God. I Will set before
you, Three or Four of those Charges.

Let one of your Charges upon your Children, be That in 1 John 3.23. This is
His Commandment, that we should Believe on the Name of His Son Jesus Christ.
Charge them to carry their poor, guilty, ignorant and polluted and Enslaved
Souls, unto the Lord Jesus Christ, that He may Save them from their Sins, and
Save them from the Wrath to come. Charge them, to mind how the Lord Jesus
Christ Executes the Office of a Prophet, and a Priest, and a King, and Cry to
Him, that He would Save them in the Execution of all those Blessed Offices.

Let another of your Charges be that in Hag. 1.5, 7. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, Consider your Ways. Charge them to set apart a few minutes now and
then, for Consideration; and in those minutes, Charge them to Consider, what
they have been doing, and what they should have been doing, ever since they
came into the World, and if they should immediately go out of the World, what
will become of them throughout Eternal Ages. I have Read of a Dying Parent, who
laid this Charge upon his wild Son, That he would allow one quarter of an Hour
every Day to Consider on something or other, any Thing, as his Fancy led him.
The Young man having for some while done so, at last began to consider, why his
Dying Parent should lay such a Charge upon him This brought on so many Devout
Thoughts, that e're long, in the Conversion of the Young man, the Desire of the
Dying Parent was accomplished. Oh! If you could Engage your Children to Think
upon their Ways, there would be Hopes of their Turning to God.

But, Let a Third of your Charges, be that in Mat. 6.6. Enter into thy Closet,
and when thou have shut thy Door, pray to thy Father that sees in secret.
Charge them to Retire for Secret Prayer, every Day that comes over their Heads.
Talk with them, till you see, that they can tell, what they should pray for:
And then, often charge them to pray every day; yea, sometimes Ask them, Do you
Remember the charge I Laid upon you? Ah, Parent, Thy Children will do well,
while it can be said, Behold, They pray. And thy House filled with thy
Childrens Prayers, would be better accommodated, than i^ it were filled, with
all the Riches of the Indies.

Let a Fourth of your Charges be That, in Prove. 9.6. Forsake the Foolish and
Live. Charge them to avoid the snares of Evil Company; Terrify them with
Warnings of those Deadly Snares. Often Repeat this Charge unto them, That if
there be any Vicious Company, they shu^ (...), as they would the Plague or the
Devil. Often say, My Son, if Sinners entice thee, consent thou not. Often say,
My Child, Walk with the Wise, and thou shall be wise, but a Companion of Fools
shall be destroyed. Oh, Don't let the Beasts of prey, carry away thy Children
alive.

Shall I add; It is here intimated, That an Abraham, is to Command his
Children, very particularly, about, The Way of the Lord. The Way of the Lord,
is the Way of his Right, pure, Instituted Worship. Well then, Command your
Children, That they don't Forsake the Holy Institutions of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and Embrace a Vain Worship, consisting of Things that He never
Instituted. There are some clauses in the Second Commandment, which in imate,
That if Fa^^n^s would see the Mercies of God upon their Children, they must
Charge them, to Worship God, only in those Ways, of Worship, that God has
Appointed.

Thus keep Charging of your Children, while you Live. And, if you are capable
so to Do, Do it once more with all possible Solemnity, when you come to Die. The
words of a Dying Parent, will probably be Living Words, and Lively Ones. When
our Excellent Mitchel was a Dying, he let fall such a Speech as This, unto a
Young Gentleman, that Lodged in his House, My Friend, As a Dying man, I now
charge you, that you don't meet me out of Christ in the Day of Christ. This one
Speech, brought into Christ, the Soul of that Young Gentleman! Truly, If your
Dying Lips, may utter such Dying Words unto your Children, who can tell, but
they may then be brought into Christ, if they were never so before! But, lest
you should have no opportunity, to Speak in a Dying Hour, why should you not
Write such Things, as you would have them to Think upon, when you shall be Dead
and Gone? An unknown deal of Good, may your Children Reap, from the
Admonitions, that a Dying Parent may Leave unto them.

VI. Parents, Be Exemplary: Your Example may do much toward the Salvation of
your Children, Your Works will more Work upon your Children, than your Words;
Your Patterns will do more than your Precepts; your Copies than your Counsils.
What was then said unto Pastors, may very fitly be said unto Parents, in Tit.
2.2. In all Things show thy self a pattern of good works; and in 1 Timothy 4.12.
Be thou an Example in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in Spirit, in Faith,
in Purity. 'Twill be impossible for you to infuse any Good, into your Children,
if you appear void of that Good your selves. If the Old Crab go backward, it is
to no purpose, for the Young One to be directed unto going forward: Syrs, Young
Ones, will Crawl after the Old Ones. Would you have your Children, well
principled with the Fear and Faith of God? Mind that passage, in Act. 10.2.
Cornelius was a devout man, and one that Feared God, with all his House. Mind
that passage, in Act. 18.8. Crispus Believed on the Lord, with all his House.
It seems, the whole House, is like to do, as the Parents do. It Is, as Austin
expresses it, the usual Cry, Nolumus esse meliores quam patres, We will be no
Better than our Parents. If the Parents will make their Cakes to the Queen of
Heaven, the Children will kindle their Fires for them. Justin Martyr somewhere
Enquires why the Prophet Elisha imprecated the Revenges of Heaven upon the
Children that mocked him, when they hardly understood what they did? And he
answers, The Children Learnt their wicked Language from their Parents, and now
God punished both of them together. Parents, Let your Children see nothing by
you, but what shall be commendable and imitable. Be able to say unto your
Children, My Child, Follow me, as you have seen me follow Christ. Let them from
your Seriousness, and your Prayerfulness, and your Watchfulness, and your
Sanctification of the Lord's Day, be taught, how they should walk and please God.

You Bid them do well; Show them How!

VII. Prayer, Prayer, must be the Crown of all: Parents, Is it your Hearts
Desire? Let it be also your Prayer, for your Children, that they ^ay be Saved.
Prayer for the Salvation of any Sinners, avails much. How much may it avail
for the Salvation of our Sinful Children? Much availed that Prayer of David, in
1 Chronicles. 29.19. Lord, Give unto my Son a perfect Heart, to keep thy
Commandments. Parents, Make such a Prayer for your Children, Lord, Give unto my
Child, a New Heart, and a Clean Heart, and a Soft Heart; and an Heart after thy
own Heart. We have been told, That Children once were brought unto our Lord
Jesus Christ, for Him to put His Hands upon them; and He put His Hands upon
them, and Blessed them. Oh! Thrice, and Four Times Blessed Children! Well,
Parent, Bring thy Children unto the Lord Jesus Christ; It may be, He will put
His Blessing, and Healing, and Saving Hands upon them: Then, They are Blessed,
and shall be Blessed for evermore! If Abraham Cry to God, O that my Son Ishmael
may Live in thy sight! God will say to Abraham, Concerning Ishmael, I have
heard Thee! Pray for the Salvation of thy Children, and carry the Names of
every one of them, every day before the Lord, with Prayers, the Cries whereof
shall pie^ce the very Heavens. Holy Job did so! Job 1.^5. He offered according
to the Number of all his Children; Thus did Job continually. Address Heaven
with daily Prayers, That God would make thy Children the Temples of His Spirit,
the Vessels of His Glory; and the Care of His Holy Angels, Address the Lord
Jesus Christ, with Prayers, like them of old, That all the Maladies upon the
Souls of thy Children may be cured, and that the Evil One may have no
possession of them. Yea, When thou do cast thine Eyes upon the Little Folks,
often in a day dart up an Ejaculatory Prayer to Heaven for them; Lord, Let this
Child be thy Servant for ever. If thy Prayers are not presently answered, be
not thereby Disheartened: Remember the Word of the Lord, in Luke 18.1. That men
ought always to pray, and not to Faint. Redouble thy Importunity, until thou
speed for thy Child, as the poor Woman of Canaan did. Join Fasting to thy
Prayer; It may be, The Evil in the Soul of thy Child, will not go out, without
such a Remedy. David betakes himself to Fasting, as well as Prayer, for the
Life of his Child. Oh, Do as much for the Soul of thy Child! Wrestle with the
Lord. Receive no Denial. Earnestly protest, Lord, I will not let thee go,
except thou Bless this poor Child of mine, and make it thy own! Do thus, until*
if it may be, thy Heart is Raised by a Touch of Heaven, to a particular Faith;
That God has blessed this Child, and it shall be Blessed and Saved for ever.
But is this all that is to be done? There is more. Parents, Pray with your
Children, as well as for them.

Family prayer must be mentained by all those Parents, that would not have
their Children miss of Salvation, and that would not have the Damnation of
their Children horribly fall upon themselves. Man, Thy Family is a Pagan
Family, if it be a Prayerless Family: And the Children going down to the place
of Dragons from this thy Family, will pour out their Execrations upon Thee, in
the Bottom of Hell, until the very Heavens be no more.

But, besides your Family Prayers, O Parents, why should you not now and then,
take one capable Child after another, alone before the Lord? ^arry the Child
with you, into your Secret Chambers; make the Child kneel down by you, while
you present it unto the Lord, and Implore His Blessing upon it. Let the Child,
hear the Groans, and see the Tears, and be a witness of the Agonies, wherewith
you are Travailing for the Salvation of it. The Children will never Forget what
you do; It will have a mavelous Force upon them.

Thus, O Parents, You have been told, what you have to do, for the Salvation of
your Children; and certainly, their Salvation is worth all of this!

Your Zeal about the Salvation of your Children, will be a symptom of your own
Sincerity. A total want of that Zeal, will be a Spot upon you, that is not a
Spot of the Children of God.

God will Reward the Zeal. It Is very probable; That the Children thus cared
for, will be the Saved of the Lord. Your Glad Hearts will one day see it, if
they are so: 'Twill augment your Heaven, through all Eternity, to have These in
Heaven with you.

And let it be Remembered, That the Fathers, are not the only Parents obliged
thus to pursue the Salvation of their Children: You that are Mothers, have not
a little to do for the Souls of your Children, and you have Opportunity to do
more than a Little. Bathsheba the Mother of Solomon, and Eunice the Mother of
Timothy, did greatly Contribute unto the Salvation of their famous and worthy
Sons. God has Commanded Children, Forsake not the Law of thy Mother; Then, a
Mother must give the Law of God unto them. It Is said of the Virtuous Woman, She
Looks well to the Ways of her Household; Then, a Virtuous Mother Looks well to
the Ways of her Children. Your Children may say, In Sin did my Mother Conceive
me. Oh, Then Let Mothers do what they can, to Save their Children out of Sin.
And especially, Mothers, Do you Travail for your Children over again, with your
Earnest Prayers for their Salvation, until it may be said unto you, as it was
unto Monica the Mother of Austin, concerning him; It Is impossible, thar thy
Child should perish, after thou have Employed so many Prayers and Tears for the
Salvation of it.

Now, God give a Good Success to these poor Endeavors!

THE Duties of CHILDREN To their Parents.
DEUTERONOMY. XXVII.14, 16. The Levites shall speak, and shall say unto all the Men of
Israel, with a loud voice:

Cursed is he that sets Light, by his Father or his Mother. And all the
people shall say, Amen.


I Am going to Entertain you with a Discourse, that cannot have a fitter
praeface, than those words, in Psalm. 34.11. Come, ye Children, Hearken unto me,
I will teach you the Fear of the Lord. The Children of my Neighbors, are now
appearing among us; Yea. Our Little Ones are no Little part of the Assembly.
And very many of these, are the Children of pious Parents, the Children whose
Piety has therefore been fervently desired and required by their Parents. Come,
ye Children, Hearken to me; I will tell you, what you shall do, that your
Parents may be Happy in you, and that your own Happiness may be secured and
increased.

There was a Solemnity sometimes observed upon the Two Mountains of Ebal, and
Gerizzim, in the Land of Israel. On the Top of Mount Ebal, there stood Six of
the Israelitish Tribes, and Six on the Top of Mount Gerizzim. Certain Levites
with the Ark of God, in the Valley between them, directing themselves unto
Mount Ebal, with a Loud Voice, uttered very Distinctly, no less than Twelve
terrible Curses; unto which the Tribes on that Mount, made the very Heavens
ring, with a dreadful, Amen, unto them. But between each of these Curses, the
Levites directed themselves unto Mount Gerizzim, with Blessings directly
opposed unto those Curses; and the Tribes on that Mount, gave the Shout of a
Joyful, Amen, upon them. It Is true, the Order prescribing the Blessings, is not
so distinctly Recited by Moses, as that of the Curses; because it is Reserved as
the Special Glory of our Blessed Lord Jesus Christ, and of His Glorious Gospel,
to bring in the Blessings of Obedience. Until the Gospel of the Lord Jesus
Christ arrive unto us, the Law does pronounce unto us nothing but Curses, we
hear nothing but a Thunder of Wrath Cursing of us

The Second of the Direful Curses* which the Levites of God* facing to Mount
Ebal, pronounced was, Cursed be he that sets Light by his Father or his Mother.
Doubtless, when the vast Body of people, as one man, replied, Amen, upon it, it
sounded like an horrible Thunderclap. Yea, but the Thunderclap is not yet
over; the peals of it, are this very Day to be again Sounded, in the midst of
you, O Congregation of God. We read, that when the thing thus Appointed, was
first observed, by the Tribes of Israel, in the Days of Joshua, [Josh. 8.35.]
There were the Little Ones, in the Congregation. It is not amiss, that there
are so many Little Ones, in the Great Congregation here come together; and unto
The^ especially, am I now to bring that Warning from God.

The Heavy Curse of God, will fall upon those Children, that make Light of
their Parents. To Set Light by ones Parents, is in other words, to Treat them
with any Ungodly Contempt: And, you mind it, My Children, that the Curse of God
is denounced, not only upon Children, which cast Contempt upon their Fathers:
Oftentimes the Fathers have the Wisdom to keep up their Authority, and keep
themselves above the Contempt of their Children. But the Mothers do more
frequently by their Fondness, and Weakness, bring upon themselves, the Contempt
of their Children, and Lay themselves Low, by many Impertinencies. Now, behold,
the Admonition of Heaven; the Children which cast Contempt upon their Mothers,
do also bring themselves under the Curse of God.

The Curse of God! The Terriblest Thing tha^ ever was heard of; The First born
of Terribles! Can I mention this Tremendous Thing, The Curse of God; and, Oh,
My Children, Will not you Tremble at it? Who can for^^ar crying (...), as Elihu
did, when he heard the Thunders of God rattling in the Heavens over him* At this
my heart even Trembles, and it is moved out of its place! I hope, none of you
are come to such a Degree of Atheism, as to Defy, the Curse of God* You will not
mock at the Fear of the most Fearful Thing, in the World. But give me your
Attention, while I do from the Oracles of the Almighty God, handle that CASE
among you.

CASE.
What Respects to their Parents' must be rendered by the Children, that would
not by Affronts to their Parents, bring down upon themselves the dreadful
Curses of God?

The Lessons, which I have now to set you, My Children, be these.

I. Maintain in your own Spirits, a Dread of those Dreadful Curses, with which
the God of Heaven uses to take Vengeance on the Children, who put not Respect,
but Contempt, upon their Parents. Behold* how dreadfully the Judgments of God
follow the Children that Set Light by their Parents; and Oh, my Warned
Children, upon the sight of those Warnings, cry out, Lord, my Flesh trembles
for fear, and I am afraid of those Judgments!

Indeed there is no Sin more usually Revenged, with the Sensible and Notable
Curses of God, than that Sin, The Contempt of Parents. Exasperated Parents
themselves, do sometimes Imprecate Curses upon their Chi^dren; and the
Invisible World with a st^^nge, but a quick work, usually sa^es* Amen, to those
Curses. But, I beseech of you* O Parents, that be your Exasperations what they
will, you forbear to use any Imprecations on your Children. Alas, They will be
Cursed Children fast enough, without the least Ill wish of yours to hasten it.
When it was Instituted, that the Levites were to proclaim, Cursed is be that
sets Light by his Father, or his Mother* One part of the Institution was* All
the people shall say, Amen. Truly, it often comes to pass, that when the Curses
of God come upon them that ^et Light by their Parents, it shall be so* that all
the people shall take Notice of it; all the people shall see an, Amen, set unto
it, shall see it Ratified. Children, I must be a little particular with you.

First. Undutiful Children, for the Sin of the Contempt they cast upon their
Parents, are often Cursed by God, with b^i^g* Left unto yet more Sin against
Him* I could not have spoken a more Terrible word! This is most certain, The
more Sinful any man is, the more Cursed is that man. It is an amazing Vengeance
of God, that gives a Sinner up to Sin for Sin, and Curses a Sinner for one Sin,
by Leaving him to another. But Undutiful Children, are commonly Cursed, and
Banned by such a Vengeance of God. We read of some Sinners, whom the Justice of
God, gives up to Sin; and this is one Brand upon those doleful Sinn^rs, in Romans
1.30. Disobedient unto Parents. The Fifth Commandment stands in the Front of
all the Six, upon the Second Table of the Law. Children, If you break the Fifth
Commandment, there is not much Likelihood, that you will keep the rest; No,
there is Hazard, that the Curse of God, will give you up to break every one of
them all. Undutiful Children soon become horrid Creatures, for Unchastity, for
Dishonesty, for Lying, and all manner of Abominations: And the Contempt which
they cast upon the Advice of their Parents, is one thing that pulls down this
Curse of God upon them. They who Sin against their Parents, are sometimes by
God given up to Sin against all the world beside. Mind the most Scandalous
Instances of Wickedness and Villainy; You Will ordinarily find, they were first
Undutiful Children, before they fell into the rest of their atrocious
Wickedness.

Secondly* Undutiful Children for the Contempt they cast upon their Parents,
are often Cursed by God, with a Mischief brought upon all their Affayrs. A
Strange Disaster uses to follow Undutiful Children, much Evil pursues that kind
of Sinners; there is a secret Vengeance of God, perplexing their Affayrs; through
that Vengeance of God, None of their Affayrs do prosper with them. When David
was vexed with one of his Undutiful Children, he could foretell, in Psalm. 55.19.
God shall Afflict them. There is a Secret Blast of God, upon Undutiful
Children. They are Afflicted in their Estates: It is the Curse of God upon
them, for their being Loathe* to do what they could for their Parents, with
their Estates. They are Afflicted in their Bodies: It is the Curse of God upon
them, for their Dishonouring the Parents of their Bodies. God Afflicts them
with Reproaches: It Is the Curse of God upon them; They have Reproached or
Despised their Parents. They are followed with one plague after another, by the
Irresistible Wrath, and Curse of God: They cannot comprehend, how they come to
be so plagued in all their Interests: It Is it may be their Contempt of their
Parents, that has, been the Worm at the Root, which causes all to wither with
'em. And if these Undutiful Children, ever Live to have Children of their own,
God pays 'em home in their own C^in; God pays 'em in the Undutifulness of their
own Children; In the Undutifulness of their own Children, God makes 'em, to
possess the Iniquities of their Youth. Judah, cast Contempt upon his Parents,
by Marrying a Canaanitess, as it should seem without their Consent: God Cursed
this Judah with a couple of Children, who were such Wretches, that the
Immediate Hand of Heaven, dispatched 'em out of the World. You have doubtless
been informed of that famous History, in the Theatrum Historiae; A vile Son did
once beat his old Father, and then Drag him to the Threshold of the House, by
the Hair of the Head. Afterward, when he grew Old himself, which by the way,
was a Rare Thing!) his own Son did in like manner beat him, and then Drag him
also, by the Hair of the Head, not only to the Threshold, but out of the Doors,
into the Dirt. Hereupon he cried out with Anguish, Ah! If this Varlet had
pulled me only to the Threshold, I had been served, but just as my Father was
by me! Children, Remember this.

Thirdly. Death; Yea, an Early Death, and a Woeful Death, is not seldom the
Curse of God upon Undutiful Children, for their being so. It is the Tenor of
the Precept, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, that thy Days may be long upon
the Land. Mind it, Children; Your Days are not like to be long upon the Land,
if you Set Light by your Father, or Mother. When Absalom, with his Crew, was
manifesting a Bloody Undutifulnes^, his offended Father praedicted thus much,
That those bloody and crasty men, should not Live out half their Days. Why, he
knew, that the very Finger of God, had once written as much as this comes to;
That Children, which did not Honor their Parents, must not look to have the^^
Days ^ong in the Land. We have all heard the Fate of that Undutiful Absalom;
now some Travelers Report, that in the place where Absalom was Buried, there
is now a vast Heap of Stones, thus produced: It is customary for them, that go
by the place, to throw a Stone upon it, using these words; Thus it shall be
done unto the Son that Rebelleth against his Father. Stand still, O my
Children, and Look with Horror upon the Grave of Absalom: Read there, and see
the Curse of God upon the Undutiful. Children that cast Contempt on the
Parents, who have been the Instruments of their Life, do thereby, what, but
make Forfeitures of their Life? It becomes Children to reckon it one main
Design, and Business, and privilege of their Life, to be Comforts unto their
Parents: When they cease to do so, God with a direful Curse often gives that
Order about them, Take away the Life of that Undutiful Creature! That Creature
shall no longer Live in the World. It was an Edict of Heaven, in Exodus 21.17.
He that curses his Father or his Mother, shall surely be put unto Death. And
what shall then be done unto the Children, that prove Curses unto their Father,
or their Mother? Undutiful Children are so; But the Curse of God puts them to
Death for it: And because those Undutiful Children are Wicked over much,
therefore they Die before their Time. Yea, it is no unusual Thing for the Death
of Undutiful Children, to be Embittered with some Ex^raordinary Circumstances
of Confusion and Calamity. I tell you, O Undutiful Children; There is Danger,
Lest you be so Cursed of God, as to be Hanged on a Tree, at the Last. It is
Remarkable, That the most of them, who are Executed on the Gallows, do at their
Execution cry out of This: Oh, It Is my Undutifulness unto my Parents, It Is my
Disobedience unto my Parents, that has brought me unto this Lamentable End! It
is a memorable passage, in Prove. 30.17. The Eye that mocks at his Father, and
despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of the Valley shall pick it out, and
the young Eagles shall Eat it. It seems, an Untimely and a Tragical Death,
often Exposes the Carcases of those Children, to the Carnivorous Fowls of
Heaven. There was a Law in Israel, Deuteronomy. 21.21. That the Rebellious Child
should be put to Death. After Stoning, he was Hanged up; for in Israel they
Hanged up none, till they had first otherwise killed him; and no doubt, his
Corpse b^ing taken down, as it was to be before Sun set, it was thrown into a
Noted Pit, such an one as that, into which they (...) the Corpse of Judas over
the Precipice; and there (...) Fowls of Heaven preyed upon it. Agur perhaps
alludes to This; And we often see it so, that the Rebellious Child, is left of
God, unto those Crimes, for which he is put to Death, e're it be long. More
than so; Undutiful Children are Unnatural Children; And the Curse of God
sometimes gives over Unnatural Children to commit the most Unnatural Murders.
They have Murdered themselves, and been Self-Destroyers: and as they have
Sinned against Nature, so they Die the most against Nature, that can be. A Young
man in this Country Drowned himself; but he Left behind (...), a Writing to his
Father, wherein he complained, O Father, I have kept my Soul, as long as I
could; My Ruin was the pride and stubbornness of my Tender Years! But is this
all?

No; Lastly; All the Curse of God upon Undutiful Children hitherto, is but the
Death, riding the Pale Horse in the Revelation; whereof it is said, Hell
followed. I am after all to tell you, That the Vengeance of Eternal Fire, will
be the portion of Undutiful Children after all; Children that cast Contempt
upon their Parents, God will cast into the Vengeance of Eternal Fire at the
Last, and into Everlasting Contempt. Surely, the Damned, are the Cursed of God!
Hear, O Children; If you are the Children of Rebellion, the Curse of God will
make you the Children of Perdition, throughout Eternal Ages. Undutiful
Children, what are they, but the Children of Belial? This is as much as to say,
They are the Children of Satan; and unto Satan they shall go. The Bible has
called 'em, The Children of the Devil; And whither shall the Children of the
Devil go, but into the Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels?
The Fiends of Darkness, will be the Ravens, and the Eagles, that shall fasten
their Talons, in the Eyes of those Children. When our Lord Jesus Christ, the
Judge of the World, foretells, that in the Day of Judgment, having said unto
those on His Right Hand, Come ye Blessed, He will say unto those on His Left
Hand, Depart, ye Cursed, into Everlasting Fire, with the Devil and his Angels;
He seems to allude unto the Action between Gerizzim and Ebal. Truly, the
Children Damned of old, upon Mount Ebal, for Setting Light by their Father or
their Mother, will be They, whom the Lord Jesus Christ, will one Day Doom, to
Depart from Him into Everlasting Fire, with the Devil and his Angels. It was
said, in Prove. 20.20. Whosoever curses his Father, or his Mother, his Lamp shall
be put out in Obscure Darkness.

Children, If by Undutifulness to you^ Parents, you incur the Curse of God,
(...) will not be Long before you go down into Obscure Darkness, even, into Utter
Darkness: God has Reserved for you the Blackness of Darkness for ever. The very
Children of the Kingdom themselves, have been cast into that hideous Darkness,
when they have proved Undutiful. Be it known to you; That Undutifulness to your
Parents, will bring you to feel many Stripes, from an Enraged Conscience in the
World to come; for you know the Will of God; Your Undutifulness is a Sin
against your Conscience. Yea, be Dutiful to thy Parents, or expect all the
formidable outpourings of an Infinite and Eternal Wrath upon thy Soul* Thou
do not value the Wrath of thy Parents; It is a Light Thing to thee: But the
Wrath of the Lord God Omnipotent, Oh, Don't make Light of That; It is a fearful
thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God!

I hope, we have been long enough upon Mount Ebal. Shall we now turn a little
unto Mount Gerizzim?

II. Let the Signal Blessings of God, upon Children who treat their Parents
with due Respect, find much Respect with you, be a great Encouragement unto
you, have a strong Impression upon you. The Levites, as far as we understand,
were to turn unto Mount Gerizzim, and with a loud voice to say, Blessed be he,
who does not set Light by his Father, or his Mother: And all the people were to
say, Amen. Hearken, O my Children, to the Blessings of God, that shall be
poured and showred from on High upon the Dutiful; and let them charm you, into
all possible Dutifulness. There are Children, whose continual Desire and Prayer
it is, That they may be in all Things made Rich Blessings unto their Parents.
They Honor their Parents, and are an Honor to their Parents. Their Parents do
with Glad Hearts behold their Wisdom, and must bear this Testimony for them,
Never were Parents more Happy in their Chiildren. O the Blessings that belong
to Children of such a Character! If it might be said, as it was by David, when
God gave him a Dutiful Son, that was to Build the Temple of the Lord; in Psalm.
127.5. Blessed is the man, that has his Quiver full of such Arrows,; Then
surely, Blessed are the Arrows, that are in the Quiver of such a man! The Holy
Spirit of God sets a special Remark, upon that Command, which requires Children
to be Dutiful unto their Parents: in Ephesians. 6.2. It Is the First Command [of the
Second Table] with a promise, That it may be well with thee. It shall be well
with you, O ye Dutiful Children; you have the word of a God for it. You may
note it, That in the Command, what we Translate, That thy Days may be Long, is
to be read, That they may prolong thy Days. Who are those They? They are thy
Father, and thy Mother. But how can thy Father, and thy Mother, prolong thy
Days? How, but by Blessing of thee, in the Name of the Almighty God. If the
Days of such a Child be not prolonged, we must allow a Sovereignty in such
Dispensations of Heaven; but there is cause to hope, for such a Child, that God
has prolonged his Days, in the Happiness of the Heavenly Word. This is plain;
Those Parents, that are Blessed with Dutiful Children, do with an inexpressible
Agony wish all sorts of Blessings to their Children. If it were in their power,
to confer Blessings upon their Children; Oh, how much would they do for them!
Now because, it is in the power of God alone to confer Blessings upon us, these
Parents go to God, for their Children, and they say with good old Jacob, God
bless the Lads! I assure you, such Benedictions from obliged Parents, have a
more than ordinary Authority, and Efficacy in them* For ones Parents to go
before God, and plead, Ah, Lord, such a Child of mine, has Loved me, and Served
me, and Helped me; and his good Carriage to me, has been such, that even upon
that Account I have reason to wish him all the good in the world: I therefore
bring that Child unto thee, and I pray thee to Bless him with all the B^essings
of Goodness: To be thus Blessed by ones Parents, O my Children, it is a thing of
more value than if a rich Inheritance were to be received from them. This is
very certain, There is no point of Religion, more certainly and commonly
Rewarded with Blessings in this world, than that of rendering unto Parents the
Dues that pertain unto them. A signal Prosperity, even in this world, uses to
attend those Children, that are very Obedient or Serviceable unto their
Parents. Those Reckabites, that Obey the Commandment of their Father, Thus said
the Lord of Hosts, They shall stand before me for ever. There are Children, who
have with unspeakable pleasure, supported their Aged Parents, in their
Necessities; They have said unto their Necessitous Parents, like Joseph, Thus
says thy Son, come down to me, Thou shall be near to me! I believe, There are
some at this very Time, in this very place, who can say, That from the Time,
they did for their Parents as they have done, God has signally Smiled upon
them. Friend, That Aged Father or Mother, in thy House, is not only the Glory
of thy House, but a better and a richer Thing than a Mine of Silver there.

Children, Be Blessings to your Parents, and be Assured, That those Parents
will be Greater Blessings to you, than you can be to Them. They will be so as
Long as they live; yea, more than so; After your Parents are Dead and Gone, the
Effects of their Prayers will yet Live: All the Prayers which those Gratified
Parents put up for you, will be still Answering, after they are Dead, as long
as you your selves do Live. David had been a Son, very Tender of his Parents:
and now, says David, in Psalm. 27.10. When my Father and my Mother for sake me,
then the Lord will take me up: He Will Requite all tha^ I did for my Father, and
my Mother. Shall I go a step further? When you your selves also are Dead and
Gone, even Your Children may Reap the Fruits of what you did for your Parents:
Your Posterity, may fare the better for your Dutifulness. The Jews have a
Notion among them; That for the sake of the Honor, that Esau paid unto his
Father, the Israelites Long after might not Extirpate the Edomites, who were
the Posterity of Esau. Moses tells the Israelites, You have compassed this
Mountain Long Enough. Why? Because Esau compassed a Mountain in Hunting for his
Father.

But after all; Dutiful Children acting upon principles of Christianity, may
hope to meet with their Christian Parents in Heaven; There Abraham the
Religious Father, There Isaac the Dutiful Son, There Jacob the Dutiful
Grandson, are Together; Blessed are they that meet there, in the Light of the
face of God; Blessed throughout Eternal Ages! Consider This, O Children; and
Set not Light by your Parents.

But being, by these Considerations prepared for it, it may now be Time to say;

III. The Respects that Children must render unto their Parents, are comprised
in those Three Words, Reverence, and, Obedience, and Recompense. Children do
Set Light by their Parents, or cast Contempt on them, if they withhold any of
these Three Regards from them: and the Curse of God, will Revenge the Contempt

First, You Set Light by your Parents, if you withold from them, the Reverence
that is due unto them. The God of Nature has placed a Distance, between
Parents and their Children; Children then Set Light by their Parents, when they
Forget this Distance. There is first, an Inward Reverence, that Children owe
unto their Parents. It was Enjoined in Lev. 19.3. Ye shall Fear, every man, his
Mother, and his Father. Children, you Set Light by your Parents, if your minds
are not Struck, with some awful Apprehension of their Superiority over you; if
you don't see an awful Image of God, in their Superiority; if you don't look
upon them, as the very Deputies of God, in their several Families. But this
Reverence must have some Outward Expression given of it. There is an Outward
Reverence, that Children owe unto their Parents. Hence it is said, in Mal. 1.6*
If I be a Father, where is my Honor? Hence it is said, in Prove. 31.28. Her
Children Rise up, and call her Blessed. Their Speeches, both to their Parents,
and of their Parents, must be full of Reverence. When Children speak to their
Parents, their Language must carry in it, some Acknowledgment of their being
such. Thus, in Genesis 31.35. She said unto her Father, my Lord. When Children
speak of their Parents, they must show a concern, that nothing Abusive be
uttered. Thus, in Psalm. 127.5. The Children of Youth, seem to Defend their
Father, from the Enemies in the Gate, or, False-Accusers. And their Actions
toward their Parents must yet more Emphatically Speak the Reverence, which
they would Retain for them. Thus in Genesis 48.12. Joseph bowed himself, with his
Face to the Earth, before his Father. Thus in 1 King. 2.10. Solomon Rose up to
meet his Mother, and bowed himself unto her, and She Sat on his Right Hand.
Now, Children, you Set Light by your Parents, if you Talk Sawcily and
Clownishly unto them; if you Reproach them, Defame them, and Backbite them; if
your Behavior toward them have any malapert Impudence in it. Though your
Parents may give you never so much Occasion of Complaint, it becomes you to
make as Little Reflection upon it, as ever you can. Say Nothing, but what the
Glory of God makes it Necessary for you to say. Though they should happen to do
you any Injuries, you may not show those Resentments, that you have upon the
Injuries of other Persons.

Again.

Secondly; You Set Light by your Parents, if you withold from them, the
Obedience that is due unto them. If Children don't Study to Do, what their
Parents would have them to do; and if the Word and Will of their Parents have
not the Force of a Law upon them, the Children do Set Light by them, in such a
misbehaviour. It was demanded in Ephesians. 6.1. Children, Obey your Parents in the
Lord, for this is Right Children, you Set Light by your Parents, if you don't
count it a Right, a Just, a Fair Thing, and a Thing very Reasonable, for you to
be the Servants of them, who have done so much for you their Children, and
beware of Crossing them, who have done so much to Comfort you. It was said, in
Col. 3.20. Children, Obey your Parents in all Things, for this is well-pleasing
unto the Lord. But, Children, You Set Light by your Parents, if it be not also
very Well-pleasing unto You, to Please them, so far as without Sin you may do
it; and if you be not unwilling at any Time, to give them any Displeasure. When
the Father of Joseph laid his commands upon him, he Obeyed those commands,
though with the Risque of his very Life. It should be the very Joy of your
Life, to yield Obedience unto the commands of your Paren^s. Do your Parents
give you any Instruction? You are called upon, in Prove. 4 1. Hear, ye Children,
the Instruction of a Father. Most of all, in the Grand Motions and Changes of
your Life, Children, your Parents are to be consulted, and the Satisfaction of
your Parents is to be proposed. In your Callings, and in your Matches
especially, the Directions of your Parents must be of Exceeding Moment with
you; Indeed Nothing should be done without them! Wherefore, Children, you Set
Light by your Parents, if you make nothing of their Commands, and if you tread
their just Reproofs under foot. You Set Light by them, if you Leave Undone what
they Desire, and much more, if you Do what they Forbid. You Set Light by them,
if their Anger, be a Light matter with you.

Thirdly. You Set Light by your Parents, if you withold from them the
Recompense that is due unto them. Those Children Evidently Set Light by their
Parents, who are Insensible of the Obligations which their Parents have laid
upon them, or, who count any thing too much to be done by Children for their
Parents. Of Joseph it is said, in Genesis 47.12. He Nourished his Father, and all
his Fathers Household with Bread. And it is elsewhere pressed upon us, I (...)
not thy Mother, when she is old. Children, you Set Light by your Parents, if
you don't Requite them as well as you can, and if you imagine that you ever can
Requite them Enough. It was a Sad saying of Luthers, That One Father will more
willingly maintain Ten Sons, than Ten Sons will maintain One Father. But those
Children do Set Light by their Parents, who had not as liev maintain their
Father, as maintain their Children; and who would not gladly be to their
Mother, the Restorer of her Life, and the Nourisher of her old Age, as the
Mother of Ruth, found her Son-in Law to be unto her. It was demanded, in 1 Timothy
5.4. Let the Children Learn to show piety at home, and Requite their Parents;
for that is Good and Acceptable before God. Those Children have no Piety in
them, they Set Light by God, as well a^ by their Parents, unto whom it is not a
most Acceptable Thing to make some Recompense unto their Parents, for all the
vast Benefits which their Parents have heaped upon them. Children, Do you
think, you can ever make a R^compence unto them, that have Bor^^ you, and Bred
you, and Fed you, and Endured Thousands of Sorrows for you. One says, Many
treat their Parents, as they do their Candles; they Set them in High Candle
sticks, while they are full of Tallow, but when all their Substance is wasted,
they tread them under foot. And some there are, who do not Support their
Parents, but Wrong them, and Rob them, and Pillage them; They Wast their
Parents. Alas, Children, you Set-Light by your Parents in all of this Impiety.
But Oh, don't make Light of this Impiety; Say, Destruction from God is a Terror
to me!

IV. By Father and Mother, all sorts of Parents are intended; Let the Caution
be accordingly Extended, and Set Light by no sorts of Parents whatsoever.
Natural Parents cannot safely come (...) the Contempt of their Children: God
will Curse the Children that Set Light by Them; and can you dream then, (...)
God will allow any Contempt of Political Parents, of Ecclesiastical, or of
Scholastical? There are Parents in the Commonwealth, as well as in the Family;
There are Parents in the Church, and Parents in the School, as well as in the
Commonwealth. If you Set Light by these Parents, you Herd your selves among
the Cursed of God. Remember, O Servants, thy Master, is thy Father, and thy
Mistress, is thy Mother. Do not Set Light by thy Master, or thy Mistress, Lest
the Cursed of God at last hang thee up in Chains, among the Monuments of His
Indignation. Because thy Superiors in the Family, are thy Parents, therefore
there is laid that Charge of God upon thee, in 1 Pet. 2.18. Servants, be
subject unto your Masters, with all Fear, not only to the Good and Gentle, but
also to the Fr^ward. The Proud hearts of many Servants, make them d^scontent at
their Servile State; The Subjection expected from them throws them into a very
Grumbling Discontent. Ye proud Wretches, your Sin, was the very Sin that at
first made all the Devils in Hell. The Devils, those proud Spirits could not
bear to be Servants in such a Station as God had ordered for them; and for this
their Pride, the Almighty has Cursed them, and Damned them. Servants, Have a
care, Lest by your Pride you fall into the Condemnation of the Devil. It is the
Providence and the Ordinance of the Lord Jesus Christ that has made you
Servants; and if out of Regard unto Him, you carry it well in your Servitude,
He will graciously Accept all that you do, as if done unto Himself. It was
therefore said, in Col. 3.23, 24. Servants, whatever ye do, do it heartily as
unto the Lord, and not unto men; knowing that of the Lord you shall Receive the
Reward of the Inheritance, [which belongs unto Sons:] for ye Serve the Lord
Christ. Well then; Don't Set Light by your Masters. If they be Masters, where
is your Fear of them? Expose not their Failings, if you see any in them. Let
there be no Sullenness, no Sawciness, no Rude Retortings, in your Deportments
toward them. Give them not cause to complain, with Job, I called my Servant,
and he gave me no Answer. Be not those Eye Servants, that will do their Masters
Will, no longer then their Masters Eye is upon them; The All-seeing Eye of the
Almighty God is upon you. Transgress not their just Commands, either wilfully,
or Carelessly; If you do, the Commands of God are also Transgressed in your
Miscarriages. Indeed, if your Masters bid you do an Ill Thing, you must with
modest Expostulations, rather Suffer than Obey. But if they bid you do what is
Fit and Right, you Sin against God, if you do it not; If they will not obey
you, Masters, Turn them out of Doors. Nor is this all that Servants have to do:
Servants, you must use all Diligence, and Faithfulness, in your Masters
Business. A Slothful Servant is truly called a Wicked Servant. But Eliezer, the
Servant of Abraham, would not Eat his Victuals, till his Masters Business were
dispatched. Le^ your Masters Business be honestly discharged, though you should
like Jacob, when a Servant, have your Sleep departing from your Eyes When your
Masters do send you, on Errands, Loiter not; Be not Sluggards to them that send
you. And be the true Sons of Israel; able to say, Thy Servants are True men.
Gehazi was a Servant that Lied unto his Master; but God made that Liar to
become a Leper. Of all Faults in your Servants, I advise you, Masters, never to
let that of Lying be unpunished. But that of Stealing often accompanies it; of
which, O Servants, beware; for God will never let That go unpunished* I
vehemently call upon you, That you never venture to wrong your Masters unto the
value of a Penny as long as you Live. Mark it, you will Entail Eternal Vexations
upon you, and God will make you loose a Pound for every penny, whereof you have
wronged your Masters. Have you ever purloined from them? Oh, Fly penitently
unto the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ for pardon, and make as much
Restitution, and as full Reparation, as ever thou can; or the Jealous God,
will never pardon thee, till the Torments of the Damned, have Exacted the
utmost Farthing from thee. Servant, Be such a Blessing in thy Masters House, as
Joseph was to his. Contrive all the ways imaginable, that thy Master may be ^he
better for thee. It may be, thy Master will Bless God for Thee. However (...)
will Bless thee in thy Serving of him. If you slight all these Things, Look for
the Curses of God.

And now, Let people Remember, That Rulers are Parents. Don't Set Light by
Them. The Charge of God upon people, is That in Tit. 3.1. Be Subject, and Obey
Magistrates, and be ready to every Good Work, and speak evil of no man; much
less of the Magistrate^* Our Setting Light by Excellent Magistrates, has been
the Scandalous Crime of our Country; and for that Crime whole Colonies may come
to smart under the Revenges of God.

Let Churches Remember, That Pastors are Parents. Don't Set Light by Them. The
Charge of God upon Churches, is That in Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the
Rule over you, and submit your selves; for they watch for your Souls, as they
that must give Account, that they may do it with Joy, and not with Grief; for
that is unprofitable for you. There has been a Disorder, called, Corabism,
sometimes very Extravagant. But for Setting Light by Ministers, that have been
Holy, and Able, and Faithful, and Painful Men of God, God sometimes removes a
Candlestick out of its place, or at least says, Never shall a Burning and a
Shining Light more be seen standing in it.

Let Scholar^ regard their Tutors as their Parents. My Child, The Master of the
School is a Father to thee. Those that were under the Education of Moses, are
called, The Sons of Moses Wherefore, Scholars, Do you with all Conscience of
God, Honor your Tutors; and perform the Tasks which they Impose upon you.
Don't Set Light by thy Schoolmaster; but Love him, and Prize him, and Hearken
to him, and be Thankful to him, and Thankful to God for him. These are ways to
Escape the Curses of God.

V. They that have at at any Time Set Light by their Parents, must Go to God in
Christ for His Pardons, that so His Curses may not overtake them. Who is there
that can say with the Son in the Gospel; who said unto his Father, Lo, these
many years do I Serve thee, neither Transgressed I at any Time thy Commandment?
The Dutifullest Child among us all, has been so Defective in his Dutifulness,
that he dare not plead it before God, in his Justification; He must say, as in
Psalm. 143 ^2. Lord, Enter not into Judgment with thy Servant; for in thy sight
shall no man Living be Justified. What then shall we do? Why, we read
concerning Mount Ebal, where the Curses of God were Fulminated; in Deuteronomy. 27.5,
6, 7. It was commanded, In Mount Ebal, thou shall Build an Altar unto the Lord
thy God, and thou shall offer Burnt Offerings thereon unto the Lord thy God,
and thou shall Offer Peace Offerings, and Rejoice before the Lord thy God. And
we find that Joshua, afterward did accordingly. It is an Ingenious Note of one
upon it; This was no more than Needed, for the Maledictions had no sooner been
uttered, but Condemnation and Execution had instantly Ensued, if these
Sacrifices with the Merit of Christ therein Typified had not seasonably
Interceded. Children, you hear the Unequal of Heaven resounding from Ebal with
the Comminations of God, Cursed is he that Sets Light by his Father or his
Mother. Our Consciences tell us, That we have done it many a time. Away then,
Away to the Antitype of the Altar on Ebal. Oh, plead with God, the Burnt
Offering of Christ, and the Peace Offering of Christ, that the Curse of Go^ may
not seize upon us, that we may no^ be Burnt in the Flames of His Indignation,
that He may be at Peace with us for ever. When it was denounced* Cursed is he
that Sets Light by his Father or his Mother, it followed, that all the people
said, Amen. AMEN, is the very Name of Christ. May all the people now fly to
that, AMEN, that they may, be sheltered from the Curses of God. And, Oh, call
it to mind the Example of the Lord Jesus Christ. There never was in the world,
so Dutiful a Son as He! We read in Luke 2.51. He went down with His Mother, and
His Reputed Father, and though they were very Low, in the World, He became
subject unto them. We read in Joh. 19.27. That when He wa^ in His last Agonies,
it was a Thing lying very near His Heart, that His Widow Mother, might be
provi^ed for: He said unto a Disciple, Behold, thy Mother! intimating that He
would have him, take her Home unto his own House. Now, be your Dutifulness to
your Parents, never so complete, Let this Righteousness of the Lord Jesus
Christ, be all that you will plead with God, as your Title to the promised
Blessings of the Dutiful.

VI. Do not Go on, Children, If you value your Lives, and Souls, do not Go on
to Grieve your Parents, by any Disrespect unto their Admonitions, or by any
Vanity whatsoever. You cannot more Make Light of your Parents, than when you
Make Light of their Counsels: your Contempt of their Counsels, will speedily
bring down Gods Curses upon you. Moses did well, when he Hearkened unto the
voice of his Father-in-law, and did all that he had said. It is the voice of
Heaven, in Prove. 1.8. My Son, Hear the Instruction of thy Father, and forsake
not the Law of thy Mother. Is it not the Instruction of thy Father, That thou
should avoid all Vicious Company; and, That thou should Pray in Secret
every Day; and, That thou should Read and Hear the Word of God, with Assiduity?
Or if not so, yet it may be, the Law of thy Mother, who is in Travailing pains
for thee, to see Christ formed in thee. Now, don't Make Light of the
Admonitions, with which thy Parents are thus calling upon thee. If thy Parents
Enjoin upon thee any thing that is not Sinful, it will be a Sin for thee to
Refuse the doing of it: How much more is the Sin, if thou do Refuse to do
what the Great God has first Commanded, and thy Parents Enjoin because the
Great God has first Commanded? Oh, my Children, I am afraid, I am afraid, there
are some of you, that may read your Doom, in those Ominous words, in 1 Samuel
2.25. They hearkened not unto the voice of their Father, because the Lord would
slay them.

It is an unutterable Grief, that some of you give unto your pious Parents;
They see, that you are still poor, carnal, and thoughtless Creatures: and that
perhaps a piece of gay Attire, is of more Account with you, than a Christ, or a
Soul. It Is told them, That the Ungodly Youths in the Town do horribly poison
one another. These Youths cry up an Indifferency in Religion, and say, It Is out
of fashion for a man to be of one Religion more than another; that is, in
reality to say, It Is out of fashion to be of any Religion at all. So they
insensibly draw one another on, to deride Seriousness in Religion, and the most
Serious and Lively Preachers of it; Until they become Idle, profane, Sottish
Debauchees, and betimes Ripe for the Fiery Indignation of God. Your Parents are
Trembling, with an unknown Distress and Anguish, Lest you be Entangled in a
Familiarity with these Ungodly Youths. It fills your Parents with a grievous
Horror, That they cannot see the marks of a Regenerate Soul upon you; They
never hear you let fall a word, that may discover in you the least care of a
Never dying Soul. They cannot find out, that there are any Transactions between
the Lord Jesus and you, about the Salvation of a Soul in the Hands of the
Destroyer. As Austin says, of his Blessed Mother, Toties Filios parturiebat,
quoties a Deo eos deviare cernebat, so it may be said perhaps of thine, She
never sees thee Sinning against God, but it brings the Anguish of a New Travail
upon her. It may be, you once had some Good Beginnings, in Religion,; Your
Parents felt their Hearts within them Leap for Joy, at those Beginnings; They
Hoped, Well, This my Child was Lost, but is found, was Dead, but is alive! But
seeing all your Goodness gone, like the Morning Cloud, and the Early Dew, it
throws them into an Extreme Consternation. How Cheerfully would they give all
they have in the world, if they might say of you, Behold, they Pray! They are
every Day Extremely uneasy, least* you Die before you are New born, and it had
been Good for you, that you never had been. Born at all. Ah, Vain Children;
Give, Give some Relief to this Grief of your Parents. Fall down before the
Lord, and say, Lord, Thou shall be my Father, and the Guide of my ^outh. Turn
to God in Christ, and become Devout Children; Then, say they, My Heart, O my
Children, shall Rejoice, even mine! But your Parents count that you make Light
of them, so long as you Lightly Esteem the Rock of your Salvation, and make
Light of God, and Christ, and the Covenant of Grace. And now, I Earnestly
testify unto you, That if you Go on to Sin against God, and against your
Parents, the Curses of the Great God are Impending over you: Those Curses will
horribly Wound the Head, of those that go on still in their Trespasses. Yea,
thoug^ you are the Children of Pious Parents, the Advantage you might have had
by that, shall be changed into a Misery. The more Pious Parents you have had,
the more Forlorn Children shall you be throughout Eternal Ages. We read, that
even the Children of Abraham themselves, will be Cast into the Fire of the
Wrath of God, if they do not bring forth Good Fruit before Him; And we read of
such among the Damned, as Cry out, Oh! Father Abraham, I am Tormented in this
Flame! It is a Strange passage, that I find lately published. The famous Dr.
Twiss, had been a very wicked Boy: There Dyed a School fellow of his, that was
more wicked than he: The Ghost of the Dead Lad, appeared unto Twiss, and
horribly Cried out, I am Damned! This was, as his worthy Son assures us, the
occasion of Twiss's Conversion unto God. Oh! It Is to be Feared, That many of our
Young People, who have Dyed at home and abroad, and after the Madness of that
Ungodly Life, by which they broke the Hearts of their Parents, are Gone unto
the Dead; if they could in Ghost now appear unto their Fellow-Sinners, yet
Surviving, they would horribly Cry out, I am Damned! I am (...), for my
Ungodliness! But you have Enough to Warn you, against all Ungodliness, without
One coming to you, from the Dead. And while we thus Warn you, there is this
terrible Intimation to be added unto all the rest. Refractory Child; Thy Pious
Parents, themselves will not own thee, in the Day when God shall Curse thee,
and cut thee off, and cast the out for ever. And all the Grief which thy Pious
Parents here Endured for thee, and from thee, will but be Oil to the
Everlasting Flames of that Grief, which thou shall Endure in the Place of
Dragons. Oh, come to a Right Mind, Thou Prodigal; and by Repentance give unto
thy Pious Parents cause to say, This is a dear Son, and a pleasant Child. Then
the God of Heaven Himself will Bless thee, and say, I will Surely have Mercy
upon them.

An Address, Ad Fratres in Eremo.
Syrs!
A Little Book to assist, The Education of Children, is now in your Hands. But
can they be well Educated, if their Parents never send them to SCHOOL? This is
a point, that seems now to call for some Inculcation.

A Good School deserves to be called, the very Salt of the Town, that has it:
And the Pastors of every Town, (who are* Sal Terrae,) are under peculiar
obligations, to make this a part of their Pastoral Care, That they may have a
Good School, in their Neighborhood. A woeful putrefaction threatens the Rising
Generation; Barbarous Ignorance, and the unavoidable consequence of it,
Outrageous Wickedness will make the Rising Generation Loathsome, if it have not
Schools to pr^serve it. But Schools, wherein tho Youth may by able Masters be
Taught the Things that are necessary to quali^y them for future
Serviceableness, and have their Manners therewithal well formed under a
Laudable Discipline, and be over and above W^^l-Catechised in the principles of
Religion, Those would be a Glory of our Land, and the preser^atives of all
other Glory. The Minister, that shall give his Neighbors no Rest, until they
have agreeable Schools among them, and that shall himself also at some Times
Inspect and Visit the Schools, will therein do much toward Fulfilling that
part of his Ministr^, Feed my Lambs; and his Neighbors under his Charge, will
(whatever they think of it!) have cause to Bless God, for this Expression of
his Faithfulness.

But these are not the only persons, to whom this matter belongs; The Civil
Authority, and the whole Vicinity, cannot be True to their own Interest, if
they do not say, We also will be with thee. When the REFORMATION began, in
Europe, an hundred and fourscore years ago, to Erect Schools every where, was
one principal concern of the Glorious and Heroic Reformers; and it was a common
thing even for Little Villages of Twenty or Thirty Families, in the midst of
all their Charges, and their Dangers, to maintain* one of them. The Colonies of
New England were planted on the Design of pursuing that Holy Reformation; and
now the Devil cannot give a g^eater Blow to the Reformation among us, than by
causing Schools to Languish under Discouragements. If our General Courts,
decline to contrive and provide Laws for the Support of Schools; or if
particular Towns Employ their Wits, for Cheats to Elude the wholesome Laws;
little do they consider how much they expose themselves to that Rebuke of God,
Thou have destroyed thy self, O New England. Would we Read, in the ancient
Histories, how zealous the more discreet Pagans were to maintain Schools among
them; it might put us Christians to the Blush, among whom it is common for
Schools to starve and sink; and a mind sordidly covetous, Witholds more than is
meet, but it tends unto what is Infinitely worse than poverty.

Syrs, What will be the Issue of these Things? The Issue will be, That, Si
Ecclesia desideret pastorem, facilius Impostorem, inveniet quam pastorem; Et
Res publica pro Doctore Juris, Juris Tortorem; Et pro medicis, mendici, pro
praeceptoribus, Deceptores sese offerent. But least through the want of Schools,
there should in a little while, be scarce one man in a place able to construe
this Description of the Fate so lowing upon that want, I will transcribe in
plain English, the first Article of the, Prognostications upon the Future State
of New England, lately published: Where Schools are not vigorously and
Honorably Encouraged, whole Colonies will sink apace, into a Degenerate and
Contemptible Condition, and at last become horribly Barbarous: And the first
Instance of their Barbarity will be, that they will be undone for want of men,
but not see and own what it was that undid them. You will therefore pardon my
Freedom with you, if I Address you, in the words of Luther.

If ever there be any Considerable Blow given to the Devils Kingdom, it must
be, by Youth Excellently Educated. It is a serious Thing, a weighty Thing, and
a thing that has much of the Interest of Christ, and of Christianity in it,
that Youth be well trained up, and that Schools, and Schoolmasters be
maintained. Learning is an unwelcome guest to the Devil, and therefore he would
fain starve it out. But we shall never long retain the Gospel, without the help
of Learning. And if we should have no Regard unto Religion, even the outward
prosperity of a people, in this World, would necessarily require Schools and
Learned men. Alas, that none are carried with Alacrity and Seriousness, to take
care for the Education of Youth, and to Help the World with Eminent and Able
men.

But the Freedom with which this Address is made unto you, is not so great as
the F^rvour that has animated it. My Fathers, and Brethren, If you have any
Love to God, and Christ, and Posterity; let Schools be more Encouraged. If you
would not betray your Posterity into the very Circumstances of Salvages, let
Schools have more Encouragement. But in the Anguish, the Despair, of Success to
be otherwise found by this Address, I will Turn it from you, unto the Almighty
Hearer of Prayer.

AND, O thou Savior, and Shepherd of thy New-English Israel: Be Entreated
Mercifully to look down upon thy Flocks in the Wilderness. Oh, give us not up
to the Blindness and Madness of neglecting the Lambs in the Blocks. Inspire thy
People, and all Orders of men among thy People, with a just care for the
Education of Posterity. Let Well-Ordered, and well-instructed, and
Well-maintained Schools, be the Honor and the Defense of our Land. Let
Learning, and all the Helps and Means of it, be precious in our Esteem; and by
Lea^ning, let the Interests of thy G^^pel so prevail, that we may be made wise
unto Salvation. Save us, O our Lord JESUS CHRIST; Save us from the Mischiefs
and Scandals of an Uncultivated Offspring; Let this be a Land of Light, until,
Thou, O Sun of Righteousness, do thy self arise unto the World with Healing in
thy Wings. Amen.



THE END,

