Barbarian Cruelty BEING A True History of the Distressed Condition of the
(...) under the Tyranny of (...) Ishmael Emperor of (...) King of Fez and (...)
Barbary.

In which is likewise given a particular Account of his late Wars with the
Algerines. The manner of his Pirates taking the Christians and Others. His
breach of Faith with Christian Princes. A Description of his Castles and
Guards, and the Places where he keeps his Women, his Slaves and Negroes.

With a particular Relation of the dangerous Escape of the Author, and two
English Men more from thence, after a miserable Slavery of ten Years.

By FRANCIS BROOKS.

BOSTON, Re printed for S. Phillips, at the Brick Shop. 1700.

December. 8. 1692.

Imprimatur, Edmund Bohun.

To Their Sacred Majesty's, William and Mary, Of Great Britain, France and
Ireland, KING and QUEEN.
Most Gracious Sovereigns,
A Midst the throng of those weighty and important Cares that fill Your Royal
Breasts, it is indeed a high presumption, in one so inconsiderable as I am, to
offer the interrupting them by this Address. But since such is your Royal
Clemency, as not to deny Access to the meanest of Your Subjects, Permit me,
with awful Reverence and Humility, to lay the ensuing Narrative at Your
Majesty's Feet, with hopes You will vouchsafe to shelter it under Your Royal
Patronage.

The diplorable and miserable Condition, wherein many of Your Majesty's
Subjects, with other Christians, now lie groaning in Slavery, and under the
barbarous Tyranny and Inhumanity of Mully Ishmael Emperor of Morocco, is a
Subject that may perhaps not altogether be thought unworthy the Cognizance of
Your Majesty's; it being manifest to all the World how much it has been the
Glorious Design of Your Majesty's whole Life and Reign, to set Mankind at
Liberty, and to free the Distressed from the Yoke of Tyranny and Oppression.
May that Almighty Hand that has framed Your Majesty's for the Support and Joy
of the Universe, continue to Crown all your Affairs with uninterrupted Success,
giving You more and more the Hearts of Your Subjects, and the Necks of Your
Enemies. And after Your Majesty's have reaped many Harvests of Laurels, may You
plant such an Olive of Peace, under the Branches whereof all Europe may for
successive Ages rejoice.

Which is and shall be the constant Prayer of Your Majesty's poor and
distressed, though Loyal Subject, Francis Brooks.

TO THE Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THough I must own my self incapable to write upon this Subject, any thing
worthy to be exposed to the public view, since my Education has not given me
those Advantages of Style and Composition, altogether necessary for such an
Undertaking: Yet considering I had the miserable Experience of what has been
barbarously inflicted on me, with many others my Fellow Sufferers, who are
still groaning under the most insupportable Miseries; I thought my self bound
in Duty to publish, as well as I can express it, what was plain Matter of Fact,
to the end it might more powerfully move your Compassion, and excite you
Charity for the Redemption of those who remain to this Day under their Egyptian
Taskmasters. A full Account of which you have in the ensuing Relation, wherein
I have made it my Business, to give you a clear and particular view of the most
remarkable Passages that happened during the unfortunate time of my Confinement
among those barbarous Salvages. I shall offer nothing but Truths, which ten
Years Sufferings have made me too long acquainted with. We were not only
banished from our Native Country, (being English men, and my self born in
Ratcliff Parish in Bristol) but from all the Spiritual as well as Temporal
Comforts. We were confined amongst those whose Religion was composed of
Cruelty, whose Customs were Extravagant, and whose Usages almost intolerable;
what from the hardness of our Labors, and the coarsness of our Provisions, we
were reduced to the most pressing Extremities, which caused us to think and
contrive all ways and means to procure our desired Liberties; which considering
how narrowly we were watched, and how closely kept, was almost impossible to be
effected.

I need not mention here how I made my Escape, with two others of my
Companions, since I have given you an exact Account of it, with all its
Circumstances, in the following Relation, with what happened afterward to the
Person who was instrumental in our happy Deliverance, for which we are in Duty
bound, during the whole Course of our Lives, to own the particular Providence
of God, to whose Assistance and Protection we owe our present Safety.

The chiefest Design of my publishing this Book, is to caution all Seafaring
men, whose particular Voyages carry them into the Streights, that they take all
possible care not to be trapan'd by these subtle Pirates, who infest those
Coasts, where we unfortunately fell into their Hands; and that reflecting on
the Barbarities they must expect to suffer from those merciless Enemies, it
will be their surest Interest to defend themselves to the utmost of their
power, even to the last Extremity, Death it self being to be preferred before
that, or any other Slavery.

Another Motive is, That I hope what I write, may be a means to procure Liberty
for these my Country men, who are now laboring under the most pressing
Miseries, and who would be very serviceable at this time against the Common
Enemy; whose deplorable Condition has been not long since published and
recommended in a Brief to be continued for two whole Years, as follows.

WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace* of God, King and Queen of England, Scotland,
France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, etc. To all and singular
Archbishops, Bishops, etc.

Whereas a great number of Our good Subjects, peaceably following their
Employments at Sea, have been taken by the Turkish Pirates of Algiers, Salley,
Barbary, and other Places on the Coast of Africa, and now remaining Slaves, in
Cruel and Inhumane Bondage without any Days of Rest, either on the Turkish
Sabbath or ours, except four Days in a Year, being kept to extreme Labor;
from which some endeavoring a little Rest, several of them were barbarously
Murdered. Neither is their Diet any more Tolerable than their Labor, great
Numbers being allowed no other Food than decayed Barley, which stinketh so,
that the Beasts refuse to eat it: And often they are not permitted to go from
their Labor to fetch Water, which is their only Drink; and sometimes driven
about by Black a moors, who are set over them as Task masters; and some by them
have been so severely whipped, that they have dropped down Dead. Whose
miserable Conditions being represented to Us, and We having now an Offer from
the Emperor of Fez and Morocco, by his Envoy sent ^ither to Treat about a
general Redemption of all the English that are his Slaves; and the Dey of
Algiers having now also invited Us to redeem Our Subjects there in Slavery, etc.

So that if the before-recited End may have its desired Success, it will make
sufficient Amends for any Censures or Reflections that may be made on me, upon
the account of my imperfect Performance; therefore I shall only refer their
distressed Case to your Benevolence and Charity, as I do my Book to your Pardon
and Candor; which, I hope, will neither be denied to them, nor

Your Humble Servant, F. B.

(...) their Cutlasses. When they meet with any of our Merchant Men of small
Force, having but 8 or 10 Guns, they often deceive them, by telling them they
are Algerines getting the Master on board them to show his Pass when he and his
Men are on board, they enter them and take their Ship.
They had on board them 300 Men and 16 Guns; when they had thus taken our Ship,
they carried us to Sally, and sent our Ship into Memora, having secured us in a
place under Ground: our Diet they gave us was a little black Bread and Water.
There they kept us four days, and then sent us to Memora to discharge the Ship
they took from us, and sent the Oil with which we were laden, in Skins, upon
Camels and Mules, to the Emperor of Morocco. After we had worked there very
hard all Day in delivering the Ship, they put us down in the Hold of their Ship
in Irons, and afterward sent us to Macqueness, where the Emperor's Castle is,
and where he keeps all his Slaves, and we were delivered up to the Viceroy,
(the Emperor being then in Camp against a City to the Southward, called
^arradant in Barbary) and by his Negroes we were driven to work all day,
driving and cursing of us, bidding us turn Moors, and at Night we were driven
to a place where the rest of the Christians lay, being like a Vault under ground.

In the Year 1680, the English Captives that were under this inhuman Tyrant,
the Emperor of Morocco, bewailing their own Condition, making moan to one
another, and praying to God for Deliverance, at last concluded amongst
themselves to draw a Petition to our late King Charles the Second of Great
Britain, giving him to understand their miserable Condition in this Captivity:
which being done, the King took it into Consideration, and sent over Captain
Francis Nicholson; who being come, and seeing the Cruel Bondage his poor
Countrymen were in, their hard Labor and cruel Fare, having therewith many
cruel Stripes and Blows, he could not but lament their Condition, and prayed
God that he might come to some Composition with that Hellish Tyrant for them.
The Emperor at the same time sent for the Shack, or Chief over all the Jews in
his Dominion, and bid him build a Town, which would be better for the Jews than
the Cane Houses, (his Name was Abraham Memoran) and at that time Captain
Nicholson made an Agreement with the Emperor for the Christians, and the
English and Portuguese were delivered him up, the Emperor wishing them a good
Journey to Tangier; the Captain took them out of the Town that Night, which the
Shack of the Jews hearing of, that came to the Emperor, telling him, if he
would let him have the Christians to build the Jews Town, he would give him as
much Money as the Captain had agreed with him for: the Emperor bid him come
again in the Morning. Then the Shack or Chief of the Jews went immediately home
to his House, and got a Present ready, and sent it in to the Emperor's Wife,
that she might solicit the Emperor for him: which having received, she sent
word back by the Eunuchs, that she would endeavor to prevail with him, which
she did. And the next Morning he spoke again to the Emperor, who immediately
sent out his Negroes to drive back the Christians, which were hurried again to
their Works in a cruel manner. The Moors of his City Macqueness seeing that,
cursed the Jews for doing it. But the Captain could in no wise prevail with
this grievous Tyrant the Emperor, (notwithstanding the Captain had done what in
him lay to have got the Christians away) who said he would not part with them
till the Town was finished. So they went to work with great Chops, and Baskets
to carry Earth in; and the Negroes were set over them to keep them at it from
Morning to Night. When the Town was finished, he put in his Negroes: but the
Curse of the Jews fell upon their own Governor, his Mischief returned on his
own Head, as will shortly be shown. In the mean time the poor Christians were
grievously hurried and punished by those Hellish Negroes at the Command of this
wicked and inhumane Tyrant the Emperor, and had scarce time to take any
Nourishment, or eat any of their bad Bread that was allowed them, but with a
great many Threats, Stripes and Blows by the Negroes, bidding them turn Moors.
In which condition they prayed to God to preserve them in their Faith; in
which, through his Assistance, they remained constant.

Some time after Captain Nicholson being gone from thence, the Emperor laid
Siege against a City called Tarradant, in the South part of that Dominion,
being kept by a King whose Name was Mully Hammet: and having been there a
considerable time* he sent to the chief of the Jews, to bring him up some Goods
which he wanted from Macqueness. When he had gotten Mules, and carried them to
the place where the Emperor was in Camp, the Vice Roy's Son being there with
the Emperor, went to the said Shack or chief of the Jews, and desired him to
assist him with some Money, and his Father would repay him, when he, viz. the
Chief of the Jews, should return to Macqueness. He told him his Father owed him
already several thousand Ducats, and would not pay him any, for as yet he could
get none from him: and said moreover, if he should die and perish, he would not
lend him a penny. Of which passages he acquainted his Father, writing a Letter
thereof to Macqueness. Afterward the Chief of the Jews went to Macqueness to
the Vice Roy called Coyd Birry, and told him he had acquainted the Emperor of
the Care he had in his Absence of his Castle and Business; he taking little
notice of him, but returning him Thanks for his Kindness he went away. But Coyd
Birry the Governor (being so called in the Emperors Absence) ordered one of
his chief Negroes in a little time after to go and take such a Horse which he
described to him, and go to the place where the Country People kept their
Market, to see if he could find the said Chief of the Jews; and if he saw him,
take little notice of him; but if he had an opportunity, watch as he went home
to his House, and kill him. The Negroe did as he was ordered, and espying the
Shack, or Chief of the Jews, going home to his House, in a Road which lay
through a parcel of Olive Trees, the Negro came to him, pretending Kindness to
him, being glad to see him, etc. and riding by his side along on Horseback,
spied his opportunity very diligently, so spurred his Horse over him, rode upon
him and trod out his Brains. Word thereof was quickly carried to the Viceroy,
that the Chief of the Jews was killed, at which he seemed to be sorry, that the
People might take no notice thereof, and acquainted the Emperor therewith, and
had made search, but knew not who had done it. The Emperor sent him word back,
that if he did not find out who did it, he would cut off his Head, and ordered
the said Vice Roy to put the Governor of the Jews Son to be the Chief in his
stead; but the old Jew was soon forgotten by the Emperor.

When the Emperor had laid Siege some Years against Tarradant, and could not
take it, he returned home to Macqueness. After he had been at home a certain
time, he went against that City with about 70000 Horse and Foot, and declared
that if any Christians knew what belonged to mining he would set them to work;
and if they took the Town, they should have their Liberty; so four English Men
undertook the Work, the Moors dug, and they gave Directions. The Mines being
finished, and 30 Barrels of English Powder rolled into the Mine, and a Train
laid; the Christian that fired it was blown up: and a Breach was made in the
Castle-Wall, but they could not enter, their Enemies fired so thick upon them,
killing a great many of Mully Ishmael the Emperor's Men. They mined again under
the Burges, or small Forts: after Powder was put in, and a Train laid, he that
gave fire to it, had his Arm struck off, the Burg was blown up with the People
therein. And the Emperor Mully Ishmael coming to view the Breach, and being
told by the People, the Christian had lost his Arm, he ordered his chiefest
Doctor to take care and heal him; for in case he did not see to him carefully,
he should lose his Head. Mully Hammet got up his People to the Breach, and kept
out the Emperor and his Forces, that they could not enter. Afterward Mully
Hammet went out of his Castle with a small Guard, and meeting with some of the
Emperor's Scouts, one of them knowing Mully Hammet, cocked his Piece and shot
him to death: Then Mully Hammet's Guard fought with Mully Ishmael's Scouts, and
there were several killed on both sides. Some of Mully Hammet's Guards retired
into the Castle, and acquainted the chiefest of them that were in the Castle,
that their King was killed: presently they proclaimed Mulla Rann (being the
chiefest of the Governors in Mully Hammet's time) to be their King. Which News
being carried to the Emperor by his Scouts, he enquired who had killed Mully
Hammet? they told him one of the Scouts, which he sent presently for by a
Messenger, and bid him acquaint him that he should have a good Reward for
killing him; he being brought before the Emperor, expecting a great Reward for
so doing, after he had examined him, he rewarded him with calling him Dog, and
said he should die for killing Mully Hammet, and immediately caused him to be
made fast to a Mule's Tail, and so had him dragged through the Camp, and
ordered one to go before and declare, that it was for killing of Mully Hammet;
he was dragged so long till his Body was torn in pieces; after that he had him
put in a place where the Country People used to come into the Camp. Mully Ran
kept the Castle and City, and the Emperor's Forces made more Mines in order to
take the City and Castle, which being finished, they blew up the Town Walls,
and several small Forts, with the People in them, and made so great a Breach
that Mully Ishmael entered his Men and took both the City and Castle, and
promised the People he would be kind to them; but when he took the Town, he
secured their Arms, Ammunition and Treasure, and carried the People of that
place to Macqueness: and being come down to Macqueness, he put all the
Christians, and several hundreds of the Natives to work there to make a Court,
and Houses for his Women. And coming on a certain time, (as he uses constantly
to do) although it rained very fast, as he was going into one of the Houses,
the Master Workman and his Assistants going (...) hoist up a piece of Timber,
the Rope that held it broke, and the Timber fell, with which he suddenly
retired back, and sent for the Master-Workman in great Passion, threatening him
for taking no better care: he told him he was as careful as he could be for his
life in doing it, saying, it was a Mischance he he could not prevent;
nevertheless he took a Piece out of one of his Boys Hands, and shot him to
Death, and went among the Christians raving and tearing as if he would have
killed them all, setting his Negroes and Guard to beat both the Moors and the
Christians that were at work; which they did with such Violence, that many of
them had their Heads and Arms miserably broken, making his Buildings more like
a Slaughterhouse than a place of Work; and at the same time ran two of his
Moors through with his Lance. So that he makes no more to kill a Man at his
Pleasure, than to kill a Dog.

In a little time after the Emperor was come to Macqueness, the three
Christians that were Miners; desired their Liberty as he had promised: He
granted it, and ordered a Letter to the Governor of Sally, that he should send
them away by the first opportunity; a Ship being ready, they desired their
Liberty, being at Sally, in order for their Journey; but the Governor instead
of granting it, abused and railed on them, saying, they should pay him so much
a Head, or they should not go. The English Man that lost his Arm, turned back
and acquainted the Emperor thereof, telling him what the Governor said, who
wrote a Letter and sent him, with two of his chief Negroes, saying, If he would
not let them go off* he would cut off his Head: The Governor hearing that,
durst not detain them any longer. So the three English Men, whose Names were
William Chalender, Robert Jackson, and Benjamin Newman, through the Goodness of
God arrived at London, and came again to their own Country.

In the Year 1683. Captain Venetia the younger, a Pirate, belonging to Sally,
met with one Mr. Bellamy, an English Man, who was bound for Leghorn in a Pink
of 8 Guns, to whom he gave Chase: and when he came up to Mr. Bellamy* the
Pirate examined him from whence he came? he answered, From London; and enquired
likewise of him whither he was bound? who said, To Leghorn Mr* Bellamy asked
him from whence he came and what Place he belonged to? he said To Algier. The
Pirate commanded Bellamy to hoist out his Boat, and bring his Pass aboard, who
answered, he should hoist out his own if he had any business with him, which he
did, and sent his Lieutenant aboard on Bellamy. One of Mr. Bellamy's Men that
had been a Captive in Sally, knowing the said Pirate told the Master he knew
him very well, and that he belonged to Sally. When the Lieutenant came to
Bellamy's side. Mr. Bellamy placed some of his Men with their small Arms at the
entering, and said, one Man should not enter him save the Lieutenant, who viewed
Mr. Bellamy's Pass, acknowledging it to be good. The Lieutenant returning
aboard their own Ship, acquainted the Captain, saying, We'll fire at them and
afright them; in order to which, he commanded them to make ready; the Pirate
firing at Mr. Bellamy, he fired at them again, so they fought a considerable
time: Mr. Bellamy killed and wounded about thirty of his Men, and he wounded
some of Bellamy's Men: but for want of Powder, Mr. Bellamy was forced to yield.
When Venetia had taken him and his Company, and brought them aboard his own
Ship, leaving several of his own Men in their stead, he began to examine Mr.
Bellamy why he had killed and wounded so many of his Men? Who answered, he
would have killed all the rest, and him too, if he had had Powder; with that
the Pirate cut him down with his Cutlass and ripped him open, and said, there
was an end of a Dog, so threw his murdered Body into the Sea, and carried all
his Men into Sally, and from thence to Macqueness. Thus have these bloody
Heathenish Crew deceived many of our Countrymen, telling them they belonged to
Algier, when they belonged to Sally. I pray God keep all my Countrymen, and all
good Christians out of the Hands of that barbarous and inhumane Crew, the worst
that live upon the Earth! and that all may beware of them, has caused me thus
to write; being one that by sad Experience, and from a certain knowledge I have
had of them, can assure these things to be nothing but a real Truth; and bless
God that he has thought me worthy to escape them, and that I am now come safe
to the Land of my Nativity.

In the Year 1685. A Ship being bound from London to Barbados, in which were
four Women, two of them being Mother and Daughter; one of those Heathenish
Pirates meeting them, gave them Chase, and coming up to them, examined them
strictly from whence they came, and whither bound? who told them as before, From
London to Barbados; (the Pirate was Venetia the younger, who had 300 Men, and
18 Guns) after the Commander had enquired the same of them, he understood what
they were, they telling him that they came from Algier; so they demanded of him
to show his Pass, and said he must hoist out his Boat; they seeing him not
provided with Guns to defend himself, could make no Resistance, which being
done, the Captain of the Pirate took them into his Cabin, and would show
himself kind to them, treating them, and giving them Dates. In the mean while
the Lieutenant and Moors girded their Pistols and Cu^lasses on their Wastes,
and with the English man's Boat went aboard his Ship, and took all that were
aboard him, with the four Women. And the Captain asked who the young Woman was,
and whether she was ever married? Account being given him concerning her, he
ordered her to be put in the Cabin, lest any of his own barbarous Crew should
offer to lie with her, and so Sailed away for Sally. Being come there, the
Captain of the Pirate brought them they had taken to Macqueness, and the Women
were carried before the Eunuchs. The Captain giving an account to the chief
Eunuch, that one of those Women was a Virgin; but for the Men, they were driven
by the Negroes to hard Labor. And afterward all the Christians of the Ship,
and the 4 Women were brought up to Macqueness; the Women were brought before
the Emperor's Eunuchs, and an account given to the Chief of them by the Moors
Captain, that one of them was a Virgin, and she was immediately sent to the
Emperor's Women* and the Eunuch sent to the Viceroy, acquainting him how he
had disposed of the Virgin, who ordered the other Women to be brought to his
House, and ordered the Negroes to drive the poor Christians to hard Labor, who
at Night were looked up, amongst the other Christian Captives, having no
Sustenance allowed them for that day; and what their poor Brethren offered
them, they could not eat, being such Bread as I have already described, so bad,
that the Beasts in that place refused to eat it: and what betwixt their Diet
and Lodging on the cold ground, together with the Negroes hard Usage, many of
them fell sick. And to add to their Extremity, were threatened and abused by the
Negroes to turn Moors; but they daily prayed to God to strengthen them in their
Afflictions, and in his great Mercy work some way for their Deliverance out of
this dreadful Bondage.

Afterward the chief Eunuch sent word to the Emperor, that he had a Christian
Virgin amongst the rest of his Women. The Emperor ordered him to send her up to
the Camp, with a parcel of his Eunuchs to guard her thither. When she came to
the Camp, the Emperor urged her, tempting her with Promises of great Rewards if
she would turn Moor, and lie with him. She earnestly desired of the Lord to
preserve and strengthen her to resist his earnest Persuasions, and great
Proffers, which he used, to have his Desires fulfilled. When he could not
prevail so, he fell to threatening her, and put her amongst his Negro Women, and
threatened to kill them if they offered to show her any Kindness, where they
kept her, beating and abusing her for several days. She prayed still to the
Lord to strengthen her, and held a resolution to withstand him; who again
sought to prevail with her, tempting and promising of her great things, if she
would turn, which she still refused: so he caused her to be stripped, and whipped
by his Eunuchs with small Cords, so long till she lay for dead; and he caused
her to be carried away out of his Presence that time, and charged his Women
none of them should help her till he sent for her, which was not till two days
after, and in the mean time to have no Sustenance but that black rotten Bread:
at which time he sought again to prevail with Promises and Threats, which she
still withstood, praying to the Lord that she might be preserved from him, and
be delivered from his cruel Hands. Then he pricked her with such things, as
commonly his Women use instead of Pins, being as sharp. Thus this beastly and
inhumane Wretch by all ways he could invent, sought to force her to yield,
which she resisted so long, till ^^^tures, and the hazards of her Life forced
her to yield, or resign her Body to him, tho her Heart was otherwise inclined
So he had her washed, and clothed her in their fashion of Apparel, and lay
with her; having his Desire fulfilled, he inhumanely, in great haste forced her
away out of his Presence; and she being with Child, he sent her by his Eunuchs
to Macqueness (who delivered her with the Emperor's Charge concerning her) to
the chief Eunuch, and after that she was delivered of two Children.

About four Years ago, two Englishmen, and a French man being at Memora; and as
they were passing along the River, on a certain time in a Boat, with some
Moors, one of which was a Lieutenant, he ordered the Christians to go on Shore
to fetch a little of their black Rusk and Water: And as they were passing along
the River to take their Pleasure, the Christians said to one another, Now is
the time, with the Lord's leave, for us to see for our Liberty: The Frenchman
said, The Moors would be too many for them: The Englishmen said, Fear not, let
us trust in the Lord, and he will deliver us. So they going aboard with their
Bread and Water, the Lieutenant bid them get out their Oars, and pull up like
Dogs as they were; which they bore patiently. At Night some of the Moors lying
down, they fell upon those Moors that were awake. They then fearing the
Christians would be too hard for them, called out and awaked the other Moors.
Then the Lieutenant and other Moors came, and he drew his Knife, and stabbed one
of the English men to death, the other knocked him down, and they fought so
long till Blood was spilt on both sides. The next day the English man and
Frenchman were carried up to Macqueness in Irons, before the Emperor, and by
the Moors was informed of what was done. The Emperor upon Examination, told
them if they did not immediately turn Moors, he would kill them. The Frenchman
yielded: the Emperor then threatened the English man, if he did not turn, he
would quickly kill him. He made (...) said true? but they finding not the Mule
that was wanting, he ordered the Negro, immediately to be stripped unto his
Drawers, and fastened to a Mule's Tail, which was done, and he was dragged so
the space of half a Mile to Prison, there to remain; and had the Master-Workman
stretched out by four Negroes, two at his Hands and two at his Feet, beating of
him till he could not turn himself, bidding him take care of his Mules, saying,
if when he came again he found such bad stuff for his Work, he would cut off
his Head. So immediately he sent his Negro Boys to fetch the seventy Christians
that were hard at Labor making a Wall; so asked one of them if he could speak
his Language? who said he could, examining him in like manner about the Stuff?
who answered, he durst not for fear acquaint him of the Badness of it: so he
took one of his Sticks they used to carry after him, and calling him Dog, bid
him hold his Head fare to strike at: having stricken him down, he knocked down
all the rest with his own Hands, and broke their Heads so miserably, that the
place was all bloody like a Butcher's Stall, and none of them durst make
Resistance, for if they had he would presently have killed them. So he bid them
rise like Dogs as they were, saying, if they used any more such bad Stuff in
his Work, he would kill them all.

In 1689, the Emperor sent down to the Coyde, or Governor of Tangier, to take
a view of Alarache, where was a Garrison belonging to the King of Spain. The
Governor taking view thereof, he sent him farther Orders to prepare for the
taking it, if he could possibly. So sending back to the Emperor to provide him
Forces, the Emperor sent him down 40000 Horse and Foot, besides the Forces he
had there: And he laying Siege to the Place, the Spanish Boats fetched off the
Officers Wives and Children. They afterward raised a small Fort, to keep all
small Vessels or Boats from fetching any thing off. Which the Friars taking
notice of, hoisted up a Flag of Truce; and came to a Treaty with the Governor
of the Moors, till they had been with the Emperor at Macqueness. When come
thither, they told him, that if he would let them go, and take what was their
own with them, they would give him the Place, with the Christians, and all the
Ammunition and Guns. To which he agreed, saying, he would. They returning again
to Alarach, ordered the Governor of the Moors to make a Feast; and going to
their own Garrison, told their own Governor, that they had made an Agreement
with the Emperor, and that they should march into Ceuta in their own Arms,
saying, They had better do so, than go into Slavery amongst the Christians. The
Governor, and the Governor of the King of Spain dining together: When Dinner
was over, he bid him send for his Men, and send them with all speed to Ceuta.
They being come, he commanded them to lay down their Arms; which he (to wit the
Moors Governor) quickly secured, telling them they must go up to the Emperor
at Macqueness, for he had a mind to see them, and afterward they must return
to Ceuta. So the Moors took the great Guns, with their Carriages, Muskets and
Powder, carrying them all to the Emperor, with a Band of Men to guard them
thither. Being come thither, he set his Negroes to drive them to work; ordering
the great Guns to be unmounted, and laid flat on the Ground betwixt the two
Walls, with those Guns that were brought from Memora. So the Negroes kept them
at hard Slavery, beating and whipping them all day long; and at Night they were
to lodge underground; allowing them such Bread as his other poor Captives have,
and Water to sustain them alive.

After the poor Christians had undergone their hard Labor and cruel Stripes,
for the space of five months time, many of them fell sick and died: then this
Tyrant came and enquired what was become of them? they gave him account, that
seven hundred of them were turned Moors, and five hundred were dead. After that
the poor Christians concluded to draw a Petition to the King of Spain, and lay
before him their miserable Condition under this Tyrannical Emperor, having but
now and then rotten Bread, and Water when they could catch it, and therewith
cruelly punished to add to their Extremity. The King of Spain received their
Petition; and viewing it, declared to his Council what a Condition his poor
Subjects were in under this cruel Tyrant the Emperor of Morocco. And the said
King took it into consideration, and sent over an Ambassador to the Emperor* to
see if he could agree with him for his Subjects that were there in Slavery. The
Ambassador being come an Agreement was made betwixt them, that the King of
Spain should give a thousand Moors for an hundred Christians. And for the
Soldiers Wives that were not carried off, and young Children, they agreed for
4 Moors a Head. The Ambassador bargained with the Emperor, to have the
Christians down to Tittivan, lying near unto Tangier, and there to remain till
the Moors were brought over, and left at Ceuta, a place not far from thence.
After which the Ambassador returned home to the King of Spain, acquainting his
Master what a miserable condition his poor Subjects were in, working from
Morning to Night, allowing them nothing but old rotten Barley bread and Water;
not suffering them to have any thing to lie upon, after their hard Labor and
cruel Usage by the Moors, nor no Apparel to wear, but daily beating them, and
often with his own Hands, to force them to turn Moors. The King of Spain
ordered his Ambassador to take as many Moors as he had agreed for: So (...)
went and got the Moors together, and went over to Ceuta with them; when being
come thither, he went to Tittivan; and leaving the Moors in Ceuta, he spoke to
their Governor, told him the Moors were ready at Ceuta, and that as many
Christians as he was pleased to send to Ceuta, there should be so many Moors
surrendered as they had agreed for. When the Moors were all delivered up, and
the Christians brought in; The Moors Governor brought them up to Macqueness to
the Emperor; the Emperor enquired of them how they had fared in Christendom?
They answered, they had allowed them a Jacket and a pair of Breeches once a
year; and for their Provision, they had a certainty of Rusk, and hot Beans once
a Day. But being come to their own Country, they began to lament the Christian
Captives poor condition, seeing daily what they endured with Hunger, Cold, and
Stripes; and many times the Tears fell from their Eyes for grief to see it;
some of the Moors saying, We are Christians, (privately to them) but durst not
publicly own it: And at another time told the Captives, (when they saw the
Emperor's Cruelty, often murdering one or other at his Pleasure; and themselves
had nothing allowed them but a little of that rotten Barley-bread, and a little
Butter that stunk) that they had rather be in Spain than there. And some of the
Moors got back again into Spain, acquainting the People there what a cruel
Tyrant their Emperor was, and how miserably he used the poor Christians. And
when the Spanish Ambassador returned with the Christians, into their own
Country, the King asked them how they had fared? Who gave a large Account, as
aforesaid, of the hard Bondage and Slavery the Emperor of Morocco had kept them
in whilst they were under him. The King said, it was well they had kept their
Faith, as they had done, whilst there. And his Ambassador drew a Petition to
the King his Master, imploring his Favor to remember them that were left
behind, and take their suffering Condition into his Christian Consideration;
which he did, and ordered them some Relief. Those that were left behind,
likewise petitioned him to allow them something Yearly: which was done, and
care taken that it should be sent over for their Use: As likewise our Factories
at Cales and Portugal, having enquired how it was with them; and understood the
English fared no better than the rest, contributed toward their Necessities,
and sent it over from Cales to Tittivan' to one Mr. Anthony Packer, a Merchant
there, desiring him to order it them for their Relief: Who accordingly did, and
they therewith bought them a few Clothes to cover their Nakedness. So they
wrote back to Mr. Anthony Packer, and to the Factories, returning them Thanks
for their Kindness in remembering them, praying to God to prosper them in their
Affairs. And I beseech God to open the Hearts of our Gracious King and Queen of
England, as he has done others, to grant some Relief for their distressed
Subjects that are yet in that place, whose cruel Sufferings I could do no less
than acquaint them with, being when I left them, in as poor a condition as ever.

The poor Christian Captives that are taken by any of those Hellish Pirates
belonging to the Emperor of Morocco, are brought up to Macqueness, being kept
at hard Work from Daylight in the Morning till Night, carrying Earth on their
Heads in great Baskets, driven to and fro with those barbarous Negroes by the
Emperor's Order: and when they are drove home by the Negroes at Night to their
Lodging, which is on the cold Ground, in a Vault or hollow place in the Earth,
laid over with great Beams athwart, and Iron Bars over them, they are told in
there like Sheep, and out in the Morning; and if any be wanting, he quickly
secures the Negroes, and sends out a parcel of his Guard to look for them.
Their Food is Bread made of old rotten Barley, and their Drink Water when they
can get it: Many times when they are hurried to their Work in a Morning, not
knowing whether they shall be able to undergo their Afflictions till Night: and
when they are drove home, expecting Rest, the Tyrant sends some of his Negroes
to hurry them again to work, either to hale down Walls, cut (...) or the like,
keeping them both Night and Day many times without either Bread or Water, which
is all their Sustenance: when they have done that, the Negroes dare not to
drive them home before he gives order, lest they be killed for so doing; when
they have his Order, they drive them home, tell them over, and so lock them up
until Day light in the Morning. And in this Captivity. I have been, with the
rest of my poor Country men for the space of Ten Years, being so long since
taken; but now, through the Mercies of God, I am come to see my Native Country,
and cannot but condole their Miseries I have left behind under that cruel
Tyrant the Emperor of Morocco; beseeching Almighty God, that none of my Country
men may ever come to have a share under that hard Task-master. There are three
hundred and forty English men, Subjects of our Gracious King, in this sore
Captivity.

This Emperor, as I have been informed, touching his Birth or Descent, was
begotten of a Negro Woman by a white Man, one of the noblest of their Quality
in that time, and is a Molatto by his Color; but when he is in a passion, he
looks just as he is, as black as an Infernal Imp; which his Natives take notice
of, and can tell when he is angry. For his Apparel, he wears a fine Holland
Shirt, with Sleeves so large that will make any ordinary man a pair of Drawers,
besides a large pair of Drawers of the same, with Breeches over them, and next
to his Shirt a Garment of as fine Stuff as can be had, made of the fashion of a
Wastcoat without Sleeves, and over that a Coat of as fine Cloth as can be
bought, made almost of our fashion; he wears over that a sort of Garment which
they call a Shilham, or Barnoose, but we may call it a short Cloak, being
wrought all over with Silver and Gold, with a Cap to go over his Head, having
at the top of it a great Bob with a Fringe, and at the bottom a great Fringe
all round it: on the lower part from his Breast it is open, and the upper part
made fast; and over that in cold Weather he wears a Cloak, with a Cap to put
over his Head: upon his Head he wears sometimes a Turbet (as they call it) made
of Silk; and when it is hot weather, he wears a Garment made of a sort of Stuff
like fine Crape, and a Hat; and on his Legs he wears fine red Boots, but
different from our Fashion: he is oftener on Horseback than on Foot; his Guard,
which are of different Stature, wear some of them Shoes, and have over their
Shirts and Drawers only Cloaks with Caps, some light colored, and some dark:
sometimes he has an hundred following him, and at other times fifty, and
sometimes more, he having thirty thousand Negroes of his own Slaves.

Every one of his black Guard have a Piece, and he has three or four Lances
carried after him, and several Pieces ready charged, to kill with at his
pleasure, either the Christians or his own Natives. When he falls out with his
Guard, he strips and takes their Clothes from them, and puts them in Irons, and
sets them to work. He seldom returns home after his going out in a Morning,
without killing one or other before he returns, by running of them through with
his Lance, shooting them, or dragging them at a Mule's Tail, either Men or
Women, seldom repenting for what he has done; Mahomet their great Prophet
possessing them with a Belief, that if he kills any one, he merits Heaven by so
doing; but if any Person should kill him, he cannot avoid going to Hell. He has
Water carried after him by a Boy, which he drinks, to make the People believe
he drinks nothing else* and likewise has short sticks carried after him daily,
to beat the poor Slaves at his pleasure, which is hourly, to vex and punish
them, delighting in nothing more.

He was first made a Coyde or Governor of some part of the Country, and by his
Kindness and Affability to the People, he gained Respect from them in that
Country. Mully Sheade being then King, and living in the City of Fez, there
died; and the Inhabitants there being all Whites, and he a Mollato, they cried
up Mully Hammet. Mully Ishmael being then beloved of his own People, he raised
a small Army, and went against the said City and won it: having conquered Fez*
he still strove to oblige the People; and one Guillan raised a small Army,
against whom Mully Ishmael went. Guillan being a great Friend to our Nation,
the Governor of Tangier offered him Assistance if he was pleased to accept it:
he returned him Thanks, saying, it was bad enough for himself and his own Army
to be conquered, and it would be worse for the Christians if they should go
with him; but engaging himself, Mully Ishmael conquered him, and his People
carried his Head up to Macqueness. When I was there, the Emperor kept two of
Guillan's Sons in his Castle, and had them at School amongst his own Children,
because of their Father's Courage and Stoutness.

Our English Governor was concerned at the loss of Guillan and his People.
When the Emperor had won most of his Country, and conquered Tarradant, he soon
after came to Macqueness, and ordered all his Bashaws or Governors to build
Walls and great Houses upon their own Charge, on pain of losing their Lives.
Some finished their Houses, and some could not, having not wherewith to do it,
being brought so low, he causing it to be so, that they might not rebel against
his chief Son, called Mully Sedan, for whom he has the greatest Esteem above
all his Sons, thinking he may succeed after his Decease: but I hope in God, and
wish it may never be, for the young Tyrant imitates his Father too much in
cutting and killing the Slaves as bad as he almost, that the People begin to
dread him as well as the old one.

The Emperor's Castle has four Gates belonging to it. The City of Macqueness
is an old decayed place, the Castle standing distant from it, and walled in
some places double, and has a few old Iron Guns mounted upon them: For the
Brass Guns that were taken from the King of Spain, he is afraid to leave them
with any of his Governors, lest they rise against him, and had them brought up
to Macqueness, placed within the Castle Gates betwixt two Walls flat upon the
Ground. The Buildings within the Walls are very high, and several small Forts
round the Castle Walls. And lately he set the People to build two new Towns,
(with which to plague his Country People, to bring them as low as he can) which
I think will never be finished in his time; and if he did it on his own Cost
and Charge, he would not have so many Buildings. When Taxes are brought him in,
he treasures it up, taking but little out again.

The common Diet the Emperor uses to eat, is made like a kind of Grain; they
call is Cuscozoo* being boiled and mixed with their Butter, which is far more
loathsome and strong to us than our Butter in England; being put into Platters,
they put thereon Mutton cut in small pieces: So he sits down, and thrusting his
Hand into it, he shakes it a little to and fro, crambing it in his mouth
together. When he has done, he calls his Negroes to take what is left to eat
while he stands over them, and they are in great fear lest he kill them; which
he certainly would do, if one should eat more than another. Their Drink is
commonly Water; it is said, he will drink Wine; wherein he makes invalid the
Doctrine of their great Prophet Mahomet* who told the People, it was a great
Sin to do it; yea, and he will often be drunk too* (to the sorrow of his poor
Slaves); though if any of the rest, if it be the greatest among them, be found
in the like case, if he comes to the knowledge of it, he will kill them. His
Guards about him are made up of Negro Boys, of fourteen, sixteen, or eighteen
Years old. If he calls for the greatest Man in his Country about the least
Crime, they presently run like so many Hounds, and they come Collering of him,
as if he were a Bullock to be slaughtered: When he is haled so before the
Emperor, he either kills him, or he is beaten, or put in Irons, and thrown into
Prison; and after this manner he governs his own People.

When he had Business with our Nation, and asked Advice of the Chief of his own
Country, none durst say his Concerns would go well or ill, for fear he would
dislike what they said, although he would often require them to do it: So he
first gives his own Judgment of the matter, and they say as he does. He is
seldom true to his Word, having cheated most Kings and Princes that have had
any thing to do with him; as in case of the Algerines, who made him pay dearly
for it.

Whilst I was there, he made Peace with Holland and France; but soon broke it,
taking since that time several Dutch and French Ships, making Slaves of their
Subjects. If he swears one thing to day, he will swear another thing on the
morrow. Yet he did not out wit (notwithstanding his Falsehood and Treachery) the
King of Spain's Ambassador, who surrendered not one of the Moors, till the
Christians were got into the Spanish Garrison.

If any Christian King or Prince sends an Ambassador to this Emperor, (as in my
time there have been from England, Spain and France) when they come thither, he
makes them wait a considerable time: And he is so high in his own conceit, that
except they be Persons of Quality, he regards them not; and when they come
before him, (...) be either in his Stable, or on Horseback, or sitting on an
heap of Earth, and so speaks to them by an Interpreter, (and will not allow a
Penny toward their Charges, nor any Place to lodge in, be they who they will)
and so sends for several of the white men, being Bashaws or Governors, the
chiefest of his Country, who dare not for their lives be judges to speak
otherwise than what he says first, for fear of him

About twelve years since he sent an Ambassador over to our late K Charles the
Second, to Congratulate his Majesty, and Treat with him for Peace, or the like;
and in the mean time sent out his Pirates to take our English Ships. Our King
not thinking him to be so false, sent him a Present over by Hammet Benhado, the
Emperor's Ambassador; who is now as barbarous to the poor Christians as any
belonging to the Emperor. He never goes to rest, but when dead sleep overcomes
him, and make him so drowsy, that he cannot hold up his Head; and as he goes to
rest, he often kills one or other of his Negroes, at home as well as abroad.
Then in one of his Rooms in the Castle, he lies down on a kind of Quilt on the
Ground; and sleeping that Night, he rises early in the Morning, and falls to
his old Tyrannous and Inhumane Practices, domineering over his poor Slaves, and
sets the Negroes to whip, stone and beat them, to work harder than many times
it is possible for them to think they can hold out or endure till Night. The
poor Christians, the English Captives, daily praying to God, if it be his Will,
to support them in this distressed Condition and to keep them and deliver them
from under this miserable Oppression they are under, and restrain the Hands of
that bloody Tyrant: And when they think of their Native Country, and the
Government thereof, they cannot but greatly lament their own Condition,
erecting their Prayers to Heaven for the Preservation of their own King and
Country; and that God would be pleased to open their Hearts to remember them in
this sad and deplorable Condition. Thus bemoaning one another, they commit
their Case to him, who is the wise Disposer and Orderer of all things, without
whose Permission nothing can be acted or done, who can in his due Time grant
them Relief.

On Fridays the Emperor goes to his Place of Worship, having first viewed his
Slaves, being of several sorts, both Christians, Negroes, and a sort of People
called Brabboes; the last sort being Natives of the Country, which he
suppresseth so much, that they are not able to pay him Taxes, keeping them at
as hard Slavery as the rest. If he kills none in the Morning before he goes to
Worship, they dread him for fear he will at his return: he rides thither and
back again, going about Eleven of the Clock, and returns about One, against
which time the poor Slaves order one or other to watch, and are in as great
fear when they see him as if they must all be destroyed; and they all work more
hard that day than all the rest of the Week. He killed seven and twenty Moors
on one day; but there is none can tell the several thousands of poor Souls this
unmerciful Tyrant has stain since his Reign, which is now about two and twenty
Years.

For his Women I think he knows no the number of them, he has so many both
Whites, Blacks, Mollatoes, and Copper-colour'd; and for Apparel they have a
piece of Silk of a Red or Yellow Color, which they wear over their Heads. They
wear Shifts or Smocks made of fine Linnin, big enough to make two Shifts, and
fine Drawers that will reach down to their Heels, which are open or slit in the
middle; and their upper Garment is fine Flannel, and a Silk Girdle about their
middle: upon each of their Breasts they wear Silver or Gold Pins, with which
they fasten their upper Garment; and upon their Wrists of their Hands they wear
on each a Silver Shackle, and likewise upon the Small of their Legs; and on
their Feet red Slippers. He has store of Children of several Colors. He has
built within his Castle fine Dwellings for himself to live and lodge in; and for
his Women he has built very fine Houses, two Courts very sumptuous; in the
bigger of them are seventy two Marble Pillars, each at least three foot thick,
to support the fine painted Works above; in the middle of the greater Court is
a Marble Cistern with curious Spring Water, which springs or boils up in the
middle thereof, and comes from a Fountain about two Miles from the Castle. If
he desires to lie with any of his Women, he sends an Eunuch to fetch whom he
pleases: she being come, he lies with her, after that he bids her begone; being
as inhumane in this as in the rest of his Actions; and away she goes, lest he
kill her. He allows his* Women a quantity of Flower, and sends his Eunuchs to
measure it them out; and sometimes goes to look over them himself, lest his
Eunuchs cheat him. One of his Women came to him carrying a young Child in her
Arms, desiring him to allow her a little more Flower and Butter; he bid her
stay a while, and she should have it; then he called for some of his Eunuchs,
and killed her, and caused them to pull the young Child in pieces Limb from
Limb.

It Is his Pleasure sometimes to show his Women his fine Buildings: before he
goes, he sends his Eunuchs to drive away all the Men out of their sight, riding
with a Lance himself before the Women, being two or three hundred following,
where he rides in great Pomp, extolling this and the other Work, and admiting
the Bravery thereof: but the Women dare not to speak a word otherwise than as
he himself does.

In the Year 1688, the Emperor of Morocco sent a Letter to the Algerines,
acquainting them that he heard they had a great many Christian Slaves; and
since he had a great deal of work to do, if they would sell him any of them, he
would give them 150 Dollars a Head for five hundred of them, and send them away
with all speed They gathered three hundred French Men, and brought them to
Tittivan; being landed there, the Governor had them to Macqueness to the
Emperor, to see them, and asked him if he liked them? who answered, Yes.
Immediately by the Emperor's Order they were driven away by the Negroes in a
barbarous manner. The Algerines expecting their Money from the Emperor, having
waited a long time for Payment, they resolved at once to demand it from him:
When they asked him for it, he answered, he did not use to give Money for
Christians that were brought into his Land. Then they charged him with breach
of Promise, saying, they hoped he would not serve them so. He said, if they did
not retire out of his Country, he would cut off all their Heads. So they
retiring to Algier with speed, acquainted the King and his Pateroons how they
had sped with the Emperor, giving Relation of what he said concerning the
Christians. The King presently raised an Army of 50000 Men, preparing
Ammunition and Fieldpieces, who marched through Trimsind, a place at or near
the Emperor's Dominions, where they entered without Resistance; and as they
passed along, several of Mully Ishmael's People ran to them: Mully Ishmael's
Coydes, or Governors, acquainted him that the Algerines were coming against
him: Mully Ishmael hearing thereof, raised an Army of Eighty thousand Horse and
Foot, and made his Son Mully Sedan General thereof. Whilst his Army was a
preparing, the Algerines were got up as far as a Town called Tezzo, within two
days Journey of Fez, where they pitched. Mully Sedan went against them; and
being there, the Algerines wrote a Letter to Mully Ishmael, acquainting him,
that they did not come to fight with his Son, but to have met himself in
Person: he sent them word back that his Son was able enough for them. Soon
after they had received his Letter, they engaged Mully Sedan's Army, and slew
abundance of them. Many of Mully Sedan's People deserted him, joining with the
Algerines. Then he sent with all speed to the Emperor his Father, giving him
account what had happened. When Mully Ishmael understood that, he gave out,
that if any Christians would help, and stand by the great Guns, if he prevailed
against the Algerines, he would give them their Liberty. So eight Englishmen
told him they knew what belonged to the Guns, and they would go with him. So he
ordered an hundred Moors to assist them, and to take out six great Guns (that
they judged might be most serviceable) from the place where they lay betwixt
the Walls. They told him they wanted Carriages: He sent for Carpenters
immediately, charging them to make Carriages strong and good, and that with all
speed, upon pain of losing their Heads in case they neglected. Mully Sedan
again sent the Emperor his Father word, that if he did not hasten to Battle,
the Algerines would be in Fez, in four days time* Mully Ishmael hearing that,
was forced to go with all speed, raising what Forces he could, leaving for
haste his Field pieces behind him. The Emperor being come where his own Army
lay, he made Peace with the Algerines General, and in order thereto, gave forty
eight Mules laden with Gold, and an Horse and Furniture worth 200000 Crowns.

About a month before I came from Macqueness, one of our own Nation, namey
Elias Roberts, being by the said Emperor put to look after a parcel of Sheep he
came himself to view them; and telling, them over, found three of his number
wanting, who thereupon sent for one of his chief Negroes that kept all account
of them, and examined him what was become of them? he replied, the Christian
kept the Key and locked them up every Night, and carried it with him to the
place where he went to sleep under Ground. The Tyrant immediately sent his
Blood hounded Negros to fetch the poor Christian, who was not far from them;
being come, he asked him what was become of those Sheep that were wanting? he
made Answer, he went home every Night, having first fastened the Door, and that
the Negroe had a false. Key to the Door; so turning to the Negroe, and upon
Examination finding him faulty, he presently shot him to Death, running his
Lance through his Body in several places, and threatened the Christian for not
acquainting him therewith sooner, saying, if he would not turn Moor, he would
kill him, as he had done the Negro, who lay dead before them. The Christian
boldly replied, he was brought up in the Faith of Jesus Christ, and he would
not turn Moor, and that he feared God, whose Power was greater than his; so the
Emperor fell to cutting him, and afterward had him very inhumanely stretched
out by those bloody Negroes, and beaten till he was left for dead. Then he went
away to his Works where English Captives were, and told them he had killed one
of the Dogs their Brother, for taking no better care of his Sheep, calling them
Dogs in his, own Language, and bidding them fetch that Dog away; five or six of
them went and brought the poor Man away, who had been so cruelly beaten by the
wicked Wretch, his Body was so exceedingly bruised, he could not stir neither
hand nor foot; neither could he feed himself for several days, but as we helped
him. Yet through God's Mercy, he was pretty well recovered before my Departure
from thence. And thus when the poor Captives are by this unmerciful, and
rather, as we may term him, inhumane Brute, beaten and killed at his pleasure,
none dare make any complaint to him; for instead of taking any Pity of them, he
matters no more to kill a Christian than to kill a Dog; and if any of them
seeks for Favor from this Tyrant, he is either killed, of sorely beaten by
either him or his bloody Negroes.

A Moor, one of the Natives of the Country, having Compassion on me, and seeing
my sad Condition that I was kept daily in, which I cannot at large insert here,
came to me, speaking his own Language, being Arabic, knowing I could
understand him; and he asked me if I would go to my Native Country? I replied,
are you in earnest or not? he answered, Yes, and would direct me, and go along
with me himself to Marsegan, a Garrison belonging to the King of Portugal. I
told him, if he expected any Reward or Satisfaction from me for his pains, I
had nothing to give him; he said he knew that by my Condition. So I enquired of
him where he lived? he answered, at a place called Assimore, which is not far
from the Christian Garrison; and he said, he would trust to the Benevolence of
the Governor of that place, provided I would speak to the said Governor for a
Gratuity for him, when we should arrive there. I told him I should be worse
than a Jew, if I did not do that; and they themselves count the Jews the worst
and falsest of all People. Then I asked him in what time we should provide for
our Journey? he said, as soon as I could find convenient opportunity; and I
farther prevailed with him to take in two more Englishmen along with us, whose
Names were Tristram Bryan, born in Plymouth; and Edward Tucker, who came from
New England. And in five days time after we were fitted with a small quantity
of Bread for the Journey, supposing we might accomplish our Journey in ten
nights time, for we must of necessity hide our selves in the Day for fear of
being discovered; yet we found it difficult enough to perform it in two and
twenty days, in which time we were put to great Hardships and Necessities on
the way. The Particulars are as follow.

On the 26 th of June, 1692, in the Evening, we set forward from Macqueness,
and traveled as far as we could that Night in great fear of being pursued,
with our Moor to direct us in the way, knowing that if they had found us, we
had been killed, if not burnt, which would have been the Moor's Lot had we been
taken: toward day we had a great River to pass; when we were got over, we
found a small Coppise or Wood, where we rested the Day following, being the 27
th. In the Evening when the Sun was set, our Guide was forward to be going, not
knowing how the Event would prove, and I had much ado to persuade him from
going before 'twas dark. When we came into the Road out of the Wood we met ten
Moors, and Mules and Asses laden with Goods for the Emperor, being Iron, which
they had taken from one Savage, an English Master that came from Bilboa; so we
followed our Guide the Moor, who gave them the time of the Night, and they him
likewise; and so we passed that time without any further trouble, they
supposing us to be Moors, being we had on their sort of Apparel. So we
traveled that Night, making what haste we could, and still in great fear, lest
we should have been discovered by Moors: when we rested* it was toward Day, in
some Brambles or Bushes, seeing them pass along by us, driving of Sheep and
Bullocks; but through Mercy they did not see us. And the next Night, being the
28 th, we traveled all Night; and when Day appeared, we could not find a
convenient place to lodge in, which we sought for; and about Sunrising we found
a place betwixt two Mountains where were Holes made with the Winter Rains
coming off the Hills near a Pathway, to which we made, and espied several Moors
who went along the Road, that had Mules and Asses laden with Iron, who saw us
not. Some part of the Day we slept; and the Moor and I watched; in which time
the Moor gathered Palm, and made a Sling, to sling Stones at Lions and other
wild Beasts that appeared.

So in the Evening, after Sunset, (being the 29 th) we traveled till we came
to a Riverside, where were a great parcel of Moors and Mules a baiting, that
had Bail Goods, which the Sally Moors had taken in Prizes, to carry to the
Emperor at Macqueness; who strictly enquired of our Moor, from whence we came,
and whither we were going? He made answer, To Salley, and came from Macqueness,
and so our Moor bad them Goodnight; and we traveled on (without further
enquiry) along the Riverside before we could get over. When we were over,
there were a great many Bramble bushes and Rush-bushes; and our Moor feared
there were Lions in that Place, so we made what haste we could up a Hill, on
the top of which was a great Plain; and being very thirsty, we traveled on a
good way further, and heard a noise of Frogs and Toads; to which Place we came,
and found a standing Water, which stunk; however we drank thereof to stay our
Thirst, and 'twas sweet to us: and so went on till we found a ruined Castle,
which had formerly belonged to the Portugues, at which our Moor would fain have
rested; but I told him there might happen to be Moors there, because they
usually rested in such Places in the Night. So we came to a place where grew a
great parcel of high Weeds, and there we rested that Day.

The 30 th at Night, after Sun set, we set forwards; but were very thirsty, the
Sun having shone hot upon us that Day, having lain without shelter, only the
Weeds. I asked our Moor, how long it would be e're we could find any Water? He
said, A little further there was a small River; but we thought it a long way to
it, our Throats being so parched with Drought; so we drank Water, and eat a
little Bread, which did greatly refresh us; and we went forward till near break
of Day, where we rested in some Weeds till about two in the Afternoon; at which
time the three Women disturbed us two or three times, but saw not our Faces. So
we three went forward, and our Moor stood, and enquired of them the way to
Salley. Then the Women asked from whence we came? Who answered, From Tapholet,
which was a City in that Country. They further asked, if he had lain in that
place all Night? and asked what they were that were with him? He told them,
Three of his Neighbors, and that they had laid there all Night, being
Strangers. They said, It was a wonder that the Lions had not destroyed us,
there being so many in that place, they devoured some of their Cattle, almost
every Night; and they told him it was about four Leagus to Sally.

After Sunset ( July 1.) we traveled till we came to a Wood, where the Moor
would have had us to rest; but seeing of Lights which the Country People had in
their Tents, and hearing a Lion roan thereabouts, we went further, and came to
a ruined Tower, where was a good Spring of Water; we drank and refreshed our
selves, but durst not stay for fear of Moors being in that place; and going a
little farther, we came into a Valley, where was a Hole the Winter Rains had
made, there we rested; and after the Sun was risen, two Moors came to cut Palm:
At which I awaked our Moor, who spoke to them, and gave them the time of Day,
and they likewise to him. They enquired of him from whence he came, and whither
he was going? He told them, he came from beyond Tapholet, and was going to
visit a great Saint at a Town called Temsnah; and asked further, if there were
none with him? He answered, there were three more* They asked, if we had lain
there all Night? He said, we had; They said, it was to be wondered that the
Lions had not devoured us; and came to look at us where we lay, speaking
Arabic; but the Moor told them, we could not speak that Lingua; and we were
covered all over with our white Blankets, being such as the Moors commonly
wear. So they went away and left us, telling us. We did well in going to visit
the Saint. So we got up, and espying a parcel of Bushes a little distance off,
we removed thither, lest the two Moors should have informed of us at Sally, and
so have come back to the place and found us. The Bush where we were hid, was
near a Riverside, but we durst not go to drink thereat, by reason of People
which passed to and fro there by us all-day long.

July 2. After Sunset, we attempted to go over the River; but it being so
strong a Stream, and deep, we could not pass over it: And in our going a great
way further up the Riverside, there happened to be several of the Moors; yet
being Night, they saw us not, save only one Man of the Natives, which had tied
up a bundle of Canes fast together to pass over the River with them; to whom
our Moor gave the time of the Night; and he answering with the like to us, we
parted: and going higher up, we found a place not so deep as the other part of
the River; so got over, and traveled up a Hill on the other side, where we
found some Bushes, and there we rested, and our Moor lay on the outside of
them. In the Morning when the Sun was risen, came by us two Moors with (...)
Asses, who said one to the other, it was wonder the Lions had not devoured that
Man, meaning our Moor, who they saw lying by the side of the Bushes.

On the third Instant, after the Sun was set, we set forward, endeavoring to
get to the Seaside: but there being several People in the way, watching with
their Dogs to keep the wild Beasts from their Gardens; which we hearing, were
fain to flee further from them: so we traveled a little further* and rested
among some Rushes.

The next Night, being the 4 th. of July, we traveled after Sun setting as far
as we could, being weary and faint, and rested.

On the 5 th; on which Day after Sun was set, we set forward and traveled till
we came to a place where was a standing Water, being thereto led by a noise of
Frogs; which although the Water stunk, yet drinking thereof, it was sweet to
us; with that, and a little Bread, we were much refreshed; but at this time our
Bread was gone, so we traveled a little further, and rested.

The 6 th Instant, after Sunset, we went forward, and discovered a great many
Lights which the Natives had in their Tents where they lodge: So we parted a
while one from another, to find out the Roads. At length I came to a place
where the Country People use to go to Market, where we again met together; and
traveling a while, we heard some Dogs as I thought, did scent us; and near
that place we met with a Lion lying by the way-side; which the Moor seeing,
before he roused, he struck him fair over the Head. So the Lion roared at him,
and followed us half a mile or more; but our Moor kept slinging of Stones at
him so fast, that he left us. Then we came to a Valley, where was a Wood on
each side: When Day appeared, we rested in the Wood, having no Bread to sustain
us; but we durst not enter the Wood till it was Day light, for fear of the
Lions: We then found a piece of Pot in the Wood, with which our Moor brought us
some Water out of the Valley; for we durst not fetch it our selves, lest the
People saw us: so when the Moor had brought us a pot full of Water, (but in the
mean time we were lamenting our sad Condition for want of Bread, having then no
Sustenance but Palm-Berries* Grass and Weeds, and any thing we could eat, which
was sweet to us) he said, in his own Language, God was great. So went from us
about the space of four Hours; in which time he fold his Sash, and bought us a
small quantity of Bread (about a pound and an half) therewith, and brought us a
little of it, which we ate; and he fetched us a little more Water in the Pot:
After we had eaten and drank of the Water, we went to sleep, two of us watching.

On the 7 th, after Sun set, we traveled on; and the Moor slung Stones, whilst
we passed through the Wood, lest there should be Lions lurking thereabouts:
having refreshed our selves with the Bread and Water, we rested amongst some
Brambles, but could find no more Water that Night.

Then on the 8 th Day at Night we came to another Wood, in which we traveled a
great way, and kept two of us awake to watch against Lions and other wild
Beasts.

On the 9 th we set forward, and traveled in the same Wood, and still had no
Water.

The 10 th, after Sun setting, we went till we came to an Hill of Rocks; at the
bottom whereof we found a Spring of Water, and drinking thereof, we were
greatly refreshed, and there was a little River, from which we went, till we
came to some Trees or Bushes, and there rested.

About eight a Clock in the Morning, July 11. (it raining fast) we ventured to
travel that Day, after we had rubbed out a little Corn, and eaten, that the
Moor had brought us, having no Bread to eat: so went to the top of an Hill, on
which grew a Tree, which we climbed upon, and espied the Sea at a great
distance from us. We traveled all that Day, and the Night following, till
toward Day, that we rested, but had neither Bread nor Water.

On the 12 th at Night, after Sunsetting, we traveled a good way, and heard a
noise of Frogs and Toads; to which we made, and found Water, which we drank of;
and although it was very brackish, yet it was pleasant to us, by reason of our
sore drought. A little from thence we met with a Person of Quality, as we
judged by his Habit and Attendance, having ten Men with him; to whom our Moor
paid his Respects, and gave him the time of the Night. He answered him again in
his own Language and asked him whither we were going? Our Moor answered, To
Santa Cruse: So he bid us God speed: Afterward our Moor asked him from whence
he came? He answered, From Assimore. So we departed away, and traveled till we
found some Bushes, wherein we rested that Day.

July 13. After Sunsetting we set out, and came so near to Assimore, that
listening we heard the People in it, and saw the Town, which stood on the South
side of a Hill, and a River by the Town, which was so deep, that we could not
get over, because one of our Men could not swim: Then we traveled along the
North side of the River, till we came to a place where Canes grew, and there we
rested by the Riverside.

July 14 After it was Day, our Moor went to see his Family which dwelt there in
that Town. We having been a considerable time without Bread, I requested our
Moor to bring us a little, (which he did) and likewise to see if he could find
any thing to carry my Country man over the River; and about four in the
Afternoon he returned with some Bread, and said, he had found a Tree. After Sun
was set, we went to view it, and found it not fit to swim withal: So we
returned, and went back to the Canes, and there staid.

On the 15 th Instant, when the Sun was risen, I desired our Moor to go and
enquire of the People, where we might pass over the River? The People told him,
there was no other Passage but by a Boat at the Town. So our Moor went about a
League further in the Country, where he saw a Man and a Woman upon a Mule
crossing the River, and marked the place with some Stones, that we might find
it, and so returned to us, and rested till Sun setting. So we set forward, and
had gone but a little way before we heard a Lion roar, but he did not come in
our sight; then we came to the place where the Moor laid his Mark, and sat down
to consult how to pass over there, we hearing of People in a Garden were near
at hand: And in the interim, we heard a Lion just behind us; so we hastened and
got over the River, and traveled a little further, and rested.

July 16. After Sun setting we traveled about a Mile further, where we saw a
Town, that our Moor said was a Saint's Town, to which the People, that were not
able to pay their Taxes to the Emperor, fled for Refuge.

July 17. After Sun setting we traveled; and going till about Midnight we came
within call of the Garrison The distance between Macqueness and Mersygan, being
two hundred Miles or more; but traveling in the Night, occasioned our missing
the Way: so that we went at least three hundred Miles before we came to the
Garrison.
which was at Mersygan belonging to the King of Portugal: So I called out, and
the Soldiers made answer to me, and asked what we were? I replied, we were
three Christians and a Moor: which they presently acquainted the Governor of,
and bid us hasten nearer, lest there should be any Moors in the hearing of us.
Which we did, and running to a wrong place, they called to us again to make to
the two Draw bridges, where we sat down. So the Governor, and the rest of the
Officers, came to the Wall; and after he had examined us, he and the Guard let
us in; and he ordered his Servants to bring us into the House, and to give us
some Relief; and he himself came to us, and wondered that so little satisfied us
in our eating and drinking: So had us into another Room, and asked me, If I did
not know of three Men that were taken by the Moors from that Garrison? I
answered, I knew of two, but not the third. He bid me speak to the Moor, and
ask him, if he would undertake to bring them thither to that place? So I spoke
to the Moor, who bid me tell the Governor* That he would endeavor it to the
utmost of his Power. So the Governor ordered us a Lodging; and in the Morning
ordered his Clerk to write a couple of Letters, and gave them to the Moor, with
forty pieces of Eight for bringing us thither, saying, If he did bring the two
Portuguess, he would give him as much more as should maintain him and his
Family as long as he lived. The Moor said, He would do his endeavor. So the
Governor ordered Dinner for us: And about four a Clock he again sent for me
and the Moor; and bid me tell him in his Language, That if he feared any thing
in his Return, he would send some of his Troopers to conduct him on the Way.
The Moor made answer, He should go more safe alone. After Sun was set, the
Governor gave him Victuals to serve him, till he could shift for himself. And
the Moor taking his leave, returned, and went on his Journey.

About three Weeks after, a Portuguese Man of War came into that Garrison, to
fetch about 1800 Soldiers off from thence: So I desired of the Governor we
might go aboard with them: Which he was willing, and in four days after we had
been aboard, most of the Soldiers being come off, the Captain sent a Letter to
the Governor, by the Coxon of the Pinnace, desiring him to hasten he remainder
away. When the Pinnace went ashore, his Crew wondered to see any Moors there,
and asked, What they did there? The Portugues told them, They came with a Flag
of Truce, to treat for three Moors they had taken. They offered the Governor
two thousand Dollars for them, being one of them was a Shack, or Governor; or
Bullocks, or Sheep, or Corn, in lieu of Money. He answered, No; for they had
taken three Troopers belonging to his Garrison; and he heard that two of them
were at Macqueness. They replied, They knew by whom he heard that, for the
Christians that the Moor brought, had acquainted him therewith; but he had paid
dearly for it, for, said they, he was taken with the Pieces of Eight, and
Letters about him, and carried up to the Emperor and burnt: At which the
Governor was very sorry when he heard it The Governor then told them, he
heard two of his Troopers were alive at Macqueness, but he feared the third was
dead, because he heard nothing of him; and bid them go up to the Emperor, and
prevail with him, if they could, for the two Christians, and bring them, and
they should have the three Moors. They told him, they could not do that. He
made answer, Then they should never have the Moors. So at Night when they came
on Board, I asked them what was the best News? Who said, Very bad; for they had
seen a parcel of Moors, who had given account to the Governor, that the Moor
that brought us to the Garrison was taken and burnt. At which I was much
grieved, knowing the poor Moor's true hearredness toward us, in bringing and
directing us on our Journey, when we made our escape from Macqueness. So
setting fail for Lisbon, through God's Mercy we safely arrived there, and went
to the King's Palace, giving him Thanks for the Kindness the Governor had be
stowed upon us, and the Moor that brought us to the Garrison.

When we came thither, several of the Nobility enquired of us, What Nation we
were of* and told us, if we desired it, we might speak with the King; and
acquainted him of us, who ordered us to come before him; and enquired of us if
we could speak French or Portuguese? I said, we could speak some Portuguese,
and a little Lingua Franc: So he enquired from whence we came? And I gave him
account of our narrow escape from that Slavery we had been in under the
Emperor, etc. and told him how our Bread was gone in ten days time, and that we
had been two and twenty Days in coming from Macqueness, to the Garrison, and
did eat nothing but Reach till the 23 d Night. He much wondered how we were kept
alive the rest of the time after our Bread was gone. I told him, through God's
Assistance we had shifted as well as we could; for our Liberty being sweet to
us, had caused us to run these great hazards we were exposed to. He further
enquired after those Christians that are still in Slavery; of which I gave him
an Account of all I could remember: And desired him, out of the abundance of
his Goodness and Clemency to remember them in their Afflictions. He told me, it
was more than he ever heard before, and said, he would before Winter came, take
care to send them Relief, to buy them Victuals and Clothes; and enquired of me,
Whether any of his Subjects desired me to lay their Condition before him? I
answered, No, but (by God's permission) I had in part undergone the same
Afflictions they were in, and knew well enough how it was with them. He made
answer, God would bless me for it. He likewise asked, if I knew what number of
Ships were at Salley? I cold him, eleven Sail. He said, He knew Venetia, for he
had formerly been at his Palace I said, it was our late King James' Pleasure to
give him his Liberty; with much more that passed betwixt us.

When this Venitia returned home to the Emperor, the Emperor ordered him to
build a Ship; and several English men, that were newly taken Slaves he caused
to draw Timber in a Cart from Memora to Salley, (which was twelve Miles
distant) like so many Oxen, driving and whipping of them in a very barbarous
manner. The Name of Venetia caused me to insert this here, to show the
barbarous Cruelty of this inhumane Wretch; and so I shall leave him, and
proceed.

We having taken our leaves here, took our Passage for Holland, where my two
Countrymen staid; but I took my Passage for England, where, praised be God for
his great Mercies, I arrived safely, being by his good Providence at last
delivered from under the Hands of this inhumane Tyrant, and his Hellish Crew of
Negroes; beseeching Almighty God, that all my Country men, in all their Affairs
and Negotiations, may ever escape from his cruel Hands.

Francis Brooks.

THE Turkish FAST, Out of the Monthly Murcury, for December, 1697.
THE 29. of the last Month, N. S. the new Aga of the Janissaries made his
Public Entry into Adrianople; but he had not above Ten or Twelve Captains of
the Janissaries to attend him, all the rest who were at the Battle of Z^nta
being killed, or since dead of their Wounds. The next day the Grand Signior
arrived at the same City with his new prime Visir; but he rode directly to his
Seraglio without entering into the City, not desiring they should make him any
public Reception, or that the Sultanness his Mother should meet him, as she
intended, two Miles out of the City. The ill Success of the last Campaign has
cast a deep Consternation into all the Provinces of his Empire which have heard
the ill Tidings, insomuch that in some Places the People begin to murmur
against the Grand Signior and his Government. For which Reason the Sultan has
caused a General Fast, and Public Prayers to be said throughout all his
Dominions Alamode de Turqueske, which are to be accompanied with Processions to
Mecca, in hopes to appease the Anger of Heaven. To which purpose he has set
forth the following Ordinance, wherein are many things to be observed relating
to Mohammedan Bigotry.

THe Grand Signor of the Turks acknowledging that the Hand of God lies heavy
upon his Dominions and his Subjects, for that they have so often fought and
been vanquished as well by Sea as by Land by their Enemies the Christians, who
have also in a little time regained from 'em a large Extent of their Country,
attributes these frequent Misfortunes to the too great Confidence he has had in
his Stength and his Alliances against the Emperor of the Christians. For which
Reason he Ordains and Commands, by these Presents, for the attoning the Wrath
of God, and his great Prophet Mahomet, That every Friday of the New Moon, as
also upon the 5 th. 6 th. and 7 th. of the Month, that all Persons fast all the
Day, without eating or drinking, till the Stars appear in the Sky. That the
Mufti and his Clergy upon those Days be clothed with Sackcloth, girt with
Cords, with long Beards; and that they go in that posture, first through the
Streets, and then to the Churches, with their Eyes fixed upon the Earth,
lamenting and crying, Ja Aagib, Allah, Alah, that is to say, O Merciful God, O
God. That they also take the Coffin of the Grand Prophet out of his Sepulcher
in Mecca That after they have placed it in a Chair, they also take Twenty five
more Coffins, full of the Bones of those who were formerly slain fighting in
Defense of the Musulman Religion; which done, they shall perfume 'em with
Incense, to the end that by that means the great Prophet may be moved to employ
his Intercessions to appease the Wrath of the Great God. That after all this
has been done upon the above mentioned Days, and that they shall have placed
the Prophet's Coffin in the open Field, all Pilgrims and Inhabitants, as also
all the Foreigners of all the Caravans, may walk seven times about the Coffin
weeping and bewailing themselves* and that the last Day of the Fast they make a
solemn Procession, Twenty Miles an end, in the following manner.

1. Six thousand Turks shall lead the way clothed in Sackloth, girt with
Cords, Bare foot, and without Turbans, carrying a Box full of dead Men's Bones,
with broken Scimitars, small rusty Fire arms, etc.

2. Three thousand other Musselmen all bloody, covered with Ashes, shall follow
them, bewailing themselves, and tearing their Clothes.

3. Six thousand Persons naked from the Wast upward, shall follow them,
whipping their Backs and Breasts with Thorns till th^^ fetch blood, which shall
drop upon the Ground, nor shall they be suffered to rub or wipe themselves.

4. After them shall appear Three thousand Spahi's bareheaded, with long
Beards, carrying the Prophets Coffin, who shall be surrounded with Three
hundred Basha's with naked Swords, and if any one shall offer to take off his
Eyes from looking steadfastly upon the Coffin, the Basha's shall presently kill
him and cast his body to the Dogs.

5. At the end of every Mile they shall put to the Sword, a Christian Slave,
and a Jew; and they shall let 'em die in their own Blood.

6. Thirty Basha's, Governors of Provinces, shall follow them without Purple,
and with Turbans of plain black Cloth, died before hand in the Blood of a Jew
and an Ass: and every one of these Basha's shall have one Hand bound behind
him, and instead of a Sword shall wear a long Came'ls Tail trailing upon the
Ground.

7. Three thousand Janissaries shall follow them without Arms, but with
Battoons, which they shall trail after 'em, and they shall cry out, Allah bize
ramah eile, Lord be Merciful unto us.

8. Next to them shall come a Chest full of Money, which shall be scattered
upon the Road. But the poor shall be forbid, upon pain of being empal'd, to
touch the Money before the end of the Procession.

9. Lastly, The Concourse of People shall close the Procession. In the midst of
the Crowd there shall walk a Hundred Santons, or otherwise Turkish Hermites,
who shall cut their Arms, Breasts, and Faces, with Knives, till the Blood drop
upon the Ground, and at the end of every Mile they shall lift up their Hands to
Heaven, and cry, Vengeance against the Christians, and say, Allah Jekfa, Ja
Allah erraman, It Is enough, Lord, most Merciful God.

FINIS.

