The Selling OF JOSEPH A Memorial.
FOR AS MUCH as Liberty is in real value next unto Life: None ought to part
with it themselves, or deprive others of it, but upon most mature Consideration.

The Numerousness of Slaves at this day in the Province, and the Uneasiness of
them under their Slavery, has put many upon thinking whether the Foundation of
it be firmly and well laid; so as to sustain the Vast Weight that is buuilt
upon it. It is most ceertain that all Men, as they are the Sons of Adam, are
and have equal Right unto Liberty, and all other outward Comforts of Life. GOD
has given the Earth [with all its Commodities] onto the Sons of Adam, Psalm
115. 16. And (...) made of One Blood, all Nations of men for to dwell on all
the face of the Earth, and (...) determined the Times before appointed, and the
bounds of their habitation: That they should seek the Lord. Forasmuch then as
we are the Offspring of GOD etc; Act 17.26,27,29. Now although the Title given
by the last ADAM does infinitely better Men's Estates, respecting GOD and
themselves; and grants them a most beneficial and inviolable Lease under the
Broad Seal of Heaven, who were before only Tenants at Will; Yet through the
Indulgence of GOD to our First Parents after the Fall, the outward Estate of
all and every of their Children, remains the same, as to one another. So that
Originally, and Naturally, there is no such thing as Slavery. Joseph was
rightfully no more a Slave to his Brethren than they were to him: and they had
no more Authority to Sell him, than they had to Slay him. And if they had
nothing to do to sell him to the Ishmaelites bargaining with them, and paying
down Twenty pieces of Silver, could not make a title. Neither could Potiphar
have any better Interest in him than the Ishmaelites had. Gen37. 20, 27, 28 For
he that shall in this case plead Alteration of Property, seems to have
forfeited a great part of his own claim to Humanity. There is no proportion
between Twenty Pieces of Silver, and LIBERTY. The Commodity it self is the
Claimer. If Arabian Gold be imported in any quantities, most are afraid to
meddle with it, though they might have it at easy rates; lest if it should have
been wrongfully taken from the Owners, It should kindle a fire to the
Consumption of their whole Estate. It Is pity there should be more Caution used
in buying a Horse, or a little lifeless dust, than there is in purchasing Men
and Women: Whenas they are the Offspring of GOD, and their Liberty is,

Auro pretiosior Omni.

And seeing GOD has said, He that Steals a Man and Sells him, or if he be
found in his band, he shall surely be put to Death. Exodus 21. 16. This Law
being of Everlasting Equity, wherein Man Stealing is ranked amongst the most
atrocious of Capital Crimes: What louder cry can there be made of that
Celebrated Warning,

Caveat Emptor!

And all things considered, it would conduce more to the Welfare of the
Province, to have White Servants for a Term of Years, than to have Slaves for
Life. Few can endure to hear of a Negro's being made free; and indeed they can
seldom use their freedom well; yet their continual aspring after their
forbidden Liberty, renders them Unwilling Servants. And there is such a
disparity in their Conditions, Color and Hair that they can never embody with
us, and grow up into orderly Families, to the Peopling of the Land: but still
remain in our Body Politic as a kind of extravasat Blood. As many Negro men as
there are among us, so many empty places there are in our Train Bands, and the
places taken up of Man that might make Husbands for our Daughters. And the Sons
and Daughters of New England would become more like Jacob and Rachel, if this
Slavery were thrust quite out of doors. Moreover it is too well known what
Temptations Masters are under, to connive at the Fornication of their Slaves;
lest they should be obliged to find them Wives, or pay their Fines. It seems to
be practically pleaded that they might be Lawless; it is thought much of, that
the Law should have Satisfaction for their Thefts, and other Immoralities; by
which means, Holiness to the Lord, is more rarely engraved upon this sort of
Servitude. It is likewise most lamentable to think, how in taking Negros out of
Africa, and Selling of them here, That which GOD has joined together men do
boldly rend asunder; Men from their Country, Husbands from their Wives, Parents
from their Children. How horrible is the Uncleanness, Mortality, if not Murder,
that the Ships are guilty of that bring great Crowds of these miserable Men,
and Women. Methinks, when we are bemoaning the barbarous Usage of our Friends
and Kinsfolk in Africa it might not be unseasonable to enquire whether we are
not culpable in forcing the Africans to become Slaves amongst our selves. And
it may be a question whether all the Benefit received by Negro Slaves, will
balance the Account of Cash laid out upon them; and for the Redemption of our
own enslaved Friends out of Africa. Besides all the Persons and Estates that
have perished there.

Obj. 1. These Blackamores are of the Posterity of Cham, and therefore are
under the Curse of Slavery. Genesis 9. 25, 26, 27.

Answ. Of all Offices, one would not beg this; viz. Uncalled for, to be an
Executioner of the Vindictive Wrath of God; the extent and duration of which is
to us uncertain If this ever was a Commission; How do we know but that it is
long since out of Date? Many have found it to their Cost, that a Prophetical
Denunciation of Judgment against a Person or People, would not warrat them to
inflict that evil. If it would, (...) might justify himself in all he did
against his Master, and the Israelites, from 2 Kings 8. 10, 12.

But it is possible that by cursory reading, this Text may have been mistaken.
For (...) is the Person Cursed three times over, without the mentioning of
Cham. Good Expositors suppose the Curse entaild on him, and that this Prophecy
was accomplished in the Extirpation of the Canaanites, and in the Servitude of
the Gibeonites. Vide Pareum. Whereas the Blackmores are not descended of
Canaan, but of Cush Psalm 68. 31. Princes shall come out of Egypt [Mizraim]
Ethiopia [Cush] shall soon stretch out her hands unto God Under which Names,
all Africa may be comprehended; and their Promised Conversion ought to be
prayed for. Jer. 13. 23. Can the Ethiopian change his Skin? This shows that
Black Men are the Posterity of Cush Who time out of mind have been
distinguished by their Color. And for want of the true, Ovid assigns a
fabulous cause of it.

Sanguine tum credunt in corpora summa vocato
Aethiopum populos nigrum traxisse colorem.
Metamorph. lib. 2. Obj. 2. The Nigers are brought out of a Pagan Country, into
places where the Gospel is Preached.

Answ. Evil must not be done, that good may come of it. The extraordinary and
comprehensive Benefit accruing to the Church of God, and to Joseph personally,
did not rectify his brethrens Sale of him.

Obj 3. The Africans have Wars one with another: Our Ships bring lawful
Captives taken in those Wars.

Answ. For ought is known, their Wars are much such as were between Jacob's
Sons and their Brother Joseph. If they be between Town and Town; Provincial, or
National; Every War is upon one side Unjust. An Unlawful War cannot make lawful
Captives. And by Receiving, we are in danger to promote, and partake in their
Barbarous Cruelties. I am sure, if some Gentlemen should go down to the
Brewsters to take the Air, and Fish: And a stronger party from Hull should
Surprise them, and Sell them for Slaves to a Ship outward bound: they would
think themselves unjustly dealt with; both by Sellers and Buyers. And yet it is
to be feared, we have no other kind of Title to our Nigers. Therefore all
things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them:
for this is the Law and the Prophets. Matt. 7. 12.

Obj. 4. Abraham had Servants bought with his Money, and born in his House.

Answ. Until the Circumstances of Abraham's purchase be recorded, no Argument
can be drawn from it. In the mean time, Charity obliges us to conclude, that He
knew it was lawful and good.

It is Observable that the Israelites were strictly forbidden the buying, or
selling one another for Slaves Levit. 25. 39. 46. Jer. 34 8. -- 22. And GOD
gaged His Blessing in lieu of any loss they might conceit they suffered
thereby. Deuteronomy. 15. 18. And since the partition Wall is broken down, inordinate
Self love should likewise be demolished. GOD expects that Christians should be
of a more Ingenuous and benign frame of spirit. Christians should carry it to
all the World, as the Israelites were to carry it one toward another. And for
men obstinately to persist in holding their Neighbors and Brethren under the
Rigor of perpetual Bondage, seems to be no proper way of gaining Assurance that
God has given them Spiritual Freedom. Our Blessed Savior has altered the
Measures of the ancient Love-Song, and set it to a most Excellent New Tune,
which all ought to be ambitious of Learning. Matt. 5. 43, 44. John 13 34 These
Ethiopians, as black as they are; seeing they are the Sons and Daughters of the
First Adam, the Brethren and Sisters of the Last ADAM, and the Offspring of
GOD; They ought to be treated with a Respect agreeable.

Servitus Perfecta voluntaria, inter Christianum and Christianum, ex part
servi patientis saepe est licita, quia est necessaria: sed ex part domini
agentis, and procurando and exercendo, vix potest esse licita: quia non
convenit regulae illi generalis Quaecunque volueritis ut faciant vobis homines,
ita and vos facite eis. Matt. 7. 12. Perfecta servitus poenae, non potest jure
locum habere, nisi ex delicto gravi quod ultimum supplicium aliquo modo
meretur: quia Libertas ex naturali aestimatione proxime accedit ad vitam ipsam,
and eidem a multis praeferri solet. Ames. Cas. Consc. Lib. 5. Cap. 23. These. 2,
3. BOSTON of the Massachusetts;

Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, June, 24 th. 1700.


