TO FRIENDS IN IRELAND, And elsewhere; A Mournful Word to the merry-hearted in
Zion; with a word of Comfort to her Bowed down Mourners.

Written in great Exercise of Soul and Spirit in obedience to the LORD.

BY THOMAS UPSHER.

Woe to you that (...), for you shall mourn and weep.

Luke 6 v. 25. Neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor Jesting, but giving
thanks.

Ephesians. 5. verse 4. Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

Matthew. 5 verse. 4. These are they which came out of great tribulations, and
have washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb.

Rev. 7. verse. 14. Reprinted in Philadelphia. 1700

A mournful Word to the merry hearted in Zion; with a Word of Comfort to her
Bowed down Mourners.
FRIENDS that profess the self-denying way of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, (who was a
Man of sorrows, and deeply acquainted with grief,) and yet are of a jolly
spirit, and of a merry heart, who can laugh and j^st at pleasure, saying, There
is no har^ in it.

I have this to say to you, whether y^u will hear or forbear* that the Lord is
displeased with you, and calls for Mourning and Weeping (...) s^cret places
instead of Laughter and J^^^ing in Company. And I must needs tell you, that if
ever you were rightly bowed and ^^mo^ed in a sense of your lost and undo^
states, and were made to lament and mourn in the sight and feeling of your
wretchedness, you have too soon quitted that exercise; you have not ^ast often
enough through the fire, neither have you been baptized enough with the Waters
of many tribulations. You have not drunk sufficiently of the Cup of trembling
at the hand of the Lord, and therefore you must come down from your pleasant
and delightful Seats, and be humbled as in Dust and Ashes before the Lord of
Hosts, whose fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem; and you must pass
through it again, and again, till all your dross is taken away, and all your
light chaff be burnt up. O! Friends, you are those that are at ease in Zion,
and have taken up a rest too soon, and now the Lord is about to disturb you,
and rou^^ you up out of your false security; Blessed are those that are willing
to come forth to Judgment at the ^our^ and Alarm of the Trumpet of his eternal
(...) for I proclaim in the Lords power that the time hastens and dra^s on
(...)* that Judgment (...) eminently and searchingly begin at the House of God,
in his Sanctuary, amongst his people that are peculiarly called by his name;
and the unfaithful^, the Hippocrite, and Rotten-^earted, shall tremble with the
shaking h^r^or of his searching Judgments. And you that are jolly spirited*
m^rry hearted, and that take liber^y to laugh, joque, and j^^t at pleasure, the
very Pillars of your House shall tremble, you shall weep and mourn in solitary
places* and strew your tears in secret Corners.

Therefore take warning I pray you, and be humbled before the Lord, and cry
mightily to him night and day, that he may take vengeance speedily upon that
idle and airy spirit, from whence springs th^se things that are contrary to the
mo^^^ful followers of the Lord Jesus Christ. O! I entreat you watch and pray,
yea, cry mightily to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, that he may cru^^^y and
utterly slay this Nature in you, which has often led you to forgetfulness o^
God, and has veiled and darkened you many times.

Is it not think you very sorrowful to consider how a great many in a little
time after they have come out of a good Meeting, where they have been under a
^^^ce of the Lords power, and have been reached with a tendering Visitation,
fall to idle, silly, needless discourse, and it may be to laughter and jesting,
which I declare is as contrary to what they were before as darkness to Light;
and tell them of it, they will say, they think no harm; Well I tell you there
is harm in it you hurt your selves and others, and you lay a stumbling blok
(...) the way of the weak; you are bad ^xamples; you give occasion to them that
are without; for though they may seem to be pleased with your Company and
Co^versation they will sl^y ri^icule an^ slight you as (...) Religion and will
as I have hear some say such (...) merry as we; for all his ser^ous Principles
he will ^est, and laugh and jo^k (...) speak at large, as well as we.

These things are not of a good savor; how do you think this will answer the
End of your holy calling, which is to be the salt of the Earth, as Lights in
the World as a City set on a hill that cannot be hid. Trees of Rigteousness
bringing forth much fruit to the glory of God, fruits of self-denial, heavenly
(...) while you are on Earth, giving a manifest Testimony that you are true
(...) of the Lamb through great (...) I would (...) Christ's Words in the ^ th.
of Luke (...) you that laugh now for you shall weep and mourn; And also the
Apostles Words. Eph^sians 5 th. where he speaks of Fornication Covetousness,
Uncle (...)* and Filthiness; tel^ing them these things do not become Saints
neither foolish ^^lling, for jesting but rather giving of thanks. And consider
Christ Jesus your Captain and Savior of whom it is said he was never seen to
laugh, but had often been seen to weep.

It is to be feared some of you will harden your hear^s and put at least a
(...) slight upon this Warning and Counsel; But such shall know assuredly in a
day of distress and bitter adversity (which shall c^rtainly be their p^r^on*
that these sayings are (...) tales nor yet such little matters as some would
make them; though (...) they are far and full, and in a day o^ prosperity thy may
^ick against Reproof, and puff up their hearts in wantonness against this
tender advice.

Methinks some will be ready to say, What would have us Melancholy, Morose,
always reserved and shut up from innocent Communication? I answer no, for that
would be an extreme on the other hand: that which I am deeply concerned to
speak against, is Laughter, foolish Talking, and Jesting, and such like. And
that which I am speaking for, is Temp^rance, Sobriety and Moderation, with
watchfulness over our Words, Actions, Deportment, and behavior, at all times,
and in all places, upon all occasions; remembering the saying of our Lord Jesus
Christ* That we must give an account at the day of judgment for every idle Word
we shall speak.

I do tell you again in much assurance, that the great God of the ^pirits of
all flesh calls for mourning at your hands, and happy shall they be that answer
his Call in time.

And now I am under a necessity to remind you of the late Prophecy of that
ancient eminent and faithful Messenger and Minister of Jesus Christ, William
Edmondson, in Dublin* at thi^ half Years Meeting: The substance of which was,
That a dreadful day of distress was hastening on apace* and should surely come,
in which the Lord would dung the Ground in this and other Nations, with the
Carcasses of Men, and that the Lord would shake the fair and lofty Buildings of
many, with their pleasant things that they have delighted in. And this will
surely come to pass a^ ever it was spoken; Therefore Friends be not of an
unbelieving Heart, Of surely that Council is good to you, which the Lord by the
Prophet Amos gave to Israel, when ^e threatened them with sore Judgment, which
was on this wise: Thus will I do unto thee, O Israel and because I will do this
unto thee, ^repare to meet they God O^ Israel, Amos 4.

But my Heart mourns. Ah! I am distressed in my Soul* my bowels are pained
within me for the sake of ^^ose that will have their own ^ill* (...) go on
their old Road let the Servants of the Lord say what they wi^^ as his
Ambassadors and (...): (...) I am satisfied (...) a Rem^ant that will embrace
this Warning and Coun^el* and forsake* l^ave off and turn their backs upon
these foolish things and thankfully come and drink a bitter Cup of Condemna^ion
and Judgment for their Bypast Jests, Laughter and wantonness of speech and
behavior: And they shall come to mourn for all these things by which they
regard^^sly past away much precious (...), and are greatly behind hand in their
days work of Salvation, which is to be wrought in ^ear and trembling, Phil. 2.
verse. 1^. Not in Laughter and Jesting: and they shall mourn and ^am^nt because
of their misspent time* and they shall be diligent to redeem it, and they
shall redeem it.

And the Lord will make th^se b^a^e and honorable Men and Women in his Work
and Service* and will make them ^hine in his com^^^ss in the life of
Righteousness and self-denial (...) last ^ays shall be their best days ^he
nearer they grow to their Grave the nearer ^hey shall be to the Lord and the
cl^arer shall be their assurance by his Spirit of his eternal love to them.

Finally my Friends to whom I am writing in the bowed downness and grief of my
Spirit, I pray you, I be^seech you with beseechings, tak^ warning; take the
Council, an^ Advice of a poor Servant of the Lord; haste and come away out o^
these foolish customs and practices* and touch with them no more for ever then
shall my sorrowful Sou^ (...) in the Lord for your sakes and you shall reap the
peace and advantage of it to your poor immortal Souls* when life and time with
all these lower Comforts shall ^ail you.

So to the Light and Spirit of Truth I commit you, which will readily s^ow you
in your selves those things that are contrary to the life of Christ, and will
give you power against them i^ you be faithful to its blessed and holy
discoveries: And it will enable you to shine forth in sobriety, gravity,
humility, and temperance, in all things to the Glory of the ^verlas^ing ^od and
the promotion (...) if de^y^ng life the^ shall it be (...) with you whatever
J^^gments, (...) and M^s^ries come upon the (...) of di^obedience.

And now a few Words of Comfort to th^s^ that are bowed (...) Mour^ers i^* Zion
who are faithful to the (...), but are deeply affl^cted (...) I^mpta^^ers
Trya^s and buffettings (...) ways, which makes them to (...), they shall not
hold out to the (...). Dear Friends, I can call you (...) you are to the Lord
and (...) my Soul and I will surely show you what the Lord has shown and sealed
(...) me in the Word of life, which i^ on this wise.

That you are his Peculiar and Choice* (...), and he has a very tender (...)
you, and as you have your (...) ^im and cleave to his Spirit in (...) will
surely keep you as the Apple (...) Eye, and he will (...) suffer the devoure^
(...); and though a^ times you may be (...) tempests and deeply afflicted and
^ardly bese^ch every hand, and ^ay (...) for a time as if you were (...) of the
Lord* and you may be ready to (...) ever he will appear to your J^y and Comfort
again: And (...) it may be so that you think your Condition not to be equaled,
and are like poor David who said in his distress, after he had seen the great
deliverance of the Lord at several times, I shall one day ^^ll by the hand of
Saul. Yet the (...) of his (...) mercies gave him to see the desire of his Soul
at last and deli^ered him out of all distress* Even so will the Lord do for
you, wo^se minds are stayed upon him, and truly trust in him, and therefore let
patience have its prefect Wor^ and endeavor to be content with the dealings of
the Lord, for he knows best what is best for you: And have a great care you are
no ^^^trumental for (...) of (...) your exercise. For I know be my own
Experience, that when the Lord brings the Soul (...) the (...), which is the
Spirit of Judgment and burning, Isa. 4. then the Enemy he works to make (...)
easy and restless under the purifying Judgments of the Lord; And then if (...)
be not watchful it grows impatient* and here a cloud of Exercises and Doubtings
comes over it, and sometimes is almost brought to the Gates and ^awes of
Despair. And thus a multitude of unprofitable Afflictions has come upon some
for want of Pa^i^^ce and for want of being resigned and given up in all things
to the Will of God ^o trust their All in his ^ands, ^^ing faithful and diligent
in his Work.

Again sometimes the LORD pleased to hide his ^ace for a moment, for the
exercise ^o the Soul, according to his great Wisdom for its good* Then the
Enemy he works again (...) bring into impatience* and if he prevails, then he
labors in the next place* to set the Soul at work for it self without the LORD
to get enjoyments of its own* and kind^^ sparks of Fire, by the heat and
S^reglings of its own Spirit. And now again abundance of exercises follows upon
this, for these empty Flashes hold not ^ong; when the Soul comes to be
sensible, it lies down in sorrow, a and sometimes the LORD (...) pleased to
suffer it to dwell, as in Land of Drought for a season, and now is rea^ly to be
cast down into* great discouragements again: And all this is for want of true
patience, and a ^re^ and constant giving up of (...) will to the will of GOD
and to become as Clay in the Hand of the Potter, (...) Isa. 50. verse 10 11.

And therefore this is the word of Advice, which I tenderly give unto (...)
such, as are in deep exe^cises of A^^^ction^, upon your Souls account.

Wait often upon the LORD, not only in Meetings* but out to Meetings also, that
you may feel his Power to subject your Will^ to his Will, and in every thing to
be resigned to him dispose and dealings, and then (...) things will be made
^asie, and bitter things will be made sweet: And in the LORD's ti^^, through
many (...)* you shall come forth as ^old S^aven times (...) and your ^^^fare
shall be accomplished, and your ^niquity ^^rdo^ed, and you shall (...) for ever
in that City, where the (...) shall not say (...) the (...) that dwell the re^^
shall (...) Righteous, and the LORD shall be your everlasting Light, and their
GOD (...) Glory and (...) days of your Mourning shall be (...) Sorrow and
Sighing shall (...).

And then you Bowed down ones of many Afflictions you shall lift up your Bowed
down heads, and by living experience sing that blessed Song of Lion; That the
LORD GOD eternal has turned your Captivity as the streams of the South, and
has done great things for you, whereof you are glad, he has turned your
barren* Wilderness and desolate Desert, into an holy and heavenly Paradise,
where you Eat of the Tree of Life, and Drink of the Water of Life freely.

I can say my Heart overflows with ^^ve to* you poor afflicted Soul^e cry
where, and I do simpathize^ (...) you according to my experience, and do pray
to the LORD for you, that you ^ay have Patience, and be ^^sign^d into the hand
of the LORD, subject (...) his will in all things; and the^ ever doubt but* ^e
that has (...) Foundation, (...) his own time lay (...)* I say ^his (...) in a
^pring of pure Lo^^ to you*

From one, who (tho young in Years) have past through many deep Exercises and
have seen the wonderful deliverances of the LORD in many great Temptations* and
have as much reason as any man living to keep humble, and ^ow, and ^^^^chful,
before the LORD, all (...) of the days of my ^^^^grimage. Thomas Vpsher.
Dublin 15 th of the 3 d Month 1699.
The End.

