SOME QUERIES Sent up to his Excellency the Earl of Bellomont, by the House of
Representatives of the Province of New York the 31th July, 1770. concerning his
Excellency's Proposition to them of building a Fort for defense of the five
Nations of Indians.
1. THe absolute necessity of the building of a Fort, with the conveniences
and inconveniences thereof?

2. Then the properest place where this Fort shall be built, and the Dimension,
and of what Materials to be (...), and in how long time?

3. What the charges of the building of this Fort may amount to?

4. What number of men to garrison it, and whence obtained, and who shall
constantly defray the Charges of the said men, with all other Charges belonging
to the said Fort?

5. Who shall manage the building of the said Fort, and in whose hands the
Money shall be (...) to pay the Charge?

6 And a (...) building of the said Fort, they being in as much (...) more
danger of the French and Indians than our selves?

His Excellency's Answer to the said Queries.
1. THe necessity of building a Fort for defense of the Indians (...) from the
(...) in all the (...) since his being in (...) them therefore he (...)
staggering condition they seem at present) (...) of Necessity; since if (...)
the French will infallibly make advantage (...) 'em so as in a very short time
to debauch (...), let not the difficulty of building a Fort frighten us, the
French (...) taught us the way; their Fort of Cad^^^que is as remote from
Canada as this intended Fort can be from Albany; yet that distance did not
deter them from building the said Fort, nor has it discouraged them from (...)
with Provision of all sorts. Lastly, There is (...) makes it necessary to erect
a Fort immediately, as much in the (...) of the five Nations as may be, for the
settlement of a good Minister o^ two (...) Fort to instruct the Indians, which
can never be otherwise expected (...) be complied (...) to go and live among
the (...) and certain (...) now that Poisoning is become so common (...) taking
away the (...) Men.

2 To the second Query, it is answered, That the proper place for erecting a
(...) be the (...) of the King's Engineer; but it is supposed, it will (...)
^here in the (...) Country, not only (...) the Center of the five Nations, but
also, because a (...) built (...) the French Fort to (...), as b^ing (...) most
capable of (...) and (...) And in this (...) also it (...) proper to commit the
(...) of the five Nations, and know of them what part of the Country will be
most agreeable to them for the building a Fort, which the said Earl will do at
the (...) he is to have with them this next week at Albany. It Is (...) the said
Fort shall be made with Sod-work, well Ditch't and Pallisaded.

3. The Charge of building such a Fort as is intended, cannot reasonably be
supposed to exceed Fifteen hundred Pounds.

4. The Garrison proposed for this Fort is one hundred Men, under command of a
Captain who is to have two Lieutenants under him; the said Garrison to be duly
paid and satisfied at the Kings charge, and the said Fort (...) great Guns, six
pound. 1^.

5. The said Earl leaves the management of building the said Fort to the
Gentlemen: the House of Representatives, so far as relates to the Receipts and
Payments of the said Money.

6 It Is not practicable to make any answer to the sixth Query, because the
Neighboring Colonies are not in the power of the said Earl to induce them to a
Contribution to the charge that has been proposed, neither indeed were it safe
to delay this Undertaking so long as till our Neighbors could be ask't the
Question.


