By The Honorable John Nanfan, Esquire Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief
of His Majesty's Province of New York, and Territories depending thereon in
America, etc. A PROCLAMATION
WHereas James Gillam, a Notorious Pyrate, said to have Murdered Capt. Edgecomb
Commander of the (...) for the East India Company, in the East Indies, with his
own hands, when the said Edgecomb was asleep, has (...) himself to ^^ese parts
as a Passenger i^ Capt. Kids Ship. And whereas English Smith and Humphery Clay,
two of the Crew belonging to the said Capt. Kid, are supposed to (...) within
this Province, (...) of the Law. I do therefore hereby, by and with the Advice
and consent of his Majesty's Council for this Province, Require and Command all
and every his Majesty's Justices of the Peace, and other Offic^rs Civil and
(...) other Persons whatsoever within my Government, to seize, secure and
apprehend them the said James Gillam, English Smith and Humphery Clay and bring
them before my self and his Majesty's Council for this Province. And that such
Notorious (...) may not go unpunished, I do hereby, by and with the Advice
aforesaid, promise a Reward of Thirty Pounds to such Person or Persons who
shall seize, secure and apprehend the said Gillam, and bring him before my self
and Council. And a Reward to (...) Person or Persons who shall (...) and
apprehend the said Smith or Clay, and bring them before my Self and Council,
the Sum (...) Ten Pounds for each. And I do hereby, by and with the Advice
aforesaid, strictly Require and Command all and every Person and Persons
whatsoever not to entertain, harbor, comfort, conceal, convey away, or assist
in the C^nveyance away of them the said James Gillam, English Smith or Humphery
Clay, or any of them, on Penalty of being prosecuted with the utmost Severities
of Law.

Given at Fort William Henry in New York the 29 th Day of August, 1699. and in
the Eleventh Year of his Majesty's Reign. John Nanfan.
By Order, B. Cosens, Cl. Concilij.

God Save the KING.
(...) Excellent Majesty in New York, 1699.


