Things that Young People Should Think upon. OR, The DEATH of Young PEOPLE
Improved, In some Lively ADMONITIONS to the Living.

WITH CONSOLATIONS, to the Bereaved Parents of such Young People, as are by an
Early, (and perhaps a Sudden) DEATH, taken from them

On JOB 1.19. The YOUNG MEN, -- are Dead.

Haec, ut quivimus, et ut nostri ingenioli
Vires far potuerunt, Locuti sumus.
Hieron. in Zech. Boston, in N. E. Printed by B Green, and J. Allen: Sold at
the Printing House, at the South End of the Town. 1700.

IT IS well known, to all that know the ancient Laws of the only People, which
the God of Heaven then had on Earth, That the Lord by His Laws required His
People, to offer their First Fruits unto Him. Yea, The First Sons of men that
ever were Born into the World, actually and practically acknowledged their
Obligations to offer their First Fruits unto the Lord. And the Pagans
themselves found the Tradition, of paying their First Fruits unto the Lord, so
agreeable unto the Light of Nature in them, that even among the Pagans also, it
was a Note of the Highest Profanity, for any to Refuse the payment thereof.
Yea, a famous Writer among them writes of a People so Irreligious and
Atheistical, that God had not their First Fruits, which, he says, Were by a
Sudden Desolation so strangely destroyed, that there were no Remainders, either
of the Persons, or of their Houses, Left.

It is Observed, That a dreadful Desolation is in a thousand ways continually
carrying off the Young men of this Country; And it may be concluded, That the
moral cause of this woeful Desolation is, because our Young People do no more
offer their First Fruits unto the Lord.

The obscure Author of the Short Sermon, here Exposed, was willing to bespeak
the First Fruits of Piety in the Young People of his Flock, for their Glorious
Lord; and he made some fresh and sad Instances of Desolation among them* to be
the Occasion, and the Argument of his Doing it. A Speech once made by a General
from a Tomb Stone, was once vainly counted Ominous. Hea(...)n can make a Speech
made, as it were, from a Grave (...)one, Acceptable and Serviceable. They that
Fear God, and Love Christ, will not ill resent this Action (...)f the unworthy
Author; and for him to be Reviled by Others, will be a greater Honor than he
is worthy of.

Give him leave instead of his Name, to Subscribe the (...)etters, which
Ernestus put under his Lamp.

S. A. C. M.

Things that Young People should Think upon. OR, The Death of YOUNG PEOPLE made
Useful to the LIVING.
Boston, 24 d. 1 m. 1700. Three Young men of the Neighborhood, being Drowned,
from a Canooe, on the Tuesday before.
Job I.19. The YOUNG MEN -- are Dead.


IT is a thing very sensible unto all who are not utterly void of all Sense*
That an Horrible Tempest has been with a Long and (...) Strong Force horribly
beating upon(...) (...) And among the Objects which the Tempest (...) fallen
with most Fury upon* there are none (...) have Suffered more observably and
more (...)plorably, both by Sea and Land, than the (...) Men of our Land. If it
were a special Article in the Afflictions of Job, That the Young Men in his
Family were cut off, with an Untimely Death: Alas, how many, how many of our
poor Families are in like sort Afflicted, by Deadly Strokes, carrying off our
Young men before their Time! The Sons of Job, were suddenly Snatched out of the
World. If they had their Life among the Unclean, as Elihu seems to fear they
had, it was none of their pious Fathers Fault; They had a Father full of
Prayer, and Care, and Fear, concerning them, lest they should Bid Farewell to
the Fear of God: And there is ground for Hope, that they might be such as were
not Lost, when they were Dead. Nevertheless they Died in Youth; and their Death
was attended with some very Tragical Circumstances. We often have a Report
brought unto us, concerning our Sons, The Young men are Dead. Three Young men
went well out of their Fathers Houses, one morning the last Week: and before
the next Evening, the Report was brought, The Young men are Dead. And it is not
long since other Young men, have in the very same way, come to the same
Untime(...) End The Report has been brought many and (...) a Time unto us from
abroad concerning the (...) men of our Acquaintance that from hence (...)
abroad, The Young Men are Dead. Many (...) Neighbors have their Sons and their
(...) absent from them; and that which (...) their Absence the more uneasy is,
the Dread of having that Report shortly brought unto us, The Young men are
Dead. Such a Report was brought unto Job, and after many and bitter and heavy
Afflictions the bringing of this Report unto him, was the Last and the Height
of all, until painful and pining Sickness at length arrested also the Body, of
that Holy man. The Remark which we have now to make is,

That as All Men must Die, so Young men may Die.

Persons may be liable to the Stroke of Death, even in the Time of Youth. It Is
observed by the Learned Amyraut, That the Saints of old, thought that God sent
them into the World for two ends; the one, to advance His Glory as much as they
were able; the other, to Enjoy therein the Testimonies of His Favor, in
Temporal Blessings for a course of years, which is the Ordinary Term of Life:
Death before the Full Age of a man, they therefore deprecated, as among the
Testimonies of the Divine Anger; as if a Young Plant should complain to the
Gardener,, for cutting it off at the Root, when it is just beginning to Bud.
Nevertheless we see it every day come to pass, that Plants of all Ages are Cut
down by the Knife of Death. What one says of the Grammarian, may be said of
every Child of Adam, That being able to Decline all other Nouns in every Case,
he can Decline Death in no Case at all. All Ages from a sad Experience have
given us a full Demonstration of it; That persons are Seized by Death at all
Ages. Young men Die as well as Old men; yea, more Die while Young men, than ever
come to be Old men. We say, There are Skins of all Ages in the Market, and
Skulls of all sizes in Golgotha. Yea, more Die before Thirty, than after Sixty.
And that which puts a doleful Accent on this Remark is, That Young men may Die
very Suddenly; and as Job speaks, and as Jobs did, In a moment they go down to
the Grave. Death does not always make a slow Dispatch, by some Disease, upon
Young men; it sometimes Dispatches them with a sudden Violence. The Thunder,
and the Whirlwind, that overwhelmed the Sons of Job, is not more sudden in its
violence. There are numberless Accidents, by which the Angels of Death, do
their Excution at once, when they have a Commission to take Young men into
their Hands. Drowning is one of those Accidents, than which there is none more
frequent; Thus is the Lamp of Young men put out! It is at once plunged into the
Water, and in less than three minutes perhaps it is put out. Before Clock work
was advanced, the best Instrument for measuring of Time known in the English
Nation, was that poor one of K. Alfred, The Burning of a Candle marked into
twelve parts. If such an Instrument ought new to be allowed for a Resemblance
of Humane Life, we must say upon it, Alas, How often is a Candle blown out
before the Six hours of the Twelve are spent! Young men may be Well and Gone,
in half an Hours Time. In the Forenoon Young men may think themselves likely to
Live yet some scores of years; In the Afternoon something befalls them,
whereupon the Report shall come, The Young men are Dead.

The Thing which we are now to Endeavor, is, to make some Agreeable and
Profitable Improvement of this plain Remark.

Since our Young men, are so many of them Dead, and so Suddenly, and so Awfully
Dead, what Improvement should the Living make of their Untimely Death?

Let our Improvement Ly in these points of Christianity.

I. Are the Young men Dead? Let All People, and especially let Young People,
seriously Lay to Heart, the Death of so many Young People among us, and the
surprising, the amazing manner of their Death. It was threatened, in Psalm. 28 5.
Because they regard not the Works of the Lord, He shall destroy them. Young
People, would you not be Destroyed! Then seriously Regard those Works of the
Lord, by which He has already Destroyed so many of you. Very lamentable was
the Condition of that people, concerning whom the Lord said, in Isa. 9.17. The
Lor(...) shall have no Joy, in their Young men. Alas, My Neighbors; We may
Lament this as our own Condition; In the Deaths which carry off so many of our
Young men, we may read this Thing written, with Dismal and with Direful
Characters of Blood, The Lord has much Wrath against their Young men. The Wrath
of God has been Burning like a Formidable Fire against our Land; Our Stupidity
is paenal and fatal, and the worst part of that Wrath, if we are insensible of
it. Now a very sore Ingredient of our Calamities under it, has been that, in
Psalm. 78.63. The Fire consumed their Young men. The Deaths of our Young men
have been inflicted at such a rate, that we may cry out with the Prophet; The
Curse has devoured our Land, and few desirable Young men are left.

I know not well, how to give Orderly Relation of the Confusion, into which our
Young People have been daily falling for many years together. But give me leave
to take the words of that Prophet, whom they call, The Weeping Prophet, and [
Where are you, O Tears, when we speak of such a matter!] Say, I am full of the
Great Wrath of the Lord, and I will tell you, how it has been poured on the
Assembly of our Young men together.

First, By the Sword of an Extended and Prolonged War, Our Young men are Dead:
they were brought forth, and brought up, for the Murderer. The Almighty and
provoked God, pass,d upon us that Sentence, in Jer. 18.21. Let their Young men
be Slain by the Sword. And accordingly, our Young men were for many years
together, Pressed into the Wars; but the Pressing of them was but Numbering
(...) for the Slaughter. What were the Enemies, that for many years together
vexed us, but those, of whom we might say, and sigh, The Lord has called an
Assembly against me, to Crush my Young men. But then, Our Young People
terrified by the Hardships Ashore, have gone to Do Business on the Great
Waters; and the Storms of the Divine Displeasure have so pursued them there
also, that more of our Young men are Dead. It has been with our Young People,
as it was with Zidons, in Isa. 23.4. The Sea has spoken, I do not nourish up
young men. Wonderful Shipwrecks have sunk Multitudes, Multitudes of our Young
men, into the deep Valley of Destruction: God has cast them into the Place of
Silence, and the Waters have compassed them about, they have gone down to the
Bottom of the Mountains, the Bars of the Pit have been about them for ever. And
of those that have Escaped Shipwrecks, how many, [ God knows!] how many have
Sailed unto their Long Home at the Ports where they have arrived; and so come
short Home? Themistius Elegantly compares the Death of Old men, to going out of
an Inn, the Death of Young men to a Shipwreck; alas, how often does it happen
unto us every year, by a Literal Shipwreck? The Sea has been the Snare of our
Young men: and a Snare of Death. For this invites us to Reflect upon a Third
Way of Dying, wherein our Young men are Dead. Not only Contageous and
Epidemical Distempers have been raging in our own Towns, whereby our Young
People, have been chiefly preyed upon; but our Young People have gone into
Frigates, and gone unto Islands, that have been so many Post-Houses, for their
Sickliness. We are from thence often informed, as in Jer. 9.21. Death has cut
off the young men from the Streets, and from the Ships: and for that cause,
there are many Mourners in our Streets. But in fine, lest here should not be
Deaths enough, to take off our young men, behold, how many Casualties, do ever
now and then, produce this Report among our Neighbors, The Young men are Dead!
Ever now and then, our Young men are Drowned, perhaps by Two or Three at a
Time, or by Falls, or Shot, or some other Quick Mischief, they are hurried away
into the Land of Darkness. Now when two Young men were killed with a Sudden
Death, in Israel, it was Enjoined, in Lev. 10.6. Let the whole House of Israel
bewayl it. Even so, since there have been so many Young men, detached from us
by a Sudden Death* I must call upon you all, to Bewayl it before the Lord.

II. Are the Young men Dead? Let All People, especially let Young People,
consider, How Soon, [they know not, How Soon!] the Time of their Death may
overtake them. The Death of Young men, has a Voice to All men; especially if it
be a Sudden Death, it is then a Speaking Death: And the language of it, is that
in Pro. 27.1. Boast not thy self of To morrow, for thou know not, what a Day
may bring forth. Syrs, the Sudden Death of young men, does naturally Lead us to
this Consideration; That ordinarily there is not any man, who does on any Day
infallibly know what shall on that very Day befall him. [ Nescis quid serus
vesper vebat.] Where is the man, that when he Rises in a morning, may presume
to say I shall Out live this Day, or, This Day shall not be my Last! It was
said by the Wise man, (and every Wise man will often think of it!) in Eccl
9.12. Man knows not his Time; as the Fishes are taken in an Evil Net, and as
the Birds that are caught in the Snare, so are the Sons of men snared in an
Evil Time, when it falls suddenly upon them. Time here means, the Changes
that are in Time to come upon us. It Is ordinarily so; The most knowing of
Mortals, may every Day say, I don't know what Changes are this Day to come upon
me. The Nets, the Snares, of Disasters are, for ought we know continually
Spread for us: and silly Creatures that we are, we know not when we shall fall
into them. No Day does ordinarily arrive to any man, but for ought he knows,
That very Day may bring forth his Death unto him. He was an Old man, that said,
in Genesis 27 2. I know not the Day of my Death. But show me the Young man that
must not say so too. O that all men, and peculiarly Young men would after this
Day, Live every Day, in some sort as if it might prove their Last. It Is
oftentimes the portion of Wicked men to Die suddenly. Little did the Inhabitants
of the four Criminal Cities, Know what a Day would bring forth, when they were
at Sun rise in the midst of their Debaucheries, but before Sun set the
Vengeance of Eternal Fire took hold upon them. Little did the Philistines know
what a Day would bring forth, when they were in the midst of their profane
Sport, but they were immediately Crushed unto Death, by the fall of an House
about their Ears. Little did the Assyrians know what a Day would bring forth,
when they were full of Merry and Jolly Expectations overnight, but were by the
next morning made Lifeless carcases by the irresistible Thunder of God. Little
did Ananias and Sapphira know what a Day would bring forth, when they came into
the Congregation in perfect Health; but were carried Home Dead; they Died upon
the Spot. Oftentimes it is the Portion of Godly men also to Die Suddenly Little
did the People that were Sacrificing at the Temple, Know what a day would bring
forth, when they were going to shed the Blood of their Sacrifices, but had
their own Blood shed with that of their Sacrifices. Little did the honest
Folks, that were waiting under the Tower of Siloam, know what a Day would bring
forth, one minute before the Tower fell upon them. Little did Uzzah know what a
Day would bring forth, when he laid his Hand upon the Ark. Little did the
Prophet sent unto Jeroboam, know what a day would bring forth, when a Lion was
waiting to devour him. In short, as Died an Ahab, so Died a Josiah. Yea, and
Young men, may Die Suddenly as well as other men. It was a true Speech of
Aquinas, An old man has Death just before his Face, but a Young man has Death
just behind his Back. Death may Smite a Young man, as soon as an Old man. And
the same uncertainty, that men every Morning have about what may befall
themselves in their Death before the Evening, the same they have about the
other Calamitous Changes that may befall them, and about the Calamities that
may befall any others that belong unto them. One that, has an Husband or a
Father in the Morning, does not know but this Day may make them, a Widow and an
Orphan. A Job has his Children about him, in the Morning, and he did not know,
that before Night his Children should be his no more. In such Ignorance, does
the All wise God, keep the Children of men concerning their own futurities. By
this Ignorance we are the better kept in a Filial Faith, on the Fatherly Care
of that God, in whose Hands are our Times. It Is indeed the only Ignorance that
is the Mother of Devotion. I will use upon it, the Expressive words of the
Learned Heinsius, Non quaedam ignorare tantum, sed et ignorare quaedam velle,
Humilitatis C^ristianae partem non Exiguam Existimamus. It Is a part of a Good
Christian, to Affect such an Ignorance. And as it is a Judgment upon Wicked
men, that they must not know aforehand, what is to befall them, or, when it
shall befall them: For hereby, as the Psalmist speaks, in Psalm. 73.13. How are
they brought into Desolation as in a moment? So, it is a Favor unto Godly men.
If they knew what a Day would bring forth such a knowledge would but make
Sorrow for every Day. It would utterly take away the Comfort we take in any
thing under the Sun, if we knew aforehand, When and How we are to take our
leave of that Comfort. As the man of God Wept, when he beheld Hazael in 2 King.
8.12. Because (as he said) I know the Evil that thou will do: Thus if a man
knew the Evil that is anon to befall himself or his house, he would so fall a
Weeping at it, that he would be able to Taste no sweetness in the Gifts of God
unto him. Consider, O my Young people, consider; You know not what may Suddenly
come upon any of you.

III. Are the Young men Dead? Then let Young men prepare for Death, and by an
Early Conversion begin immediately to Live unto God. It is very certain, [ The
Mouth of the Lord has spoken it!] That for to Die Unconverted, is to Die
Miserable. Be not Deceived, my Young Folks; To go out of the World, without
Conversion, is to go into Confusion world without end. Endless and Easeless
Destruction

(...)
