THE CHARTER Granted by Their Majesty's King WILLIAM AND Queen MARY, To the
INHABITANTS Of the PROVINCE OF THE Massachusetts Bay IN New England.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND.

Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, (Printers to His Excellency the
GOVERNOR and COUNCIL,) for, and Sold by Michael Perry, and Benjamin Eliot.
1699.

The CHARTER granted by Their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary, etc.
WILLIAM and MARY, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France, and
Ireland, King and Queen, Defenders of the Faith, etc. To all to whom these
Presents shall come Greeting. Whereas his late Majesty King James the First,
Our Royal Predecessor, by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England,
bearing Date at Westminster the Third day of November, in the Eighteenth Year
of his Reign, did give and grant unto the Council Established at Plymouth in
the County of Devon, for the Planting, Ruling, Ordering and Governing of
New England in America, and to their Successors and Assigns, all that part of
America lying and being in breadth from forty Degrees of Northerly Latitude
from the Equinoctial Line to the forty eighth Degree of the said Northerly
Latitude, inclusively, and in length of and within all the Breadth aforesaid
throughout all the main Lands, from Sea to Sea, together also with all the firm
Lands, Soils, Grounds, Havens, Ports, Rivers, Waters, Fishings, Mines and
Minerals, as well Royal Mines of Gold and Silver, as other Mines and Minerals,
Precious Stones, Quarries, and all and singular other Commodities,
Jurisdictions, Royalties, Privileges, Franchises and Preheminences, both
within the said Tract of Land upon the Main, and also within the Islands and
Seas adjoining: Provided always that the said Lands, Islands, or any the
Premises by the said Letters Patents intended and meant to be granted, were not
then actually possessed or inhabited by any other Christian Prince or State, or
within the Bounds, Limits or Territories of the Southern Colony, then before
granted by the said late King James the first, to be planted by diverse of his
Subjects in the South parts: To have and to hold, possess and enjoy, all and
singular the aforesaid Continent Lands, Territories, Islands, Hereditaments and
Precincts, Seas, Waters, Fishings; withal and all manner of their Commodities,
Royalties, Liberties, Preheminencies and Profits that should from thenceforth
arise from thence, with all and singular their Appurtenances and every part and
parcel thereof, unto the said Council, and their Successors and Assigns for
ever, to the sole and proper Use and Benefit of the said Council, and their
Successors and Assigns for ever: To beholden of his said late Majesty King
James the first, his Heirs and Successors, as of his Manor of East Greenwich
in the County of Kent, in free and Common Sockage, and not in Capite, nor by
Knights Service: Yielding and Paying therefore to the said late King, his Heirs
and Successors, the fifth part of the Oar of Gold and Silver, which should from
time to time, and at all times then after happen to be found, gotten, had and
obtained, in, at, or within any of the said Lands, Limits, Territories or
Precincts, or in, or within any part or parcel thereof, for or in respect of
all and all manner of Duties, Demands and Services whatsoever, to be done, made
or paid to the said late King James the first, his Heirs and Successors (as in
and by the said Letters Patents, amongst sundry other Clauses, Powers,
Privileges and Grants therein contained, more at large appears:) and whereas
the said Council Established at Plymouth in the County of Devon, for the
Planting, Ruling, Ordering and Governing of New England in America, did by
their Deed indented under their Common Seal, bearing date the Nineteenth Day of
March, in the Third Year of the Reign of Our Royal Grandfather King Charles the
First, of ever Blessed Memory, Give, Grant, Bargain, Sell, Infeoff, Alien and
Confirm to Sir Henry Roswell, Sir John Young, Knights, Thomas Southcott, John
Humphreys, John Endicott and Symond Whetcombe, their Heirs and Assigns, and
their Associates, for ever, all that part of New England in America aforesaid,
which lies and extends between a great River-there, commonly called Monomack
alias Merimack, and a certain other River there called Charles River, being in
a bottom of a certain Bay there commonly called Massachusetts, alias (...),
alias Massatusetts Bay, and also all and singular those Lands and Hereditaments
whatsoever, lying within the space of three English Miles, on the (...) part of
the said Charles River, or of any and every Part thereof; and also all and
singular the Lands and Hereditaments whatsoever, lying and being within the
space of three English Miles to the Southward of the southermost part of the
said Bay called Massachusetts, alias Mattachusetts, alias Massatusets-Bay; and
also all those Lands and Hereditaments whatsoever which lie and be within the
space of three English Miles to the Northward of the said River called Monomack
alias Merimack, or to the Northward of any and every part thereof, and all
Lands and Hereditaments whatsoever lying within the Limits aforesaid, North and
South in Latitude, and in Breadth, and in Length, and Longitude, of and within
all the breadth aforesaid throughout the Main Lands there, from the Atlantic
and Western Sea and Ocean on the East part to the South Sea on the West part,
and all Lands and Grounds, Place and Places, Soil, Woods and Wood grounds,
Havens, Ports, Rivers, Waters, Fishings and Hereditaments whatsoever, lying
within the said bounds and limits, and every part and parcel thereof; and also
all Islands lying in America aforesaid, in the said Seas, or either of them on
the Western or Eastern Coasts or parts of the said Tracts of Land, by the said
Indenture mentioned to be given and granted, bargained, sold, enfeoffed,
alien'd and confirmed, or any of them; and also all Mines and Minerals, as well
Royal Mines of Gold and Silver as other Mines and Minerals whatsoever in the
said Lands and Premises, or any part thereof, and all Jurisdictions, Rights,
Royalties, Liberties, Freedoms, Immunities, Privileges, Franchises,
Preheminencies and Commodities whatsoever, which they the said Council
Established at Plymouth in the County of Devon, for the Planning, Ruling,
Ordering and Governing of New England in America, then had, or might use,
exercise or enjoy, in or within the said Lands or Premises, by the same
Indenture mentioned to be given, granted, bargained, sold, enfeoffed and
confirmed, in or within any part or parcel thereof: To have and to hold the
said part of New England in America, which lies and extends, and is abutted as
aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof; and all the said Islands, Rivers,
Ports, Havens, Waters, Fishings, Mines, Minerals, Jurisdictions, Franchises,
Royalties, Liberties, Privileges, Commodities, Hereditaments and Premises
whatsoever, with the Appurtenances, unto the said Sir Henry Roswell, Sir John
Young, Thomas Southcott, John Humphreys, John Endicott and Simond Whetcombe,
their Heirs and Assigns, and their Associates for ever, to the only proper and
absolute use and behoof of the said Sir Henry Roswell, Sir John Young, Thomas
Southcott, John Humphreys, John Endicott and Symond Whetcombe, their Heirs and
Assigns and their Associates for evermore: To be holden of our said Royal
Grandfather King Charles the First, his Heirs and Successors, as of his Manor
of East-Greenwich in the County of Kent, in free and common Sockage, and not in
Capite nor by Knights Service, yielding and paying therefore unto our said
Royal Grandfather, his Heirs and Successors, the fifth part of the Oar of Gold
and Silver which should from time to time, and at all times hereafter happen to
be found, gotten, had and obtained in any of the said Lands, within the said
Limits, or in or within any part thereof, for and in satisfaction of all manner
of Duties, Demands and Services whatsoever, to be done, made or paid to Our
said Royal Grandfather, his Heirs or Successors (as in and by the said recited
Indenture may more at large appear.) And Whereas Our said Royal Grandfather in
and by his Letters Patents under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at
Westminster the fourth day of March, in the fourth Year of his Reign, for the
Consideration therein mentioned, did grant and confirm unto the said Sir Henry
Roswell, Sir John Young, Thomas Southcott, John Humphreys, John Endicott and
Symond Whetcombe, and to their Associates after named, viz Sir Ralph
Saltenstall Knight, Isaac Johnson, Samuel Aldersey John Ven, Matthew Craddock,
George Harwood, Increase Nowell, Richard Perry, Richard Bellingham, Nathanael
Wright, Samuel Vassal, Theophilus Eaton, Thomas Golfe, Thomas Adams, John
Brown, Samuel Brown, Thomas Hutchins, William Vassal, William Pincheon and
George Foxcroft, their Heirs and Assigns, all the said part of New England in
America, lying and extending between the Bounds and Limits in the said
Indenture expressed, and all Lands and Grounds, Place and Places, Soils, Woods
and Wood grounds, Havens, Ports, Rivers, Waters, Mines, Minerals,
Jurisdictions, Rights, Royalties, Liberties, Freedoms, Immunities, Privileges,
Franchises, Preheminencies and Hereditaments whatsoever; bargained, sold,
enfeoffed and confirmed, or mentioned or intended to be given, granted,
bargained, sold, enfeoffed, aliened and confirmed to them the said Sir Henry
Roswell, Sir John Young, Thomas Southcott, John Humphreys, John Endicott and
Symond Whetcombe, their Heirs and Assigns, and to their Associates for ever, by
the said recited Indenture: To have and to hold the said part of New England in
America, and other the Premises thereby mentioned to be granted and confirmed,
and every part and parcel thereof, with the appurtenances, to the said Sir
Henry Roswell, Sir John Young, Sir Richard Saltenstall, Thomas Southcott, John
Humphrys, John Endicott, Symond Whetcombe, Isaac Johnson, Samuel Aldersey, John
Ven, Matthew Craddock, George Harwood, Increase Nowell, Richard Perry, Richard
Bellingham, Nathaniel Wright, Samuel Vassal, Theophilus Eaton, Thomas Golfe,
Thomas Adams, John Brown, Samuel Brown, Thomas Hutchins, William Vassal,
William Pincheon and George Foxcroft, their Heirs and Assigns for ever, to
their only proper and absolute use and behoof for evermore: To be holden of our
said Royal Grandfather, his Heirs and Successors, as of his Manor of
East-Greenwich aforesaid, in free and common Sockage, and not in Capite nor by
Knights Service; and also yielding and paying therefore to Our said Royal
Grandfather, his Heirs and Successors, the fifth part only of all the Oar of
Gold and Silver which from time to time, and at all times after should be there
gotten, had or obtained, for all Services, Exactions and Demands whatsoever,
according to the Tenor and Reservation in the said recited Indenture expressed.
And further, Our said Royal Grandfather by the said Letters Patents did give
and grant unto the said Sir Henry Roswell, Sir John Young, Sir Richard
Saltenstall, Thomas Southcott, John Humphreys, John Endicott, Symond Whetcomb,
Isaac Johnson, Samuel Aldersey, John Ven, Matthew Craddock, George Harwood,
Increase Nowell, Richard Perry, Richard Bellingham, Nathanael Wright, Samuel
Vassal, William Pincheon and George Foxcroft, their Heirs and Assigns, all
that said part of New England in America, which lies and extends between a
great River there, commonly called Monomack, alias Merimack River, and a
certain other River there called Charles River, being in the bottom of a
certain Bay there commonly called Massachusetts, alias Mattachusetts, alias
Massatusetts Bay; and also all and singular those Lands and Hereditaments
whatsoever, lying within the space of three English Miles, on the South part of
the said River called Charles River, or of any or every part thereof; and also
all and singular the Lands and Hereditaments whatsoever, lying and being within
the space of three English Miles to the Southward of the southermost part of
the said Bay called Massachusetts alias Mattachusetts, alias Massatusets Bay;
and also all those Lands and Hereditaments whatsoever which lie and be within
the space of three English Miles to the Northward of the said River called
Monomack alias Merimack, or to the Northward of any and every part thereof, and
all Lands and Hereditaments whatsoever lying within the Limits aforesaid, North
and South in Latitude, and in Breadth, and in Length and Longitude, of and
within all the breadth aforesaid throughout the Main Lands there, from the
Atlantic or Western Sea and Ocean on the East part, to the South Sea on the
West part; and all Lands, Grounds, Place and Places, Soils, Woods and
Wood-lands, Havens, Ports, Rivers, Waters and Hereditaments whatsoever, lying
within the said Bounds and Limits, and every part and parcel thereof; and also
all Islands in America aforesaid, in the said Seas, or either of them on the
Western or Eastern Coasts or Parts of the said Tracts of Lands, thereby
mentioned to be given and granted, or any of them; and all Mines and Minerals,
as well Royal Mines of Gold and Silver as other Mines and Minerals whatsoever
in the said Lands and Premises, or any part thereof; and free Liberty of
Fishing in or within any of the Rivers or Waters within the bounds and limits
aforesaid, and the Seas thereunto adjoining; and all Fishes, Royal Fishes,
Whales, Balene, Sturgeon, and other Fishes of what kind or Nature soever, that
should at any time thereafter be taken in or within the said Seas or Waters, or
any of them, by the said Sir Henry Roswell, Sir John Young, Sir Richard
Saltenstall, Thomas Southcott, John Humphreys, John Endicott, Symond Whetcombs,
Isaac Johnson, Samuel Aldersey* John Ven, Matthew Craddock, George Harwood,
Increase Nowell, Richard Perry, Richard Bellingham, Nathaniel Wright, Samuel
Vassal, Theophilus Eaton, Thomas Golfe, Thomas Adams, John Brown, Samuel
Brown, Thomas Hutchins, William Vassal, William Pincheon and George Foxcroft,
their Heirs or Assigns, or by any other Person or Persons whatsoever there
inhabiting, by them or any of them to be appointed to Fish therein. Provided
always, that if the said Lands, Islands, or any the Premises before mentioned,
and by the said Letters Patents last mentioned, intended and meant to be
granted, were at the time of the granting of the said former Letters Patents,
Dated the third day of November, in the Eighteenth Year of the Reign of his
late Majesty King James the First, actually possessed or inhabited by any other
Christian Prince or State, or were within the Bounds, Limits or Territories of
the said Southern Colony then before granted by the said King, to be Planted by
diverse of his loving Subjects in the South parts of America, That then the said
Grant of our said Royal Grandfather should not extend to any such parts or
parcels thereof so formerly inhabited, or lying within the bounds of the
Southern Plantation as aforesaid. But as to those Parts or Parcels so possessed
or inhabited by any such Christian Prince or State, or being within the
boundaries aforesaid, should be utterly void: To have and to hold, possess and
enjoy the said parts of New England in America, which lie, extend, and are
abutted as aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof; and all the Islands,
Rivers, Ports, Havens, Waters, Fishings, Fishes, Mines, Minerals,
Jurisdictions, Franchises, Royalties, Liberties, Privileges, Commodities and
Premises whatsoever, with the Appurtenances, unto the said Sir Henry Roswell,
Sir John Young, Sir Richard Saltenstall, Thomas Southcott, John Humphreys, John
Endicott, Symond Whetcombe, Isaac Johnson, Samuel Aldersey, John Ven, Matthew
Craddock, George Harwood, Increase Nowell, Richard Perry, Richard Bellingham
Nathaniel Wright, Samuel Vassal, Theophilus Eaton, Thomas Golfe, Thomas Adams,
John Brown, Samuel Brown, Thomas Hutchins, William Vassal, William Pincheon
and George Foxcroft, their Heirs and Assigns, for ever: To the only proper and
absolute use and behoof of the said Sir Henry Roswell, Sir John Young, Sir
Richard Saltenstall, Thomas Southcott, John Humphreys, John Endicott, Symond
Whetcombe, Isaac Johnson, Samuel Aldersey, John Ven, Matthew Craddock, George
Harwood, Increase Nowell, Richard Perry, Richard Bellingham, Nathaniel Wright,
Samuel Vassal, Theophilus Eaton, Thomas Golfe, Thomas Adams, John Brown,
Samuel Brown, Thomas Hutchins, William Vassal, William Pencheon and George
Foxcroft, their Heirs and Assigns for evermore: To be holden of Our said Royal
Grandfather, his Heirs and Successors, as of his Manor of East-Greenwich in
the County of Kent, within the Realm of England, in free and common Sockage,
and not in Capite nor by Knights Service: And also yielding and paying
therefore to Our said Royal Grandfather, his Heirs and Successors, the fifth
part only of all the Oar of Gold and Silver which from time to time, and at all
times hereafter, should be gotten, had or obtained for all Services, Exactions
and Demands whatsoever. Provided always, and his Majesty's express Will and
meaning was, that only one fifth part of all the Gold and Silver Oar above
mentioned in the whole, and no more should be answered, reserved or payable
unto our said Royal Grandfather, his Heirs and Successors, by Color or Virtue
of the said last mentioned Letters Patents, the double Reservations or Recitals
aforesaid, any thing therein contained notwithstanding. And to the end that the
Affairs and Business which from time to time should happen and arise concerning
the said Lands, and the Plantations of the same, might be the better Managed
and Ordered, and for the good Government thereof, our said Royal Grandfather
King Charles the First, did by his said Letters Patents Create and make the
said Sir Henry Roswell, Sir John Young, Sir Richard Saltenstal, Thomas
Southcott, John Humphreys, John Endicott, Symond Whetcombe, Isaac Johnson,
Samuel Aldersey, John Ven, Matthew Craddock, George Harwood, Increase Nowell,
Richard Perry, Richard Bellingham, Nathanael Wright, Samuel Vassal and
Theophilus Eaton, Thomas Golfe Thomas Adams, John Brown, Samuel Brown, Thomas
Hutchins, William Vassal, William Pincheon and George Foxcroft, and all such
others as should thereafter be admitted and made free of the Company and
Society therein after mentioned, one Body Corporate and Politic in Fact and
Name, by the Name of the Governor and Company of the Massachusetts Bay in New
England and did grant unto them and their Successors diverse. Powers, Liberties
and Privileges, as in and by the said Letters Patents may more fully and at
large appear. And Whereas the said Governor and Company of the
Massachusetts Bay in New England, by Virtue of the aid Letters Patents did
settle a Colony of the English in the said parts of America, and diverse good
Subjects of this Kingdom encouraged and invited by the said Letters Patents,
did Transport themselves and their Effects into the same, whereby the said
Plantation did become very populous, and diverse Counties, Towns and Places,
were Created, Erected, made and set forth, or designed within the said parts of
America, by the said Governor and Company for the time being: And Whereas in
the Term of the Holy Trinity, in the thirty sixth Year of the Reign of our
Dearest Uncle King Charles the Second, a Judgment was given in Our Court of
Chancery then sitting at Westminster, The first Charter vacated by a Judgment
in Chancery, Anno 1684
upon a Writ of Scire facias, brought and prosecuted in the said Court against
the Governor and Company of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, that the
said Letters Patents of our said Royal Grandfather King Charles the First,
bearing date at Westminster the 4 th day of March, in the fourth Year of his
Reign, made and granted to the said Governor and Company of the Massachusetts
Bay in New England, and the Enrollment of the same, should be cancelled,
vacated and annihilated, and should be brought into the said Court to be
cancelled, (as in and by the said Judgment remaining upon Record in the said
Court does more at large appear:) And whereas several Persons employed as
Agents in behalf of our said Colony of the Massachusetts Bay in New England,
have made their humble Application unto us, That we would be graciously pleased
by our Royal Charter to Incorporate our Subjects in our said Colony, and to
grant and confirm unto them such powers, The Agents of that Colony Petitioned
to be reincorporated as formerly.
privileges and Franchizes as in our Royal Wisdom should be thought most
Conducing to our Interest and Service, and to the Welfare and happy State of
our Subjects in New England: And We being graciously pleased to gratify our
said Subjects, and also to the end our good Subjects within our Colony of New
Plymouth in New England aforesaid, may be brought under such a form of
Government, as may put them in a better Condition of Defense, and considering
as well the Granting unto them as unto our Subjects in the said Colony of the
Massachusetts Bay our Royal Charter, with reasonable Powers and Privileges,
will much tend not only to the safety, out to the flourishing Estate of our
Subjects in the said parts of New England, and also to the advancing of the
Ends for which the said Plantations were at first Encouraged; Of our Special
Grace, certain Knowledge, and mere Motion, have Willed and Ordained, and We do
by these presents for us, our Heirs and Successors Will and Ordain, That the
Territories and Colonies commonly called or known by the Names of the Colony of
the Massachusetts Bay, and Colony of New Plymouth, the Province of Main, the
Territory called Accada, or Nova Scotia; and all that Tract of Land lying
between the said Territories of Nova Scotia, and the said Province of Main, be
Erected, united and Incorporated: The Massachusetts, Plymouth, and the Province
of Main, Nova Scotia, united and made one Province.
And we do by these presents unite, Erect and Incorporate the same into one
Real Province by the Name of Our Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New
England, and of our Especial Grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, we have
given and granted, and by these presents, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do
give and grant unto our good Subjects, the Inhabitants of our said Province or
Territory of the Massachusetts Bay, and their Successors, all that part of New
England in America, lying and extending from the great River commonly called
Monomack, alias Merimack, on the North part, and from three miles Northward of
the said River to the Atlantic or Western Sea or Ocean on the South part, and
all the Lands and Hereditaments whatsoever lying within the Limits aforesaid,
The Extent and Bounds of that Province.
and Extending as far as the outermost points or Promontories of Land called
Cape-Cod, and Cape Mallabar North and South, and in Latitude, breadth, and in
length and Longitude, of and within all the breadth and Compass aforesaid
throughout the main Land there* from the said Atlantic or Western Sea and
Ocean on the East part toward the South Sea, or Westward as far as our
Colonies of Rhode Island, Connecticot, and the Narragansett Country: And also
all that part and portion of main Land, beginning at the entrance of Piscataway
Harbor, and so to pass up the same into the River of Newickwannock, and
through the same into the furthest head thereof, and from thence Northwestward,
till one hundred and twenty miles be finished, and from Piscataway Harbor
mouth aforesaid Northeastward along the Sea Coast to Sagadahock, and from the
period of one hundred and twenty miles aforesaid to cross over land to the one
hundred and twenty miles before reckoned up into the land from Piscataway
Harbor through Newickwannock River, and also the Northhalf of the Isles of
Shoals, together with the Isles of Capawock, and Nantuckett near Cape Cod
aforesaid, and also the Lands and Hereditaments lying and being in the Country
or Territory commonly called Arcada, or Nova Scotia, and all those Lands and
Hereditaments lying and extending between the said Country or Territory of
Nova Scotia, and the said River of Sagadahock, or any part thereof; and all
Lands, Grounds, Places, Soyls, Woods and Wood-grounds, Havens, Ports, Rivers,
Waters, and other Hereditaments and Premises whatsoever lying within the said
Bounds and Limits aforesaid, and every part and parcel thereof: And also all
Islands and Islets lying within Ten Leagues directly opposite to the Main Land
within the said Bounds: And all Mines and Minerals, as well Royal Mines of Gold
and Silver, as other Mines and Minerals whatsoever in the said Lands and
Premises, All Mines and Minerals granted to the Inhabitants and their
Successors.
or any part thereof. To have and to hold, the said Territories, Tracts,
Countries, Lands, Hereditaments; and all and singular other the Premises, with
their and every of their Appurtenances to our said Subjects the Inhabitants of
our said Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, and their Successors
to their only proper Use and Behoof for evermore, To be holden of Us, our Heirs
and Successors, as of our Manor of East-Greenwich, in the County of Kent, by
Fealty only in free and common Sockage: Yielding and paying therefore yearly to
Us, our Heirs and Successors, the Fifth part of all Gold and Silver Oar, and
Precious Stones which shall from time to time, and at all times hereafter,
happen to be found, gotten, had and obtained in any of the said Lands and
Premises, or within any part thereof. Provided nevertheless, and we do for Us,
our Heirs and Successors, grant and ordain, that all and every such Lands,
Tenements and Hereditaments, and all other Estates, which any Person or
Persons, or Bodies Politic, or Corporate, Towns, Villages, Colleges or
Schools, do hold and enjoy, or ought to hold and enjoy, All Lands,
Hereditaments, etc. formerly granted to any Town, College, or School of
Learning, confirmed.
within the Bounds aforesaid, by or under any Grant or Estate duly made or
granted by any General Court formerly held, or by virtue of the Letters,
Patents herein before recited, or by any other Lawful Right or Title
whatsoever, shall be by such Person and Persons, Bodies Politic and Corporate,
Towns, Villages, Colleges, or Schools, their respective Heirs, Successors and
Assigns for ever, hereafter held and enjoyed, according to the purport and
intent of such respective Grant, under and subject nevertheless to the Rents
and Services thereby reserved or made payable, any matter or thing whatsoever
to the contrary notwithstanding. And provided also, That nothing herein
contained shall extend, or be understood or taken, to impeach or prejudice any
Right, Title, Interest or Demand, which Samuel Allen of London, Merchant,
claiming from and under John Mason, Esquire deceased, or any other Person or
Persons, has or have, or claims to have, hold or enjoy, of, into, or out of
any part or parts of the Premises situate within the Limits above mentioned:
But that the said Samuel Allen, and all and every such person and persons, may
and shall have, hold and enjoy the same in such manner, (and no other than) as
if these Presents had not been had or made. It being our further Will and
Pleasure, That no Grants, or Conveyances of any Lands, Tenements or
Hereditaments to any Towns, Colleges, Schools of Learning, or to any private
Person or Persons, shall be judged or taken, to be avoided or prejudiced, for,
or by reason of any want or defect of Form, but that the same stand and remain
in force, and be maintained and adjudged, and have effect in the same manner as
the same should or ought before the time of the said recited Judgment, The
Governors Council to Consist of 28 Assistants.
according to the Laws and Rules then and there usually practiced and allowed.
And we do further, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, Will, Establish and
Ordain, That from henceforth for ever there shall be One Governor; One
Lieutenant, or Deputy Governor; and one Secretary of our said Province or
Territory, to be from time to time appointed and commissionated by Us, our
Heirs and Successors; and Eight and twenty Assistants, or Counselors, to be
advising and assisting to the Governor of our said Province or Territory for
the time being, as by these Presents is hereafter directed and appointed: Which
said Counselors or Assistants are to be constituted, elected and chosen in
such form and manner as hereafter in these Presents is expressed. And for the
better Execution of our Royal Pleasure and Grant in this behalf, We do by these
Presents, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, nominate, ordain, make and
constitute our Trusty and Well-beloved Simon Broadstreet, John Richards,
Nathanael Saltonstall, Wait Winthrop, John Phillips, James Russel, The Names of
the first Assistants.
Samuel Sewall, Samuel Appleton, Bartholomew Gedrey, John Hathorn, Elisha
Hutchinson, Robert Pike, Jonathan Corwin, John Jolliffe, Adam Winthrop, Richard
Middlecot, John Foster, Peter Sergeant, Joseph Lynd, Samuel Heyman, Stephen
Mason, Thomas Hinkley, William Bradford, John Walley, Barnabas Lothrop, Job
Alcot, Samuel Daniel, and Silvanus Davis, Esquire the first and present Counselors
or Assistants of our said Province, to continue in their said respective
Offices or Trusts of Counselors or Assistants until the last Wednesday in May,
which shall be in the Year of our Lord 1693, To continue until May, 1693. and
until others are chosen by the Assembly.
and until other Counselors or Assistants shall be chosen and appointed in
their stead, in such manner as in these Presents is expressed. And we do
further by these Presents constitute and appoint our trusty and Well beloved
Isaac Addington Esquire to be our first and present Secretary of our said Province,
during our pleasure. And our Will and Pleasure is, That the Governor of our
said Province for the time being, shall have Authority, from time to time, at
his Discretion, to assemble and call together the Counselors or Assistants of
our said Province for the time being: The Governor with seven Assistants to be
a Council.
And that the said Governor, with the said Assistants or Councillors, or
seven of them at the least shall, and may from time to time hold and keep a
Council for the ordering and directing the Affairs of our said Province. And
further, We Will, and by these Presents for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do
Ordain and Grant, that there shall and may be convened, A general Court or
Assembly to be held the last Wednesday in May, or oftener every Year.
held and kept by the Governor for the time being, upon every last Wednesday
in the Month of May, every Year, for ever, and at all such other times as the
Governor of our said Province shall think fit and appoint, a Great and General
Court or Assembly; which said Great and General Court or Assembly shall consist
of the Governor and Council or Assistants for the time being, and of such
Freeholders of our said Province or Territory, as shall be from time to time
elected or deputed by the major part of the Freeholders, and other Inhabitants
of the respective Towns or Places who shall be present at such Elections; each
of the said Towns and Places being hereby empowered to elect and depute Two
Persons and no more to serve for and represent them respectively in the said
Great and General Court or Assembly. Two Assembly-men to be Chosen by the
Freeholders in every Town.
To which Great and General Court or Assembly to be held as aforesaid, We do
hereby, for Us our Heirs and Successors, give and grant full Power and
Authority from time to time to direct, appoint and declare what number each
County, Town and Place shall elect and depute to serve for, and represent them
respectively in the said Great and General Court or Assembly. Provided always,
that no Free holder, or other person, shall have a Vote in the Election of
Members to Serve in any Great and General Court or Assembly to be held as
aforesaid, who at the time of such Election shall not have an Estate of Free
hold in Land within our said Province or Territory, to the value of Forty
Shillings per Ann. at the least; or other Estate to the value of Fifty Pounds
sterling: And that every Person who shall be so elected, shall, before he Sit
or Act in the said Great and General Court or Assembly, take the Oaths
mentioned in an Act of Parliament made in the First Year of our Reign,
entitled, An Act for Abrogating of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and
appointing other Oaths, and thereby appointed to be taken instead of the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy: And shall make, repeat and subscribe the
Declaration mentioned in the said Act, before the Governor, or Lieutenant or
Deputy Governor, or any Two of the Assistants for the time being, who shall be
thereunto authorized and appointed by our said Governor. The Governor has
Power to Adjourn, Prorogue and Dissolve the Assembly.
And that the Governor for the time being shall have full Power and Authority
from time to time, as he shall judge necessary, to Adjourn, Prorogue and
Dissolve all Great and General Courts or Assemblies met and convened as
aforesaid. And our Will and Pleasure is, and we do hereby, for Us, our Heirs
and Successors, grant, establish and ordain, That yearly, once in every Year
for ever hereafter, the aforesaid number of Eight and twenty Counselors or
Assistants shall be by the General Court or Assembly newly Chosen; that is to
say, Eighteen at least of the Inhabitants of, or Proprietors of Lands within
the Territory formerly called the Colony of the Massachusetts Bay; and Four at
the least of the Inhabitants of, or Proprietors of Lands within the Territory
formerly called New-Plymouth; and Three at the least of the Inhabitants of, or
Proprietors of Lands within the Territory formerly called the Province of
Maine; The Governors Counselors to be Inhabitants or Proprietors of Land in
New England.
and one at the least of the Inhabitants of, or Proprietors of Land within the
Territory lying between the River of Sagadahock and Nova Scotia. And that the
said Counselors or Assistants, or any of them, shall or may at any time
hereafter be removed or displaced from their respective Places or Trust of
Counselors or Assistants by any Great or General Court or Assembly; and that
if any of the said Counselors or Assistants shall happen to die, or be
removed, as aforesaid, before the General Day of Election, that then, and in
every such Case, the Great and General Court or Assembly, at their first
sitting may proceed to a New Election of one or more Counselors or Assistants,
in the room or place of such Counselors and Assistants so dying or removed.
And We do further grant and ordain, Judges, Sheriffs Justices, etc. to be
appointed with the Consent of the Governors Council.
That it shall and may be lawful for the said Governor, with the Advice and
Consent of the Council or Asistants, from time to time, to nominate and appoint
judges, Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer, Sheriffs, Provosts, Marshals,
Justices of the Peace, and other Officers, to our Council and Courts of Justice
belonging. Provided always, that no such Nomination or Appointment of Officers
be made without Notice first given, or Summons issued out seven days before
such Nomination or Appointment, unto such of the said Counselors or Assistants
as shall be at that time residing within our said Province. And our Will and
Pleasure is, That the Governor, and Lieutenant or Deputy Governor and
Counselors, or Assistants for the time being, and all other Officers to be
Appointed or Chosen, as aforesaid, shall, before the undertaking the Execution
of their Offices and Places respectively, take their several and respective
Oaths for the due and faithful performance of their Duties in their several and
respective Offices and Places; What Oaths are to be taken.
and also the Oaths appointed by the said Act of Parliament made in the First
Year of our Reign, to be taken instead of the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy; and shall make, repeat and subscribe the Declaration mentioned in
the said Act, before such Person or Persons as are by these Presents herein
after appointed: ( That is to say,) The Governor of our said Province or
Territory, for the time being, shall take the said Oaths, and make, repeat and
subscribe the said Declaration before the Lieutenant or Deputy Governor; or,
in his Absence, before any two or more of the said Persons hereby nominated and
appointed the present Counselors or Assistants of our said Province or
Territory, to whom We do by these Presents give full Power and Authority to
give and administer the same to our said Governor accordingly. And after our
said Governor shall be sworn, and shall have subscribed the said Declaration,
that then our Liutenant or Deputy Governor for the time being, and the
Counselors or Assistants before by these Presents nominated and appointed,
shall take the said Oaths, and make, repeat and subscribe the said Declaration
before our said Governor: And that every such Person or Persons as shall (at
any time of the Annual Elections, or otherwise upon Death or Removal) be
appointed to be the New Counselors or Assistants, and all other Officers to be
hereafter Chosen from time to time, shall take the Oaths to their respective
Offices and Places belonging; and also the said Oaths appointed by the said Act
of Parliament, to be taken instead of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy;
and shall make, repeat and subscribe the Declaration mentioned in the said Act,
before the Governor, or Lieutenant-Governour, or any two or more Counselors
or Assistants, or such other Person or Persons as shall be appointed thereunto
by the Governor for the time being: To whom We do therefore by these Presents
give full Power and Authority, from time to time, to give and administer the
same respectively, according to our true meaning herein before declared,
without any Commission or further Warrant to be had and obtained from Us, our
Heirs and Successors in that behalf. And our Will and Pleasure is, and we do
hereby Require and Command, That all and every Person and Persons hereafter by
Us, our Heirs and Successors, Nominated and Appointed to the respective Offices
of Governor, or Lieutenant, or Deputy Governor, The King ^^serves to himself
Pow^^ (...) appoint (...) Govern^^^ Deputy ^^vernour, and Secretary.
and Secretary of our said Province or Territory (which said Governor, or
Lieutenant, or Deputy Governor, and Secretary of our said Province or
Territory for the time being, We do hereby Reserve full Power and Authority to
Us, our Heirs and Successors, to Nominate and Appoint accordingly) shall before
he or they be admitted to the Execution of their respective Offices, take as
well the Oath for the due and faithful Performance of the said Offices
respectively, as also the Oaths appointed by the said Act of Parliament made in
the said first Year of our Reign, to be taken instead of the said Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and shall also make, repeat and subscribe the
Declaration appointed by the said Act in such Manner, and before such Persons
as aforesaid. And further Our Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby for Us,
Our Heirs and Successors, grant, establish and ordain, that all and every of
the Subjects of Us, our Heirs and Successors, which shall go to and inhabit
within our said Province and Territory, Persons born in New England to have the
Privileges of Natural Subjects of England.
and every of their Children which shall happen to be born there, or on the
Seas in going thither, or returning from thence, shall have and enjoy all
Liberties and Immunities of Free and Natural Subjects within any of the
Dominions of Us, our Heirs and Successors, to all intents, constructions and
purposes whatsoever, as if they and every of them were born within this our
Realm of England: And for the greater Ease and Encouragement of our loving
Subjects, inhabiting our said Province or Territory of the Massachusetts Bay,
and of such as shall come to inhabit there, We do by these Presents, for Us,
our Heirs and Successors, grant, establish and ordain, Liberty of Conscience to
be granted to all Christians except Papists.
that for ever hereafter there shall be a Liberty of Conscience allowed in the
Worship of God to all Christians (Except Papists) inhabiting or which shall
inhabit or be resident within our said Province or Territory. And we do hereby
Grant and Ordain, That the Governor, or Lieutenant or Deputy Governor of our
said Province or Territory for the time being, or either of them, or any two or
more of the Council or Assistants for the time being, as shall be thereunto
appointed by the said Governor, shall and may at all times, and from time to
time hereafter, have full Power and Authority to administer and give the Oaths
appointed by the said Act of Parliament, made in the first Year of Our Reign,
to be taken instead of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, to all and every
Person and Persons which are now inhabiting or residing within our said
Province or Territory, or which shall at any time or times hereafter go or pass
thither And We do of our further Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion,
Grant, Establish and Ordain, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, that the Great
and General Court or Assembly of our said Province or Territory for the time
being, Convend as aforesaid, shall for ever have full Power and Authority to
Erect and Constitu^e Judicato^ies and Courts of Record, The genera^ Court has
Power to Erect Judicatories, to hear and determine concerning all manner of
Crimes, capital or not capital; and Pleas, whether real, p^rsonal or mixed
or other Courts, to be held in the Name of Us, our Heirs and Successors, for
the Hearing, Trying and Determining of all manner of Crimes, Offenses, Pleas,
Processes, Plaints, Actions, Matters, Causes, and things whatsoever, arising or
happening within our said Province or Territory, or between persons inhabiting
or residing there, whether the same be Criminal or Civil, and whether the said
Crimes be Capital or not Capital, and whether the said Pleas be real, personal
or mixed, and for the awarding and making out of Execution thereupon: To which
Courts and Judicatories, We do hereby, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, give
and grant full Power and Authority from time to time to administer Oaths for
the better discovery of Truth in any matter in Controversy, o^ depending
before them. And We do for Us, our Heirs and Successors, Grant, Establish and
Ordain, that the Governor of our said Province or Territory for the time
being* with the Council or Assistants, may do, execute or perform all that is
necessary for the Probate of Wills, Wills.
and granting of Administrations for touching or concerning, any Interest or
Estate which any Person or Persons shall have within our said Province or
Territory. And whereas we judge it necessary that all our Subjects should have
Liberty to Appeal to Us, our Heirs and Successors in Cases that may deserve the
same, We do by these Presents Ordain, that in Case either Party shall not rest
satisfied (...) the Judgment or Sentence of any Judicatories or Courts within
our said Province or Territory in any personal Action, Appeals to the King in
some Personal Actions.
wherein the Matter in difference does exceed the Value of three hundred pounds
Sterling, that then he or they may Apppeal to Us, our Heirs and Successors, in
our or their Privy Council, Provided that such Appeal be made within fourteen
days after the Sentence or Judgment given; and that before such Appeal be
allowed, security be given by the Party or Parties appealing, in the value of
the matter in difference, to pay or answer the Debt or Damages for the which
Judgment or Sentence is given, Execution not to be staid
with such Costs and Damages as shall be awarded by Us, our Heirs or
Successors, in Case the Judgment or Sentence be affirmed: And Provided also
that no Execution shall be staid or suspended by reason of such Appeal unto Us,
our Heirs and Successors, in Our or their Privy Council; so as the Party suing
or taking out Execution, do in the like manner give security to the Value of
the matter in Difference, to make Restitution in Case the said Judgment or
Sentence be Reversed or Annulled upon the said Appeal. And We do further, for
Us, our Heirs and Successors, Give and Grant to the said Governor, The general
Court has Power to make Laws, not repugnant to the Laws of England.
and the great and general Court or Assembly of our said Province or Territory
for the time being, full Power and Authority, from time to time, to Make,
Ordain and Establish all manner of wholesome and reasonable Orders, Laws,
Statutes and Ordinances, Directions and Instructions, either with Penalties or
without (so as the same be not repugnant or contrary to the Laws of this our
Realm of England) as they shall judge to be for the good and welfare of our
said Province or Territory, and for the Government and Ordering thereof, and of
the People inhabiting, or who shall inhabit the same, and for the necessary
support and defense of the Government thereof. And We do for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, give and grant, that the said General Court or Assembly shall have
full Power and Authority to Name and settle Annually, To Name and Settle Civil
Officers Except etc.
all Civil Officers within the said Province, such Officers Excepted, the
Election and Constitution of whom We have by these Presents reserved to Us, our
Heirs and Successors, or to the Governor of our said Province for the time
being; and to set forth the several Duties, Powers and Limits of every such
Officer to be appointed by the said General Court or Assembly, and the Forms of
such Oaths not repugnant to the Laws and Statutes of this our Realm of England,
Power to impose Taxes on all the Inhabitants, to be disposed by warrant from
the Governor and Council, or according to such Acts as shall then be in force.
as shall be respectively administered unto them for the Execution of their
several Offices and Places; and also to impose Fines, Mulcts, Imprisonments,
and other Punishments, and to impose and levy proportionable and reasonable
Assessments, Rates and Taxes upon the Estates and Persons of all and every the
Proprietors or Inhabitants of our said Province or Territory, to be issued and
disposed of by Warrant under the Hand of the Governor of our said Province for
the time being, with the Advice and Consent of the Council, for our Service in
the necessary Defense and Support of our Government of our said Province or
Territory, and the Protection and Preservation of the Inhabitants there,
according to such Acts as are or shall be in force within our said Provinces,
and to dispose of matters and things, whereby our Subjects, Inhabitants of our
said Province, may be religiously, peaceably and civilly governed, protected
and defended, so as their good Life and orderly Conversation may win the
Indians, The Conversion of the Indians to be endeavored.
Natives of the Country, to the Knowledge and Obedience of the only true God
and Savior of Mankind, and the Christian Faith, which his Royal Majesty our
Royal Grandfather King Charles the First, in his said Letters Patents declared
was his Royal Intentions, and the Adventurers free Profession to be the
principle End of the said Plantation. And for the better securing and
maintaining Liberty of Conscience hereby granted to all Persons at any time
being and residing within our said Province or Territory as aforesaid, Willing,
Commanding and Requiring, and by these Presents, for Us, our Heirs and
Successors, ordaining and appointing that all such Orders, Laws, Statutes and
Ordinances, Instructions and Directions as shall be so Made and Published under
our Seal of our said Province or Territory, shall be carefully and duly
observed, kept and performed, and put in Execution according to the true intent
and meaning of these Presents. Provided always, and We do by these Presents,
for Us, our Heirs and Successors, Establish and Ordain, that in the framing and
passing of all such Orders, Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, The Governor to
have a Negative on the Acts of the General Assembly, etc.
and in all Elections and Acts of Government whatsoever, to be passed, made or
done by the said General Court or Assembly, or in Council, the Governor of our
said Province or Territory of the Massachusetts Bay in New England for the time
being, shall have the Negative Voice, and that without his Consent or
Approbation signified and declared in Writing; no such Orders, Laws, Statutes,
Ordinances, Elections, or other Acts of Government whatsoever, so to be made,
passed or done by the said General Assembly or in Council, shall be of any
force, effect or validity, any thing herein contained to the contrary in any
wise Notwithstanding. And We do for Us, our Heirs and Successors, Establish and
Ordain, that the said Orders, Laws, Statutes and Ordinances, be by the first
opportunity after the making thereof, sent or transmitted unto Us, our Heirs
and Successors, under the Public Seal, to be appointed by Us, for Our or their
Approbation or Disallowance. And that in Case all or any of them shall at any
time within the space of three Years next after the same shall have been
presented to Us, our Heirs and Successors, in our or their Privy Council, be
disallowed and rejected, and so signified by Us, our Heirs and Successors, Laws
to be sent to England for the Royal Approbation: If not disallowed within three
Years to be in force until Repealed by the Assembly.
under our or their Sign Manual and Signet, or by Order in our or their Privy
Council, unto the Governor for the time being, then such and so many of them
as shall be so disallowed and rejected, shall thenceforth cease and determine,
and become utterly void and of none effect. Provided always, that in Case We,
our Heirs or Successors, shall not within the term of three Years after the
presenting of such Orders, Laws, Statutes or Ordinances, as aforesaid, signify
our or their Disallowance of the same, then the said Orders, Laws, Statutes or
Ordinances, shall be and Continue in full Force and Effect, according to the
true intent and meaning of the same, until the Expiration thereof, or that the
same shall be repealed by the General Assembly of our said Province for the
time being. Provided also, that it shall and may be lawful for the said
Governor and General Assembly to make or pass any Grant of Lands lying within
the Bounds of the Colonies formerly called the Colonies of the
Massachusetts Bay, and New-Plymouth, and Province of Main, The General Court
has Power to pass any grants of Land in Massachusetts Plymouth, or the Province
of Mayn. Grants or Land between Sagadahock and St. Laurence to have the Royal
Approbation.
in such manner as heretofore they might have done by virtue of any former
Charter or Letters Patents; which Grants of Lands within the Bounds aforesaid,
We do hereby Will and Ordain to be and continue for ever of full Force and
Effect, without Our further Approbation or Consent. And so as nevertheless, and
it is our Royal Will and Pleasure, that no Grant or Grants of any Lands lying
or extending from the River of Sagadahock, to the Gulf of St. Laurence and
Canada Rivers, and to the Main Sea Northward and Eastward, to be made or past
by the Governor and General Assembly of our said Province, be of any force,
validity or effect, until We, our Heirs and Successors, shall have signified
our or their Approbation of the same. And we do by these Presents for Us, our
Heirs and Successors, grant, establish and ordain, that the Governor of our
said Province or Territory for the time being, shall have full power by
himself, or by any chief Commander, or other Officer or Officers, to be
appointed by him from time to time, to Train, Instruct, Exercise and Govern the
Militia there; and for the special Defense and safety of our said Province or
Territory, to Assemble in Martial Array, and put in Warlike Posture the
Inhabitants of our said Province or Territory, and to Lead and Conduct them,
and with them to Encounter, Expulse, Repel, Resist and Pursue by Force of Arms,
The Governor to Command the Militia*
as well by Sea as by Land, within or without the Limits of our said Province
or Territory, and also to kill, slay, destroy and conquer, by all fitting
ways, enterprises and means whatsoever, all and every such Person and Persons
as shall at any time hereafter attempt or enterprise the destruction, invasion,
detriment or annoyance of our said Province or Territory; and to use and
exercise the Law Martial in time of actual War, Invasion or Rebellion, as
occasion shall necessarily require; and also from time to time to Erect Forts,
and to Fortify any Place or Places within our said Province or Territory, and
the same to furnish wi^h all necessary Ammunition, Provision and Stores of War,
for offense or defense, and to commit from time to time, the Custody and
Government of the same, to such person or persons as to him shall seem meet,
and the said Forts and Fortifications to demolish at his pleasure, and to take
and surprise by all ways and means whatsoever, all and every such Person or
Persons, with their Ships, Arms, Ammunition, and other Goods, as shall in a
Hostile manner Invade, or attempt the Invading, Conquering or Annoying of our
said Province or Territory. Provided always, and We do by these Presents, for
Us, our Heirs and Successors, Grant, Establish and Ordain, That the said
Governor shall not at any time hereafter, by Virtue of any Power hereby
granted, No Persons to be Transported out of the Province without their own
Consent.
or hereafter to be granted to him, Transport any of the Inhabitants of our
said Province or Territory, or oblige them to March out of the Limits of the
same, without their free and voluntary Consent, or the Consent of the great and
general Court or Assembly of our said Province or Territory; nor grant
Commissions for Exercising the Law Martial upon any the Inhabitants of our said
Province or Territory, without the Advice and Consent of the Council or
Assistants of the same. Provided in like manne^ (...) We do by these Presents,
The Law-Martial not to be executed on any Inhabitant without the Consent of the
Council.
for Us, our Heirs and Successors, Constitute and Ordain, That when and as
often as the Governor of our said Province for the time being, shall happen to
dye, or be displaced by Us, our Heirs or Successors, or be absent from his
Government, that then and in any of the said Cases, the Lieutenant or Deputy
Governor of our said Province for the time being, shall have full Power and
Authority, to do and execute all and every such acts, matters and things, which
our Governor of our said Province for the time being, might or could by Virtue
of these our Letters, Patents lawfully do or execute, In the absence of the
Governor, the Deputy Governor to have the same Power.
if he were personally present, until the return of the Governor so absent, or
Arrival or Constitution of such other Governor as shall or may be appointed by
Us, our Heirs or Successors in his stead; and that when and as often as the
Governor, and Lieutenant or Deputy Governor of our said Province or Territory
for the time being, shall happen to dye, or be displaced by Us, In the absence
of both the Governor and Deputy Governor, the major part of the Council to
have their Power.
our Heirs or Successors, or be absent from our said Province; and that there
shall be no person within the said Province, Commissionated by Us, our Heirs or
Successors to be Governor within the same; then and in every of the said
Cases, the Council or Assistants of our said Province shall have full Power and
Authority, and We do hereby give and grant unto the said Council or Assistants
of our said Province for the time being, or the major part of them, full Power
and Authority to do and execute all and every such acts, matters and things
which the said Governor, or Lieutenant or Deputy Governor of our said
Province or Territory for the time being, might or could lawfully do or
exercise, if they or either of them were personally present, until the return
of the Governor, or Lieutenant or Deputy Governor so absent, or Arrival or
Constitution of such other Governor, Lieutenant or Deputy Governor, as shall
and may be appointed by Us our Heirs or Successors from time to time. Provided
always, and it is hereby Declared, that nothing herein, shall extend or be
taken to erect, or grant, or allow the exercise of any Admiral Court,
Jurisdiction, Power or Authority, but that the same shall be, and is hereby
reserved to Us and our Successors, and shall from time to time be erected,
granted and exercised by Virtue of Commissions to be issued under the Great
Seal of England, Admiralty Jurisdiction reserved.
or under the Seal of the High Admiral, or the Commissioners for Executing the
Office of High Admiral of England. And further, Our express Will and pleasure
is, and We do by these presents, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, ordain and
appoint that these our Letters, Patents shall not in any manner Enure, or be
taken to abridge, bar or hinder any of our loving Subjects whatsoever, to use
and exercise the Trade of Fishing upon the Coasts of New England, The Trade of
Fishing not to be a bridg'd.
but that they and every of them shall have full and free Power and Liberty to
continue and use their said Trade of Fishings upon the said Coasts, in any of
the Seas thereunto adjoining, or any Arms of the said Seas or Salt water Rivers
where they have been wont to Fish; and to build and set upon the Lands within
our said Province or Colony, lying waste, and not then possessed by particular
Proprietors, such Wharfs, Stages and Workhouses, as shall be necessa^y for the
salting, drying, keeping and packing of their Fish, to be taken or gotten upon
that Coast, and to cut down and take such Trees and other Materials there
growing, or being upon any parts or places lying waste, and not then in
possession of particular Proprietors, as shall be needful for that purpose, and
for all other necessary easements, helps and advantages concerning the Trade of
Fishing there, in such manner and form as they have been heretofore at any time
accustomed to do, without making any wilful waste or spoil, any thing in these
Presents contained to the contrary notwithstanding And Lastly, for the better
providing and furnishing of Masts for our Royal Navy, We do hereby reserve to
Us, our Heirs and Successors, all Trees of the Diameter of twenty four Inches,
Trees fit for Masts not growing upon any Soil granted to particular persons to
be preserved.
and upwards of twelve Inches from the ground, growing upon any Soil or Tract
of Land within our said Province or Territory, not heretofore granted to any
private Persons: And We do restrain and forbid all Persons whatsoever from
telling, cutting or destroying any such Trees without the Royal License of Us,
our Heirs and Successors, first had and obtained, upon Penalty of Forfeiting
One Hundred Pounds Sterling unto Us, our Heirs and Successors, for every such
Tree so felled, cut or destroyed, without such License had or obtained in that
behalf, any thing in these Presents contained to the contrary Notwithstanding.
In Witness whereof, We have caused these our Letters to be made Patents.
Witness our Selves at Westminster, the seventh day of October, in the Third
Year of our Reign.

By Writ of Privy Seal. PIGOT.


