A TOKEN FOR CHILDREN.

BEING An Exact Account of the Conversion, Holy and Exemplary Lives and Joyful
Deaths of several Young Children.

By James Janeway, Minister of the Gospel.

To which is Added, A Token, for the CHILDREN of NEW ENGLAND.

OR, Some Examples of Children, in whom the Fear of GOD was Remarkably Budding
before they Died; In several Parts of New England.

Preserved and Published for the Encouragement of Piety in other Children.

Boston in N E Printed for Nicholas Boon, at his Shop over against the Old
Meeting House. 1700.

To all Parents, Schoolmasters and School-Mistresses, or any that have any
hand in the Education of Children.
Dear Friends,
I Have often thought that Christ speaks to you, as Pharoah's Daughter did to
Moses's Mother, Take this Child and Nurse it for me O Sirs, consider what a
precious Jewel is committed to your charge what an advantage you have to show
your love to Christ, to stock the next generation with N^ble Plants, and what a
joyful account you may make, if you be faithful: Remember, Sou^s, Christ and
Grace cannot be over-valued, I confess you have some disadvantages, but let
that only excite your diligence; the Salvation of Souls, the commendation of
your Master, the greatness of your reward, and everlasting Glory, will pay for
all. Remember the Devil is at work hard, wicked ones are industrious, and a
corrupt nature is a rugged, knotty piece to hew: But be not discouraged, I am
almost as much afraid of your laziness and unfaithfulness, as any thing Do but
fall to work lustily, and who knows but that rough stone may prove a Pillar in
the Temple of God? In the Name of the living God, as you will answer it shortly
at his Bar, I command you to be faithful^ in Instructing and Catechizing your
young ones; if you think I am too peremptory, I pray read the command from my
Master himself, Deu^ 6.7. Is not the duty clear? and dare you neglect so direct
a Command? Are the souls of your Children of no value? Are you willing that
they should be Brands of Hel^? Are you indifferent whether they be Damned or
saved? shall the Devil run away with them without control? will not you use
your utm^st endeavor to deliver them from the wrath to come? You see that they
are not subjects uncapab^e of the Grace of God; whatever you think of them,
Christ does not slight them; they are not too little to die, they are not too
little to go to Hell* they are not too little to serve their great Master, too
little to go to Heaven; For of such is the Kingdom of God: And will nor a
possibility of their Conversion and Salvation, put you upon the greatest
diligence to teach them? Or are Christ and Heaven, and Salvation, small things
with you? If they be, then indeed I have done with you* But if they be not, I
beseech you lay about you with all your might; the Devil knows your time is
going apace, it will shortly be too late: O therefore what you do, do quickly,
and do it, I say, with all your might, O pray, pray, pray, and live holily
before them, and take some time daily, to speak a little to your Children, one
by one, about their miserable Condition by Nature; I know a Child that was
converted by this sentence, from a godly School-Mistress in the Country, Every
Mothers Child of you are by Nature Children of wrath. Put your Children upon
learning their Catechism, and the ^^riptures, and getting to pray and weep by
(...) Christ: take heed of their company; take heed of pardoning a lie; take
heed of letting them mispend the Sabbath, put them I beseech you, upon
imitating these sweet Children; let them read this Book over an hundred times,
and observe how they are affected, and ask them what they think of those
Children, and whether they would not be such? and follow what you do with
earnest cries to God, and be in travel to see Christ formed in their Souls. I
have prayed for you, I have often prayed for your Children, and I love them
dearly; and I have prayed over these papers; that God would strike in with
them, and make them effectual to the good of their Souls. Encourage your
Children to read this Book, and lead them to improve it. What is presented, is
faithfully taken from experienced solid Christians, some of them no way related
to the Children, who themselves were Eye and Ear witnesses of God's works of
Wonder, or from my own knowledge, or from Reverend Godly Ministers, and from
persons that are of unspotted reputation, for Holiness, Integrity and Wisdom;
and several passages are taken verbatim in writing from their dying Lips I may
add many other excellent Examples, if I have any encouragement in this Piece*
That the Young Generation may be far more excellent than this, is the Prayer of
one that dearly loves little Children.

James Janeway.

A PREFACE Containing Directions to CHILDREN.
YOU may now hear (my dear Lambs) what other good Children have done, and
remember how they wept and prayed by themselves; how earnestly they cried out
for an interest in the Lord Jesus Christ: May you not read how dutiful they
were to their Parents? How diligent at their Books? how ready to learn the
Scripture, and their Catechisms? Can you forget wha^ Q^estions they were wont
to ask? How much they feared a lie, how much they abhorred naughty company, how
holy they lived, how dearly they were loved, how joyfully they died?

But tell me my dear Children, and tell me truly, Do you do as these Children
did? Did you ever see your miserable state by Nature? Did you ever get by your
self and weep for Sin, and pray for grace and pardon? Did you ever go to your
Father and Mother, M^ster, or Mistress, and b^g of them to pity you, and pray
for you, and to teach you what you shall do to be saved, what you shall do to
get Christ, Heaven and Glory? Do thou love to be taught good things? Come
tell me truly, my dear Child, for I would fain do what I can (...) to keep thee
from falling into eve^^asting Fire. I would fain have one of those little ones,
which Christ will take into his arms and (...) do thou spend thy time? is it
in play and Idleness, and with wicked Children? Dare you ^ake Gods Name in
vain, or swear, or tell a lie? Dare you do any thing which your Parents forbid
you, and neglect to do what they command you? Do you dare to run up and down
upon the Lord's Day? or do you keep in to read your Book, and to learn what your
good Parents command you? what do you say, Child? Which of these two sorts are
you of? Let me talk a little with you, and ask you a few Questions.

1. Were not these Children sweet Children, which feared God and were dutiful
to their Parents? Did not their Fathers and Mothers, and every body that fears
God, love them and praise them? What do you think is become of them, now they
are dead and gone? Why, they are gone to Heaven, and are singing Hallelujahs
with the Angels: they see Glorious things, and having nothing but joy and
pleasure, they shall never sin any more, they shall never be beat any more,
they shall never be sick, or in pain any more.

2. And would not you have your Fathers love, your Mothers commendation; your
Masters good word? Would not you have God and Christ love you? and would not
you fain go to Heaven, when you die? And live with your godly Parents in Glory,
and be happy for ever.

3. Whither do you think those Children go when they die, that will not do what
they are bid but play the Truant, and lie, and speak naughty words, and break
the Sabbath? whither do such Children go do you think? why, I will tell you,
they which Lie, must to their Father the Devil into everlasting burning; they
which never pray, God will pour out his wrath upon them; and when they beg and
pray in Hell Fire, God will not forgive them; but there they must lie for ever.

4. And are you willing to go to Hell to be burned with the Devil and his
Angels? Would you be in the same condition as naughty Children? O Hell is a
terrible place, that is worse a thousand times than whipping, Gods anger is
worse than your Fathers anger; and are you willing to anger God? O Child, this
is most certainly true that all that be wicked, and die so, must be turned into
Hell; and if any be once there, there is no coming out again.

5. Would you not do any thing in the world rather than be thrown into Hell
Fire? Would you not do any thing in the world to get Christ, and grace and
glory.

6. Well now, what will you do? will you read this book a little, because your
good Mother will make you do it, and because it is a little n^w Book, but as
soon as ever you have done, run away to play, and never think of it?

7 How art thou now affected, poor Child, in the Reading of this Book? Have you
shed ever a tear since you begun reading? Have you been by your self upon your
knees; and begging that God would make you like these blessed Children? or are
you as you use to be, as careless and foolish and disobedient and wicked as
ever?

8. Did you never hear of a little Child that died? and if other Children die,
why may not you be sick and die? and what will you do then, Child, if you
should have no grace in your heart, and be found like other naughty Children.

9 How do you know but that you may be the next Child that may die? and where
are you then if you be not God's Child.

10. Will thou tarry any longer my dear Child, before thou run into thy
Chamber, and beg to God to give thee a Christ for thy Soul, that thou may not
be undone for ever,? Will thou get presently into a corner to weep and pray?
Methinks I see that pretty Lamb begin to weep, and think of getting by himself,
and will as well as he can cry unto the Lord, to make them one of these little
ones that go into the Kingdom of Heaven; Methinks there stands a sweet Child,
and there another, that are resolved for Christ and for Heaven: Methinks that
little Boy looks as if he had a mind to learn good things: Methinks I hear one
say, Well, I will never tell a lie more, I will never keep any naughty Boy
company more, they will teach me to swear, and they will speak naughty words,
they do not love God. I Will learn my Catechism, and get my Mother to teach us to
pray, and I will go to weep and cry to Christ, and will not be quiet till the
Lord has given me Grace. O that is my brave Child indeed!

11. But will you not quickly forget your promise? are you resolved by the
strength of Christ to be a good Child? Are you indeed? nay, but are you indeed?
Consider, dear Child, God calls you to remember your Creator in the days of
your youth; and he takes it kindly when little ones comes to him, and loves
them dearly; and godly people, especially Parents, and Masters and Mistresses,
they have no greater joy, than to see their Children walk in the way of truth.

Now tell me, my pretty dear Child, what will you do? shall I make you a Book?
shall I pray for you, and entreat you? Shall your good Mother weep over you?
And will not you make us all glad, by your turning quickly to the Lord? Shall
Christ tell you that he will love you? And will not you love him? Will you
strive to be like those Children? I am persuaded, that God intends to do good
to the ^ouls of some little Children by these papers, because he has laid it
so much upon my heart to pray for them and over these papers, and through mercy
I have already experienced, that something of this nature has not been in
vain. I shall give a word of direction, and so leave you.

1. Take heed of what you know is naught; as lying, O that is a grievous fault
indeed, and naughty words, and taking the Lords name in vain, and playing upon
the Lords day, and keeping bad company, and playing with ungodly Children: But
if you go to School with such, tell them that God will not love them, but that
the Devil will have them, if they continue to be so naught.

2. Do what your Father and Mother bids you, cheerfully; and take heed of doing
any thing that they forbid you.

3. Be diligent in reading the Scripture, and learning your Catechism; and what
you do not understand, to be sure ask the meaning of.

4. Think a little sometimes by your self about God and Heaven, and your Soul,
and what Christ came into the world for.

5. And if you have no great mind to do thus, but had rather be at play, then
think, what is it that makes me that I do not care for good things is this like
one of God's dear Children? I am afraid I am none of God's Child, I feel, I do
not love to come unto him: O! What shall I do? Either I will be Gods Child or
the Devils; O what shall I do? I would not be the Devils Child for any thing in
the World.

6. Then go to your Father or Mother, or some Good Body, and ask them what thou
shall do to be God's Child; and tell them that thou art afraid, and that thou
can not be contented, till thou have got the love of God.

7. Get by thy self, into the Chamber or Garret, and fall upon thy knees, and
weep and mourn, and tell Christ thou art afraid that he does not love thee, but
thou would fain have his love; beg of him to give thee his Grace and pardon for
thy sins, and that he would make thee his Child: Tell God thou do not care
who don't love thee, if God will but love thee: Say to him, Father, have thou
not a bl^ssing for me thy poor little Child? Father, have thou not a blessing
for me, even for me? O give a Christ! O give me a Christ! O let me not be
undone for ever! Thus beg, as for your lives, and be not contented till you
have an answer; and do thus every day, with as much earnestness as you can,
twice a day at least.

8. Give your self up to Christ: say, dear Jesus, thou did bid that little
Childr^n should be suffered to come unto thee; and Lord, I am come as well as I
can, would fain be thy Child: take my heart and make it humble, and meek, and
sensible and obedient, I give my self unto thee dear Jesus, do what thou will
with me, so that thou will but love me, and give me thy Grace and Glory.

9. Get acquainted with Godly people and ask them good questions, and endeavou^
to love their talk*

10. Labor to get a dear love for Christ* read the History of Christ's
sufferings: and ask the reason of his sufferings, and never b^ content till you
see your need of Christ, and the excellency and use of Christ.

11. Hear the most powerful Ministers; (...) read the most searching books and
get you^ Father to buy you Mr. White's Book for little Children, and A Guide to
Heaven.

12. Resolve to continue in well-doing all you^ days; then thou shall be one of
those swee^ little ones that Christ will take into his arm^^ and bless, and
give a Kingdom, Crown and Glory too. And now dear Children I have done, I have
written to you, I have prayed for you; but what you will do I cannot tell* O
Children, if you love me, if you lov^ your Parents, if you love your Souls, i^
you would escape Hell Fire, and if you would live in Heaven when you die, do you
go and do as these good Children, and tha^ you may be your Parents joy, your
Country honor, and live in Gods fear, and die i^ his love* is the prayer of
your dear Friend,

J. Janeway

A TOKEN FOR CHILDREN.
EXAMPLE I. Of one eminently Converted between Eight and Nine years Old, with
an account of her Life and Death.
MRS. Sarah Howley, when she was between Eight and Nine years Old, was carried
by her Friends to hear a Sermon, where the Minister Preached upon Matt. 11.^3.
My Yoke is easy, and my Burden ^s light: in the applying of which Scripture,
this Child was mightily awakned, and made deeply sensible of the Condition of
her Soul, and her need of a Christ,? she wept bitterly to think what a case she
was i^; and went home and got by her self into a Chamber, and upon her knees
she wept and cried to the Lord, as well as she could, which might easily be
perceived by her eyes and countenance

2. She was not contented at this, but she got her little Brother and Sister
into a Chamber with her, and told them of their condition by Nature, and wept
over them, and prayed with them and for them.

3, After this she heard another Sermon upon Prove. 29.1. He that being often
reproved, hardneth his heart, shall suddenly be destroyed, and that without
remedy: At which she was more affected than before, and was so exceeding
solicitous about her Soul, that ^he spent a great part of the night in weeping
and praying, and could scarce take any rest day or night for some time
together; desiring with all her Soul to escape from everlasting flames, and to
get ^^ interest in the Lord Jesus; O what should she do for a Christ! what
should she do to be Saved!

4. She gave her self much to attending upon the Word preached, and still
continued very tender under it, greatly savouring what she heard.

5. She was very much in secret Prayer, as might easily be perceived by those
who listened at the Chamber door, and was usually very importunate, and full of
tears.

6. She could scarce speak of sin, or be spoke to, but her heart was ready to
melt.

7. She spent much time in reading the Scripture, and a Book called, The best
friend in the worst of Times; by which the Work of God was much promoted upon
her Soul, and was much directed by it how to get acquaintaince with God,
especially toward the end of that Book. Another Book that she was much
delighted with, was Mr. Swinnock's Christian Man's Calling, and by this she was
taught in this measure to make Religion her business. The Spiritual B^e was a
great companion of hers.

8. She was exceeding dutiful to her Parents, very loath to grieve them in the
least: and if she had at any time (which was very rare) offended them, she
would weep bitterly.

9. She abhorred lying, and allowed her self in no known sin.

10. She was very Conscientious in spending of time, and hated Idleness, and
spent her whole time either in praying, reading instructing at her Needle, at
which she was very ingenious.

11. When she was at School, she was eminent for her diligence, teachableness,
meekness and modesty, speaking little; but when she did speak it was usually
spiritual.

12. She continued in this course of Religious duties for some years together.

13. When she was about fourteen years old, she brake a Vein in her Lungs (as
is supposed) and often did spit blood, yet did a little recover again, but had
several dangerous relapses.

14. At the beginning of January last, she was taken very bad again, in which
sickness she was in great distress of Soul. When she was first taken, she said,
O Mother, pray, pray, pray for me, for Satan is so busy that I cannot pray for
my self; I see I am undone without a Christ, and a Pardon! O I am undone unto
all Eternity.

15. Her Mother knowing how serious she had been formerly, did a little wonder
that she should be in such agonies; upon which her Mother asked her what sin it
was, that was so burdensome to her Spirit: O Mother, said she, it is not any
particular sin of Omission or Commission, that sticks so close to my
Conscience, as the sin of my Nature; without the Blood of Christ, that will
dam^ me.

16. Her Mother asked her; what she should pray for, for her; she answered,
That I may have a saving knowledge of Sin and Christ: and that I may have an
assurance of Gods love to my Soul. Her Mother asked her why she did speak so
little to the Minister that came to her? She answered that it was her duty with
patience and silence to learn of them: and it was exceeding painful to her, to
speak to any.

17. One time when she fell into a ^it, she cried out, O I am a going, I am a
going: But what shall I do to be Saved? Sweet Lord Jesus, I will lie at thy
feet; and if I perish, it shall be at the Fountain of thy mercy.

18. She was much afraid of presumption, and dreaded a mistake in the matters
of her Soul, and would be often putting up ejaculations to God, to deliver her
from deceiving her self. To in^tance in one: Great and Mighty God, give me
Faith and true Faith, Lord, that I may not be a foolish Virgin, having a Lamp
and no Oil.

19. She would many times be laying hold upon the promises, and plead them in
prayer. That in Matt. 11.28, 29. was much in her tongue, and no small relief to
her Spirit. How many times would she cry out, Lord, have not thou said, Come
unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden, and I will give you rest.

20. Another time her Father bid her be of good cheer, because she was going to
a better Father; at which she fell into a great passion, and said, but how do I
know that? I am a poor sinner that wants assurance O, for assurance! It was
still her note, O, for assurance! This was her great, earnest, and constant
request, to all that came to her, to beg assurance for her; and, poor heart,
she would look with so much eagerness upon them, as if she desired nothing in
the world so much, (...) that they would pity her, and help her with their
prayers; never was poor creature more earnest for any thing, than she was for
an assurance; and the Light of Gods Countenance: O the piteous moan that she
would make! O the Agonies that her Soul was in!

21. Her Mother asked her, if God would spare her Life, how she would live?
Truly Mother, said she, we have such base hearts that I cannot tell, we are apt
to promise great things when we are sick, but when we are recovered, we are as
ready to forget our selves and to turn again unto folly; but I hope I should
lie more careful of my Time and my Soul, than I have been.

22. She was full of natural affection to her Parents, and very careful least
her Mother should be tired out with much watching: Her Mother said, ^how shall
bear parting with thee, when I have scar^^ dried my eyes for thy Brother? she
answered, the God of love, support and comfort you; it is but a little while,
and we shall meet in Glory, I hope. She being very weak, could speak but
little, therefore her Mother said, Child, if thou have any comfort, lift up thy
hand; which she did.

23. The Lords day before that, in which she died, a Kinsman of hers came to
see her, and asking of her, whether she knew him? She answered, Yes, I know
you, and I desire you would learn to know Christ: you are young, but you know
not how soon you may die; and O to die without a Christ, it is a fearful thing:
O redeem Time! O Time, T^me, Time, precious Time! Being requested by him not to
spend herself, she said, she would fain do all the good she could while she
lived, and when she was dead too, if possile; upon which account, she desired
that a Sermon might be Preached at the Funeral, concerning the pr^ciousness of
Time. O that young ones would now remember their Creator!

24. Some Minister that came to her, did with earnestness beg that the Lord
would please to give her some token for good, that she might go off triumphing,
and Bills of the same nature were sent to several Churches.

25. After she had long waited for an answer of their prayers, she said, Well,
I will venture my Soul upon Christ.

26. She carried it with wonderful patience, and yet would often pray that the
Lord would give her more patience, which the Lord answered to astonishment; for
considering the pains and agonies that she was in, her patience was next to a
wonder; Lord, Lord, give me patience, said she, that I may not dishonor thee.

27. Upon Thursday, after long waiting, great Fears, and many Prayers, when all
her Friends thought she had been past speaking, to the astonishment of her
Friends, she broke forth thus with a very Audible Voice, and Cheerful
Countenance; Lord, thou have promised, that whosoever comes unto thee, thou will in no wise ^ast out; Lord I come unto thee, and surely thou will not cast
me out. O so sweet! O so glorious is Jesus! O I have the sweet and glorious
Jesus; he is sweet, he is sweet, he is sweet! O the admirable love of God ^n
sending Christ! O free Grace to a poor lost Creature. And thus she ran on
repeating many of these things an hundred times over; but her Friends were so
astonished to see her in this Divine Rapture, and to hear such Gracious Words,
and her Prayers and Desires satisfied, that they could not write a quarter of
what she spoke.

28. When her Soul was thus ravished with the love of Christ, and her tongue so
highly engaged in the magnifying of God; her Father, Brethren, and Si^ters,
with others of the Family, were called, to whom she spoke particularly, as her
strength would give leave. She gave her Bible as a Legacy to one of her
Brothers, and desired him to use that well for her sake, and added, to him and
the rest, O make use of time to get a Christ for your Souls; spend no time in
running up and down in playing: O get a Christ for your Souls while you are
young; remember now your Creator before you come to a sick bed: put not off
this great work till then, for then you will find it a hard work indeed. I know
by experience, the Devil will tell you it is time enough; and you are young,
what need you to be in such have? You will have time enough when you are old.
But there stands one (meaning her Grandmother) that stays behind, and I that
am but young, am going before her. O therefore make your Calling and Election
sure, while you are in health. But I am afraid this will be but one nights
trouble to your thoughts; but remember, these are the words of a dying Sister.
O if you knew how good Christ were! O if you had but one taste of his
sweetness, you would rather go to him a thousand times than stay in this wicked
world. I would not for ten thousand, and ten thousand worlds part with my
interest in Christ. O how happy am I, that I am going to everlasting Joys! I
would not go back again for twenty thousand worlds; and will you not strive to
get an Interest in Christ?

29. After this, looking upon one of her Fathers Servants, she said, What shall
I do? What shall I do at the great Day, when Christ shall say to me, Come, thou
Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for thee. And shall say to
the wicked, Go, thou Cursed into the Lake that burns for ever. What a grief is
it for me to think, that I shall see any of my friends that I knew upon Earth,
turned into that Lake that burns forever! O that word, For Ever, remember that,
For Ever! I speak these words to you, but they are nothing, except God speak to
you too: O pray, pray, pray, that God would give you Grace! And then (...)
prayed, O Lord finish thy work upon their Souls. It will be my comfort to see
you in Glory, but it will be your Everlasting happiness.

30. Her Grandmother told her she spent her self too much; he said; I care not
for that, if I could do any Soul good. O with what vehemence did she speak, as
if her heart were in every word she spoke.

31. She was full of Divine Sentences, and almost all her discourse, from the
first to the last, in the time of her ^ickness, was about her Soul, Christ's
sweetness, and the ^ouls of others; in a word, like a continued Sermon.

32. Upon Friday, after she had had such lively discoveries of Gods love, ^he
was exceeding desirous to dye, and cried out, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly,
conduct me to thy Tabernacle, I am a poor Creature without thee: but Lord
Jesus, my Soul longs to be with thee: O when shall it be! Why not now, dea^
Jesus? Come Lord Jesus, come quickly; but why do I speak thus? Thy ^^me, dear
Lord, is the best; O give me patience!

33. Upon Saturday she spoke very little (being very drowsy) yet now and then
dropped these words: How long sweet Jesus? Finish thy work sweet Jesus, Come away
sweet dear Lord Jesus, come quickly,; sweet Lord help, come away, now, now,
dear Jesus come quickly; Good Lord give patience to me to wait thy appointed
time; Lord Jesus help me, help me, help me. Thus at several times (when out of
her sleep) for she was asleep the greatest part of the day.

34. Upon the Lord's day, she scarc^ spoke any thing, but much desired that
Bills of thanksgiving might be sent to those who had formerly been praying for
her, that they might help her to praise God for that full assurance that he had
given her of His love; and seemed to be much swallowed up with the thoughts of
Gods free love to her Soul. She often commended her Spirit into the Lords hands;
and the last words which she was heard to speak, were these, Lord help, Lord
Jesus help; Dear Jesus, Blessed Jesus -- And thus upon the Lords Day, between
Nine and Ten of the Clock in the forenoon, she slept sweetly in Jesus, and
began an Everlasting Sabbath, February 19. 1670.

EXAMPLE II. Of a Child that was admirably affected with the things of God,
when he was between Two and Three years Old; with a brief account of his Life
and Death.
1. A Certain little Child, whose Mother had dedicated him to the Lord in her
womb^ when he could not speak (...), would be crying after God, and was greatly
desirous to be taught good things.

2. He could not endure to be put to Bed without Family duty, but would put his
Parents upon duty, and would with much devotion kneel down, and with great
patience and delight, continue till duty was at an end, without the least
expression of being weary; and he seemed never so well pleased, as when he was
engaged in duty.

3. He could not be satisfied with Family duty, but he would be often upon his
knees by himself in one corner or other.

4. He was much delighted in hearing the Word of God, either Read or Preached.

5. He loved to go to School, that he might learn something of God and would
observe and take great notice of what he had read, and come home and speak of
it with much affection; and he would rejoice in his book, and say to his
Mother, O Mother! I have had a sweet lesson to day, will you please to give me
leave to fetch my book that you may hear it?

6. As he grew up, he was more and more affected with the things of another
world; so that if we had not received ou^ information from one that is of
undoubted fidelity, it would seem incredible.

7. He quickly learned to read the Scripture, and would, with great Reverence,
Tenderness and Groans, read till tears and sobs were ready to hinder him.

8. When he was at secret prayer, he would weep bitterly.

9. He was wont oftentimes to complain of the naughtiness of his heart, and
seemed to be more grieved for the Corruption of his Nature, than for Actual Sin.

10. He had a vast Understanding in the things of God, even next to a wonder,
for one of his age.

11. He was much troubled for the wandering of his thoughts in duty, and that he
could not keep his heart always fixed upon God, and the work he was about, and
his affections constantly raised.

12. He kept a watch over his heart, and observed the workings of his Soul, and
would complain that they were so vain and fooli^h, and so little busied about
Spiritual things.

13. As he grew up, he grew daily in knowledge and experience, and his carriage
was so heavenly, and his discourse so excellent and experimental, that it made
those which heard it, even astonished.

14. He was exceeding importunate with God in duty,; and would plead with God
at a strange rate, and use such arguments in prayer, that one would think it
were impossible should ever enter into the heart of a Child; he would beg, and
expostulate, and weep so, that sometimes it could not be kept from the ears of
Neighbors; so that one of the next house was forced to cry out, The prayers
and tears of that Child in the next house will sink me to Hell, because by it
he did condemn his neglect of prayer, and his slight performance of it.

15. He was very fearful of wicked company, and would often beg of God to keep
him from it, and that he might never be pleased in them that took delight in
displeasing of God: And when he was at any time in the hearing of their wicked
words, taking the Lords Name in vain, or Swearing, or any filthy words, it
would even make him tremble, and ready to go home and weep.

16. He abhorred lying, with his Soul.

17. When he had committed any fault, he was easily convinced of it, and would
get in some (...) and secret place, (...) with tears beg pardon of God, and
strength against such a sin. He had a friend that often watched him, and listened
at his Chamber Door, from whom I received this Narrative.

18. When he had been asked, whether he would commit such a sin again, he would
never promise absolutely, because he said his heart was naught; but he would
weep and say, he hoped by the Grace of God he should not.

19. When he was left at home alone upon the Sabbath days, he would besure not
to spend any part of the day in Idleness and Play, but be busied in praying,
reading in the Bible, and getting of his Catechism.

20. When other Children were playing, he would many a time and often be praying.

21. One day a certain person was discoursing with him, about the Nature,
Office^, and Excellency of Christ, and that He alone can satisfy for our Sins,
and merit Everlas^ing life for us; and about other of the great Mysteries of
Redemption: he seemed savingly to understand them, and was greatly delighted
with the discourse.

22. One speaking concerning the Resurrection of the body, he did acknowledge
it; but that the same weak body that was buried in the Churchyard, should be
raised again, he thought very strange, but with admiration yielded, that
nothing was impo^^^ble to God; and that ^very day he was taken sick unto death.

23. A Friend of his asked him whether he were willing to dye, when he was
first taken sick; he answered, No; because he was afraid of his state as to
another world: Why Child, said the other, thou did pray for a new Heart, for
an humble, and sincere Heart, and I have heard thee; did thou not pray with
thy heart? I hope I did, said he.

24. Not long after, the same person asked him again, whether he were willing
to dye? He answered, Now I am willing, for I shall go to Christ.

25. One asked him what should become of his Sister, if he should dye and leave
her? He answered, The Will of the Lord must be done.

26. He still grew weaker and weaker, but carried it with a great deal of
sweetness and patience, waiting for his change, and at la^t did cheerfully
commit his Spirit unto the Lord; and calling upon the Name of the Lord, and
saying, Lord Jesus, Lord Jesus, -- in whose bosom, he sweetly slept, Dying as
I remember, when he was about Five or Six years old.

EXAMPLE III. Of a little Girl that was wrought upon, when she was between Four
and Five years Old, with some account of her holy Life and triumphant Death,
1. MAry A. When she was between Four and Five years old, was greatly affected
in hearing the Word of God, and became very solicitous about her Soul, and
everlasting Condition, weeping bitterly, to think what would become of her in
another World, asking strange Questions concerning God and Christ, and her own
Soul. So that this little Mary, before she was full five years old, seemed to
mind The one thing needful, and to choose The better part, and sat at the Feet
of Christ many a time, and often with Tears.

2. She was wont to be much in secret Duty, and many times come off from her
knees with Tears.

3. She would choose such times and places for secret Duty, as might render her
less observed by others, and did endeavor what possibly she could to conceal
what she was doing, when she was engaged in secret Duty.

4. She was greatly afraid of Hypocrisy, and of doing any thing to be seen of
men, and to get commendation and praise; and when she had heard one of her
Brothers saying, That he had been by himself at prayer, she rebuked him
sharply, and told him how little such prayers were like to profit him, and that
was little to his praise, to pray like a Hypocrite, and to be glad that any
should know what he had been doing.

5. Her Mother being full of sorrow after the Death of her Husband, this Child
came to her Mother, and asked her why she wept so exceedingly? Her Mother
answered, She had cause enough to weep, because her Father was dead: No dear
Mother, said the Child, you have no cause to weep so much; for God is a Good
God still to you.

6. She was a dear lover of faithful Ministers. One time after, she had been
hearing of Mr. Whitaker, she said, I love that man dearly, for the sweet words
that he speaks concerning Christ.

7. Her Book was her delight, and what she did read, she loved to make her own,
and cared not for passing over what she learned, without extraordinary
observation and understanding; and many times she was so ^^rangely affected in
reading of the Scriptures, that she would burst out into Tears, and would
hardly be pacified* so greatly was she ta^en with Chri^s Sufferings, the zeal
of Gods Servants, the danger of a Natural State.

8. She would complain oftentimes of the corruption of her Nature, of the
hardness of her Heart, that she could Repent no more thoroughly, and be no more
Humble and Grieved for her Sins against a good God; and when she did thus
complain* it was with abundance of Tears.

9. She was greatly concerned for the Souls of others, and grieved to think o^
the miserable Condition that they were in upon this account; when she could
handsomely, she would be putting in some pretty sweet word of Christ; but above
all, she would do what she could to draw the hearts of her Brethren and Sisters
after Christ and there was no small hopes* that her example and good Counsel
did prevail with some of them when they were very young, to get into corners to
pray, and to ask very gracious Questions about the things of God.

10. She was very Conscientious in keeping the Sabbath, spending the wh^le time
either in Reading or Praying, or learning her Catechism, or teaching her
Brethren and Si^^ers. One time when she was left at home upon the Lords Day,
she got some other little Children together, with her Brothers and Sisters, and
in^^ead of Playing (as other naughty Children use to do) she told them, That
that was the Lords Day, and that they ought to remember that Day to keep it
holy; and then she told them, how it was to be spent in Religious Exercises all
the day long, except so much as was to be taken up in the Works of necessity
and mercy; then she prayed with them her self, and among other things begged,
that the Lord would give Grace and Wisdom to them little Children, That they
might know how to serve him, as one of the little ones in the company with her,
told afterward.

11. She was a Child of a strange tenderness and compassion to all, full of
bowels and pity: whom she could not help, ^he would be ready to weep over;
especially if she saw her Mother at any time troubled* she would quickly make
her sorrows he^ own, and weep for her, and with her.

12. When her Mother had been somewhat solicitous about any worldly thing, she
would, if she could possibly, put her off from her care one way or other. One
time she told her, O Mother, Grace is better than that, (meaning something her
Mother wanted,) I had rather have Grace and the Love of Christ, than any thing
in the world.

13. This Child was often musing and busied in the thoughts of her Everlasting
Work; witness that strange question, O what are they doing, which are already
i^ Heaven? And she seemed to be hugely desirous to be among them that were
praising, loving, delighting in God, and serving of Him without Sin. Her
Language was so strange about Spiritual matters, that she made many excellent
Christians to stand amazed, as judging it scarce to be paralleled.

14. She took great Delight in reading of the Scripture, and some part of it
was more sweet to her than her appointed food; she would get several choice
Scriptures by heart, and discourse of them savourly, and apply them suitably.

15. She was not altogether a stranger to other good Books, but would be
reading of them with much affection; and where she might, she noted the Books
parti^ularly, observing what in the reading did most warm her heart, and she
was ready upon occasion to improve it.

16. One time a woman coming into the House in a great Passion, spoke of her
Condition, as if none were like hers, and it would never be otherwise; the
Child said, it were a strange thing to say when it is night, it will never be
day again.

17. At another time a near Relation of hers being in some streights made some
complaint, to whom she said, I have heard Mr. Carter say a Man may go to heaven
without a Penny in his Purse, but not without Grace in his Heart.

18. She had an extraordinary Love to the People of God; and when she saw any
that she thought feared the Lord, her Heart would even leap for joy.

19. She loved to be much by her self, and would be greatly grieved if she were
at any ^ime deprived of a convenience for secret Duty; she could not live
without constant Address to God in secret; and was not a little pleased when
she could go into a corner to pray and weep.

20. She was much in praising God, and seldom or never complained of any thing
but Sin.

21. She continued in this course of praying and praising of God, and great
dutifulness and sweetness to her Parents, and those that taught her any thing,
yet she did greatly encourage her Mother while she was a Widow, and desired
that the absence of a Husband, might in some measure be made up by the
dutifulness and holiness of a Child. She studied all the ways that could be to
make her Mothers Life sweet.

22. When she was between eleven and twelve years old, she sickned, in which
she carried it with admirable patience and sweetness, and did what she could
with Scripture Arguments, to support and encourage her Relations to part with
her, that was going to Glory, and to prepare themselves to meet her in a
Blessed Eternity.

23. She was not many days sick before she was marked; which she first saw her
self, and was greatly rejoiced to think that she was marked out for the Lord,
and was now going apace to Christ. She called to her Friends, and said, I am
marked, but be not troubled, for I know I am marked for one of the Lords own.
One asked her, How she knew that? She answered, The Lord has told me, that I
am one of His dear Children. And thus she spoke with a holy Confidence in the
Lords Love to her Soul, and was not in the least daunted when she spoke of her
death; but seemed greatly delighted in the apprehension of her nearness to her
Fathers House. And it was not long before she was filled with joy unspeakable
in believing.

24. When she just lay a Dying, her Mother came to her, and told her, She was
sorry that she had reproved and corrected so good a Child so often. O Mother,
said she, Speak not thus, I bless God, now I am Dying, for your Reproofs and
Corrections too; for it may be, I might have gone to Hell, if it had not been
for your Reproofs and Corrections.

25. Some of her Neighbors coming to visit her, asked her, if she would leave
them? She answered them, If you serve the Lord, you shall come after me to
Glory.

26. A little before she died, she had a great conflict with Satan, and Cried
out, I am none of his; her Mother seeing her in trouble, asked her what was the
matter? She answered, Satan did trouble me, but now I thank God all is well, I
know, I am none of his, but Christ's.

27. After this, she had a great sense of Gods Love, and a Glorious sight, as
if she had seen the very Heavens open, and the Angels come to receive her; by
which her Heart was filled with joy, and her Tongue with praise.

28. Being desired by the standers by, to give them a particular account of
what she saw. She answered, You shall know hereafter; and so in an ecstasy of
Joy and holy Triumph, she went to Heaven when she was about Twelve years old.

Hallelujah.

EXAMPLE IV. Of a Child that began to look toward Heaven, when she was about
Four years old, with some observable Passages in her Life, and at her Death.
1. A Certain little Child, when she was about Four years old, had a
Conscientious sense of her Duty toward her Parents, because the Commandment
says, Honor thy Father and thy Mother. And though she had little advantage of
Education, she carried it with the greatest Reverence to her Parents
imaginable, so that she was no small Credit, as well as Comfort to them.

2. It was no usual thing for her to weep, if she saw her Parents troubled,
though her self had not been the occasion of it.

3. When she came from school, she would with grief and abhorrency say, that
other Children had sinned against God by speaking grievous words, which were so
bad, that she durst not speak them again.

4. She would be oftentimes admiring of Gods mercy, for so much goodness to her
rather than to others; that she saw some begging, others blind, some crooked,
and that she wanted nothing that was good for her.

5. She was many a time, and often, in one hole or another, in Tears upon her
knees.

6. This poor little thing would be ready to counsel other little Children, how
they ought to serve God; and putting them upon getting by themselves to pray;
and has been known when her friends have been abroad, to have been teaching
Children to pray, especially upon the Lords Day.

7. She very seriously begged the prayers of others, that they would remember
her, that the Lord would give her Grace.

8. When this Child saw some that were laughing, who she judged to be very
wicked; She told them, that she feared that they had little reason to be merry.
They asked whether one might not laugh? She answered, No indeed, till you have
Grace; they who are wicked, have more need to Cry, than to Laugh.

9. She would say, that it was the Duty of Parents, Masters and Mistresses, to
reprove (those under their charge) for sin, or else God will meet with them.

10. She would be very attentive when she read the Scriptures, and be much
affected with them.

11. She would by no means be persuaded to profane the Lords Day, but would
spend it in some good Duties.

12. When she went to School, it was willingly and joyfully, and she was very
teachable and exemplary to other Children.

13. When she was taken sick, one asked her Whether she were willing to Dye?
She answered, Yes, if God would Pardon her Sins. Being asked how her Sins
should be Pardoned? She answered, Through the Blood of Christ.

14. She said; she did believe in Christ, and desired, and longed to be with
Him, and did with a great deal of cheerfulness give up her Soul.

There were very many observable Passages, in the Life and Death of this Child,
but the hurry and grief that her Friends were in, buried them.

EXAMPLE V. Of the Pious Life, and Joyful Death, of a Child which Dyed when he
was about Twelve years Old, 1632
1. CHarles Bridgman had no sooner learned to speak, but he betook himself to
Prayer.

2. He was very prone to learn the things of God.

3. He would be sometimes teaching them their Duty that waited upon him.

4. He learned by heart many good things, before he was well fit to go to
School: and when he was sent to School, he carried it so, that all that
observed him, either did or might admire him. O the sweet Nature, the good
Disposition, the sincere Religion which was in this Child!

5. When he was at School, what was it that he desired to learn, but Christ,
and Him Crucified.

6. So Religious and Savoury were his Words, his Actions so upright, his
Devotion so hearty, his Fear of God so great, that many were re^^y to say, as
they did of John; What manner of Child shall this be?

7. He would be much in reading the Holy Scriptures.

8. He was desirous of more Spiritual knowledge, and would be often asking very
serious and admirable Questions.

9. He would not stir out of doors before he had poured out his Soul to the
Lord.

10. When he eat any thing, he would be sure to lift up his Heart unto the Lord
for a Blessing upon it; and when he had moderately refreshed himself by eating,
he would not forget to acknowledge Gods goodness in feeding of him.

11. He would not lie down in his Bed, till he had been upon his knees; and
when sometimes he had forgotten his Duty, he would quickly get out of his Bed,
and kneeling down upon his bare knees, covered with no Garment but his
linnings, ask God forgiveness for that sin.

12. He would rebuke his Brethren if they were at any time too hasty at their
Meals, and did eat without asking a Blessing; his che^k was usually this; Dare
you do thus? God be merciful to us, this bit of Bread might ^h^ak us.

13. His Sentences were wise and weighty, and well might become some ancien^
Christian.

14. His sickness was a lingering Disease^ against which, to comfort him, one
tells him of possessions that must fall to his Portion; And what are they? said
he, I ha^ rather have the Kingdom of Heaven, than (...) thousand such
Inheritances.

15. When he was sick, he seemed much taken up with Heaven, and asked very
serious Questions about the Nature of his Soul.

16. After he was pretty well satisfied about that, he enquired how his Soul
might be Sa^ed; the answer being made, by the applying of Christ's Merits by
Faith; he was pleased with the answer, and was ready to give any one that
should desire it, an account of his Hope.

17. Being asked, whether he had rather Live or Dye? He answered, I desire to
Dye, that I may go to my Savior.

18. His Pains increasing upon him, one asked him, Whether he would rather
still endure those Pains, or forsake Christ? Alas, said he, I know not what to
say, being but a Child; for these Pains may stagger a strong Man; but I will
strive to endure the ^est that I can. Upon this he called to mind that Martyr
Thomas Bil^^y; who being in Prison, the Night before his burning, put his
Finger into the Candle, to know how he could endure the Fire. O (said the
Child) had I Lived then, I would have run through the Fire to have gone to
Christ.

19. His sickness l^sted long, and at least three days before his Death, he
Prophesied his Departure, and not only that he must dye, but the very Day. On
the Lords Day, said he, look to me; neither was this a word of course, which
you may guess by his often repetition, every day asking till the day came
indeed, What, is Sunday come? At last, the looked for day came on* and no sooner
had the Sun beautified that morning with its light, but he falls into a Trance;
his Eyes were fixed, his Face cheerful, his Lips smiling, his Hands and Feet
clasped in a Bow, as if he would have received some Blessed Angel that were at
hand to receive his Soul. But he comes to himself, and tells them how he saw
the (...) Body that ever Eyes beheld, who bid him be of good cheer, for he must
presently go with Him.

20. One that stood near him, as now suspecting the time of his Dissolution
nigh bid him say, Lord, into thy hands I commend my Spirit, which is thy due;
for why thou have redeemed it, O Lord my God most true.

21. The last Words which he spoke were exactly these: Pray, pray, pray, nay*
yet pray; and the more Prayers, the better all prospers; God is the best
Physician; Into His Hands I commend my Spirit. O Lord Jesus receive my Soul:
Now close min^ Eyes: Forgive me Father, Mother, Brother, Sister, all the world.
Now I am well, my Pa^^ is almost gone my Joy is at hand. Lord have mercy on me,
O Lord receive my Soul unto thee. And thus he yielded his spirit up unto the
Lord, when he was about Twelve years old*

This Narrative was taken out of Mr. Ambrose his Life's Lease.

EXAMPLE VI. Of a poor Child that was awakened when she was about Five years
Old.
1. A Certain very poor Child, that had a very bad Father, but it was to be
hoped a very good Mother, was by the Providence of God, brought to the sight of
a Godly Friend of mine, who upon the first sight of the Child, had a great
pity for him, and took an affection to him, and had a mind to bring him up for
Christ.

2. At the first, he did with great sweetness and kindness allure the Child, by
which means it was not long before he got a deep interest in the Heart of the
Child, and he began to obey him with more readiness than Children usually to
their Parents.

3. By this a Door was opened for a farther Work, and he had a greater
advantage to instill Spiritual principles into the Soul of the Child, which he
was not wanting in, as the Lord gave opportunity, and the Child was capable of.

4. It was not long before the Lord was pleased to strike in with the Spiritual
Exhortations of this good Man, so that the Child was brought to a liking to the
things of God.

5. He quickly learnt a great part of the Assemblies Catechism by heart, and
that before he could read his Primer within Book; and he took a great delight
in learning his Catechism.

6. He was not only able to give a very good account of his Catechism, but he
would answer such Questions as are not in the Catechism, with greater
understanding than could be expected of one of his Age.

7. He took great delight in discoursing about the things of God; and when my
Friend had been either praying or reading, expounding or repeating Sermons, he
seemed very attentive, and ready to receive the truths of God, and would with
incredible gravity, diligence and affection, wait till duties were ended, to
the no small joy and admiration of them which observed him.

8. He would ask very excellent questions, and discourse about the condition of
his Soul and Heavenly things, and seemed mightily concerned what should become
of his Soul when he should dye: so that his discourse made some Christians eve^
to stand astonished.

9* He was greatly taken with the great kind^^^s of Christ in dying for
sinners, and and would be in tears at the mention of them: and seemed at a
strange rate to be affected with the unspeakable Love of Christ.

10. When no body has been speaking to him, he would burst out into tears, and
being asked the reason, he would say, that the very thoughts of Christ's love to
sinners in suffering for them, made him that he could not but Cry.

11. Before he was Six years old, he made Conscience of a secret (...); and
when he prayed, it was with (...) ^^^raordinary meltings, that his eyes have
^ooked ^^d and sore, with weeping by himself for his sin.

12. He would be putting of Christians upon Spiritual discourse when he saw
them, and seemed little satisfied, unless they were talking of good things.

13. It is evident, that this poor Child's thoughts were very much busied about
the things of another World, for he would oftentimes be speaking to his
Bedfellow a^ midnight, about the matter of his Soul; and when he could not
s^eep, he would take Heavenly conference to be sweeter than his appointed rest.
This was his usual custom, and thus he would provoke and put forward an
experienced Christian, to spend waking hours in talk of God and the everlasting
rest.

14. Not long after this, his good Mother dyed, which went very near his heart,
for he greatly honored his Mother.

15. After the Death of his Mother, he would often repeat some of the Promises
that are made to Fatherless Children, especially that in Exodus 22.22. Ye shall
not affect any (...) or the Fatherless Child; if thou (...) in any wise, and
they Cry at all unto me, I will surely hear their Cry -- These words he would
often repeat with tears, and say, I am Fatherless and Motherless upon Earth,
yet if any wrong me, I have a Father in Heaven who will take my part; to Him I
commit my self, and in Him is all my trust.

16. Thus he continued in a course of Holy Duties, living in the fear of God,
and showed wonderful Grace for a Child, and died sweetly in the Faith of Jesus.

My Friend, is a judicious Christian of many years experience, who was no ways
related to him, but a constant eye and ear witness of his Godly life, and
honorable and cheerful death, from whom I received this Information.

EXAMPLE VII. Of a Notorious Wicked Child, who was taken up from Begging, and
admirably Converted; with an account of his holy Life and joyful Death, when he
was Nine years Old.
1. A Very poor Child, of the Parish of Newington-But^s, came begging to the
door of a dear Christian Friend of mine, i^ a very lamentable case, so filthy
and nasty, that he would even have turned ones stomach to have looked on him:
But it pleased God to raise in the heart of my Friend, a great pity and
tenderness toward* this poor Child, so that in Charity he took him out of the
streets, whose Parents were unknown, who had nothing at all in him to commend
him to any ones Charity, but his misery. My Friend eyeing the Glory of God, and
the good of the Immortal Soul of this wretched Creature, discharged the Parish
of the Child, and took him as his own, designing to bring him up for the Lord
Christ. A Noble piece of Charity* And that which did make the kindness far the
greater, was, that there seemed to be very little hopes of doing any good upon
this Child, for he was a very Monster of wickedness, and a thousand times more
miserable and vile by his Sin, than by his Poverty. He was running to Hell as
soon as he could go, and was old in naughtiness when he was young in years; and
one shall scarce hear of one so like the Devil in his Infancy, as this poor
Child was. What Sin was there (that his age was capable of) that he did not
commit? What by the Corruption of his Nature, and the abominable Example of
little Begger-boys, he was arrived to a strange pitch of Impiety. He would call
filthy Names, take Gods Name in vain, Curse and Swear, and do almost all kind
of Mischief; and as to any thing of God, worse than an Heathen.

2. But this Sin and Misery was but a stronger Motive to that Gracious man to
pity him, and to do all that possibly he could to pluck this Firebrand out of
the Fire, and it was not long before the Lord was pleased to let him
understand, that He had a design of everlasting kindness upon the Soul of this
poor Child; for no sooner had this good Man taken this Creature into his house,
but he prays for him, and labors with all his might to convince him of his
miserable condition by Nature, and to teach him something of God, the worth of
his own Soul, and that Eternity of Glory or Misery that he was born to: And
Blessed be Free Grace, it was not long before the Lord was pleased to let him
understand, that it was Himself which put it into his heart to take in this
Child, that he might bring him up for Christ. The Lord soon struck in with his
Godly Instructions, so that an amazing Change was seen in the Child, in a few
weeks space he was soon convinced of the evil of his ways; no more News now of
his calling of Names, Swearing, or Cursing; no more taking of the Lords Name in
vain; now he is civil and respective; and such a strange alteration was wrought
in the (...), that all the Parish that r^ng (...) his (...) before, was now
rea^^ to talk of his Ref^rmation; (...) company, his talk, his ^mployment is
now changed, and he is like another Creature; so that the Glory of Gods Free
Grace began already to shine in him.

3. And this Change was not only an external one, and to be discerned abroad,
but he would get by himself, and weep and mourn bitterly, for his horrible
wicked life, as might easily be perceived by them that lived in the house with
him.

4. It was the great care of his Godly master, to strike in with those
Convictions which the Lord had made, and to improve them all he could; and he
was not a little glad to see that his labor was not in vain (...) the Lord; he
still experiences that the Lord does carry on his own work mightily on the
heart of the Child; he (...) still more and more broken under a sense of his
undone state by Nature; he is often in tears, and bemoaning his lost and
miserable Condition. When his Master did speak of the things of God, he listened
earnestly, and took in with much greediness and affection what he was taught
Seldom was there any discourse about Soul-matters in his hearing, but he heard
it as if it were for his life, and would weep greatly.

5. He would after his Master had been speaking to him, or others, of the
things of God, go to him, and question with him about them, and beg of him to
instruct and teach him further, and to tell him those things again, that he
might remember and understand them better.

6. Thus he continued seeking after the knowledge of God and Christ, and
practicing holy Duties, till the sickness came into the house, with which the
Child was smitten; at his first sickning, the poor Child was greatly amazed and
afraid, and though his pains were great, and the distemper very tedious, yet
the fence of his sin, and the thought of the miserable condition that he feared
his Soul was still in, made his trouble ten times greater; he was in grievous
agonies of Spirit, and his former sins s^ared him in the face, and made him
tremble; the poison of Gods Arrows did even drink up his Spirits; the sense of
Sin and Wrath was so great, that he could not tell what in the world to do; the
weight of Gods Displeasure, and the thoughts of lying under it to all Eternity,
did ever break him to pieces, and he did Cry ou^ very bitterly, What should he
do? He was a miserable Sinner, and he feared that he should go to Hell; his
Sins had been so great and s^ many, that there was no hopes for him. He was not
by far so much concerned for his Life, as for his Soul, what should become of
that forever. Now the plague upon hi^ Body seemed nothing to that which was i^
his Soul.

7. But in this great Distress the Lord was pleased to send one to take care
for his Soul, who urged to him the great and precious Promises which were made
to on^ in his condition, telling him that there was enough in Christ for the
Chiefest of Sinners* and that He came to seek and save such a lost Creature as
he was. But this poor Child found it a very difficult thing for him to believe
that there was any mercy for such a Dreadful Sinner as he had been

8. He was made to Cry out of himself, not only for his Swearing and Lying, and
other outwardly notorious Sins; but he was in great Horror for the Sin of his
Nature, for the Vileness of his Heart, and Original Corruption; under it he was
in so great anguish, that the trouble of his Spirit, made him in a great
measure to forget the pains of his body.

9. He did very particularly confess and bewail his sins with tears; and some
sins so secret, that none in the world could charge him with.

10. He would Condemn himself for sin, as deserving to have no Mercy, and
thought that there was not a greater Sinner in all London than himself, and he
abhorred himself as ^he vilest creature he knew.

11. He did not only pray much with strong Cries and Tears himself, but he
begged the prayers of Christians for him.

12. He would ask Christians, whether they thought there were any hopes for
him, and would beg of them to deal plainly with him, for he was greatly afraid
of being d^ceived.

13. Being informed how willing and ready the Lord Christ was to accept of poor
Sinners, upon their Repentance and Turning, and being counseled to venture
himself upon Christ, for Mercy and Salvation, he said he would fain cast
himself upon Christ, but he could not but wonder how Christ should be willing
to dye for su^^ a vile wretch as he was, and he found i^ one of the hardest
things in the world to Believe.

14. But at last, it pleased the Lord to give him some small hopes that the^
might be Mercy for him* for he had bee^ the Chiefest of Sinners; and he was
mad^ to lay a little hold upon such promises, (...) that, Come unto me, all ye
that are weary an^ heaven laden, and I will give you rest. Bu^ O! how did this
poor B^y admire and Ble^^ God for the le^st Hopes! How highly di^ he advance
Rich and Free Grace, tha^ should pity and pardon him! And at last he was full
of Praise, and admiring of God so that, (to steak in the words of a Preciou^
man, that was an eye and ear witness) to the Praise and Glory of God be it
spoken, the house at that day, for all the sickness in it, was (...) little
lower Heaven, so full of Joy an^ Praise.

15. The Child grew exceedingly i^ Knowledge, Experiences, Patience, Humility
and Self-abhorrency; and he thought he could never speak bad enough of himself,
the Name that he would call himself by, was (...) Toad.

16. And though he prayed before, yet now the Lord poured out upon him the
Spirit of Prayer, in an extraordinary manner for one of his age; so that now he
prayed more frequently, more earnestly, more spiritually than ever. O how
eagerly would he beg to be washed in the Blood of Jesus! and that the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, that was over Heaven and Earth, and Sea, would pardon
and forgive him all his Sins, and receive his Soul into his Kingdom. And what
he spoke, it was with so much life and fervor of Spirit, as that it filled the
Hearers with astonishment and joy.

17. He had no small sense of the use and excellency of Christ, and such
longings and breathings of his Soul after him, that when mention has been made
of Christ, he has been ready almost to leap out of his bed for joy.

18. When he was told, that if he should recover, he must not live as he li^^;
but he must give up himself to Christ, and to be his Child and Servant, to bear
his Yoke and be obedient to his Laws, and live a holy life, (...) take his
Cross, and suffer mocking and reproach, it may be, persecution for His Name
sake. Now, Child, (said one to him,) are you willing to have Christ upon such
terms? He signified his willingness by the earnestness of his looks and words,
and the casting up of his Eyes to Heaven, saying, Yes, with all my Soul, the
Lord helping me, I will do this.

19. Yet he had many doubts and fears, and was ever and anon harping upon that,
That though he were willing, yet Christ he feared was not willing to accept of
him, because of the greatness of his Sin; yet his hopes were greater than his
fears.

20. The Wednesday before he Died, the Child lay as it were in a Trance for
about half an hour, in which time he thought he ^aw a Vision of Angels: When he
was out of his Trance, he was in a little pett, and asked his Nurse, Why she
did not let him go? Go, whether Child said she: Why along with those brave
Gentlemen (said he:) but they told me they would come and (...) me away for all
you, upon Friday next. And he doubled his words many times, upon Friday next,
those brave Gentlemen will come for me; and upon that day, the Child died
joyfully.

21. He was very thankful to his Master, and very sensible of his great
kindness in taking him out of the streets, when he was a begging, and he
admired at the goodness of God, which put it into the mind of a stranger to
look upon, and to take such Fatherly care of such a pittyful sorry Creature as
he was. O my dear Mother, (said he) and Child of God, I hope to see you in
Heaven, for I am sure you will go thither. O Blessed, Blessed be God, that made
you take pity upon me, for I might have Dyed, and have gone to the Devil, and
have been Damned for ever, if it had not been for you.

22. The Thursday before he Dyed, he asked a very Godly Friend of mine, wha^ he
thought of his condition, and whether his Soul was now going? For he said, he
could not still but fear, lest he should deceive himself with false hopes, at
which my Friend spoke to him thus: Child, for all that I have endeavored to
hold forth the Grace of God in Christ to thy Soul, and given you a warrant from
the Word of God, that Christ is as freely offered to you, as to any sinner in
the world; if thou (...) but willing to accept of Him, thou may have Christ
and all that thou do want, with Him; and yet thou give way to these thy
doubtings and fears, as though I told you nothing but lies. Thou sayes^ thou
fear that Christ will not accept of thee; I fear thou art not heartily
willing to accept of Him. The Child answered, Indeed I am; Why then, Child, if
thou art unfeignedly willing to have Christ; I tell the, He is a thousand times
more willing to have thee, and wash thee, and save thee, than thou art to
desire it. And now at this time Christ offers Himself to thee again; therefore
receive Him humbly by Faith freely into thy heart, and bid Him welcome, for He
deserves it. Upon which words the Lord discovered His love to the Child, and
he gave a kind of a leap in his bed, and snapt his fingers and thumb together
with abundance of joy, as much as to say, Well, yea all is well, the Match is
made, Christ is willing, and I am willing too; and now Christ is mine, and I am
His forever. And from that time forward, in full Joy and assurance of God's
love, he continued earnestly praising God, with desiring to dye, and (...) with
Christ. And on Fryday-morning he sweetly went to rest, using that very
expression, Into thy hands, Lord I commit my Spirit. He Died punctually at that
time which he had spoke of, and in which he expected those Angels to come to
him; he was not much above Nine years old when he Died.

This Narrative I had from a Judicious Holy man, unrelated to him, who was ^n
Eye and Ear-witness to all these things.

The End of the First Part.
A TOKEN FOR CHILDREN.

The Second Part.

BEING A farther Account of the CONVERSION, Holy and Exemplary Lives, and
Joyful Deaths, of several other Young Children, not Published in The First Part.

By JAMES JANEWAY, Minister of the GOSPEL.

Psalm. 8.2. Out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings, have thou Ordained
Strength.

Boston, in N. E. Reprinted by T. Green, for Benjamin Eliot. 1700.

A PREFACE TO THE Reader.
Christian READER,
IN the former Part of my Token for Children, I did in part Promise, That if
that Piece met with kind entertainment, it might be followed with a Second of
the same Nature. If it did not seem a little to savor of Vanity, I might tell
the World what encouragement I have met with in this Work; but this I will only
say, That I have met with so much as has persuaded me to give this Little Book
leave to go abroad into the World. I am not also Ignorant, what Discouragements
I may meet with, from some, but as long as I am sure I shall not meet with
th^^, That it is Improbable, if not Impossible, that it should Save a Soul; I
think the rest may easily be answered, or warrantable slighted. But because I
am persuaded by some, that one Example in the former, (viz. that of a Child
(...) began to be serious between Two and Three Years old) was scarce credible,
and they di^ fear might somewhat prejudice the authority o^ the (...) shall say
something to answer that* They w^^ch make this Objection are either Good or
Bad; If Bad, I expect never to sa^tisfy them, except I should tell them of ^
Romance or Play, or somewhat that might suit a Cardinal Mind; it is like
Holiness i^ older Persons, it is a matter of Contempt and Scorn to them, much
more i^ such as these I mention. The truth of it is* it is no wonder at all to
me, that the Sub^jects of Satan should not be very well please^ with that,
whose design is to undermin^ the interest of their great Masters: No^thing will
satisfy some, except Christ an^ Holiness may be degraded and vilified* But
hold Sinner, hold, never hope it, Hea^ven shall never be turned into Hell for
the sake, and as for all thy Atheistical Objecti^ons, Scoffs and Jeers, they
shall e're long be fully answered* and the Hosannah's (...) Hallelujah's of
these Babes shall Condem^ thy Oaths, Blasphemies, and Jeers, and then thou will
be silenced, and except Converting Grace turn thy heart quickly, tho^ wilt
forever rue thy Madness and Folly* when it is too late to remedy it.

But if the persons that make this Ob^ection be Godly, I question not, but that
I may give them reasonable satisfaction.

First, Consider who it is that I had that Example from. It was one Mrs.
Jeofries in Long-Lane in Mary Magdalen Bermondsey Parish, in the County of
Surry, a Woman of that fame in the Church of Christ, for her Exemplary Piety,
Wisdom, Experience, and singular Watchfulness over every Punctili^ that she
speaks; that I question not, but that her name is precious to most of the
Ministers of London, at least in the Borough; and as a Reverend Divine said,
Such a Mother in Israel, her single Testimony about London, is of as much
Authority almost as any one single Ministers: And having since discoursed this
matter with her, she calls God to Witness, that she has spoken nothing but
Truth; only in this she failed, in that she spoke not by far so much as she
might have done concerning that sweet Babe. I might add, that I have since seen
a Godly Gentleman out of the Country, that did profess to me, that he had seen
as much as that in a little one of the some Age, who since that time, I hear,
went sweetly to Heaven. Does not the Reverend Mr. Clark, in his Works, quote a
Child of two years old, that looked toward Heaven* Does not credible History
acquaint us wit^ a Martyr at seven years old, that was whip^ped almost to
Death, and never shed on^ tear, nor complained, and at last had his Hea^ struck
off? I do not speak of these as common matters, but record them amongst these
stupen^dious Acts of Him that can as easily work Won^ders as not. What is too
hard for the Almighty* Has God said, He will Work no more Wonders* I think
most of Gods Works in the business (...) Conversion call for Admiration: And I
believ^ that Silence, or rather Praise, would better be^come Saints, than
questioning the truth of suc^ things; especially where an apparent Injury (...)
thereby done to the interest of Christ, the Honor of Gods Grace, and the
Reputation of so eminen^ a Saint. I judge this sufficient to satisfi^ most, as
for others I trouble not my self* if I may but promote the Interest of Christ
and the Good of Souls, and give up my Ac^count with Joy, its enough. That the
Lord would Bless my endeavors to these ends, I be^ the Prayers of all Saints,
and yours also sweet Chil^dren that fear the Lord; and that Parents and Masters
would assist me with their warm appli^cation of these things, and that Children
may (...) their Crown and their Joy, Is the Prayer of (...) that desires to
love Christ and little Childr^^ dearly.

James Ianeway.

A TOKEN FOR CHILDREN. The Second Part.
EXAMPLE VIII. Of a Child that was very Serious at Four Years Old, with an
Account of his Comfortable Death, when he was Twelve Years and Three Weeks Old.
1. JOhn Sudlow, was Born of Religious Parents, in the County of Middlesex,
whose great care was to instill Spiritual Principles into him, as soon as he was
capable of understanding of them; whose Endeavors the Lord was pleased to
Crown with the desired success: So that (to use the Expression of a Holy Man
concerning him) Scarce more could be expected or desired from so little a one.

2. When he was scarce able to speak plain, he seemed to have a very great awe
and reverence of God upon his Spirit, and a strange sense of the things of
another world, as might easily be perceived by those serious and admirable
questions which he would be often asking of those Christians that he thought he
might be bold with.

3. The first thing that did most affect him, and made him endeavor to escape
from the wrath to come, and to enquire what he should do to be Saved, was the
Death of a little Brother; when he saw him without breath, and not able to
stir, and then carried out of doors, and put into a Pit-hole, he was greatly
concerned, and asked notable questions about him; but that which was most
affecting of himself and others, was, Whether he must Dye too, which being
answered, it made such a deep impression upon him, that from that time forward,
he was exceeding Serious, and this was when he was about four Years old.

4. Now he is desirous to know what he might do that he might live in another
World, and what he must avoid, that he might not Dye for ever, and being
instructed by his Godly Parents, he soon labors to avoid whatsoever might
displease God; now tell him that any thing was Sinful, and that God would not
have him to do it, and he is easily kept from it, and even at this time of day,
the apprehensions of God, and Death and Eternity laid such a restraint upon
him, that he would not for a World have told a lie.

5. He quickly learned to read exactly, and took such pleasure in reading of
the Scriptures and his Catechism, and other good Books, that it is scarce to be
paralleled; he would naturally run to his Book without bidding, when he came
home from School, and when other Children of his age and acquaintance were
playing, he reckoned it his Recreation to be doing that which was good.

6. When he was in Coats, he would be still asking his Maid serious questions,
and praying her to teach him his Catechism, or Scriptures, or some good thing;
common Discourse he took no delight in, but did most eagerly desire to be
sucking in of the knowledge of the things of God, Christ, his Soul, and another
World.

7. He was lingely taken with the reading of the Book of Martyrs, and would be
ready to leave his Dinner to go to his Book.

8. He was exceeding careful of redeeming and improving of Time; scarce a
moment of it, but he would give an excellent account of the expense of it; so
that this Child might have taught elder Persons, and will questionless Condemn
their idle and unaccountable wasting of those Precious hours in which they
should (as this sweet Child*) have been laying in provision for Eternity.

9. He could not endure to read any thing over slightly, but whatsoever he
read, he dwelt upon it, labored to understand it thoroughly, and remember it;
and what he could not understand, he would often ask his Father or Mother the
meaning of it.

10. When any Christian Friends have been discoursing with his Father, if they
began to talk any thing about Religion, to be sure they should have his
company, and of his own accord, he would leave all to hear any thing of Christ,
and crept as close to them as he could, and listen as affectionately though it
were for an hour or two: He was scarce ever known to express the least token of
weariness while he was hearing any thing that was good, and sometimes, when
Neighbors Children would come and call him out, and entice him, and beg of him
to go with them, he could by no means be persuaded, though he might have had
the leave of his Parents, if he had any hopes that any good Body would come
into his Fathers House.

11. He was very modest whilst any stranger was present, and was loath to ask
them any questions: but as soon as they were gone, he would let his Father know
that there was little said or done, but he observed it, and would reflect upon
what was past in their discourse, and desire satisfaction in what he could not
understand at present.

12. He was a Boy of almost prodigious parts for his age, as will appear for
his solid and rational questions; I shall but mention but two of many.

13. The first was this, when he was reading by himself, in Dra^ton's Poems
about Noah's Flood and the Ark, he asked, Who Built the Ark? It being answered,
that it was likely that Noah hired men to help him to Build it: And would they
(said he) Build an Ark to Save another, and not go into it themselves?

14. Another question he put was this* Whether had a greater Glory, Saints or
Angels* It being answered, that Angels were the most Excellent of Creatures,
and it is to b^ thought, their Nature is made capable o^ greater Glory than
Man's. He said, he wa^ of another mind, and his reason was, because Angels was
Servants, and Saints are Children* and that Christ never took upon him the
Nature of Angels, but he took upon him the Nature of Saints, and by his being
MAN, H^ has advanced humane Nature above the Nature of Angels.

15. By this you may perceive the greatness of his parts, and the bent of hi^
thoughts; and thus he continued for several Years together, laboring to ge^
more and more Spiritual knowledge, and (...) prepare for an endless Life.

16. He was a Child of an excellent sweet Temper, wonderfully Dutiful to hi^
Parents, ready and joyful to do what he was bid, and by no means would do any
thing to displease them, and if they were at any time seemingly angry, he would
not stir from them till they were thoroughly reconciled to him.

17. He was not only good himself, but would do what he could to make others so
too, especially those that were nearest to him; he was very watchful over his
Brethren and Sisters, and would not suffer them to use any unhandsome words, or
to do any unhandsome action, but he would be putting them upon that which was
good, and when he did at any time rebuke them, it was not Childishly and
Slightly, but with great Gravity and Seriousness, as one that was not a little
concerned for Gods Honor, and the Eternal welfare of their Souls.

18. He would go to his Father and Mother with great tenderness and compassion,
(being far from telling of Tales) and beg of them, to take more care of the
Souls of his Brethren and Sisters, and to take heed lest they should go on in a
Sinful Christless state, and prove their sorrow and shame, and go to Hell when
they dye, and he r^ined for ever.

19. He was exceedingly affected with hearing of the Word of God Preached, and
could not be satisfied, except he could carry home much of the substance of
what he heard; to this end he quickly got to learn Shorthand, and would give a
very pretty account of any Sermon that he heard.

20. He was much engaged in secret duty, and in reading the Scriptures; to be
sure morning and evening he would be by himself, and was no question, wrestling
with God.

21. He would get choice Scriptures by heart, and was very perfect at his
Catechism.

22. The Providence of God were not passed by, without considerable
observation by him.

23. In the time of the Plague, he was exceedingly concerned about his Soul and
Everlasting state; very much by himself upon his knees.

This Prayer was found written in Shorthand after his Death.

O Lord God and Merciful Father, take pity upon me, a miserable Sinner, and
strengthen me, O Lord, in thy Faith, and make me one of thy Glorious Saints in
Heaven. O Lord keep me from this Pois^nus Infection; however, not my will, but
thy Will be done, O Lord, on Earth as it is in Heaven; but O Lord, if thou have
appointed me to Dye by it, O Lord, fit me for Death, and give me a good heart
to tear up under my afflictions: O Lord God and Merciful Father, take pity on
me, thy Child, teach me O Lord thy Word, make me strong in Faith. O Lord I have
Sinned against thee, Lord Pardon my Sins; I had been in Hell long ago if it had
not been for thy Mercy. O Lord, I pray thee to keep my Parents in thy Truth,
and save them from this Infection, if it be thy Will, that they may live to
bring me up in thy Truth: O Lord, I pray thee stay this Infection that rages
in this City, and Pardon their Sins, and Try them once more, and see if they
will turn unto thee. Save me O Lord from this Infection, that I may Live to
Praise and Glorify thy Name; but O Lord, if thou have appointed me to dye of
it, fit me for Death, that I may dye with comfort; and O Lord, I pray thee to
help me to bear up under all afflictions, for Christ His sake. Amen. 24. He was
not a little concerned for the whole Nation, and begged that God would pardon
the Sins of this Land, and bring it nearer to himself.

25. About the beginning of November* 1665. this sweet Child was smote with the
Distemper, but he carried it with admirable patience under the hand of God.

26. These are some of his Dying Expressions -- The Lord shall be my Physician,
for He will cure both Soul and Body -- H^iven is the best Hospital, -- It is
the Lord, let Him do what seems good in His Eyes. Again, -- It is the Lord
that takes awa^ my Health, but I will say as Job did, Blessed be the Name of
the Lord -- If I should live longer, I shall but Sin against God. Looking upon
his Father, he said, If the Lord would but lend me the least Finger of his
Hand, to lead me through the dark entry of Death, I will rejoice in him.

27. When a Minister came to him, a^mong other things, he spoke somewhat of
Life. He said, This is a wicked world, yet it is good to Live with my Parents,
but it is better to Live in Heaven, --

28. An hour and an half before his Death, the same Minister came again to
visit him, and asked him, John, Art thou not afraid to die? He answered, No, if
the Lord will but comfort me in that h^ur* But said the Minister, How can
thou expect comfort, seeing (...) deserve none? He answered, No, if I had (...)
deserts I had been i^ Hell long ago. But replied the Minister, Which way do
thou expect Comfort and Salvation, seeing thou art a Sinner? He answered, ^n
Christ alone -- In whom, about an hour an half after, he fell asleep, saying,
He would take a long sleep, Charging them that were about him not to ^ake him.

He Died when he was Twelve Years Three Weeks and One Day old.

EXAMPLE IX. Of a Child that was very Eminent, when she was between Five and
Six Years Old, with some Memorable Passages of her Life, who Died about 1640.
1 ANne Lane was Born of honest Parents in Colebrook, in the County of Bucks,
who was no sooner able to speak plain, and express any thing considerable of
reason, but she began to act as if she were Sanctified from the very Womb.

2. She was very solicitous about her Soul, what would bec^me of it when she
should die, and where ^he should live for^ever, and what she should do to be
saved, when she was about Five Years old.

3. She was wont to be often engaged i^ secret Prayer, and pouring out of her
Soul in such a manner, as is rarely to be heard of from one of her years.

4. I having occasion to lie at Colebrook, sent for her Father, an old
Disciple, an Israelit^ indeed, and desired him to give me some account of his
Experiences, and how the Lord first wrought upon him?

5. He gave me this answer, That h^ was of a (...) somewhat Civil; Honest, and
as to man (...), but he was l^ttle acquainted with the Power of Religion, till
this sweet Child put him upon a th^row enquiry into the state of his Soul, and
would s^^ll be begging of him and pleading with him to redeem hi^ Time, and to
(...) with life and vigor in the things of God, which was no small
demonstration to him of the ^ea^ity of (...), that a very Babe and Suckling
should speak so feelingly about the things of God, and be so greatly concerned
not only about her own Soul but about her Fathers too, which was the occasion
of his Conversion, and the very thought of it was a quickening to him for Thirty
Years, and he hopes never to wear off the Impressions of it from his Spirit.

6. After this she (as I remember) put her Father upon Family Duties, and if at
any time he were for any time out of his Shop, she would find him out, with so
much sweetness and humility beg of him to come home, and to remember the
preciousness of time, for which we must all give an account.

7. She was grieved if she saw any that conversed with her Father if they were
^nprofitable, unsavory, or long in their Discourse of common things.

8. Her own Language was the Language of Canaan: How Solidly, Profitably, and
Spiritually would she talk? So that she made good people take great delight in
her company, and justly draw the admiration of (...) that kn^w her.

9. She could not endure the company of common Children, nor play* (...) was
(...) above all (...) most Children are taken with; her business was to be
reading, praying, discoursing about the things of God, and any kind of business
that her age and strength was capable of, idle she would not be by any means.

10. It was the greatest Recreation to her to hear any good People talking
about God, Christ, their Souls, the Scriptures, or any thing that concerned
another Life.

11. She had a strange Contempt o^ the world, and scorned those things which
most are too much pleased with. She could not be brought to wear any ^^ces, or
any thing that she thought (...).

12. She would be complaining to her Parents, if she ^^w any thing in them tha^
she (...) would not be for the honor of (...) or suitable to that condition
(...) the Providence of God had set them (...), in the World.

13. This Child was the joy and delight of all the Christians there-abouts, in
those ^imes, who was still quickening and raising of the Spirits of those that
talked with her. This poor B^b^ was a great help to both Father and Mother, and
her memory is (...) to this day.

14. She continued thus to walk as a stranger in the World, and one that was
making haste to a better place. And after she had done a great deal of work for
God and her own Soul, and others too, she was called home to rest, and received
into the Arms of Jesus before she was ten Years old; she departed about 1640.

EXAMPLE X. Of a Child that was awakened when She was between Seven and Eight
Years Old, with some Account of her last Hours, and Triumphant Death.
1. TAbitha Alder was the Daughter of a Holy and Reverend Minister in Kent, who
lived near Gravesend. She was much instructed in the Holy Scriptures and her
Catechism, by her Father and Mother, but there appeared nothing extraordinary
in her, till she was between Seven and Eight Years old.

2. About which time, when she was sick, one asked her, what she thought would
become of her if s^e should Dye? She answered, That she was greatly afraid that
she should go to Hell.

3. Being ask^d why she was afraid she should go to Hell? She answer^d, Because
she (...) she did ^ot love God.

4. Again, being asked how she d^d know she did not love God? She replied, What
have I done for God ever since I was born? And besides this, I have been taught
That he that l^ves God keeps His Commandment^, but I have ^ept none of them all.

5. Being further demanded, if she would not (...) love God, She answered, Ye^*
with all her heart, if she could, but she ^ound is a hard thing to love one she
did not see.

6. She was advised to beg of God a heart to love Him: She answered, She was
afraid it was too late.

7. Being asked again, whether she was not sorry that she could not love God:
she answered Yes, but was still afraid it was too late.

8. Upon this seeing her in such a desponding condition, a dear Friend of hers
spen^ the next day in Fasting and Prayer for her.

9. After this, that Christian Friend asked her how she did now? She answered
with a great deal of joy, that now she blessed the Lord, she loved the Lord
Jesus dearly, she felt she did love Him. Oh, said she, I love Him dearly.

10 Why said her Friend, did you not say yesterday, that you did not love the
Lord, and that you could not? What did you mean to speak so strangely? Sure
(said she) it was Satan that did put into my mind: But now I love Him, O
blessed be God for the Lord Jesus Christ.

11 After this, she had a discovery of her approaching Dissolution, which was
no small comfort to her: Anon (said she, with a holy Triumph) I shall be with
Jesus, I am Married to Him, He is my Husband, I am His Bride, I have given my
self to Him, and He has given Himself to me, and I shall live with Him for
ever.

12 This strange language made the Hearers even stand astonished: But thus she
continued for some little t^me, in a kind of ecstasy of joy, admiring the
excellency of Christ, rejoicing in her Interest in Him, and longing to be with
Him.

13 After a while some of her friends standing by her, observed a more than
ordinary earnestness and fixedness in her (...) Look how (...) something.

14 One asked what it was she fixed her Eyes upon so eagerly (...) warrant
(^aith one that was by) (...) see^^ Death^ ^ coming.

15 No (said she) it is Glory that I see, it is that I fix my Eye upon.

16. One asked her what was Glory like She answered, I cannot speak what, but I
a^ going to it* will you go with me* I am going (...) Glory, O that all of you
were to go with (...) to that Glory? With which words her Sou^ took wing, and
went to the possession o^ that Glory which she had some believing ^ight of
before.

She Die^ when she was between Eight and Nine Years old, about 1644.

EXAMPLE XI. Of a Child that was greatly affected with the things of God, when
She was very Young; with an exact Account of her admirable Carriage upon her
Deathbed.
1. SUsanna Bioks was Born at Leiden in Holland, Jan. 24. 1650. of very
Religious Parents, whose great care was ^o instruct and Catechize this their
Child* and to present her to the Ministers of ^he place, to be publicly
in^^ructed and Catechized.

2. It pleased the Lord to bless Holy ^ducation, the good Example of her
Pa^ents, and Catechizing, to the good of her ^oul, so that ^he soon had a true
savor and relish of what she was taught, and made an admirable use of it in a
time of need, as you shall hear afterward.

3 She was a Child of great (...) to her Parents, and of a very sweet, humble,
spiritual Nature, and not only the truth, but the power and eminency of
Religion did shine in her so clearly, that (...) did not only comfort the
hearts of her Parents, but drew the admiration of (...) that were witnesses of
Gods works of lov^ upon her, and may well be proposed as a pattern not only to
Children, but to Persons of riper years.

4 She continued in a course of Religi^ons Duties for some considerable tim^ so
that her life was more excellent tha^ most Christians, but in her last sickne^^
she excelled her self, and her deportmen^ was so admirable, that partly through
wonder and astoni^hment, and partl^ through sorrow, many observable things were
passed by without commiting to P^^per, which deserved to have been written in
Letters of Gold: But take these which follow, as some of many which were ^ake^
from her dying Lips, and first publishe^ by Religious and Judicious Christians
(...) Dutch, afterward translated into Scotch and with a little alteration of
the stil^ (for the benefit of English Children (...) brought into this form by
me.

5 In the Month of August, 1664. wh^^ the Pestilence raged so much in Hollan^
this sweet Child was smitten, and as so^^ as she felt her self very ill, she
was sai^ to break forth with abundance of sens^ and feeling, in these following
words: If ^hy Law were not my delight, I should perish (...) my affliction.

6 Her Father coming to her to encourage her in her sickness, said to her, be
of ^ood comfort my Child, for the Lord will be near to thee and us, under this
^eavy and fore Trial, He will not forsake (...) though He chasten us. Yea
farther ^said she) our Heavenly Father does chas^en us for our profit, that we
may be par^^kers of His Holiness; no chastisement ^^eme^h for the present to be
joyous, but ^rievous, but afterward it yields the ^eaceable fruit of
righteousness to them which are exercised thereby. The Lord (...) now chastning
of me upon this sick bed, ^ut I hope He will bless it so to me, as (...) use it
to yield to me that blessed fruit, according to the riches of His mercie^ which
(...) not.

7 After this, she spoke to God with her Eyes lift up to Heaven* saying, Be
mer^iful to me; O Father, be merciful to me a sinner, according to thy Word.

8 Then looking upon her sorrowful ^^rents, she said; It is said, Cast thy
bur^^n upon the Lord, and He shall sustain the, and He will never suffer the
Righteous to (...) moved. Therefore, my dear Father and Mother, cast all your
care upon Him who causes all things to go well that do concern you.

9 Her Mother said unto her, O m^ dear Child, I have no small comfort from the
Lord in thee, and the fruit of (...) Grace whereby thou have been so much
exercised unto Godliness in reading the Word in Prayer and gracious Discourse,
to the edification of thy self and us. The Lord Himself who gave thee to us,
make up th^^ loss, if it be His pleasure to take thee away from us.

10 Dear Mother (said she) though^ leave you, and you me, yet God will never
leave us; for it is said, Can a Woman forg^^ her sucking Child, that she should
not have compassion on the fruit of her Womb, yet (...) not I forget thee,
behold I have graven th^^ upon the palms of my hands. O comfortabl^ words, both
for Mothers and Children Mark, dear Mother, how fast the Lo^^ keeps and holds
His people, that H^ does even grave them upon the palms (...) His hands. Though
I must part wi^^ you* and you with me, yet Blessed be Go^ ^e will never part
either from you or (...).

11 Being weary with much speaking, ^he desired to rest a while, but after a
(...) time awaking again, her Father asked ^er how it was with her? She made no
^^rect answer, but asked what day it was? ^er Father said, it was the Lords
Day. Well then, said she, have you given up ^y name to be remembered in the
public ^rayers of the Church: Her Father told ^^r he had. I have learnt, said
she, Tha^ (...) effectual ^ervent Prayer of the Righteous ^^^leth much.

12 She had a very high esteem for the ^^ithful Ministers of Christ, and much
de^^red their company where she was, but ^^owing the hazard that such a visit
might ^^pose them and the Church too, she should by no means suffer that the
Ministers should come near her person, but chose ra^^er to throw her self upon
the Arms of ^he Lord, and to impro^e that knowledge ^^e had in the Word, and
her former ex^^rience, and the visits of private Christi^^, and those which the
Church had appoint^^ in such cases, to visit and comfort the (...).

13 One of those which came to vis^^ her, was of very great use to her to
comfort her, and lift her up in some measur^ above the fears of Death.

14 Though young, she was very much concerned for the Interest of God and
Re^ligion, for Gospel Ministers, and for the Sins and the Decay of the power o^
Godliness in her own Country, which will further appear, by what may fol^low.

15 Her Father coming in to her, foun^ her in an extraordinary passion of
wee^^ing, and asked her what was the cause (...) her great sorrow; She
answered, have I not cause to weep, when I hear that Dom^^^ de Wit was taken
sick this day in his Pul^pit, and went home very ill; Is not th^^ a sad sign of
Gods displeasure to (...) Country, when God smites such a faith^ful Pastor?

16 She had a high valuation of God* and could speak in David's Language, (...)
have I in Heaven but thee, and there is (...) on Earth that I can desire in
comparison (...) thee. She was much lifted up above (...) fear^ of Death; what
else was the mea^^ing of such expressions as these? O (...) do I long! even as
the heart pants after the waterbrooks, so my Soul pants after thee, O God,
for the living God, when shall I come and appear before God.

17 She was a great hater of Sin, and did with much grief and self-abhorrency
reflect upon it; but that which lay most upon her heart, was the Corruption of
her Nature and Original Sin. How often would she Cry out in the words of the
Psalmist, Behold I was Shapen in Iniquity, and in Sin did my Mother Conceive
me: and I was altogether Born in Sin. She could ^ever lay her self low enough
under a sense of that Original Sin which she brought* with her into the world.

18 She spoke many things very judiciously of the Old Man, and putting i^ off,
and of the New Man, and putting that on; which showed that she was no stranger
to Conversion, and that she in some measure understood what Mortification,
Self-denial, and taking up of her Cross, and following of Christ meant. That
Scripture was much in her mouth, The Sacrifices of God are a Contrite Heart; a
Broken and a Contrite Spirit, O God, thou will not d^spise. That brokenness of
heart ((...) she) which is built upon and ^^ows from Faith, and that Faith
which is built upon Christ who is the proper and alone Sacrifice for Sin.

These are her own words.

19 Afterward she desired to rest, and when she had slumbered a while, she
said* O dear Father and Mother, how weak do I feel my self! My dear Child (said
her father) God will in His tender Mercy strengthen thee in thy weakness. Ye^
Father (said she) that is my Confidence For it is said, The Bruised Reed He
will (...) break, and the Smoking Flax He will no^ quench.

20 Then she discoursed excellently o^ the Nature of Faith, and desired that
the Eleventh of the Hebrews should be read unto her; at the reading of which,
she Cried out, O what a steadfast loyal Faith was that of Abraham, which made
him willing to offer up his own and only Son ^ai^h, is the substance of things
hoped for the evidence of things not seen.

21. Her Father and Mother hearing her excellent discourse, and seeing her
admirable carriage, burst out into abundanc^ of tears: Upon which, she pleaded
with them to be patient, and content with the hand of God. O (said she) why do
you weep at this rate over me, seeing ^ hope, you have no reason to question,
but ^f the Lord take me out of this miserable world, it shall be well with me
to all Eternity. You ought to be well satisfied, seeing it is said, God is in
Heaven, and does whatsoever pleases Him: And do you not pray every day, that
the Will of God may be done upon Earth as it is in Heaven? Now Father, this is
Gods Will that I should lie upon this sick bed, and of this disease; shall we
not be content when our prayers are answered? Would not your extreme sorrow be
murmuring against God, without whose good pleasure nothing comes to pass.
Although I am struck with this sad disease, yet because it is the Will of God,
that does silence me, and I will as long as I live, pray that Gods Will may be
done, and not mine.

22 Seeing he^ Parents still very much moved, she further argued with them from
the Providence of God, which had a special hand in every common thing, much
more i^ the disposal of the lives of Men and Women: Are not two Sparrows sold
for a farthing, and not one of them falls to the ground without our Heavenly
Father? Yea* the hairs of our Head are all numbered: therefore fear not, you are
of more value than many Sparrows. Adversity and Prosperity they are both good.
Some things seem evil in our Eyes, but the Lord turns all to the good of them
which are His.

23 She came then to speak particularly concerning the Plague. Does not (said
(...)) the Pestilence come from God* Why else does the Scripture say, Sha^^
there be evil in the City which I have not sent* What do those people mean,
which say, the Pestilence come from the Air? Is not the Lord the Creator and
Ruler of the Air, and are not the Elements under Hi^ Government^ Or if they say
it com^^ from the Earth, has He not the same Power and Influence upon that
too? What talk they of a Ship that came from Africa* have we not read long ago,
together ou^ of Lev. 26.25. I shall bring a Sword upon you, and avenge the
quarrel of my Covenant and when you are assembled in the Cities* then will I
bring the Pestilence in the midst o^ you.

24* After this, having taken some little rest, she said, O now is the day for
opening of the first question of the Catechism, and if we were there, we should
hear, that whether in Death or Life a ^eliever is Christ's, who has Redeemed us
by His own precious Blood from the power of the Devil: and then she quoted*
Romans 14.7, 8. For none of us Lives unto himself, and none of us Dies to
himself. For whether we Live we Live unto the Lord, and whether we Die we Die
unto the Lord, whether then we Live or Die, we are the Lords. Then be
comforted, for whether I live or die, I am the Lords. O why do you (...) your
selves thus! But what shall I say* With weeping I came into the World, and with
weeping I must go out again. O my dear Parents, better is the Day of my Death,
than ^he Day of my Birth.

25 When she had thus encouraged her Father and Mother, she desired her Father
to pray with her, and to reques^ of the Lord that she might have a quiet and
peace^ble passage into another World.

26 After her Father had prayed for ^er, he asked her, whether he should send
for the Physician; she answered, by no means, for I am now beyond the help of
Doctors. But said he, my Child, we are to use the ordinary means appointed by
the Lord for our help, as long as we live, and let the Lord do as seems good
in His Eyes. But said she, give me the Heavenly Physician, He is the only
(...). Does not He say, Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and
I will give you rest; and does not He bid us call upon Him in the day of
distress, and He will deliver us, and we shall glorify Him: Therefore, dear
Father, call upon Him yet again for me.

27. About this time a Christian friend came in to visit her, who was not a
little comforted when he heard and saw so much of the Grace of God living in a
poor young thing which could not but so far affect him as to draw tears of joy
and admiration from him, and her deportment was so teaching that he could not
but acknowledge himself greatly Edified and Improved by her Carriage and
Language.

28 That which was not the least observable in her, was the ardent affection
(...) had for the Holy Scriptures and her Catechism, in which ^^e was thoroughly
Instructed by the Divines of the place where she lived, which she could not but
own as one of the greatest mercies next the Lord Christ: O how did she bless
God for her Catechism, and beg of her Father to go p^^^icularly to those
Ministers that had taken so much pains with her to instruct her in her
Catechism, and to thank them from her, a Dying Child for their good
Instructions, and to let them understand, ^or their encouragement to go on in
that work of Catechizing, how refreshings those truths were now to her in the
hour of her distress. O that sweet Catechizing, said she, unto which I did
always resort with gladness, and attended without weariness.

29. She was much above the vanities of the World, and took no pleasure at all
in those things which usually take up the heart and time of young ones. She
would say that she was grieved and ashamed both for young and old, to see how
glad and mad they were upon vanity, and how foolishly they spent their time.

30 She was not forgetful of the car^ and love of her Master and Mistress which
taught her to read and work, but she desired that thanks might also be
particularly given to them. Indeed she thought she could never be thankful
enough both to God and Man for that kindness that she had experience of: But
again and again, she desired to be sure to thank the ^inisters that instructed
her, either by Catechizing or Preaching.

31 After some rest, her Father asked her again how she did, and began to
express somewhat of that satisfaction and joy that he had taken in her former
diligence, in her reading the Scriptures and writing, and her dutifulness, and
that great progress that she had made in the things of God, upon which she
humbly and sweetly desired to own God and His kindness in her Godly Education,
and said, that she esteemed her Holy Education under such Parents and Ministers
as a greater portion than ten thousand Gilders, for thereby I have learned to
comfort my self out of the Word of God, which the world besides could never
have afforded.

32 Her Father perceiving her to grow very weak, said, I perceive Child thou
art very weak; It is true Sir ( said she) I feel my weakness increases, and I
see your ^orrow increasing too, which is a piece of my affliction; be content,
I Pray you, it is the Lord which does it, and let you and I say with David, Let
us fall into the Lords hands, for His Mercies are great.

33 She laid a great Charge upon her Parents not to be over-grieved for her
after her Death, urging that of David upon them, while the Child was sick, he
fasted and wept, but when it died, he washed his face, and sat up and eat, and
said, Can I bring him back again from Death, I shall go to him, but he shall
not return to me. (...) ought you to say after my Death, Our Child is well, for
we know it shall be well with them that trust in the Lord. She did lay a more
particular and straight Charge upon her Mother; saying to her, dear Mother, who
have done so much for me, you must promise me one thing before I Dye; and that
is, that you will not sorrow over^uch for me; I speak thus to you, because ^ am
afraid of your great affliction; Con^^der other Losses what they have been;
remember Job; forget not what Christ foretold; In the World you shall have
Tribulation, but be of go^d Cheer, in me y^^ shall have Peace; and must the
Apostles suffer so great tribulation and must we suffe^ for none? Did not Jesus
Christ my onl^ Life and Savior, sweat drops of Blood* Was He not in a bitter
agony, mocked, spit at, nailed to the Cross, and a spe^^ thrust through His
Blessed side, and (...) this for my sake, for my stinking Sins sake* Did not He
Cry out, My God, my God* why have thou forsaken me? Did not Christ h^ng naked
upon the Cross to purchase for me the garments of Salvation, and to cloat^ me
with His Righteousness, for there (...) Salvation in no other name.

34 Being very feeble and weak, she said, O if I might quietly sleep in the
bo^some of Jesus! and that till then He would strengthen me! O that He would
take me into His arms as He did those little ones, where He said, Suffer little
Children to come unto me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, and He took
them into His arms, an^ laid His hands on them and Blessed them. I lie hear as
a Child, O Lord I am thy Child, receive me into thy gracious Arm^ ^ Lord,
Grace! Grace! and not Justice! ^or if thou should enter into Judgment with
me, I cannot stand, yea, none living should be just in thy sight.

35 After this, she Cried O how faint ^m I! But fearing lest she should
dis^earten her Mother, she said, while there (...) life, there is hope: if it
should please ^he Lord to recover me, how careful would (...) be to please you
in my work and learn^^g, and whatsoever you should require of (...)!

36 After this, the Lord did again send ^er strength, and she labored to spend
(...) all for Christ in the awakening, edi^ying and comforting of those that
were about her; but her chiefest endeavor was ^o support her dear Parents from
extraordinary sorrow, and to comfort them out ^f the Scriptures, telling them,
That she ^^ew all things did work together for the good of them that did love
God, even to those which are Called according to His purpose; O God establish
me with thy Free Spirit! Who shall separate us from the Love of Christ, I (...)
persuaded that neither Life, nor Death, (...) Angels, nor Principalities, nor
Powers, (...) things Present, nor things to Come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor
any other Creatur^* shall separate us from the Love of God, which is toward us
in Christ Jesus our Lord. M^ Sheep (says Christ) hear my voice, and ^ know
them, and they follow me, and I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall
never Perish, and no man shall Pluck them out o^ my hands. My Father who gave
them (...) is Greater than all, and none shall Pluck the^ out of my Fathers
hand. Thus she seemed to attain a Holy Confidence in God, and an assurance of
her State as to another World.

37. When she had a little refresh^^ her self with rest, she burst forth with
abundance of joy, and gladness of Hear^ with a Holy Triumph of Faith, sayin^
out, Death is swallowed up of Victory, O Death where i^ thy Sting; O Grave when
is thy Victory? The Sting of Death is Si^, and the Strength of Sin is the Law;
but Thanks be to God who has given us the Victory through our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

38 That she might the better suppo^^ her Friends, she still insisted upon the
which might take off some of their burden, by urging the necessity of Death*
We are from the Earth, and to the Earth we must return: Dust is the Mother of
us all, the Dust shall turn to Dust, from whence it is; and the Spirit to God
which gave it.

39 Then she discoursed of the shortness of Man's Life. O what is the life of
man! The days of man upon the Earth are as the grass, and the flowers of the
Field, so he flourishes, the wind passes over it, and it is no more, and his
place knows him no more.

40 She further urged the sin and sorrow that did attend us in this life, and
the longer we Live, the more we Sin; now the Lord will free me from that sin
and sorrow. We know not the thoughts of God, yet do we know so much, that they
are mercy and peace, and do give an expected end. But what shall I say, my life
shall not continue long, I feel much weakness, O Lord, look upon me graciously,
have pity upon my weak distressed heart. I am oppressed, undertake for me,
that I may stand fast and overcome.

41 She was very frequent in Spiritual ejaculations, and it was no small
comfort to her, that the Lord Christ did pray for her, and promise to send His
Spirit to comfort her. It^s said, (said she) I will Pray the Father, and He
shall give you another Comforter. O let not Him leave me! O Lord, continue with
me till my battle and work be finished.

42 She had very low and undervaluing thoughts of her self, and her own
Righteousness; what meant she else to Cry out in such Langauge as that, None
but Christ! without thee I can do nothing? Christ is the true Vine! O let me be
a Branch of that Vine! What poor worms are we! O dear Father, how lame and
halting do we go in the ways of God and Salvation? We know but in part, but
when that which is perfect is come, then that which is imperfect shall be done
away. O that I had attained to that now: But what are we our selves; Not only
weakness and nothingness, but wickedness. For all the thoughts and imaginations
of man's heart, are only evil, and that continually, we are by Nature Children
of wrath, and are Conceived and Born in Sin and Unrighteousness. Oh! Oh! this
wretched and vile thing SIN! But thanks to God who has redeemed me from it.

43 She comforted her self and her Father, in that great Scripture, Romans 8.15,
16, 17. Ye have not received the Spirit of Bondage again to fear, but ye have
received the Spirit of Adoption, by which ye Cry Abba Father. It is the Spirit
that witnesses with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God; and if
Children, then are we Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joynt-Heirs with Christ. You see
thence Father, that I shall be a fellow-heir with Christ; who has said, In my
Father^ house are many mansions, if it were not so, I would have told you, I go
to prepare a place for you, I will come again, and take you to my self, that
where I am there ye may be also. O Lord, take me to thy self. Behold dear
Mother, He has prepared a place and dwelling for me.

44 Yea, my dear Child, said her Mother, He shall strengthen you with His Holy
Spirit, until He has fitted and prepared you fully for that place which He
has prepared for you.

45 Yea Mother, it is said in the Eighty-fourth Psalm, How lovel^ a^e thy
Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts, my Soul does thirst, and longs for the Courts
of the Lord; One day in thy Courts is better than a thousand; yea, I had rather
be a Doorkeeper in the House of God, than dwell in the Tents of the Wicked.
Read that Psalm, dear Mother, wherewith we may comfort one another. As for me,
I am more and more spent, and draw near my last hour.

46 Then she desired to be prayed with, and begged that the Lord would give her
an easy passage.

47 After this, she turned to her Mother, with much affection, she said, Ah my
dear and loving Mother; that which comes from the heart, does ordinarily go to
the heart, once more come and kiss me before I leave you.

48 She was not a little concerned about the Souls of the rest of her
Relations, and did particularly charge it upon her Father, to do what he could
possibly to bring them up in the ways of God. O let my Sister be ^rained up in
the Scriptures, and Catechizing, as I have been.

49* I formerly wept for my Sister, thinking that she would dye before me, and
now she weepeth for me, and then she kissed her weeping Sister. Also she took
her young little Sister in her Arms, a Child of Six Months old, and she kissed
it with much affection, as if her very bowels had moved within her, and spoke
with many Heartbreaking words, both to her Parents and the Children.

50 Her Father spoke to one that was by, to take the poor little Child away
from her, from the hazard of that fiery distemper, and bid his Daughter to give
her from her, for he had already too much to bear. Well Father, said she, did
not God preserve the three Children in the Fiery Furnace: And did you not teach
me that Scripture, When thou passest through the Fire, thou shall not be Burnt,
neither shall the Flame kindle upon thee.

51 She had a very strong Faith in the Doctrine of the Resurrection, and did
greatly solace her Soul with excellent Scriptures, which do speak the happy
state of Believers, as soon as their Souls are separated from their Bodies, and
what she quoted out of the Scripture, she did excellently and suitably apply to
her own use, incomparibly above the common reach of her Sex and Age. That in 1
Cor. 15.42. was a good support to her, The Body is sown in Corruption, but it
shall be raised incorruptible; It is sown in dishonor, but it shall be raised
in glory; It is sown in weakness, but it shall be raised in power. And then she
sweetly applies it, and takes in this Cordial. Behold thus it is, and thus it
shall be with my poor mortal flesh: Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord,
because they rest from their labors, and their works do follow them. The
Righteous perish, and no man lays it to heart, and the Upright are taken
away, and no man regards it that they are taken away from the evil to come,
they shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, every one who
walked in their uprightness. Behold now Father, I shall rest and sleep in that
Bedchamber.

52 Then she quoted Job 19.25, 26, 27. I know that my Redemer lives, and that
He shall stand at the latter end upon the Earth; and though after my skin worms
destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God; whom I shall see for my
self, and my eyes shall behold, and not another, though my reins be consumed
within me. Behold now Father, this very skin which you see, and this very flesh
which you see, shall be raised up again; and these very eyes which now are so
dim, shall on that day see, and behold my dear and precious Redeemer; albeit
the worms eat up my flesh, yet with these eyes shall I behold God, even I my
self, and not another for me.

53 Then she quoted Joh. 5.28. Marvel (...) at this, for the hour is coming in
which all that are in their Graves shall hear His voice, and come forth; those
that have done good un^o the Resurrection of Life. See Father, I shall rise in
that day, and then I shall behold my Redeemer; then shall He say, Come ye
Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you before the beginning
of the World.

54 Behold now I live, yet not I, but Christ ^iveth in me, and the li^e that I
now live in the ^lesh, is by the Faith of the Son of God, who ^^ved me, and
gave Himself for me. I am ^aved, and that not of my self, it is the Gift of
God, not of Works, that no man should ^^st.

55 My dear Parents, now we must shortly part, my speech fails me, pray the
Lord for a quiet close to my combat.

56. Her Parents replied, Ah our dear Child! how sad is that to us, that we
must part? She answered, I go to Heaven, and there we shall find one another
again; I go to Jesus Christ.

57 Then she comforted her self to think of her seeing her precious Brother and
Sister again in Glory. I go to my Brother Jacob, who did so much Cry and Call
upon God to the last moment of his breath: And to my little Sister who was but
three years old when she died: Who, when we asked her whether she would Dye?
Answered, Yes, if it be the Lord's will. I will go to my little Brother, if it
be the Lord's will, or I will stay with my Mother, if it be the Lord's will.
But I know that I shall Dye, and go to Heaven and to God. O see, how so small a
Babe had so much give it to behave it self every way, and in all things so
submissively to the will of God, as if it had no will of its own; but if it be
the will of God, if it please God; nothing for her, but what the Will and
Pleasure of God: And therefore, dear Father and Mother, give the Lord thanks
for this His free and rich Grace, and then I shall the more gladly be gone. Be
Gracious then, O Lord, unto me also, be Gracious to me. Wash me thoroughly from
my Unrighteousness, and cleanse me from my Sin.

58 After this, her Spirit was refreshed with the sense of the Pardon of her
Sins, which made her to Cry out, Behold God has washed away my sins, O how do
I long to die! The Apostle said, In this Body we earnesty sigh and groan,
longing for our House which is in Heaven, that we may be ^loathed therewith.
Now I also lie here ^ighing and longing for that Dwelling which is above. In
the last Sermon which I heard; or ever shall hear, I heard this in the
New-Church, which is matter of great comfort unto me.

59. Then she repeated several notable ^criptures which were quoted in that
Sermon, afterward she desired to be prayed with, and put Petitions into their
Mouths, viz. That all her Sins might be forgiven, That she might have more
abundant Faith, and the assurance of it; and the comfort of that assurance, and
the continuation and strength of that comfort, according as her necessity
should require. Afterward she prayed her self, and continued a pretty space.

60 When Prayers was ended, she called to her Father and Mother, and demanded
of them, whether she had any time angered or grieved them, or done any thing
that did not become her? And beg^ged of them to forgive her.

61 They answered her, that if a Children had carried themselves so to their
Parents as she had done, there would b^ less grief and sorrow on all hands tha^
there is; and if any such thing has escaped the^, we would forgive it withal
ou^ hearts, you have done as became a good Child.

62 Her heart being quieted with he^ peace with God and her Parents, she began
to dispose of her Books; particularly she entreated her Mother, to keep Mr. De
Wit^ Catechize Lectures, as long as she lived for her sake, and let my little
Sister have my other Book as my remembrance.

63 Then (said ^e) she felt her breas^ exceedingly pained, by which she knew
that her end was very ^igh. Her Father spoke to her as he was able, telling her
the Lord would be her strength in the hour of her necessity.

64 Yea said she, The Lord is my Sheperd, although I pass through the Valley of
the Shadow of Death, I will not fear, for thou art with me, thy Rod and thy
Staff, they comfort me: And it is said, The sufferings of this present life are
not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. Shall I
not suffer and endure, seeing my Glorious Redeemer was pleased to suffer so
much for me? O how was He mocked and crowned with Thorns, (...) He might
purchase ^ Crown of Righteousness for us: And that is the Crown of which Paul
spoke, when he said, I have fought the good fight, I have finishing my Course,
I have kept the Faith, henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness,
which the Lord the Righteous Judge, shall give unto me in that day; and not
only unto me, but to all that love His Ap^earing.

65 Ye are bought with a Price, therefore Glorify God with your Souls and
Bodies, which ^re His. Must I not then Exalt and Bless Him while I have a
being, who has bought me, yea, bought me with His Blood? Surely He has born
our griefs, and took our infimities, and we esteemed Him smitten and stricken
of God* But He was wounded for transgressions, and bruised for our sins: the
chastisment of our peace was upon Him, and by His stripes are we healed, and
the Lord ^^id upon Him the iniquity of us all. Behold (...) Lamb of God that
takes away the sins of the World: That Lamb is Jesus Christ* who has
satisfied for my sins. So sait^ Paul, Ye are washed, ye are sanctified, ye ar^
justified in the Name of our Lord Jesus, and through the Spirit of our God.

66 My end is now very near, now ^ shall put on white Raiment, and be clothed
before the Lamb, that spotless Lamb, and with His spotless Righteousness. Now
are the Angels makink ready to carry my Soul before the Throne of God. These
(...) they who are come out of great Tribulation, who have washed their Robes,
and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb.

67 She spoke this with a Dying voice* but full of Spirit, and of the Power of
Faith.

68 Her lively assurance she further uttered in the words of the Apo^^le, We
know that if this earthly house of our Tabernacle be dissolved, we have one
which is built of God, which is Eternal in the Heavens; for in this, we sigh
for our house, which is in Heaven, that we may be Clothed therewith.

69 There Father, you see that my Body is this Tabernacle, which now shall be
broken down: my Soul shall now part from it, and shall be taken up into that
Heavenly Paradise, into that Heavenly Jerusalem. There shall I dwell and go no
more out, but sit and sing, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord God of Hosts, the
Lord of Sabbath! Her last words were these: O Lord God, into thy Hands I Commit
my Spirit, O Lord be Gracious, be Merciful to me a poor Sinner. --

And here she fell asleep.

70 She Died the First of September, 1664. betwixt Seven and Eight in the
Evening; in the Fourteenth Year of her Age; having obtained that which she so
often entreated of the Lord a quiet and easy departure, and the End of her
Faith, the Salvation of her Soul.

EXAMPLE XII. Of the excellent Carriage of a Child upon his Deathbed, when but
Seven Year^ Old.
1. JAcob Bicks, the Brother of Susanna Bicks, was Born in Leiden, in the Year
1657. and had Religious Education, under his Godly Parents, the which the Lord
was pleased to sanctify to his Conversion, and by it lay in excellent
Provisions to live upon in an hour of distress.

2. This sweet little Child was visited of the Lord of a very sore sickness,
upon the sixth of August 1664. three or four weeks before his Sister, of whose
life and death we have given you some account already: In his distemper he was
for the most part very sleepy and drousie, till near his Death, but when he did
awake, he was wont still to fall a praying.

3 Once when his Parents had prayed with him, they asked him if they should
once more send for the Physician? No (said he) I will have the Doctor no more*
the Lord will help me: I know He will take me to Himself, and then He shall
help all.

4 Ah my dear Child, said his Father, that grieveth my heart: Well, (said the
Child) Father let us pray, and the Lord shall be near for my helper.

5. When his Parents had Prayed with him again, he said, Come now dear Father
and Mother, and kiss me, I know that I shall Dye.

6 Farewell dear Father and Mother, ^arewel dear Sister, Farewell all. Now shall
I go to Heaven unto God and Jesus Christ, and the Holy Angels: Father know you
not what is said by Jeremiah: Blessed is h^ who trusts in the Lord. Now I
trust in Him, and He will bless me. And in 1 John ^. it is said, Little
Children love not the World, for the World passes away.

7 Away then all that is in the World, away with all my pleasent things in the
world: away with my Dagger, for where I go* there is nothing to do with Daggers
and Swords: men shall not ^ight there, but praise God. Away with all my Books;
there shall I know sufficiently, and be learned in all things of true Wisdom,
without Books.

8 His Father being touched to hear his Child speak at this rate, could not
well tell what to say; but my dear Child, the Lord will be near thee, and
uphold thee.

9* Yea Father ( said he) the Apo^^le ^eter says, God Resists the Proud, but
He gives Grace to the Humble. I shall humble my self under the mighty hand of
God, and He shall help and lift me up.

10. O my dear Child, said his Father, have thou so strong a Faith?

11 Ye^, said the Child, God has given me so strong a Faith upon Himself
through Jesus Christ, that the Devil himself shall flee from me, for it is
said, He who Believes in the Son has Everlasting Life, and he has overcome
the wicked One. Now I Believe in Jesus Christ my Redeemer, and He will not
leave or forsake me, but shall give unto me Eternal Life, and then shall I
Sing, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of Sabbath.

12* Then with a short word of Prayer, Lord be Merciful to me a poor Sinner, he
quietly breathed out his Soul, and sweetly slept in Jesus, when he was about
Seven Years old. He died August 8. 1664.

Hallelujah.

EXAMPLE XIII. Of one that began to look toward Heaven* when he was very
Young, with many Eminent Passages of his Life, and his joyful Death, when he
was Eleven Years and Three Quarters Old.
1. J^^n Harvy was Born in London, in the Year 1654. his Father was a Dutch
Merchant, he was piously Educated under his virtuous Mother, and soon began to
suck in Divine Things with no small delight.

2 The first thing very observable in him was, that when he was two years and
eight months old, he could speak as well as other Children do usually at five
years old.

3 His Parents judging, that he was then a little too young to send out to
School, let him have his liberty to Play a little about their Yard. But instead
of playing, he found out a School of his own accord hard by home, and went to
the School-Mistress, and entreated her to teach him to read, and so he went for
some time to School without the knowledge of his Parents, and made a very
strange progress in his Learning, and was able to read distinctly, before most
Children are able to know their Letters.

4 He was wont to ask many serious and weighty Questions, about matters which
concerned his Soul and Eternity.

5 His Mother being greatly troubled upon the Death of one of his Uncles, this
Child came to his Mother and said, Mother, though my Uncle be Dead, does not
the Scripture say, he must Rise again: Yea, and I must Dye, and so must every
Body, and it will not be long* before Christ will come to Judge the World, and
then we shall see one another again, I pray Mother do not weep so much. This
grave Counsel he gave his Mother, when he was not quite five years old, by
which the sorrow for her Brother was turned into admiration at her Child, and
she was made to sit silent and quiet under that smarting stroke.

6 After this, his Parents removed to Aberdeen in Scotland, and settled their
Child under an able and painful Schoolmaster there, whose custom was upon the
Lord's day in the Morning, to examine his Scholars concerning the Sermons that
they had heard the former Lords day, and to add some other Questions which
might try the Understanding and Knowledge of his Scholars; the Question that
was once proposed to his Form was, Whether God had a Mother? None of all the
Scholars could answer it, till it came to John Harvy, who being asked, Whether
God had a Mother? Answered N^, as He was God, He could not have a Mother, but
as He was Man He had; this was before he was quite Six Years old His Master was
somewhat amazed at the Child's answer, and took the first opportunity to go to
his Mother, to thank her for instructing her Son so well; but she replied, that
he was never taught that from her, but that he understood it by Reading, and
his own Observation.

7 He was a Child that was Extraordinary inquisitive, and full of good
questions, and very careful to observe and remember what he heard.

8 He had a great Hatred of whatsoever he knew to be displeasing to God, and
was so greatly Concerned for the Honor of God, that he would take on bitterly,
if that any gross Sins were committed before him. And he had a deep sense of
the worth of Souls, and was not a little grieved when he saw any do that which
he knew was dangerous to their Souls.

9 One day seeing one of his near Relations come into his Fathers House
distempered with Drink as he thought, he quickly went very Seriously to him and
Wept over him, that he should so Offend God, and Hazard his Soul, and begged of
him to spend his Time better than in Drinking and Gaming; and this he did,
without any instruction from his Parents, but from an inward Principle of
Grace, and love to God and Souls, as it is verily believed.

10 When he was at play with other Children, he would be oftentimes putting in
some word to keep them from naghty talk, or wicked actions; and if any did take
the Lords Name in vain, or do any thing that was not becoming of a good Child,
they should soon hear of it with a witness; nay, once* hearing a Boy speak very
profanely, and that after two or three admonitions, he would not forbear, nor
go out of his Company neither, he was so transported with Zeal, that he could
not forbear falling upon him, to beat him, but his Mother chiding him for it,
he said, that he could not endure to hear the Name of God so abused by a
wretched Boy.

This is observed not to Vindicate the Act, but to take notice of his Zeal.

11 He was a Child that took great delight in the Company of Good men, and ^
especially Ministers and Scholars; and if he had any leisure time, he would
improve it by visiting of such, whose discourse* might make him wiser and
better; and when he was in their Society, to be sure, his talk was more like a
Christian and Scholar, than a Child.

12. One day after School-time was over, he gave Mr. Andrew Kant (one of the
Ministers of Aberdeen) a visit, and asked him several solid Questions, but the
Good man asked him some questions out of his Catechism: And finding him not so
ready in the answers as he should have been, did a little reprove him and told
him, that he must be sure to get his Catechism perfectly* by heart; the Child
took the reproof very well, and went home, and fell very hot upon his
Catechism, and never left, till he got it by heart; and not only so, but he
would be enquiring into the sense and meaning of it.

13 He was so greatly taken with his Catechism, that he was not content to
learn it himself, but he would be putting others upon learning their Catechism,
especially, those that were nearest to him; he would not be satisfied, till he
had persuaded his Mothers Maids to learn it, and when they were at work, he
would be still following them with some good question or other; so that the
Child seemed to be taken up with the thoughts of his Soul, and Gods Honor, and
the good of other Souls.

14 He was a Conscientious observer of the Lord's day, spending all the time
either in secret Prayer, or reading the Scriptures, and Good Books; Learning of
his Catechim, and Hearing of the Word of God, and public Duties; and was not
only careful in the performance of these Duties himself, but was ready to put
all that he knew upon a strict observation of the Lor'ds day, and was
exceedingly grieved at the Profanation of it; one Lords day, a Servant of his
Fathers going out of the house upon extraordinary occasion, to fetch some Beer,
she took on so bitterly, that he could scarce be pacified, because that Holy
Day was so abused (as he judged) in his Fathers house.

15 When he was betwixt Six and Seven Years old; it pleased God to afflict him
with sore eyes, which was no small grief unto him, because it kept him from
School, which he loved as well as many Boys do their play; and that which was
worse, he was Commanded by the Doctor not to read any Book whatsoever at home.
But, O how was this poor Child grieved, that he might not have liberty to Read
the Holy Scriptures! And for all their Charge, he would get by himself, and
stand by the window, and read the Bible and good Books; yea, he was so greedy
of reading the Scripture, and took so much delight in it, that he would scarce
allow himself time to dress himself; for reading the Word of God was his great
delight. Yea, though he had been beat for studying so much, yet judging it
God's Command that he should give himself up to reading, he could not be beat
off from it, till he was so bad, that he had like never to have recovered his
sight more.

16 It was his practice to be much by himself in Secret Prayer, and he was
careful to manage that work, so as that it might be as secret as possible it
might be, but his frequency and constancy made it to be so easily observed,
upon which, One time one having a great mind to know what this sweet Babe
Prayed for, got into a place near him, and heard him very earnestly Praying for
the Church of God, desiring that the Kingdom of the Gospel might be spread over
the whole World, and that the Kingdom of Grace might more and more come into
the Hearts of God's People, and that the Kingdom of Glory might be hastened. He
was wont to continue half an hour, sometimes an hour, upon his knees together.

17 He was much above the vanities that most Children are taken with, and was
indeed too much a man to live long.

18 He was very humble and modest, and did by no means affect fineness in
apparel, but hated any thing more than necessaries, either in clothes or diet.

19 When he perceived either his Brother or Sisters pleased with their new
Clothes, he would with a great deal of Gravi^y reprove their Folly, and when
his reproof signified little, he would bewail their vanity.

20 Once he had a New Suit brought from the Tailors, which when he looked on,
he found some Ribbons at the knees, at which he was grieved; asking his Mother,
Whether those things would keep him warm? No, Child, said his Mother; Why then
(said he) do you suffer them to be put here, you are mistaken, if you think
such things please (...) and ^ doubt* some that are better than u^, may (...)
the Money that this Cost you, to buy them Bread.

21 He would entreat his Mother to have a care of gratifying a proud humor in
his Brother and Sisters, he did tell them of the danger of Pride, and how
little reason they had to be Proud of that which was their Shame; for said he,
If it had not been for Sin, we should have had no need of Clothes.

22 At leisure times, he would be talking to his School-fellows about the
things of God, and urge the necessity of a Holy life. That Text he much spoke
on to them, The Axe is laid on the Root of the Tree, and every Tree that
brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down and cast into the Fire. Every
Mothers Child of us that does not bring forth the fruit of good Works, shall
shortly be cut down with the Axe of Gods wrath, and cast into the Fire of Hell;
and this he spoke like one that believed and felt the power of what he spoke,
and not with the least visibility of a Childish levity of Spirit. This was,
when he was between Seven and Eight years old, and if he perceived any Children
unconcerned about their Souls, he would be greatly troubled a^ it.

23 After this, his Parents removed not far from London, where he continued
till that dreadful year, Sixty Five; he was then sent to the Latin School,
where he soon made a very considerable Progress, and was greatly beloved of his
Master, the School was his beloved place, and Learning his recreation. He was
never taught to write, but took it of his own ingenuity.

24 He was exceeding Dutiful to his Parents, and never did in the least dispute
their Command, except, when he thought they might cross the Command of God, (as
in the forementioned business of reading the Scriptures when his eyes were so
bad.)

25 He was exceeding contented with any mean Diet, and to be sure he would not
touch a bit of any thing, till he had begged Gods Blessing upon it.

26 He would put his Brother and Sisters upon their Duties, and observe them
whether they performed it or no, and when he saw any neglect, he would soon
warn them; if he saw any of them take a spoon into their hands before they had
^raved a Blessing, he said that is just like a Hog indeed.

27 His Sister was afraid of the darkness, and would sometimes Cry, upon this
account; he told her, she must fear God more, and she need then be afraid o^
nothing.

28* He would humbly put his near Relations upon their Duty, and minding the
Concerns of their Souls and Eternity, with more Seriousness and Life, and to
have a care of doing that which was for the dishonor of God, and the hazard of
the Soul.

29 He was of a compassionate and charitable disposition, and very pitiful to
the poor, or any that were in distress, but his greatest pity was to poor
Souls; and as well as he could, he would be putting Children, Play-fellows,
Servants, Neighbors, upon minding their poor Souls.

30 One notable instance of his true Charity, I cannot omit. A certain Turk was
by the ^rovidence of God, cast into the place where he Lived, which this sweet
Child hearing of, had a great pity to his Soul, and studied how he might be any
way instrumental to do it good; at la^t finding a man that understood the
Language of the Turk, he used means to get them together, which he at last
procured; the first thing that he did, was to put his Friend upon d^scoursing
with the Turk about his Principles, whether he acknowlede a De^ty; which the
Turk owning; the next thing he enquired after, was,, What he thought of the
Lord Jesus Christ. At which the Turk was troubled and put off the discourse,
and said, he was athirst, and an hungry; which the Child being informed of, by
the Interpreter, immediately went to a Brew House near at hand (his own house
being far off) and did entreat the Master of the Brew House to give him some
Be^r for the Turk, and the argument he used was this: Sir, here is a poor
stranger that is athirst, we know not where we may be cast before we Dye: He
went to another place, and begged Food for him; using the same argument as
before, but his Friends hearing ^f it, were angry with him, but he told them he
aid it for a poor stranger that was far from home, and he did it that he might
think the better of the Christians, and the Christian Religion.

31 He would have a savoury word to say to every one that he conversed with, to
put them in mind of the worth of Christ, and their Souls; and their nearness to
Eternity. Insomuch, that good People took no small pleasure in his Company. The
Ta^lor that made his Clothes, would keep them the longer before he brought
them home, that he might have the benefit of his Spiritual and Christian
society; and more frequent visits.

32 He bewailed the miserable condition of the generality of mankind (when he
was about Ten Years old) that were utterly estranged from ^od, though they
called Him Father, yet they were His Children only by Creation, and not by any
likeness they had to God, or interest in Him.

33 Thus he continued walking in the ways of God, engaged in reading, praying,
hearing the Word of God, and Spiritual discourse, discovering thereby his
serious thoughts of Eternity.

34 He had an earnest desire, if it might be the Lords good pleasure, to give
himself up to the Lord in the work of the Ministry, if he should live; and this
out of a dear love to Christ, and Souls.

35 He was next to the Bible most, taken with reading of Reverend Mr. Baxter's
works, especially his Saints Everlasting Rest; and truly, the thoughts of that
Rest, and Eternity, seemed to swallow up all other thoughts; and he lived in a
constant preparation for it, and looked more like one that was ripe for Glory,
than an inhabitant of this lower World.

36 When he was about Eleven years and Three quarters old, his Mothers house was
visited with the Plague; his eldest Sister was the first that was visited with
this distemper, and when they were praying for her, he would Sob and Weep
bitterly.

37 As soon as he perceived that his Sister was Dead, he said, The Will of the
Lord be done: Blessed be the Lord. Dear Mother, said he, you must do as David
did, after the Child was Dead, he went and refreshed himself, and quietly
submitted to the Will of God.

38 The rest of the Family held well for about Fourteen Days, which time he
spent in Religious Duties, and preparing for his Death; but still his great
Book was, The Saints Rest; which he read with exceeding curiosity, gathering
many observations out of it in writing, for his own use. He wrote several
Divine meditations of his own, upon several Subjects, but that which seemed
most admirable, was a meditation upon the Excellency of Christ; he was never
well but when he was more immediately engaged in the Service of God.

39 At Fourteen Days end, he was taken Sick, at which he seemed very Patient
and Cheerful; yet sometimes he would say that his Pain was great.

40 His Mother looking upon his Brother, shaked her head, at which he asked, if
his Brother were marked; she answered, Yes Child; he asked again, whether he
were marked; she answered nothing; well, says he, I know I shall be marked; I
pray let me have Mr. Baxters Book, that I may read a little more of Eternity,
before I go into it. His Mother told him that he was not able to read; he said
that he was; however, then pray by me, and for me; his Mother answered, that
she was so f^ll of grief, that she could not pray now; but she desired to hear
him pray his last prayer.

41 His Mother asked him, whether he were willing to Die, and leave her? He
answered, Yes, I am willing to leave you, and go to my Heavenly Father. His
Mother answered, Child, if thou had but an assurance of Gods Love, I should
not be so much troubled.

42 He answered, and said to his Mother, I am assured, dear Mother, that my
Sins are Forgiven, and that I shall go to Heaven, for said he, here stood an
Angel by me, that told me, I should quickly be in Glory.

43 At this his Mother burst forth into tears. O Mother, said he, did you but
know what joy I feel, you would not weep, but rejoice. I tell you I am so full
of comfort, that I cannot tell you how I am; O Mother I shall presently have my
head in my Fathers bosom, and shall be there, where the Four and Twenty Elders
cast down their Crowns, and Sing Hallelujah, Glory and Praise, to Him that sits
upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever.

44 Upon this, his Speech began to fail him, but his Soul seemed still to be
taken up with Glory, and nothing now grieved him but the sorrow that he saw his
Mother to be in for his Death; a little to divert his Mother, he asked her,
What she had to Supper; but presently in a kind of Divine Rapture, he Cried
out, O what Sweet Supper have I making ready for me in Glory!

45 But seeing all this did rather increase, than allay his Mothers grief, he
was more troubled, and asked her, what she meant, thus to offend God; know you
not, that it is the Hand of the Almighty. Humble your self under the mighty
hand of God, Lay your self in the Dust, and kiss the Rod of God, and let me see
you do it, in token of your submission to the Will of God, and bow before Him.
Upon which, raising up himself a little, he gave a lowly bow, and spoke no
more; but went Cheerfully and Triumphingly to rest, in the bosom of JESUS.

Hallelujah.

FINIS.
A Token, for the CHILDREN of NEW ENGLAND.

OR, Some EXAMPLES of Children, In whom the Fear of GOD was Remarkably Budding,
before they Dyed, In Several Parts of NEW ENGLAND.

Preserved and Published, for the ENCOVRAGEMENT of PIETY in other CHILDREN.

AND, Added as Supplement, unto the Excellent JANEWAYES Token for Children Upon
the Re-printing of it, in this Country.

Boston, in N.E. Printed by Timothy Green, for Benjamin Eliot, at his Shop,
under the West End of the Town House. 1700.

A TOKEN FOR THE CHILDREN OF NEW ENGLAND.
IF the Children of New England should not with an Early Piety, se^ themselves
to Know and Serve the Lord JESUS CHRIST, the God of their Fathers, they will be
Condemned, not only by the Examples of Pious Children in other parts of the
world, the Published and Printed Acounts whereof have been brought over hither;
but there have been Exemplary Children in the midst of New England it self,
that will Rise up against them for their Condemnaation. It would be a very
profitable thing to our Children, and highly Acceptable to all the Godly
Parents of the Children, if, in Imitation of the Excellent Ja^eway's, Token for
Children, there were made a true Collection of Notable Things, Exemplified in
the Lives and Deaths of many among us, whose Childhood has been Signalized for
what is Virtuous and Laudable.

No doubt, when the Church History of New England comes abroad, there will be
found in it, the Lives of many, Eminent persons, among whose Eminencies, not
the le^st was, Their ^earing of the Lord from their Youth, and their being
Loved by the Lord, when they were Children.

But among the many other Instances, of a Childhood and Youth delivered from
Van^ty, by Serious Religion, which New England has afforded, these few have
particularly been preserved.

EXAMPLE I.
LIttle more than Thirteen years old, was JOHN CLAP of Situate, when he Died;
but it might very Truly be said of him, That while he was yet Young, he began
to seek after the God of his Father. From his very Infancy he discovered a
Singular Delight in the Holy Scripture, whereby he was made Wise unto
Salvation; and he also made himself yet further Amiable, by his Obedience to
his Parents, and his Courtesy to all his Neighbors. As he grew up, he
signalized his Concern for Eternity, not only by his diligent attendance upon
both Public and Private Catechizing, but also by the like attendance on the
Ministry of the Word, which he would Ponder and Apply, and Confer about, with
much Discretion of Soul, and Pray for the Good effect thereof upon his own
Soul. Yea, 'twas even from his Childhood observable in him, that ever after he
began to speak Reasonably, he would both affectionately regard the
Family-Prayers, and likewise, both Morning and Evening, with a most unwearied
constancy recommend himself by his own Prayers unto the Mercies of God.

Arriving higher in his Age, he was very Conscientious of his Duty, both to
God, and Man; and particularly careful of his Fathers Business, which now
became his own Calling. At Work with his Father in the Field, he would
frequently be propounding of Questions, by the Answers whereof he might be
promoted in the knowledge of God: and at the seasons which others usually
employ to vain purposes, he would be abounding in the exercises of Devotion.
But of all the Imitable things to be seen in him, he was exemplary for nothing
more, than his endeavors in Preparation for, and Sanctification of, the Lords
Day. Yea, his Parents have affirmed, that for a Year or two before he Died,
They never heard an Unprofitable Word come out of his Mouth; but he would often
bewayl the Idle, Tryfling, Vain Discourses of other People.

About a Year and a half before he Dyed, the Good Spirit of God, Blessed him,
with yet a more through Conviction of his Misery by reason of Sin both Original,
and Actual: whence though he had been such a Pattern of ^nnocency, yet he would
aggravate his own Sinfulness, with Lamentations truly extraordinary. And for
his Relief against the Terrors of God, wherewith he was now Distracted, he was
brought unto an utter Despair of his own Righteousnesses and Abilities; but in
this Condition, he came to Adore the Grace of God, offering a JESUS who is Able
to Save unto the Uttermost: In his Longings to enjoy the Love of God, through
Jesus, he was like the Heart panting after the Waterbrooks!

The Wounds of his Spirit, were accompanied with a Languishing and Consuming of
his Flesh; yet with great Patience ^e endured the Hand of God, and he followed
the Lord with Prayers, with Cries, with Tears, for the manifestation of the
Divine Love unto him.

It was also Observed and Admired, that when he was abroad at the Public
Worship, in the time of his Weakness, he would stand the whole time of the Long
exercises, and be so affectionately attentive, that one might see every
Sentence uttered in those Exercises, make some impression upon him. The best
Christians in the place prosessed themselves, made ashamed by the Fervency of
this Young Disciple* And in Days of Public Humiliations, or Thanksgivings,
kept with regard unto the general Circumstances of the Country, he would bear
his part, with such a sense of the Public Troubles or Mercies, as argued more
than a common measure of a Public Spirit in him.

The Minister of the Place, visiting of him, after Sickness had confined him,
found him, in an extreme dejection of Soul; his very Body Shook, through his
Fear, left the Day of Grace were over with him; yet justifying of God, though
he should be forever cast among the Damned. But yet his Fear^ were accompanied
with Hopes in the Alsufficient merits of the Blessed Jesus: in which Hopes he
continued using all the Means of Grace, according to his Capacity, and
Lamenting after those whereof he was not Capable.

A Month before he Died he kept his Bed; the First Fortnight whereof he was
very Comfortless, and yet very Patient; abounding all this while in Gracious
Admonitions unto other Young People, that they would be concerned for their own
Eternal Salvation. And you should not now have heard him complain, that he
wanted Health and Ease, though he did so; but that he wanted Faith, and Peace,
and Christ; yet Expressing a profound Submission to the Will of God. But i^ the
Last F^rtnight of his Life, this poor Child of God, had his weary Soul more
comfortably Satiated with the Promise^ of the New Covenant. God filled him with
a mavelous Assurance of His Love, and so Sealed him with His own Spirit, that
he Rejoiced with Joy Unspeakable and full of Glory. He would often be saying,
Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and there is none on Earth, that I desire
besides thee: My Flesh and my Heart fa^leth, but God is the Strength of my
Heart, and my Portion for ever. And, I know that my Redeemer Lives, and that He
shall Stand at the Latter Day upon the Earth. And, If I Live, I shall Live unto
the Lord; if I Die, I shall Die unto the Lord; and whether I Live or Die, I am the
Lords. And, When Christ, who is my Life, shall appear, then shall I also appear
with Him in Glory. He would profess, that his Communion with the Lord Jesus
Christ, was Inexpressible; and the Spectaters judged his Consolations, to be as
Great, as could be born, in a mortal Body. Being now asked, Whether the
Thoughts of Dying Troubled him not? He replied, No, Death is no Terror to me,
because Christ has taken away my Sin, which is the Sting of Death. But being
asked, Whether he was willing to Live? He answered, I am willing to submit unto
the Will of God; but if God have appointed me to Life, I desire I may Live to
His Glory. And being asked, Whether God had put out of Doubt, his Interest in a
Dying and Rising Jesus? He returned, Yes; and God has fully answered my
Desires; I am now going to a thousand times better World. He told his Mother, I
Love you as dearly as my own Life, yet I had rather Die, and be with Christ.

He continued Six Days, with his Teeth so shut, as that they could not be
opened; and for the first Three Days and Nights, he took no ^ustenance;
afterward, though this but seldom, he Sucked in between his Teeth, nothing
but a little Cold Water: in which Time, they that Laid their Ears to his Lips,
could over-hear him continually Expressing his Comfort in God. But just before
his Death, his Teeth were opened; when he would often say, Oh! how precious is
^he Blood of Christ, it is worth more than a Thousand Worlds! and often pray,
Come, Lord Jesus, Come quickly! and at Last, he gave up himself to God, in
those words, Lord Jesus, receive my Spirit. He desired his Mother to turn his
Face unto the Wall; whereupon she said, John, Do thou now Remember Hezekiah's
Turning his Face unto ^he Wall? He said, Yes, I do Remember it: and as she
Turned him in her Arms, he so quietly breathed his Soul into the Arms ^f his
Blessed Savior.

[Extracted out of the Account, Written and Printed, by Mr. Witheril, and Mr.
Baker, Ministers of Situate; and Prefaced by Mr. Vrian Oaks, who takes that
Occasion to say, of this John Clap, He was a Young Old Man, full of Grace,
though not full of Days.]

EXAMPLE II.
MR. Thomas Thornton, the aged and faithful Pastor of Yarmouth, was blessed
with a Daughter, named Priscilla, which at the Age of Eleven, left this world,
having first given demonstrations of an Exemplary Piety.

She was one remarkably grave, devout, serious; very inquisitive about the
matters of Eternity; and in her particular Calling very diligent. She was
nevertheless troubled with sore Temptations and Exercises about the state of
her own Soul: the Anguish of her Spirit, about her Body of Death, caused her to
pour out many tears and prayers; and she pressed, That some other pious
Children of her acquaintance, might with her keep a Day of Humiliation
together, That (as she expressed it) they might get power against their sinful
Natures. But it pleased God at length to bless the words of her Godly Mother,
for the quieting of her mind. It was her singular Happiness, that she had such
Godly Parents; but it was her Opinion and Expression, We trust too much to the
Prayers of our Parents, whereas we should Pray for our selves.

At last, she fell Mortally Sick. In the beginning of her Sickness, she was
afraid of Dying; For, said she, I know of no Promise to encourage me. She could
not but own that she had in some measure walked with God; yet she complained,
That she had not found God meeting her in her Prayers, and making her Heart
willing to be at His Dispose; and that the Pride of her heart, now lay as a
Load upon it. She owned, That she had many Thoughts of Jesus Christ, and that
it grieved her that she had Sinned against Him, who had Done and Died for her.

But many days were not past, before she could profess her self Willing to
Dye* with some Assurance of her then going to Eternal Blessedness. Many Thanks
and Loves did she now render to one of her Superiors, declaring, 'Twas because
they had curbed her, and restrained her from sinful vanities. And she said,
Were I now to choose my Company, it should be among the People of God; I see
plainly that they are the only Company. She was not without her Conflicts in
this time, wherein one of her Speeches was, Damnation, that is the worst thing
of all, but Christ is of all the best; I find it so; Christ is to me, Wisdom,
Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption. She told her Father, she knew
she was made up of all manner of Sin; but said she, I hope God has Humbled me,
and Pardoned me, in the Merits of the Lord Jesus Christ. Unto her affectionate
Mother she said, Mother, why do you Weep, when I am well in my Soul? Will you
Mourn, when I am so full of Joy? I pray Rejoice with me.

When she was extremely spent, she said unto her Parent, O my Father, I have
been much troubled by Satan, but I find Christ is too hard for him, and Sin,
and all. She now said, I kn^w now that I shall Dye; and being asked, Whether
she were afraid of Death; with a sweet smile she replied, No not I, Christ is
better than Life! And so she continued in a most joyful frame, till she Dyed: a
little before which, it being the Lord^-day, she asked, What time of the day
'twas, and when they told her, 'Twas Three of the Clock; she replied, What? Is
the Sabbath almost done? Well, my Eternal Sabbath is going to begin, wherein I
shall enjoy all Felicity, and sing Hallelujahs to all ETERNITY. And hereupon
she quickly fell asleep in the Lord.

EXAMPLE III.
MR. NATHANAEL MATHER, dyed Oct. 17. 1688. at the Age of Nineteen, ^n Instance
of more than common Learning and Virtue. On his Gravestone, at Sal^m, there are
these words deservedly inscribed, The Ashes of an Hard Student, a Good Scholar,
and a Great Christian.

He was one, who used an Extraordinary diligence, to obtain skill in the
several Arts, that make an Accomplished Scholar; but he was more diligent in
his Endeavors to become an Experienced Christian.

He did with much of Solemnity enter into Covenant with God, when he was about
Fourteen years old, And afterward he Renewed that solemn Action, in such a
Form as this.

I do Renounce all the Vanities and Wretched Idols and Evil Courses of the
World.

I do Choose, and will ever Have, the Great God, for my ^est Good, my Last End,
my Only Lord. He shall be the Only One, in the Glorifying and Enjoying of whom
shall be my Welfare; and in the Serving of whom shall be my Work.

I will ever be Rendering unto the Lord Jesus Christ, my proper Acknowledgments,
as unto my Priest, my Prophet, and my King; and the physician of my Soul.

I will ever be studying what is my Duty in these Things; and wherein I find my
self to fall short, I will ever count it my Grief, and Shame; and betake my
self to the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant.

Now, Humbly Imploring the Grace of the Mediator to be suffi^ient for me, I do
as a further Solemnity, hereunto Subscribe my Name, with both Heart and Hand.

Having done This, he did for the rest of his Life, walk with much
Watchfulness, and Exactness.

One of the Directories, which he drew up, for himself, was This.

O that I might lead a Spiritual Life! Wherefore let me regulate my Life by the
Word of God and by such Scriptures as these.

1. For regulating my Thoughts, Jer. 4.14. Isa. 55.7. Mal. 3.17. Psalm. 1^4.34.
Phil. 4.8. Prove. 23.26 Deuteronomy. 15.9. Eccles. 1^.20. Prove. 24.9. Mat. 9.4. Zech.
8.17.

2. For regulating my Affections, Col. 3.2, 5. Gal. 5.24. For my Delight, Psalm,
1.2, Psalm. 37.5. For my Joy, Phil. 4.4. Psalm. 43.4. My Desire, Isa. 26.8, 9.
Ezekiel. 7.16. My Love Mat. 22.37. Psalm. 119.97. My Hatred, Psalm. 97.10. My Fear,
Luke 12.4, 5. My Hope, Psalm. 39.^. My Trust, Psalm. 62.8. Isa. 26.4.

3. For regulating my Speech, Ephesians. 4.29. Col. 4.6. Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. Psalm. 119.46.
Psalm. 71.8, 24. Prove. 31.26.

4. For regulating my Work, Tit. 3.8. 2 Timothy 2.12. 1 Timothy 5.10. Tit. 2.14. Mat.
5.47. 1 Timothy 6.8. Rev. 3.2. Romans 13 12. Act. 26.20.

Another of his Directories, was formed into an Hymn.

' Lord, what shall I return unto
'Him from whom all my mercies flow?
'(I.) To me to Live, it Christ shall be,
'For all I do I Will do for Thee.
'(II.) My Question shall be often beside,
'How thou may most be Glorified?
'(III.) I will not any Creature Love;
'But in the Love of Thee above.
'(IV) Thy Will I will embrace for mine,
'And every management of thine
'Shall please me. (V) A Conformity
'To Thee shall be my Aim and Eye.
'(VI) Ejaculations shall ascend
'Not seldom from me. (VII) I Will attend
' Occasional Reflections, and
'Turn all to Gold that comes to hand.
'(VIII) And in particular among
'My Cares, I Will try to make my Tongue
'A Tree of Life, by speaking all
'As be accountable who shall.
'(IX.) But last, nay first of all, I will
'Thy Son my Surety make and still
'Implore Him, that He would me bless
'With Strength as well as Righteousness.
He would also keep whole Days of Prayer, and Praise, by himself: And he would
set himself to Consider much on that Question, What shall I do for God?

He was much in Meditation, and often wrote the chief Heads of his Meditation.
He would Read the Scripture, with a Note, and a Wish fetched out of every
verse. And at Night, he would ask,

I. What has Gods mercy to me been this day?

II. What has my Carriage to God been this day?

III. If I Die this night, is my Immortal Spirit safe?

Many more such imitable things, are in the History of his Life (diverse times
Printed at London,) reported of him.

EXAMPLE IV.
ANN GREENOUGH, the Daughter of Mr. William Greenough, left the world, when she
was but about five years old, and yet gave astonishing Discoveries of a Regard
unto God and Christ, and her own Soul, before she went away. When she heard any
thing about the Lord Jesus Christ, she would be strangely transported, and
ravished in her Spirit at it; and had an unspeakable Delight in Catechizing.
She would put strange Questions about Eternal things, and make Answers her self
that were extremely pertinent. Once particularly, she asked, Are not we dead in
Sin? and presently added, But I will take this way, the Lord Jesus Christ shall
make me alive. She was very frequent and constant in Secret prayer, and could
not with any patience be interrupted in it. She told her Gracious Mother, That
she there prayed for her! And was covetous of being with her Mother, when she
imagined such Duties to be going forward. When she fell sick at last of a
Consumption, she would not by any sports be diverted from the Thoughts of
Death, wherein she took such pleasure, that she did not care to hear of any
thing else. And if she were asked, Whether she were willing to Dye? She would
still cheerfully Reply, Ay, by all means, that I may go the Lord Jesus Christ.

EXAMPLE V
AT Boston, 12 d. 3 m. 1694. there dyed one DANIEL WILLIAMS, in the Eighteenth
year of his Age.

There was a Collection made of some of his Dying Speeches.

Being asked, Whether he Loved God? He replied, Yes, I Love Him dearly; for,
Lord, whom have I in Heaven, but thee?

He said, God has promised, They that seek Him Early shall find Him: Ever since
I was a Child, I Dedicated my self to seek and serve the Lord. Though I have
not had so much Time, as some others, yet that little Time which I had, I spent
in waiting on, and wrestling with, God by prayer: and I said, I will not let
thee go, till thou have blessed me.

Seeing some of his Relations weep, he said, why do you Cry, when I am ready to
Sing for Joy?

They saying, They knew not how to part with him, he replied, Why? Are you not
willing I should go to my Heavenly Father? I shall quickly be with my Heavenly
Father, and with His Holy Angels, where they are singing of Hallelujahs. Its
better being there than here. When I am there, I shall not wish my self here, in
this Troublesome world again. I have a desire to depart, and to be with Christ,
which is best of all.

He was much Concerned for poor perishing Souls. He would say, Oh, that I had
but Strength! How would I Pray, and Sigh, and Cry to God, for the poor world,
that lives in Sin and Pride!

He Expressed himself, most pathetically to his ^^lations, when he took his
leave of them.

At last, he asked, What Angel that was, that he saw before him? well, said he,
I shall quickly be with him: Come, Lord Jesus, come quickly!

A Friend asking him how he did, he said, I am one bound for Heaven, I would
not have you pray for my Life; I am afraid you do!

On the day of his Death, being full of Pain, he said, Jesus Christ bore more
than this, and He Dyed for me; and shall I be afraid to Die, and go to Him: No,
I am not.

Then said he, O Death where is thy Sting? O Grave where is thy Victory?

EXAMPLE VI An Extract of a Letter, from Southold, 23 d. 4 m. School.
I Have been requested, to give you this Account, from the Parents of a
Gracious Child, who in all her Life did comport her self, to walk in the Lords
Holy Fear, and gave a great Attention in Hearing the Word of God, and the Lord
was pleased to ripen her for Himself, though she was but fifteen years, and
four months old. Though she was Young, it pleased the Lord, to put a great fear
and awe upon her Heart, of breaking the fifth Commandment. And when she was
under the Dispensation of God in Sickness, it pleased the Lord for to endue her
with patience, to be willing to bear His Hand, with all meekness. She Confessed
herself to be a great Sinner, and to have sinned against a Gracious God But the
Lord vouchsafed her a strong Faith, to Believe, that He is a merciful God, and
willing to Forgive Sins, and that He had Forgiven her Sins, in the Blood of our
Blessed Savior Jesus Christ. And, therefore she was very willing to leave the
world, and her Father and Mother, having Faith, that she was going to Christ.
These were her own Expressions. When her Mother did ask her, if she was willing
to Die, for she was too young to Die: She sometime before she dyed, said, she was
not fit to Dye, but prayed unto the Lord, that He would please to (...) her and
make her, willing to Die. Oh, said she, Death comes unaware, it comes like a
Thie^ ^n the Night! The Lord granted her desire: For afterward, when her
Mother asked her, My Child are you willing to Die? Her answer was, That now she
was willing to Die, and to leave a thousand worlds, and Father and Mother, and
all to go to Christ. She desired, That the Curtains might be drawn, that the
light of this world might not deprive her from beholding the Brightness and the
Glory of the other World. And when she see her Father and Mother weeping for
her, she said, My dear Father and Mother, don't mourn for me; you might well
mourn for me, if I were to go into utter Darkness; but I am going to God in
Heaven. I long to be in the New Jerusalem, with the Lord Jesus Christ: And now
I can Dye. And lying a while in an Agony, when she came out of that Agony, she
said, Mother, did you not hear me Sing? I thought, I was in Heaven with the
Lord Jesus Christ, and my Grand-Parents, and the Holy Angels, and heard such
melodious Praises of God, as I never heard; and I was very sorry that I could
not Sing like them. She said unto her Relations, Oh, don't set your Hearts upon
the world, nor look for the Honors and Riches of this world, but seek first
the Kingdom of Heaven! She would call upon her Father to go to Prayer at the
Evening, and say, I cannot, I dare not go to sleep without it. She wished, That
some Young People might come to her, to put 'em in mind, to Consider their
Latter End, and leave off their Pride. There came a Young maid to see her, and
she said to her, with Tears in her Eyes, That she should not follow the
Fashions of the world, and not put off Repentance to a sickbed. Yea, she spoke
to all them that were about her, That they would not mind this world, but the
other World. Her Mother asked her, If she was not afraid to ly in the Dust? But
^^e was not thoughtful, what should become of her Body, believing her Soul
should go to God. Mother, said she, I could not Sing here, but now I am going
to Sing the Praises of God in Heaven. Looking on her Father, she said, Oh,
Father, there is no God like our God, for (...) is a God Pardoning Iniquity,
Transgression, and Sin. She said, I wonder how you do, to love to live in such
a Troublesome, Ev^l, and Sinful world: Don't you see how the Judgments of God,
are all over the Earth. She often Cried out, O Lord Jesus, Come: Let thine
Angels come, and carry me to the Bosom of Abraham!

This is a true Relation of this Gracious Flower of the Lord Jesus Christ: She
was an only Child; her Name was, Bethiah, the Daughter of Thomas and Mary,
Longworth.

The Lord raise up your Heart, to declare His wonderful mercies, in working so
Graciously upon the Heart of such a young Flower; that the Lord may raise up
more such Gracious Souls, in our Rising Generation.

I remain, your affectionate Brother, I. S.

EXAMPLE VII. A Notable passage, transcribed from the Life of Mr. John Baily,
as it was Related in a Sermon Preached on the Day of his Funeral, at Boston, N.
E. 16. d. 10. m. 1697. By Mr. Cotton Mather; and afterward Printed.
FRom a Child he did know the Holy Scriptures: Yea, From a Child he was wise
unto Salvation. In his very Childhood he discovered the Fear of God, upon his
young Heart, and Prayer to God, was one of his Early Exercises.

There was one very Remarkable effect of it. His Father was a man of a very
Licentious Conversation; a Gamester, a Dancer, a very Lewd Company-keeper. The
Mother of this Elect-Vessel, one day took him, while he was yet a Child, and
calling the Family together, made him to Pray with them. His Father coming to
understand, at what a rate the Child had Prayed with his Family, it smote the
Soul of him, with a great Conviction, and proved the Beginning of his
Conversion unto God. God left not off working on his Heart, until he proved One
of the most Eminent Christians in all that Neighborhood. So he Lived, so he
Dyed; a man of more than Ordinary Piety. And it was his manner sometimes to
Retire unto those very places of his Lewdnesses, where, having that his little
Son in his Company, he would pour out Floods of Tears, in Repenting Prayers
before the Lord.

Some SCRIPTVRAL HYMNS FOR Children.
[I.] Little Children Brought unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST.
On Mat. XIX.14.
WHen Little Children once were brough^
To our most Gracious Lord,
Them that Opposed, He better Taught,
By this most precious Word:
' Suffer Your Little Children, so,
' Forbid them not, I say,
' Their Savior to come unto;
'I'm He, and come they may.
'Acknowledge me a mighty King,
'That Heavenly Graces give;
' Infants to me, for Subjects bring;
' My Heaven does them receive.
Thus does our Blessed Shepherd call,
Our Lambs into His Fold:
Lord pour thy Blessings on them all,
Blessings richer than Gold.
Oh! What a Glorious Grace is This,
Which God through Christ will grant,
That HE ours and our Childrens is,
In His Best Covenant.
[II.] Early Religion.
1 King. XVIII.12.
O That while I am Young I might
Fear the most Glorious One;
And not my Great Redeemer Slight:
Thine, Lord, I Am THINE alone.
2 Chronicles. 34.3.
May I while I am very Young,
Seek unto God by Prayer:
And those Loved Ones be found among
That Early Seekers are:
Psalm. 119.9.
May I, while I am Young, give Heed
Unto thy Holy Word;
Called, there to Cleanse my ways with Speed,
By the most Holy Lord.
2 John 4.
Though I am yet a Child, I would
In my most Forward Youth,
Walk, by the conduct of my God,
In the pure paths of Truth.
2 Timothy 2.22.
Those Lusts that Youthful are, to me
May they most Hateful prove;
And may the Laws of JESUS be
My Sweetest Joy and Love.
Eccl. 12.1.
Lord, THEE, my Maker, Thee, To Day,
God, Father, Son, and Spirit,
I would Remember, that I may
Eternal Life Inherit.
[III.] The Consent of the Believer unto the Ten Commandments.
LORD, I should have no Lord, beside
Thee, to be Loved, Served, Glorified.
I should the Glory due to Thee,
In Ways, pay, that Appointed be.
Thy Names, Thy Words, Thy Works, I should,
Sacred for proper Uses, hold.
The Days which thou made Sacred have,
I should not in Diversions wast.
In their Fit places, every one,
I should with all Fit Honors own.
That Life none may unjustly Loose,
Means I should with all kindness use.
Chaste I should be in every part,
Yea, Chaste in every Thought of Heart.
To Get and Keep my Worldly Wealth,
I should commit no sort of Stealth.
Truth I should utter, and maintain,
And no Good Name with Slander stain.
With sweet Content I should Receive
All the Wise God will please to give.
Lord, By the Blood of CHRIST, I pray,
Save me, who do not thus obey;
And by the Strength of CHRIST, from hence,
Saved, Let me yield Obedience.
[IV.] The Lords Prayer.
OUR Father, in the Heavenly Throne,
Inclined from thence to Help us all;
For the Sake of thy Blessed Son,
Thy Children thus upon Thee Call.
We would thy Ever-glorious Name,
As Holy, with Great Fear Adore:
And wish that All may in the same,
Thy Holy One Praise Evermore.
May thy Just Kingdom Come, we Pray;
That thou art the Worlds King, we know:
But, Oh! bring on that Happy Day,
When all the World shall own Thee so.
May we thy Righteous Will approve,
And it all Things commanding see,
As it in the New Heaven above,
And the New Earth below, shall be.
Lord, Give us a Convenient Food;
What may be Such, to Thee we leave,
And let us not want any Good;
All we Rely on Thee to give.
Our Faults, by which we are in Debt
To Thy dread Justice, Lord, Release:
Christ Pays our Debt; And we Forget,
For this, our Neighbors Injuries.
We Are Frail; Us from Temptation Save;
Sins, Oh! Sins, The worst Evils are:
Us Let not Evil Tempters have,
And hold in any Sinful Snare.
Thou have the Rule of All; A Word
Of thine can Do All: To Thee then
All Honor's due: We Shout, O Lord,
AMEN, in Faith of thy, AMEN!
[V.] The Lord's Day.
On Rev. I. 10.
THis is the Day of Rest, whereon
Our Lord Rose from the Dead;
The Price of man's Redemption,
This Day was fully paid.
This is to us, the Joyful Day,
Which our Lord made His own,
By His most Wonderful Display
Of Power and Grace thereon.
The Jewish Sabbath Laid Asleep
With our Lord under Earth,
Directs us Now This Day to keep
Of our Lords Second Birth.
This is the Day, our Lord now chose
Thereon still to Appear;
The Day, for Him preferred by Those
That His Apostles were.
It is Declared, The Lord's Day, Now,
Holy unto the Lord
It will no Worldly Thought allow,
No Worldly Work or Word.
Now, Lord, on this Thy D^y, dispense,
Thy Spirit unto me:
And by thy Spirits Influenee
Let me now Acted be.
This Day, Oh! Spirit, from on High,
Make thou a Mean and Sign,
Of that Great Sabbatism, when I
Shall in thy Glory shine!
[VI.] Prayer Encouraged.
Matthew. 7.7. -- 11. with Luke 11.9.13.
THat Lord, on whose Account alone
Our Prayers prevail with God,
Bids us Address that Glorious One,
With Prayers for Every Good.
Ask now, and ye shall have, (says He)
' Seek now, and ye shall find.
'Heav'ns Doors, at which you Knocking be,
'Shall Open to your Mind.
'What Father, to a Sons Request
'For Bread or Fish, will throw
'A Stone or make? His very best
'He'l on a Son bestow.
God is your Better Father; You
'In me, His Children are;
'You'l Gain, with His Good ^p^rit now,
' All Good Things else, by Prayer.
Joh. 16.23.
' Children, Then to the Father Go;
'Go, in my Name, I say:
'Rich Blessings He will give unto
'Them, in that Name, who Pray.
FINIS.

