A Challenge to Caleb Pusey, and a Check to his Lies and Forgeries, etc.
IT is three years since I published a Book, called, News of a Trumpet, etc.
which has vexed and galled the Quakers, to see their vile Errors and Heresies
further discovered to the World; and some Consultations there has been among
'em as I am told, to bring forth an Answer, which accordingly, I have long
expected and at last have met with a right Scarrilous Pamphlet, signed by one
Caleb Pusey, Satan's Harbinger by Title, wherein he pretends to answer [here
and there a bit of] my said Book: He leaps over 4, 5 or 6 pages at a time with
silence; and what he does speak to, he in many places Tares my Sentences to
pieces, and leaves out the substance of the Subject, to make me speak what I
never intended [the true method of G. Fox] to render me odious. To prove this*
I Will cite but one Passage, even the very first Quotation he brings of mine in
the top of his first page where he leaves out these woods, According to what
was made manifest to them, and so makes it speak as he has a mind But he having
sucked such Wickedness from the founder of their Religion, he cannot leave it
till he ceases to be a Quaker

For great part of those confused sayings which I quote, he sends me to a
Quakers Book for an answer, viz. to G K's Books while he was one with them.
Alas poor man! is the Quakers cause so drooping that he is forced to support it
with one Quakers Book to help another, which duly considered, no ways helps
him neither.

I have not read above half his Pamphlet, yet meet with between thirty and
forty Lies, Perversions, Forgeries, etc Lies of all sorts, double and single;
in order to prove this I Will not enter his Book neither, but take that one
Passage, that he quotes in his Preface, where he charges me of shamefully
abusing a saying of W. Penn in his Sandy Foundation. p. 20. There he denis that
W. Penn calls Christ, as Man, The finite impotent Creature. This I charge on
Caleb Pusey as a Lie; Nay, it is a double Lie; for he adds, that W. P. meant it
of us sinners; whereas the only Subject that W. P. there treats on, is Jesus
Christ as the second Person in the Trinity, whom he calls The finite and
impotent Creature, and denis him to have satisfied the offended infinite
Justice of his Father for man's sin, for that very reason, and calls it an
absurdity so to believe or affirm. I have this Book of W. Penns by me, and I do
desire and entreat all modrate People that want to be satisfied in the Truth of
this to come and see it; for I design to keep the Book for that purpose, to
discover the baseness of this Caleb Pusey.

But above all, I admire at W. Penn, being a Man of Wit, Parts and Learning,
that he should be so deeply mired in the Bog of Quakerism, as to suffer, nay,
countenance such palpable Lies to be published in print, of his Writings, it
being not only his place but in his Power to have prevented it; certainly if he
believes he shall hereafter give account of his Stewardship to Almighty God, he
must needs believe this thing will rise in Judgment against him, which is
puposely done to deceive and delude poor ignorant People. -- But as for C.
Pusey I have no reason to expect better friuts from him, for he is not honest
in Morals, he unjustly withholds part of an Estate from the Executor of Thomas
C^^s^; but be it known to him I can force him so far to be honest, provided his
Brethren are no Judges in the case. However he is a fit Tool to serve the
Quakers, because he can lie and abuse men without shame. But to the matter.

Let this one passage in his Preface, which he esteems a capital Crime against
me [by repeating it diverse times over and over in his Book and calls it an
abominable Lye] be the Rule and Touch stone of Trial between us in the case,
and to try the rest of his wordy stuff in his Book. Therefore I here challenge
him in the face of the World to let us choose four, six or more judicious Men to
judge of this Passage, and if they find me wrong, and he right, I Will be bound
to print what sort of Condemnation Caleb Pusey shall assign. But if they find
me right and he wrong, he shall be bound to print what Condemnation I shall
assign him.

Now with this Millstone, through Gods assistance, will I grind this Miller,
and by this Token it shall be known to the World that his case is Naught, that
he makes Lies the Quakers Refuge, and dare not refer it to any but his own
Party, who are his encouragers in this wicked Work, and at whose Charge he
prints, and not at his own; for New-Rome has a Public Stock to carry on her
underground Designs; but it is otherwise with me, I must print at my own Charge.
Therefore till he accepts my Challenge, this is all the Answer I think to give
him. Mean time, my Book does its Service appointed by divine Providence in
England, the Land of my Nativity, where it has been Reprinted and spread for
the benefit of my Countrymen in Defyance of Cart loads of his S^^y Sophisms,
Lies and Trumpery, which will prevail on none but those they have already
Conquered.

Advertisement.
The Reader is desired to take Notice that this Paper was writ above a year
ago, and has lain in the Printers hands ever since, which has caused the
Quakers to glory over the Author, as supposing he durst not make any Return to
their Lies, etc. But be it known to them that Truth seeks no Corners, nor does
he, but offers to meet them before any Impartial Auditory But think he is not
under any Obligation to trace them in all their Serpentine turnings, etc. until
they answer this fair and reasonable Challenge above offered to Caleb Pusey.

Postscript.
AS to John Wo^d he brings long stories in the Postscript to prove me a Liar,
when as what he brings is a confirming of the substance of that which I charge
him with, viz.. That he was Sheriff and Preacher, a thing unpresidential, and
that Roberts was a sufferer by his taking the said Roberts his goods, etc. I Will
propose this to J. Wood, Let half a dozen of his friends relate a story, that
contains many circumstances, and I Will engage they shall every one differ in
relating one and the same story. And shall I therefore call them Liars, though I
know (...)? No, I hope I have more charity.

But what need I argue thus? for I have published nothing of John Wood that he
accuses me for, but what I had and still have by me in writing, sent to me
under the hands of the Widow Roberts, and one of her Neighbors, which also
well agrees with what she and her sick Husband related to me when they
requested me to print it in my Almanac* and I believe when she again sees the
writings, she will so recollect her self as not to eat her words, as I perceive
some Preachers have endeavored to force her to do. So that J. W. wrongs me in
calling me Liar, as will be found by all who think it worth while to view the
said Writings in my hands.

Daniel Leeds.


