The Order of the Gospel, Professed and Practiced by the Churches of CHRIST in
New England, Justified by the Scripture, and by the Writings of many Learned
men both Ancient and Modern Divines; In Answer to several Questions, relating
to Church Discipline.

By Increase Mather, President of Harvard College in Cambridge, and Teacher of
a Church at Boston in New England.

Jer 2.21, 36 I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed -- why
gaddest thou about so much to change thy way? --

Col 2 5. Joying and beholding your Order, -- and the Steadfastness of your
Faith.

BOSTON, Printed by B Green, and J. Allen, for Benjamin Eliot, at his Shop
under the West End of the Townhouse, 1700

QVicquid praecipiti via Certum deserit ordinem Laetos non habet Exitus.
Boethius.

The Epistle Dedicatory. TO THE Churches of CHRIST IN New England.
THAT the Churches which are called Reformed, have attained unto but an
Imperfect Reformation, is a Truth not to be denied: The defect has not been so
much in Doctrine as in Worship and Discipline. Nevertheless, in this respect
some Churches have gone beyond others. In Geneva, France, Holland, they have
made an higher Progress then in Germany: of which the chief Reformers, such as
Melancthon, Martyr, Musculus, Zanchy and others were very sensible, bitterly
complaining that many who were willing to cast off the yoke of Antichrist, yet
were not willing to Subject to the Yoke of Christ. Amongst all the Reformed
Churches, some have given the Preference to the Bohemian-Brethren, who sprang
from the Waldenses, and they from the true Apostolic Church, not corrupted
with Popery. These did Luther in the year 1524 mislike, because of their stri^^
Ecclesiastical Discipline. But twelve years after that, he saw cause to alter
his Judgment, and write in Defense of those Holy Churches, which once he had
written against, bewayling his own Error in that he had been so Lax in
Admissions to the Lords Table, and wishing that the Evangelics in Germany, had
began the Reformation with Discipline, and not with Doctrine only. For which
change of his Judgment Popish Authors do unworthily upbraid him, since it was
a change for the better. Lasitius (the Polish Historian) says, that if any
where in the World the Primitive Apostolical Churches were to be seen, it was
amongst the Ecclesiolae, the poor little Churches of the Bohemian Brethren.
When Learned Bucer heard one of their Ministers (who was sent on purpose into
Germany for that end) give an account of the Order of their Churches, he burst
out into Tears, saying to the other Divines Present, This is Heaven upon Earth.
Vergerius, (that famous Preacher who having been the Popes Legate to the
Emperor, taking Calvin's Institutions into his hands with a design to confute
him, was Converted thereby) wrote to an Eminent Person in those Churches, that
be Prayed for nothing in this world so much as that he might Live and Dye a
member amongst them. Now that wherein these Churches did chiefly Excel, was
their Order Especially in their great strictness as to Admissions to the Lords
Supper. It was in those days objected against them, Fratres non habent
Ecclessam apertam, that their Churches were enclosures, and their Church doors
were too strai^. But they knew that the Scripture calls the Church a Garden
Enclosed, a Spring shut up, and a fountain Sealed. Cant 4 12 They were wont to
Answer such as made that objection against them, Christ has taught (...) that
we must not give Holy things, Except to Holy Persons Religion (said they) is
not to begin with the Sacrament, but with Repentance and Faith. And as Christ
would not commit himself to all that Professed Faith, so neither must we. There
are many that prove Abortive Christians, we must be as careful as we can, that
we be not deceived with such Communicants* And therefore the Consciences of
such as offer themselves to our Communion are to be searched into, and they
must be tried concerning their sincerity again and again; and Observation made
what Fruits that are Evidences of true Repentance do appear in them. This was
the Doctrine: This was the Discipline of those famous Churches* Thus did they
Practice for many years. But by reason of an Universal Toleration, and through
Corruption in their Schools, they degenerated, and wonderfully lost their
Discipline, until the Jealousy of the Lord dissipated and destroyed them all. A
late writer observes, that for the space of Forty years the Reformed Churches
in France kept close to their Ecclesiastical Discipline, but after that they
grew remiss. And what has God done to them all at this day? It was spoken to
the Church in Ephesus, Rev. 2 4, 5. Thou have left thy first Love, Remember
therefore whence thou art fallen, and do the first works, or else I will come
to thee quickly, and will remove thy Candlestick out of his place. The
Revelation was written Forty year^ after the Church in Ephesus was first
planted. The First Generation of Church Members in that time were doubtless the
most of them dead: their Successors wanted the First Zeal for the ways of
Christ wherein their Predecessors had Excelled. This at last issued in a
Removal of the Candlestick.

And should not the dear Churches of New England, be awakened by such awful
Examples to take heed l^ast it be thus with them? And therefore to beware of
Declensions, either from the Fiath or from the Order of the Gospel. There is
that which the Scripture call, the present Truth, in which in a special manner
we ought to be Established 2 Pet. 1.12. viz. That which is very Peculiarly the
Truth of the Age or the Place where the Divine Providence has cast our Lot. And
this is N^w the Truth which do^ concern Ecclesiastical Polity. That is it, for
which our Fathers suffered a Voluntary Exile into this Wilderness, when it was
a Land not Sown. Here God rewarded them with showing to them the form of his
House, with all the outgoings thereof, and all the comings in thereof. Mr
Brightman, before ever there was a New England, Conjectured that there would be
some Faithful Servants of Christ in a Wilderness, unto whom he should make
Singular Discoveries of Truth; which several Judicious Authors have Esteemed as
a Prophetical Passage fulfilled in what has come to pass in this American
Desert. However, The Truths which respect Church Order are they which these
Churches above any other are concerned to maintain: And an Apostasy from them
would in New England be a greater Sin and Provocation to Christ, then in any
Place in the whole world. Regenvolscius in his Ecclesiastical History of the
Slavonian Churches, relates that Lucas Brugensis, (a man famous for his
Learning and Piety amonst the Bohemians,) was wont to say, that he did not so
much dread all the Enemies and Persecutors whom they were continually
endangered by, as he was afraid least remissness in their Holy Discipline would
prove the ruin of their Churches. His Prediction was sadly verified: I pray God
the like fate may never attend these Churches, in too many of which there is an
amazing Relaxation of Discipline. Sure I am, that to depart from the Order of
the Gospel established in these Churches in the days of our Fathers, and
declared in the Platform of Discipline, is not the way to obtain such signal
Divine protections as they were favored with. Isa. 4*9. If we Espouse such
principles as these, Namely, That Churches are not to Enquire into the
Regeneration of those whom they admit unto their Communion. That Admission to
Sacraments is to be left wholly to the prudence and Conscience of the Minister.
That Explicit Covenanting with God and with the Church is needless. That
Persons not Qualified for Communion in special Ordinances shall Elect Pastors
of Churches. That all Professed Christians have right to Baptism. That Brethren
are to have no Voice in Ecclesiastical Councils. That the Essence of a
Ministers call is not in the Election of the People, but in the Ceremony of
Imposing hands. That Persons may be Established in the Pastoral Office without
the Approbation of Neighboring Churches or Elders; We then give away the whole
Congregational cause at once, and a great part of the Presbyterian Discip^ine
also. To begin a change in one of these Particulars without Decision of a Synod
would in other Churches of the Reformed be counted Presumption; but to design
all or most of these Innovations at once, is certainly a bold Attempt* No
longer since then May 27 1697. no less then Thirty Ministers in this Province,
did declare and subscribe it with their hands, That they were made sensible of
the tendencies which there are amongst us toward Deviations from the good
Order wherein our Churches (...) according to the Word of the Lord Jesus
Christ, been happily established and continued There is cause to be sensible of
it now as much as then. For Deviations are not less then f^^merly, but rather
grow^ng upon us ev^^y day. Shall we then by silence (...) Truth? When the
interest of Christ is concerned; do we not hear that voice, Who is on the Lords
Side? Who? Is there no one that will stand up for the Churches of Christ? The
Good People in them may then well think that their Watchmen are all either Dead
or Asleep: For which cause it is, that I Dedicate this ensuing Dissertation
unto you the Churches of Christ in New England.

My Brethren, and the Lords People.

It is not my own Cause, but Yours, which I have here undertaken and plead for.
Did I say Yours? Nay, it is Christ's Cause. The defense of these Truths is now
become the Cause of Christ and of his Churches in New England I am also very
sensible that Young Divines, who have not Studied these Controversies, are apt
to think, that what has been Ordinarily professed and practiced in the Churches
of New England, is Novelty and Singularity. It may in that respect be a Service
to the Churches that something be written, which may be for the Information and
Illumination of such, in Questions of this nature, by means whereof they may be
the more fit to Serve the Churches of God wherever the Divine Providence shall
see good to dispose of them.

New England (I mean the Churches in it) was Planted a Noble Vine wholly a righ
seed. We are all concerned in our several Capacities (Ministers in theirs and
People in theirs) to Labor what in us lies, that they who shall come after us,
may not prove Degenerate Plants; much more should we Endeavor that they may
not be so in our Days. It is a sad Observation often Verified by Experience,
That Religion in the Purity and Power of it, seldom continues long in the same
place. When the Church of Israel was in a Settled State, They Served the Lord
all the days of Joshua, and of the Elders that out lived Joshua; that
Generation was gathered to their Fathers, and there arose another Generation
after them which knew not the Lord. They turned quickly out of the way which
their Fathers walked in, obeying the Voice of the Lord, but they did not so. It
was the Third Generation of Church Members which proved Degenerate and
Apostate: Pray God it be not so in New England. The First Generation of his
Servants whom he brought into this Wilderness are gathered to their Fathers.
And many of the Second Generation, such of them as are yet living are now in
years, and soon will be all gone. The Third Generation are coming to take their
turn: Some of them are great Blessings to the Churches, as inheriting the
Principles, Spirit, and Grace of their Fathers and Grandfathers, but many of
them do not so. On which account, it is not at all to be wondered at, if they
Dislike the Good Old way of the Churches; yea, if they Scoff at it, as some of
them do; or if they are willing to depart from what is Ordinarily Practiced in
the Churches of Christ in New England* For the Congregational Church
Discipline, is not Suited for a Wordly Interest, or for a Formal Generation of
Professors. It will stand or fall as Godliness in the Power of it does prevail
or otherwise. That there is a great decay of the Power of Religion throughout
all New England is Lamentably true. If that revive, there will be no fear of
Departing from the Holy Discipline of the Churches of Christ. But revived it
will be amongst those who are Enemies to Explicit Covenanting with God and His
People, against whom the Religious Societies of the Church of England
Communion, now in London, will rise up and Condemn them. Was it ever known that
Collapsed Churches were restored to their Primitive State of Purity, but in
this way, and by this means of Explicit Renovation of their Covenants with God
and with one another. But I hope enough is said about that in the Subsequent
Disquisition.

Let the Churches Pray for the College particularly, that God may ever Bless
that Society with faithful Tutors that will be true to Christ's Interest and
theirs, and not Hanker after new and loose ways. This is a matter of no small
concernment. For if the Fountain whose Streams should make glad the City of
God, be corrupted, Posterity will be Endangered thereby. The poor Churches in
Bohemia before mentioned found it so. If the begun Apostasy should proceed as
fast the next thirty years as it has done these last, surely it will come to
that in New England (Except the Gospel it self Depart with the Order of it)
that the most Conscientious People therein, will think themselves concerned to
gather Churches out of Churches. But as yet the Declension is not gone so far
but a Stop may be put thereunto, and the Interest of Religion be Retrieved. It
was said to one of the decaying Churches in Asia, Be watchful and strengthen
the things which remain, and are ready to Die; -- Remember how thou have
received, and heard, and hold fast. Does not the Lord Jesus Christ say so to
the Churches in New England:) And does He not say, as unto another of the
Churches, Hold fast that thou have, that no man take thy Crown.

The Lord give us Grace so to do, which is the hearts desire and Prayer, of him
who is,

Yours to Serve you, Increase Mather.
Boston. Ian. 1700.
THE Order of the Churches in New England. VINDICATED.
QUESTION I. WHether Particular Churches ought to Consist of Saints and true
Believers on Christ?
The Question is not de facto, whether there are not true Churches in whom
there are many that are not Saints, but de jure, whether it ought to be so? and
whether that Church is not Guilty of Sin, which do^ admit those into their
Communion who are not in the Judgment of rational Charity true Believers on
Christ. This being premised for the true stating of the Question; the Answer is
Affirmative. And that for these amongst other Reasons.

1* There are Scripture predictions relating to the Times of the New Testament
which (...) that Evangelica^ Churches shall consist of Holy Persons. It is
foretold that the uncircumcised shall not Enter into Gods Holy City. Isai.
52.1. That the high way, the way into the Church should be the way of Holiness.
Isai. 3^.^. That the people should be all Righteous, the branch of the Lords
planting, the work of his hands that He might be glorified. Isai. 60.21. That
unsanctified persons shall be kept out of the Spiritual Jerusalem, Rev. 21.27.

2. The Scripture informs us that in Churches where the appointment of Christ
was observed it has been thus. As in Ephesus, Corinth, Philippi, Colosse, the
members of the Churches there, were Saints, Faithful Brethren, Sanctified in
Christ Jesus.

3. A particular instituted Church is the House of God. That particular Church
in Ephesus is said to be so. 1 Timothy 3.15. A Mr. Paul Bain on Ephesians. 1. p. 91.111.
Learned and Eminent Divine has these Expressions. As (says he) a virtuous
Civil man do^ not like to have in his House uncivil persons, so the most Holy
God will not allow any to be in his Family, that are unholy. As no man can
think well to have ^wine in his House, or Dogs and Swine to come to board with
the rest of the Family, so open Sinners have no allowance from God to be in his
Household.

4. None that were legally unclean might enter into the Jewish Temple, 2 Chronicles.
27.1^. Act. 21.28, 29. Nor Eat of the Pasover and other Holy things. Numb. 9 6,
10, 11. Now Evangelical Churches are the Lords Temple. 1 Cor 3.16, 17. And 2
Cor. 6.16. And they have in them Sacred things, yea the Body and Blood of
Christ; and therefore ^hey who are Morally Unclean may not be admitted into
them. The Ceremonial Holiness of the Jewish Church was Typical of that real
Holiness which ought to be in Gospel Churches.

5. When it has been otherwise, the Lord has reproved them that have caused or
permitted such abuses; as in the Church at Corinth, Pergamus, Thyatira, which
are blamed for their suffering Ungodly persons to be in their Communion. 1 Cor.
5 2, 13. Rev. 2.14, 15, 20. A Scripture which has respect unto the Times of the
Gospel severly rebukes those Ministers which shall bring men that are
Vneurcumcised in Heart, (Unregenerate persons) into the Sanctuary, into the
Church of God, to Eat the Bread and Drink the Blood which they that are there
partake of, Ezekiel* 44, 7, 9.

6. Nothing can be more fatal to the interest of Religion, then to Constitute
Churches of Unsanctified Members. This made way for the Antichristian Apostasy,
which has been Subversive to the Interest of Christ and Holiness throughout the
greatest part of that which bears the Name of Christendom. When Christianity
became the (...) ^eligion, whole Provinces at once were mad^ Church Members,
upon a bare Profession of Christianity, without any regard to their (...)
Sanctity. And this Corrupting the Church ^s to the matter of it, was the means
of intr^^ucing that Corruption in Doctrine, Worship, Order, which soon
followed. Of this some of the Ancients who lived in the fourth Century were
very sensible, for we find in their Writings s^d complaints about it. If we
allow a Degeneracy in our Churches in respect of the matter of them our
Beth^ls, will soon become Bethavens. It is a smart but a true Expression of a
Great Dr. Owen of a Gospel Church. part 2* p. 4.
Divine,. That to compose Churches of habitual Sinners, and that either as to
Sins of Commission or Sins of Omission, is not to Erect Temples to Christ, but
Chapels to the Devil.

Nor is this Assertion, That Visible Saints are the matter of a particular
Church a notion peculiar unto Congregational Men. Our Brethren of the
Presbyterian Parswasion say the same thing. Yea, the good old Non-conformists,
and all that have been Studious of Reformation in the Church concur in this
principle. Mr. Ball Answer to Cann. part 2. p. 49, 50.
who was of the Presbyterian Judgment, says, That all true Churches should
consist of Visible Saints. The Non-conformists do acknowledge that Churches
planted and gathered according to Gods Word consists of Saints on^^* Thus Mr.
Ball. The Presbyterians of the Union (...) London have it for one of their
Articles, Th^^ none shall be Admitted as Members in order to Communion in all
the special Ordina^^es of the Gospel, but such persons as are Knowing and Sound
in the Fundamental Doctrines of the (...) Religion, without Scandal in their
Lives, and to a Judgment regulated by the word of God, are persons of Visible
Godliness and Honesty, credibly professing cordial^ Subjection to Jesus Christ.
Worthy Mr. Rutherford has these words, Plea for the Presbytery in Scotland. p.
18^.
Those only (says he) are to be admitted to the Supper of the Lord, whom in
Charity, we Judge, can and do Try and Examine themselves, and rightly discern
the Lords Body, and who in Faith can annuatiate the Lords Death* The Churches
in New England are free to admit those into their Communion who are th^s^
qualified; Nor do they insist on more.

QUESTION II. WHether there ought not to be a Trial of persons concerning their
Qualifications and Fitness for Church Communion before they are Admitted
thereunto?
The Answer may be given in three Ass^rtions.

1. We Affirm that Examination and Trial of the persons who offer themselves to
our S^cr^d Communion whether they are duly qualified for it, is ordinarily
necessary.

For,

1. If men professing and pretending to be Apostles were to be tried whether
they were so indeed or no, then there is the like reason that men pretending to
be Saints, and so fit materials for Church Fellowship, should be tried whether
they be so or no. But the ^ormer is plain from Rev 2.2. Where such persons were
tried and found to be but (...).

2. In the Old Testament there were persons set at the Gates of the Temple to
see who they were that did Essay to enter, and to keep those out that were not
duly qualified 2 Chronicles* 23.19. And shall the New Testament Temple, i. e. the
Church of God, have no persons to Examine such as would enter thereinto? If
Ceremonial uncleanness made men (...) to enter into the Material Temple, (...)
Uncleanness renders them incapable of Admission into the Spiritual Temple.
Where^fore an Examination is necessary.

3. It is said of the Mystical Jerusalem, that Twelve Angels were at her Gates,
Rev 21.1^. Which does not obscurely intimate, that there are Officers in the
Christian Churches whose work* it i^ to observe who they are that Es^^y to
enter thereinto, that so the worthy or duly qualified may be admitted and
others be debarred from Entrance.

2. The trial to be used should be such as may make it appear to the Judgment
of rational Charity, that the persons be so qualified as all Church Members
ought to be. It has been proved that Church Members ought to be Believers,
Saints, Regenerate persons. And therefore the Church should put the persons,
who desire Admission into their Holy Communion, to declare and show whether it
be thus with them, whether they have truly Repented of their Sins, and whether
they truly Believe on Christ. Thus we read that Philip Examined the Eunuch
whether he did believe on Christ with all his Heart or no. Act. 8.37: And John
Baptist put those whom he admitted to his Baptism to manifest their unfeigned
Repentance. Matthew. 3.2.

Nevertheless,

3. A rigid Severity in Examination is to be avoided, and such tenderness and
Charity ought to be used as that the weakest Christians if Sincere may be
encouraged and gladly admitted. Yea, it were better (as Mr. Cotton In the way
of the Churches p. 58.
observes) to admit diverse Hypocrites then to keep out one Sincere Child of
God from coming into the Church.

For,

1. Our Lord Jesus Christ would not break the bruised Reed nor quench the
Smoking flax. Matthew. 12.20. But gather the tender Lambs in his arms, and carry
them gently in his bosom. Isa. 40.11.

2. Such as are weak in the Faith we are Expressly Commanded to receive. Romans
14 1. Receiving into Church fellowship may well (amongst other things) be
comprehended in that Expression.

3. Weak Christians if Sincere have the Substance of that Faith and Sanctity
which is necessarily required in Church Members; and therefore no reason they
should be Excluded, though others may Exceed them in measure and degree of
Knowledge and Grace.

4* Church Communion and the Ordinances of God belonging thereto, being of
special use for Confirmation and growth in Grace, such Christians that are the
weakest have the most need thereof, and therefore by no means should be
Excluded ther^-from. These Rules being observed, we affirm that Examination of
persons to be admitted into Communion at the Lords Table is necess^ry. More
Arguments for it may be seen in Mr. Cottons Excellent Treatise of the Holiness
of Church Members. And in this Controversy those of the Presbyterian persuasion
agree with the Congregational, as we see in their Vindication of the
Presbyterial Government published by the Ministers at London in the year 1650.
Wherein what we assert is largly proved by many Reasons, and the usual
Objections against it, are solidly answered. In the primitive Times they were
very strict in Examining those who were admitted into Church Fellowship. The
great Chamier wishes that the like strictness were used in these days. Origin
against Celsus (Lib. 3. p. Mihi. 142, 147, 148.) says, that in those days,
Christians did initiate none but Converted ones in their Mysteries, and that
they did all that possibly they could do, that their Churches might consist of
none but such as were endued with Spiritual Wisdom, and that therefore they
that joined to them submitted to severe Examinations. This principle, That
ungodly persons are not fit to be admitted to the Lords Table, was asserted in
the first dawnings of the Reformation. Not only such as fell in with the Geneva
Discipline, but the First Reformers in the Church of England went thus far. The
Twenty nineth Article says, That in the use of the Lords Supper, such as are
void of a Lively Faith, to their Condemnation Eat and Drink the Sign and
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ. The Liturgy says, That in no wise
men should come but in the Marriage Garment. That if any man be in Malice, or
in any grievious Crime, Let him not come to the Holy Table, but let him Repent
truly of his Sins past, and have a lively Faith in our Savior Christ. Such
Expressions as these are in the English Liturgy. A. B* Cranmer in his Answer to
the Fifteenth Articles of the Devonshire Rebels, having quoted many old Canons
which require the people to Communicate and not the Priest alone, has these
words, I would Exhort every Good Christian man often to receive the Holy
Communion: yet I do not recite all these things to the intent that I would in
this Corrupt World where men live so ungodly as they do, that the old Canons
should be restored again, which Command every man present to receive the
Communion with the Priest; which Canons if they were now used, I fear that men
would receive it unworthily. See the Appendix to Cranmers Life lately published
by Mr. Strype p. 96. As for that objection that the Sacrament* is a Converting
Ordinance, and therefore that there is no need of Examining men about their
Conversion in order to their being admitted to partake thereof, it is a Popish
Assertion, Condemned and Confuted by our Divines, Excepting that some of the
Grossest Lutheran^ have Espoused it. Diverse of our late Writers of the
Presbyterian Judgment have Elaborately and Abundantly refuted that pernicious
Error. Mr. Vines calls this Opinion an Vpstart Notion: And says, He wonders
that any should stand up in the defense of it since there is an army to a man
against them. See his Treatise of the Lords Supper. p. 215. Mr. Gillespy in his
Aarons Rod Blossoming. Book 3.12, 13 and 14. Chapters, does not only Answer Mr.
Prins Allegations for the Affirmative, but he has by no less than Twenty
Arguments with great Learning and Judgment demonstrated, that the Sacrament of
the Supper is not a Converting but a Confirming Ordinance: otherwise it might
be Administered not only to Ungodly but to Unbaptised persons. An Ordinance
appointed for Conversion is not to be withheld from Unbaptised persons: But
the Lords Supper is to be withheld from Unbaptised persons, Ex^d. 12.48.
Therefore etc.

QUESTION. III. WHether are not the Brethren, and not the Elders of the Church
only to Judge concerning the Qualifications and Fitness of those who are
Admitted into their Communion?
Answ. There is some difference of Apprehension, and yet no breach of Amity or
Union, as to this Question between the Brethren of the Presbyterian and the
Congregational way, the former giving this power only to the Eldership, the
later joining the Fraternity with them. In Resp. ad Apollon. p. 13.
Mr. Cotton, and from him Mr. Norton has Judiciously stated and discussed this
Controversy. Let their and some other Arguments be duly weighed in the
Balla^^^ of the Sanctuary.

1. They that have power in Admission have power to Judge whether the persons
to be Admitted are duly qualified for Admission. But this is true of the
Fraternity as well as of the Presbytery. No one can be Admitted into the Church
by the Elders without the Consent of the Brethren. The Community is concerned
in who are Admitted, and therefore should concur therein. Its a received maxim,
Quod tangit omnes, debet ab omnibus approbari. And reason says, They that have
power to Admit have power to Judge whether the persons who desire it, are fit
for that Admittance.

2. They that have power to Judge whether a person is fit to be cast out of
Communion, have power to Judge whether he is fit to be received into Communion.
The Ke^ [the power] of Opening and Shutting belongs to the same persons. But it
is clear from the Scripture, that the Brethren and not the Elders only have
power to Judge whether an Offender is fit to be Excommunicated. Matthew. 18.17. 1
Cor^ 5.12. All Orthodox Divine^ agree that Church Discipline should be
Exercised, Consentiente plebe. So amongst the Ancients, Cyprian, Ambrose,
Austin, Jerome, Chrysostom, Nazianzene, Theodoret, Theophylact. And amongst our
Modren Divines, Calvin, Beza, Bullinger, Melancton, Junius, Pareus, Rivet,
Trelcatius If their consent is necessary, than they have power to Judge whether
they ought to consent or no.

3 They that have power to Judge whether a person Excommunicated, is fit to be
restored to the Communion of the Church, have power to Judge whether persons
never yet received into the Communion of the Church are duly qualified for
that Communion. But the Apostle writes to the Brethren as well as to the Elders
of the Church in Corinth to restore a penitent, whom they had according to the
discipline of Christ laid under a Church ^^nsure, 2 Cor. 2.6. If the Brethren
are competent Judges cencerning the Repentance of a Lapsed Communicant, they
are not incompetent Judges of the Repentance of other persons that may offer
themselves to their Communion.

4 When Saul desired to join to the Church at Jerusalem, he was not admitted
until the Brethren were by the Testimony of Barnabas, together with his own
Declaration, satisfied concerning the reality of his Faith and Repentance. Act
9 26, 27.

5. If only Elders have power to Judge who are fit to come to the Sacrament or
to join to the Churches, then in case there is but one Elder in a Church (as
there are very few Churches in New England that have more Elders than one) the
Sole power will reside in that one man's hands. Then by a parity of reason one
alone would have power to suspend from Communion, which Judicious Presbyterians
do not allow of. For the London Ministers in their Vindication of the
Presbyterian Government, ( p 70, 71.) have these words. It is (say they) as
warrantable by the word of God, for one Minister to assume unto himself alone
the power of Suspending from the Sacrament, as it is to assume the whole power
of admitting to the Sacrament* for contrariorum eadem est ratio: For one
Minister alone to assume this power to him self, is to make himself a
Congregationa^ Pope. It is a bringing into the Church (...) power that would
have some resemblanc^ to Auricular Confession. Thus said the Presbyterians
Fifty years ago.

6. The way to keep Popery out of the World, is for the Fraternity in Churches
t^ assert and maintain that power and privilege, which does of right belong
unto them Certain it is, that in the first Ages of Christianity this power
which we plead for, was no^ taken out of the hands of the Brotherhood* One of
the Ancients, whose writings give us the greatest in-sight, into what was the
general practice of the Churches, in the Thir^ Century makes this past dispu^e.
In Cyprian. Epist 40.
one of his Epistles he has these words, Examin^^ buntur Singela prusentibus et
judicantibus vobis. And in another, Vix plebi persuadeo at tale^ patiantur
admitti. That he had much ado to persuade the people to be satisfied with the
Repentance and Qualifications of some that desired a Reception or Restoration
to their Communion. When in after times Church Members thought with themselves,
our Ministers understand Church Affairs better than we do, therefore we will
unconcern our selves, and leave all to their Conscience and Prudence: this very
thing (as some Learned men have observed) was that which made way for the rise
of Popery. It may be it will be for the Edification of some Readers, if we
recite some passages out of our famous Dr. Owen. In his Judicious Part 1. page
295, 296.
Treatise of Evangelical Churches. He has these words D^* Stillingfleet denies
unto the people all Liberty or Ability to choose their own Pastors, to judge
what is meet for their own Edification, what is Heresy, or a pernicious Error,
and what is not, or any thing of the like nature. This is almost the same with
that of the Pharisees, concerning them who admired and followed the Doctrine of
our Savior, Joh. 7.49. This people which know not the Law: yet was it this
People, whom the Apostle directed to choose out from among themselves, persons
meet for an Evangelical Office. Act. 6. The same People who joined with the
Apostles and Elders in the consideration of the Grand case concerning the
continuation of the Legal Ceremonies, and were Associates with them in the
determination of it. Act 15. The same to whom all the Apostolical Epistles,
Excepting some to particular persons, were written. And unto whom such
directions* were given and duties Enjoined in them, us suppose not only Liberty
and Ability to judge for themselves in all matters of Faith and Obedience, but
also an especial Interest in the Order and Discipline of the Church, those who
were to say to Archippus their Bishop, take heed to the Ministry which thou
have received in the Lord that thou ful^fill it. Col 4.17. Unto whom of all
sorts it is Commanded that they should Examine and Try Antichrists, Spirits,
and false Teachers, that is all sorts of Heretics, Heresies, and Errors. 1 John chap. 2.3. etc That people who even in following Ages adhered unto the
Faith and the Orthodox profession of it, when almost all the Bishops were
became Arian Heretics. This principle of the Reformation in Vindication of the
Rights, Liberti^s and Privileges of the Christian People to judge and choose
for themselves in matters of Religion, to join freely in those Church Duties
which are required of them, without which the work of it had never been carried
on, we do abide by and maintain. Yea, we meet with no Opposition more fierce
then upon the account of our ass^rting the Liberties and Rights of the People
in reference unto Church Order and Worship. But I shall not be afraid to say,
that as the Reformation was begun and carried or, on this principle: So when
this People shall through an apprehension of their Ignorance, Weakness, and
Vnmeetness to judge in matters of Religion, for themselves, and their own duty,
be kept and debarred from it; or when through their own sloth, negligence, and
viciousness they shall be really incapable to manage their own Interest in
Church Affairs, as being fit only to be Governed if not as Bruit Creatures, yet
as Mute persons and that these things are improved by the Ambition of the
Clergy engrossing all things in the Church to themselves, as they did in former
Ages, if the Old Popedom do not return, a New one will be Erected as bad as
the other Thus far Dr. Owen.

QUESTION. IV. WHether is it necessary that persons at their Admission into the
Church, should make a public Relation of the Time and Manner of their
Conversion?
Answ. 1. As the Question is worded, the Answer must be Negative. Nor do the
Churches of New England impose this^: nor ought this to be required or desired
of every one that joins to our Communion:

For,

1. Some truly Converted ones know neither the Time nor the Manner of their
Conversion* It is often so with those that have been Advantaged with a
Religious Education, and that have been all their days kept from falling into
Scandalous Sins. The Spirit of God changes their Hearts gradually and
insensibly, as Mr. Hooker and other practical Divines have shown. I have In
the preface to Mr. Mitchels Life.
elsewhere noted what Mr. Baxter relates concerning a considerable number of
Eminent Christians who being met together on other accounts, it was proposed
whether they could all give an account of the Exact Time of their Conversion;
and there was but one of them all that could do it.

2. The natural Tempers and Infirmities of some are such as make them incapable
of relating publicly what God has done for them. Some have a natural Hesitancy
of Speech. Others are of very bashful Tempers. Others are of such weak
Intellectuals as that they can Scarce speak sense. To put such upon Public
Declarations of their Experiences, would be to expose Sacred things to be
Contemned and Ridiculed by m^n of profane Spirits.

3. It is possible that the Occasion of a man's Conversion may have been
something not fit to be publicly related. It may be the words of some
persecuted Saint who is in obscurity. It may be some signal Judgment on some of
his Relations: Nay, it may be some Secret Sin which himself has been guilty of,
may have so wounded his Conscience as to occasion his true Repentance for all
his other Sins: but this he ought not to tell the World of.

4. I am the more flow to pronounce the practi^^ in Question to be Absolutely
ne^essary, for that, Good and wise men have not been satisfied neither with the
necessity nor yet with the Expediency of it. True it is, that the reason of
that Opposition against it which is in the minds of some, proceeds from their
own want of Experience. The American Apostle, (as Mr. Baxter calls him) good
old Mr. Eliot, who was very Zealous for public Relations, has sometimes told
us of a man that Joined himself to the Church in Roxbury, who had been a very
bitter Enemy to this Holy practice of the Churches in New England, until the
Lord changed his Heart: And then when he offered himself to the Communion of
the Church, he began his public Relation after this manner. It may be it will
be wondered at that I who have been such an Enemy to these Relations, and have
so often inveighed against that practice of the Churches, should now be willing
my self to Relate what impressions the Word and Spirit of God has made upon me.
I must Confess, that when I was against that Practice, the true reason was
because I had nothing to say; but it has pleased the Lord to Open my eyes, and
to Change my heart: and now I am willing to Declare unto all you that fear the
Lord, what God has done for my Soul. After this manner did that Converted man
Express himself. Yet nevertheless, some who have had Experience of the
Regenerating Grace of God in their own Souls, have not thought it necessary, to
declare this Publicly, when they Join in Church Fellowship. I remember my
Worthy Friend and Ancient acquaintance, the Reverend and Learned Mr. John How
(who was Pastor of a Congregational Church in great Torrington in Devonshire,
where I was his Successor in the work of the Ministry forty years ago)
informed me of one in that Church, who had been very averse to make a Relation
of hi^ Experiences, as supposing there was no Rule in Scripture obliging all
that joined to the Church so to practice: But at last he yielded to the
Importunity of them that desired it from him; and made such a Relation of the
work of God on his Soul, that (as Mr. How assured me) there was not one man in
all the Church that had dry Eyes at the hearing of it. These things considered,
we shall readily concede unto those who are Scrupulous about Relations, that A
Formal Relation is not absolutely necessary in order to Admission into Church
Fellowship*

Nevertheless,

Answ. 2. The practice of the Churches in New England as to this particular, is
Lawful, Laudable, and Edifying. It is Lawful for Churches to desire those that
offer themselves to their Holy Fellowship, to give an account of their Faith
and Repentance: And when a Church desires it, no capable person ought to refuse
it* For,

1. There is Scripture warrant for this practice David says, I have not hid
thy Righteousness within my heart, I have declared thy Faithfulness and thy
Salvation, I have not concealed thy loving kindness and thy Truth from the
great Congregation. Psalm. 40.10 And in another place, he says, Come and hear
all you that fear God, and I will declare what he has done for my Soul. Psalm
66.16. These Expressions show that a Christian should be willing upon just
occasion, to declare the Goodness and Gracious workings of God upon his Soul,
and this too in the Assembly and Congregation of his People. Now if a Church
does desire it, that's a just occasion for the doing of it: and therefore it
then ought to be done. Moreover, the Scripture says, that Christians should be
ready to give a reason of the hope that is in them to every one that asks. 1
Pet. 3.15. This Expression of A reason of their hope shows that they must not
only declare what good things they hoped for in this or in another world, but
also upon what grounds they did so hope. For else they might show their hope,
but not the Reason of their hope. Now if a man has Experienced a work of Saving
Conversion, causing him to acc^pt of Christ on the ^erms of the Gospel, he has
sufficient Ground and Reason for Hope. Ephesians. 1.18. Heb. 11.1. But without that
he has no reason to hope but the contrary. Ephesians. 2.12. Therefore he that
declares the reason of his hope, must declare his Faith and Regeneration If the
Apostle does specially intend that Christians should be ready to do this before
Persecutors, who would probably be offended with them for it, surely they
should be ready to do this before a Church of Christ who will not be offended
with them, but bless God for what they shall hear. The Presbyterian Vindication
of Presbyterian Government. p. 67.
Ministers of London say well, whose words are these, If Christians are bound
to give an account of their Faith and Hope to every one that asks, yea even
to Heathen Persecutors, how much more ought they to do it to the Officers of
the Church? especially at such a Time when they desire to be admitted to such
an Ordinance as is not common to all sorts of Christians I add, And how much
more to a whole Church of Christ, if they ask it? There are also Scripture
Examples to encourage this Holy practice. They who were admitted to John's
Baptism, made an Open Declaration of their Conversion. Math 3.6. And those
Converts in Act. 2. did manifest that serious desires were wrought in their
Souls to be delivered from their Sins, which lay upon their Consciences and
pricked their hearts, and that they gladly received the word of promise. If
this was publicly manifested by them before their Admittance to Baptism; why
should not the like be done now by Christians before their Admission to the
Lords Table? It is also recorded concerning the Converted Ephesians, that they
not only believed, but Came and Confessed. Act. 19.18. which implies A Public
Declaration of their Conversion And we find that the Apostle Paul was ready
upon all just occasions to relate the story of his Conversion. This does
warrant Christians now to practice the like on just occasions. And consequently
when a Church of Christ shall call for it. The great Austin in his Book of
Confessions, relates the story of his Conversion: The like we find in the
published lives of many Saints. Justin Martyr in his disputation with Tryphon
the Jew gives a Mavelous account of his Conversion, by means of a Reverend
old man, that advised him to Read the Scriptures and to pray to God for
illumination, and then departed out of his sight.

2. It is necessary that Churches should know that those whom they admit to
their Communion are duly qualified for that Communion. That they have in them
(so far as men are able to judge) that which is the matter of Self-Examination,
viz. Faith and Repentance. That they have an ability to Examine themselves, and
not only Doctrinally but Spiritually to discern the Lords Body. 1 Cor. 11.28,
29. Now one way for the Church to know that they are such, is, by a Relation of
Experiences. Nor can it be known except by a Relation, or that which shall be
Equivalent thereunto; as our worthy See his Life. p. 84.
Mr. Mitchel has Evinced.

3. This practice of our Churches has a tendency to promote Godliness in the
Power of it. I bless the Lord, in that there are a^ this day in London, several
Religious Societies of the Communion of the Church of England, whose design is
to promote Religion in the Power of it. Now these Societies require of such as
join to them, that they give the Society a Solemn account of their sense of
Spiritual things, which they do sometimes Orally and sometimes in Writing. One
that has perused some of their Papers, Reports tha^ they have in them such
Pious and sensible Expressions as would mightily affect any Pious Person to
read them. But of this I have made a more large Recitation in a lately See my
Epistle before Mr. Willards Sermons on 2 Timothy 3.^^.
published Epistle. Now since this practice has a tendency to promote
Godliness, wha^ should it not be continued in our Churches* If the Reformers in
the Church of England, require a Solemn account of their sense of Spiritual
things of those that are Admitted into their Religious Societies, why may not
we require the like of them that join to our Churches, which are Religious
Societies?

4. This practice has been and will be attended with bl^ssed effects.

For,

1. It will cause the Name of God to be glorified. The Church that Hears a
Savoury Relation from any that present themselves to their Communion, will
praise God for his Grace in them. Gal. 1.24.

2. The Lords people will have Joy and Comfort in such Members being added to
them. If Paul and Barnabas did cause great joy to the Brethren by declaring the
Conversion of others. Act. 15.3. That Christian will cause great joy to a whole
Church of Christ, that shall Relate to them, the Experience which he has had of
the Grace of God in his own Conversion. It is good to be a helper and not an
hinderer of the joy of Saints. 2 Cor. 1.24.

3. The person that does thus join himself to the Lords People will have more
of their Love and Affection than could otherwise be expected. When they
perceive what Experience he has had of the Converting Grace of God in his Soul,
every one that is Godly will Love him, and their Hearts will be United to him.
1 John 5.1. I Appeal to the Children of God it they do not find it thus. If
when they (...) any persons make a very Experimental Relation of Gods dealings
with them, in Convincing them of their misery by Nature, and bringing them to
cast themselves upon Christ, and helping them against special Temptations, they
do not find in their hearts a Singular Love and Holy Affection toward such
persons ever after that day. From such Considerations as these mentioned, the
practice of the Churches of New England respecting the matter in Question is to
be Justified, and I pray God, that it may be with due Solemnity continued. That
some of our Presbyterian Brethren require that which is equivalent to what is
with us called a Public Relation, of those whom they admit to the Lords
Supper, is to be seen by a Discourse, called, The Young man's claim to the
Sacrament, Written by my worthy Friend Mr. John Quick, a Reverend Minister now
in London. I shall only add, that care is to be taken, Lest this custom of the
Churche^ degenerate into a mere Formality Not only things in themselves Lawful
and Good, but (...) Holy Institutions of Christ, have through the Malice of
Satan and the Corruptions of me^, been turned into Formalities. So are Church
officers, Sacraments, and Church Censures i^ the Church of Rome, and in some
Protestan^ Churches also; which are not thoroughly cleansed from the Romish
Superstitions. Ou^ Customary Relations may and will be so too, (...) we be not
careful to prevent it. Insipid, Sapless Relations which are used only Profo^ma,
will not Edify; but give Scandal, and Prejudice many against this Laudable
Practice. There are Reports, as if in some Churches, Persons have brought
written Relations first to the Minister, and then to the Church, which were not
of their own dictating, but devised by others for them. I hope these Reports
have nothing of Truth in them, but if they have, I am sure that such Liars to
the Holy Ghost, have Exceedingly provoked the Lord.

QUESTION. V. HAS the Church Covenant as Commonly practiced in the Churches of
New England, any Scripture Foundation?
Answ. This Question was Considered at a General Convention of Ministers at
Boston, May 26* School. And all the Ministers then present (one only exc^pted.)
did Concur in the Affirmative. The Reasons to prove that this Practice of our
Churches is not an humane Invention, but grounded on the Word of God, are such
as these.

1. Nothing is more Indisputable then that under the Old Testament, the Church
was Constituted by a Covenant. Nor was any Proselyte admitted into that Church,
but by laying hold of the Covenant. A Proselyte was Filius faederis a Son of
the Covenant. The Jews were Vnchurched by being Discovenanted. Zech. 11 10.
Things abundantly insisted on in the Old Testament, are more sparingly
mentioned in the New. Such as the Sanctification of the Sabbath, and the Church
State of the Infant Children of the Lords People. The like may be said as to
the Church Covenant. Several Eminent Divines have given this reason why the
Word Covenant is not mentioned by the Apostles, when they speak of particular
Churches. viz Because it is founded on moral Equity, and often mentioned in the
Old Testament. Moreover (as is noted by a Learned Author) the name Covenant and
Covenanting, was that which would have made the Churches in those days
Obnoxious to the Civil Powers, who were then Enemies to Christianity. Therefore
the Apostles did forbear the Names, but Established the Thing by Similitud^s
evidently implying it.

2. Scriptures which relate to Gospel Times, intimate such a Covenant as is
used in our Churches. Isa. 62.5. It Is said of the Churches, Thy Sons shall
Marry thee, which implies a Covenant. Thus Isa. 44.5 One shall say I am the
Lords, and another shall Subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and Surname
himself by the name of Israel. This is Explicit Covenanting, to be in Gospel
Times. So Isa. 56 4. They that choose the things that please me, and take hold
of my Covenant.

3. Members in particular Evangelical Churches are said to be Fellow Citizens.
Ephesians. 2.19 Now there is no Admission into jus Civitatis, or City privileges,
but by an Act which implies a Cov^nant. Citizens are in a Covenant together to
k^ep the Laws, and maintain the Liberty of the City.

4. A Church when Collapsed, is restored by a Renovation of their Church
Covenant with God, and with one another: Of which we have Instances in the
Scripture. 2 Chronicles. 23.16. and 29.9, 10. and 34 31, 32. Ezra. 10.3, 5. Nehe.
10.29. Now there is the same reason of Restitution, as of Institution.

5. Nothing else can be mentioned as Constituting a Particular Church, but only
a Covenant, Agreement, or Consent to walk with God and one another according to
the Rules of the Gospel. Mere Cohabitation does not make a Church Member, for
then Jews and Pagans would be Members of Evangelical Churches. Nor does
Profession do it, for then i^ would be impossible to cut off Scandalous Members
by Excommunication. Nor Baptism: For then upon the ceasing of Membership in a
Particular Church, a man must be rebap^ised.

6 There are Scriptures in the New Testament which imply such a Covenant, as
that which we plead for. Act 2.42. They Continued, The Greek word signifies,
They joined and Cleaved together. So Act. 5.13. None durst Join themselves, i.
e. give themselves to the Church; they were afraid of being Married to the
Church The word is the same with that Matthew. 19* 6 It is in resp^ct of the
Covenant (as Dr. G^odwin In his 4 th. Volum.
ob^erves) that they who are Co^jugally related, are said to be joined tog^th^r

7. If Implicit Covenanting is absolutely necessary to the b^ing (...) a
particular Church, than Exp^icit Covenanting must needs be a good thing. The
more Explicit men are in Con^essing Christ, and owning his institutions, the
more do they Glorify him. Matthew. 10.33. Mark 8.39 There is (as Mr. In his
Answer to Mr Hudson. p. 41.
Stone the famous Teacher of Hartford has observed) much of the Visible Glory
of Christ appearing in the Explicitness of the Church Covenant, when men
visibly bind themselves and their Children to Christ. That Explicit Covenanting
was practiced among Christians in the next ages to the Apostles, is Evident
from Pliney (who lived Anno. 110) his Letter to the Emperor Trajan. Having
Enquired into what was Customary in Christian Assemblies, He says that they
did meet to Worship Christ, and that they did by an Oath bind themselves to
attend the Discipline, that they would not allow of Adulteri^s, Thefts, Lying,
or any Evil thing to be among them. We see in Justin Martyr, his Second Apology
(who lived within fifty Years of some of the Apostles) that Christians were in
those Days admitted into Church Fellowship, declared their R^solution in all
things to Conform to the Word of God They did not only profess their belief of
the Christian Religion, but promised to live accordingly. Apol. 2. p. 93, 94.
Tertullian Cap. 2. p. (Mihi) 13.
in his Apology speaking of Plinies Letter but now cited, Expresses the
Practice of those Primitive Christians, by saying that they met together ad
Confaederandam Disciplinam, which shows that they had both a Discipline and a
Covenant amongst them, and clearly Explaines the meaning of Plinies Sacrament
or Oath, which he affirms to be Practiced in the Christian Ass^mblies.
Commenius Histor. p. 46. et. in rat. ordin. p. 43, 46.
informs us that in the Bohemian Churches such as were admitted to full
Communion, made a public profession of their Faith before the whole Church,
withal promising to live according to the rules of the Gospel. In the
beginning of Queen E^iz. Reign, several Congregations in England, particularly
those in Coventry, and in Northampton, did publicly profess Repentance for
their Idolatry, and Promised Obedience to the Protestant Doctrine then restored
and estab^ish^d; which Mr Robinson in his Answer to Mr. Bernard, p. 464
Supposes to be the deed not of the whole Congregations, but of some Ministers,
a few of their people joining with them. There are some who say that
Presbyterians are against Explicit Covenanting. My design is to vindicate them
as well as their Congregational Brethren. And I must therefore say, that such
an Imputation to them all, is an injurious Reflection. Both the one and the
other acknowledge that Explicit Covenanting is not Essential to the being of a
Particular Church. Nevertheless, that it is very useful to the been esse
thereof, for the more effectual Management of Discipline, and preservation of
Order in the Churches, which renders it a duty. Dr. Hornbeck (a Learned
pro^essor in the University of Leyd^n who has written in Defense of the
Presbyterian Government) In Epist. ad Dureum. p 309, 310.
declares his approbation of the practice of Congregational Churches as to that
of Explicit Covenanting, and that he approves of what Mr. Cotton, Mr. Richard
Mather, and Mr. Norton, (all of New England) have published on that Subject.
The Churches in Holland are under the Presbyterian form of Government. It is
certain that they did many years since require Explicit Covenanting both with
God and with the Church, by those that were admitted into their Communion.
Zepperus who himself was one of them, writes that their manner and order, is,
Zepper. de polit. Eccles. L. 1. c. 14.
That when any persons are admitted to the Lords Table, they make a Public
Profession of their Faith before all the Church, and likewise promise and
Covenant that they will continue in that Faith, and lead their Lives
accordingly. This personal Covenanting with God and the Church is required by
several of the Synods in Holland, and is highly approved of by the most Learned
Voetius in his Books of Part 1. Lib. 1 c. 4.
Ecclesiastical Polity. An Episcopalian near upon an hundred years since,
complained that the Calvinists and Reformed Churches in France would not admit
any one unto the Lords Table, Except he did make a Pub^ick Profession of his
Faith, and did also Promise by the help of God to continue, steadfast therein.
Our Renowned Mr. Robert Parker, (who being driven out of England by the then
Persecuting Prelates lived amongst the Reformed Churches abroad) acquaints us
that in those Churches, When any person seeks Admittance into Church Communion,
the Name of him who desires to be a Church Member is Published in the
Congregation, that if any one has ought to Object against the Person
Propounded, he should acquaint the Elders therewith. If nothing is brought in
against him, he is admitted, but not without a Solemn Covenant with God and the
Church; and to the Church he promises to walk as becomes that Holy Fellowship,
that he will submit to the Discipline of the Church, that he will Watch over
the Brethren of that Communion according to the command of Christ. If (says
Mr. Parker) De pol. Eccles. L. 3. c. 16 p 171, 172.
this were practiced in the Church of England, there would be no cause for A.
B. Whitgift to say, that the Visible Church is full of Idolaters, Adulterers,
Drunkards, and Atheists. That none were admitted to be Members of Particular
Churches amongst the Reformed in See Mr. Quicks Synodicon. An. 1565. p. 61.
France without Public Covenanting or Promising Subjection to the Discipline
of Christ, is well known. Now let us hear what a later Presbyterian says about
an Explicit Church Covenant: The Reverend Mr Baxter in his Book called Church
Concord P. 20, 21.
declares that there is no difference at all between the Learned of both
persuasions. ( Viz. Presbyterian and Congregational) about this controversy.
The thing (says he) that the Presbyterians have stood upon is no more but to
Vindicate the Truth of our Churches against the Separatists, that have denied
them to be true Churches, because they have not an Explicit Covenant. They deny
not but that such a Covenant may conduce to the well being of the Church. And
he adds further; I conclude that whatsoever some Particular Persons may be
Guilty of, there is no real differance between the Presbyterians and
Independants in the point of Church Covenant. God forbid, that any faithful
Minister of Christ should fight against that which is profitable to the
well-being of the Church, merely because without it the Church may have a
being. Then must we plead for hunger and want, and calamitous diseases that
leave us but the being of men. Nature, and Scripture, and the Presidents in the
Old Testament, and the Doctrine of the Apostles, and the Ancient practice of
the Churches do satisfy us of the usefulness of H^ly Covenants, prudently,
seriously, and seasonably made. Thus Mr Baxter who has much more to the same
purpose in his Book of Confirmation.

QUESTION. VI. IS Public Reading of the Scriptures without any Explication or
Exhortation therewith, part of the work incumbent on a Minister of (...) Gospel
Answ. The Question is not whether such Readings are Lawful, (for who doubts
that) but whether the Minister that shall omit them does fail in that which is
some part of his duty. To which the Answer must be Negative* It cannot be
proved that that which some call Dumb Reading, or public Reading of the
Scriptures without any Explication or Exhortation is part of the Pastoral
Office, or that which every Minister of the Gospel is bound unto. Some have
thought V. Dido. clav. p. ^33. And Aynsworth against Smith. p. 44.
that when Paul says to Timothy, Till I come give attendance to Reading, that
he means Public Reading of the Scriptures; but then he adds, and to
Exhortation and Doctrine. 1 Timothy 4 13. The Reading of one Chapter with a brief
Explication, will Edify the Congregation more than the bare Reading of Twenty
Chapters will do. And every Minister should attend that which will be most to
the Edification of his People. If public Reading without Explication or
Exhortation therewith is a duty, than those Ministers who when they Read
publicly do always Expound or Exhort therewith, but do not practice that
which is called Dumb Reading, are guilty of Sin, as omitin^ that which is their
duty. But such Minister are not guilty of Sin: And if not, it will the^ follow
that they who practice Reading without Explication under the notion of a duty
are guilty of Superstition, in making that a duty which is none. As for Reading
without Interpretation, there are many who can d^ that as well as the Minister.
We find in Neb* 8.8. That they read in the Book of the La^ distinctly, and gave
the sense, and caused them (...) understand the Reading. That the Jews were
wont to Read the Scriptures in their Synagogue every Sabbath day, we all know.
The Pe^^teteuch (or (...) Books of Moses) was by then divided into fifty four
Parashoth, or Sections which they read over on^^ every year* When Antiochus
inhibited the Reading of the Law, the Jews instead thereof Read the Prophets;
after which it became customary to Read both of them. The Jews called the
Lections out of the Prophets, Haphtharot, which signifies Dismission, because
they were wont to dismiss their Assemblies with those Readings But that
Explications and Exhortations used to attend their Readings is certain* It
belonged to him that was the chief Ruler o^ the Synagogue to see this done, who
did sometimes permit others to do it. The chie^ man in the Synagogue was by the
Jews called Chazzan, i. e. the Inspector, or Overseer, and sometimes they
called him Sheliaoh Tsibb^r, i. e. The Angel of the Congregation. The work of
this person was to go before the Congregation in prayer. And although he did
seldom read himself, he appointed others to do it, making his choice of Seven,
and diligently observed how they read. This Overseer of the Synagogue, or some
other person used to interpret wh^t was read. On this very account, the
Synagogue was called, Beth Midrash, i. e. The House of Exposition. See Mr.
Weem^ Exerci^^tion. 15. p. 163. Where he shows that it was the manner of the
Jews after the reading of the Law and the Prophets to Expound. Besides what
Writers on this Subject inform us, the thing is clear from these Scriptures. 2 Chronicles. 17 9. Luk 4.16. -- 22. Act. 13.15. and 15 21. It cannot be proved that
Reading without Explication or Application was used by the Pastors in the
Churches of Christians in Apostolical Times, nor yet in the next Ages to them.
We see in Justin Martyr, that the Scriptures were then Read, but a Sermon
thereon followed In Cyprians V. Cyprian Epist. 24 and 34.
Time there was a Reader distinct from the Presbyter, who was Ordained to that
Office. He is by Cyprian called Doctor Audientium, (which as the most Learned
Professor of Vtrick has observed) impli^s that he did more than barely Read. In
Austins time, they used to have three Lections. They read an Epistle, and
something out of the Gospel, and a Psalm, after which the Minister Preached
upon what wa^ read. Therefore Austin begins some of (...) Sermons with (...),
Tres has Lectiones, etc* Those (...) which you have heard etc* When the
distinct^^n of Libri proto-Canoni^i (...) deutero-canonici was received, the
Reading (...) the Scriptures in Public Congregation brought in the Reading of
Apochrypha Books* (and at last the Reading of Homilies instea^ of Preaching)
which is still practiced in (...) and in some Protestant Congregation^
notwithstanding there is in the Council (...) a Canon against it. From these
an^ the like Considerations Public Readings (...) the Scriptures unless with
some Exposition there^n was not practiced in the Church^^ of New England by
those Eminent Servan^^ of Christ, who first planted Churches (...) this
Wilderness. Mr. Rutherford in his accoun^ of the Government of the Church of
Scotland* under that head of The Pastors Duty, (p. 314) mentions reading
Scriptures with Exposition* but says nothing of reading without that. (...) am
informed that there are Congregations in Scotland, where not the Pastor, but
the Ruling Elder reads the Scripture. Mr. Calderwood, (that Learned Scotch
Divine who goes under the name of Didoclavius) says, that he would not have
Sermons without reading the Scriptures: Nor reading without Interpretation. Non
probo Lectionem sine Interpretatione. Altar Damascan. p. 632. In some V. Voet.
de pol. Eccles part. 1. lib. 2 p. 605.
Congregations in Germany, the Scriptures have been read in order, and
illustrated with a brief and pious Explication. In the Tigwrin^ Liturgy, there
is no mention of Reading without Interpretation. I therefore suppose that there
is no such practice in the Helvetian Churches. I knew an Eminent Minister in
England who did for many years read the Scriptures in the public Congregation,
without any Explication, but in his latter Time he saw cause to alter his
Judgment and practice therein, always joining Interpretation with his
Reading. The Bishop of Derry in his late discourse of Humane Inventions in the
worship of God, makes a sad complaint, that the Nonconformist don't use to read
the Scriptures in their Assemblies. He says, that in all the Meetings in the
North of Ireland in a whole year there is not so much Scripture read as in one
day in the Church. Sure it is a sad thing (says he) that a man may go to most
Meetings many years, and never ^ear one entire Chapter read in them. Mr. Boyse
Answers him, that it is the general practice of the Ministers in the North of
Ireland (the Ministers there are generally of the Scotch Nation, and of the
Presbyterian Judgment.) to read every Morning an entire portion of Scripture,
usually a whole Chapter, or at least so much as they can go through with, in an
Exposition of half an hours length. Now let us suppose there are Forty Meetings
in the North of Ireland, and that in each Meeting half a Chapter is read every
Lord's Day, for three quarters of the year, by this Computation, there will be
near Eight hundred Chapters read in these Meetings in a year. But will the
Bishop persuade us that there is as much read in one day in the Parish Church.
Mr. Boyse moreover says, that there are few Sermons of the Dissenters in which
there is not as much of the Scriptures recited to the people as if put together
would make up two or three Chapters. And that the Dissenters have better reason
to blame the Conforming Clergy for casting out the Exposition of Scripture when
read (as that Exercise is distinguished from Sermon^) then the Bishop to
reproach them for not reading the Scripture. And that those more fully comply
with Gods Command, who read and Expound, than those that only read. He takes
notice what a miserable sort of Clergy there is in Russia and other parts of
the Christian World, where their Ministers are mere Readers. Thus Mr. Boyse a
worthy Minister of the Presbyterian Judgment in Dublin, whom I have the rather
taken notice of because he was born in New England, at Rowley, in which Church
his Father (a man of Eminent piety) was an Officer. To conclude the answer to
the Question before us. It is evident that in Origens time Interpretation of
the Scripture did accompany the public Reading of it. For he calls their
Sermons, Diageseis, Contra C^lsum. L. 3. p. 142.
the enarrations or Explication of what had been Read. Origin was won^ himself
to read several Chapters. We find that he read the 25, 26, 27, 28. Chapters of
the First Book of Samuel at one time, but deferred the Exposition of the last
of those Chapters to another Opportunity. At another time he read in Jeremiah
from Verse 10. of Chapter 15. to Verse 5. of Chapter 17. and spent an hour (as
he was wont to do) in Explaining and Applying what he had read. As for those
who are of the Bishops mind, that many Presbyterians as well as Congregational
men are guilty of Sin, and Humane Invention in the worship of God, in that they
always add Explication or Application to what they read in public. I shall
only recommend to their serious Consideration two passages, both which are
quoted by Mr. Boyse^* One is that of Austin, Quare Legitur, si Silebitur, aut
quare auditur, si non Exponitur: Why do we publicly read the Scripture, if we
must be silent and not Expound it. The other is that of Bernard, Non tradit
Matter parvulo nucem integram, sed frangit eam^^at nuclcum porrigit: Opening the
Scripture is like taking the Kernel out of the Nut.

QUESTION. VII. IS Baptism to be Administered to all Children, whom any
Professed Christian shall engage to see Educated in the Christian Religion?
Answ. If the Question were only whether all Children Adopted by Believing
Parents might not be Baptized, we should not oppose. For this is granted not
only by the generality of Protestant Divines, but Eminent Writers of the
Congregational Persuasion, particularly Dr. Ames, and Mr. Cotton, are for the
Affirmative. But as the Question is worded, we defend the Negative. And say,
that all such persons as are Comprehended in the Question, have not a right to
Baptism, consequently it would be a Profanation of the Holy Insti^ution of
Christ to Administer Baptism to them. For,

1. Papists, Socinians and other Heretics are Professed Christians. But their
Children ought not to be Baptized. For that is to declare their Religion to be
the true Religion. When the Children of Israel were Baptized unto Moses in the
Cloud, it was thereby signified that the Religion taught by Moses, was the true
Religion. 1 Cor. 10 2. But Papists have corrupted the very Essentials of the
true Christian Religion, not by one but by many Heresies by them m^ntained,
besides their Idolatry. Nor does it follow, that if the Children of Papists had
no right to Baptism, that then their Baptism was a Nul^ity and must be
Iterated. For they baptize in the same Name, and use the same outward Element
(though with Superstitions Additions of their own) which is of Divine
Institution; in which respects although Fieri non debuit, factum valet. Now if
the Children of Papists notwithstanding their being Professed Christians, have
no right to Baptism, if any such should engage to see a Child Educated in the
Christian Religion, that could not Entitle him to this Sacred Ordinance. Who
can believe that if a Papist will undertake to be the Godfather of the
Spurious Children of Negroes or Indians, then those Children ought to be
Baptized? But they ought to be so, if this be a true Position, That Baptism
ought to be Administered to all Children whom any Professed Christian shall
engage to see Educated in the Christian Religions Our first Reformers were
large enough in their Principles and Practice as to the Subject of Baptism
Nevertheless, they taught that the Children of Papists had no right to Baptism.
So V. Calvini Epist.
Calvin, Farel, Beza. Yea, the Sea their discipline and L^. Roque^* p. 201.
Reformed Churches in France will not admit the Children of Papists to Baptism,
although Protestant Godfathers would engage for their Education in the true
Religion. Our famous Mr. Carthwright has In 1 Reply p. 172, 173. and 2 d. part
of 2 Reply p. 142.
proved that such Children have no right to Baptism because they are cut off
from the Covenant, and do not belong to the Visible Church. We must of
necessity own the Church of Rome to be a true Church, if we own the Members of
it to have right to Baptism. But the contrary has been evinced by Dr. Whitaker,
Alting, Turretin, and many others who have made it appear that Papists only
retain the words of that which is called the Apostles Creed, but not the true
sense of it.

2. There are many professors of the Protestant which is the true Christian
Religion, whose Children have not by the appointment of Christ any right to
Baptism. For we may not Baptize the Children of profane Parents. A national
Synod in Holland, Anno. 1619. Permits none to be Susceptors in Baptism, but
such as are Orthodox in Religion, and of a blameless Life. The Ecclesiastical
Discipline of the Reformed Churches in France, permits not them who are
suspended from the Lords Supper, to present their Children to Baptism as long
as their Suspension shall endure. Every body knows that Nil did quod non hab^t.
No man that has not a right to Baptism himself, can convey a right to his
Children. The Primitive right must be as V Voet. pol. Eccles. part 1. L. 2. p.
661.
good as the Derivative. But a Known wicked man has no right to the Seals of
Gods Covenant. Psalm. 50.16, 17. It is a dishonor to the Name of Christ that
such should be owned as his Servants, or wear the Livery that belongs to such.
2 Timothy 2.19. When the Church is made an Inn to receive all Comers by a
Promiscuous Baptism, the Name of the Lord is profaned, as says our great
Defense of Admonition. p. 137.
Carthwright but now mentioned. The Ancient Doctors, particularly De Baptisimo.
c 18.
Tertullian De Compunction Cordis L. 1.
Chrysostom, and Especially Austin, De Fide et operibus.
(who has largely disputed against the Baptising of Ungodly men though
Professed Christians) are wont to allege that Scripture. Matthew. 7.6. Give ye
not that which is Holy to Dogs, against the Baptising of such persons: which
words notwithstanding they have another sense are fitly applied here. For
Baptism is an Holy thing. And the Scripture compares wicked men (though
Professors of the true Religion) unto Dogs. Psalm. 22.20. 2 Pet. 2 22. No man
thinks that Infidels ought to be Baptized But Practical Infidels are many times
worse than Professed ones. 1 Timothy 5 8. If any man provide not for his own
House, he has denied the Faith, and is worse then an Infidel. Many Professed
Christians do practically deny the Faith; by their Vicious Lives they Nullify
their Christianity, and are worse than Infidels. To Baptize them would be to
profane the Sacred and Glorious Name of Christ. Shall Swearers, Drunkards,
Fornicators, and such like, who live in the visible breach of the Everlasting
Covenant every Day, have that Covenant Sealed unto them by Baptism, when it is
manifest that they have no Interest in the thing* Signified and Sealed by that
Ordinance? Have Excommunicates or their Children a right to Baptism? The Jews
(as Buxtorf Buxtorf. in Lexic. Thalmudi^. page 1101. Godwin Moses and Aaron. B.
5. Chapter 2.
observes) looked upon Infant Children as Excommunicate with the Parents And
therefore ((...) another Learned Author informs us) such Children were not
Circumcised. A National Synod in Scotland* Anno 1560, has declared that the
Children o^ Excommunicate Parents ought not (until the Parent Manifest
Repentance) to be admitted unto Baptism. B^za allows of it in case the Children
of the Excommunicate be by the Parents committed to the Tuition and Education
of a faithful Member of the Church, Beza Epist. 10.
as we see in his Letter to the Ministers of Newenburg in Switzerland, but not
without that Caution. When in Geneva a Protestant Member of a Church there had
Apostatized to the Popish Religion, the Grandmother remaining still a Member of
the true Church, desired Baptism for her Grandchild; but considering that the
next Parents were both of them Idolaters, and the Child remaining under their
Education, the Renowned Farel V. Calvin Epist. 147.
refused to Baptize it, though his Colleaque would do it, which occasioned an
unhappy Schism in that Church. But then shall persons who are ipso Jure (i. e.
Visolius Legis sine sententia judicis) Excommunicate (which is to be affirmed
of many Professed Christians) by Baptism be declared to have a regular standing
in the Visible Church? It is by some pretended, that Presbyterians are for
Baptizing all Professed Christians. They that say so are injurious to those our
worthy Brethren. The Great John Calvin has been Esteemed the Father of
Presbyterians. He was not for Baptizing all that pretended to Christianity, as
his V. Epist. 136.
Epistles show. In the year 1550. Our English Josiah, King Edward the Sixth
granted to the Dutch Protestants, and other Strangers in London, a Charter of
Incorporation to become a Church, and to have a Meeting House for them, and for
their Successors, which He Ordained* to be called by the name of the Church of
the Lord Jesus, Fullers Church History, B. 7. p. 407.
Enjoining all his Subjects to permit them quietly to use and exercise their
own proper Rites and peculiar Discipline notwithstanding they agreed not with
the Rites and Ceremoni^^ used in the Church of England. These Protestants
dissenting from the Church of England have been called Presbyterians. Their
first* and noble Pastor, John, who was a free Baron of Lasco in Poland, has
Published an account of their Discipline, wherein He declares, That Baptism is
Administered in the Public Assembly ^f the Church after the Public Sermon* for
seeing Baptism does so belong to the who^^ Church, that none ought to be driven
back that i^ a Member of the Church, nor to be Administered to any who is not a
Member of it: it is mee^ that it should be performed Publicly in the fa^^ of
the whole Church. -- We do Baptize their In^fants alone who have Joined
themselves to (...) Church by Public Confession of their Faith an^ Observation
of the Ecclesiastical Discipline. -- W^ suffer no Stranger to offer his Infant
to Baptis^ in our Church, who has not made a Public Profession of his Faith,
and willingly submitted himself to the Discipline of our Church. Thus writes
John a Lasco, a noble Polander, who is Succeeded by the Dutch Ministers, and
Church now in London. To proceed. The Leyden Divines, Polyander, Rivet, Waleus,
Thysius, were accounted Presbyterians. But they were not for B^p^izing
professed Christians whose Lives were profane. They Synops. pur. Relig. disp.
44. These. 46.
say expressly, Si quis vero Licet fidem Professus impie vivat Baptismo
initiandus non est, for which they give this Reason, That Baptism is a
Sacrament not only of Faith, but of Repentance; For which cause they that
persist Impenitently in any Scandalous practices are not subjects meet for that
Sacrament. The Learned Spanheimius is called a Presbyterian. But he has by
weighty Reasons proved, that Profane men though Profess^d Christians, ought not
to be Baptized. Mr. Baxter goes for a Presbyterian. In his disputations of
Right to Sacraments.
He has by irrefragable Arguments evinced, that the Children of notoriously
Ungodly men ought not to be Baptized. Mr. George Gilaspy was a Presbyterian of
the Church in Scotland. Now his words are these. In Aarons Rod. p. 515.
I believe (says he) no Conscientious Minister would adventure to Baptize one
who has manifest and Infallible Signs of Irregeneration. Surely we cannot be
answerable to God if we should Administer Baptism to a man whose works and
words do manifestly declare him to be an Unregenerate Unconverted person. By
the Testimonies which have been cited, it is clear that the denial of Baptism
to some who are professed Christians is not the Principle of Independents only.

3. Such Laxness in the Administration of Baptism as is Expressed in the
Question before us, is Popish and Antichristian. It was not so in the Primitive
Ages of Christianity. That Error of the necessity of Baptism (not only
necessitate praecepti sed medij) in order to Salvation. Likewise that Error of
Baptismal Regeneration, that Baptism does Regenerate men Ex opere operato, as
Popish Authors teach, brought in this Error also. Bellarmine, and others of
that Religion affirm that Baptism does Sanctify ^he Unclean, and that therefore
it is not profaned when administered to persons known to be wicked. In pursuance
of this principle a Popish Priest Baptized no less than three hundred thousand
Americans. V. Purchase pilgr. concerning America. p. 115.
And another Seven hundred thousand as their own Historians inform us) amongst
all which there was not one Good Christian. Most certainly, the Apostles did
not Baptize after that Lax manner. And John Baptist required Fruits meet for
Repentance of the Adult persons whom he admitted to this Sacred Ordinance* and
when a Generation of Vipers came to him for Baptism, he rej^cted them because
of their Impenitency. Matthew 3.8. with Luke 7.30.

QUESTION. VIII. IS Baptism in a private House where there is no Church
Assembly allowable?
Answ. Papists, Episcopal Protestants, and some Lutherans plead for it. But the Sea Perin of the Waldenses Doctrine p. 43.
Doctrine of the old Waldenses was, that Baptism ought to be Administered in a
full Congregation, to the end that he that is received into the Church, should
be reputed and held of all for a Christian Brother, and that all the
Congregation might pray for him, that he may be a Christian in Heart, as he is
outwardly esteemed a Christian. Most of our Writers (especially Presbyterians)
disapprove of Private Baptism The Reformed in France, See their discipline. chapter
11. s 6.
and the Churches in v. Voet. de pol. Eccles. part 1. L. 2 p. 726.
Holland also require Baptism to be publicly administered. Our English
Presbyterians in the Directory, says that Baptism is not to be administered in
private (...), or privately, but in the place of public Worship, and in the
face of the Congregation. The Geneva Divines (as is to be seen in Zanchys
Epistles) when this case was proposed to them, Whether Baptism might not be
administered in private, Advised those that sent to them, not to Baptize any but
where there was a public Assembly, for which they gave several Reasons.
Calvin, although he does not judge private Baptism to be a mere nullity,
nevertheless in his L. 4. c. 15. s. 16.
Institutions, he disallows of it. And in his Epistles, he reasons after this
manner, Epist. 185.
Baptism Seals our Introduction and Initiation into the Visible Church and Body
of Christ, and our Adoption to the Heavenly Inheritance, therefore (says
Calvin) Fas non est administrare Baptismum nisi in Caetu Public, It is not
lawful to administer Baptism except in a public Congregation. The Judicious
and Learned Professors Syhops. disp. 44. These 53.
of Leyden, condemn private Baptisms: So does In Epist. Theol.
Maresius, and so does Problem. Theol. part. 2. p. 162.
Alting. In Scotland, Altar. damasc.
Mr. Calderwood, English popish Ceremonies. p. 112.
Mr. Gelaspy, Plea for Presbytery. p. 315.
Mr. Rutherford, have all of them witnessed against it. It is evident that in
the early Ages of Christianity Private Baptisms were not used, but there was an
Error on the other hand, for they used not to Baptize except at Easter and
Pentecost, when were the greatest Assemblies. In the very beginings of the
Reformation in England, private Baptism was not allowed of except in case of
necessity. King Edward 6. his Common Prayer Book, requires that the people
should be admonished to bring their Children to Baptism only on the Lords
days, and on Holidays, that so all the Congregation might be witnesses of
their being received into the number of the Faithful, and that they might all
be put in mind of what they had promised in Baptism. And although private
Baptisms are ordinarily practiced by the Ministers of the Church of England,
when no necessity compels them, the Liturgy allows not of it. The Arguments
which our Divines produce against private Baptism are such as these.

1. John Baptist did not Baptize in private, but where there was an open
Public meeting. It has been objected that Paul Baptized the Jailer in a
private House where was no Church Assembly: To which is Answered, that Paul was
an extraordinary Officer: And that it was impossible in that Pla^^ (...) that
Time to call a Congregation of (...) be witness^s of the Administration when as
yet there were no Christians in that City.

2. Baptism is a part of public Ministry: It ought to be as public as
Preaching. Nor may it be administered except by one who is called to the Public
Ministry.

3. No person may be cast out of the Church privately, but the proceedings
therein ought to be public with the consent and presence of the wh^le Church
Therefore the Seal of Admission into the Church by Baptism ought to be public
also. There is a parity of reason therein.

4. Our profession of the Name of God and of Christ ought to be in the most
public way and manner that possibly can be Matthew. 10.32. Rev. 14.1. But (...)
^^ptism we do in a singular manner make a profession of the Name of the true
God and of Jesus Christ. Matthew. 28.20. Act 19.5. Gal. 3.27.

5. Didoclavius Vbi supra p. 854.
argues more like a Congregational man than like a Presbyterian. For thus he
reasons. The power of Administering Sacraments is as Chrysostom speaks,
Delivered to the Church, although the Dispensation or Administration thereof
belongs to the Pastors. Now the Minister alone (says he) has not all the
power, so as that he may separately Administer the Sacrament to whom he
pleases, but there ought to be the approbation, consent, and presence of the
Church.

6 This practice of private Baptism was grounded on an Error; namely on a
persuasion of the absolute necessity of Baptism to Salvation. Austin was not
without that Error. He thought that Infants who dyed Unbaptised could not go to
Heaven, for which reason he has been called, Durus Pater Infantum. There was
about the same time another Error worse than this crept into many Churches;
viz. That none could be saved that did not partake of the Lords Supper. So did
they misunderstand that Scripture Joh. 6 53. As i^ Sacramental Eating were
there intended; whereas those words were spoken by our Savior before the Lords
Supper was instituted, and are meant of the Souls Eating and Drinking by Faith.
But from this Error it was that Children were made to Eat and Drink of the
Consecrated Bread and Wine. So lest they should miss of Salvation they would
Baptism them in private when it could not be done in public. But we know that
it is the Contempt, and not the mere Privation of Sacraments that is damning.
The Helvetian Churches do in no case allow of Baptism in any private House. See
the Liturgy of the Churches in Switzerland. p. 90.

QUESTION. IX. Ought all that Contribute toward the Maintenance to have the
Privilege of Voting in the E^ection of a Pastor?
Answ. It would be Simoniacal to Affirm that this Sacred Privilege may be
Purchased with Money, or, that Contribution can Entitle to it. For,

1. This is against the Scripture, and that in more respects than one.

1. The Scripture requires all that are taught to Contribute to him that is
their Teacher. Gal. 6.6. But it does not say that all who are taught shall have
power to choose a Pastor for that Church where they are taught. In the
Primitives Times the Catechumens did many of them Contribute to him that was
their Instructor, but not one of them all had the privilege of Voting in the
Election of the Churches Pastor.

2. The word of God has given power to the Brethren in particular Churches to
choose their own Officers. Act. 1.26. and 6.2, 3, 5^. and 14 23. Wherefore to
give it to others besides them is not according to the word of Christ.

3. If all that Contribute have power to Vote in the Election of a Pastor, then
many women must have that Privilege, for they may Contribute to the
Maintenance. But this the Apostle allows not of. 1 Cor. 14.34, 35. So that
this Affirmation is Contrary to the Scripture in more respects then one

2. It is against Reason. For them who have no right to the Lords Supper
themselves* to appoint who shall be the dispenser of that Ordinance to others,
is highly irrational.

3 This will deprive particular Churches of that Power which does belong to
them, and which Christ has purchased for them wi^h the price of his own Blood.
To have power to Choose their own Pastors is an invaluable Privilege For them
to give or rather to s^ll that Privilege away to all that will Contribute,
must needs be displeasing to the Lord who has bought it for them at so dear a
rate. It may be the Contributors will be more than twice so many as the
Brethren of the Church. So i^ may easily come to pass, that a Pastor shall be
Chosen and not so much as one in the Church that did, or could in Conscience
Vote for him. So then this Principle is of Dangerous Consequence. It may soon
prove fatal and destructive to the Churches, and to the Interest of Christ
amongst them.

4 It is contrary to the principles and practices of Christians in the
Primitive Times* Eusebius says that after the Death of James, the Church chose
Simeon the Son of Cleophas to be his Successor. Nothing is more Evident then
that in the First ages of the Church, Pastors were Chosen by all and only their
Flocks; in Choosing a Minister they did Klerozein, that is Choose him by Lot;
from whence it was that Ministers had the name of the Clergy given to them.
Ignatius writing to the Church in Philadelphia tells them, that it belonged to
them to Choose their Pastor. The Nicene Council in a Synodal Letter to the
Churches in Africa, advise them to Choose Orthodox Pastors instead of Arians.
Cyprian tells us, In Epist. 52.
that Cornelius was made Bishop Suffragio Plebis, by the Suffrages of the
people. Yea, he says Lib. 1. Epist 41. that Pleb^ maxim potestatem habet, vel
sacerdotes dignos eligendi, vel indignos recusandi. And there are many passages
in him and other Fathers, (as they are called) which show that the power of
Choosing Pastors was in the Church. Nay, Antichrist had got a considerable
footing in the World, before ever this privilege of Choosing their own Pastors
was wrestled out of the hands of Particular Churches. It was about the Year
1219. that Pope Innocent III. forbid the Laity to meddle in the Election of any
Church Guide. M La Roque of the Eccles discipline p. 20.
supposes, that Canon was made in opposition to the Albigenses who retained
the Ancient practice of the Churches in Choosing their own Officers. The Emperor
Constantine writing to Nicomedia, says, that it was in their power to make a
Choice of what Pastor they pleased. The Council of Calcedon confirms the
Churches power of Elections. There are many Instances to this purpose in the v.
Theod. l. 4. c 20 Socrat. l. 5. c. 15. Z^zom. l. 8 c. 19.
writers of Ecclesiastical History.

5 All our Great Reformers and Emine^^ Modern Divines, (Prelatical ones
excepted) have ass^rted the power of Electing Ministers to be in the Church.
The depriving the Church of this privilege is by Calvin, called Impia
Ecclesiae Spoliatio. A Spoil impiously committed upon the Church of God. I
could easily produce Testimonies for this, out of Luther, Bullinger, Musculus,
Vrsin, Junius, See Mr. Jacob of Church Government, with the peoples consen^.
Chapt. 3.
and many others, but it is needless. Some Learned wri^ers of the Presbyterian
Judgment, in their arguings against Jus Patronatus, or the power of Patrons to
impose Ministers on the people, and in their disputations against Episcopal
Institution and Induction, have strenuously ass^rted and proved, that
particular Churches have power to Choose their own Pastors. One of the Articles
agreed unto by the United Brethren in London is, That each particular Church
has right to Choose their own Officers. That this was the Judgment of the Old
Puritan Nonconformists is asserted in that Book which bears the Title of
Puritanismus Anglicanus, which goes under the name of Dr. Ames, because of his
preface to it, but Mr Bradshaw and not Ames was the Author, as a Learned
professor Hornbeck Epist. ad Dur^um. p. 27.
in the University of Leyden has informed us.

6 One of our Synods in New England, viz. that which met at Boston in the Year
1662. does Expressly declare, That the power of Voting in the Church, belongs to
Males in full Communion, and that others are to be debarred from that Power.
Prop. 4. p. 18. In other places of the world, although a Modest dissenting is
not an offense, yet it is not allowed in Terms to Contradict, what has been by
Synods Established.

7. To give the Power of Electing Ministers to any besides the particular
Churches over which they are set, is Contrary to the Good Laws of this
Province, which Confirm unto the Several Churches therein, all their former
Privileges respecting Divine Worship, and Church Order, and particularly their
Power of Choosing their Ministers, which Laws have (through the Favor of our
Lord Jesus Christ to his Church^s in New England) obtained the Royal
Approbation.

QUESTION X. IS it Expedient that Churches should enter into a Consociation, or
Agreement, that matters of more then ordinary Importance, such as the Gathering
of a New Church, the Ordination, Deposition, or Translation of a Pastor be done
with Common Consent?
Answ. This is both Expedient and Necessary. The Synod which Convened at Boston
Anno 1662. has sufficiently cleared this Point. And although there was in that
Synod some dissent as to the Question about the Subject of Baptism then
discussed; in the Answer to the other Question relating to the Cons^ciation of
Churches, there was an Unanimous Concurrence. The design of which is not (as
has been well observed by Dr Medul. Theol. L. 1 c. 39 These 27.
Ames and Mr. De pol. rules. L. 3. c. 22.
Parker) to infringe the Liberty of particular Churches, but from the word of
God to direct and strengthen them in the Regular Exercise thereof. The Reasons
for it are such as these.

1. The Churches of Christ stand in a Sisterly relation each to other under
Christ their head, having the same Faith, and ought to have the same Order.
Ephesians. 4 5. Col. 2.5. Phil. 3.16. This Union implies a suitable Communion, and
that they ought to have a Mutual care each of other. Cant. 8.8.

2. The Scripture teaches that in weight^ Cases we should ask Counsel. 2 Samuel
20.1^ Prove. ^.5. and 15.22. and 24.6. Which General Rules concern Polities as
well as particular Persons, and Churches as well as civil Societies.

3. There are Scripture Examples to instruct us in our Duty herein. We find,
that when the Church in Antioch had a weighty Case before them, they sent to
another Church for Counsel Act. 15.2. The Apostle Paul sought for the
Concurrence, and Right hand of fellowship of other Apostles. Gala. 2.9.
Ordinary Elders and Churches, have no less need of each other to prevent their
running in vain^ Gal. 2.2.

4 Such a Communion of Churches is that which we plead for, is no Innovation,
but that which has ever been the Profession and practice of those that have
been called Congregational There is a Book which bears the Title of, An Answer
of the Elders of the several Churches in New England to Thirty two Questions,
Printed in the year 1643. Of which Book my Father Mather was the Sole Author.
And he wro^e it in the Primitive Times of these Churches, ( viz. in the year
1639) as himself assured me. What he wrote was approved of by other Elders,
especially by Mr. Cotton, unto whom he Communicated it. Now in Answer to Q 18.
p. 64. are these words, The Consociation of Churches into Classes and Synods,
(...) h^ld to be Lawful, and in some cases Necessary: as namely, in things that
are not Peculiar to one Church, but Common to them all. And likewise, (...) a
Church is not able to End any matter which concerns only themselves, then they
are to seek for Council and Advice from Neighbor Churches, as the Church at
Antioch did send unto the Church at Jerusalem. Act 15.2. The ground and use of
Classes and Synods with the Limitations therein to be Observed, is Summarily
laid down by Dr. Ames, unto whom we do wholly Consent in this matter. This was,
and is the Judgment of all that adhere to the Order of the Gospel Professed in
the Churches of New England. The world is much mistaken in thinking that
Congregational Churches are Independent. That Name has indeed been fastened upon
them by their Adversaries; but our Platform of Discipline Chap. 2. Sect. 5.
disclaims the name. And so does our Renowned Hooker Part 2. Chap. ^.
in his Survey of Church Discipline. Likewise those famous Apologists in the
Assembly at Westminster, viz. Dr. Goodwin, Mr. Nigh, Mr. Simpson, Mr.
Burrough's, and Mr. Bridge, say that It is a Maxim to be abhorred, that a
single and particular Society of men Professing the name of Christ, should
Arrogate to themselves an Exemption from giving an account to, or being
censurable by Neighbor Churches about them. That Apostle of this Age, (as Dr.
Goodwin calls him) Mr. Cotton, the first and forever famous Teacher in this
Boston, when he in the Name of the Elders and Messengers of the Churches, gave
to Mr. Mitchel the right hand of fellowship, at his Ordination to the Pastoral
Office in the Church of Cambridge, he did in a singular manner recommend to him
(and that Excellent man was to his dying day mindful of Mr. Cottons Advice)
endeavors for the establishment of a Consociation amongst the Churches of
Christ throughout this Colony, that wise man foreseeing that without this,
disorder and confusion would in Process of time inevitably happen; as I have
more largely declared in In my first Principles of N. E. p. 28. etc.
another Discourse in which Mr. Cottons proposals respecting the Consociation
mentioned, are Published to the world. Moreover, that the Concurring Judgment
of those who are Congregational is according hereunto is Evident from the
Declaration of Faith or Order which was agreed unto by the M^ss^ngers of One
hundred and Twenty Congregational Churches in England, who met at the Savoy in
London, Anno 1658. They thus declare, ( e) ^n case of difficulties and
differances in point of Doctrine, wherein either the Churches in general are
concerned in their peace, union, and edification, or any Member or Members of
any Church are injured in, or by any proceeding in Censures not agreeable to
Truth and Order: It is according to the mind of Christ, that many Churches
holding Communion together, do by their Messengers meet in a Synod (...)
Council, to Consider and give their* Advice in or about the matter in
differance. But the Testimony of that Blessed Jeremiah Burrough^ ^uts the thing
beyond all dispute. For hi^ words are these In his Irenicum. p. 43, 44, 47.
Those in the Congregational^ way acknowledge.

1. That they are bound in Conscience to gi^^ account of their ways to
Churches about them, or to any other who shall require it. This not in an
Arbitrary way, but as a duty which they owe to God and Man.

2. They acknowledge that Synods of other Ministers and Elders about them are
an Ordinance of Jesus Christ for the helping the Church against Errors, Schisms
and Scandals.

3. That these Synods may from the power they have from Christ, admonish men
and Church^^ in his Name, when they see evils continuing i^, or growing upon
the Church, and their admonition^ carry with them the Authority of Jesus Christ.

4. As there shall be cause, they may declare men or Churches to be subverters
of the Faith, or otherwise according to the nature of their offense, to shame
them before all the Churches about them.

5. They may by a solemn act in the Name of Jesus Christ, refuse any further
Communion with them till they repent.

6. They may declare also in the Name of Christ, that those erring People or
Churches are not to be received into fellowship with any of the Churches of
Christ, nor to have Communion with any other in the Ordinances of Christ.

If it shall be said, surely they do not come up to these six things mentioned.
To that I Answer (says Mr. Buroughs) I do not in these deliver only my own
Judgment, but by what I know of the Judgment of all those Brethren with whom I
have occasion to converse by Conferance both before and since, I stand charged
to make it good to be their Judgment also; ye^, it has been theirs and mine for
diverse years, even the^ when we never thought to have enjoyed our own Land
again. We see by these Testimonies that Congregational men in general, as well
as the Churches of New England in special, are no such Independents, no such
B^ownists, no such M^rellians, as some have represented them to be.

5. If we admit not a Consociation of Churches, there will be no Remedy against
the Male Administrations of Particular Churches; nor any cure of Schisms, or
Errors that may happen in our Churches. This has been objected (but
injuriously) as a Scandal attending the Congregational Church discipline, and
that therefore it is a way not practicable. Indeed, if we refuse this part of
Church Communion, the obj^ction would be unanswerable. And who would be willing
to be a Member of that Church, in which although he should be never so much
wronged, there will be no relief for him upon Earth? There was once a Church in
New England, which having censured one of their Members, he complained of the
suppose^ wrong done him, to Neighbor Elders, who thought he had received hard
measure. The Pastor and major part of the Church were no^ willing the case
should have a re-hearing before the Elders and Messengers of other Churches.
Upon this, great clamours were raised, and pr^judices taken up against the
Congregational Discipline. Mr. Cawdrey got this story by the end, and in his
Epistle to the Dissenting Brethren p. 10. He says that a Minister in N E
writes over to England, that this injured person would have no remedy until the
Churches in New England were become Presbyterians, and that if Independency
does not brea^ all the Churches in New England excepting a few
Semi-Presbyterian, some are deceived Who the Minister was that wrote thus to
England, M^ Cawdrey tells us not. But it is a great wron^ to the Churches of
New England, and to the way Congregational, to Represent them, and all that are
of that way, as being of such Independent and Unaccountable Principles, which
they utterly disclaim. Dr. Owen in his Disciplinary Catechism, and especially
in the Additament there unto, (which was written on occasion of an harsh and
rash censure in the Independent Church in Cambridge in England) h^^ with great
evidence of reason, refuted the maintainers of such an Independency.

6. The order asserted is (as has been truly observed by the Learned Doctor
last mentioned) confirmed by the practice of the first Churches after the
Apostles: for when the Church in Corinth had by an undue Exercise of Discipline
^eposed some of their Elders, the Church (...) Rome taking Cognizance of it,
wrote to (...), ^eproving their rashness, and advised their ^^^toration, as it
is to be seen in the Epistle of Clement than Pastor of the Church in Rome,
which Clement is thought to be the same whom Paul speaks of, Phil. 4.3. And
when the Church of Antioch was afterward troubled with the Heresies of their
Pastor Samasetanus, the Neighboring Pastors came unto the Church, and joined
their concurrence in his depos^^ion. It is certain that in the next Ages to the
Apostles, a Pastor was not settled in any Church without the Concurrence of
others. When the Church had Elected a Pastor, they presented him to the
Neighbor Pastors for their Approbation, nor could he be legally confirmed
without it. Lib. 5. c 11.
Eusebius tells us that when Alexander was chosen Pastor of the Church in
Jerusalem by the Brethren of that place, he had the common consent of the
Circumjacent Pastors. And thus (as Cyprian informs us) it was practiced in all
the Churches throughout Africa. He speaks particularly concerning Sabinus, who
was Elected a Pastor of Eremita in Spain, that Neighbor Ministers concured in
his Ordination, after the Fraternity had Elected him. His words are Cyprian
Epist. 68.
Quod factum vi^^mus in sabini Ordinatione ut (...) universae fraternit^tis
suffragio, and de Episcoporum judicio, Episcopat^^ ei deferetur. We find i^
Ecclesiastical Story, that in the Primitive Times the Names of Persons to be
Ordained were Published abroad th^s so if any one had ought to object they
might produce it. Which custom of the Christians in the Election of their
Pastors was so highly approved of by the Emperor Severus, as that he would have
it put in practice in Establishing Governors of Provinces throughout the
Empire.

7. Neither do the Reformed Churches Or^dain a Minister without the concurrence
and approbation of Neighbor Ministers. To give the Right hand of Fellowship to
a new Ordained Minister, was a usual custom a^mongst the Churches in Bohemia,
for which the^ alleged that Scripture, Gal. 2.9. as is Testified by Rat. ordin
discipl p. 33.
Comme^ius. In the beginning of the Reformation in the Church of Scotland, one
Article of their discipline, is, That when a Minister is Ordained the rest of
the Ministers shall take the Elected by the hand in sign of their consent, as
is related in the History of the Reformation Page 288.
which goes under the Name of Mr. Knox. I find also, that there is the like
practice in the Protestant French Churches. When a Minister is Ordained, two
Deputies of the Synod or Colloque are appointed in the presence of the People,
to give him the Right Hand of Fellowship. These things I have the rather
mentioned for the Information of our young Divines, who being Unstudied in the
Controversies of Church discipline, are apt to think that the cus^^m of giving
the Right hand (...) Fellowship at Ordina^^^ns, is a Novelty and Sin^^^^rity
practiced no where but in New England, whenas it was used in other Churches
long before there was a New England in the world. But (not to divert) the
French Protestant Discipline will by no means allow that a Ministe^ should
intrude himself into any Church, without the approbation of Neighbor Pastors.
One of the Articles of their Discipline is in these words, The Minister that
shall intrude himself, although he were approved by the People, is not to be
approved by Neighbor Ministers or others. A late La. Roque p. 23.
Author that Comments on this Article of the French discipline, observes that
it holds a Conformity with the practice of the Churches in the primitive Times.
For the Council of Antioch has this Canon, If a Bishop out of Employment
intrude himself into a Vacant Church, and usurp the place without the Authority
of a Synod, Let him be turned out, although he may be approved by all the
People, which he shall have gained to him. Thus careful have Churches been,
both in former and in later ages that in the Establishment of a Minister, the
concurrence of Neighbor Elders should be endeavored. And this which has been
said is consonant (...) the Articles agreed unto by the United Brethren at
London They declare, That in so weigh^ a matter as calling and choosing a
Pastor, (...) Judge it ordinarily requisite, that every such Church consult and
advise with the Pastors of Neighboring Congregations. And that, it is
Ordinarily requisite that the Pastors of Neighboring Congregations concur in
the Ordinati^^ of the Person chosen by the Brotherhood of the Particular
Church. That word Ordinarily (...) well put in, because in a Time of
Persecution that cannot be done, which in a Time of Liberty may, and ought to
be attended. The Presbyterian discipline of France, requir^^ that a Minister
shall not be admitted to (...) Office, but by the Provincial Synod; exce^^ (say
they) it be in troublesome Times, and then he may be ordained with the
Approbation of only three Ministers. The like to which was decreed in the Synod
of Nice, that ordinarily all the Pastors of a Province should concur in the
Ordination of a Pastor, but in case of an urgent necessity so requiring, it
might be done with the concurrence of three Pastors. And these things may serve
to justify a former Law made by the civil Government in this Colony, That no
person should be Ordained a Minister in any Church, but with the Approbation of
the Elders and Messengers of four Neighboring Churches. This practice although
it has not at present* the Authority of the civil Law to confirm it,
nevertheless, being grounded upon Scripture and right reason, it ought to be
Sacred unto us.

QUESTION. XI. MAY the Brethren in Churches and not the Past^rs only be sent
unto, and have their Voice in Ecclesiastical Councils?
Anws. We maintain the Affirmative in this Question In the last General Synod
which ^as in New England, viz. That which met at ^oston in the year 1679. Some
Churches sent (...) their E^ders without any Brethren: which the Synod was so
far unsatisfyed with, (...) that they would not allow those Pastors (...) fit
with them, until they had prevailed with their Churches to send Brethren also,
being very tender of admitting any thing that should look like an infringement
of that Liberty and privilege which does by the Institution of Christ belong
to the Brotherhood in particular Churches. The reasons of our Judgment are
such as these.

1. The first Synod that ever was in which a Copy and Sampler is left to all
Succeeding Generations, did consist not only of Elders but of Brethren, who had
their voice therein, namely the Synod at Jerusalem, of which Act. 15. gives us
the account. The 4 th verse speaks of the Church as well as of the Apostles
and Elde^s. Now he that was in (...) Time the Oracle of the University of
Cambridg^ argues thus, Whitaker de Concilijs.
why was the cause brought to the People and not to the Elders only, if they
had not power to judge in the case? And he therefore concludes against
Bellarmine, that every Laice in that Synod had a difinitive suffrage as much as
Peter himself. And whereas Bellarmine objects, that the Brethren did only hear
and not speak, in that Assembly Whitaker argues from verse 12 That the Brethr^^
had been (not tumultuously but in an order^^ manner) declaring their
apprehensions on the case under controversy; or however that the Expression in
that Verse implys, that the^ had a Liberty of Speech granted to them* And in
verse 22. it is said, It pleased the Apostles and Elders with the whole Church,
etc. In the Council of Basil, it was argued, that that word, It pleased, being
spoken not of the Elders only, but of others, it does Evidently import, that
those other, even the Members of the Church had also a power of Judgment and
determination in the Question then under debate. From thence likewise does Juel
against Harding prove that Laics (as they calls the Brethren in Churches) have
this power of right belonging to them, to Sit and Judge in Ecclesiastical
Councils. And so does Dr. Willet In Synops papism. Cont. 3 Q. 3. p. 126.
(a Learned and worthy Confor^^ble Divine of the Church of England) from that
same Scripture conclude. Moreover, in (...) Verse. 23. it is said, that the
Letters containing the Decrees of that Council were Sent (and consequently
signed) in the Name of the Brethren as well as of the Apostles and Elders*
Which shows that they had something else (...) do in ^^at Synod than only to
keep silence, and hear what others had to say. Wherefore Dr. Owen might well
say, Of a Gospel Church. p. 263.
That in Synods, i^ i^ not necessary that Elders alone should be sent by the
Churches, but they may have others joined with them, and had so until
prelatical usurpation over-turned their Liberty. There were many besides Paul
and Barnabas sent from Antioc^^ to Jerusalem, and the Brethren of that Church,
whatever is impudently pretended to the contrary, concurred in the decree and
determination there made. Thus Dr. Owen.

2. There is weight in Austine Argument* viz. That the power of the Keys
belongs to the whole Church. And that therefore not the Pastors only should
have their voice in Councils. Since Councils represent the Churches by whom
they are chosen, it is meet that some of each order should be chosen.
Church Members are fellow Citizens, and therefore ought not to be deprived of
their power.

3. It is not their Office but the Churches Delegation that gives power to be
the Members in Synods. The Specificating act in which Synodal power and so the
right of a Decisive Vote is founded, is the Churches Delegation. None ought to
be Admitted into such Assemblies, but those whom the Churches shall ^end. Now
as in Civil Councils, many times not only Magestrates but other Citizens duly
qualified are sent to represent the City whose delegates they are; so in
Ecclesiastical Councils, not only the Rulers of the Churches, but others may
receive a mission from them, and have then and there, equal power with the
former. True it i^ that of these Delegates from the Churches, the Elders ought
to be the principally concerne^* They are presumed best to know the sta^^ of
their Churches, and to be best able to Judg^ in Ecclesiastical Affairs. This
notwithstanding, they are not to assume the sole power to themselves, nor yet a
Negative Voice i^ in such Assemblies, as they may in their own particular
Churches. It must (says Dr. Owen) Ibid. p. 26^.
be affirmed that no persons by Virtue of any Office merely, have right to be
Members of Ecclesiastical Synods as such, Neither is there either example or
reason to give color to any such pretense. Officers of the Church, Bishops,
Pastors, Elders, may in present in them, ought to be present in them, are
meetest for the most part so to be, but merely as such, it belongs not unto
them* This will seem to some to be Independent Doctrine: But that is their
mistake. Bullinger, Hyperius, Daneus, Voetius, and amongst our English writers
Whitaker, Parker and other great Divines have affirmed as much as this comes to
Yea, the generality of our Divines in their disputations against the Papists
Episcopal Monopoly of Synodal Power, reason as we do. And it is clear from this
Argument. If it belongs to Elders as such to be Members of Synods, then all
such must be there. But if so, then in case a Synod should continue sitting a
year together (as it often happens) all that while the Particular Churches to
whom those Elders belong that are remote from the place where the Synod meets,
must not have one Elder to instruct and guide them.

4. The Questions which are handled and decided in Synods are commonly such as
Brethren and not Elders only are concerned in. This Reason is urged by our Juel
(a great light in the English Church) in his defense of the Church of England.
Yea, some Learned Papists have been so ingenuous as to confess there is weight
in it. That which pertains to all is not valid, if some of all sorts have not a
consent in it; which assertion (says Dr. Fyeld writing against the Romanists)
has its foundation in nature and in reason.

5. In some Churches there are Brethren whose gifts and abilities are beyond
their Pastors. And why should not such be Members of Ecclesiastical Councils,
and have a suffrage therein equal with any others? In some Monasteries of old
there were Readers of Divinity, whose work it was (as the incomparable de
Success Eccles. c. 7. s 24.
Usher has observed) to instruct Clergy men. There are at this day in some
Universities, Learned professors of Theology (who are not Pastors of any
Church) perhap^ more able to give light in a difficult Controversy than any
Elder in the Synod What reason can be given why Churches should not delegate
such, or why they should not have decisive Votes as well as any others?

6. The most Famous Synods which have been in the world have consisted not of
Elders only. That in the next Ages to the Apostles others besides Pastors were
Member^ of Ecclesiastical Councils, our Divines in the^^ writings against the
Papists have proved. I^ the Council of Calcedon there were Seven Earls and ten
noble Senators, and not Ecclesiastic^^ only. Since the Reformation, the
Churches of Sweveland See Harmon. of Confessions. p. 602.
Petitioned that there might be a Council called of every degree and sta^^
consisting of the best Learned and most Godly men whom the Province did afford.
In the famous Synod of Dort, there were besides Pastors, Professors of
Divinity, and many Seniors or Ruling Elders who were not ordained Officers. In
the Assembly at Westminster which met July 1. 1643. There were not only Pastors
of Churches, but several noble men, e. g. The Earl of Pembrooke, the Lord say,
the Lord Wharton (who told me Eight (...) ^goe, that he was the only person of
that Ass^mbly then living) and several others of the Nobility, and some
Gentlemen, of the House of Commons, Mr. S^^den, Mr. Rouse, Mr. Wh^^lock and
others: Also Commissioners (...) Scotland were joined with them, e. g. The Earl
of Lothian, Lord W^rristone, Lord La^derdale, besides Ministers from that
Kingdom. So then it is not an Independent Phansy, that Assemblies met to
consult about Ecclesiastical and Religious Controversies should consist of
other Persons besides Ecclesiastics.

7. Some not found in the Faith have thought it their interest to maintain the
Negative in this Question In an old Heretical Council V. Willet ubi supra. p.
127.
there was an outcry, Synodus Episcoporum est, Synods should consist of none
but Bishops, others are Superfluous. So do the Papists Teach: They say that in
the Synod Act 15. only the Apostles were Judges, and that the Laics, or
Brethren there had nothing to do but to hear and submit their Judgments and
Consent to what the other should determine. Just after the same manner do some
Prelate Protestants, particularly Su^lift, and Bridges express themselves. The
Jesuit Sanders railes against the Magdeburgenses because in their
Ecclesiastical History they affirm that Laics were Members of Synods. None
(says he) but madmen can be^^eve that Mechanics should (...) in Council with
Bishops to Judge of Ecclesiastical affairs. But as to that objection, that
Illiterate persons are not fit to be in Synod there to determine Questions
wherein Religion (...) concerned, a very Learned Dutch Vo^t pol. Eccles. part
3. p 195.
Divine gives a double Answer.

1. That some who are no^ Pastors of Churches are nevertheless men of great
Learning as were many of the Seniors in the Synod of D^rt.

2. That some who do not excel in Scholastical Learning are versed in the Holy
Scriptures, and in Zeal and Piety Excel some Ministers Many Seniors with us
(says he) abode by the Truth, when their Pastors did not so, in the Time when
the Arminian Remonstrants made a disturbance in the Churches.

QUESTION. XII. DOES the Essence of a Ministers Ca^^ Cons^st^ in his being
Ordained with the Imp^siti^^ of hands by other Ministers?
Answ. There are who say that it does* And that the Minister imposing hands
must be a Bishop, or otherwise it is no volid Ordination. Which notion makes
all (or most of) the Ministers in France, Switzerland, Denmark, Holland,
Scotland etc. to be no true Ministers for want of Episcopal Ordination. We have
these things to offer to the contrary.

1. The Essence of a Ministers Call consists in a mutual Election between him
and his People. As in Marriage the Consent of both parties is Essentially
requisite, but a public Solemnization of the Marriage is not so. The
Coronation of a King is not Essential to his Office, nor is the Solemn
Inauguration of a Public Magistrate Essential to his being a Magistrate. No
more is Ordination to the being of a Minister. Learned Papists notwithstanding
they are wont to place the Essence of a Ministers Call in his Ordination, says
that a Cardinal has his Ecclesiastical power by virtue of his Election before
his Installment. And that a Pope when Elected has Power to rule the Church
before his I^thronization. The Lawyers say that Solennia non sunt de rei
Substantia. We cannot say that if a man has not received Imposition of hands
that then he is no Pastor, but we may say that if he has not been Elected by
some Church of Christ he is no Pastor, but his Ordination is a nullity. For
which cause the Learned Of the Church. Cha. 11. p* 125.
and noble Morney approves of Chrys^^tom, his saying that Election by the
People is so necessary that without it there is neither Altar, nor Priesthood.
And a whole Council, viz. that of Calcedon has pronounced all such Ordinations
to be null, as we shall afterward have occasion more fully to declare. Suppose
a person qualified with Ministerial gifts should suffer Shipwreck in a remote
Island where there are none but Heathen, and should by Preaching be
instrumental in the Conversion of many of them, might not these his
Converts-Elect him to be their Pastor, and might not he accepting of their
Call, Administer all Ordinances to them without any Ordination by the
Imposition of the hands of Ministers, where there are no Ministers? Mr. Herle a
Learned Presbyterian does not deny it. And Dr. Whitaker de p^n. tif Roman
Quest. 2 cap. 15 p 300.
affirms no less in saying, that if there were not a Bishop in the World the
Church could Create Bishops Ecclesiastical Story informs us, That Aedisius and
Frumentus being private men by Preaching the Gospel Converted a great Nation of
Indians. Might they not Administer Sacraments to these Converts being Elected
by them to be their Pastors, without any Imposition of hands from other Pastors
in a Country where none were. See Dr. Fulk on Romans 10.15.

2. Not only Congregational Men, but many of the Presbyterian Judgment, and
others also, esteem the Imposition of Hands to be an indifferent and not a
necessary thing. That which may be either done or left undone without Sin. Thus
do the Presbyterians in Scotland declare. In the History of the Church of
Scotland written by Mr. Calderwood, p. 26. It is asserted that Imposition of
hands they judge not necessary in the Admission of Ministers* And when in the
year 1597. that Question was by the King put to the General Assembly,
Calderwood Hist of Church of Scotl p. 383.
(...) he a Lawful Pastor who wants Imposition of hands? Their Answer was in
these words, Imposition or Laying on of hands is not Essential and necessar^,
but Ceremonial and indifferent in the Admission of a Pastor. This does Mr.
Gillespy also maintain in his Learned Discourse against English Popish
Ceremonies p 285 The Dutch Churches esteem Imposition of hands to be
Adiaphorous. And therefore sometimes in the Ordination of Pastors they omit
that Ceremony; and they never use it in the Ordination either of Ruling Elders
or of Deacons. So far as I can learn, the Churches of New England are the only
ones in the World that Ordain Ruling Elders or Deacons with the Imposition of
hands. In 1 Timothy 4.14
Piscator, Danous, Alting Zepperus, Polanus, declare it to be Indifferent. So
do Ba^duinus, Gerhard and other writers (of the Lutheran persuasion. In some
places in V. Voet. de pol. Eccles. part 1. L. 2. ^ p. 465.
Germany they use this Ri^e of Imposing hands, in the Ordination of Ministers,
in Baptism, and in Confirmation, and at Marriage also, but in all as a thing
Adi^phor^us.

3. If we make the Essence of a Ministers C^ll to consist in his Ordination by
imposition of hands from other Lawful Ministers, it will be a difficult thing
to prove that our first Reformers were true Ministers of Christ As for
Ordination in the Church of Rome some of them renounced it, not at all
supposing themselves to be Ministers of Christ merely o^ that account. They
thought it was their duty, inordinatissimam Ordinationem ejurar^ as Beza
speaks. Some of them never had it* For they did first Preach without any formal
Call or Allowance of those who usurped the Title of Pastors and Bishops, and
the Sol^ power of Ordination, and were afterward^ called to the Ministry by the
Churches which they had taught. Tilenus being demande^ of the Earl of Laval
from whom Calvin had hi^ Calling, Answered, from the Church of Gene^va, and
from Farel his Predecessor, who had also his from the People of Geneva, who had
Right and Authority to institute and depose Ministers. Bellarmine objects that
the Protestants have no true Ministers among them, because they have not
received Ordination by Imposition of hands Successively from the Apostles. Dr.
Willet in Answer thereto says, Synopsis Contr. 2. Q 13. p. 81.
In the Corrupt times of the Gospel the Lord has raised up Faithful Ministers
to his Church that could show no Succession from the Degenerate Clergy. They
that stand upon a Lineal Succession of Ordination from the Apostles, must of
necessity own the Church of Rome to be a true Church, and (the Bishops of Rome)
the Ministers of Antichrist to be the true Ministers of Christ. For Churches to
go to them for Ordained Ministers, is (says Melancth^n) as i^ the Sheep should
go to Wolves for Shepherds. It has been well said by those who have gone before
us, That God does so much abhor Antichrist that he would not have his People to
seek to him, nor to his Priests to Ordain Christ's Ministers, as he would not
take of Babylon a Stone for a corner, nor a Stone for a Foundation. Jer. 51.16
Whereas it is objected (says Mr. Perkins) That they who are Lawfully called
are Ordained by them whose Auncesters have been Successively Ordained by the
Apostles. I Answer, there is a Succession of Doctrine in which our Ministers
Succeed the Apostles, and this is sufficient. If in Turkey, or America, or else
where the Gospel should be received by the Counsil and parswasion of private
Persons, they shall not need to send to Europe for Consecrated Ministers, but
they have power to Choose their own Ministers from within themselves. Thus Mr.
Perkins. To the like purpose does In Ephesians. ^. ubi de Baptismo.
Zanchy speak. And Voetius in his Learned Book concerning the Desperate cause
of Papacy, has made it as clear as the Light of the Sun, that not a Personal
Succession, but a Succession in respect On Gala. 2 11.
of Doctrine is necessary to make a true Minister of Christ.

4. There are Judicious and Learned men who conceive that others besides
Ministers may Impose hands in the Ordination of Minister^. This is asserted in
our Platform of Discipli^^, which had the Approbation of many Divines as
Eminent for Piety and Learning as mo^^ which this Age has produced. Nor is th^^
which will seem a very strange Assertion to some, a notion peculiar to
New England Divines only. Others of as deep Judgment (...) any whom the World
has known, have maintained the same. Dr. Ames Bellerm* ^^ervat Tom. 2. L 3 cap
2.
says, that as the power of Seeing is formally and subjectively in the Eye,
yet originally in the whole Animal, so is the power of O^dination in the whole
Church, and that therefore although (...) a well constituted Church, the Act of
Ordination is to be performed by the Elders, in case duly qualifyed Elders are
not to be had, Ordination may be performed by non Elders. And that in a Corrupt
state of the Church where Order and Ministry fa^ls, A plebe actus Ordinationis
Legitime fieri potest, the People may Ordain. Dr. Whitaker De pontifice Romans Q
2. c. 15. et de Ecclesia. Q. 5. c. 6.
affirms, that they that have power to Call have power to Ordain. And that the
Church has power both to Ca^^ a Bishop and to Ordain him* also. Not only
Congregational men, but some Presbyterians whose great Learning and Piety has
made them Eminen^, have said as much as is in our Platform of Discipline
affirmed concerning Ordination. Voetius Desp cause. pap. L. 2 c. 2. p. 269, 274.
asserts, That the Church may delegate a Member of their body to Ordain a
Presbyter, or may wholly omit the Solemnity of a Consecration, and that the
Person chosen to the Ministry, may by virtue of his Election perform the acts
belonging to his Ministerial Office. The very same is affi^med by Didoclavius
p. 242. And by Mr. Gillespy against the Ceremonies. p. 286. Also Gerson Bucer
De Guber. Eccles. p. 262, 263.
maintains that in case the E^dership should wholly fail the power of
Ordination remains with the Church. The Defenders of this Problem allege such
Reasons for it, as deserve Consideration. e. g.

1 That we read in the Scriptures of Non-Officers imposing their hands upon
such as were set apart unto a Sacred Office. The Levites were Ecclesiastical
Officers, but the Children of Israel who imposed hands on them were not so Numb
8.10.

2. We read in the New Testament of Ordinary Officers imposing hands on them
who were Extraordinary Officers. Thus Ananias imposed hands on Paul. Act 9 And
after that, the Elders of the Church in Antioch imposed hands on Paul and
Barnabas. Act. 13.3. And not only Paul but the Elders of the Church in Ephesus
imposed hands on Timothy, who was an Evangelist and therefore an Extraordinary
Officer. Now if an o^^inary Officer may lay his hands on one that is
Extraordinary, why may not a Non-Elder appointed there unto by the Church, do
the like to one that is only an Ordinary Presbyter? This clearly Answers what
Papists and Prelates are wont to object, viz. that the Ordainer is greater than
the Ordained, and that therefore none but Bishops ought to Ordain or impose
hands, as being a degree above Presbyters. But was (...) greater then the
Apostle Paul? or the Ministers in the Church of Antioch greater then Paul and
Barnabas? or the Presbyters in Ephesus greater then Timothy? In the beginning
of the Reformation in England several who had never been O^dained Priests by
Bishops, were nevertheless made Bishops, as is observed in the late Collection
of State Tracts. p. 50. Some Councils have allowed (...) the Ordination of
Bishops in a case of necessity when Bishops were not at hand, by those who were
no Bishops, but inferior to them, which neither do some of our Episcopal
Writers gainsay: And notwithstanding the Council of Trent has declared all
Secular Ordinations to be nullities, that do^ not make them ^o be so.

3. Imposition of hands in Ordination is not a Sacrament (as many of our
Divines have proved against the Papists) nor has it any Religious Significancy
in it. No doubt but this Rite might Lawfully be used at the Inauguration of
some Civil Officers, at the Jews from whom it is borrowed, Imp^sed hands on a
Senator when Solemnly admitted into the great Sanedrin, and upon a Doctor in
one of their Colleges when admitted to a Rabbinatus as Alting De Academia Hebr.
shows: Though sometimes they were Promoted without any Imposition of hands as
Buxtorfe Lexi^. Thalmud. p. 1498.
out of the Jewish Writers inform us

4. Mr Hookers Judgment, is* that Ordination is not an act of Authority out of
Order only. And that therefore it may be performed by Non-Officers. As for that
Objection which some have thought weighty. viz. That none can give what himself
has not, and that therefore men upon whom hands were never imposed cannot
impose hands upon others, it is easily Answered, men may give that which they
are ^ot formally only vertually the Subjects of A Nation by choosing a King,
give him Legal Power. A City by Choosing a Lord Mayor, make him a Magistrate. A
Woman by giving her self in Marriage causes the man to whom she gives her
self to have the Power of an Husband: but no man will be so absurd as to say,
that a Woman has formally the power of an Husband. In former Ag^s the Kings of
England in their Charters to Abbats and Bishops v. Malmesbury de G^st. Reg.
Angl. L. 2. c. 7* 8.
gave them power to Ordain Monks and Clerks: But those Kings were not
themselves Ecc^esi^stical Officers, or O^dained Notwithstanding all this
Discourse, (...) far from approving that which has been practiced in some
Churches, who when Neighbor Elders were present, have improved Brethren to
impose hands on their Pastors. I think it were better to have an O^dination
with Fasting and Prayer only, without any imposition of hands, (as is practiced
in many Congregations in England) then to have that unnecessary Ceremony
performed by Non-Elders. The Old Doctrine of New England, was, That if the
Church where Ordination is to be performed has not Elders of its own, they
should desire Neighbor Elders to Assist in the Ordination of their Pastor, and
that with Imposition of hands as well as with Fasting and Prayer Most true it
is, that we read not in the New Testament of the Imposition of hands by
Non-Elders, because then Elders were not wanting to perform that Service and to
make use of Non Elders in this affair when Elders might be obtained is not
decent, nor approved of by those great Divines that do not absolutely deny the
Lawfulness of such a practice. I shall only add, that Daneus, in his Commentary
on 1 Timothy 5 22. p. 361. does not only maintain that imp^sition of hands is not a
necessary Ceremony in the Constitution of a Minister, but says, that it is
Fatuity to do as the Papists do, in making the Essence of a Legitimate vocation
to the Ministry, to consist therein, and that to make it a Question, whether
the same person may receive imposition of hands more than once; is to propose a
vain and inept Question, beca^se it is not material whether it be ever done at
all.

QUESTION XIII. MAY a man be Ordained a Pastor, Except to a particular Church,
and in the presence of that Church?
Answ. There are two parts of this Question, which we shall Answer distinctly.

1. We assert that no man ought to be Ordained a Pastor, Except unto a
particular Church. For,

1 We have no Instance in the Scripture of ordinary Officers Ordained, Except
unto a particular Flock. Act 14 23. They Ordained Elders by E^ection (so does
the Geneva Translation read the words truly enough as that Learned Knight, Sir
Norton Knat^hbull In Animadv. in Libr. N. T.
has critically evinced) in every Church. Paul left it in Charge with Titus,
that he should Ordain Elders in every City. Tit. 1.5. He was not to Ordain them
to be Individua vaga, but a particular place, a City wherein was some Church
was assign^d to them to Labor in. He might not (as Mr. Baynes and from him
Altar Damascen. p. 209.
Didoclavius speaks) Ordain Elders as the University Creates Doctors of
Physic, without assigning them any Patients, or as they make Masters of Art
w^^hout providing for them any Scholars.

2. Pastor and Flock are Relates, and therefore one cannot be without the
other. It is contrary to the Rules of Reason (as Logicians know) that the
Relate should be without its Correlate. V^e^ de despe^. c^usa p^p^tus. p. 238.
To say that a Wandering Lesvite who has no Flock is a Pastor, is as good sense
as to say, that he that has no Children is a Father, and that the man who has
no Wife is a Husband Nor may it be pretended that the Catholic Church is his
Flock. For (not to insist on the common Protestant Doctrine that the Catholic
Church ^s Invisible; as comprehending all true Believers from Abel to the End
of the World)

3. A Pastor is under an Obligation to feed every one that is of the Flock
which he is a Pastor unto. Act. 20 28. Take heed therefore to your selves, and
to all the F^ck over which the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers is any mere
man able to feed all that Fl^ck of the Church Catholic Visible? A Minister
must give an account concerning every Soul in that Flock which he is the Pastor
of* Heb. 13 17 They that say they are Pastors of the Catholic Church, may do
well to think what account they can give of the ten thousands of Souls
belonging to their Flock that were never instructed nor fed by them.

4. Supposing a man to have a Particular Church to which he is related, if he
is a Pastor to other Churches besides that, then it is not in the power of that
Church to deprive him of his Pastoral Office. If they should reject him and
that deservedly from being their Pastor, he may pretend, I am a Pastor of the
Catholic Church, and will be so, do you do your worst. This favors of the
Papists indelible Character, who pretend that if a man has been once Ordained,
he can never be a Laic again. Then a person who is justly not only deposed from
his Office, but Excommunicated, may be a Pastor still. And if so, then he that
is not so much as a Member of the Visible Church may yet be a Pastor of the
Church Catholic, for one justly Excommunicate, is no longer of Christ's
Visible Kingdom, being Authoritatively delared to belong unto Satan. Our
Discipline declares not only that such as never were related to a particular
Flock, but such as have been, but now are not so related, to be no Church
Officers. The words in the Platform, Ch 9 S. 7 Are, He that is clearly loosed
from his Office relation unto that Church whereof he was a Minister, cannot be
looked at as an Officer, nor perform any act of Office in any other Church,
unless he be again orderly called unto Office.

5. When Ordinations at large did wi^h other Corruptions creep into the
Church^s, (...) whole Synod found it necessary not only to bear witness against
that practice, but to declare such Ordinations to be void and null, and the
Ordainers liable to Censure. It is well observed by the Ingenuous Writer of the
History of the Council of Trent Hist. Trid Conc L. 6. p. 550,
that in the Golden Times of Christianity, no Persons were Ordained but to a
particular Ministry; but that this pious Institution was soon Corrupted,
Bishops Ordaining men that had no Election by any Church. This caused great
Confusion as the Magdeburgensian Historians have noted. As a Remedy, the
Council of Calcedon made a decree against all such Ordinations. The Sixth Canon
of that Synod declares, That if any man shall be Ordained absolutely, that is
to the Catholic without relation to a particular Church, the Imposition of
Hands which he has received shall be null, and that he shall not Serve in the
Church, to the dishonor of them that have Ordained him. This Decree was
Confirmed by other Synods afterward, so that it became a general Rule in the
Church, that no man should be Ordained without a Title. But the forementioned
Historian (with many others) takes notice that this Rule was in process of time
perverted* For whereas at first to have a Title was to have a particular
Church, afterward to have a Title was to have Money. The Canons of the Church
of England will not permit any one to be Ordained without a Title, but they too
much comply with the Papists in allowing those to have Titles who have none
such as the Calcedonian Council intended.

6. The impleaded Ordinations are contrary to the Judgment of our Eminent
Divines, and to the practice of some of the best P^^formed Churches. Junius
Animadvea^. in Bellarm. Contrum. 5. cap 3. etc. 7.
declares his Approbation of the mentioned Canon of the Calced^^ Synod, And
that since an Elder is not Ordained to the Ministry absolu^ely, but to the
Minister of this or that Church in particular, it is fit that the Church should
be concerned in the Ordination. And that in the Apostolical Times in the
Ordina^ion of a M^nister, there was first a Cheirotonia or E^ection by the
People, and th^n a Cheirothesia or imposition of hands; That these two were
always joined together as the Antecedent and Consequent. Mr. 2 d Reply p. 272.
Cartwright says that after E^ection follows Ordination which is a Solemn
investing or putting a Minister into the Possession of that Office whereunto he
was before Chosen To the like purpose does Dr Whitaker speak; It is needless,
and would be endless to heap up Testimonies concerning this, since it is a
Common received opinion amongst our Divines, (we must always except pre^atical
ones) that the Election of a Minister by the Church should precede his
Ordinat^^n* One of the Articles of the Ecclesiastical discipline of the French
Protestants, is, Ministers shall not be Ordained without Assigning them a
particular Flock So in the Kirk of Scotland one Article of their Polity is See
the History of the Church of Scotland p. 105.
All Office bearers should have their own particular Flocks, amongst whom they
Exercise their particular Charge; as I find it Expressed by Mr Calderwood.
That Learned Altar damasc. p. 209.
Author disapproveth of the Impleaded Ordinations, because they make a man to
be a Minister only Inpotentia, but not in actu. Indeed Mr Rutherford has such
strange words as these, ^t is presupposed that A B is Ordained a Pastor before
the People can Elect him for their Pastor. Mr. Hooker replies to him that he
finds Bellarmine speaking just after that manner, which caused Dr. Ames to tell
him, that he disputed preposterously, and did set the Cart before the Horse,
when he placed Ordination before Election. But notwithstanding Mr. Rutherford
in that particular Notion deserts the Common Protestant Doctrine, in another
place he has these words, A Pastor is only the Pastor of that Flock over which
the Holy Ghost by the Churches Authority has set him as their Pastor, yet so as
when he Preaches in another Congregation, he cease not to be a Pastor,
howbeit not the Pastor of that Flock; in saying which he yields the cause
wholly as Mr. Survey of Church Discipline p. 2 p 61.
Hooker tells him. So then we are now agreed. I shall only add, that the United
Brethren in London declare that Ordinarily, None shall be Ordained to the work
of the Ministry, but such as are called and chosen thereunto by a particular
Church. And that Learned Presbyterian Mr. Gillespy affirms, Engl* pop. Cere
part. 3. chap. 8.
That Ordination ought to be given to him on^y who is Elected, and that because
he is Elected.

As for the other part of the Q^estion, Whether Ordination ought not to be
performed in the presence of that Church where the Minister is to Serve? The
Answer is, That O^dinarily it ought to be The O^dinations which we read of in
the Scripture were so. I^ a People who are remote from all Ministers fit to
Ordain, desire one whom they have Elected to be Ordained for them in anoth^r
Land, by a Solemn Separation of him to that Service of Christ, with Fasting and
P^ayer and Imposition of hands; tha^s a ^a^e ca^e, and I know not why in such a
case there may not be an Ordination though the Church is not (because they
cannot be present. But if there are Elders in the place where the Minist^r is
to dispense the Mysteries of the Gosp^l, for him to receive Ordination not in
the presence of his Church, is irregular and contrary to Scripture Example. In
the Primitive Times of Christianity, Ordinations were perf^rmed not only with
the Consent, but in the presence of the Church, yea, of the whole Church in
which any Pastor was to Preside. Cyprian L. 1. Epist. 4.
affirms that no Ordination is rightly performed except the People to whom the
Pastor is Ordained be present: He declares this to be according to the Doctrine
and Practice of the Apostles. In the third Century it was thus practiced both
in the Asian, and in the African Churches. Thus was Origin v Eusebius. L 6. c 8,
10.
Ordained. And another instead of Narcissus who was withdrawn from his
Pastoral care of the Church in those days in Jerusalem. The Magdeburgerses
Cent. 3. cap. 6. p. mihi. 94, 102.
in their Ecclesiastical History note that if any Bishop was to be Ordained
they sent (not to Ministers in another Province a Thousand Miles distant but)
to Neighbor Pastors for their Approbation, Convenie^ant fratres omnes (say
they) all the Brethren came together, and when the Election was over, they
pr^ceeded to an Ordination with the Imposition of hands, Praesente universo
populo, in the presence of all the People Thus also it is amongst the Reformed
Churches in France. There was a Time when some young Scholars of the French
Nation, having had their Education in the University of Leyden in Holland
received Ordination from the hands of Dutch Divines, at which the Presbyterians
in France were dissatisfyed: For which cause the Synod at Gerge^^ in the year
1601. made it one of their decrees, See Mr. Quicks Synodicon.
That Letters be written to the Doctors and Professors of Divinity, in the
University of Leyden, entreating them not to Ordain the French Proposants
Studients in their University; but when they have finished their Course of
Theology, to send them into France, that here being called to the Ministry,
they may receive imposition of hands in the face of our Churches.

QUESTION XIV. IS the Practice of the Churches of New England in granting
Letters of Recommendation or Dismission from one Church to another according to
Scripture and the Example of other Churches?
Answ. It is so. See Act. 18* 27. Romans 16.1, 2 That this was an usual Practice
in the Churches in the Apostolical Times, is plain from 1 Cor. 16.3. and 3.1.
Col. 4 10, 11.3 Job. 3.8, 9, 10. This practice was continued in the Churches
after the Apostolical Times. Polycarp in his Epistle to the Church at Philippi
recommends Crescens with his Sister to their Communion, testifying that their
Conversation had been blameless. The Greek Churches called such Letters as the
Scriptures do Systatick Epistles or Letters of Recommendation. In the Latin
Churches they were called Literae Communicatoriae. Tertullian calls them
Literas pacis. That in the Primitive Times such Letters were in use may be seen
in Tom 2. Anno 142.
Baronius. And that something of this nature was practiced in the Fourth
Century is manifest from a decree of the first Council in Carthage M^gd^b.
cent. 4 c 9 p. 402.
That no one shall Communicate in another Church without a Letter from the
Bishop of his own Church. Nazianzene in one of his Orations against Julian the
Apostate speaks of these Letters And several Ancient Synods make mention both
of Literal Commendatitiae, and Literae dimisseriae And some of the Protestant
Reformed Churches practice as the Churches of New England do as to th^^ matter.
So in v. La R^que. p 145.
France. And in H^lland several of their Synods have Commended this practice of
the Churches, that when persons remove from one Church to another in order to
their partaking at the Lords Table, they should bring Letters Testimoni^l with
them. Some of their greatest D^vines have written in Defense of it. Dr Hornbeck
In Epist. ad Durcum. p. 111.
Commends the Churches of New England for this their Profession and practice.
The famous Gilbert V^etius who has be^n esteemed the most Learned man in the
World; In Answer to that Question, Whether in the Translation of (...) from
(...) Church to another, Letters (...) and Testimonial are not requisite?
A^^wers, de pol. Eccles part. 1 c. 4 p. 67.
(...) Ecclesiasticus et (...) in Ecclesi^^ Belgicis. (...) ^^quires that it
should be (...) And (...) custom ob^ains in the Du^ch Churches. He gives
diverse Reasons for it.

1. Such Letters will serve instead of a new Examination and Trial which is
necessary when persons are first Admitted into the Church.

2. Because otherwise Churches may be imposed upon, so as to receive Members
who are unfi^, and it may be under offense in the Churches from whence they
come.

3. To receive the Members of another Church without the Approbation of that
Church to which they do belong, is the way to make difference in Churches, and
to set them one against another Thus that Learned man. Granting of Letters
Testimonial was pr^ctised in the Churches in Guernsey when first Reformed:
Their Ecclesiastical Discipline was the Composure of the famous Thomas
Cartwright (as the Ministers in that Island assured me, when I had my
Conversation amongst them many years since) Now one Article of their Discipline
is, That there shall not he received to the Lords Supper any one of other
Parishes without Good Testimony from his Pastor, or of two of the Elders where
there is no Minister. Although it is true, that no Church ought to be made a
P^ison, It is nevertheless a Sin for any Church Member to leave that Church
where the Providence of God has set him without just cause. It is a Violation
of his Church Covenant. The removal of a Member from a Church does tend to the
weakening of that Church If one may depart without just reason, why not an
other, and a third, and ten, twenty, and more, until the Church is in a manner
dissolved. And therefore it is rational that if Members of Churches desire to
remove their Relation to another Church, they should acquaint their own Church
with their desires, and the reason thereof that so if they are justifiable,
they may have a Loving Dismission, but if otherwise that they may be Convinced
of their Error, and desist from their purpose. It is no sign of Wisdom for a
man so to abound in his own sense, as not to ask the Advice of others (the
Church especially to which he is related) ^n a matter of such moment Prove.
11.14 and 12.15. Letters of Dismission are requisite that so it may be known
that his departure is not offensive. By the Letters in Controversy nothing else
is intended, but Letters Testimonial from some Church of Christ, or the Elders
thereof, Concerning some of their Communion removing from them to another
People, be it for lesser or longer Time. The sorts of these Letters are diverse
according to the Occasions of the person for whom they are written. It is only
for distinction sake that some are called Letters of Dismission, others Letters
of Recommendation. For if we speak exactly, both of them are Letters of
Recommendation, containing some T^stimonials for the party, and both of them
are Letters of Dismission, as signifying that he goes with the consent of the
Church, whether it be with a purpose to return, or for continuance with those
unto whom he is going In the Heads of Agreement assented to by our Presbyterian
and Congregational Brethren in London, These are some, That a Visible professor
joined to a Particular Church ought to continue steadfastly with the said
Church, and not forsake the Ministry and Ordinances there dispensed without an
orderly seeking a Recommendation to another Church. Again they say, We ought
not to Admit any one to be a Member of our respective Congregations that has
joined himself to another, without Endeavors of Mutual Satisfaction of the
Congregations concerned.

QUESTION. XV. IS not the asserting that a Pastor may Administer the Sacrament
to another Church besides his own Particular Flock, at the desire of that other
Church, a declension from the First Principles of New England, and of the
Congregational Way?
Answ. Not at all. For our Platform of Church Discipline does not at all
contradict it, but rather approve of it, Chapt. 15 S. 4 And some of the First
Eminent Ministers in New England have defended the lawfulness of such a
practice. So Mr. Norton in his Answer to Apollony, Mr. Shepard of Cambridge,
and Mr. Allin of Dedham in their Answer to Mr Ball. And my Father in a Letter
of his to Mr. Hooker, bearing Date Nov 6 1645. Gives such Reasons for it as
are not easy to be answered. Dr. Goodwin who was a Pillar amongst
Congregationals, declares his Judgment fully in the Affirmative, and this not
only in a Letter written not long before his Translation to Glory, of which I
have elsewhere given an account, but in his Discourse of Church Government, in
his fourth Volum^ lately published, which was written long before that Letter,
and where in he shows that such an occasional Exercise of Ministerial Power in
another Church at their Request will not Infer any such Jurisdicti^n as that
which the Presbyterian Brethren plead for. We shall for the satisfaction of
those that have not that Book of the Doctors, cause his words to be
Transcribed. He thus speaks, B. 5* Chapter 10 p. 232.
It is one thing that there may Occasionally be an Exercising of an Elders
Power in another Congregation, and it is another thing that it should be
assumed and challenged, which is the thing that remains further to be proved by
the Presbyterial Divines. As it is one thing for a Child under Age, though he
should not Govern himself, to have Liberty to choose a Guardian for the Time,
but it is another thing that a Company of men should assume to be his Guardians
for ever. It will be one thing for a Corporation to send to another Corporation
for their Recorder, a man skilful in the Law, to perform the Office of a
Recorder with a Jury at their Session, they now wanting one, or there falling
out a Case of difficulty, wherein their own does need Assistance; but it will
be another thing for the Recorders of several Corporations in a Cou^ty to go
and challenge by virtue of Association, and the Common Law of Communion in the
Kingdom, a constant power of Jurisdiction to be Exercised over them.

And in this case the Communion of Churches in r^spect of Members Qua Members,
and of E^ders, Qua Elders answer one another, according to our principles. For
as the Members of another Church, if they come to a Particular Church, and are
received by their Consent by them, and so for that Time become as one body with
them, by virtue whereof they receive the Sacrament amongst them, as being for
this act incorporated and as one bread with them occasionally, in this do not
receive merely and simply as Members of another Church, distinctly and a (...)
considered, although by virtue of their being Members of (...) are thereby for
that Time occasionally received into that Church ad tantum so far as to Enjoy
such and such a privilege, so as the Sacrament in this, is not said to be
given to the Members of two Churches apart considered, but to one Church as
thus making one, though upon a differing respect; and so it is also in their
receiving Elders (if we may make that supposition) to perform Acts of Eldership
occasionally, they do it not in this single and apart Consideration that they
are simply E^ders of other Churches, as if considered only as such they may
make a Consistory met out of this Church to be over this Church, and so
Excommunicate, but they come to and are present in and with that Church being
called by them, and received as Elders for that Act, and for that Time as one
with them, so as the Acts which they do perform are Acts of that Church, or of
Elders in that Church, and are not to be considered as Acts of other Elders
that have no power over that Church. Thus far Dr. Goodwin. And that this
accords with the Judgment of Congregational Divines, and was also practiced in
the next Ages to the Apostles, when Polycarp Pastor of the Church in Smyrna
administered the Sacrament to the then Church of Saints in Rome, I have more
fully declared in an Answer to this Question, which was printed in the Year,
1693. And thus it was practiced in the Churches of New England in their
beginning Times! For when Mr. Wilson, Pastor of the only Church then in Boston,
was absent from his Flock in a Voyage for England, Mr. Phillips, Pastor of the
Church in Watertown, administered the Lords Supper to the Church in Boston. This
was above threescore years since. And thus did Mr. Eliot, (a zealous man for
the Order of the Gospel, practiced in the Platform of Discipline) practice
forty years ago in the Indian Churches.

QUESTION. XVI. IS it a Duty for Christians in their Prayers to make use of the
words of that which is Commonly called the Lords Prayer?
Answ. It cannot be proved that this is a duty. The Question is not whether it
is Lawful to make use of those words in Prayer. No man can rationally doubt,
but that the words in that as well as the words of other Prayers in the
Scripture may be made use of in our Addresses to Heaven. The Rigid Separatists
will not deny this. Mr. Aynsworth says, v Mr. Pagets Arrow against Separation.
p. 4, 63.
We hold it Good and Holy to use aright any of the Lords Prayers, or any words
of Scripture, or those or any of those Petitions taught us in Matthew. 6. or Luke
11. in the words of either Evangelist, or other words as the Spirit of God
which helps us to Pray, leads us to any of them Likewise Mr. Robinson In his
Answer to Mr. Bernard p. 469.
who was a Rigid Separatist until Dr. Ames convinced him of his Error therein,
He says, We hold it Lawful to use th^se very words in our Prayers, all, or any
part of them, if we be thereunto Guided by the Holy Spirit in whom we must
always Pray, and by whose help we must make our Requests unto God. Doubtless
then Congregational men will concede as much as this comes to. Mr. Jeremiah
Buroughs (a famous Divine of the Congregational Persuasion) once when he
Preached his Expository Lectures was prevented from coming to the Assembly
exactly at the Hour appointed, If he should at that time have enlarged in
Prayer as he usually did, the Auditors would have been detained longer then
they expected. Nor was he willing to begin his Exposi^ion without any Prayer at
all, he therefore began it with only Praying in the words of the Lords Prayer.
This report I believe; for my m^st D^ar and Honored Fri^nd Dr. William Bates,
late Pastor of a Church in Hackney near Lond^n (whom for Honors sake I
mention) assured me that he was then present and an Ear Witness of what I have
now related But the Question is, Whether this is necessary: Not whether a
Minister may without Sin make use of the words of the Lords Prayer, but whether
he Ought to do it, and Consequently shall be guilty of Sin if he does it not.
The Question being so stated we defend the Negative. Let it be considered.

1. That our Saviors words are, After this manner pray ye. Mat. 6.9. Whence
Austin Lib. de Magistro. cap. 1.
concludes that Christ taught his Disciples not what words they should use in
Prayer, but what things they should pray for. To the same purpose does Beda
speak. And this also is the sense of Calvin, Musculus, Piscator, Bertram, and
of Grotius himself, that our Savior did not intend that His Disciples were
bound to recite those words in Prayer, nor would He tie them to the use of
Syllables. Nor indeed is it probable that our Lord in the midst of his (...)
would prescribe a Form of Words to His Disciples* Whence Mr. Joseph Mede (a
great Conformist) concludes, See his Works. Fol. 2.
That when those words were first uttered, the Disciples understood not that
their Master intended it for a Form of Prayer, but for a Pattern or Example
only. He that prays for any thing not contained in that Platform of Prayer,
does not pray after that manner, but he that does with Faith pray for the
things comprehended therein, although he should not use one Expression in it,
but other words importing that sense, does truly Pray after that manner. It is
Pleaded that in Luke the words are When you pray, say; but that may well be
interpreted not as intending say these words, but these things in your prayers:
So does Grotius give the sense of them. When Moses was charged, Thou shall say
unto Pharaoh, etc. Exodus 4.22. He did not think that he was obliged to say
those very words, only to Express that thing: Nor did he in deliv^^^ng his
Message tie himself to those words and syllables. The like may be here
affirmed. Moreover, most of those that do Say the Lords Prayer, do not say as
it is in Luke.

2 The two Evangelists in their Reciting that Prayer have not the same words.
Whence we conclude that it was given only as a Platform or Directory for
Prayer, and not as a Form which we may not vary from. In Luke there is no Amen
concluding the Prayer nor any Doxology, besides the words both in the fourth
and in the fifth Petition are not just the same words with those in Matthew.
N^w if the meaning of Pray after this manner, and of when you pray, say, is,
that we are in duty bound to use those words and syllables as a Form, whose
Form must we follow? whether that of Matthew, which is part of Christ's Sermon
on the Mount? or that in Luke which was taught the Disciples in another place,
and on another occasion, near upon a year and half after the Former? Dr.
Lightfoot in vol. 2. fol. 1138.
tells us that the Jews concluded their Prayers in Synagogues, and private
Houses with saying Amen; but that they never said Amen in the Temple, but
instead thereof, they concluded with saying these Words, Blessed ^e Name of the
Glory of his Kingdom forever and ever. I remember a Jewish Rabbi says that
those words were the usual Prayer of their Father Jacob, but the Doctor thinks
that the Doxology is omitted in Luke, and added in Matthew, to instruct us that
we should use this Form, both in Public and in Private. Yet this Answers not
the Question, which of these Forms is to be used; which of them in Public, and
which in Priva^^? If we must kee^ exactly to the Jewish mode of worship, the
Form in Matthew must not be used in (...) Cathedral which answers to the
Temple, because it concludes with Amen. Nor must the ^^rm in Luke, because it
wants the (...), which is peculiar to the Temple. The Gospel does not require
nor approve o^ Indai^ing in Christians.

3 That Common Argum^^^, however (...) by Mr. (...) ^
which many have p^^duced to (...) usage of (...) Lords (...), deserves ^urther
(...) then it would be unlawful (...) th^se words and (...). When it is (...),
and when you Pray, say, those w^rds of our Savior are not a (...), but an
absolute Commandment. When (...), that is, Whenever you pray. As, when you give
A^ms, is as much as to say, when ever you give Alms. Thus when s^ever a
Ch^ist^an (...), he must pray after that manner which Christ in his Sermon on
the Mount prescribed. If therefore the meaning of Pray thus, is, use these very
words, it would not be Lawful at any time to vary from them. Which no man will
be so unreasonable as to affirm. It would be less proper for a Christian in his
Closet to speak in the plural ^^mber. Indeed the Superstitious Jews made a
Canon that their Compendious Prayer, which they call Majan q. d a Fountain
Prayer, and require their Disciples to say it Eighteen times every day, shall
be Expressed in the plural number, though he that says it has no man with him,
and they make him Guilty of Sin that shall Pray that Prayer in the singular
number though in his Closet, because he must never look on himself as Separated
from the Synagogue. But does any man believe, that if a Christian shall say,
give me my daily bread, forgive my debts, lead not me into Temptation, deliver
me from evil, that he offends by not speaking plurally in the very Syllables of
the Lords Prayer? It would be so, if the design of the precept were to tie us
up to Words and Syllables.

4. There are few of those who use the Lords Prayer, that keep to the words
either of Matthew or of Luke in their saying of it. For in the Fifth Petition
they vary therefrom. The words in Matthew are, Forgive us our debts as we
forgive our debtors, Math. 6.12. The words in Luke are, Forgive us our Sins,
for we also forgive every one that is indebted to us, Luke 11.4. When as they
that say the Lords Prayer use the words which are in the Liturgy, viz Forgive
us our Trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us. It will be said,
that is the same thing though not the same words with the other. But this is to
give up the cause, since our Question is not concerning things but words.
Moreover, by this small alteration of the words a Great Truth, viz. That our
Sins are our Debts, is lost. Cyprian is justly blamed for making a little
change in the Sixth Petition, for he expresses it, Ne patiaris nos induci etc
Suffer us not to be led into Temptation, whereby a great and mysterious Truth
respecting the Activity of Providence in Leading men into Temptation is
obscured. They that pretend they are bound in Conscience to use the Lords
Prayer as a Form, and so to keep exactly to the words therein contained, are
not able to Extricate themselves from this Argument against them. Nor can I
give any reason why they express the Fifth Petition as they commonly do,
excepting this, that they have taken their use of the Lords Prayer, not out of
the Bible but out of the Common Prayer Book.

5. It cannot be proved that either Christ on his Apostles did use this Prayer
as a Form. A most Heavenly Prayer made by our Savior, is recited in the 17 th
of John, but He did not conclude with the words of this prayer* We find in Acts
1.24 And in Act. 4 24. That the Apostles prayed in Church-Meetings, but not
that they did either begin or conclude with the recitation of the Lords Prayer.
Durandus Rationale Divin. Li. 4 c. 1* and cap 47.
boldly affirms, That the Apostles Consecrated the Eucharist, by repeating the
words of Institution, and super-adding the Lords Prayer. And that Peter did at
first so Celebrate that O^dinance in the Oriental Parts where he Resided for
the space of four years. I doubt not but that this is as true, as what he
further says, that afterward that Apostle caused three Prayers more to be
added to the Mass There is no more proof that the Apostles any of them used to
say the Lords Prayer, then there is that the Liturgy fat^^red on James was
wri^^en by him; the vanity whereof has been sufficiently discovered by our
Protestant Divines. That Incomparable Divine and Casuist, Dr. Ames, Cas. Consc
L. 4. c. 17.
judges that we may conclude that the Lords Prayer was not given as a Form,
but as a Platform, because the Scriptute says nothing of the Ap^stles so using
it. Neither do the Apostles or Evangelists in any of their Writings Exhort
Christians unto the formal usage of that Holy Directory for prayer. Nor do we
read any thing of that matter in the next Age after the Apostles. Eusebius L. 4
c. 15.
has record^d an Excellent Prayer made by Polycarp when he Suffered Martyrdom;
but although he prayed after that manner which the Lords Prayer requires, there
is not one sen^ence of that prayer in his. Justin Martyr gives an account of
what was practiced in the Assemblies of Christians in those days, viz. of their
Reading the Scriptures, Preaching thereon, Prayers, Administration of Baptism
and the Lords Supper, but has not the least hint of their using to repeat the
Lords Prayer, which had it then been Customary, no doubt he would have
mentioned it as he does some other things which were deviations from the
Apostolical practice, particularly that of sending the Eucharist to such as
were absent. It is true, that in the third Century, the Lords prayer was used
in some of the Assemblies of Christians, yet not in all of them, only when the
Communicants were by themselves alone: They never repeated that prayer if any
that were only Catechumens happened to be present. Nor might Hanc orationem
baptizati orant August Epist. 54.
such use it until they were baptized. They supposed it unlawful for
Unregenerates to call God their Father. The Writings of Austin In Matthew Homil
18. and 2 Cor Homil. 2.
and Chrysostom and others of the Ancients have made this indisputable. There
is an expression in Tertullian Praemissa Legitima oratione. Tertull de (...).
p. 6^9.
from whence some have gathered, that in those days Christians did not Conclude
but Begin their prayers with the Lords Prayer. Nevertheless, they did not think
it necessary. It is evident that Origin did sometimes use this prayer; but
without an opinion of its being necessary. For when he writes concerning a
method of prayer, he advises to begin and end with Doxologies: but he does not
advise to begin or to end with the Lords prayer. Clemens Alexandrinus concludes
his last Book of Pedagogy with prayer, yet not with the Lords Prayer. This
enervates what Mr. Richard Ward and other object, viz. That if the Lords
prayer, was given only to be a rule, and not enjoined as a form, then
Christians for 1500 years together did not understand the true meaning of Mat.
6 9. But suppose that an hundred years after the Apostles were all dead, this
Formality had been generally practiced, we could not from thence infer, that it
was so in their days. For Innovations and Declensions from the Primitive
Purity were soon brought in unawares amongst the Churches. In Tertullians Time,
they Prayed toward the East. Origin also advises it; but the Apostles never
gave that Advice* In those days they used Exorcisms, signing with the Cross
and Chrism in Baptism. All which things were Corruptions in Religion, and are
now rejected by most of the Reformed Churches In those Times also, they put
especial respect upon Wednesdays and Fridays, which in Tertullian are called
Stationum dies. Because Christ was Sold on a Wednesday, and Crucified on a
Friday they would have more devotion on those (...) on other days in the week.
These were Early Superstitions And although we read nothing of their keeping
the Feast of Christ's Nativity for more than an hundred years after this;
nevertheless, Whitsunday and Pentecost was observed in Commemoration of the
descent of the Holy Ghost on the Apostles. Also Lent and Easter were accounted
Sacred Times. The observation of Easter was as ancient as Polycarp, who was the
Disciple of the Apostle John. Presently after Polycarp, Christians used every
year to observe a day in Commemoration of the Death Days which they called the
Birth Days of their Martyrs. I have mentioned these particulars to show that
the Argument from the practice of Churches after the ^postles Days, is not
conclusive except it can be proved that the Scripture does warrant such a
practice, and then it is ex abundanti, recommended to us, 1 Cor. 11.16.

6. Other Arguments besides that of Ancient Custom which are commonly alleged
for useing the Lords Prayer as a Form, do not carry Conviction with them. It is
pleaded, that our Prayers are Imperfect, when as this Form contains in it all
that we are to pray for, therefore to make up the Defects of our Prayers, we
must subjoyn this. To which has been replied, that the Decalogue does contain
in it, all the Duties which God requires of men, Matthew 22 40. But it does not
therefore follow that Ministers should conclud their Imperfect Sermons, with a
Recitation of the Ten Commandment. No more are they bound to a Repetition of
the Lords Prayer, at the Conclusion of their own imperfect ones. Moreover, we
may not think that Words and Syllables will make amends for the Defect of our
Prayers; for that is (as shall be further said) to give to them what is proper
to the Merit and Intercession of the Lord Jesus Christ. It is also pretended
that every Rabbi or Master amongst the Jews delivered a Form of Prayer, to his
Disciples. That John Baptist did so: And that in Conformity hereunto, the
Disciples Petitioned Christ to give them a Form, which he granted their desires
in: And that he took every Sentence of this which we call the Lords Prayer out
of the Jews Common Prayer Book at that time used amongst them, and willed his
Disciples to use it as a Form. Thus do some say. And all this is sooner said
than proved. Some have told us of things in the Jewish Rituals which others
could never find there. Baronius, Casaubon and many besides, say, that it was
usual amongst the Jews to wash th^^r feet before they sat down to eat the
Passover, and that therefore what is recorded, Joh. 13.5. was nothing but a
Jewish custom used at the Passover. Yet Buxtorf (who was as much conversant in
the Writings of the Jews as any man in the world) says, that if a man reads
over all their Ritual Books, and the whole Talmud besides, he will not find any
such thing therein. Other particulars relating to the Administration of the
Lords Supper, are by Genebrard, Scaliger, (with many more) pretended to be in
imitation of what is in the Jewish Rituals, whom the Learned Reader may see
refuted by Buxtorf in his Dissertation de Caena Dominica. The like to this may
be affirmed with respect to the Subject before us. But supposing (which yet
remains to be demonstrated) the Disciples were to use this prayer as a Form
whilst they continu^d under the Jewish Pedagogy, it cannot from thence be
concluded that Believers under the New Testament are bound so to use it. There
are some Lerrned men that do allow the Lords Prayer to have been a prescribed
Form, that do not think it to be designed for the perpetual use of the Church
as such, but only for a Temporary Form. And that after our Lords Resurrection
and Ascension, they should no longer use it as a Form, because therein is no
express mention of the name of Christ, nor asking Blessings for his sake, nor
ascribing praises to God through him, which after his accomplishing the work of
Redemption, ought to be. Thus do they interpret that Scripture, Jo^. 16 24.
However it does not follow that it a Form were proper and needful for the Jews,
that such things are necessary for Christians in the days of the Gospel,
wherein there is a more pl^ntiful eff^sion of the spirit of praye^ (...) 12.10
We say not that all Forms are (...). No d^ubt but that a man who has (...) of
prayer, (...) better make use of a Form of his o^n composing or taken out of
some good Book, (but I would not advise to take one out of the Mass Book) to
worship God with, in his Family, then not to have any Religious Worship at all
therein. But if that man shall afterward ^e blessed with a Gift of Prayer, for
him to tie himself to a Form is (as uses to be said) like as if one that has
used C^^^ches whilst he was weak, should continue to use them (...) he has
gained strength. What Liturgies (...) Jews had whilst they were yet the Church
of God, we know not. Nor is there any great Credit to be given to what their
Rabbis who are made up of Fables, shall think meet to tell us. Some of
themselves confess that Forms of Prayer were not always used by their Fathers.
Saubertus in his late Learned Academical Disquisitions, Cites a passage of R.
Bechai, V. Sauber^ Palaestra p. 123.
who says, That from the time of Moses until the Great Sanedrim, there was no
ordinary Form of Prayer amongst the Israelites, but every man made a prayer for
himself, according to what knowledge and gift of utterance he was endued with.
If the Jews had Prayer Books of Humane Composure in our Saviors Time, (as our
Liturgical men are persuaded) it is too much boldness to Conjecture that the
Lord borrowed the Petitions in the Lords prayer from them. What though Grotius,
v. Dr Tailors ductor d^^it. Lib. 2. c. 3. R 15.
and others find Expressions like those, in Jews Prayer Books? It does not
necessarily follow that they were taken from thence. Dr. Lightfoot Joh* 1. p.
1003.
charge the Jews with Fi^^hing out of the Gospel, particularly that they have
Stolen those words, Thy Kingdom come, and those, Lead us not into Temptation,
and inserted them into their Liturgies This seem^ more probable, then that the
Lord should take (...) Prayer out of their Service Books. It was counted
Blasphemy in Celsus, when he affirmed that Christ borrowed many of his Divine
Notions out of Plato Mr. Boyse mentions an horrid Assertion of Dr. Combers in
his pretend^d Answer to Mr. Clarksons unanswerable discourse of Liturgies, viz.
That our Savior was so afraid of Innovation as to take every Sentence of the
Lords prayer out of the Jewish Forms then in use. In that degenerate Age was he
afraid to teach any thing that would seem New to them! How then did some who
heard him Preach, say, What new Doctrine is this? Mar. 1.27. Was the Lord who
did so often reprove them for their Formality in Worship, Afraid of Innovation
if they should change their Vain Conversation received by Tradition from their
Fathers? Was tha^ admirable Directory for prayer which none but he who is the
Wisdom o^ G^d could be the Author of, all borrow^d out of Jewish Common
Prayer-Books, devis^d by no man knows who? Credat Judaeus Apella.

7. That many have Superstitiously abused this blessed portion of Scripture,
cannot be denied. They have set up the Lords Prayer in the room of Christ
himself, imagining that God will accept of their other Petitions for the sake
of their repeating this Form, as if that would Sanctify and make amends for
the defects in their prayers, which to do belongs to the Mediator, nor can any
thing else do it. The Judicious Alting Theol. problem p 740.
giv^th this caution, That in using the Lord Prayer men should be careful of
Superstition in thinking that there is a Latent Efficacy in Words and
Syllables. Papists will say their Pater Noster more often in an hour, then the
Jews do their Majan prayer in a day, superstitiously dreaming that the
pronouncing of those Letters and Syllables will save them. One of the most
moderate Montaigne Essays. Chapter ^6 p. 172.
and ingenuous of their Writers speaks thus, Both rising and going to bed,
sitting down and rising from board, and going about any particular action or
business; I would have all good Christians to say the Pater Noster. It is
(says he) the only Prayer that I use at every place, at all times, and upon
every accident; and instead of changing, I use often Repetition of it. Thus
speaks a Roman Catholic. Nor are all who call themselves Protestants,
altogether free from Superstition in this matter. Many of them are (as Mr.
Fenner speaks) in their saving the Lords Prayer, Guilty of Syllabical Ido^atry.
There are some make a Charm of those Letters and Syllables. What is it better
when persons are Judged to be either innocent or guilty of the Crime of
Witchcraft according as they have power to say or not to say the Lords Prayer?
Whether it was Instituted to be a Form or no, I am sure it was never Instituted
to Try who are Witches: Nor can the Inability of some Persons to pronounce
those Words and Syllables, who can pronounce any other, proceed from natural
causes, but from the operation of Demons. Nor is there certainty in the
Experiment. Glanvil (as I remember) confesses that this kind of Ordeal is
fallible. I shall take notice of but one Allegation more: It is pretended that
our Savior has Obliged us to a Form of Words in the Administration of Baptism,
and of the Lords Supper: And then why not as well to a Form of words in Prayer?
If it were as is objected, there is no consequence in the Argument: It does not
at all follow that if there are some Forms of Divine Institution, that then the
Lords Prayer was given as a Form. Moreover, although it is Lawful and
Commendable in Ministering Baptism to keep to the words of Institution in Matthew.
28.19. Yet neither is this Commanded, but an Agreement in sense is sufficient.
For it is evident that the Apostles did not always keep to that Form. Act
2.38. and 8.16. and 10 48 and 19.5. This is so manifest, as that Aquinas
confesses it, only he supposes that the Apostles had by Revelation a
particular dispensation for their not keeping to the prescribed Form. D^.
Lightfoot says, that when the Apostles Bap^ised Jews, it was in the Name of
Jesus, because the great Controversy amongst them was, Whether Jesus of
Nazareth was the true Messiah; but that when they Baptized the Gentiles where
that Controversy had no footing, they Baptized into the Name of the Father, Son
and Holy Spirit. The Greek and the Latin Church did not keep exactly to the
same Form of words in their Ministering that Holy Ordinance. In the Greek Church
sometimes they said, I Baptize, sometimes, Be thou Baptized: but their usual
Form was, This Servant of Christ is Baptized: Yea they intermixed some words of
their Belief with the words of Institution in their Administering Baptism. Thus
Justin Martyr declares, that Washing with Water is performed in the Name of the
Father of all things, and our Lord God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, and of
the Holy Spirit. Again, he says, in the Name of Christ who was Crucified under
Pontius Pilate. Amongst the Latins they did not keep to the Words and Syllables
of the Institution. For Cyprian says, In nomine, in the Name, but Tertu^lian,
In nomen, INTO the Name, (which is most agreeable to the Original.) And in
another place he does not mention Name in the Form used in Baptism, but says,
Into the Father, Son and Holy Spirit. This variation as to words as long as the
sense and d^sign was the same, they thought was no variation from the Precept.
Of this Judgment are Cartwright, Martinius, and Voetius amongst our Modern
Writers. The like is to be affirmed with respect to the Lords Supper.
Notwithstanding the words of Institution are recited by three of the
Evangelists, and by Paul to the Corinthians, nevertheless they all as to some
words differ, but agree in the Substance of what is by each of them related,
which shows that we are not in the Administration of the Holy Supper, ^imitted
to the use of always the same Words and Syllables It is clear and manifest
from Austin, and others of the Ancients that there was in those days a great
vari^ty used in the Consecration of the Elements. Now if the using the very
words of Institution in Ministering the Sacraments is not Commanded, much less
are we Commanded to use the words Express^d in our Lords Directory for Prayer.
We conclude then that since the use of those words as a Form is only a thing
Indifferent, and not necessary, or a Commanded duty; when the case is so
circumstanced that it cannot be done without Offenee, it is rather a duty and
will be most pleasing to Christ not to use it as a Form. It is a sound
Principle which some of the School men have maintained. Etiam Spiritua^ia non
necessaria sunt fugienda, si exijs Scandalum oritur. Hos. 2.16 1 Cor 10.32

I shall only add, that Biddle (the notorious Socinian) having ass^rted, that
our Savior Prescribed the Lords Prayer to be used as a Form by his Disciples,
Dr. Owen proposes several Queries for him or any on his behalf to Answer; and
amongst others these, Whether the asserting this Form of Words to be used, has
not confirmed many in their Atheistical Blaspheming the Holy Spirit of God, and
His Grace in the Prayers of His People? And whether the Repetition of these
words after men have been long Praying for the things contained in them, as the
manner of some is; be not so Remote from any Pretense or Color of warrant in
the Scriptures, as that it is in plain terms Ridiculous Thus Dr. Owen in his
Answer to Biddle. p. 669.

QUESTION XVII. MAY the Churches under the Presbyterian and Congregational
Discipline maintain Communion with one another, notwithstanding their differing
Sentiments as to Church Government?
Answ. They may and ought to do so. In the Apostolical Churches there were as
great and greater differences in Judgment then are those between the Brethren
of these two Persuasions; who nevertheless did maintain a Christian Communion
with each other, as it was their Duty to do. Romans 14.1, 2. Phil. 3.15, 16. They
have been Confessors, and Fellow Sufferers for bearing witness to the same
Cause of Truth, which should Endear them to each other. In matters of Faith
they all agree. Yea, and in the Substantials of Church Order. They all say,
that there ought to be nothing in the Worship of God, besides what Himself has
appointed. No Officers in the Church, nor Sacrments, nor Censures but what are
the Institutions of Christ. A moderate Presbyterian, and a solid Congregational
man agree in so many things, and differ in so few and small things, that it
would be a shame for them to divide and break Communion about them. A man that
gives himself to Reading and Searching after Truth, may in a few years time,
see cause to differ from himself as much as a Presbyterian and Congregational
man differ from one another. The Provincial Assembly of London in their
Treatise of the Divine Right of the Gospel Ministry. Part 1. p. 191. Speak
respectfully of the New England Platform of Church Discipline, although they
concur not therewith in some particulars, they say concerning the Ministers
(...) New England, that they agree with them wholly in the same Confession of
Faith, and in many things of the greatest concernment in the matter of Church
Discipline. And that those things wherein we differ, are not of such
consequence as to make a Schism between us. They further add, that they can
truly say as their Brethren in New England do in the Preface to the Platform,
(which Preface was written by Mr. Cotton, and approved of by other Elders) that
it is far from us so to attest the Discipline of Christ as to detest the
Disciples of Christ. Dr. Arrowsmith sometimes Regius Professor of Divinity in
the University of Cambridge, notwithstanding his being a Presbyterian, calls
the Ministers in New England, Fratres nostr^s jure nobis dilectissi^^s; Our
Brethren deservedly most dear unto us. V. Tactica sacra. p. 115. The Godly
Learned Mr. Rutherford has declared, that if the Congregationals would all come
up to what Mr. Cotton asserts in his Book of the Keys of the Kingdom, he would
meet them half way. Mr. Baxter, not long before he went to his Everlasting
Rest, said to me, If all Independents were like New England Independents, we
should soon be one. Our Congregational Brethren in England who met at the
Savoy, Anno 1658. Have this for the last Article of their Discipline, Churches
gathered and walking according to the mind of Christ, judging other Churches
(though less pure) to be true Churches, may receive to occasional Communion
with them, such Members of those Churches as are credibly testified to be
Godly, and to live without offense. The practice of the Churches in New England
has been according to this profession. For we have received to our Communion
those that have come to us with Testimonials from Presbyterian Ministers in
England, and diverse that have come to us from Scotland Yea, and some French
Refugees of whose sincere Piety we have had Testimonials. And (which is more)
several worthy Ministers known to be of the Presbyterian Judgment who came to
us from England, par^icularly Mr. Morton and Mr. Bailey, were received among us
with the greatest respects that the Elders and Churches in New England could
manifest toward them. And whereas they did scruple a Re^ordination by
Imposi^ion of hands (which is usual in these Churches) that as (...) urged upon
them, but they were establish^d in the Churches who Elected them with fasting
and prayer, without any laying on of hands. Mr. Cotton not long before his
departure to a better World, drew up some proposals for the Acccommodation and
Union of these two Reforming Persuasions, in which his Spirit was very much
engaged. My most dear Brother Samuel Mather (who was well known to the Churches
in New England above forty years ago, and after that in England and in Ireland,
where he ended his days) not long before he finished his Course, wrote a small
Book which bears the Title of Irenicum, or an Essay for Union; wherein he
shows how inconsiderable the Differences are between those of the Presbyterian
and Congregational Judgment, and that they may without any selling of Truth to
purchase peace, mutually own and give the Right Hand of Fellowship to each
other, as true Churches and Ministers of Jesus Christ, that they should lay
aside all their Animosities, and remember that Golden Rule, Romans 14.3. Let not
him that Eats, despise him that Eats not, and let not him that Eats not,
judge him which Eats, for God has received him. So let not him who depends on
the way of Classical Subordination, despise him that depends not, and let not
him that depends no^, judge him that depends, for the Lord has received
them both.

Amongst those who go under the name of Congregational, there is a variety of
apprehension in some Disciplinary Controversies. Some of them have thought that
no Children should be admitted to Baptism whose Parents are not admitted to the
Lords Table. This was the opinion of our Learned Mr. Chauncey, who was many
years Praesident of the College, and of Mr. Davenport, and some few others of
the first Ministers in these Churches. But Mr. Cotton, my Father Mather, Mr.
Norton, Mr. Rogers, Mr. Mitchel, and the generality of our New England Divines
were for a greater Latitude as to the subject of Baptism. Some esteem none to
be Members of the Visible Church, excepting those that belong to Particular
Churches: So Mr. Hooker, Mr. Stone, and most of our Ministers. But in this the
generality of Congregationals in England vary from them. They suppose that all
the men in the world, who deserve the name of Christians, or that make a
profession of the true Religion, and do not destroy that profession by any
Error in Judgmen^, or Scandal in Conversation, are the Catholic Visible
Church, of which number th^re are many who are not in full Communion wi^h any
particular Instituted Church. Some limit Baptism to Membership in a particular
Church. So has it been with us in New England for the most part. But other
Congregationals differ from us in this point Dr. Goodwin has strenuously
asserted, that a Particular Church is the Subject of that Ordinance of the
Lords Supper, but not of Baptism. And of this Judgment were Dr Owen, and Mr.
Greenhill, as both of them did many (...) since in Letters I received from
them, signify to me; and Dr. Owen in diverse of his printed Books, declares he
was so persuaded. So that they who go under the name of Congregational must
withdraw Communion from one another as well as from Presbyterians, if diff^ring
sentiments about Disciplinary Qu^stions, be a sufficient ground for disunion
and separation. Dr. Ames was Congregational, highly approving of the Churches
in New England; and purposing to have ended his days amongst them. On his
Deathbed (as one that was then with him has publicly testified) he declared
that if there were any Churches, in the World whom God would own, they were
such as those in New England. And although Gangraena says, that then it was a
mercy that Learned Ames lived no longer, better men than he will not say so.
Dr. Twiss was Presbyterian, nevertheless, there was an Endearedness between
Ames and him. M Marshal and Mr. Strong Loved as Br^thren ^^^wi^hstanding the
former was Presbyterian, and the Latter Congregational. Two Lustres of years
are now expiring, since the Ministers in London of both those persuasions
declared their readiness to Walk together according to the Gospel Rules of
Communion of Churches. Would all that pretend to the Name of Presbyterian
observe the Articles of that Union, the Congregationals in New England would
readily give them the Right Hand of Fellowship. Especially if they would
practice according to some Essential Articles therein; particularly that
Article which declares, that none shall be admitted to all special Ordinances
but such as are not only free from Scandal in their lives, but persons of
visible God^iness, making a credible profession of cordial Subjection to Christ
And that Article which says, We are m^st willing and ready to give an account
of our Church proceedings to each other when desired. Also that Article wherein
they say, we agree that in order to concord, and i^ weighty and difficult
cases, it is needful and according to the mind of Christ, that the Ministers of
several Churches be consulted and advised with about such Matters. Is not the
Embodying into a Church State a weighty matter? Is not the Cal^ing and
Ordaining a Minister a Weighty Matter? They that shall do such things without
advising with Neighbor Churches or Ministers, must think of some other name
whereby they may be distinguished. For it is a very vain thing for them to
pretend to be either Presbyterian or Congregational: when the Fundamental
Articles of their Union are manifestly transgressed and violated. For my own
part I have many years desired to see an Union of these two Reforming Parties.

When I was lost at London, I did that little I was Capable of, to promote that
Union which has been happily Eff^cted. And I account it one of the greatest
Mercies of my Life, that ever I was at all instrumental in so Bl^ssed a work.
In several points, wherein those of the Congregational persuasion differ from
the other, I am satisfied in my own Judgment, that they have Truth on their
side; nevertheless, there have been as Eminent men for Piety and Learning of
the Presbyterian persuasion, as any the World has in this last Age been
Blessed with, whom it is an affliction at all to differ from. I therefore
finish, with the words of a Great man among us, Mr. Cotton. way of the
Churches. p. 84.
who speaking of some Presbyterian Divines, thus Expresses himself, Those
Godly Learned Divines we do so highly Esteem, and so deeply Reverence in the
Lord, that were the cause our own, and not the Lords, we should rather let it
fall, than defend it, by Opposition to the Grave Judgment of such Holy Saints.

THE END.
ERRATA. Page 11 l. 19. for it will r. will it? p. 17 l 18 r. annuntiate p. 26
l 21 r. singula praesentibus p. 40 l 12 r Church p 51 l 4 r. Tigurin p 67 l 4
r. Baptize p 69 l Antipen r wrested p 72 l ult r Pol. eccles* p 84 l 9 r Laick.
definitive p 89 l 27 r Sutliff. p 93 l 27 r Marriages. p 110 l 13 r Literae p
117 l 9 for practiced r professed, for the r our.

THE CONTENTS.
Q 1. WHether particular Churches ought to consist of Saints and true believers
on Christ? p. 13 Q 2 Whether there ought not to be a Trial of persons
concerning their Qualifications or fitness for Church communion, before they
are Admitted thereunto? p 17 Q 3 Whether are not the Brethren, and not the
Elders of the Church only to judge concerning the Qualifications and fi^ness of
those who are Admitted into their communion? p. 22 Q 4 Whether is it necess^ry,
that persons at their Admission into the Church, should make a public Relation
of the Time and manner of their Conversion? p 29 Q 5 Has the Church Covenant as
commonly practiced in the Churches of N.E. any Scripture foundation? p 39 Q 6
Is Public Reading of the Scripture without any Interpretation, part of the
work incumbent on a Minister of the Gospel? p. 47 Q 7 Is Baptism to be
Administered to all Children, whom any professed Christian shall engage to see
Educated in the Christian Religion? p. 54 Q 8 Is it Lawful to Baptize in a
private House, where there is no Church Assembly? p. 62 Q 9 Ought all that
Contribute toward the Maintenance to have the privilege of Voting for the
Pastor of a Church? p. 67 Q 10 Ought there to be a Consociation of Churches so
as that no new Church should be gathered, or Pastor Ordained, but with the
Approbation of Neighbor Churches or Elders? p. 72 Q 11 May the Brethren in
Churches and not the Pastors only, be sent to, and have their Suffrages in
Ecclesiastical Council? p. 83 Q 12 Does the Essence of a Ministers Call,
consist in his being Ordained, with Imposition of hands by other Ministers? p.
90 Q 13 May a man be Ordained a Pastor Except to a particular Church, and in
the presence of that Church? p 101 Q 14 Is the Practice of the Churches of New
England in granting Letters of Recommendation, or Dismission from one Church to
another, according to Scripture and the Example of other Churches? p. 109 Q 15
Is not the asserting that a Pastor may Administer the Sacraments to another
Church besides his own particular Flock, at the desire of that other Church, a
declension from the first principles of New England, and from the
Congregational way? p 115 Q 16 Is it a Duty for Christians in their prayers to
use the very words of that which is commonly called the Lords Prayer? p 117 Q
17 May the Churches under the Presbyterian and Congregational Discipline,
maintain Communion with one another, notwithstanding their different
Persuasions concerning Church Government? p 136

