A Monitory LETTER About the MAINTENANCE Of an Able and Faithful Ministry.

Directed Unto those People, who Sin against, and Sin away the Gospel, by not
Supporting the Worthy Preachers of the Gospel.

A Decree of a National Synod of Reformed Churches at Paris

All the Churches shall be desired to shun Ingratitude unto their Ministers, (a
Sin to (...) among us) and take special care, that they be more Respected, and
their Labor (...) Rewarded, not to Enrich and Fatten them but to give them a
Becoming and Sufficient maintenance.

Du^iter profecto et Misere viverent Evan^^^^^^ Ministri, si ex Libera Populi
Contributione (...) Sustentandi.

Luther. Boston, in N. E. Printed in the Year. 1700.

To J. F. Esquire.
SIR,
A Famous Ruler in Israel gives us that Report of his own Conduct, Neh. 13
10.11. I perceived that the portions of the Levites had not been given them;
Then I contende^ ^or them, and said, why is the House of God forsaken? God has
ma^e you a Ruler even one of the Counselors and Justi^es, in our little
Israel; and though, I k^ow, nothing is more dis^astful to you than a Worldly,
Sl^thful, Ambitious Clergy, and you are as far as any man I know, from the
Character of, Priest ridden; yet you count no sort of men, more Highly to be
Esteemed, than Holy, Prayerful, Watchful, Painful, Humble, and Learned
Ministers of the Gospel Because when you were informed, that in many Towns,
those Men of God, have not their Portions duly given them, you hoped, that
among other ways of helping it, some Good might be done, by a Monitory Letter
to the Negligent; you desired one, who has the least occasion for your Cares
about him, ^o compose it, and are your se^f at the charge to Publish it, and
Scatter it. The Worthy Ministers, whom you thus desire to see well Supported,
have their Graces tried by their Temptations, and Live by Faith, E^ing the
Providence of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the Provision that He strangely mak^^
for them What if You should now be an Instrument of some Advantage to them, and
because to them, to their F^^ks also? You will at least meet with this
Recompence^; while you Speak comfortably unto them, who teach the Good
Knowledge of the Lord, they will in their S^cr^^ Prayers before the Lord,
Remember You and your Family; And whom they Bless, their God will Bless!

A Monitory LETTER, about the Maintenance of an Able and Faithful MINISTRY.
Brethren,
IF ever you arrive to Blessedness, i^ must be by Faith, in the Blessed Lord
Jesus Christ, who is Revealed and Offered unto you, in the Glorious Gospel of
God: And if ever you Enjoy the Offers of the Gospel, it must be by the
Preachers o^ it: Even by the Ministry of men set apart, for the Work of
Explaining and Applying, the Great Mystery of Godliness among you.

A Ministry cannot be upheld without a Maintenance. Now, while some of your
Ministers, choose to leave their Salaries unto the voluntary Contributions of
the People, these are others, who (sensible of what the Great V^ettus writes,
Hominum saepe tanta est Injusti^ia, ^allacia, Lubricita, ac profanitas, ut
Expediat Contractum intercedere,) do make their Contracts wi^h their people,
for their Stipends. But it is well known* That though the Maintenance promised
unto the Ministers among us, be ordinarily very small, scarce a Competency: and
our Ministers are mostly of Calvin's mind in this point, (as in all other they
are Calvinists,) Consil^^^ (...) ut Ministris tantum Erogaretur, quantum ad
^^^galitatem Ordi^^ suo dignam, suffic^ret, non quod ad L^xum red^ndaret;
Enough to supply them, in a credible and suitable Frugality would suffice them:
nevertheless, they are often cheated of much, out of that Little, that has been
promised unto them. The Ministers not rarely are put off with a Pay, called
sometimes by the Name of, Synecdochical Pay, wherein by a certain Figure of
Avaritious and Sacrilegious Rhetoric, the part goes for the whole. There are
multitudes, who from one end of the year unto the other, do nothing, toward
the Support of the Evangelical Ministry; and though a Levy do in most places
Compel some to do something, yet that something is done grudgingly, as upon
Compulsion, and the whole comes not up to all that had been Engaged. If the
Ministers now should go to take the Remedy which the Law gives them, for the
Recovery of their Arrearages, they would find the Remedy worse than the
Disease, and by using the Law, wound the future success of the Gospel* While
they have been, by the Acts of Assemblies, Exempted from Taxes, they have in
reality been Taxed above any one Rank of men whatsoever. Nor does any but the
Lord Jesus Christ, who in his Infinite Wisdom orders His Holy Servants to
Preach under the Cross, know the Temptation that many of them have endured,
when they have been defrauded of the Due^ Vowed unto them and when a, Res
augusta Domi, has broken their Spirits, and hindered their Studies, and ruined
the Liberal Education of their Families It is their comfort indeed, that the
Lord Jesus Christ says to the Angels of the Churches, I know thy Works, and
thy Poverty, and thy Patience.

How, Syrs, give leave unto one, who though he cannot be called, as Rabbi Tarphon
was among the Jews of old, The Wealthy Priest, yet is at this Time, as little a
Sufferer in this case, as perhaps any man in the Country, to Expostula^e the
Case a little with you, on the behalf of his more Suffering Brethren throughout
the Country.

In the first place, Although your Ministers rarely, if ever, touch upon it
(because they would Preach the Lord Jesus Christ, and not Themselves,) yet I
hope, you are not ignorant, That there is the plain, and clear Commandment of
the Lord Jesus Christ, for the Maintenance of His Evangelical Ministry. I
pray, Do your Ministers the Right for once, your selves to Read, without
putting Them to Read, in the first Epistle to the Corinthians, the Ninth
Chapter, from the fourth verse, to the Fourteenth. You shall here find an
Inspired Apostle of the Lord jesus Christ, with six or seven irrefragrable
Reasons, in about nine or ten verses, proving This, which he makes his
conclusion, The Lord has ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel. It is then incontestably evident, That if you do not your
part, that your Ministers may Live comfortably, you Sin against the Ordinance
of the Lord Jesus Christ I am astonished, tha^ many a man, who calls himself a
Christian, can invent any way to quiet his Conscience before that positive word
of the Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6.6. Let him that is t^^ght in the Word,
Communicate unto him that yea^^eth in all good things. Now because the
Deceitful Hearts or men will plead in their own Excuse, I don't afford these
Exp^^^es, my Family will want, all that I shall sp^^d that way; the Apostle
adds, Be not deceived, God is not mocked. q.d. God knows, that you throw away
upon your needless vanities, what you might much better have communicated unto
your Teachers. When our Lord sent forth His Ministers, he directed them to
expect a Subsistence from those to whom He sent them: And that upon this
consideration, Mat. 10.10 For the Workman is worthy of his meat: and Luke 10.7.
For the Labourer is worthy of his (...). What horrid impudence is it now, for
the Wolves to ^ark at the Shepherds, of our* Flocks, by the Name of Her^lings,
merely because they accept a Maintenance from them? Those Pagant, [for none
worthy the Name of Christians, would so directly and expressly contradict our
Glorious Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory!] They have certainly forgot what
the Apostle Paul writes, 2 Cor. 11 8 about his Taking Wages (or Hire) of other
Churches; though he forbore to demand any thing of that at Corinth. That Great
Minister of the Lord Jesus Christ* receiving the money, that the Philippians
ga^h^red for him, says, Phil. 4 18. It was a Sacrifice, acceptable, well
pleasing to God. God req^^red a Maintenance for his Ministers under the Old
Testament; yea, though their Tribe, was ^ardly a Fortieth part of the people, yet
they had, by computation, a^ much Maintenance as Three of the Twelve Tribes
beside. And when they had part of their Maintenance d^tained from them, the
Almighty God Thundered upon it, Mal 39, 10* Ye are cursed with a Cu^se, for ye
have R^^bed me: Let there be meat in my House, and prove me now herewith, if I
do not pour you out a Blessing. Now the Apostle counted it no weak Argument,
that was to be fetched from the Maintenance of Ministers under the Old
Testament, for the Maintenance of Ministers under the New. Says he* 1 Cor
9.13 Do ye not know, that they which Minister about Holy Things, Live of the
Things of the Temple! And they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the
Altar? Even so they which preach the Gospel should Live of the Gospel. The
Ministers of the New Testament, are as worthy of a Maintenance, as those of
the Old. And yet they don't ask of you, your Tithes, which was but part of the
Levitical Maintenance: but if they might have so much as a Tenth part of what
the Levites had, I am verily persuaded, it would richly content many of them.
If Moses took such care for his Ministers, will any man dream, that Jesus (the
Son over his House) takes no care at all for His? The word of the Lord ^^sus
Christ requires of a Minister, 1 Timothy 3 6 That he be given to Hospitality: How
is it possible for him to be so, i^ you be given to Coveteousness, and given to
Dishonesty, and Cheat him of his Maintenance!

I beseech you, Syrs, Let Reason and Justice be a little heard, pleading the
cause of your Neglected Ministers. Your Ministers demand not their
Maintenance, as making a ^ucre of Prayers, and Sermons, and Sacraments, and
Spiritual Benefits: They are not the Sons of Simon Magus, to make a merchandise
of things that are Spiritual; nor are they unmindful of Simon Peter's caution,
about, Filthy Lucre. But while they apply themselves unto Spiritual Services,
first, it is a vast Labor which they undergo. The Ministry is a most Laborious
Employment, unto all that have any sense of the Account, that they must give of
their Stewardship. And sure, a Maintenance is one Thing, in the Honor,
belonging to them, that Labor in the Word and Doctrine. And then, they are
unavoidably taken off all other ways of nourishing themselves and their
Families. Had they been broug^t up unto another Calling, or, would they yet
betake themselves to a meaner Calling, they would probably grow Rich as fast as
(...). But they confine themselves to their Ministry; because the Lord has
Commanded them to give themselves unto it, and, Be wholly in i^. It is
therefore Barbarous to deny them an agreeable Maintenance.

Briefly, Your Ministers are desirous to follow their Studies closely; and
indeed, if they be no^ Hard Students, it is impossible they should be Able
Ministers of the New Testament. In their Public Discourses, they are not fond
of an Off hand Preaching; they be not for Spitting of Sermons; they would not
give the Lord that which cost them nothing; they would compose well Studied
Meat Offerings, not only for You O People of the Lord, but also for the Lord of
Hosts Himself, that Great King, whose Name is dreadful It is needful, they
should have good Libraries, which, I assure you, are Costly Things: And it is
needful, they should not be like the Clerks, who having large Libraries which
they seldom looked into, were by the K. of France compared unto men with
Crooked Backs, which carried a load they never looked upon, but they must sit
much in their Libraries, until they become themselves walking Libraries.
Besides all this; the Government of their Churches, takes up no little share of
their Time. And they must Visit their Flocks, to pray over the Sick, and
Comfort the Bereaved and Instruct the ^gnorant, and Relieve the Tempted and
give their best Advice unto the Unadvised. Yea, they must on frequent occasions
give themselves to Fasting and Praying in their own Reti^ements, lest the
Devices of Satan (who Desires to Sift them) should in any thing prevail against
themselves, and their Flocks. Now, Sirs, are any so forsaken of all Reason,
that they will not confess it an inestimable Benefit unto a Town, for to have a
Minister, (a Good man, and f^ll of the Holy Spirit, and Faith*) devoting
himself unto these Divine Services, for them? Or, Is it Reason, that a man of
worth, so Devoted, should by the unworthy Niggardliness, of those, whom he
serves, be left wh^lly to sink under his encumbrances? Or, Is all Reason gone
out of the world?

If your Ministers are prudently Thoughtful about their Maintenance, it is
because they have Read that Word, 1 Timothy 5.8 If any provide not (...) his own,
he is worse than in Infidel. And those men are truly worse than Infidels, who
clamor against an Honorable Provision for the Ministry; the worst of Infidels
do honorably Maintain those that are set apart, for the supposed Service of
their Souls.

And that which may make the Repr^of to those men, who Rob their Ministers of
their Dues, the more pungent is This; That there is a Sacrilege in the
Robbery. It Is a Robbing of God. The Lord Jesus Christ, in Heaven says, Ye did
it unto me.

Yea, You must allow me, to Advance this Assertion. Every man* owes a Portion
of his Estate, unto Pious Uses; be owes it unto the Lord: the Great Lord is
abused, if that Quitrent be no^ rendered unto Him. But what Portion of his
Estate is it, that every man must Sep^rate, and Consecrate unto Pious Uses,
that so all the rest may be clean unto him. I should think, That something
about a Tenth part seems the Least that can be. I know very well, that many do
and must give more than such a Portion; and I know the Business of many to Ly
so that they cannot exactly give just this portion. However, something about
this portion, seems a Good proportion. I find our Father Jacob, saying, Genesis 28
21, 22. The Lord shall be my God, and of all that thou shall give me, I will
surely give the Tenth unto th^^. (Syrs, This was a long while before Moses was
born!) It s^ems, That man does not enough own the Lord for his God, who is not
willing to give so much as the Tenth unto Him. Say, Will you not be the Seed of
Jacob? They who beguile the Lord of this, are not so much as they should be,
True Israelites. I could never ye see an Answer, to that Argument; If the
Tithes of Abraham, were the Rights of Melchizedek, then the Tithes of
Christians, (the Seed of Abraham) are the Rights of the Lord Jesus Christ: For
I am certain, That the Lord Jesus Christ is, A Priest after the Order of
Melchizedek. It may be, I have a little surpised you with some Fear, that I am
going to chall^nge your Tithes, as due to the Clergy. But I Will put you out of
pain as to That; I do not so! The Lord Jesus Christ has expressly provided
others, as well as His Ministers, to be the Receivers of His Re^ts. The
Improvement which I am to make of the Argument, is This. Let your Industrious,
and Self-denying Ministers have but One Half, of what one would judge proper to
pay to the Glorious Antitype of Melchizede^ in ^ious Uses, and I will
undertake, it shall satisfy them* I^ will be but Righteousness in you; and
you will enjoy more than a little peace in it. Yea, It Is possible, in many Towns,
if you would permit your Ministers, to single out only some Two Species,
(perhaps, One) of the many Blessings that make up your Harvest, and receive
only a Tenth part of those Things, their Maintai^^^ce would be better than it
is; they would gladly take up with it. This indeed I don't propound, but only
argue. Whereas now, they are Exposed unto strange Hardships; and they have over
and above given unto them, to study upon, that claus^ in the Lamentations, Our
Wood is Sold unto us*

Yea, I have been told, That when some of our Ministers, have been visited by
the Hand of God with Sickness, and mourning for two or three months together,
with the Sighs of Heman, I am shut up, and I cannot come forth! the people have
gone to Substract so much of their yearly Maintenance, as their Sickly months
would have come to. Alas, my Friends, common ^^genuity would cry, Shame, upon
such doings: And Christianity would have bespoke rather an Addition ^o, than a
Substraction from the Maintenance of your Ministers, who are in your Service,
and only by the Calamity of Sickness interrupted in the Service

But, Sirs; what can you imagine to get, by thus witholding more than is meet?
Oh, That you would Believe that word of God, Prove. 11.24, 25. There is that
with^ldeth more than is meet, but it tends to Poverty; whereas, The liberal
Soul shall be made Fat If the Spirit of Judas, cause you, to begrutch, all that
is laid out upon the Lord Jesus Christ, and His Ministers, it is time for you,
to consider, what Spirit ye are of. And if the Impiety of Pinching and Starving
your Ministers, be aggravated, by your breaking your Covenants with them, [for
oftentimes, men are so much worse than the Pharisees, that they neither pay
Tithes nor keep Faith!] I entreat you, to ponder seriously on that awful Word,
Jam. 5.4. Behold, the Hire of the Laborers which is of you kept back by Fraud,
Cries: and their Cries are entered into the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath. It Is a
Crime, you see that Cries to God for Vengeance: And I am astonished, That the
Impovershing Dispensations of God, which have been upon us, do no more put us,
upon doing as that People, of old were called upon, Hag 1 5, 6, 9. Thus says
the Lord of Hosts, Consider your ways: ye have sown much, and bring in little:
ye looked for much, and lo, it came to little: why? says the Lord of Hosts:
Because of mine House that is wast Your injured Ministers, especially the more
Deserving ones, do make as little Complain^ is ever they can, against their
Neighbors, or unto the^. They say with Job, As for me, is my Complaint (...)
man? If it be, is to little purpose But, when they s^^ Debts oppressing of
them, and the Necessaries of Life hardly allowed unto them and their Families,
while their People can throw away upon Pride, and upon Drink, and upon their
Diversions, the Money that would have been a thousand times better assigned
unto any Virtuous Uses in the world, Then they are Overwhelmed, and they pour
out their complaint before the Lord. They mourn before the Lord, in Sec^et
places, and cry out, Lord, I am Oppressed, undertake for me! But an incredible
wrath from the Jealous and Wronged Lord Jesus Christ, breaks forth against the
People, that are guil^y of so great an Oppression I tell you truly, Except it
be the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ, Crying against a People, I know not,
whether any Cry more terrible can go up to Heaven, than the Crying wants and
Straits of His Holy M^nisters I have been told, That if the Tavern-keepers in
many Towns, would bring in tru^ Accounts, of what Money they have received in
the Needless visi^s of their Neighbors to the Taverns, the Sum would vastly
exceed all that is in th^se Towns laid out upon the House of God. This is a
Thing that Cries to Heaven, for the Removal of a Despised Gospel; Believe it,
Sirs, Believe it.

It Is a wonderful Damage, that you do your selves, if it were no more than This;
That by taking off your Ministers from their Studies, you S^u^^ their
Abi^ities, and Cramp their Accomplishments, and (...) the vast Good that would
thereby accrue unto your selves. It seems, you would have your Ministers to be
the Stars, rather than the Lamps of the Churches, and like Stars, to Shine,
without the supply of any Earthly Contributions: But they are Lamps; and how
should they do any other than Burn Dim, if you don't supply them? Antigon^^
ad^^^ing to see, the Diligent Philosopher Clean^hes, grinding his own Corn at
the Mil^, Cleanthes told him, I must either grind or Starve: whereupon
Antigonus noted it as a great Indignity, that the Hands whereby Excellent
Things had been written, should be galled with Mechanic Labors. But how often
do the people cause the Hands which have Baptized them, and which break the
Bread of Life unto them, to be Galled with Inferior Labors, for the getting
of Bread? They must either Plough, or Starve. This must needs render their
Ministry, less Edifying, to you, than it would have been. Yea, your
Unrighteousness toward your Ministers may be punished by the Righteous God
with Spiritual Plagues; and God may give you up to such a Spirit of S^umber,
that their Ministry shall never more be Profitable to you: for the most Lively
Ministry in the world, will do good no further than that the Blessing of God
accompanies it. When people are called upon to Maintain their Ministers, it is
added, Gal. 6.8 He that sows to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life
Everlasting If you begrutch a small Pittance of of your Estates, for the
Maintenance of them tha^ are to Feed your Spirits, God may be so provoked, as
to Resolve, that you shall Reap no Spiritual Advantages from their Ministry,
but remain Barren Figtrees, till you are Cut down for the Fire of His Burning
Indignation. Yea, Sirs, If ever you did get Good by your Ministers, one would
think, you could not think any thing too Good for them! And what if the
provocation should have this (...), That God w^ll Take away (...) Excellent
Ministers, and (...) you along wh^l^ Dest^t^^, and ^erhaps Div^ded* (...), that
shall not ^e men of (...)* Goo^ Principl^^ ^ Prop^rties, as those men of God,
that went before (...) National ^ynods of the French Churches complained, That
the Ing^^titude of people refusing (...) the Subsi^^ence of (...) the Churches
with a ^ea^ Dissipation^; (...) they Ordered, The Sacraments to be (...)*
Ungrateful, if they r^mained Obstinate. And the Pri^itive Churches, I (...)
pass^d their C^nsur^s on such Offenders* We have no such Method of proc^^ding
in our Churches: But the Lord Jesus Christ, after a dreadful mann^r takes the
work men His own Hand* H^ Chastises an Ungrateful people, with Depriving them
of Sacraments* and of Ministers too* And, as the French Churches (...) Suff^red
a Total D^ssipation, Let us beware left Our Churches also do for the^^
Ingratitude, (...) under a T^tal Dissipation This I remem^^r* It Was the
complaint of Aust^n in his Time. That the P^rsi^^onious Coldnes^ of the
Christians, which dis^osed them to Rob God and withdraw the Maintenance of His
Ministers, was a grand Presage of the Calamities coming (...) Wars, i^ on the
African Chu^ches: With ^ouldiers, he says, Rapine will take, what was grudged
for the Lord Jesus Christ, and h^s Ministers. God Avert the Omen!

But you, Brethren, who in Maintaining your worth^ Ministers, will Do justly,
and love mercy, and walk humbly with your God, shall find your ^o^es no loosers
by your Equity Do but make an Impartial Observation, of others whether those
persons and those places, which Do best for the Maintenance of the Evangelical
Ministry, do not Thrive most, (...) a very se^^^^ble ^enediction of God. Yea,
Do but makes Critical Exper^m^nt on your selves, whether if you will Do more the
next ye^^ toward the Maintenance of the Evangelical Ministry, y^ don't at the
years End, find that you (...) more, than you ha^ before. However, you may
hope, that God will Eminently Prosper unto you, that Ministry, which you
Liber^lly Sustain; (...) by that Ministry, He will (...) to your Souls, those
Benefits, the ^ain whereof is better than fine Gold. God will strangely Hear
the Prayers of your Obliged Ministers for you, on frequent occasion, in this
world. And (...) world to come, you are likely to be the Crown of you
Ministers, and They your Joy, before ^he Lord Jesus (...), in those (...),
which ^ye back not seen, and (...) has not heard.

With these Intu^ations, I remain, An Unknown, but H^^rty, Servant of the
Churches.


