Reasonable RELIGION. OR, The TRUTH Of the CHRISTIAN Religion, DEMONSTRATED.

The Wisdom of its Precepts Justified: And the Folly of Sinning against these
Precepts, Reprehended.

WITH Incontestable PROOFS, That MEN, who would Act Reasonably, must Live
Religiously.

By COTTON MATHER.

Boston, in N.E. Printed by T. Green, for Benjamin Eliot, at his Shop, under
the West End of the Townhouse. 1700.

Reasonable RELIGION.
Isa. XLVI.8. Show your selves MEN.


SHould they that manage the Public Exhortations, Demand, [ And we do Demand
it!] of all our Christian Hearers, to approve themseves Real Christians, it is
to be feared, the Demand would not be universally complied withal. W^ do, in
the Name of the Great God, propound unto our Neighbors, all the Faith, and
Repentance, and Fruitfulness, and Watchfulness of Christianity; and there is
too little compliance, with the proposals. But that our Exhortations may be
rendered the more ^^^esistible and Ungainsayable, Behold, the Form wherein they
now arrive unto us. Instead of saying, Show your selves Regenerate Christians,
we will only say, Show your selves Rational Creatures. Let this One Great point
be gained, and we shall go a great way to gain every point. It is not more
Essential unto MAN, to be Animal Rationale, than to be Animal Religios^^m. He
that is not Religious, is not worthy to be counted Rational. The matter between
God and us, is now brought unto those Terms, (...) a Saint or a Bruit. Either
become a sincere Servant of the Lord Jesus Christ* or else pretend not unto the
Name of a MAN; murmur not, O sinful man, if all the Angels in Heaven count thee
but as a Beast in the shape of a Man; and by so much worse than a Beast, by how
much more in the shape of a Man.

The God of Heaven Rebuked the Sottish and Fooli^h Idolatry, whereunto the
Jewi^^ Nation sometimes Aposta^ized: And in His Rebukes, having first Exposed
the Ridiculous Folly of Idolatry, He thus calls upon them, Now, Show your
selves Men, O ye Transgressors; q. d. Do but ^act Reasonably, and you will no
more* be such Transgressors of my Holy Laws. The Blessed God would (...) men
out of Irreligion; And (...) does it, from the Topic of Ridiculou^*
unreasonableness which Irreligion is to be charged withal. The Hebrew*
Original, is capable of that further Signification, Be Ashamed. And indeed, men
acting Reasonably, would be Ashamed of the Folly that is Committed in sinning
against the Laws of God* The clause next unto our Text, in the French
Translation, very agreeably confirms our sense of the Text; Return to sense, O^
Transgressors.

The Great point, which with the countenance of this Text, I undertake to
manage, is This: Did men Act Reasonably, they would Live Religiously. OR, In
sinning against God, the sinner does not act like a Reasonable man.

(...) to act more like a Beast, than like a Man, for any man to sin against
the God that made him. If men would show themselves men, they would not allow
themselves in those things that are contrary to and condemned by the Religion
of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Indeed some were once blamed, in ^ Cor. 3.^. for Walking as men; but the
meaning of it was, Walking as men commonly Walked; not Walking as men should
walk, if they would show themselves men: They who Walk as Carnal men, and
Sensual men, do not act as Rational men. Sin is an Unmanly sort of a Thing.
It Is Beneath a man, to sin against the most High God. By living in Sin, men
debauch and debase themselves below men. It Is Reason, whereby a Man is
distingui^^ed from a Beast; Sin is repugnant unto the principles of that
Reason, by which the Almighty has given us our Distinction. In Sin men offer
violence unto the principles of Reason. Though a man that Errs does like a Man,
as man has now unman^d himself, yet men don^t show themselves men in their
Errors, that is to say, Reasonable men. Peccare est, ins^^r pecudum Errare.

Now,

In the first place, We have a Reasonable Demonstration of this Assertion, in
the Divine Testimony of The Scripture. We don't show our selve^ men, if we
don't Receive that Book* which we call, The Bible, or, The Scripture, as a
Divine Testimony. It ^^ands not with Reason that any but the Holy God, should
be the Author of such an Holy Book. It is highly Reasonable, That the God, who
is Good, and who does Good, should by writing teach His good Statutes unto us.
But if we show our selves men; we shall no where find any Book but This, where
we shall see Written the Statutes of God. All the Wicked Force of Earth and
Hell, has been Employed for the suppression of this Book: If it had not been
Gods Book, it could not have been preserved. The Mysteries, the Prophecies, and
the Majesty of the Book, are the evident Signatures of a God upon it. We don't
show our selves men, if we don't Entertain this Book of Truth, when we see
Incontestable Truth shining in every line of it; a Book, which the more it is
examined, the the more the Truth of it is demonstrated. Now one Thing asserted,
as a Truth, in this Book, is, That all Sin is an unreasonable Folly. A Sinner
is called A Fool, by the only Wise God: In the Book of Wisdom, he is, it may
be, an hundred and fifty times over called so. We have Read of a Great Prince,
who was overtaken with a sin against the Great God; when he come to sober
Thoughts upon his own sin, he Cried out, in 2 Samuel 24.10. O Lord, I have
Sinned, and I have done very Foolishly. Yea, A Sinner is by the Divine Oracles,
(as in Eccl. 9.3.) pronounced, A Madman. A prodigal sinner is in these
Oracles, represented as one besides himself. If men would but come to
themselves, with the prodigal in the Parable, they would ^ome into the Service
of God. The Service of the Lord Jesus Christ, prescribed in the Christian
Religion, is called, in Romans 12.1. A Reasonable Service. A man without serious
and practical Religion, is Emphatically compared, in Job 11.12. unto, A ^ild
Asses Colt. What? An Ass, and a^ wild Ass, and the Colt of a wild Ass! Behold,
O Irreligious man, Behold* thy picture, how it is drawn by the pencils of God.
One once, with too much Reason made this Division of Man* The Man, and the
Beast. When a man Sins, he puts off the Man, and (...) the Beast. And hence,
when man (...) into Sin, it is said in Psalm. 49. 12. He is like the Beasts that
peris^* A man that has been sinning, mu^^ bemoan himself before the God,
a^gainst whom he has sinned, like him ^n Psalm. 73.22. Lord, I have been as
(...) Beast before thee. Yea, the very Beas^ may Instruct the Sinner; [Job.
12.7.^ And will Condemn him at the last.

But we will pass unto a Further and a Treble, Demonstration of ou^ Assertion;
and we will prove it from Reason, that we cannot lay aside Reli^gion, but we
lay aside Reason too.

I. It Is a most Reasonable Thing, (...) Believe those Things, which oblig^^ all
men to Live Religiously. Ther^ are two Things, which every Reaso^nable man must
Believe, or else forse^^ his Reason. A man does not she^ himself a man, if he
don't Believ^* That there is a God, and, That the Christian Religion is the
Truth of God* But then, what follows? It necessari^ly follows, That we don't
Act Reaso^nably, if we don't Live Religiously.

First, That man does not show himself a man, who does not Believe, That there
is a GOD. We read in Psalm. 14.1. The Fool ha^h said in his heart, there is no
God. An Atheist shows himself a Fool, and not a Man. Indeed, the Being of every
thing else, may with more of Reason be questioned, than the Being of that GOD,
who gave Being to every thing else. It was a Reasonable speech of the Noble and
Learned, Earl of Northhampton; If I could give any account, how I my self, or
any thing else, had a Being without God, or how there came so constant a
consent of mankind about the Being of a God, I could be an Athe^st: But it is
Impossible, it is Impossible.

First, The Belief of a GOD, Imprinted on the Hearts of all the world, is a
sufficient Reason for the Belief of a GOD. Can they show themselves men, who
don't Believe, that which they find, as it is said in Romans 2.15. Written in
the^r Hearts? I pray, who Writ it there? As there is in the Eye of man, an
Innate Faculty of seeing* by which it will acknowledge the Being of the Light,
when ever it is opened: Even so, there is an ^nnate Faculty in the Mind of man,
which is never in the least opened, but it acknowledges the Being of a GOD.
This Faculty, whence can it proceed? We don't show ou^ selves men, if we
suppose it can proceed, from any but that GOD, of whom it is said, in Zech.
12.1* He forms the Spirit of man within him. The Belief of a GOD, is not
peculiar to any One sort of men. All Nations are so agreed in This, that rather
than have No God, they will have a Thousand. The Notion of a GOD, is Natural unto
the Reason of a man; An Inclination to confess it, is Engraven in the Breast of
man, as with the po^nt of a Diamond. It is not the mere Tradition of our
Fathers, or the mere policy of our Rulers; No* They themselves* are under as
much Apprehensions of a GOD* as any of us. Let us but show our selves men: What
R^^son have we for our Be^ief of a GOD? Why our ^ery Belief is a Reason for our
Beli^f. One must first cease to be a Man, before he lose his Belief of a GOD*
It is easier for a man to Expel his own Soul out of his Body, than to Expel*
and Efface the sense of a GOD, out of his Soul. There is Reason to think, that
there never was a Direct and a Downright Atheist among men in the world. Indeed
there have been horrid and filthy Swine, looking like men, who have bragged,
that they did not Believe a God; but even these too have Ly'd in their Impious
and Infandous* ^rag, Affirmant ^nterdiu, Nocte tamen dubitant. None of these
Wretches, have ^o believed, There is no God, as to be without vehement, and
violent, and astonish (...) suspicious of the contrary. These Wretches undergo
horrible Twinges in their Souls, awaking out of their d^^ing Sensualities; and
in their Distresses, they Cry to the GOD, whom they have Blasphemed. I
remember, (...) Pagan Historian takes notice of it; The Persians being pursued
by the Grecians, were to venture over the River Strymon; which River had been
frozen, but was now beginning to T^aw; Now, says the Historian, those
Gallants, who a little before had boldly m^intained, there was no God, I my
self saw them every one; fall down on their Knees, and lift up their Hands, and
Eyes, and Cries to Heaven, Crying O God, Help us, O God Save us, O God, have
Mercy on us! Whence is this Impression of a GOD on the Souls of men* It Is none
but a GOD, that could Imprint it.

Again; The Works of GOD commend, yea, command, the Belief of His Being, unto
the Reason of man* Show your selves men; Was it not Reasonably said, in Romans
1.20. The Invisible Things of GOD, are clearly seen from the Creation of the
w^rld, even His Eternal Power and Godhead. The Works of Creation, are enough
to satisfy the Reason of any m^^, in the Being of a GOD. Let Reason look upon
the World, the various Parts of it, the curious Ends of it, the incomparable
Order of it; it will see a World of Reason to Conclude, That there is a GOD,
who made such a World. There are the sensible s^amps (...) an Immense Power,
and Wisdom* and Goodness, to be seen every where throughout the world; there is
no Language, or Creature, where the voice thereof is not heard. It is plain,
from the (...) Invention, and poor Improvement of Arts; and from the gradual
Growth of mankind, perhaps not yet increased unto one thousand million; it is
plain to Reason, that the world had a Beginning. But from Whence? Not from a
Casual concourse and jumble of Atoms. Were Ten Thousand Wheels Casually thrown
together, would they fall so, that Seven or Eight of them, would form a
well-contriv'd Watch? A man that views a stately House, or Ship, will not be so
void of Reason, as to say, It built it self. Dull ma^ter could never produce it
self. The matter of the world, is every where in Motion. We must unavoidably
come to a First Mover. ^his First Mover can be no other than a GOD. Yea, if the
Pagan Galen, could not Read his Anatomy-Lectures, without breaking forth into
an Hymn of Praise, unto his Maker; it may suffice to say, O man, Show thy self
a man, and look upon Thy self: Say, whether any but a GOD, could be the Maker
of a Creature, so surprizingly and wonderfully made! But then, the Works of
Providence, which is Continued Creation, will yet further satisfy the Reason of
a man, in the Being of a GOD. The Preservation of the world, like an Army
preserved in exact Order, though composed of Different and Quarrelsome Nations;
Reason says, It must be ascribed unto a GOD, whose Kingdom Rules over all.
But there are Extraordinary Occurrences in the world, as well as Ordinary ones,
to proclaim, That there is a GOD. There have been undoubted Prophecies* We
don't show our selves men, if in them, we don't see a GOD; who shows unto His
Servants, the Things that are to ^^me hereafter. There have been stu^endous
Miracles* We don't show our selves men, if in them we don't see a GOD, who does
wondrous Things. There are signal Mercies granted sometimes, as Answers to
Prayer, and Rewards to Virtue: Those men don't ^^ow themselves men, who do not
say, These are the do^ngs of a GOD, and mavelous in our Eyes. There are such
Retaliating Judgments inflicted sometimes upon the Wicked, that if we will show
our selves men, we must, upon the sight thereof, Cry out, Verily, There is a
GOD, who Judges in the Earth.

Well then; Show your selves men* If there ^e a GOD, Reason says, This GOD,
(...) be Feared, and Loved, and Hoped in. Since the^^ is a GOD, there is all
the Reason in the world, that every man should Seek this GOD, and Serve Him
world without end. In all Ungodliness, there is a practical Atheism. Of Ungodly
men it is said, They are without God in the world. Indeed, (...) Defy the
perfections of God, and they set up the Flesh, the World, and the Devil instead
of God: Thus they Vnd^^^y the Blessed GOD; as far as they can. Say, Reason,
say; Is this to do like a Man? O don't persist in thy At^^^s^cal Ungodliness,
until the GOD, whom thou have so vilified, make thee ^eel, in the direful
effects of His wrath, a proof of His Eternal Power, and Godhead! But then,

Secondly, That man does not show himself a man, who does not Believe, That the
Christian Religion is the Truth of God. A Deist, as the Beast will be called,
is worse than a Beast. Men had not been so prone to Deism, as we do with Horror
(...) them in the Baptized Nations of (...), if they had (...) f^rst (...) by
Beastly Debauch^^^^^* In the Christian Religion, we are taught the way to
Blessedness, in the Enjoyment of God: This Christian Religion is truly and
justly called, in 2 Pet. 2.2. The ^ay of Truth. And every Religion, any (...)
th^^ (...) agrees with the Christian Religion, is truly to be called, (...)
way. They do not show themselves men, who Embrace not the Christian Religion. I
cannot but affirm it ^^to you; We have not Stranger proof, that there is a GOD,
than we have, Th^^ our Blessed JESUS is the Christ of Go^ and that His Religion
is the Truth of God.

If we show our selves men, (...) shall perceive, That there is (...) the
Christian Religion, unworthy (...) GOD. We read in 1 Timothy 3.^^* Without
Controversy, great is the Mystery of Godliness. There are two Things which
render the Religion of our Lord Jesus Christ, without Controversy. One Thing
is, Tha^ it is a Great Mystery. The methods of a sinners Reconciliation to God,
expressed in the Gospel are Noble, are Charming, are full of Majesty; there is
an Exquisite contrivance in them. The contrivance can be ascribed unto none but
a GOD, whose Understanding is Infinite. Another thing is, That it is a Mystery
of Godliness. There is nothing in the Gospel, but what has a Tendency to
promote what is Holy and Just and Good: No one vice is Countenanced in it: None
but the thrice Holy God* could call for such an universal, and self-denying,
and flesh-mortifying Sanctity. Every Religion else under the Cope of Heaven,
prescribes very silly ways to obtain the Pardon of Sin, and leaves the
professors of it^ many ways under the Power of Si^^* There is no Religion
among men, besides the Christian, but if men would show themselves men, they
would immediately change it for the Christian; there is no Re^^gion but This,
worthy to be maintained by a Reasonable man.

Again, Were not all the Ancient Prophecies of the Messiah, completely answered
in our Blessed JESUS? Our JESUS, not only C^m^* when the Messiah was to come;
He also D^d, all the Messiah was to do, according to Prophecies, that God had
given to the Church, concerning that Seed, that was to Break the Serpents Head.
All fell out, as we are told, in Luke 1.53. As He spoke to our Fathers. We find
in many scores of amazing Instances, the Things Foretold of the Messiah,
Fulfilled in our Savior. Our Lords Birth, our Lords Life, our Lords Death, and
all the Remarkable Circumstances thereof, were but so many Remarkable
Accomplishments, of what had been promised by God, about our Lord-Redeemer.
Then, show your selves men, and say, Certainly the Religion of the Blessed
JESUS, must be the Religion of GOD.

Moreover, Could any but the Messiah have been able to Do the Miracles that
were done by our Blessed JESUS? Our JESUS did those very Miracles; which were
predicted by the Divine Oracles, to be done by the Messiah; and they were such
Divine Miracles, that every Impartial Spectator must say, O Lord, There are n^
works, like thy works. A Learned man said unto our Lord, in Joh. 3.2. N^ man
can do these Miracles that tho^ do, except God be with him. Truly, to Help
the Blind, and Heal the Lame* and Cure the Sick, and Raise the Dead* and Cast
out the Devils, all in His own Name, and Enable His Disciples to Do all these
Things, and to Glorify God with Tongues which they never Learn^ before: and
such Things to be done for two hundred years together! N^ man can do these
Miracles, but the Messiah of God, who is more than a man* The most Inveterate
Pagans, in their Libels against our Savior, were no^ able to Deny these
Miracles; the Jews own them, in their Talmud, the Turks own them, in their
Alcor^^; So notorious is the matter of Fact* Wherefore, show your selves (...)*
and say, Never could any Religion be more confirmed, than the Religion of (...)
Blessed JESUS.

Finally; Is not the Blessed JESUS Risen from the Dead? Yes; And (...) His
Apostle tells us upon it, in Romans 1.4^ He is declared the Son of God, (...)
^^wer, by the Resurrect^on from the Dead. That our Lord Rose from the Dead,
has been made apparent* by many Infallible proofs. After His Resurrection, He
exhibited Himself, (...) those Good men, who Saw Him, and Heard Him, and Felt
Him, and con^^nced all their Senses, that it (...) ^e: This He did, no less
than (...) several Times, and unto no less than five Hundred at a Time; and the
Witnesses thereof, who (...) a Spirit, that could not (...) any other than the
Spirit of God* ^hese (...) of it, yea, suffering for it, in such a manner, that
the mo^^ Judicious Examiners could not but see, They were neither Deceivers,
nor Deceived, in what they Witnessed. Yea, our Lord, since His Ascension into
the Heavens, as a Proof, and a Fru^t of His Ascension, has sent unto us a
Letter The Book, of, The Revelation, wherein He fore-signified a Thousand
Things, both about the Romish Apostasy, and the Mohammedan Imposture, which are
since most exactly come to pass. They do not show them^elve^ men, who harbor
any suspicion o^ a Religion, having such Broad-Seals o^ Heaven unto it. But,
come then* show your selves men: If the Christian Religion be the Truth of God,
Reason says, That our Lord Jesus Christ should be our very Life, and that we
should Obey Him, as the Author of Eternal Salvation for us. Is the Christian
Religion the Truth of God? There is then all the Reason imaginable, That we
should conform our selves to the Directions of that Blessed Religion; and Deny
all Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and live Soberly, and Righteously, and
Godlily, as that Religion teaches us. Man, to be content without an Union to
Christ, and an ^^terest in His Righteousness; To be content with an Earthly
portion, and without the Blessedness of the Heavenly City, that Christ has
purchased and prepared for us; To make light of the Worship, and Church State,
and Sacraments, that Christ has Instituted; Or, to Study no conformity unto
the Exemple of the Blessed JESUS: Alas, Thou do not show thy self a man, in
all this Unchristian Behavior.

II. The Follies of Sin, are so many, so obvious, and so very Brutish, worse
than Brutish, as abundantly to convict those, of not acting Reasonably, who do
not live Religiously. In Sinning against God, there appears nothing but Folly:
Show your selves men, and you will see the Folly of sinning. No man in his wits,
would ever do the Things that we all do, whenever we Sin. An Irreligious Action
must be charged, with Folly, whoever (...) it; it cannot be vindicated.

For,

First; The Law of the Only wise God, must needs be a very wise Law* But Sin
against-God, is a Transgressio^ of that Law; Hence there must need^ be Folly in
the Transgression. Doe^ that man show himself a man, who will not consent, that
the God who made him, should give Law unto him* for that the Law of God,
concerning al^things is Right? We are, with infinite Reason told, in Psalm.
111.10* The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of Wisdom, a Good Understanding
have all they who do those things. Ther^ is then an extreme want of Wisdom in
them who do not live in the Fea^ of the Lord; they want Vnderstand^ing
exceedingly, who do not suc^ Things. To do Irreligiously, (...) act just
contrary to the Rule of Wisdom; and is this to act Reasonably? No, there is no
way of Sinning espoused by the Children of men, but the Rule of Wisdom says
upon it, This their way is their Folly!

Secondly; To Act Inconsiderately, is to Act Unreasonably: Now there is no
Sinner but what is monstrously Inconsiderate, and therefore shamefully
Unreasonable. It Is complained of them that sin, in Isa. 1.3. They do not
Consider. It is the property of unreasonable Animals, That they never Think.
And, I pray, how much does a sinner Think, when he is going to Sin? Does the
sinner Think, That the Eye of God is upon all his wickedness? Does he Think,
That God will call him to an Account, for all his wickedness? Does he Think,
That Sin will be Bitterness in the latter End? Or, Does that man ^^ew himself a
man, who never Considers, That there is a God, and Why God made him, and How
God is to ^e served? Or that man, who never Considers, If I Die in my present
Condition, what will become of me throughout Eternal Ages? This is the Guise,
This the Crime, of the ^rreligious. The Psalmist could say, in Psalm. 119.59. I
thought on my ways, and I turned my Feet unto thy Testimonies. It Is very sure,
That the men who don't walk in the ways of God, are men that little Think on
their ways. But if we don't Think like Men, how can we Think that we Act like
Men?

Thirdly, When a man Sins against God, he makes very Foolish Bargains. A Sinner
may be impleaded for an Idiot; he does worse than part with a piece of Gold,
for an Apple or a Counter. Does he show himself a man, that for the sake of a
sordid Lust, will part with a precious Christ, and all His peerless Benefits?
It Is done by all the Irreligious. Does he show himself a man, that prefers
Temporal Things, above Eternal? He that for the sake of the Criminal pleasures
of Sin, which are but for a season, will forfeit the pleasures which are at the
Right Hand of God forevermore! He that for the sake of the Deceitful Riches,
which take themselves wings, and flee away, will forego the Durable Riches of
the Heavenly Substance? The Devil is daily soliciting men into his Cursed
Bargains: He says to the sinner, Let me have thy Soul, to be a Companion with
me, in my Everlasting Torments, and I Will accommodate thee for it with a sow
Momentany Delights. Does he show himself a man, that will be betrayed into such
a wretched Bargain? The Sinner is that man, and therefore not a Man. He spoke
like a Man, that refused a costly Sin, saying, Nolo tanti emere paenitentiam, I
will not Buy Repentance at so dear a rate. A sinner parts with God, and parts
with Life, and parts with Heavenly Happiness; and what gets he by the Bargain?
Oh, It Is all to Buy nothing but a sad Repentance. Is this to play the Man? It Is
to play the Fool.

Fourthly; When a man Sins against God, he runs very Foolish Ventures. Is it
not a Non-sensical Thing, for a man, to dash himself, against what he knows
will be too hard for him? The Sinner does dash himself against (...) Omnipotent
God, who is able to crush him in a moment. He does not show himself a man, that
shall go to contend with God; Man, Feeble man, Sorry man, is no fit match for
the Almighty God. But all the Irreligious are found Fighters against God; even
against that God, against whom no man ever hardened himself and prospered. By
sin, a man does as it were* beat a Challenge unto the infinite God; It may be
said of him, He stretches out his Hand against God, and strengthens himself
against the Almighty. Now, what is this, but the Fierceness of a Devil, rather
than of a Man? A sinner madly runs the Venture, of undergoing the Anger of that
God, who overturns the Mountains in (...) Anger. He runs the Venture, of being
siezed by the wrath of God, and Broken by that wrath in the place of Dragons.
He runs the Venture of being made an Object, for the dreadful Revenges of God,
in the Fires of Hell, till the Heavens be no more. Is this to do like a Man? A
mere Sensitive Thing, will not run into the Fire. Where are the Senses of the
Sinner then? He sees the Fire of the Eternal Vengeance of God before him; and
yet when he sins, he runs and leaps into that formidable Fire! Oh! If men would
show themselves men, they would not be so desperately Venturesome. Stop,
Sinner, Stop, and show thy self a man, Go not on still in thy Trespasses.

III. When men come to themselves, they Cry out of themselves, as not having
Acted Reasonably, when they have not Lived Religiously. The famous Prince Henry
would say, I know not what you call Puritan Preaching, but I am sure, I love
that Preaching that goes to my Heart. Give me leave; If we will show our selves
men, the Things now to be Preached, will go to the Heart! There is a Time, when
men come to themselves; and that is, when they see themselves going from every
thing else. Never do men see so clearly, as when they have the shadow of Death
sitting on their Eyelids. Men do most show themselves men, when they be Dying
men. When the Children of men see themselves likely to live no longer in the
world, the Spells which the world laid upon them, are expiring; and they then
make the Truest Reflections upon the past Actions of their lives. It was a
Great Question which a Person of Quality once put unto a Wise person, How may I
most wisely Order my life? And it was a wise Answer then given to the Question,
So Think, so Do, so Live, as you would have Chosen to have done, a while ago,
when you thought your self a Dying. Truly when men think themselves a Dying,
Then, Then, they come to Right Thoughts, about the Wisest way of ordering a
Life. Men come to Judge Reasonably, when they feel themselves going to appear
before the dreadful Judgment Seat of God. But they then do Judge, that they
have not Lived Reasonably, if they have not Lived Religiously. All Dying men
ordinarily, when they look back upon their Actions, they look upon their Sinful
Actions, as very Foolish Actions, and Brutish ones. Irreligious persons, are
forewarned, in Prove. 5.11.12. Thou will mourn at the Last, and say, How have I
hated instruction, and my heart despised Reproof? Even so, these persons do
mourn at the last over all their Irreligious Actions, and say, How have I
played the Fool, in what I have done! As the Apostle speaks, in Romans 6.21. What
Fruit had ye then, in those things, whereof ye are now Ashamed? For the End of
those things is Death: When men see themselves near to that End, they are
miserably Ashamed of those things, wherein the^ have done amiss.

More particularly.

First; When a man comes to himself and his Death, he pronounces nothing to be
so Reasonable, as for a man to be Religious. A Dying man, will no^ only (...)
with him, in Numb. 23.10* (...) the Death of the Righteous* But he will also
say, I have been (...) Fool* that I have not Lived the Life of the Righteous!
That Great Scholar* and Great Statesman, Grotius, when he ^rew near his Death,
professed* He would gladly now give all hi^ Learning and Honor, for the
Religion of a certain poor Mechanic in his Neighborhood, that spent some Hours
every day, in his Devotions* and he Cried out, I wish all the world saw so much
Reason in Religion as I do* and being asked the best Counsel that a man of his
Great Seize could give, he only said, Be Serious. Truly There is no
Scoffing at Religion, ordinarily in the mouth of a Dying (...) Death will make
a man Serious: They (...) once Laughed at Serious Religion, (...) they come to
Die, they don't (...) indeed, no, but they G^^esh at (...) own Folly for doing
so: In their (...) Day men grow Serious* and with a Deadly Groan they will* Oh!
that I had been more serious in m^ ^ife, and more seriously pursued the (...)
of my life! A Renowned Privy-Counsellor, to several Monarchs* in the English
Nation, at the end of his Life, gave this as the Result of his (...)
Experience; Now, says he, I (...), that Seriousness is the greatest Wisd^m; I
find, that a due Temperance (...) the best Physic; I find, that a Good
^onscience is the best Estate. Such, (...) such are the Attestations, which men
in all Ages have given to the Reasonableness of Religion, in those (...) of
their lives, when they (...) most shown themselves men* That Great Emperor,
Charles V. one of the Greatest men that ever lived (...) face of the Earth,
Resigned his vast possessions before he died and Retired wholly to his
Devotions and Solemnly declared, The sincer^ profession of the Christian
Religion, has in it Sweets and Joys, that are not know^ in the Courts of
Princes! Truly, (...) Hearers, you never heard of any man ^^n a Deathbed,
Repenting that he ha^ lived Religiously and Seriously: But you continually hear
of Dying men, full of Repentance, that they have had so little of Religion in
their lives; and Crying out, as a Great man, well known in the English Na^tion
did: when taking his Farewe^^ of his most considerable Friends, (...) did it in
those words, Remember* Sirs, I Repent of all my life, but that part of it,
which I spent in Communion with God, and in doing of Good. Then, even at such a
Time as That, the Celebrated Seldom, who had survey (...) almost all the
Learning under Heaven could say to his Friends, The five la^t Verses in the
second Chapter to Titus, now do me more Good, than all the (...) in the world.
Will you Believe (...) Si^s? When men are (...) to ^^ve, they then Judge it a
Reasonable Thing for men to Pray without ceasing while they Live. When men are
going to the House Appointed for all the living, they then Judge it a
Reasonable thing, to count an Hour spent (...) the House of God, better than a
thousand elsewhere. Hence I infer, men don't show themselves men, till they
make such a Judgment.

Secondly; When a man comes (...) himself, and his Death, he confesses, that in
Sin he was beside himself (...) Sin seems a profitable, and a sati^^ying, (...)
at least an excusable (...) of (...) Thing, while a sinner is under his present
Enchantments; and as it is said* ^ Psalm. 36.^ He flatters himself in his (...)
Eyes, until his In^quity be found to (...)* Sin seeems a light Thing (...),
while he is Enchanted and, (...) with it; but ask a Dying (...), What is the
heaviest load that (...) upon you? He will say, My Sin, my Sin! Oh, my
Iniquities, they are as a^ heavy Burden, too heavy for me! What says Solomon,
about the Sin of Drunkenness? At the last, it bites like a Serpent* and stings
like an Adder. A Dying man, feels a Deadly Sting of Sin upon his mind, and
wishes, Oh, that I had never meddled with it. The Dying Drunkard says, I had
better had swallowed any Gall, than so many Excessive Cups. The Dying. Wanton
finds he had better have been shot through with any Fiery Darts, than with
those of Unchastity. The Dying Swearer, finds he had better have taken so many
Coals, than so many Oaths into his mouth. The Dying Cheater, finds he had as
good have drunk down so much melted Silver, as have Robbed his Neighbor. A man
that has misspent his Hours, with vain and lewd Company; he cannot keep from the^
for his life: When this Idle man comes to Dye, his old Companion^ coming about
him, appear like so m^^ny horrid Rattle-Snakes; he Cries out, O Lord, Gather
not my Soul with such Sinners; Lord, Let me go to the Company of them, that led
a Religious life. I say then, Those men, don't show themselves men, who have
not now the same Opinion of Irreligious Actions that they will have when they
come to Dye; and who do not choose to be with Religious company, rather than to
sit with vain persons. Briefly, The Cry of Dying men is, My sin, it has undone
me! it has undone me! And we don't show our selves men, if we don't see this,
before we fall into our Dying Hours.

THus, you have seen irrefragable Demonstration, That men do not Act
Reasonably, if they do not Live^ Religiously. That I may my self (...)
Reasonably, I must now turn this Demonstration, into an Exhortation unto all my
Hearers, to Live Religiously. Sirs, if any of you walk in the ways of
Irreligion, I Summon you to the Bar of your own Reason; certain I am, that you
will be dreadfully Condemned at that Bar: But then, Oh, show your selves men,
and Think, what a Condemnation you must expect from the more dreadful Bar of
Heaven: For, God is greater than our Conscience.

Many Hearers do much admire, that which they call, Rational Preaching; but
when they have opposed it unto Scriptural Preaching, they have but betrayed a
sufficient want of Reason. The most shallow Divines, and the most empty
Harangues, have most unjustly (...) sometimes distinguished by the Name of
Rational. Where^s, the more of Gospel there is in our Preaching, the more of
Reason there (...) in it. Scripture is Reason, in it is ^ighest elevation. I am
now accordingly to set before you, diverse Lessons of Scripture, in such Terms,
that you shall horribly Sin against Reason, i^ you slight them.

I. Show your selves men, and be not so Brutish, as to commit any of the
Faults, for which the Bruits themselves may Reproach us. A wicked man, is
called in Psalm. 92.6. A Brutish man. Most Reasonably may that man be called so,
that shall be so Unreasonable as to do the vile things, which the very Bruits,
by the mere Instinct of Nature avoid. God has implanted a Natural Instinct,
into the Unreasonable Creatur^^, partly that so the Reasonable Ones, may be by
them Hieroglyphically (...) and Instructed in many points of Discretion; and He
has furni^hed us with Reason, partly for this purpos^ that we may apprehend
those (...) Many Things there (...) if we do amiss, the Bruits, though they are
Mutes, will very Loudly and as very Justly cast Reproach upon us. As now, show
your selves men, and Thankfully Consider* and Acknowledge, the Benefits which
the Good God is daily conferring upon you, and Love and Serve, and Seek your
Benefactor. If you do it not, the Ox and the Ass, will Reproach your
Ingratitude; we read it, in Isa. 1.3. Hear, O Heavens, and give Ear, O Earth;
The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib; but Israel does not
Know, My people does not Consider: Ah, sinful Nation. (...) show your selves
men, and let (...) slip the Seasons of Grace, but Seasonably apply your selves,
to Do the Serv^^^* and G^t the Blessing of God. If you do it not, the Stork,
and the Turtle, the Crane and the Swallow, will Reproach your Sleepiness We
read it* in ^er. 8.6. The Stork in Heaven (...) T^mes, and the Turtle, and the
Crane, and the Swallow, observe the Time of their coming, but my People know
not the Judgment of the Lord. Once more; show your selves men, and mind the
Business of your Part^cular Vocatio^s, with Honesty and Industry. If you do it
not, the Ant will Reproach your Slothfulness: We read it; in Prove. 6.6. Go to
the Ant, thou Sluggard, consider her ways, and be wise, -- she provideth her
meat in the Summer. Yet again; Are there among you any Children Undutiful unto
their Parents? Oh* more show your selves men, lest the young Ravens, and the
young Eagles Reproach you for your Undutifulness: We read in Prove. 30.17. The
Eye that mocks at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother, the Ravens of
the Valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it. When the Old
Ravens are sick and spent with Age, the Young ones will keep with them, and be
marvellously kind unto them. When the Old Eagles, are so impaired with Age,
that they cannot Feed themselves, the Young ones Feed them, and Help them with a
marveilous Tenderness. Behold, the Birds of Heaven, ready to fly in thy Face,
and scratch out thine Eyes, if thy Parent be ill requited. Furthermore; It was
an Admonition which our Lord gave unto His Disciples, in Mat. 10.16. Be wise as
Serpents, and harmless as Doves. A Serpent perceiving himself to be much hated,
keeps himself out of Harms way as much as ever he can; he does not throw
himself into Dangers, he affronts no body, assaults no body, provokes no body,
that will not first meddle with him. Christians, show yoor selves men, and
Remembering that an Evil world hates you, do you prudently decline all needless
provocations of other men; Else the Wisdom of the Serpent will Reproach you. A
Dove, is Innocent, and Patient, Cheats no body, Hurts no body, Damnifies no
body, Revenges no Injury* Christians, show your selves men, and be Injurious to
none, but Serviceable to all, as far as we lawfully may, in all their
Interests: Else the Goodness of the Dove will Reproah you. Moreover the Sins of
^ntemperance, I was going to say, They are Beastly S^ns: But I should wrong the
Beasts, to call them so; the Beasts do but Reproach our Intemperance. Oh, show
your selves men. It was with too much of Reason said by Chrysostom, An Ass is
miser than a Drunkard. When Glareanus was urged unto the Drinking of more than
was for his Good, his Answer was, Number isto caene insipientiorem, me vultis?
Would you have me show less wit than a Dog? One who had spent a Night in
drinking of Healths, Riding home, at a Brook in the Road, bad his Horse to
drink the Health of a person he named unto him; the Horse not feeling any Need
of Drink took no notice of it; whereupon the Disguised Master had so much
Reason left him, as to make this Reflection, Alas, This poor Horse has more of
Reason tha^ his Drunken Master.

I Will have done, when I have noted this one thing more. Do we Indulge in the
Town, a considerable Number of Drones; people that might work for their living,
but can give no tolerable account of any work by which they live? Sirs, There
is not one Hive of Bees, in any of our Gardens, but what Reproaches us for our
Allowing of any Drones among us. The Exemple of the well-governed Bees, may*
Sting us, with shame for our Negligence. One writing of these curious Animals,
very truly says, Reason, as abused by us, is as much our Condemnation as our
Prerogative.

II. Show your selves men, and Never Do any of those things, which you plainly
See and Feel, bring no Good, but much Harm, to those who do them. Will a Man do
that, which he sensibly finds do him all manner of Harm, and no manner of Good*
No, the very Beasts themselves will shun such Things as those.

The Sin of profane Swearing, I wonder, what shadow of Good, any man can think
to get by it. In every other Sin, a man aims at Pleasure, or ^rofit, or Honor;
but the Swearer, as the Christian Poet Sings; Lets his Soul run for naught, as
little fearing;
Were I an Epicure, I could hate Swearing.


For a man, to cast Contempt on his Almighty and Eternal Maker, and this,
without the prospect of making any of the least advantage to himself! To incur
the displeasure of the Infinite God, for nothing but a sottish cust^^^ of
having the Bold Sound of a Big Word, in your Language! Wretches, Do but show
your selves men, and you will talk no more so exceedingly Pro^^^ely, nor let such
Blasphemy come (...) of your mouths.

But there are some Sins, wherein the Si^^ers themselves have already found a
Sensible Detriment. Now, (...) your selves men, and no more (...) Things that
have already Poisoned you. We say, A Burnt Child will dread the Fire. Sirs, can
you tell of no Sins, that have already Burnt your Fingers? You have Evidently
done your selves a mischief, by what you have done. Oh, show your selves men,
and not worse than Children: Say, I have done that which has not profited me,
and I will therefore do it no more. Certainly, a Drun^^^d herein does not show
himself a man, when, as in Prove. 23.29. Who has Woe? They that carry long at
the Wine: -- Yet (...) they, I will seek it yet again. Man, [if at least we may
call thee, A man!] Have thou not paid very dear, for thy keeping such and such
lewd Company? Thy Company, and thy Drinking, and Gaming, and Filthiness, with
such Company, do thou not plainly feel, that thou art the worse for it? Thy
Health decayed, thy Name disgraced* thy Purse wasted? show thy self a man, and,
Oh, don't play the Fool at the old rate any more. Come away, for shame come,
away; And my Son, if Sinners Entice, answer them, No, I have always got more
Harm than Good, by being with you; Depart from me ye Evil-d^ers, that I may
keep the Commandments of God.

OF, I will suppose, that you have never yet, in your own Experience* met with
Evil Effects of these and those Evil Actions. Neverthelels, Have you not seen
the Ev^l Consequence of such Actions in other men? The Judgments of God upon
others, will be Warnings unto us, if we show (...) selves men. Have not you
Seen (...) men, terribly Destroy^d by the Judgments of God upon them, for their
wickedness* Then show your selves men, and as an Argument against all such
wickedness, (...) say, Destruction from God is a Terror to me. Seen I Will tell
you what you have See^. You have Seen, the Judgments of God cuting off whole
Nations, for their Despising and Refu^ing the Glorious Gospel of the Lord Jesus
Christ. You have Seen the Judgments of God, upon the Rash wishes of men,
bringing upon them the very Things that they have (...). You have Seen the
Judgments of God, puni^hing Drunkenness, with Poverty, with Sickli^ess, with
Ignominy, and with Tragical Death. You have Seen the Judgments of God, leaving
Sabbath Breakers, to Break all the Laws of Heaven, and hasten their Falls into
that place of Torment where they see no Rest. You have Seen the Judments of
God, heavily Cursing the Children (...) ^ight by Father and Mother, and causing
them to Die before their Time, yea, to D^ upon the Gallows. You have Seen the
Judgments of God, upon Whoremongers and Adulterers, making them to mourn at the
last* when their Flesh and their Body has been Consumed. You have Seen the
Judgments of God, strangely Consuming the Estates got by Gaming, and Cheating,
and Stealing, and Robbing, and Pyracy, and Burning Coals carried into the
Nests, that have been Feathered by Dishonesty. You, my young Folks, have Seen
the fearful Judgments of God, casting the Fierceness of His Anger, upon the
Young Folks of our Land, that have Cast off Fear, and Restrained Prayer before
Him. Now, if you show your selves men, you will take these awful Warnings of
Heaven. Oh show your selves men, and by abandoning these Transgressions,
declare, Lord, I am afraid of thy Judments.

III. Show your selves men, and Reflecting on your Errand into the world, make
due Reflections also on what you have done concerning it. A Man is a creature
capable of Refl^x Acts, and there is none but Man in the visible Creation so.
Every man comes into the world, by the Order of God, and on an Errand for Him.
He that would show himself a man, must Reflect, Why am I in the world? And,
What have I to do in the world? Our Errand hither is, expressed in those words,
Isa. 43.21. This people have I formed for my self, they shall show forth my
praise. It is, to Observe and Adore the perfections of the Infinite God, and
bear a Testimony to the Truths and Ways, and yield Obedience to the Laws of
the Lord Jesus Christ, in this world, and so to prepare for a Blessed state in
another. In short, Our Errand hither, is, To Glorify God and the Lord Jesus
Christ, in Conforming to the Rules and Hopes of His Holy Religion. That man
does not show himself a man, who counts himself Born for any meaner purposes.
He that Lives only to Eat and Drink, and Play, and Sleep, and by some labor to
purchase himself conveniences for all of those, what I pray, does that man show
himself a man? But then, Oh, show your selves men, by Examining your selves,
how far you have done what you were Born to do. Says the Apostle, 1 Cor.
11.28. Let a man Examine himself. He that would show himself a man, let him do
it, by Self-examination. Of what? The Prophet has thus answered* That; Thus
sait^ the Lord of Hosts, Consider your ways. It was a sad Complaint, Jer. 8.6.
No man said, what have I done? Let there be no such thing by Heaven Complained
over us: But, show your selves men, and Retire from the Noise of secular
Business, and ponder with your selves; Well, How many years have I been in the
world? And what have I been a doing in all these years? Have I minded any thing
yet, but vain Diversions from the main Business of my Life? What progress have
I made in the Knowledge of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ? And what Service
have I done for His Glorious Name? And what Good preparation have I made, for a
Better world? Reflect on the Conduct of your Lives, and show your selves men,
by Examining your selves, whether you have Lived like men!

IV. Show your selves men, and seek not your Happiness, in those poor and Low
Enjoyments, that never can make any Ratio^al Creatures Happy. Unsanctified Men,
will dream of an Happiness to be found, in the Enjoyments of this world; but if
we would Show our selves men, we must away with so vain a Dream. The
Ever-blessed God, made Man for Himself, and gave all these inferior things to
M^n, as only Helps and Means to bring him to Himself. Such are the Faculties,
and such the Appetites of Man, that nothing but a God can satisfy him. Come
then, O man, show th6y self a man, and say with him, in Psalm. 73.25. -- Lord,
whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is nothing on the Earth, that I
desire besides thee: God is my portion forever. Let men, show themselves men,
and not fancy, that Happiness and Contentment is to be found in those worldly
things, which flatter the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye, and the ^ride
of Life. The Enjoyments of this life, are Courted by the most of men, as their
Sovereign Happiness: It may be said of them, as in Amos 2.7. They part after
the Dust of the earth* (...) Happiness, for a Snake or a Toad, rather than a
Man! Men pursue after nothing, but that they may have their ^enses Gratified,
and their Estates Flourishing, and their Neighbors putting a value upon them.
Whereas, if we would indeed show our selves men, we should see, That all these
things are Miserable Comforters, and Broken Cisterns, and Lying Va^ities: and
that for to seek Happiness in them is to Rejoice ^n a thing of naught. Luther
did therefore show himself a man, when upon some worldy Enjoyments that flowed
in upon him, he thus Addressed the God of Heaven, O my God, I earnestly protest
unto thee, that I will not be put off with such things as these. As the Apostle
said, in 1 Cor. 15.19 If we have Hope onl^ in this Life, we are of all men the
most miserable* So may all men Say, If we have our Happiness only in the Things
of this Life, we are of all Creatures the most miserable. Sirs, know you no^,
That never any man did Seek (...) in the Enjoyments of this world, but he lost
what he Sought. The Experiment of coming at Happiness in sublunary Things, has
been Tried, and Repeted, and Altered, millions of Times; but after all it has
been Cried out, as in Eccl. 1.14. Behold, all is Vanity and Vexation of Spirit.
The Spirit of man still finds, as the sick miser did of the Bags of Gold, he
called for, Ah, They will not do! They will not do! Yea, know you not, That if
you seek all your Happiness, only in the Enjoyments of this world, then you
loose all your Hap^yiness, at your leaving this world. As it is said, in Psalm
49.16. When a Rich man Dies, he shall carry nothing away. Thus, let a man have
never so much of this world about him he shall shortly take his leave of it
all. And what is become of all his Happiness, when his Eyes are sunk, and his
Breath gone, and his Heart stopped and a Death-^^ro^d, with a few clods of
Earth, is all that is left unto him? Oh, show your selves men, and no longer
seek for Happines^, in these Deceitful Things. Raise up your Thoughts, O
Rational Souls, to an Happiness, that shall beworthy of you, an Happiness that
shall suit your Noble Qualities, an^ Happiness that will be the Good ^^arp,
never to be taken away. If you will do like Men, you^l place your only
Happiness, in the Enjoyment of God by Christ, through Ete^nal Ages.

V. Show your selves men, and while you are making provision for your Bodies,
let your Souls be as well provided for. It Is the privilege of Man to have a
Soul, a most valuable and never-dying Soul. He that would show himself a man,
must Remember, That besides his Body and within his Body, he has a wonderful
Soul; a Jewel whereof the Body is but the Cabinet; A SOUL, I say, or, A
Spiritual and Immortal Substance, Endued with the powers of knowing and
willing, and affecting to be vitally United unto an Humane Body. But, if we
show our selves men, that thing, The SOUL, the SOUL, will be of all things, the
most Considerable unto us, and we shall often Consider on those words of our
Lord, in Matt^ 16.26. What is a man Profited, if (...) gain the whole World,
and lose his own Soul? We are at a world of pains to get our Body well
accommodated; for this, we ^^se Early, for this, we Sit up Late, for this, we
Eat the Bread of Care^^lness, that we may get Bread for our Body. We have all
this while a ^oul within us, that makes a lamentable Cry unto us, When O man,
when shall I, thy undone Soul, be looked after? Thou have spent many a year in
laboring to support, and preserve, and adorn a Body, that yet must seed the
worms: When will thou do any thing for thy Soul, that is in danger of going
down into Endles^ miseriespunc; Now, show your selves men, by hearing the Cries
of your own Souls, and using your cares for your Souls. Your Souls are under a
Sentence of Everlasting Death: Will you do nothing to get that Sentence off?
Your Souls are deprived of the Divine Image: will you do nothing to get that
Image Restored? Your Souls are Enslaved unto Satan: will you do nothing to be
rescued out of your Slavery? Your Souls are perishing in horrible Distempers:
will you do nothing that those Distempers may be Cured Alas, you don't Act like
Men, in doing so. You Feed your Bodies: but, Show your selv^^ men, and obtain
for your Souls, The (...) of Li^e. You Cloth your Bodies (...) Show your
selves men, and obtain (...) your Souls, The Garments of Righteousness. Your
Bodies are with no little cost, Lodged in convenient Houses, for a very little
while: but, Show your selves men, and obtain for your Souls, An House Eternal
in the Heaven. Oh! If men would show themselves men, with what Anguish of Soul,
would they lay to heart, the Condition of their own Souls, and pierc^ the very
Heavens with that Cry, in Psalm. 1.16.4. O Lord, I beseech thee, Deliver my
Soul! And O Parents, Let the Souls of your ^hildren, be in these Regards unto
you, like your own Souls. What* Are your Children but the C^ildren o^ ^wine?
Show your selves men, and be not Regardless of their Souls; do all that you can
to Save them out of the wretchedness* which is through your Corrupt Nature
conveyed unto their Souls? It is well said, by one of the Ancients* He that
m^nds his Child's Body, more (...) his Soul, is like One, that if (...) and his
Dog were like to be (...), should be sollicitous to save h^s (...), but let hi^
Ch^ld per^sh in the water. Is this to do like a Man, think you? No, it is like a
Dog rather than a Man. Oh, Show your selves men, and think, I nou^^sh, adorn
the Body of my Children, but their Soul are (...), their Soul are naked, the^r
Souls are under (...) wrath of God: I am in Agonies to help them, when their
Bodies are sick, but their Soul are ^^ning away in the^r (...). Deal with them,
Do for them accordingly.

VI. Show your selves men, and Attend upon the Ordinances of the Lord Jesus
Christ, with your Eyes upon the End, for which He has Ordained them. To Act
without an and, is to Act not like a Man. One great Concern of our Lives, is to
attend on the Natural, and Appointed, worship of God, in the Assemblies of His
people* If we would show our selves men, we should be able to give a Reasonable
Account of our being at any time in those ^^^emblies. We read of a confused
(...) at Ephesus, Act. 19.32. The Assembly was confused, and the most part knew
not wherefore they were come together. But they did not show themselves men; I
cannot say, whether Paul had not then his F^ght with the Beasts of Ephesus. It Is
great pity that any such Thing should ever be said of any Christian Assembly*
And yet such are the Thoughtless, and Careless Dispositions of men, that when
they come together, very many of them Think not, wherefore they are com^
together. Many come, only because it is the Custom, and the Fashion to come.
Sirs, The very Dogs that follow their Masters, come also upon that Account. Or,
perhaps, many come to please their Fancy, (...) to keep their Credit. An
Account not much better than the former. Show your selves men, and when you
come to the Christian Assembly, be able to give a Manlike Account of what you
do. When the people (...) out unto the Sermons of that ^^^ellent Preacher, John
Baptist, (...) Lord thus put them to it, in Mat. ^^.8. What went you out for?
When we come to a Christian Assembly, if we would show our selves men, we
should be able in a Reasonable manner to answer that Question, What is it for?
The main Ends, for which our Lord Jesus Christ, has directed our use of His
Ordinances, are summed up, in that Sentence, 1 John 1.3. Truly our Fellowship
is with the Father, and with His Son Jesus Christ. Now let those be your Ends,
in the using of these Ordinances. In the Christian Assembly, be able to say, I
am here that I may Glorify the Lord Jesus Christ, in Obedience to the
Commandment of that Glorious Lord. Be able to say, I am here, that I may obtain
more Accquaintance with the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Mystery of Salvation by
Him. Be able to say, I am here, that I may receive Benefit from the Lord Jesus
Christ, and have my Salvation furthered. Yea, and let the more particular Ends
of every Ordinance, have a room in your most awful Thoughts, when you are
before God engaged in that Ordinance. Why do you keep the Lords Day? Show your
selves men; let it be, to Commemorate the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus
Christ; and Assist your expectation of, and preparation for, the Great
^abbatism, that will arrive at your own Resurrection. Why do you stand up at
the Public Prayers? Show your selves men; let it be to implore Heaven for all
the Blessings of Peace with Godliness and Honesty, upon your selves and others.
Why do you bear part in the Public Psalms? Show your selves men; let it be to
Admonish your selves, and Magnify your Lord. Why do you give ear to the Public
Preaching? Show your selves men; let it be, that your Souls may be cast into
the Mould of what you Hear, your Minds Enlightened, your Hearts Rectified, your
Lives Reformed, by what you Hear. Why do you seek Admission into a Church
Fellowship? Show your selves men; let it be, that being built ^p in your most
Holy Faith, you may be found written among the Living of the Mystical Church.
Why do you ask Baptism for your selves, and for your Children? Show your selves
men; let it be to Signify, and Testify your Good Answer, to the proposals of
the Covenant of Grace, and lay hold on the Promises of that Covenant. Why do
you approach to the Sacrament of the Eucharist? Show your selves men; let it
be, to Revive in your own Souls, the Holy Remembrance of what has been done
for us by our Lord and Savior; and have your Interest in all the Great
Salvation of our Lord Sealed unto you. Why do you maintain the Ecclesiastical
Discipline? Show your selves men; ^et it be, to Recover Fallen Sinners unto
Repentance, and Represent unto the world, what sort of Sinners will be Ban^shed
from the Heavenly Kingdom* Finally, Why do you cast your Mi^e^, into the
Lords-dayes Collections? Show your selves men; let it be, to pay your
Quit-rents unto the Great Lord of all your possessions; and that the^e things
going up as a Memorial before God in Heaven, you may be fitted for His Heavenly
Mercies. This is Ma^ly Religion.

VII. Show your selves men, (...) whether God have Dispensed Comforts, or
Sorrows unto you, Endeavor to (...) the Calls of those Dispensations. It is
the part of a Reasonable man, to think, (...) may be the Reason and the De^^gn
of the Lords Dealings with him, and to comply with the Lords Design in all.
(...) our God multiplied Comforts unto us? We do not show our selves (...) we
do not now study and contrive, with the Psalmist, What shall ^ render to the
Lord, for all His Benefits? It was urged, in Romans 12.1. I Beseech you,
Brethren, by the mercies of God, that you present your Bodies, a Living
Sacrifice, Holy, Acceptable to God, which is your Reasonable Service. Has God
bestowed much Mercy on you, it is but Reasonable that you render all Service to
Him. Show your selves men, and Resolve with your selves; What? Shall I go on in
Rebellions against the God, who does continually follow me with His Goodness
and Mercy? No, I will not be so Foolish and Unwise as thus Ill to Requite the
Lord: But I will fear, and love, and serve my Good God, and Live unto Him, as
long as I Live. On the other side; Has our God inflicted Sorrows upon us? We
do not show our selves men, if we have not the Desire of that afflicted man,
Lord, show me wherefore th^^ Contend^^st with me! It was said in Prove. 27.^^*
Though thou should ^ray a Fool in ^ Mort^r, yet will not his Foolishness
depart from him. For a man to be as Foolish, as Carnal, as Worldly, as
Prayerless, after his Afflictions, as he was before; does he do like Man, in
that Incorrigible Stupidity? No, he is but a Fool brayed in a Mortar. Show your
selves men, and come to this Resolution with your selves; What? Have I been
Scourged by God, and shall I provoke Him to Employ yet more Scourg^^ upon me?
No, I will Return to the God that smites me, and I will turn from all my
provocations. Lord, before I was Afflicted I went astray, but if thou make me
better by my Afflictions, it will be good for me, that I have been Afflicted.
This it is* to show our selves men, under the Dispensations of God.

VIII. Show your selves men, and having the Salvation of the Lord Jesus Christ,
Offered unto you, do not mad^y Reject the Gracious Offers of it. He does not
show himself a man, that Rejects a Good Offer: Quis nisi ^entis i^ops (...) was
an Offer that Heaven (...) made unto Solomon, in 2 Chronicles. 1.7. Ask what I shall
give thee. Had Solomon then shown himself a man, if he had not accepted that
Offer? Sirs, This is a wondrous Thing, The Holy One of God appearing to us, as
He did unto Solomon, with Length of Days in His Right Hand, and in His Left
Hand Riches and Honor, makes this Offer now unto us all; Ask what I shall
(...) for you. All the things contained in the very Great and Precious Promises
of the New Covenant, are Offered unto them, that will but sincerely Acccept
thereof. Hearken to the Voice of the Lord of Glory, and be astonished: From the
Excellent Glory, there is this Offer made unto us, Man, If thou will Accept it,
I will by the Imputation of my Righteousness, make thee perfectly Righteous
before the Judgment Seat of God: If thou will Accept it, I will make thee Holy,
and by the Influences of my Holy Spirit, Sanctifying thee throughout, help thee
to be daily perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God: If thou will Accept it, I
will (...) thee by my Counsel, and bring thee to my Glory. Now, show your
selves men, and Humbly, and Gladly, and Thankfully Accept this Offer; and Cry
^o God for the Assistance of His Grace, that you may Accept thereof. Our Lord
Jesus Christ, coming to an Impotent man, in Joh. 5.6. He says unto him, Will thou be made whole? That Blessed Lord seeing us in our deplorable state, which
by Sin we are fallen into, He demands of us, Will thou be Saved out of this
miserable (...)? Ah, Condemned Sinner, Art thou willing to be Justified and
Entitled unto Life Eternal? Slave of Satan, Art thou willing to be made a
Freeman in the City of God? Child of Wrath, Art thou willing to be made an
Heir of Heaven? Sink of Lust* Art thou willing to be made a Temple of the Holy
Spirit forever? Now, show your selves men; Let not the Impertinences of this
world, cause you to neglect so Great Salvation. Lift u^ your Hearts, unto your
Compassionate Lord, saying, Lord, I am willing* Oh, (...) thy Grace make me
willing! The man that is not Willing th^^ to be Saved, shall Die a Beast, and
Rise a Devil.

IX Show your selves men, and being Mortal men, be not unmindful of your own
Mortality. Man is Mortal: He does not show himself a man, who does not count
himself a Mortal. He that forgets his Mortality, forgets that he is a Man. We
have enough, and enough to Convince us of what we read in Psalm. 89.48. What man
is he that Lives, and shall not see Death? And in Joh 14.1. Man that is Born
of a ^^man, is of few Days. Well then; Show your selves men, by being mindful
that you are but Men; and Live not as if you were to Live always in this Dying
world. By Dying daily, in Meditating on, and Realizing of our hastening Death,
we shall show our selves men; and prove our selves Wise men, and Go^^ men. It Is
not the part of a Man, but of a Madman, to (...) all Thoughts of the Future
Sta^e, and pursue the Things of this world, with such Hurry, and Fury, (...) if
(...) never to go out of thi^ world* Some Sinful persons will say of a Thing
they never thought of, I thought no more of it, than of my Dying da^?
Lamentable! What a man a^t (...), that never think of thy Dying day? Show
your selves men, and when you come into, or go out of your Houses, think, I
Shall shortl^ be carried unto the House appointed for all the Liv^ng. When you
put off your Clothes, think, I Shall shortly be shro^ded in a W^^ding-Sheet.
When you enter your Beds, think, I Shall shortly ly down in my Grave. Often
affect your selves, by thinking, how Certain your Death is, and how Uncertain
the Time of your Death. And let the affecting Thought thereof, make you afraid
of Mispending your Time, in those things, that will be grievous unto you, when
you come to Die. Alas, men do scarce never so little show themselves men, as
when they are at a loss for an odd Thing, they call, Pastime. Ah Pastime; what
a word is that! For a man that has but a short Glass of Time, to make ready for
a Tremendous Eternity; and for this man to use his wits for the Inventing of
Pastime, and S^^ander away numberless Hours, in mere Pastime; cert^^^^y, he
forg^ts that he is a Man. (...) may be needful, and useful to a (...) in
Immoderate Recreations, a (...) not show himself a man. In Fine, show thy self
a man, by taking the present Time, which is thy only Time, to make ready for
the End of all thy Time. Don't leave the Everlasting state of thy Soul at
Peradventures. There is no Unconverted man, but, for ought he can tell, he may
before to morrow morning be thrown down into the place of Dragons; he may this
night be irrecoverably siezed by the burning Indignation of God. Sure, That man
does not show himself a man, who can sleep quietly, ^hen for ought he can tell,
he shall w^ke in Eternal Torments. Oh, Show your selves men, by an Immediate
Conversion to God, and not procrastinating your Endeavors to get into good
Terms with Heaven, through pretenses, of a more convenient season, whereof no
Man, can be assured.

FINIS.

