Morality Not to be Relied on for LIFE. OR, A Brief Discourse, discovering the
One Thing Wanting, which leaves the legalist Short of Life Eternal. Delivered
in a SERMON on the Lecture in Boston, May, 23 d. 1700.

By Samuel Willard, Teacher of a Church in Boston.

Tit. 3.5. Not by works of Righteousness that we have done, but according to
his Mercy he has saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and renewing of the
Holy Ghost.

Boston, in N. E. Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Benjamin Eliot, at his
Shop under the West End of the Townhouse. 1700.

Morality Not to be Relied on for Life.
Mark X.21. -- One thing thou lackest.


IN this Context we have an History* which is also recorded in two other,
Evangelists, viz. Matthew, and Luke, though variously as to several* passages
that are inserted in one, and omitted in the other. I may not spend the time in
laying open all the particulars in this Narration; every whereof would afford
matter of instruction. The Theological Scope of it is to let us see how far a
natural man may go in the improvement of his Moral powers, and yet miss of
eternal life at last; exemplified in a young and noble man of the Jewish
Nation, as he is represented by the other Evangelists. This man, doubtless had
not only heard of Christ, but had also heard him, and been affected with his
Preaching; and, being convinced of a future everlasting state, is concerned how
he may obtain eternal Life in it: accordingly he comes running to Christ,
expressing much veneration of him, both in words and gestures, and propounds to
him the most important question that he could, viz. How he may come to inherit
eternal life: though, in the manner of his enquiry, he expressed a legal spirit,
and intimated that he hoped to be Saved by doing, What shall I do, etc. Our
Savior treats him courteously, and yet closely; he gives him good language,
but yet searches him; and, knowing the deceitfulness of his heart, resolves to
discover it to him, and others too. He therefore first puts him upon the duties
of the Moral Law, where he knew that his great presumption lay, and in which he
determined to discover him; directing him to conformity thereto: the self
Conceited man does plumply and with great confidence assert his constancy in
these observations; that he has observed all these from his youth, and would
fain know whether this were not sufficient, or if any thing more were wanting,
Matthew. 19.20. What lack I yet? Our Savior is said, verse. 21. To look upon him,
and love him; which is not to be understood of a Divine love, at least not of
such as he bears to his own, or such whom he has made partakers in his grace:
but with an humane affection, which is due to ingenuous men, though they be
mere moralists: and therefore, as he was not mistaken in him, so he goes on to
detect him. That which he summarily mentions in our Text is, that there is a
flaw in that which he is so conceited of, that there is something deficient:
and, to let him know what this was, and that he was as yet a stranger at home,
and did not know himself, he puts him upon a trial, in which the naughtiness of
his heart presently discovered it self. Christ did not openly charge him with
falsehood, as well he might, and tell him that he had not indeed kept one of
these commands aright, but he puts him upon a Test by which he might judge
himself, and discover how little safety there was in his condition. Out of
doubt, this young man was an eminent instance of a Legal Moralist, and one that
had, with a great deal of Conscience and Integrity endeavored an universal
conformity to the Law, not only in the Ceremonial, but also in the Moral part
of it, and hoped for acceptance and a reward on account of his Righteousness.
But Christ detects the deceit; and, though he might have told him that he
wanted many things, yet there was one that was the ground of all, and there
needed no more to defeat his blooming expectations. In the Greek it it, there
is one thing lacking to thee. And the word signifies, to fall behind of the
thing aimed at, and is a Metaphor from such as run in a race, but never come to
the Goal, but sit down short of it, and thereupon do in the issue miss of the
prize which was set up at it: and that which our Savior here intends, is that
there was someting wanting, which would make him to miss of eternal life. The
word used in Luke 18.22. signifies that which is left behind, or is wanting to
complete a thing, without which it remains imperfect, and cannot answer the end
aimed at in it. Hence,

DOCTRINE. There is one thing defective in the mere Morality of fallen men, the
want whereof will leave them short of eternal life.



Out of doubt there are manifold defects, which the best duties of sinful men
may be charged withal, and some more than others; but, as every of those will
not deprive them of the reward of life; so there is one thing which, if there
be no more, is enough to make all appear vain and unprofitable, as to the great
design which man is in pursuit of, viz. Everlasting felicity: and this is that
which we may at present make some enquiry into. The Case here then is;

QUESTION. What is that one thing the lack whereof will spoil the best Morality
in men?
Answ. I shall not here spend time in investigating the particular flaw which
Christ laid open in this man's Obedience; for it is beyond just dispute* that
our Saviors design in this trial, was to convince him of the nature of his
malady, and lead him to the root from which it proceeded; which by such a proof
he laid open: and what that is, we may now make search after: and, to make way
to this, and obviate those prejudices, which proud men will wait for an
occasion of, that so they may calumniate our present Doctrine, we may pursue it
in the following Conclusions.

1. That moral Obedience is due to God from all mankind. The Jews, when the
Gospel was published, were ready to charge Evangelical Preaching as if it made
void the Law, which the Apostle utterly denies, and asserts the quite contrary,
Romans 3.31. Do we make void the law through faith? God forbid: ye we establish
the law. The moral Law was adapted to the nature of man, as he was placed under
the special Government of God. When God speaks of the Ceremonial law, he uses
such a word as that, Ezekiel. 20.25. I gave them statutes that were not good. Not
as if they were not good in respect of the use which they were appointed for,
for that would have been an impeachment of Gods wisdom: but they were such as
in themselves bind an heavy and insupportable burden upon those who were under
the obligation of them, Acts 15.10. A yoke which neither we, nor our fathers
were able to bear; and they only served for the time being, which was a state
of Servitude under which the Church of God was held, during its nonage; and
even then when these were of force; we are told in, Heb. 9 9. That they could
not make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience.
Whereas the Moral Law was suited to man, and every way proper to his nature,
and relation which in it he bare to God, it has therefore that encomium given
to it, which it can never lose, Romans 7.12. The law is holy, and the commandment
holy, and just, and good. The obligation therefore to obedience to this law is
perpetual, and the Children of God, though brought under the New Covenant, do
yet owe it; and it lies upon them as a constant duty, to study and endeavor
after the greatest perfection in it, according to Christ's own precept given in,
Matt. 5. ult. Be ye perfect, as your father which is in heaven is perfect.

2. That there is a great deal which a man may do in morality, by the
improvement of his natural powers, with the common assistance of the Spirit of
God. We are here warily to distinguish between the Moral Powers which belong to
the nature of man, and the Moral Image which was connatural to him in his state
of integrity: this latter indeed is lost by the Apostasy, but the former
abides, as belonging essentially to Humanity, though this is very much crazed,
and has lost a great deal of its vigor. And, although the power of lust be so
strong in natural men, that they cannot of themselves alone withstand the
impetuosity of it, yet the Moral Powers which remain in the man, may be so far
improved by the common influences of the Spirit of God, which he affords to
some, on whom he does not bestow his Sanctifying Grace, as to make a natural
man to proceed far in compliance with the Law. This may be instanced more
especially in four particulars.

1. A man may maintain an universal outward conformity to the letter of the
Law, so far as to be blameless among men. It is true, he can do no one act of
Obedience unto Gods Law, that is entirely so, for such an act must stand forth
in all its causes entirely, which does altogether exceed the power of any of
Adams Apostate race: But he may be careful in his Conversation, and carry it so
circumspectly in all his actions that are exposed to the view of men, as to
observe them, and conform to them with great curiousness, according to his
understanding of them. And thus this noble young man mentioned in our context
was of opinion that he had done, and Paul after his Conversion, when he
reflected on his law state, could assert that he had lived after this sort, in,
Phil. 3.6. Touching the Righteousness which is in the law blameless. i e.
without incurring the imputation of Scandal from men.

2. He may be very Conscientious in all this. There is a Conscience active in
the natural man; and, though it is defiled with sin, as every thing else in the
man is, yet it is capable of being improved in him, so as to discover to, and
convince him of the reason and equity of these and those duties, the
brutishness and unreasonableness of such and such sins, the moral evil which
there is in these, and the moral goodness in those, so as to oblige him from an
inward principle to do this, and abstain from that. There is a Moral Integrity
in men, and prevails in some, that leads them to do things, not Hypocritically,
but Conscientiously. We may suppose Abimelech to plead to this* for we have no
Scripture evidence that he had reached any higher, Genesis 20.5. In the integrity
of my heart, and innocence of my hands have I done this* And God herein
consents to the truth of this assertion, Verse. 6. I know that thou did this
in the integrity of thine heart.

3. He may take a great deal of delight in thus doing. The very Heathen
Moralists, who only followed the light of nature, could boast that they found
incomparably more of pleasure and satisfaction, in the exercise of their
Virtues, than the greatest sensuallists could possibly do in their fleshly
pleasures, and could reject these with scorn for those. The Moralist does not
put a force upon his whole nature, though he may suppress some exorbitant
motions of it, when he abstains from the things that the generality immerge
themselves in, and lives contrary to the current of the times and places he
lives in; but he gratifies his Moral Principles, when he curbs in these which
are sensual. Men's Affections work naturally, when they are moved by the
impressions of Reason in them, for it belongs to the nature of man, that he is
a reasonable Creature. God therefore concedes that to men whom he yet reproves
as false, Isa. 58.2. They ask of me the ordinances of Justice, they take
delight in approaching to God.

4. He may do it with an aim at obtaining of eternal life in this way. Thus the
noble young man instanced in our Context seems to have done, inasmuch as he
would know if this would not do. The natural man maintains his cravings after
felicity, and has not lost his apprehensions of an eternal state, and
consequently is desirous of settling a permanent happiness, and to this his
actions designedly tend, how ever he may be mistaken in the Medium. He knows
that there must be a way to this, and he is in search after it, and makes it
his enquiry, Psalm. 4.6. Many there be that say, who will show us good? And the
Legalist looks upon his own Righteousness to be the way, and accordingly he
prosecutes it with such an aim: yea indeed* this is the very legal Spirit in
man, that he thinks to obtain it thus: so it was with the Jews in the Apostles
time, Romans 9.32. They sought Righteousness, not by faith, but as it were by the
works of the law.

3 Morality helps the man to be Serviceable to mankind in his Generation. It is
a gift of God, for man to be helped to exert these principles which are in
them, and for that reason is to be acknowledged and not despised. It is
subservient to Gods Common Government, in conducting of the affairs of this
lower world; and in this regard a Moral man may be said to be a blessing in the
place where he lives, and is useful for the public benefit; and God makes
improvement of these for such an end. If all the world were given up to, and
drenched in all manner of Immoralities, there would be no living for mankind
one with another, but the whole world would soon be reduced to a Chaos, whereas
this fits the man for public Service; such an one was Saul, by virtue of those
common gifts that God bestowed on him, when he was made King over Israel; and
he continued so to be, till the Spirit of God departed from him. Such an one
may be helpful to the Children of God; and that both by his counsel, and his
example, and so was Achitophel to David, before he went off in Absaloms
Rebellion, Psalm. 55.13, 14. Mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance; we
took sweet counsel together, and walked to the House of God in company. And
doubtless such was Demas to Paul, before he forsook him.

4. There are many present outward advantages that the man may gain to himself
by it. There are several benefits which in this life men get by their morality,
in the ordinary course of Gods Providence. The man hereby maintains his credit
or reputation among men; it wins the good word of all that are sober; whereas
immorality exposes men to be the scorn of all, but those that are their
companions in debauchery. It keeps the man from those courses which would of
their own nature prove ruinous to him, in respect of his estate, peace, health
and life. It gives the man more quiet of Conscience, and prevents those horrors
which immoral men draw upon themselves by their sinning against the light that
is in them: for the Conscience of a Legalist is wont ordinarily to treat him
according as it has resentments of his carriage toward the Law which is
imprinted upon it, Rom 2.14, 15. These are a law to themselves, which show the
work of the Law written upon their hearts; their consciences also bearing
witness, and their thoughts mean while, either accusing or else excusing one
another. And it procures the man many temporal blessings from God in the course
of his common Providence; Men fare the better in this world oftentimes for
this: for though mere Morality does not procure Gods special love for men, yet
the Morality it self is so far a duty, and God many times favors men in
temporary benefits on the account hereof; and it prevents calamities which
otherwise might have overtaken them: hence that advice given, Eccles. 7.17. Be
not overmuch wicked, neither be thou foolish, why should thou die before thy
time?

5. The Moral Obedience of the Children of God, is Serviceable to their Eternal
Felicity. The truth of this assertion is questioned by none but such as are
downright Antinomian; though, how far, and after what manner it is so, affords
occasion for hot disputes. There is a moral Righteousness, the want whereof
will exclude a man from the Kingdom, Mat. 5.20. Except your righteousness
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. There is a Holiness, without which no man
shall see God, Heb. 12.14. This is so far from being discharged by the Gospel
Covenant, that it teaches it, Tit. 2.11, 12. The Grace of God which brings
Salvation, has appeared to all men; teaching us that denying ungodliness and
worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
world. There are therefore many and great promises made in the Gospel to the
faithful obedience of the Children of God: 1 Cor. 15. ult. Knowing that your
labor shall not be in vain, in the Lord. Gal 6.9. Be not weary of well doing,
for in due time you shall reap if you faint not. Rev. 2.10. Be thou faithful
unto the death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life; Romans 2.7. To them that by
patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, honor, and immortality,
eternal life. Far be it from any to think, that the Gospel does either give men
a discharge from the duty of Obedience to Gods Commands, or that it does not
encourage it with the promise of eternal rewards.

6. But mere morality will leave the man short of Eternal Life, and under the
Curse of Eternal Death. All men in their natural state are under the Curse,
Ephesians. 2.3. Were children of wrath by nature, even as others. And whiles this
abides on them, they must needs be far from life, for these two are contraries.
In vain then do men seek any other course to advance their everlasting welfare,
but such as may rescue them from that Curse. That man cannot be less than
miserable on whom the Wrath of God abides; Christ therefore so expresses
sinful man's misery, Joh. 3.36. The wrath of God abides on him. The man also
must be put into the way of life, if ever he obtain it, but mere morality will
not do this, but leave him infinitely short of it, as will presently appear.

7. The reason of this is, because the man, notwithstanding his Morality, wants
one thing to render his person and obedience acceptable to God. Out of doubt
God has the disposal of life and death in his own hands: his loving kindness
is better than life, and his Wrath carries in it death and ruin to all such as
must finally undergo it. Let a man take never so much pains in his Services,
and be at never so much cost in the doing of them, yet, if at the last God will
not accept of them at his hands, but reject both them and him, they will
nothing avail him. Now it is certain, that there is that which is defective in
the most operose and specious service of the Moralist, which renders it far
from pleasing God, so as to crown it with a reward of happiness, and thereby
renders it unserviceable to him in order to eternal life, and that we may find
out what this one thing is, and not be mistaken about it, we may trace the
thing it self, and be satisfied about the reason of its deficiency in this
regard, in the following Assertions.

1. In that moral obedience to which life was engaged in the First Covenant,
there was required an exact conformity to the Rule therein given to man, which
none of fallen men can attain unto. There was not only a morality required of
man by the precept, for so there is still, and will be as long as the special
Government of God continues: but a constant life of happiness was Entailed upon
it by promise, in case man had complied with it: but this was in the Covenant
of Works, the language whereof we are told, in Romans 10.5. Moses describes the
Righteousness which is of the law; that the man which does these things shall
live by them. But then, the Obedience on which this promise might come to be
claimed, was such as entirely answered the Law in its full demands, without any
the least defect; for we are told, Jam. 2.10. Whosoever shall keep the whole
Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. That Covenant did not
run in such a strain, let the man do the best he can, and that shall be
accepted of him, and he shall live; though it is certain that it required
nothing more than man could then do, inasmuch as the Law was adequate to the
powers that God put into man, and the Image of God which he then had upon him,
contained in it a power commensurate with his duty: but yet, it commanded
entire and perfect conformity to the will of God; and therefore it is a vain
thing for sinful men to say, they do to the best of their power, and what more
can be expected of them? for, if by sin they have lost that power which God
once gave unto man, less then which will not do to enable him to perform entire
obedience to the precept, should he say true, that he does to his utmost, it
signifies nothing, as long as that is short of the command. But it is certain
that none living has such an ability remaining in him The Apostle says, in 1 John 1.8. If we say that we have no sin* we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us; and the wise man makes that challenge, Prove. 20.9. Who can say, I
have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? Yea that is true of the best
of men here, Jam. 3.2. In many things we offend all; and this leaves every man
that stands related to that Covenant under a Curse, according to, Gal. 3.10. As
many as are of the works of the Law, are under the Curse; for it is written,
Cursed is every one that continues not in all things that are written in the
book of the law to do them.

2. The Apostasy has made man a debtor to Revenging Justice, for which his
personal Obedience cannot satisfy. The Covenant of Works, under which man was
at first placed, had not only in it, a promise of life made to perfect
Obedience, but also a threatening of death denounced in case of Disobedience. We
are therefore told, in Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death; it was due to man
upon agreement, in case that he should transgress; and this Sanction of that
Covenant was of equal force with the former, and God stands in Justice as much
obliged to this as to that; accordingly the threatening was delivered with the
greatest asseveration, Gen 2.17. In the day thou eatest thereof thou shall
surely die. So that now the case is quite altered with the man, in regard of
that Covenant, from what it was at the first: for, although the Relation of all
men, whiles they remain in their natural estate, which they bear unto that
Covenant, abides, and they are to be tried and judged according to the tenor
of it, and as they come under this or that Sanction of it: yet the promise of
life, as it was made on the Hypothesis of perfect obedience, does not abide,
nor is any longer to be used as an encouragement to fallen man. Once God said,
This do, and live; but he does not say so now; for the man is come short of
this, being by sin fallen under the threatening, and is utterly lost as to the
promise; so that not only is it in vain for him to think to do and live, in
regard of that impotency which is fallen upon him, leaving him without
strength; but upon the supposal that he could now henceforward do, as perfectly
as Adam could before he lost his power, yet there is no life for him by that
Covenant, Gal. 3.21. If there had been a law given which could have given life;
(i. e. to fallen man) verily righteousness should have been by the Law. And the
reason is, because a Curse is upon him for disobedince; and all his doing can
never expiate it; it is but his present quit rent, and will not make up former
arrears; hence that advice, Luke 17.10. When ye have done all those things that
are commanded you, say, we are unprofitable Servants; we have done that which
was our duty to do.

3. The acceptableness of the imperfect obedience of sinful men, is derived
through a New Covenant, to which the Moralist is a stranger. Though the First
Covenant accepted of nothing but what was in all points perfect, yet the
Covenant of Grace does. It is certain that there are some whose not only
persons but services too are received by God, and he smells a sweet savor in
them. This is not because they have recovered a sinless perfection, or that any
of their duties are without defects attending them; no; they profess the quite
contrary, so did he, Phil. 3.12. Not as if I had already attained, either were
already perfect; and hence is fain to deprecate a law trial, as knowing that he
is not able to stand it, but it will condemn him, Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.
For this acceptance therefore he must be removed from the Old Covenant, which
speaks nothing but terror to him, and be brought under a new one; which is
therefore called, the bringing in of a better hope, Heb. 7.19. This Covenant
has declared a way which God has found out to cover the imperfections, and
accept of the sincerity of such as are in it, consistent with the Justice of
God, and for the manifestation of his Grace. Now the moral man, as such, has
no claim to the spiritual and saving privileges of this Covenant, nor does he
desire it, counting that he can do well enough without it; however he may, by
an external relation, have a claim to Gospel privileges in the outward
dispensation of them; yet he is really under the Law, and therefore must stand
or fall according to the sentence of it.

4 In this Covenant there is a new principle requisite, from which all
acceptable Obedience must flow, viz. Faith. We are told, in Heb. 11.6. That
without faith it is impossible to please God. And hence, all the truly
commendable and accptable services, are said to be done by Faith. For this
therefore it is necessary that not only there be a principle of saving says in
the man, else he can do nothing believingly, but there must be the exerting of
it in every act of New obedience, if ever God will receive it. A man may pray
as formally, and use as suitable and pathetical expressions in it as can be,
but if he do not pray in faith, all is lost, and his prayers are but howlings:
hence that direction and caution, Jam. 1.5, 6, 7. Let him ask of God; but let
him ask in faith, nothing wavering; for let not such a man think that he shall
receive any thing of the Lord; and Mat. 21.22. All things whatsoever ye shall
ask in prayer, believing, ye shall receive. A person may hear the word with
great attention, and receive it with much affection, the stony ground hearers,
reeeived it with joy, Mat. 13.20. But it will not profit him, unless he receive
it mixed with faith, Heb 4.2. And the like may be said of all other duties.

5. This faith has Christ for its object, on whom it entirely relies for
Salvation. As we are saved by grace, so it is through faith, Ephesians. 2.8. And
without this faith there is no Salvation to be obtained by us, for he that
believes not shall be damned, Mark 16.16. Which faith is not a bare credit of
the truths recorded in the Word of God, and those Theological Doctrines that
are revealed therein, though this also be necessary unto it; but it centers
upon Christ as the object that is therein revealed, and offered in the promise,
on whom it places its whole dependence for life and salvation; and is
therefore called a believing in him, and to the so believing, eternal life is
secured, Joh. 3.16. Whosoever believes in him, shall not perish, but have
everlasting life; which dependence must be limited to him, and not be divided
with any other, because our salvation is from him alone, Acts 4.12. Neither is
there salvation in any other.

6. The influence of this faith into our moral Obedience, to render it
acceptable unto God, and serviceable to our salvation: is mainly in these three
respects.

1. It makes us sensible of our own self-insufficiency, and drives us to Christ
alone, for his strength to enable us. The Moralist does all his duties in his
own strength, nor is he concerned to seek any out of himself: but the true
believer does his in the strength of Christ, he says as Paul, Phil. 4.13. I
can do all things through Christ that strengthens me. By the eye of faith he
sees that as he has no sufficiency of his own for any thing, so that he must
have it all from him, 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves, to
think any thing as of our selves, but our sufficiency is of God. He therefore
dares not to set about any thing, without looking up to him for his aid: all
his undertakings are with such a reference, Psalm. 119.32. I will run the way of
thy Commandments, when thou shall have enlarged my heart, Cant. 1.4 Draw me, we
will run after thee. If he resolves upon any thing, it is with a reliance here,
Psal^ 71.16. I will go in the strength of the Lord God. And if he does any
thing well, he pays the acknowledgment of it hither, 1 Cor. 15.10. Not I, but
the Grace of God which was with me.

2. It convinces us of the imperfection of our best duties, so as to remove
our dependence on them, and make us to seek a pardon of their short coming,
through the blood of Christ. Faith makes us apprehensive that we can be accepted
only in the beloved Ephesians. 1.6. It makes us to confess with the Church, Isa.
64.6. All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; and profess with Paul, Phil.
3.8. I count all things but loss, and dung that I may win Christ. It lets us
see, that if we rely upon them for their own worth, we are undone: that there
is enough to be alleged against them, and that therefore there is a pardon to
be sought in order to acceptance, according to, Psalm. 130.3, 4. If thou, Lord,
should mark iniquities, who should stand? but there is forgiveness with thee,
that thou may be feared. We therefore carry them to Christ, that they may be
offered up with his sweet Incense, that so the dung of them may not procure
them to be rejected.

3. It makes us to resolve our whole hope into the Righteousness of Christ, and
a dependence on the free Grace of God. It makes us to do nothing at all with
any opinion of meriting by it: we will do nothing, so as to expect that for the
sake of our doing, we shall obtain any thing from God. Our Obedience is not put
in the room of a Propitiatory Sacrifice, but only is presented as a
Thank-Offering to God, in testimony of the infinite obligation laid upon us by
his giving of his Son for us; we renounce all our own Righteousness in the
bottom, that so we may be built upon that of Christ; as he, Phil. 3.9. Be found
in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the Law, but that which
is through the faith of Christ. We acknowledge that these Services are so far
from deserving a reward, that it is only free grace that receives them of us;
and that it is for Christ's sake that we are so received.

7. The legal Moralist is not only a stranger to, but an enemy of this faith.
He acknowledges another faith, but one that is Historical, and is contained in
an Assent given to the Articles of Religion; as to the faith of recumbency on
Christ, he looks upon it as a ridiculous thing, and entertains the Doctrine of
it with scorn. He has a Righteousness of his own, which he sets up in
contradiction to the Righteousness of faith, that is revealed in the Gospel;
and because these two are inconsistent, and the one of them will necessarily
drive out the other; the pride of his heart maintains his own, and that will
not suffer him to submit to the other. This was the folly and misery of those
Jews, Romans 10.^. They being ignorant of Gods Righteousness, and going about to
establish their own Righteousness, have not submitted themselves to the
Righteousness of God. And hence there is nothing more disgustful to such an one
than the plain asserting of the Doctrine of such a faith, as carries the man
entirely out of himself, and makes him to place his whole hope on the
Righteousness of Christ for pardon and acceptance; and to rely altogether upon
him for all the strength and assistance, whereby he may live and please God.

8. Hence it is for the want of this faith that his Morality must needs fail
him, and leave him under condemnation in the great day. The absence of this
spoils all the rest. Here then we have found out what is the one thing that is
lacking, and in the lack of that, every thing else is deficient, and all his
labor is lost. And the reason of all this is, because Christ is the Mediator
of the New Covenant, who has alone made the atonement, and opened the way to
life by his obedience, so that Justice and Mercy may meet together in the
Salvation of Sinners; which, according to the tenor of the New Covenant, can
derive to none but by Faith in him, whose perfect righteousness has made way
for the acceptance of the imperfect but sincere Services of true believers.

USE I.
Hence what caution had Gospel Ministers need to use in their preaching up of
moral duties? That it is their duty to preach them, and press them upon their
hearers, is certain; otherwise they cannot be faithful in declaring the whole
Counsel of God: and yet if they so preach them as to revive the Covenant of
Works, to advance the Righteousness of man, and depreciate the Righteousness of
Christ, they are far from being the Ministers of Christ, and are indeed the
very betrayers of Souls to destruction, as far as in them lies. Nor indeed do
I know of any thing which does more threaten the undermining of true
Christianity, and the bringing in of another Gospel, than the putting of Moral
Virtues into a legal dress, and without any more ado, to commend them to us as
the Graces of our Christian Religion. He who when he has told men all the
moral duties required in the Law of God, and laid them out according to the
nature of them, as they were enjoined on them in the First Covenant, says to
them, this do and live, and does not endeavor to show them that there is
something more wanting, without which they are undone, will be found an enemy
of Grace, and a murderer of Souls: nor would I have such a Ministers account to
give in the last day for a thousand worlds.

USE II.
Let it be a Solemn word of Caution to all Sober and Moral men, to beware that
you trust not in this for Eternal Life. The pride that is in your corrupt
nature, will prompt you exceedingly hereunto, for the natural man would fain be
seen and have something to boast of, that he may ascribe to himself; and the
flesh pleasing Doctrines that are at this day vended on this account, will be
very grateful to that pride, and nourish it in them. But take heed, there is
one thing which, if when you have done all, is wanting, you will be undone, and
found to have laid out your Money for that which is not bread: What availed it
this man in our Text, that he had kept all the Commands from his youth upwards?
he still wanted that, the want whereof was his undoing. You live among men very
Soberly and Abstemiously, you are no Drunkards, Gluttons, Gamesters
Fornicators, etc. You do no man any wrong in your commerce, you are diligent in
your Callings, honest and conscientious in your traffic, zealous in the
Religious observance of the duties of worship private and public, and have the
good word, and applause of your neighbors for these things: and if this be all
that you can pretend unto, you have your reward; If you have not a better claim
to Eternal Life than all this amounts to, you will not be able to stand in the
Judgment; the righteous Judge will declare that he knows you not: your morality
will be found no better than iniquity, and you must depart with the Workers of
it. See then that now you get that one thing, else all will be lost, and your
Souls perish for ever.

FINIS.

