The Religious Mariner.

A Brief DISCOURSE Tending to DIRECT the Course of Seamen, In those Points of
RELIGION, Which may bring them to the PORT, of Eternal Happiness.

Matthew. XIV. 25. JESUS went unto them, walking on the Sea.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND, Printed by B Green, and J. Allen, for Samuel Phillips
at the Brick Shop. 1700.

PREFACE.
THere is a Glorious Prophecy, in Hab. 2 14 That the knowledge of the Glory of
the Lord, shall fill the Earth, as the Waters cover the Sea. We know, That in
all Prophetical Scripture, People, are still meant by, Waters. The Spirit of
Prophecy in this passage of Scripture, seems to foresee, the Improvement and
Advancement of Navigation, after the Invention of the Loadstone, in the Latter
Days; The People shall then Cover the Sea, and the Ocean shall be Covered with
Vessels, carrying of Men, to Do Business on the Great Waters. In the Prediction
of that matter, 'twas very proper to call, The People, by the Name of, The
Waters; for besides the Resemblance, which at all times they bear unto the
Waters, upon which they are now Sailing, their Living on the Waters Entitles
them to this Denomination, just as a Country or City, gives a Denomination to
its Inhabitants; Greece to Grecians, Rome to Romans. And it is Predicted, That
by means of Navigation thus grown toward perfection, it will come to pass,
That the Knowledge of the most Glorious Lord will fill the Earth, and the
Knowledge of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, shall be carried into all Corners of the
World.

Lord, Forgive! the Sinful Neglects of the Protestant Nations to make their
Navigation, Subservient unto the Illustrious Design, of conveying the Knowledge
of the most Glorious Lord, unto all parts of the Universe. And let Pious and
Zealous men, Seriously Consider, what a Shame it is, that the Protestant
Nations, which do so much Exceed the Popish in their Shipping, should so far
come short of them, in their Endeavors by their Shipping to Propagate the
Noble Faith of Christianity. I hope, It will not be long, before Societies will
be Erected, in the Protestant Nations, which will Study Numberless ways, as
much to outdo the Popish ones, in sending abroad the Charms of our Holy
Religion unto the Regions where they send our Vessels, as our Holy Religion it
self out-does the Romish, or the Pagan Idolatry. God will Bless your Voyages, O
ye Christian Societies; The Lord Jesus Christ, will Bless them wonderfully.

In the mean Time, I could not but count it one way of being Serviceable, To
promote the Knowledge, and Service of the most glorious Lord, among those that
profess the Art of Navigation; who, it is most proper, should first have it
themselves, before they will do much to bring others into it. A Ship
well-Rigg'd, is a lovely Sight; a Ship well Manned, is a better. The Author was
willing to do what he could, that the Ships belonging to his Neighbors (who
are very much a Sea faring-Tribe,) should be filled with Good Men; which is the
best-way, to be Well-Mann'd. He gave them therefore a Short- Winter-Sermon,
which at their Desire, is now put into their Hands for their more Perpetual
Monitor If he have not Set it off, with Ornaments and Gaieties, it may as well
answer the End, (your Ships do so, and why not Sermons?) without them.

I find old Joachim hundreds of years ago, Prophesied notable Successes to the
English Nation, Propter Bon^s Marinarios; by means of Good Mariners. Who does
not Wish for it? Go, Little Book; Publish not the Name of thy Author, but
pursue His only Aim; which is, That the Lord JESUS CHRIST may be known upon the
Waters.

The Religious Mariner.
[To North Boston, in New England, 26 d. 9 m. 1699.]
It is written, in Jon. I. 16. The men feared the Lord exceedingly.


WHAT men were these? The Beginning of the Chapter tells us, These men were the
Mariners, of a Vessel bound for Tarshish: which Tarshish is by some Great
Geographers, counted, not the Tarsus, that was the Metropolis of Calicia, but
rather Tartessus, a City in a Spanish Island of the Mediterranean. But we have
now, a point of more Importance to prosecute, than that Geographical
Controversy and Curiosity.

It has been an Observation, older than the Days of Plato, That the Sea is a
School of Vice. It seems, the Fear of God is not sound so much among Sailors,
as one would expect from their peculiar Circumstances. Though Seamen are both
Afflicted by God, and Relieved by God, above other men, yet there is not always
to be found among them, that Fear of God, whereto their Circumstances do oblige
them.

It Is true; In the Sacred Story, we find some Seamen remarkable for the Fear of
God; And such Things as they met withal at Sea, were the occasion of it. These
were the Mariners of the Vessel, that were carrying Jonah to Tarshish. A
Fearful Storm was by God sent upon them in their Voyage. Both in the Coming of
the Storm, and in the Ceasing of the Storm, they could not but evidently see,
the Finger of God. And, behold, the Fear of God was the Effect of what they
saw. Before the Storm, these Mariners were poor, forlorn, wretched Idolaters.
But a Minister in the Vessel told them of the Lord JEHOVAH, the True God of
Israel, the Great God of Heaven. After the Storm, they became the Worshippers
of that Lord JEHOVAH, and, Feared the Lord exceedingly.

Very many of you, O Congregation of the Lord, are Mariners. This
Neighborhood, above other Parts of the Town or Land, may be called, our Tribe
of Zebulon. You are Witnesses, O our Seafaring Neighbors, and all the
Neighbors, yea, and the Holy Angels, are Witnesses, of our daily Agonies for
your Welfare. Brethren, our Hearts Desire and Prayer to God, for you, is, that
you may be Saved. We Fear exceedingly, Lest you Steer those False Courses of
Sin, which may Entail Disasters on you, and lest you miss of a safe Arrival to
the Port of Eternal Blessedness; And we Love exceedingly, to do all that can be
done, to make you Happy. To Assist you in the obtaining of Happiness, I am
willing to set before you, the Example of the Mariners, that Feared the Lord
exceedingly. The Problem, which we have now to Work, is This;

That Seafaring People should be God-fearing People.

Yea, I will carry the point so far, as to say, That No men, are more bound
unto the Fear of God, than Seamen.

It Is to be hoped, That none of our Hearers, will count themselves excused from
the Fear of God. There are none of us all, to whose Conscience, there may not
be made that Appeal, in Neh. 5.9. Ought ye not to walk in the Fear of God? But
the Seafaring Hearers, are to be now Addressed, with this Advice, above the
Rest. There are none more obliged than YOU, to Walk (and Sail) in the Fear of
God. You pass through Exceeding Hazzards, You Endure Exceeding Hardships, You
Receive Exceeding Mercies; and therefore Syrs, it becomes You, to Fear the Lord
exceedingly.

Wherefore, In the Fear of God, now give Attention, to those Admonitions, that
will arise unto you, from this Important

CASE. In what Manners, and by what Actions, ought Seafaring Persons, to make
it Evident, that their Hearts are Fraighted with the Fear of God?
By the Fear of God, you know, is meant, Religion. I am now to set before you
the Description of A Religious Mariner. There are certain Expressions of
Religion, whereby Sea faring persons must, as by so many Flags proclaim, That
they have the Fear of God within them.

Very particularly.

I. Let it be a Sensible and a Sorrowful matter unto you, That so many of your
Seafaring Brethren, are so fearfully miserable, by their wanting the Fear of
God. All that have the Fear of God in them, show it by this mark; It Is a Grief
unto them, to see others without the Fear of God. They may all of them say with
him, in Psalm. 119.158. I beheld the Transgressors, and was grieved.

Our Mariners are a Generation of men, greatly Serviceable to the Common
wealth. Ordinarily they are men of stout and brave Spirits: They are under God,
indeed the very Defense of our Nation: And we are beholden to them, for a very
great part of those Enjoyments, whereby our Lives are sweetened unto us. The
Invaluable Benefits, by the means of our Sea faring Friends done unto us,
oblige us to no little Value and Friendship for them. What a Trouble should it
be, unto all that have the Fear of God in them, to see such an Useful sort of
men, so much abandoned unto all sort of Sinfulness and Wretchedness!

It must be acknowledged unto the Exceeding Praise of God; There are many
Mariners, that Fear the Lord exceedingly. We can find many Seamen, that are
First-rate Christians, and exceed other men, for Piety, for Probity, for
Charity. When our Lord Jesus Christ singled out His Disciples, He chose a
company of Sailors. Truly, our Lord Jesus Christ, has no truer or greater
Disciples under Heaven, than some that spend their Days, not upon the Earth,
but upon the Sea. But can we say, They are all such. I would to God, we could.
No, No; As the Psalmist could say, in Psalm. 36.1. The Transgression of the
wicked says within my Heart, That there is no Fear of God before his Eyes:
Thus, All people take notice of it, that Seamen, too many of them, too too
commonly indulge themselves, in those miscarriages, which declare them to be
destitute of the Fear of God: About the Fear of God, we are told in the Word of
God; (which Teaches it:) That it is the Beginning of Wisdom: A man does not
Begin to be Wise, until he have the Fear of God. Now concerning Wisdom, we read
in Job 28.14. The Sea says, It is not with me. It Is the gloss of a famous
Interpreter upon it; Apud Nautas non solet habitare Sapientia; There are few
Sailors, that have real Wisdom in them.

Now, Syrs, Let the Fear of God, cause you to mourn over those Foolish People,
that want the Fear of God, and mourn over all the miseries, to which they do by
their Folly expose themselves. Mourn, I say, and Lift up your mournful Cries to
God, for His Grace to be Showred from on High, upon the Hearts of your
Perishing Brethren.

II Let the Fear of God, cause you to make all the Sail you can, to Faith in
Christ, where alone, your Souls may be Anchored with Eternal Safety. What is
the Fear of God? The right Notion of it, all the Bible over, is This: It Is a
Dread of the Divine Displeasure for Sin, driving a man unto the Lord Messiah,
for Deliverance from this dreadful Displeasure, and from all the Causes and
Effects thereof. Hence, in Psalm. 147.11. They that Fear God, are described as
those that Hope in his Mercy; that is, His Messiah.

Hearken, Sailors: You are all of you Sinners. Oh, be afraid lest the Wrath of
God surprise you in your Sins; and let the Fright thereof put you upon, A Fight
unto the Mercy of God in the Lord Jesus Christ: [An Incomparable Definition of
a Justifying Faith, sometimes received in the Churches of God.] Fly away, with
Distressed Souls, Fly away to the Jesus, who Delivers from the Wrath to come.
Soul, Thou art hard Chased by terrible Destroyers; Put ashore, on the Mercy of
God in the Lord Jesus Christ, by Faith, or thou art undone Eternally.

Are you going to Do Business on the Great Waters! I must mind you of it, Syrs,
That you have a far greater Business to do before you go. Get into the Lord
Jesus Christ, by committing your Never Dying Souls, into His Ever glorious
Hands. A Sailor at Sea may say with the Psalmist, in Psalm. 119.109. My Soul is
continually in my Hand. But before it come to this, O man, I beg it of thee, if
thou Love thy Soul, that thou effectually put thy Soul, into the Hand of the
Lord Jesus Christ, by Repairing to Him, and Relying on Him, for thy
Righteousness, thy Blessedness, thy Everlasting Life. I Remember, the Poet
counted him a Bold man, that ventured first of all, to go to Sea; Audax
Japetigenus, -- yea, but I earnestly testify unto you; He that will Venture to
Sea, before he have Savingly closed with the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith, is a
Bold man, yea, he is a Mad man; an hardy, a Sottish, a desperately venture some
Creature, It may be said of him, as, in Prove. 23.34. Thou shall be as he that
lies down in the midst of the Sea, or as he that lies on the Top of a Mast.
Sirs; will you go to Sea, before you have made up your Accounts? Oh, There are
sad Accounts between God and you: I beseech you, get them all made up, in your
Believing on the Lord Jesus Christ, for the Pardon of all your Sins, before you
stir. The First Ship, no doubt, that ever was Built, was that famous Ark built
by Noah; a Ship, of perhaps forty two thousand Tuns. This Ark, was in This, a
Type of the Lord Jesus Christ, That the Salvation of our Souls does depend on
our being in Him. Neighbors, Don't step into any Ship, until you are first got
into that Ark. It was said, in Psalm. 32.6. Every one that is Godly, shall pray
unto thee, in a Time when thou may be found; surely, in the Floods of great
Waters, they shall not come nigh unto him. Don't, Oh, Don't put off the work of
Coming Nigh unto the Lord Jesus Christ by Faith, until thou art Lanched forth
into the Floods of great Waters: It may then be, All too late. I lay the Charge
of God upon thee, That before thy going to Sea, thou Retire, and Ponder, upon
the Sinful State of thy Soul, and give no Rest unto thy Heavy laden Soul, (a
Soul ready to Sink under the heavy Lading of Sin,) until thou have found Rest
for thy Soul in the Lord Jesus Christ. Said the Psalmist, in Psalm. 18.4, 6, 16.
The Floods made me afraid; In my Distress I called upon the Lord, and cried
unto my God: He drew me out of many Waters. Consider, poor Sailor, when thou
art going on the many Waters, Consider, the Anger of God, at thy Sin, and at
thee for thy Sin, is Raised against thee, like an horrible Tempest; and be
afraid of those Tremendous Floods: Oh, plead with the Holy God, that the Lord
Jesus Christ, has like Jonah, been cast overboard into the Swelling and
Roaring Sea of Enraged Justice, for the appeasing of the Tempest; and cry to
Him, That though He has been Angry with you; His Anger may be turned away.
When the Sins of a man are Pardoned, they are, as it were, Cast into the Depths
of the Sea. Let none of you dare to Sail upon the Depths of the Sea, until your
Sins, by being Pardoned, are Cast into the Depths of the Sea. It Is obtained, by
going to the Lord Jesus Christ, and sincerely thus desiring of Him, and thus
depending on Him, O Blessed Lord, Thou art my Lord Redeemer; I come to thee for
Grace, and for Glory, and for every good thing. O Save me, as thou art able to
Save me, unto the uttermost.

III Let the Fear of God cause you to Steer clear of the Sins, which are the
more frequent Rocks or Shoals, whereupon the Souls of Sailors are Shipwrack'd.
What is the Fear of God? We are told, in Job 28.28. The Fear of the Lord, is to
Depart from Evil. [Compare, Prove. 3.7. and Prove. 16.6.] Let our Sea faring
People then be Sin fearing people; and count Sin the worst Evil in the World.
Indulge not your selves in any One Sin. You may see one thing aboard, that may
livelily set home this Counsil upon you. If there be but One Leak aboard
allowed and neglected, that One Leak may prove the Destruction of all. Man, A
Lust is a Leak in thy Soul, if it be allowed, it will prove thy Damnation at
the last, it will Drown thee in Perdition.

But there are some Vices, which are the Special Vices of the Sea. Against
those Vices especially, be all of you warned that go to Sea. As men in several
Nations, and in several Ages, thus men in several Callings, have that which may
be called, Their own Iniquity* Now, let a Sailor be able to say with the
Psalmist, in Psalm. 18.23. I was upright before God, and I kept my self from
mine Iniquity. If other Mariners do those Ill Things which Mariners too often
are Used, or at least are Tempted unto, Let it be thy care, O man, that thou
may say with him, in Noh. 5.15. But so did not I, because of the Fear of God.

As now; Is not the Sin of profane Swearing and Cursing, become too notorious
among our Sailors? Reform that Impiety, Ye presumptuous Fighters against God,
Reform it; else you that now Sail in a vast Sea of Waters, must ere long have
that blasphemous unruly Tongue, tortured in the Fiery Ocean of the Wrath of
God, where you shall in vain cry, Oh! for a Drop of Water to (...) my Tongue!
Think on that word, in Jam. 5.12 Above all things my Brethren, Swear not.

Filthy Speaking, Baudy Speaking, Unclean and Obscene Ribaldry* is too commonly
heard in the mouths of Sailors. Leave off this Buseness. It Is more loathsome,
then all the ^^^st cast up in the Vomits of the Sea sick. Make^^ not your
excuse, Words are but Wind. (...) may be such a wind, as may s^^k a (...) in
the Waves of Eternal Confusion. Think on that word, in Ephesians. 5.4. Let not
Filthiness, nor Foolish Talking be among you, but rather giving of Thanks.

The Sins of Unchastity, are too often the Sins of Sailors. Fornication and
Adultery, and other Diabolical practices do render many Vessels, horribly Foul.
Sailors, Be prevailed withal, to Abhor that Vice, which will render you, the
Abhorred of the Lord. It were better for you, to drink the nasty Bildge-water,
than to taste the stolen waters of Unchastity. Think on that word of God, in
Heb. 13.4. Whoremongers, and Adulterers God will Judge.

It Is a significant similitude, in Jam. 3.4, 5. Behold the Ships, which though
they be so great, and are driven of fierce winds, yet are they turned about
with a very small Helm, whithersoever the Governor lists: Even so the
Tongue. -- That Little Helm in thy mouth; Govern it, O man, and Restrain it, by
the Rules in the Word of God; else thou will run upon some fatal mischief.
Mind, even as if it were hung up in the Steerage, that Command of Heaven, in
Psalm. 34.12, 13. WHAT MAN IS HE THAT DESIRES LIFE? KEEP THY TONGUE FROM EVIL.

I will add; The First man that ever built a Ship, once fell into the Sin of
Drunkenness. Are none of you that Sail in a Ship, too liable unto that woeful
Sin? Oh, Beware of that Beastly Vice. Beastly, did I call it? I have wronged
the Beasts, by so calling it: Beasts will not be Drunk: To be Drunk, turns Men
into worse than Beasts: A Drunken man, is but Old English for, A Drowned man.
Let our Sailors take haed of being Drunkards, lest God Almighty Drown them,
yea, Damn them, for their being so. Think on that word, in 1 Cor. 6.10.
Drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.

Briefly; Whatever Lewdness may be too frequently incident unto Sailors; I must
give you the word, Bear away, Oh, Bear away from it. We read about the Ships of
Jehoshaphat, in 2 Chronicles 20.37. The Ships were Broken, that they were not able
to go their Voyage. Ahaziahs men were his Mariners; a Wicked, Horrid,
Abominable crew, were the Ships of that King Manned withal. Syrs, You Will hazard
the Breaking of your Ships, and which is infinitely worse, the Breaking of your
Souls, if you don't break off your Ungodly Ways, and Shape another Course.

When You are Solicited unto the doing of my Ill Thing, I wish you would
fortify your selves, with the Thoughts of One Thing, which often occurs unto
the Mariner. Don't you often Divert your selves with Fishing? In doing so,
then think with your selves, The Devil has cast out his Hooks, to catch my
precious and immortal Soul: His Hooks I am told, are Baited with the pleasures
of Sin; or, perhaps with the Hopes of Riches: If I do any Sinful Thing, to
obtain these Pleasures and Riches, the Hooks of the Devil have taken me. But if
I am Seized by those Hooks of Hell, what, ah what is like to become of me,
throughout Eternal Ages!

In fine; It Is a common thing, for Sailors when they have received their Wages,
to be gone unto Ill Houses, and there Squander away in a few weeks at Riotous
Living, all that they have got, by many months of hard Service aboard and
abroad. Would not any Considerate Murriner, call that man, a Fool, and a Sot,
and not worthy to be called a man, who should so ridiculously, throw away, what
he has Earned with so much of Difficulty. But, O Silly Sailor, come to thy
wits, and think, In these Impious Courses, I not only throw away all my
Earnings, in such an unaccountable manner, that all mankind will deride me, and
I shall tear my own Hair for madness, when I reflect upon it, but I shall throw
away my own SOUL also, and for the Shadow of some filthy Delight, which is but
for a moment, I shall cast my self into the Burning Lake of the Wrath of God,
where the Smoke of my Torment will ascend for ever and ever.

IV. Let the Fear of God keep you from carrying any thing Aboard, that may
Raise a Tempest, either on your Vessel, or in your Conscience. There was no
Jonas Aboard, when it is said, The men feared the Lord exceedingly. Why, show
your Fear of God, by not carrying any Jonas Aboard There is nothing of so much
concernment, for Seafaring people, as to have the Gracious Presence of God
with them, in their Voyages. Methinks, you should say with him, in Exodus 33.15.
Lord, If thy presence go not with us, carry us not up from hence. But you
cannot enjoy the Gracious Presence of God aboard, if you carry any Accursed
Thing aboard. An Accursed Thing brought Confusion on a Camp; and will bring as
much Confusion on a Ship. I come unto you then, as the Angel unto Joshua,
saying, Put away every Accursed Thing from among you, that so the Blessed God
may go with you, and multiply His Blessings on you. Put away every Thing that
will probably expose you, to the Curse of God. You Clean your Vessels, when you
are going to Sea; I pray, Cleanse your Consciences.

More particularly. One Caution proper for you, is This: That you be sure, you
don't Go out of the way, when you Go to Sea. There was a man, who would needs
Go to Sea, when he had no Call to be there: But we read in Jon 1.4. The Lord
sent out a great Wind into the Sea, and there was a mighty Tempest in the Sea,
so that the Ship was like to be broken. Before you Go to Sea, seriously
Examine, What Call you have to Go to Sea? Examine, Whether the Rules of
Christianity given in the Sacred Scriptures, be observed in your going to Sea?
Examine, Whether in going to Sea, you have done, what you may with peace
Reflect upon, if you saw the Ship foundring, or splitting under you. Could you
say, Lord, I am where thou did call me to be? Syrs, Where are your Sailing
Orders?

Truly, 'Twere much to be advised, That the Enchantments of the Sea, may not
have too strong and quick a Force upon some, to make them rashly leave Good
Callings, by which they might competently subsist ashore. I am far from
condemning all that leave their Callings, and go away to Sea; but this we have
seen, where one has Advanced himself, more than two have Ruined themselves, by
doing so.

But then, there is another Caution, which is no more than what is Needful for
you; This is, That when you Go to Sea, you don't go out with the Guilt of any
Injustice upon you. Of the Sea faring, it is said, They do Business on the Great
Waters. God will find Lamentable Business for you to do on the Great Waters, if
you have not been True, and Just, and Fair, and Square in your Business before
you go. Said the Apostle, in 1 These. 4.6. Let no man go beyond, and defraud his
Brother, in any matter, because the Lord is the Avenger of all such, as we also
have forewarned you. There are Sailors, that have taken Wages of their Masters
aforehand and then run away from those Masters, to Ship themselves with others.
Wretch, Go Ship thy self where thou will, I forewarn thee, that thou shall
find, The Lord the Avenger of all such. Thus also, How Unprosperous oftentimes
are the Ships, about which there has been any Dishonesty unrepented of? Cheat
no man of his Dues: Do not unjustly decline to pay the Debts that are owing to
any man. Ships, either Built or Filled, not by Right, will find their Sails of
such a Make, that no Good Winds will Blow into them. They that by Iniquity in
their Dealings, have made Shipwreck of a Good Conscience, what can they look
for, but every other Shipwreck?

And perhaps, it may not be amiss to add this one Caution more, unto all the
rest. There are some kinds of Passengers, it is a dangerous thing to Ship them.
There are Sinners, of whom it is said, Evil pursues them, and the Vengeance of
God will follow them, Let them go where they will. There are bloody Murderers,
and Pirates, and Atheists, and those Monsters of Wickedness, that have a
mountain of Sin upon them, enough to Sink the strongest Ship under Heaven.
Sirs, many a Ship has been lost, by having a Jonas aboard. There are some, in
such Ill Terms with Heaven, that if one could help it any way in the World, one
would not care to carry them: It Is no safe thing, to be of their Mess!

V. Let the Pear of God, put you upon Prayer to God; the Prayer of Faith, and
the Holy Worship of God. If there be no Prayer to God, there is no Fear of God:
Unto the Prayerless Mariner, it may be said; as in Job 15.4. Thou castest off
Fear, and Restrainest Prayer before God.

Now, Prayer must be used before your Voyages, if you would have Preservation
and Prosperity in your Voyages. It Is no rare thing, for Mariners, to use wicked
Superstitions, and Sorceries, and Fooleries, that they may obtain Prosperous
Voyages. To Do those Things, is to go unto the Devil, and not unto God, that
your Voyages may be Prospered. And however, God may for the present permit the
Prince of the power of the Air, to Do some odd Things, for the Encouragement of
those who Diabolically seek unto him, yet the Impiety proves Bitterness in the
Latter End: Horrible Destruction at last overtakes them that were so Impious.
Does any man imagine, That Prosperity in our Affairs, is in the power of Man
and not the gift of God? The Devil himself, is a better Christian than such a
Man. I don't speak this without Book; I find in the Book of God, that the Devil
himself said of a prosperous Man, in Job. 1.10. Thou have blessed the work of
his hinds, and his substance is increased in the Land. If men have their
Substance increased by the Sea, it is by the Blessing of God, on the work of
their Hands. Well, If all Prosperity be from God, how can we, without Prayer to
God, expect Prosperity? Never undertake a Voyage, without much Prayer before
the Voyage, and about it. Oh, Pray much unto the Lord on High, who is mightier
than the mighty waves of the Sea, That He would Mercifully order, and Happily
direct, all your motions toward the Sea; Pray to Him, Whose Way is in the Sea,
Lord, Guide me in the way wherein thou will have me to go, about my going to
Sea. This is no more than what is required in Prove. 3.6. In all thy ways
acknowledge Him, and He shall direct thy paths.

There is a commendable practice among you, to send in your Notes unto the
Congregation, intimating, That such and such, Bound to Sea, desire a
Remembrance in the prayers of the Congregation Well; but have you solicitously
Employed your own Prayers over your Voyage? It Is but a mocking of God, for you
to ask our Prayers, if you make no Prayers of your own (...). Indeed some very
worthy Mariners, have used, before their Voyages, to carry their Liberal Alms,
unto these and those poor Servants of Christ, that were Eminent for Holiness;
obliging them to Pray for the good Success of their Voyages every day during
the Time of their Absence: And God has Blessed those Mariners, most
wonderfully. Nevertheless, Pray for thy self, O Mariner, Pray for thy self.
What man will be content, that none but another shall Go to Heaven for him?

But what can Prayer do, if it be not the Prayer of Faith? Without Faith, it is
not Effectual. It must be Faithful, as well as Fervent. Single out such
Promises of God, as may suit your Voyages, and let your Faith humbly urge those
Promises for His Protections. One of those Promises, you have in Psalm. 65.5. O
God of our Salvation, Thou art the Confidence of them that are afar off upon
the Sea. Another of them you have, in Isa. 43 3. When thou passest through the
waters, I will be with thee. A Third of them you have in Heb. 13.5. I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee. Now go before the Lord, and put these
Promises in suit: [They are all of them, Cables that will hold, be the stress
never so great!] O God of my Salvation, according to thy word, I put my
confidence in thee for my Salvation, in my going afar off upon the Sea. I am
now passing through the waters; will thou be with me in my passage? I am taking
my leave of my Friends, will thou never leave me? For the sake of my Lord Jesus
Christ, who has purchased such Blessings for me, Let thy promised Goodness and
Mercy follow me wherever I go.

But then, when you are actually Embarked on your Voyages, let the Worship of
God, be maintained aboard. Said the Psalmist, in Psalm. 5.7. In thy Fear I will
worship. If God be not worshipped in the Vessel, we may say of that Vessel, as
Abraham did of that Country, There is no Fear of God in this place. What an
happy, what a lovely thing were it, if your Vessels might be, like little
Floating Churches, for the Devotions therein performed? Those Masters, who
don't pray with their Families, are very Pagans, worse than Pagans. Now let me
tell you, Masters, your Companies at Sea, are your Families. And, if you would
pray with them every day, and Keep good Orders aboard, you would find, sober
and civil men, would covet still to go with you; yea, your men would Bless God
for you, throughout the Days of Eternity. Masters, If any of you are
Prayerless, I urgently come unto you, with the Call of Jonahs Master, and I
wish your Mariners would also come unto you with such a Call, Jon. 1.6. Arise,
Call upon thy God, that we perish not. Call your Ships Company together, and
unto some such purpose as This, join with them in Calling upon God.

O Most Gracious and Glorious God, and our Heavenly Father, in our Lord Jesus
Christ. In His Name, we come unto thee, as unto the God of all Grace, for Grace
to Glorify thy Name. We acknowledge Thee, to be the Lord of all Things, and we
Ask for Hearts to acknowledge thee as our Lord* and our Owner. We pray unto
thee, O Heavenly Father, for Grace to do and bear thy Will, as it becomes thy
Obedient Children. We Entreat thee, to Smile upon our present Voyage, and all
our Lawful Affairs, and keep us from all that shall not be Lawful. Give us a
Sight and Sense of all our Sins, wherein we Confess, we have broken every one
of thy Holy, and Just, and Good Commandments, and we are worthy to be for ever
buried in the Ocean of thy Wrath. Forgive us, all these our many and mighty
Sins, through the Merits of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has been made a
Sacrifice for us; And as a Token and Effect of this our Forgiveness, Let us
have Hearts to Forgive all the Injuries that any men have ever done unto us.
Let not our Adversary the Devil, Ensnare us and Ruin us by any of his Devices.
Let us count Sin, the worst Evil in the World, and let not the Temptations of
the Devil, Seduce us into that Evil. Bless our Absent Families, and Relations.
Hasten the Time, when the Earth shall be filled with the Knowledge of the Glory
of the Lord, as the Waters Cover the Sea. Bring us in thy Time, to the Haven of
Heaven, and Eternal Happiness; Through our Lord Jesus Christ, who Ever lives to
make Intercession for us; unto whom with the Father and the Spirit, be ascribed
the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory for ever. AMEN.



Pray to Some such Purpose, I say; For I give you not this as a Form, nor would
I have you stint your selves unto a Form. Thus let every Master be able to say,
Out of the Depths, I have cried unto thee, O Lord. Oh, Let it be said of every
Master, as it was of that Captain, He was a Devout man, and One that Feared
God, with all his Vessel, and Prayed to God always. But then, Let your daily
Prayer to God, be accompanied with Reading His Word. In Prayer we Speak to God;
In Reading, God Speaks to us. Why should we speak all? Indeed from God Speaking
to us, we should be taught our Speaking to Him, and fetch something of what we
pray, out of what we Read. The Singing of Psalms, is an Agreeable Exercise, to
be by no means omitted: It will invite the Angels of Heaven aboard you: And are
not Psalms better than the Nasty Songs that sometimes make a Ship, to be but as
a Cage of Unclean Birds?

On the Lords Day, still double your Devotions; and Repeat Sermons also on this
Day of God, by which you may keep alive the Remembrance of what you once heard
in the House of God. Nor let that High Day, be needlessly diverted unto such
Things, as are improper for it. I am verily persuaded, and I have good grounds
for my persuasion, That if you would Sanctify the Lord's Day, with much
exactness, you would find all your Concerns, in all the ensuing week, for the
most part, under a notable Blessing of Heaven. I beseech you, Syrs to make the
Experiment.

If you will do thus, then, as we read in Act. 27.23. No small Tempest lay on
us, and all hope that we should be Saved was then taken away: but Paul said,
There stood by me the Angel of God whose I am, and whom I Serve; saying, Fear
not, God has given thee all them that Sail with thee: Even so, whatever
Tempest may arise, if you be able to say, O God, Thine I am, and Thee I Serve:
Who can tell, but, O Master, God may give thee all them that Sail with thee? If
the Lord Jesus Christ, be aboard with you, how comfortably are you
circumstanced? Mariners that behave themselves as the Disciples of the Lord
Jesus Christ shall have Him aboard with them. Then, though there should arise a
Tempest in the Sea, insomuch that the Ship shall be covered with the Waves, You
may cheerfully Repair to the Lord Jesus Christ; He will be, The God that will
perform all things for you. Suppose you should now miscarry at Sea: You may Die
like one Mr. Avery, an Excellent Minister, who being thrown upon a Rock, from
their Vessel Staved in a direful Storm, off our Marble head, saw one friend
after another, washed off the Rock, into the Sea: And there, up to the middle
in water, expecting the next Wave to carry him off also, he lifted up his Eyes
to Heaven, with these Expressions; Lord, I cannot challenge a Promise of the
preservation of my Life, but thou have promised to deliver us from Sin, and
bring us safe to Heaven, through the Allsufficient Satisfaction of Jesus Christ;
This, This therefore I challenge of thee. He had no sooner spoken thus, (in the
hearing of some that afterward got alive to the Shore,) but he was by a Wave
sweeping him off, immediately wafted away to Heaven!

VI. Let the Fear of God, cause ^o you a Sense of Death; and make no False
Reckoning in your ^ailing toward Eternity. As a Sense of Death, will help to
Excite a lively Fear of God, so the Fear of God will hinder then from laying
aside a Sense of Death. It was Expostulated, as an unaccountable Thing, in one
that was nigh unto Death, Luke 23.40. Do not thou Fear God? Need Sailors now
to be minded of a Thing so very obvious? There are none more Exposed than you,
to the Dangers of Death. And what? Will not you Fear God? Sometimes you
Encounter Terrible Storms, and sometimes Calms in the vast Ocean, do more
terribly threaten you than Storms. There are Numberless Accidents also, whereby
Vessels at Sea are Lost; and among those Accidents, it may be there are none
more formidable, than what happen from Fire, though in the midst of Water.
Enemies do likewise prey upon Vessels at Sea, as the Greater Fishes do upon the
Lesser ones; but the worst Enemies are Pyratical Crues, who barbarously butcher
all that may discover them. In short, so near to Death are people upon the Sea,
that one of the Philosophers being asked* Who were the most, The Living, or the
Dead? Replied, I cannot answer, till you tell me first, in which rank, you
reckon people at Sea. Another being asked, How far a Sea faring man was from
Death? Answered, No more than the Thickness of a Plank or two! The Poet Sang
upon it; Tam prope Mors urget, quam prope cernis Aquam.

Mariner, I say to thee, as Jonathan to David, Most certainly there is but a
step between thee and Death. Such a trail Bark as thy Body, how easily is it
shivered all to pieces.

Sirs, That pitched Box of Oak, in which you Sail, what is it, but a larger
sort of a Coffin? Coffins for the Dead, were of old made of Cypress wood, in
Commemoration of the First Ship, the Ark, made probably of that Wood, wherein
mankind was, as were Coffined up.

Come then; Don't flatter your selves with a Vain Dream, of having yet many
years to Live. It may be, O Vain Man, This very Voyage, thy Soul may be
required of thee. Most Emphatically says the Apostle; in 1 Cor. 7.29. This I
say, Brethren, the Time is short. The Emphasis of the Original is, The Sails of
Time are Furling. Even so, This I say, Brothers, You Cannot say, how near you
may be to the Time of your putting Ashore in Eternity. It often proves a most
pernicious Error in Sailors; They misreckon, and Reckon that they have yet many
Scores of Leagues to run, when perhaps in a Fog, they Strike and Strand upon a
Coast, and are broke all to Pieces. It is a much more pernicious Error for you
to fancy your selves a great way (...) the Future state, when perhaps you would
Strike immediately, and all Tremble at the Stroke. But let it now, no more be
complained of you, That Sailors, though they are nearer to Deaths, and oftener
in Deaths, than any men Living, yet there are no men, who less Live like men
that are to Die. You Live Surrounded with Deaths; Don't Live, as if Death were
an Article, as difficult for to be Believed, as the Resurrection from the Dead.

Would you be duly apprehensive of your Mortality, certainly, it would make
you Now to do those Things, which you will Wish to have done, when you come to
Die. There is no one point, that I would press upon you, with more of Agony than
This: If you were now going down in the Deep; Suppose an Irresistible Wind were
driving the Ship, into an unavoidable Wreck; suppose more than Six Foot Water
in the Hold, and the Sides of the Ship apace opening the Port holes of Death;
and no possibility of your ever getting to Land alive. What Sentiments of
Things, would you have in such a Deadly Extremity? Sure I am, you would then
wish, Oh, That I had not Lived in any Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, but Lived
soberly, and Righteously and Godlily in the World. You would then wish, Oh,
That I had long ago given my self up to the Lord Jesus Christ, and by laying
hold on His offered Righteousness, Laid hold on Eternal Life. You would then
wish, Oh, Let not my Soul now be gathered with Sinners, I wish, I had not been
one of them; I wish, I had prayed without Ceasing; I wish, I had made the Word
of God the man of my Counsil; I wish I had never derided Serious Religion, but
most seriously practiced it. Wherefore, Now use the Discretion, to do those
Things, which in a Dying Hour, you may not Look back with Horror upon; do those
things, that may comfort you in a Dying Hour, and help you comfortably to say,
Remember, now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in Truth!

And I will add; Methinks the Shortness of your Time, [How few Sailors Live to
be Old men!] should very particularly cure your Mispence of your Time. Sailors,
I hear, and I fear, It Is utterly a Fault among you. How many weary Contrivances
have you, at Sea, to pass the Time away? Yea, but thy Soul, O man, thy Soul, is
on the very Banks and Brinks of Eternity. Cast the Line, O man; How many
Fathom, I pray? Art thou sure, That thou have one weeks Time left unto thee?
Now, to be for nothing but pastime with this little Spot of Time! Oh, a little
more of this Time, in Reading and Supplications and Meditations over the State
of thy Soul. That, That would be for thy good Account, when Time shall be no
more. As the Apostle says, Pass the Time of your Sojourning, so let it be said,
Pass the Time of your Sailing, in Fear; even in the Fear of God.

VII. Let the Fear of God work in you, a zeal rightly to improve the Works of
God; even those Works, which at Sea, you are Entertained withal. We read
concerning the Seafaring, in Psalm 107.23, 24. They that go down to the Sea in
Ships, that do business in great Waters; these see the works of the Lord, and
His Wonders in the Deep. Now there is an use which they should make of what
they see. And what use? When some had seen the Great Works of God, it was said
upon it, in Zeph. 3.7. I said, surely thou will Fear me. When you go to Sea,
you cannot but see the Wonders of Creation: See them all, with devout Wonders
confessing the Creator of them all. Your Ships carry you to Do Business, where
you see Creatures, that are full of Wonders. Let it be part of your Business
there, devoutly to confess, These are the Works of the Lord! and adore the
Power and Wisdom, and Goodness of the Lord, which is displayed in all these
Works. You Will see many Wonderful Things by Going to Sea, which they who Travel
not from the sight of their own Chimneys can see nothing of: The Invention of
the Loadstone and the Compass, about Three hundred years ago, has led men to
the view of Wonderful Things every where, which till then they were more
strangers unto; Behold them all with pious Contemplations, and give Glory to
the God, Who made all these Things Even the mute Fish themselves, do with a
Loud Voice call upon you, Fear God, and give Glory to Him.

But then the Wonders of Providence, these Entertain you at Sea, with yet a
more particular Application.

Have you not met with wonderful Mercies, with merciful Deliverances and
Salvations, upon the Sea! Let the Fear of God, keep you from Forgetting those
Mercies. The Favors we have received on the Waters, the memory of them should
not be written on the Waters; no, but as it were, on the durable Marble. Oh,
lay that charge, and charm upon your Souls, in Psalm. 103.2. Bless the Lord, O
my Soul, and Forget not all His Benefits, who has Redeemed thy Life from
Destruction. Have you no Journals, of what Mercies God has at Sea bestowed
upon you? It Is fit, they should be Entered. And when you come home, it is well,
that you ordinarily publish in the Congregation, your desires to Praise the
Name of God, for such Mercies. Thus we read, in Psalm. 107.31, 32. He brings
them unto their desired Haven. Oh, that men would praise the Lord, for His
Goodness, and for His wonderful works to the Children of men. Let them Exalt
Him also in the Congregation of the people, and praise Him in the Assembly of
the Elders. But what signify these verbal Thanksgivings, if you don't Live
your Thanks, as well as Give your Thanks? Who is the man, that so Offers
praise, as to Glorify God? We are told, in Psalm. 50.23. He that orders his
Conversation aright. Now, if you would Order your Conversation aright, be sure
to Order it so, as in your perils at Sea, you would have chosen to have done.
It is likely, that like Jonahs Mariners, you have laid your selves under Vows
to God Oh, Remember the VOWS, you have made in your Distresses* God will
Remember them, if you do not Have you not Vowed, That if God spared you in such
and such Distresses, you would be more prayerful, more watchful, and spend your
Time to better purposes, than formerly? Trifle not with the Eternal Majesty of
Heaven: Tremble at His Word, in Eccl. 5.4. When thou vowest a vow unto God,
defer not to pay it, for He has no pleasure in Fools: wherefore should God be
angry at thy voice, and destroy the work of thy Hands? Resolve with the Saint,
in Psalm. 66.13, 14. I will pay thee my Vows, which my Lips have uttered, and
my Tongue has spoken, when I was in Trouble.

Again; Have you not seen wonderful Judgments at Sea? Perhaps, you have your
selves met with Disasters there. Don't fancy now, that a Blind Fortune sent
those Disasters. There is the Hand of God in them all. They speak to you, as in
Hag. 1.7, 9. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, consider your ways. Ye looked for
much, and lo it came to Little; and when ye brought it home, I did blow upon
it. You have also been Witnesses, to the Doleful, and Rueful Calamities,
wherewith others have there been overwhelmed. It was the commination in Isa.
2.16. The Day of the Lord of Hosts, shall be upon all the Ships. Our
Lamentation has been upon the Execution of that Commination, in grievous
Things, that our Mariners have met withal. Alas, Alas, How hardly have they
been used? What Cruelties have many of them suffered; not only from the Hands
of cruel Enemies abroad, but also from some of their own Commanders and
Officers in their own Ships at Home? To what consuming Diseases have they been
exposed, while the Destroying Angels have had large Commissions to consume
them, and cut them off, and what Pest houses have even their own Ships been
unto them? Upon them there has fallen the severest share of those Calamities,
that have of late years distressed a sinful world; and they have, Died of
Grievous Deaths. Take warning by these dismal Things, I entreat you; and let
such things awaken you unto the Fear of God. It was said of Tyrus, in Zech.
9.4, 5. Behold, the Lord will smite her power in the Sea; And of others it
follows, They shall See it and Fear.

But know it, That if you would Fear the Lord Exceedingly, you must Fear the
Lord Seasonably; I mean, in your Youth. We read of One, who Feared the Lord
Greatly: But that person could say, in 1 King. 18.12. I Fear the Lord from my
Youth. Our Sea men are mostly Young Men. And because the Fear of God is no more
among them, therefore it is, that so few of them ever come to be Old Men.
Hearken, Young men. Do you Betimes Devote your selves unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, and be able to say unto Him, Lord, I am thy Servant, devoted unto thy
Fear. There is a Ship of the greatest Consequence imaginable; The Church of the
Lord Jesus Christ is that Ship. The Commander of the Ship is the Lord Jesus
Christ Himself. Come to the Illustrious Commander. Request Him to Accept you
among His Mariners. Commit your selves to His Conduct; That is to say, Enter
into Covenant with Him. Do This, now in your Youth, O my Young Folks* Lest you
never have any Opportunity to do it at all. Do This, and you will make a more
gainful Voyage, than ever the Mariners of Solomon did unto Ophir, or, Africa;
as much more gainful, as Grace is better than the gain of fine Gold.

Upon the whole; Take my Wishes for you all. We read of some, who neglected the
Service of the Lord Jesus Christ; because, Judge. 5.17. They did remain in
Ships. I Wish, That this very Thing may Excite and Assist you, to Serve the
Lord Jesus Christ; Because you remain in Ships. I Wish, That Heaven may be the
Haven, which you are all bound unto, and that your Souls may, as Gaius's did,
make a Good Voyage to that Haven. A Minister going from New England, in a Ship,
that met with a Storm, wherein they all were Expecting the Vessel to Sink, said
unto the affrighted Company, Come, who is now bound for Heaven among you?
Behold, One is now Wishing, that you may All be so. I Wish, That you may have
an Eye of daily Observation, upon the Sun of Righteousness; and Look unto
Jesus. I Wish, That you may duly Regard, the Pole Star of the Scripture;
whereto you will do well to take heed, as to a Light shining in a dark place. I
Wish, That you may ply the Pump of Repentance, with continual Endeavors to get
Sin out of the Hold, of your Heart; and so, Draw Water before the Lord. I Wish,
That when the Gales of the Spirit striving with you, are Blowing, you may
Spread the Sails of your Souls before them, Sailing right before that Blessed
Wind; and when He shall say, Seek my Face, your Hearts may answer, Thy Face,
Lord, I will seek. I Wish, That you may often see What way you make; and
Commune with your own Hearts, in impartial Self Examinations. I Wish, That you
may thus proceed on in your Heavenly Voyage, however you may be Afflicted and
Tossed with Tempests, until you come to Cast Anchor within the Vail.

And, As for me, God forbid, that I should Sin against the Lord, in ceasing to
Pray for you.

FINIS.

