THE TRIAL OF Assurance, Set forth in a SERMON; Preached at Boston upon a
Lecture day. July 7 th. School.

By Solomon Stoddard, Pastor of the Church in Northampton.

2 Pet. 1.10. Brethren give diligence to make your Calling and Election sure.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen. Sold by Michael
Perry, under the Exchange. 1608

The TRIAL of Assurance.
John 21.17. -- Simon son of Jonas, love thou Me? --


THE falls of the People of God do darken their sincerity: they are as a Cloud
covering their uprightness: they do make their sincerity questionable unto
others: some that take notice of their falls are ready to suspect, and others
are ready to deny their sincerity; standers by are apt to impute their falls to
their Hypocrisy and the reigning power of sin; as if they had now proved
themselves to be Hypocrites. They are ready to say of them, as David said of
Doeg, Lo this is the man that made not God his trust. And their falls make
their sincerity questionable to themselves: if they have seen something of
uprightness in themselves before, now they fear, they were mistaken: they think
if there had been any Grace, that would have preserved them from falling: their
falls wound their Consciences and disturb their Peace. They think if God had
loved them, he would not have suffered them to fall into such sin: it seems to
them to be the fruit of Gods hatred: they are apt to think that their sins have
turned away the heart of God from them, and that he cannot delight in them:
they think moreover that if they had loved God, they could not have been drawn
to sin so against him. Satan is wont to improve their falls unto their
discouragement; and raises such mists, that day is turned into night unto them.
Upon this occasion Christ puts this question to Peter: the Disciples might be
unsatisfyed with him, because of his fall; and he might be dissatisfyed with
himself: but hereby Christ is leading of him into the Examination of his own
sincerity. You may conceive Christ's meaning thus: Peter you have made a
Profession many years: but in the time of my affliction, you shamefully denied
me, you formerly professed that you would dye with me, before you would deny
me, but as soon as the Temptation came; you presently denied me: and as if it
were not enough to do it once, you did it a second and a third time: and as if
plain denying had not been enough, you did it with Cursing and Swearing: is
there any love in your heart (...) me! you showed some affection but now, (...)
throwing your self into the Sea, but is it (...) love? have I your heart? am I
the object (...) your love? you professed more love than oath(...) Disciples;
but do you indeed love me?

DOCTRINE.
If a man does not certainly know, that he ha(...) performed one act of Saving
Grace, he canno(...) be certain of his Sincerity from his Walk.

The Trial of sincerity is a great and weighty work. Ministers had need be
careful in giving Rules of Trial; and People had need be carefu(...) in
applying Rules of Trial: the Doctrine i(...) propounded to prevent mistakes in
this matter Godly men are described in the Scripture to b(...) men, that walk
in the law of the Lord; men tha(...) walk not after the flesh but after the
Spirit: but i(...) is impossible for any man to evidence his sinceri(...) from
hence; unless he certainly knows that h(...) has performed some act or acts of
saving Grace. A man may have a probable knowledge of h(...) sincerity, though
he do not certainly know tha(...) he has performed any act of saving Grace:
bu(...) this is all that he can attain to by his walk; (...) (...) do not know
that he has performed any one act of saving Grace. There be many acts of
(...)aving Grace; as to believe in Christ, to love God and Christ, to hate sin,
to make the Glory of God one's end: and if a man don't certainly know any such
thing by himself: he will never be able from his walk to prove himself to be a
Saint. If a thing shine like fire in the night, yet you cannot know it to be
fire from thence; unless you see in it some property of fire. If a thing acts
as if it had life, yet you cannot know from thence, that it has life, unless
you know some action to be a Vital action. You cannot know that a man does
miracles, unless you know some one action to be miraculous: So here.

In order to the clearing of this, I shall first premise three things.

1. They that walk in a way of holiness are sincere: all that walk in a way of
obedience are upright. Walking in Gods ways is the Character of a Saint Psalm.
119.1. Blessed are the undefiled in (...)he way, who walk in the law of the
Lord. An holy (...)ife is a certain sign of a holy heart. A life of obedience
shows a principal of Grace: they that live (...) life of humility, love and
faith are real Saints; they are such indeed as they do profess themselves to
be: though they have many infirmities and cor(...)uptions, yet they are sincere
Saints. An holy life (...) more than any Hypocrite can attain unto: he may
counterfeit Holiness and have the image of it; but falls utterly short of an
holy life: an holy life is a life of sincerity and flows from a principle of
sincerity: other principles may make a man live a moral and religious life:
Prudence, Pride and slavish fear may produce much out-ward conformity, and many
inward affections: but only a principle of Grace can enable a man to live an
holy life: all that live holily are regenerate men. Ephesians. 2.10. Created in
Christ Jesus unto good works.

2. They that walk in a way of unholiness are not sincere: they that lead an
unholy life are not upright: a principle of Grace will keep a man from ways or
sin. 1 John 3.9. He that is born of God, does not commit sin, for his seed
remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is born of God: he has so much
fear that he cannot live a life of sin, he hates sin so that he cannot live a
life of sin: Some that are sincere have a less degree of sincerity than others;
but the least degree of sincerity will preserve a man from an unholy life*
Psalm. 18.23. I was also upright before him and I kept my self from mine
iniquity. An unholy life shows the reigning power of sin. Joh. 8.34. He that
commits sin, is the servant of sin. They that are serving any Lust are not
serving of the Lord: if men make great pretensions of sincerity, yet lead
unholy lives, there is no sincerity in them: if they have great affections and
hopes, yet they have no sincerity: they profess one thing and practice another.
If men serve their Pride or their Coveteousness, or their Voluptuousness, they
are not sincere, they are utterly destitute of a principle of Grace: if they
have shows of Grace, yet they are but Hypocrites, and will be damned at the
last day. Luke 13.27. Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity.

3. Many men seem to themselves to walk in a way of Holiness, yet don't
certainly know that ever they did perform an act of saving grace; though all
that make an high profession don't seem to themselves to lead an holy life, yet
abundance of them do: they are conscientious of all their ways, have many
religious affections; mourn for sin, rejoice in Sabbaths, are thankful for
mercies; are afflicted under the Tokens of Gods Anger, are desirous of the
Conversion of others: it seems to them, that they live in some degree as Saints
of old did: they think they walk holily, yet many of these persons don't
certainly know that ever they did perform one act of saving grace, several of
them never did perform one act of saving grace, therefore they cannot know that
they have: and some that have done it, are in the dark about it; they are under
doubts and uncertainties about it: the Question is, Whether such persons can
know from their Walk, that they are sincere. This the Doctrine does deny, and
it may thus be cleared up.

Argument 1. It is the acting of Grace that makes and shows the Walk to be
(...): it is not the orderliness of men's walk that shows it to be holy; nor the
affectionateness of men's hearts in Religion, that shows their walk to be holy;
nor the long continuance of good carriages, nor a good behavior in a day of
temptation; nor a savoury spirit; these things may all be, yet the walk not be
holy: if there be the acting of love, faith and repentance, then the walk is
holy: but all that men do is done in hypocrisy, if there be not the acting of
grace: if there be no grace in their prayers, in their fastings, in their
discourses; all is in hypocrisy: conscienciousness don't prove their walk to be
sincere: the young man in the Gospel was conscientious: Mat. 19.20. all these
things have I done from my youth. Zeal don't prove it, a man may be zealous,
yet not upright: Romans 10.2. they be the actings of grace that make and show the
walk to be holy; if it be not a life of faith and love, it is not a holy life:
Gal. 2.20. the life that I live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of
God: therefore he that don't know that he has performed an act of grace, cannot
know that he has an holy walk: he that don't know that he has that which is the
life of an holy walk, and essential to it, cannot know that his walk is holy.

2. It is harder to know an holy walk than one act of grace: it is harder for
any man to discern that he leads an holy life, then that he performs a gracious
act: for an holy life does consist of many gracious actions; and it is harder
to discern that a man has done many, then that he has done one: it is harder to
find out many profitable herbs in the field than one; harder to discern many
grains of Wheat among the Chaff, than one* it is harder to find many Evidences
of a good Estate than one; to the discerning of many acts of grace, there is
required more observation and examination, then to the discerning of one act of
grace; if it be difficult to find one, it will be more difficult to find two,
ten, an hundred: therefore he that don't know that he has performed one act of
grace, does not know that he leads an holy life. I may allude to that, Jer.
12.5. if thou have run with the footmen and they have wearied thee, how will thou contend with horses.

3. If the holiness of men's actions cannot be discerned severally, it cannot be
discerned in conjunction: if a man looks upon his actions severally, and cannot
say that this or that or any one was an holy action; he cannot say concerning
any action, that it was an act of saving says, or saving love; how can he when
he looks upon his carriages together, say they are holy, if there be no one
action that he can say is sincere; how can he say that his walk is sincere: if
a man sees an heap of corn, how can he say, it is an heap of wheat, when he
does not know, that there is one grain of wheat there: the sincerity of his
walk depends upon the sincerity of particular actions; and if that be hidden
from him, how can he say his walk is sincere: if for ought he knows every
prayer and duty be done in hypocrisy; then for ought he knows, his whole life
is a life of hypocrisy* if he can instance in no action that is certainly
otherwise, it may be so for ought that he knows; if he cannot answer to this
question. Joh. 21.17. Love thou me? or to that, Joh* 9.35. do thou believe
on the Son of God? or some such like; he cannot tell that he lives an holy
life* therefore such a man cannot prove his sincerity from his walk. No walk can
be evidential, but what is made up of acts of grace; therefore if he sees none,
he can have no evidence from his walk.

4. If there be no act of grace, there is no sincerity; therefore if he sees no
act of grace, he sees no sincerity; when there is no act of grace, there is no
principle of grace: though a man walk in print, yet there is no sincerity; many
carry themselves very fairly, but if there be no grace, there is no uprightness
in them, Joh. 5.42. I know you, that you have not the love of God in you; it is
all counterfeit walk: they are like men upon the Stage, that personate other
kind of men; so these men walk like Saints, and talk like Saints; but if there
be no act of grace, they are no Saints, they want that which does constitute a
Saint; therefore if a man do not know any act of grace in himself, he cannot
know himself to be a Saint, though he walk like an Angel.

5. The multiplication of such acts as are common to Saints and hypocrites,
don't show him to be sincere; prayer is common to Saints and hypocrites. Psalm.
78.34. When he slew them, then they sought him, they returned and enquired
early after God; therefore if a man do this a thousand times, it don't prove
him to be a Saint; so morality is common to Saints and hypocrites. Mat. 19.20.
and if a man carries morally, twenty years together, it don't show him to be a
Saint; so zeal, so delight in Sabbaths; if an hypocrite may do these things,
then the multiplication of them, and walking in such a way is no evidence; that
which is common, let it be multiplied never so often, don't become saving:
multiply ciphers, and they make no number: therefore there can be no evidence
of a good estate from a man's walk, unless he knew some act of grace; if he
cannot discern some act of saving grace, he must be at a loss about his
sincerity.

USE I.
See the reason why many Professors are unsatisfied about their sincerity;
though they have a pretty good conversation, are conscientious, affectionate,
zealous yet they are full of fears, they are often perplexed, and don't know
what to make of themselves; it seems to them that their walk is pretty much
according to rule, but they do not know that ever they did perform any act of
saving grace; they cannot answer to such questions, Love thou me? Joh. 21.17.
Or do thou believe on the Son of God? Joh. 9.25. this does create a deal of
perplexity to them; and they are afraid what will become of themselves, after
all their profession. And there are three sorts of them.

1. Some Professors never did see any act of grace in themselves; they never
had any: and therefore could not see any: they have had affection, but no love;
sorrow, but not godly sorrow, encouragement, but no faith. There be many
Professors that are utterly destitute of gracious carriages, they have the
resemblance of them, but they never had any exercise of grace; they are
spiritually dead, and never did perform any act of spiritual life; thus it was
with Saul, Doeg, Achitophel, Judas and Demas, they were only the pictures of
Saints, and imitated the actions of Spiritual Life, but did not perform them;
an evil tree cannot bring forth good fruit, men cannot gather grapes of thorns,
or figs of thistles: Mat. 7.16, 18* they cannot see acts of grace: men cannot
see that which is not.

2: Some Professors never did certainly know that they have performed any act
of saving grace, they have discovered the workings of grace sometimes in
themselves, but not so plainly, as to be able to speak roundly up to it, as
Peter did, Lord, thou know all things; thou know that I love thee? Joh.
21.17. they understand that there is a great deal that does resemble grace,
that is not grace; and so they doubt whether it be of the right kind: they know
that there is a temporary faith, Luke 8.13. some believe for a time, and then
fall away; and there may be strong desires and delight, where there is no
sincere love; here may be great pangs of affection, without any uprightness,
and the acts of grace were not so clear, as some others do speak of, hence they
are not fully satisfied; as when one sees a man at a great distance, he is at
some loss whether it be a man.

3. Some have certainly seen the workings of grace, but through temptations
since, they have lost the certainty of that knowledge; at the time they knew
they did believe in Christ, and that they loved God, and could say as David,
Psalm 116.1. I love the Lord; and as, Psalm. 46.1. The Lord is my strength and
refuge: but afterward they have not so full and clear a remembrance of it: and
God brings them into affliction, and unbelief prevails, and now they are
suspicious that they were mistaken; besides, God don't hear their prayers, they
have sought him many a time for such and such a mercy, and he has denied them
at last: besides, they find a dead heart, corruption strong, and have had no
such plain working of Grace a pretty while, accordingly they are full of fears
whether they are not mistaken: they say, if there were no deceit in it, how
comes it to be so and so with me?

USE. II.
Others cannot be certain of a man's sincerity from his Conversation: if others
see men carry well, they presently say, they are good men: but they don't know
it from thence; there is indeed ground enough for Charity; but not for
Assurance: for whatever men's Conversation be, if they don't see the actings of
Grace, they cannot be assured that the man is a Godly man. It is not good to
depend upon the judgment of others, for they do not know, whether a man be
sincere or not. All the external acts of Charity, Piety, Justice and Sobriety,
may be performed by a man that has no Grace; Prudence and Conscience may
produce them all: and one that has no Grace may carry as well in the eye of the
world, as he that has it* Peter does but suppose Silvanus to be faithful. 1
Pet. 5.12.

Consider 1. The inward actings of Grace are invisible to others. A man may
look into his own heart, and see the actings and workings that are there; but
he cannot look into the hearts of others; men cannot tell what actings there be
in their understandings and wills: men cannot see when they act, nor what they
act, nor what they act upon; nor how they act: men cannot tell whether they
choose or refuse. Jer. 17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things, who can
know it?

2. Men cannot by words or actions make the actings of grace so visible to
others, that they can distinguish them: if a man talk graciously and walk
graciously, he cannot make another certain that he does so: another that sees
the external action, cannot certainly distinguish it from a formal action; if he
satisfy another, yet he cannot assure another, that it is a gracious action: a
man may speak like an Angel, yet not have charity; he may give all his goods to
feed the poor, and his body to be burned, and yet not have charity, 1 Cor. 3.1,
2, 13.

USE III.
Of Warning, That you be not confident of your sincerity from your walk,
without the certain knowledge that you have performed any act of saving grace:
some men will be confident that they are in a good estate, though they do not
know that ever they believed in Christ, or have exercised any true love to God:
all that they have to say for themselves is, that they have a conscientious
care to do their duty, and are many times affected in a religious way, and
hope, they do trust in Christ and make the glory of God their end; and they
find affection to the people of God: but this you may be sure of, you cannot
conclude your sincerity from your walk, unless you know that you have performed
some act or acts of saving grace: if you do know that, then you have reason to
conclude your walk to be holy: where there is one act of saving grace, there
will be more: there is the principle, but without this you cannot conclude it.

Consider 1. If you be sincere, this confidence is mere flattery; good men
sometimes think they are good upon such foundations as will not hold: as
because God does the things that they have prayed for; because he smiles upon
them in his Providence; because others think they are Saints: so this is one
way of flattery: if you be upright, yet you cannot tell it from your walk, if
you do not know that you exercise grace: for ought any thing that you know,
your life is a life of hypocrisy: men may do all that you know you do, and yet
be hypocrites; your walk cannot be evidential to you, if you do not see the acts
of grace, your confidence is presumption; men must go upon a sure bottom, 2
Cor. 13.5. Examine your selves, prove your own selves; and this flattering and
sleep that you are fallen into does you much hurt: this makes you neglect a
good confidence, and exposes you to live a careless life, without any great
matter of the life of religion.

2. If you be not sincere, it may prove your ruin; some men that take notice
of their conscientiousness do conclude themselves godly, when they are ungodly:
and fall short of a principle of grace: they are destitute of faith and love,
Joh 5.42. I know you, that you have not the love of God in you: but because
they imagine that they are sincere, they rest in their present seize,
Joh. 9.41. because you say we see, therefore your sin remains: when they are
stirred up to get sincerity, they hope they have it already, they hope others
will take the warning, and that their children will hearken, but they think
themselves are out of danger: counsels and warnings are lost upon them, they
bless themselves in their present estate, they think their disease is cured,
and so give over the use of means; they think they are provided for Eternity,
and so they are at rest: they are under some endeavors to get more knowledge
and more grace, but not to be Converted: hence this work is neglected; when
once they have taken up such a conceit that they are godly, they have got their
deaths wound, if mercy do not prevent: they live carelessly, and when they come
to dye, they will be shut out of the Kingdom of God: there will be no room for
them in heaven, Mat. 25.12 Depart from me I know you not. Isa. 50 11. all you
that kindle a fire, and compass your selves about with sparks; walk in the
light of your fire, and in the sparks which you have kindled, this shall ye
have of mine hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow.

USE IV.
Of Direction: To Saints how to get the knowledge of your sincerity; by getting
such visible actings of grace, that you may know them certainly to be the acts
of saving grace: it is a great exercise to some Saints, whether they be sincere
Saints, they labor in it for many years; and one Minister gives signs, and
they try themselves by them, and another gives signs, and they try them selves
by them; and sometimes they think they see the signs of Saints, and sometimes
the sign of hypocrites: and they don't know what to make of themselves: the
best way is to get such exercise of grace, that you may know it to b(...)
grace; don't let grace lie in a withering condition: let it flourish, that it
may act visibly; tha(...) you may certainly know it: your walk withou(...)
this, will never clear up your good condition.

Consider. 1. There is good use of sign provided they be true signs warranted
by right interpretation of the Scripture; though many signs that men give are
very fallible: but if the signs be good, there is very good use to be made of
them; though a man may ask signs of signs endlessly; yet they are of good
advantage to beget a probable knowledge of a man's good estate; many persons are
encouraged and supported by them. 1 John 3.14. Hereby we know that we are
passed from death to life, because we love the brethren: and they are a further
confirmation to those that have had Assurances of their sincerity: when they
find Scripture signs falling in with those evidences, which they have formerly
received, they are further established thereby.

2. But the visible actings of Grace will satisfy all sorts of Christians. We
may distinguish Christians into two sorts; some are persons of great
understanding and knowledge, they have a deep insight into those ways of deceit
and hypocrisy that the heart is subject to: and they are apt to be puzzled with
questions and doubts, that fly over the heads of others; they are afraid of
such deceits as other men don't suspect: but when they have plain visible
workings of Grace, that they know to be Grace, this fully satisfyes them: Thou
know that I love thee. Joh. 21.17. Others are weak and ignorant and cannot
give many signs of true Grace, nor distinctly take them up, when they are laid
down: yet when they plainly see the visible actings of saving Grace, the thing
is put beyond question. A weak woman is as well satisfied that she loves her
child as the wisest man in the land, though she cannot make a large discourse
upon it, nor prove it by infallible signs, because she feels her love: so it is
in this case.

3. Though the visible actings of Grace may be counterfeited, yet they that
have them, may know that they have them. There is nothing but may be
counterfeited, men may counterfeit themselves to be great men and holy men:
Gold and Silver, and Jewels may be counterfeited. So these visible actings of
Grace; men may have very strong affections; where there is no love or godly
sorrow. Matt. 8.19. Master I will follow thee whither soever thou go. 1 Samuel
24.16. Saul lift up his voice and wept. Men may say Hosanna to day, and Crucify
to morrow. Yet those that have the visible actings of Grace know it. He that
dreams thinks he is awake, but he that is awake, knows he is awake: though
there be counterfeits, yet the visible actings may be known at the time.

4. If men have such visible actings of Grace but now and then, they will be of
great use to them as long as they live: though they may be after that Exposed
to great Temptations, yet these actings of Grace that they have seen, will be a
stay to them: they will work an abiding hope in the heart; they will often have
occasion to call to mind the years of the right hand of the most high, and
their Song in the night. If a man should live many years after, he will not
forget this. Psalm. 63.2. That I may see thy power and glory, so as I have seen
thee in the Sanctuary. If he has great Temptations from deadness and from Gods
with drawings; this will come to mind, and so he will have hope* and the more
such acts are repeated, the more advantage he is under to have a settled
Assurance of his sincerity.

FINIS.

