SOME FEW REMARKS UPON A Scandalous Book, against the GOVERNMENT and MINISTRY
of NEW ENGLAND: Written, By one ROBERT CALEF. Detecting the Unparrallel'd
Malice and Falsehood, of the said Book; AND Defending the Names of several
particular Gentlemen, by him therein aspersed and abused.

Composed and Published by several Persons belonging to the Flock of some of
the Injured Pastors, and concerned for their Just Vindication.

Truth will Come off Conqueror. Boston, N. E. Printed by B. Green, Sold by
Nicholas Boon. 1701.

TO THE CHRISTIAN Reader.
THE False Narrations, and Odi^us Representations, contained in that Scandalous
Book, written by Robert Calf, has made our worthy Pastors Obnoxious (for ought
we know) to hard Censures, among an unguided multitude. We have little hopes of
convicting any, who are so full fraughted with the Venom of that Book, as that
no Evidence will avail, but in spite of all that is hitherto known, will still
retain a Belief to the contrary: yet this we hope, that those who are not such
grand Enemies to Truth, may hereby be satisfied in those things which they have
hitherto but doubted of; for want of which knowledge, they have been unable to
defend those Faithful Servants of Christ. That is the End of this Book; That
those who are well wishers to the Eminent Servants of Christ, and His People,
may be able to oppose all gainsayers, who by their Reproaches, and Slanders, go
about to render them Odious to the world; whereby they will be deprived of all
their desired Opportunities to Serve God and his Faithful People. If this shall
help any therein, we shall obtain our desires, and have no cause to Repent that
ever we spent our Time and Cost about it; But Rejoice that ever we undertook
this Task. Now that there may be no more Slandering and Reviling, and
Reproaching one another, but that we may be all bound in the Bands of Unity,
Singing the Song of the Glorious Angels above; Glory to God in the Highest, on
Earth Peace, Good Will toward men: Is the hearty Desire and Prayer of those,
who in the Name, at the Desire, and with the Consent, of many others, have put
this Book into your Hands.

Obadiah Gill John Barnard John Goodwin William Robie Timothy Wadsworth Robert
Cumbey George Robinson.


SECT. I.
NEW ENGLAND was once a plaee, in which the Feet of them that brought the Good
Tidings of the Gospel were beautiful. But there is now sprung up a Number, who
seem to (...) of another Spirit: No wonder then if those who are Faithful to
Christ and His Interest, are Reproached and Maligned by them that serve His
greatest Enemy. It is an awful Symptom, of some sad thing near unto The
Churches, when the most Faithful, and Painful I abourers among us in them, are
bemired and bespattered by Ungodly men. But that God who said, Blessed are ye
when men Revile you, and Persecute you, and speak all manner of Evil of you,
falsely for my sake; will reward them.

There is according to our esteem of it, a Libellous Book lately come unto this
Country, which Book may truly be called, A Firebrand thrown by a Madman;
which is writ (with what help we know not) by one Robert Calef, who presumes to
call himself Merchant of Boston; but we wish, Better Wares were vended, by this
Merchant. The Book is full as is thought by Good men, of Scurrilous Reflections
on the Government, as well as the Ministers of the Country.

And First, for the Government; the tendency of the Book is to persuade the
People, that the Judges of the Land; are the Unjustest, Cruellest and most
Blood-thirsty men; Our Wise men (says he) becoming Fools. What was done by
them in the dark time of our Troubles from the Invisible World, all Honest men
believe, they did in Conscience of the Oath of God upon them, and they followed
unto the best of their Understanding, as we are informed, the Precedents of
England and Scotland, and other Nations, on such a Dark and Doleful occasion.
When they found the matter carried beyond the reach of Mortals, they stopped; and
the Honorable Lieutenant Governor, Council and Assembly of the Province, in a
Public Proclamation for a Fast; called for the Prayers of the Country, That
whatsoever mistakes on either hand have been fallen into, referring to the late
Troubles raised among us by Satan, and his Instruments, through the awful
Judgments of God, he would Humble us therefore, and Pardon us. After that those
our Honorable Judges (fearing least wrong steps might have been taken) had
thus set apart a Day for solemn Humiliation before the Lord, humbly Imploring
His Pardon for what might have been done amiss; for him to Repeat that matter,
and set it out with imperfect Relations and odious Aggravations, thereby
intending to render the Land, and the Judges obnoxious (though all the Learning
that he and wiser men than he, pretends unto, is insufficient to dive to the
Bottom of the matter;) and for him to speak as he does of those Honorable
Persons, (as you will find in his praeface,) as men obstinate in an Error, and
involved in the guilt of the Blood shed by Pagans and Papists before them: what
shall we think of it, but that it is inhumane, and fit for none but a Servant of
the worst Master? One would have thought, that the Fear of God (if he has any)
should have darted that Scripture into his mind, (while compiling such a
Pamphlet) Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not speak Evil of the Ruler of thy People.

But then, for the Ministry; we do admire with what face he dares so wilfully
to Reproach, and Libel the Servants of Christ? How dares he affirm (as p. the
last, of his preface) That the Accusations from the Spectral sight, being the
chief Evidence against those that Suffered, were upheld both by Magistrates and
Ministers, so long as they apprehended themselves in no danger; and then,
though they could Defend neither the Doctrine for the Practice, yet none of
them have in such a Public manner, as the Case requires Testified against
either. It Is well known by those who have ever read over the Wonders of the
Invisible World, Enchantments Encountered, p. 6. that the Judgment of the
Ministers was, That the Demons might impose the Shapes of Innocent persons in
their Spectral Exhibitions. And it was the advice of the Elders to the
Governor and Council, in the beginning of the Salem Troubles, Expressed in such
words as those, Ench. Enc. p. 15. That Presumptions whereupon persons may be
Committed, and much more Convictions whereupon persons may be Condemned as
guilty of Witchcrafts, ought certainly to be more Considerable, than barely the
Accused persons being Represented by a Spectre, unto the afflicted, nor are
alterations in the sufferers by a Look, or a Touch of the Accused, to be
esteemed an Infallible evidence of Guilt, but frequently liable to be abused by
the Devils Legerdemains. And a Book Composed by the Reverend Praesident of the
College, was afterward Published for that purpose, whereunto, Fourteen
Reverend Ministers set their hands. But this is not all, for the whole Body of
the Ministers in the Country are charged, as Guilty of Sacrilege in the
highest Degree, if not Direct Blasphemy, and Diabolical Wickedness. [p. 155.]
Elsewhere he vilely endeavors, to charge them with an Opinion, That there are
more Almighties than one, and that Satan is Almighty, and can do what he
pleases, He insinuates, that our Reverend Ministers make the Devil an
Independent Being, and (as he says) Consequently a God. An abominable Charge!
Certainly he was altogether unmindful of that Scripture, Deuteronomy. 33.11. Of Levi,
he said, Lord smite through the Loins of them that rise up against him. That
there should be any in the midst of us, that by published Libels go about thus
to render the worthy Pastors of the Flocks of Christ odious to them, is matter
of Grief unto us; and no doubt but it is so to all Good men. It was highly
rejoicing to us, when we heard that our Booksellers were so well acquainted
with the Integrity of our Pastors, as not one of them would admit of any of
those Libels to be vended in their shops. And it was our Hope that a further
Testimony would have been born by others against such pernicious attempts to
blow up the Religion of God among us. But the doing of a piece of Justice to
our own Reverend and Faithful Pastors, whom Satan has singled out (by this
Instrument) above others to spit his Venom upon, is that which in a more
especial manner has obliged us thus to appaer Publicly. These worthy persons
are the main Butts set up for the Devil to shoot his Arrows at, especially now
by a Volumn consisting of most ^^ving abuses, and aspersions. We have no need
to wonder at their not taking the pains to vindicate themselves from these
Injuries, or give any other but, The Lord (...). Contempt is the best Answer,
and a Person so inconsiderable is not worthy to be reguarded by them: But (...)
lord will (...) them Good ^^r the (...) ^^^gs of every S^m^^. They will be the
more Loved and vallued by all Wise and Good men, for thus suffering the
contradiction of Sinners. But it has been the desire of many of our Godly
Neighbors, that some (...)* who do belong unto their Flock, would publicly
appear in the V^ndication of those Injured Servants of Chris^^* The motion was
not made unto us, by either of our (...), and (though it is to them that we are
beholden for ^nformation, Relating to certain matter of^ act yet) they are
neither of them the Authors, of this Composure. For there are many belonging to
our Congregation, that are ^s fit, and as able to write Books, as he who has
been the occasion of our undertaking this (...), and several of them have been
ready to a^ ^s. And we have good Grounds to hope, that the hearts of all
Sincere Christians will rejoice to see any people so ready to Vindicate their
Inju^^d Pastors. But we have grounds to ^^ar, lest the Grand Enemy of mankind
should (...) our Childrens Conversion to God, and ob^ing Salvation by the
painful endeavors of our Faithful Teachers; and lest the Holy and useful
Books, Composed by their Elaborate endeavors to serve the Interest of Christ,
(which the Lord has Blessed for the seaso^ing of thousands of pers^^s with ^o^d
Thou^hts, from one end (...) the ^a^d ^^to the other, would loose their Reli^,
Power, and Efficacy among ^he Churches abroad, unless something to defeat the
Designs of that Evil O^e, in the Venomous Book, now Published against them, be
performed by us,

SECT. II.
Is there any among the Children of men, that have Sold themselves to serve the
Interest of Satan to purpose? Let it be their Study by their Slanders to Blast
the Reputation of those, in whom the Honor of God, and of His Religion, and
the Salvation of Souls is much concerned. This we take to be the Grand Aim and
End of all that Robert Cale^ can call his own throughout his whole Tre^^^se.
And now, went thy malice; speak what thou have to Accuse them of; they shall
come off with ^^yi^g Colors.

We will a little f^^st, lay open a few of those many Lies, and in^amous l^e
^ections, and defaming Inve^tives contained in the treatise under our present
notice, against Mr. M^^^er the Elder. The Reverend Mr. ^^crease Mather is
Charged with Unfaithfulness, in his Negotiation in England, as Agent on the
behalf of this Colony: in p. 95. it is said, The Agents did not all of them Act
according to the Mind and Interest of th^se that empowered them, which is
manifest by their not Acting jointly in what they did. Herein he not only
Reflects upon that well known, and eminent Servant of Christ, and His People,
but also upon Sir Henry Ashurst, a worthy Gentleman, who did (as we are well
assured) with all the care and pains imaginable, seek the Good of New England,
and thereby has laid us under endless obligations of Gratitude. We hope, the
Friends of New England, will not think that all persons will treat them so ill,
as this man endeavors to do. It Is as certain to us, as any such things can be,
that neither Sir Henry nor Mr. Mather, Acted in the Public Affairs of this
Colony, any otherwise then according to the best advice of the best and wisest
Friends to New England, then residing in London, with whom they always
consulted. But if Mr, Mather's words are not to be taken in his own case, then
take the Testimony of the Reverend Mr. Mead, in a Letter to a Gentleman in
Boston, well known to us, which runs thus,

Mr. Mather has deserved highly of New England, for the unfainting Diligence,
and ^^defat^gable Endeavors, he has showed in his Agency for that people, and
while some with you may perhaps wonder that he has obtained no more, we here,
who have the advantage of a better Prospect, wonder that he has done so much.
And if men reward not his great Work, and Labor of Love, I am sure God will.
What he has done has not been without the Counsel and Advice of the best
Friends, that Country has in this, both Parliament men, Lawyers, and
Ministers. And to be thankful for what you have for the present, is the way to
get what you want hereafter. Thus writes that Eminent person, who is now gone
to ^ better World. To Confirm this, we have in our hands a Printed Extract of a
Letter from the Right Worshipful Sir Henry Ashurst, to the General Assembly in
Boston, whose words are;

I have not for above Twelve Months troubled you with any of my Letters because
I knew my worthy Friend Mr. Mather, did not omit any opportunity of acquainting
you with every thing, wherein your Interest was concerned. I shall not much
enlarge upon the Services that Mr. Mather has done, for you have his true
Character sent you by the Reverend Dr. Bates and others, the most Eminent
Ministers in and about this Town. But I am sure, he has been Faithful to your
Interests and d^ligent and unwearied in your Service, with the neglect of his
Health: he has lived here for You, and deserves the greatest marks of your
Favor you can bestow on him. M^. Mather and my self, ^^tr^^sacting your
affairs did not leave an^ way is attempted, that (...) we could Consult with
could d^rect us unto. When the King was Petitioned to make (...) o^s in your
Settlement, and to appoint a Governor, and other General Officers, we then
joined all our interest together, and obtained the naming of every one of them,
and other Privileges that are not Granted to any other Plantations. None have
been more Industrious by all possible means than Mr. Mather, and myself, to
have obtained your Old Charter. I hope Mr. Mather will do me that Justice, to
assure you, that I have ^ever omitted any opportunity of serving you to the
utmost of my Power. Thus that worthy Gentleman. However, If this will not
suffice, we can produce a Letter Subscribed by Thirteen Eminent Nonconformist
Ministers in London. It is as follows.

To the much Honored General Court Assembled at Boston in New England.
Much Honored Gentlemen.
The restoring your Charter, upon which the Security and Public Good of your
Colony depends, we Congratulate with as joyful Affections, as with tender
Resentments we Condoled the deprivation of it. When your and our State was in
^ppearance desolate beyond humane Co^^s^l and Power to redress, ^hen
Deliverance come from above: and in our deep Darkness, the Dayspring from an
High visited us. We most humbly Admire and Adore the Glorious Author of that
Blessed work: And we cannot but pay our most Grateful Respects, and Dutiful
Subjection to His Chosen Servant, our Sovereign, the happy Instrument of it.
All the Colors of Language are not lively and grateful enough to express His
benefits to us. He has the honor of Establishing our Religion at home, and
gives us hopes of Restoring it abroad, in places from whence it has been
Unrighteously and Cruelly expelled.

Some among you may wonder there has been so long delay before your Charter was
smi^ht, but if you consider the Torrent of affairs in the Court after the Late
Revolution, it will lessen the wonder.

The Truth is, your affairs were so Difficult and Thorny, that the rare union
of the Wisdom of the Serpent, and the Innocence of the Dove, was requisite in
the Commissioners managing of it. A peremptory Refus^^ of any Charter, but of
an uniform Tenor with the first, had been like too strong a Medicine, that
E^^sperates the Disease instead of Curing it. In affairs of great importance,
it is wisdom maturely to deliberate, and Consider conditional events, and by the
foresight of Inconveniences that will otherwise follow, to accept of such
things as are best with respect to their Circumstances.

We must therefore give this true Testimony of our much Esteemed and Beloved
Brother, Mr. Increase Mather, That with inviolate Integrity, excellent
Prudence, and unfainting Diligence, he has managed the great business
committed to his Trust. As he is instructed in the School of Heaven, to
Minister in the affairs of the Soul, so he is furnished with a Talent to
transact affairs of State. His proceedings have been with that Caution and
Circumspection, as is correspondent to the weight of his Commission; he with
Courage, and Constancy has pursued the noble scope of his employment, and
understanding the true moment of things, has preferred the Fablick Good to the
vain conceits of some, that more might have been obtained if peremptorily
insisted on; Considering open opposition and secret arts that have been used to
frustrate the best endeavors for the Interest of New England, the happy issue
of these things is superior to our Expectations. Your present Charter secures
Liberty and Property, the fairest flowers of the Civil State: and which is
incomparably more valuable, it secures the enjoyment of the Blessed Gospel in
its purity and freedom. Although there is a restraint of your power in some
things that were granted in the former Charter, yet there are more ample
Privileges in other things that may be of perpetual advantage to the Colony.

We doubt not but your Faithful Agent will receive a Gracious reward above:
And we hope his successful Service will be welcomed with your entire
approbation, and grateful acceptance. We now with ardent affections recommend
our Dear Brother to the Divine mercy, that through such dangerous Seas he may
safely arrive at his desired place: And we earnestly pray, that the Blessings
of Heaven may be always upon your Colony; that by the Light and Power of the
Gospel, the Prince of Darkness may be expelled from his ancient Dominions; and
the Kingdom of our Savior, may be Established and Enlarged, by the Accession
of the American Heathen to be His Inheritance.

London, October. 17. 1691. Much Honored Gentlemen, We are, Your very Humble,
and Faithful Servants; William Bates. Thomas Woodcock. Matthew Head. Matthew
Barker. Richard ^tretron. Vincent Alsop. John How. John James. Samuel Annesly.
George Griffith. Richard Mayo. Isaac Chauncy. John Quick.



Now if Mr. Mather in his Negotiation for his Country, acted Faithfully
according to his judgment, and if the wisest Friends New England had in
England thought, as he did, (as is abundantly attested by persons of great
Eminency) why has this Impertinent man impeached his Fidelity?

Is it possible that a man should have more and greater Testimonies to the
Faithful discharge of his Duty in seeking the Good of this Country, to the
utmost of his ability? Robert Calef dares not say here is not sufficient
Witnesses. No, but this he does. He gives a Kick at these great men: for he
says [p. 150.] Mr. Mather got several Nonconformist Ministers to give him a
Testimonial, or Letters of Commendation for his great service. What great Folly
is it to cast such Reflections and Contumelies? See both the Folly and Falsehood
of it. What if Mr Mather had done so? where would have been the damage of it?
Is not he guilty of great Folly, to think that a Number of as Godly, Discreet,
and Excellent persons as any in the City of London, would set their Hands to
they knew not what, and so positively assert a thing they were ignorant of?
However, it is altogether False; Mr. Mather (as he has affirmed to us never had
such a thought come into his mind, nor it may be never would, as to have asked
such Testimonials, had not a person of Quality that was his particular Friend,
desired that Dr. Bates, might draw up such a Letter and that great Doctor,
(when he had well weighed and considered our Charter) most readily did it. And
the Doctor presented this Letter thus drawn up by himself, to such Ministers as
he thought fit, and Ten of them subscribed it, before ever Mr. Mather spoke a
word to them about it. But who shall be Judge, whether the Reverend Increase
Mather Faithfully served the ^nterest of his Country or no? Shall this Calf be
Judge, or the People themselves? We think it most fitting the People should be
Judge; and they shall be so. When the greatest General Court that ever was in
New England, Assembled at Boston in the year 1692. Mr. Mather (as he informs
us) waited on them with the Instructions which were sent to him at London as
Agent of the Colony; and on June the 9th. every one of the Instructions were
read by him, before the whole Assembly; where he declared to their
satisfaction, how to the utmost of his power, he had punctually observed every
one of them. And on June 24th. Mr. Bond then Speaker of the Representatives,
did in the Name of the whole House, return him hearty Thanks, for his Unwearied
and Faithful endeavors to serve his Country: he also added, that they were
sensible, it was their Duty to reward those his Faithful endeavors, but by
reason of the Expensive War they then Labored under, they could not perform
what they were willing to do on that account; Whereupon, Mr. Mather (using the
words of the Apostle,) said, He sought not theirs but them, in what he had
endeavored and performed for them: and added, He was willing to wait for a
Recompense in another World. As for Robert Calves saying, The Agents could not
all act for the Interest of them that employed them, because they did (...) Act
jointly; It is both Foolish and False. Might they not all Act for the same Good
End, and yet have their various thoughts abouts the Best Means to be used for
it? Might they not all of them to the utmost of their power, Labor to obtain
the Old Charter, and all the privileges contained in it, with additional ones,
and yet when they saw their hopes frustrated, differ in their apprehensions,
what was best now to be done? Might not the want of certain Great Privileges
(of the Old Charter in the New One) cause some of them to think, it best to
take nothing at all, and yet others think it better taking up with Hal^^ a
^^oaf than no Bread, and so get what possibly they could obtain for the
present, and wait the issue of Providence for the obtaining of more: and yet
all of them sincerely and strenuously press after the best Good and Interes^ of
them that empowered them? All the Agents are most worthy Persons, and every one
of them has deserved great acknowledgments from this Province, on account of
their Faithful Endeavors to Serve the Public Interest.

It is not worth our while to take notice of every thing this ^al says, it is
often so impertinent; However, we will say lay open one thing more. He says,
[p. 147.] that Mr. Mather procured a Charter for Sir William to be Governor,
and himself ^stablished Praesident of the College. Can there be greater
Nonsense mixed with Malice! How could this be, when Mr. Mather had been
Praesident of the College Ten Years before Sir William came to be Governor?
And it is well known that the Corporation, and all persons concerned in the
College, and the whole General Court did urge Mr. Mather to accept of the
Praesidentship of the College Twenty Years ago; and though for diverse years
he acted as Praesident, yet he refused to be Established in the place he then
managed, but was active in causing another to be Chosen who Resided there about
a Year, and then went to the Heavenly World. After that, the General Court and
Corporation did again apply themselves to him, thinking none so fit to
undertake the Care and Inspection of that Society, on which depends the
well-being of New England, as HE was, which accordingly he undertook in the
Year 1684. and ever since he has had that Charge imposed on him, though there
are Witnesses enough, he has Frequently and Earnestly desired to be eased
thereof. Spit on, Calf; thou shall be but like the Viper on Paul's hand, easily
shaken off, and without any damage to the Servant of the Lord. What more has he
to say? Why this, That Mr. Mather should not have accepted the Charter, but (
p. 150) have stayed until His Majesty's return from Flanders. Upon this Article
we enquired of the Reverend Mr. Mather, concerning that matter, and received
from him under his hand as follows;

When the King was pleased to give a positive Command that the Charter of
New England should be dispatched, it was not for the Agents to say, it shall
not be so. True it is, that all the Agents when they saw what Minute would be
inserted in the Charter, were desirous of a delay, until the Kings happy return
to England. And I may without vanity say, no man labored to have it so, more
then my self. I prayed Archbishop T^^lotson to intercede with the Queen for
this favor to us, who at my request did so. Moreover, I drew up several
Reasons against that which in the Minutes of the New-Charter is most grievous
to us; which were by Sir Henry Ashurst, and my self, delivered to His Majesty's
Attorney General, on July, 24. 1691. and which I did also send to my Lord
Sidney, one of His Majesty's principal Secretaries of State, then with the King
in Flanders. I now thought that there would be no further proceedings about the
Charter for New England before His Majesty's return. Physicians advised me to
go into the Country and use the Mineral waters for the recovery of my impaired
Health. Before I had been there Three weeks, I was to my surprise sent for to
London, with information, that the King had signified His Royal Pleasure to the
Earl of Nottingham, that there should be a procedure with a Charter for the
Massachusetts Colony, according to the Minutes that the Lords of the Committee
for Plantations had agreed to, notwithstanding the Objections of the Agents to
the Contrary. A certain Person then in the world, gave out that I was imposed
on, and made to believe that such a Signification of His Majesty's Pleasure was
sent to the Secretary of State, when there was no such thing. I therefore
prayed the Earl of Nottingham (who was then the principal Secretary of State)
to be so kind, as to order his Clerk to give me a Copy of what the King had
ordered should be done, which his Lordship was pleased to gratify me in, and I
still have the Original Copy written with the hand of his Lordships Clerk, by
me. It is in these words.

Extract of a Letter from my Lord Sidney to my Lord Nottingham.
Dated Court Aug. 10. 1691. My Lord.
I have received your Lordships of July 31. and have showed it the King, and
the Enclosed order upon the Report of the Committee of Plantations, touching
the Minutes for a Charter for the Massachusetts Colony, wherein His Majesty's
further Pleasure is desired. I am now commanded by the King to let your
Lordship know that he does approve of what the Committee has done in that
matter, and can by no means admit of the Objections of the Agents of the said
Colony, and therefore would have your Lordships proceed accordingly.

This is a true Copy compared with the Original. Richard War.


Now let the ^orld Judge, yea and Robert Calef's Conscience (if it be not
Seared) judge, whether he has done well to endeavor to Blemish my Reputation
in Print, by insinuating as if I had done amiss, in not stopping the
proceedings in the Charter for this Province, when it was not in my power to do
it. Yet nevertheless, after this I obtained those clauses in the Charter, which
Confirm all donations to Schools of Learning, and all Grants of Lands, by
former General Courts, etc. to be inserted in the present Charter: for which
better men than Robert Calef are of Opinion, that the Country owes me Thanks.
I shall further add, that after the Charter was finished, several Right*
Honorable Persons said to me, they were glad of what was gained, and that they
could assure me, that if the proceedings had been delayed, until the Kings
return, more would not have been obtained.

I hear that some of Robert Calefs Abettors whisper, that the Reverend
Ministers at London, Repented of their writing such a Letter of Attestation to
my Fidelity, and that in a Fast, they bewailed their Sin in that matter* It
must needs be Malice that has invented such a Ridiculous Story. Had it been
True, it is very Strange that none of them would signify it to me, but the
contrary. Part of this, was whispered Seven Years ago, when in Print I Charged
the Authors of that report, to be F^^gers of Lies. It was particularly
whispered, that the Reverend Mr. Quick Repented of his Subscribing the Letter:
Whereupon, I wrote to him concerning it, and Mr. Quick returned an Answer in
these words.

You write of some persons, who have Reported my Repentance for Subscribing
your Attestation. Sir, I have not the Command of other men's Tongues. As for W.
he is a man to whom I am an utter Stranger, having never heard his Name before
I read it in your Letter. Another, and I, had some Discourse about you. The Sum
of my Answer to them was this, I knew you to be a Learned and Prudent man, and
believed you to be one Fearing God, and therefore durst not Credit what any one
should say of you in your Absence. And I pray you let not other men's Reports of
me, at so great a distance be Credited against me. I Subscribed the Letter
Voluntrrily, and to the best of my Understanding Judiciously, and
Conscientiously; as I Believe did all those other Reverend Ministers, who gave
you their Hands: and I know nothing to the contrary, why I should not join in
such Good Company.


Thus writes the Reverend Mr. Quick.

Moreover, when the Famous Dr A^^^s^y was informed, that some Reported as if he
Repented of his having Set his Hand to that Letter, he replied, with some
warmth of Spirit; If there be any need of it, I will Set both my Hands to it:
For Mr. Mather did well, when he could not possibly obtain more for his
Country, to take up with the best he could get.

I am also told, that there are some men, who formerly had no great kindness
for Robert Calef, but are now, because of his reviling me and my Son, (which
not a little gratitifies the Enemies to the Holy Churches of New England)
become his great Friends; and that these complain, that I spent the Country a
great deal of Money during my Agency in their behalf. These little men know not
what it is to attend in the Courts of Kings, for Four Years together: if they
did, they would not make that objecton. And sure I am, that when I did at the
desire of many principal persons in the Country, undertake a Voyage for
England in April 1688. People in this Province, would gladly have given Ten
times more then what I Expended in their Service, on condition they might have
Restored and Confirmed to them, what now they enjoy: yea, if it had been but in
one Article of it. But besides this, I may truly affirm that in effect, I
served the Country on Free Cost. For I never demanded the least Farthing as a
recompense, for the Time I spent in attending on their Affairs, but instead
thereof, I procured in Donations for the Public, besides the Privileges of
the Charter it self, which, though not so great as I would have had, and as I
would gladly have parted with all I have in this world to have purchased, are
greater than any other Plantations besides New England enjoyes: I say, besides
these things, I procured in Donations to the Province and the College,) at
least Nine Hundred Pounds more then all the Expenses of my Agency came to. This
being plain matter of Fact, which the whole General Assembly once had laid
before them, I suppose all Reasonable men, will own, That Reproaches cast on
me, for my Expensiveness in the Public Service, are most Ungrateful and
Unworthy.


Thus has he answered our Request unto him; and now Judge, whether Mr. Mather
were to blame in these matters. The Author of the Scurrilous Book now need not
to wonder, that Mr. Mather should Print a Brief Narrative of his Negotiation in
England: He had before sent a written Copy thereof to New England, which was
read in the General Court, (as we are informed) unto their great Satisfaction.
Yet he did not without grounds Conjecture, there might be other persons in the
world, of the same Kidney with this Calf; and therefore, that so (especially in
case of his own Mortallity at Sea) his Friends might do him Justice, it was
great Prudence in him to Print a convenient Number of Copies of the said
Narrative. The Adversary, on this occasion goes on to fling at Mr. Mather. A
Letter he sent to one in England, at the same time with himself, who formerly
belonged to the North-Church in Boston, which Letter [he sayes] some call a
Bull. But what matters it, if they call it so, and a Calf too? Since that, the
person he mentions is returned to New England, and he did acknowledge his Error
before Mr. Mather and one of the Deacons of the North-Church. Whereupon Mr.
Mather did as became a Disciple of Christ, Forgive him, and declared himself
Reconciled unto him. Doubtless this Weaver wants work, or he would not have
troubled the world with such Trifles. And now, for a closure, says he, (p.
151.) that Mr. Mather deserves as much Thanks, as Dr. Sharp did when sent by
the Presbytery of Scotland, to procure the Settlement of their Kirk, etc. who
(by what we have heard of that story) to get himself made a Bishop, did what he
could to undermine the Presbyterian Government* Certainly, Satan himself could
not but blush to say, that ever Mr. Mather went to Destroy the Government of
New England, either as to their Civil or Ecclesiastical Con^^itution. Robert
Calef himself, cannot but say, (p. 151.) That the present Charter of
New England is truly Valuable, as containing in it peculiar Privileges, which
abundantly engage this People to pay the Tribute of Thankfulness to His
Majesty. With what face then can he insinuate that no Thanks are due to the
Instruments of obtaining such a Valuable Charter, and so many peculiar
Privileges? Surely he was besides himself, when he wrote such things as these.
Is it not well known, that when our former Charter was Quo Warranto^d, in the
Reign of K. Charles II. then at the request of the Select-men in Boston, Mr.
Mather did appear at a Town-Meeting (though he does not use to be at such
Meetings,) and did Encourage and Excite them, to stand by their
Charter-Priviledges, and not to give away what was the Inheritance of their
Fathers. He could not but be sensible, that by appearing so openly in such a
cause, he ventured very far, but being satisfied that he was called of God to
do what he did, he went to it with a Cheerful Heart. Whereupon (as we have
heard, and no doubt it (...) true) complaints were entered against him in that
Kings Court, for his withstanding their designs. And since the Condemnation of
that Charter, has he not labored with might and main, that the Judgment issued
against it might be reversed? Did not his earnest Endeavors, with leading
Parliament Men, procure the passing of a Vote in the House of Commons,
declaring that the taking away of the Charter of New England, was Illegal and a
Grievance? Whereupon, a Bill was passed in the House for the Restoration of
it? When he had the Honor to speak to the King, was it not his Humble Request
to His Majesty, that all the Charter-priviledges of New England, might be
Restored to them? Did he not Humbly Petition the Queens Majesty, to intercede
with the King for His Royal Favor herein, who was most Graciously pleased to
assure him, that Her Majesty would do so? These things are no secrets, every
body has opportunity to know the Truth of them. We are well assured that Mr.
Mather never gave away any Privileges of the Country, but instead of that,
was an happy Instrument of regaining some very Great Privileges, which were
unjustly taken from (...): And as in the Prosecution thereof, he did (as the
Honorable Sir Henry Ashurst tells the Assembly) impair his Health, so we
believe he whoul^ not have counted his Life Dear to him, would that have
obtained what he Zealously endeavored for us. Is there any man that has been
more Faithful to the Churches of New England? Has he not for these many Years,
both at home and abroad, with Tongue and Pen, to his utmost, Defended these
Churches, and their Government? What reason then, has this man to speak so
Falsely, and Maliciously, of him? But the Faithfullest Servants of Christ, must
look to be Reviled and Reproached, for so was their MASTER before them.

SECT. III.
As it is observed, the Lord has Remarkably joined the two Mr. Mathers in
serving His Churches, so it is observable, that the Enemy cannot but join them in
his Malignant Calumnies and Reproaches; and it is but Justice for us, to join
them in our Vindicating of them. Our Mr. Mather the Younger, must not be
troubled, if Ill-men, that Revile his most Reverend Father, shall give him a
proportionable share in their malice. There are more Fiery Darts shot at this
worthy Person, by the hand of Robert Calef, than at any one; but if he will do
as he uses to do, his Prayer, and Faith, and Patience, and Holy Conversation,
will soon quench them. However, it is our Duty to Vindicate him, if he think it
needless to Vindicate himself: Though indeed he has a witness for him in the
Consciences of all that in the least measure K^^^ him. For our parts, we cannot
but Bless God that ever we knew him. We shall but displease him, and it may be
some will think it flattery, if we should pretend to write the Character which
this worthy man deserves; those that are even his Enemies, being Judges He was
Born and Bred in this Town, where he has for more than Twenty Years together,
been a Public Preacher of the Gospel. It was a comfortable thing to Samuel,
that he was able to say, I have walked before you, from my Childhood until
now;, and that he could then appeal to them, to tell how he had walked. So may
Mr. Cottou Mather. And we do verily believe, there is not so much as one man,
that has any knowledge of him, but what will own, that they look upon him to be
a worthy Good man, a Scholar, and a Gentleman, who would not willingly write a
thing that is False, or do any Ill thing upon any Terms; and that he spends his
Life in Studies, that he might do Good to all sorts of men: and that he can be
Courteous, and full of Kindness toward Good People, that be not of his own
persuasion, as well as those that be. If we be not misinformed, Calef himself
does confess as much as this comes to; and others that are displeased at Mr.
Mather for his being so significant, in the Service of the Churches, yet when
they are out of their angry fits, will confess the same.

As for the wrongs done by Robert Calef unto him, some of us addressed him to
give us something under his own Hand, that might clear up the Truth unto the
Churches. And he has favored his Friends, with the following Letter.

SIRS,
Must I then do you and my self the Justice of Answering your desires, to have
under my Hand a brief account of these matters, wherein I have had the Honor
(for I may count it so,) to be after an horrid manner, aspersed and abused, by
the Libels of Robert Calef? Although, it is almost as needless a thing as can be
done, yet it shall be done: at least for the Chief of them. I remember, that
when this miserable man sent unto an Eminent Minister in the Town, a Libellous
Letter (which he has now also Published in his Volumn of Impertinences)
reflecting both on a Judicious Discourse written by him, and on the Holy
proposals made by the Praesident and Fellows of Harvard-Colledge, about
recording of Remarkable-Providences, and when he demanded and expected an
Answer to his Follies, that Reverend person only said, Go tell him, That the
Answer to him and his Letter is in the-Twenty-sixth of the Proverbs, and the
Fourth. When likewise, he sent about unto all the Ministers a Libellou Letter
against my self, falsely Charging me with writing in a Manuscript of mine, Ten
Articles (which are of his own drawing up) whereof the chief are of his own
^ure Invention, there was not one of all those Reverend Persons, who thought
him worthy of an Answer. And now his Book is come abroad, I cannot hear (and
many observe the like) of so much as one Virtuous and Sensible man, but let
their opinions about the Salem Troubles, be what they will, they detest it, as,
a Vile Book, as being an entire Libel upon the whole Government and Ministry in
the Land; yea, they think it beneath a Minister of the Gospel to bestow the
Pains of an Answer upon it. The Book, serves but as an Engine, to discover (by
their approbation of it,) a few persons in the Land that will distinguish
themselves by an Exalted Malignity. The reason that made me unwilling to trust
any of my writings in the hands of this man, was, because I saw the Weaver
(though he presumes to call himself a Merchant) was a stranger to all the Rules
of Civility; and I (...), that I should be served, as, now I find. He has been
so Vn^v^l, as to Print a Composure of mine, utterly without and against my
Consent; but the Good Providence of God has therein overrul^d his Malice: for
if that may have Impartial Readers, he will have his Confutation, and I my
perpetual Vindication. What occasion for any further Answer? The Antiscriptural
Doctrines Espoused by this man, do also call for no further Answer; for a
certain Scotch-man (one Stuart) of no very great Circumstances aboard one of
our Frigates then in our Harbor, sent him Two Letters, which he has been so
silly as to insert in his wretched Volumn; and those Two Letters are Penned
with so much Ingenuity, as for ever to leave him and all the Sons of the
Blasphemous Bekker without any Excuse. Only I cannot but observe, that although
the absurd man be one of such Extreme Unreasonableness, that some of his best
Friends have told me, that they have long ago signified unto him, that for that
cause, they did not wonder, that no Minister did care to be concerned with him,
and upon some Experiments I have seen, it seems impossible an Argument should
enter into him, yet he counts it Aswer enough not only unto any Argument, but
also unto the fullest Evidence under the hands of the most Conscientions and
understanding Witnesses, That he (forsooth) c^^t comp^ehend it, or (...)
e^^e^tain it. I affir^^, that this is the strongest A^gum^^t brought by him in
his wh^le Book; There is a certain Wea^^er that (...) Polie^e it. To him then I
owe no Answer, but what an Archangel has taught us to give him. However, to
You that are my Particular Fr^ends, I may offer a little further Armor,
wherein you may at any Time, if you think it worth the while, appear for my
Defense.

The wrongs that he does me are Numerous, yea, Numberless; he can scarce
mention me, without a Lie about me. I shall only single out a few that are more
Notorious, and give you but a brief touch upon them: from them you shall Judge
of the rest.

His first and main design, is to render me odious unto the Country, as being
one chief Abe^tor of that opinion, That the Devils cannot afflict in the Shape
of an Innocent person; and as being an Inciter of the Judges, to the Conviction
of Witchcrafts upon that opinion. It is very certain, that his Conscience must
needs tell him, this is a most Lying Accusation. For in my Book of Memorable
Providence, which I writ before the troubles at Salem, and even before I was
so fully acquainten with the Wiles of Satan, for my saying of which, on a
certain occasion, he flouts at me) I have a whole paragraph to caution against
accounting a Bewitched persons pretending to see an A^parition of such or such
an one, an Argument of their being Naughty People. And some of the chief
Ministers in this Land, favored that Book with their Attestation, and when it
was Reprinted in another Land, no less a man than Mr, Baxter, did recommend it
with a Praeface, as being likely to do great Service to the Christian Religion;
however, my friend Calef now Derides it. And in my Book of the Invisible World,
written in the highest ^orment of those Troubles, I have many Pages to diswade
from reliance on the Representations made unto the Afflicted, and bespeak all
possible Compassion and Charity for such as had been so Represented in the
Glasses of the Lying Spirit: which Book was not only ordered by the Governor,
to be Published, with Terms of the highest Respect, but also was Perused and
Approved by as Eminent persons as any in the Country, who were sufficiently
dissatisfied at the things then a doing. Moreover, when the Ministers presented
unto the Governor and Council, their advice against making the Spectral
Exhibitions to be so much as a Presumption of Witchcraft, it was my poor Hand
which drew up that advice, and my Heart was always in it. It may be no man
living ever had more people under Preternatural and astonishing Circumstances,
cast by the Providence of God, into his more peculiar care, then I have had;
but the Name of no one Good person in the world, ever came under any Blemish,
that I know of, by means of any Afflicted person, that fell under my particular
care; yea, no Man, Woman or Child, ever came into any trouble, for the sake of
any that were Afflicted, after I had once began to look after them. And whereas
my Buffeter says, That His Excellency, the Governors Pardoning the Condemned
persons, was not only without but also directly against his Pastors advice; All
the Ministers then in the Neighborhood, will bear witness for me, that they
know this to be a Falsehood. And after the Storm was raised at Salem, I did my
self offer to provide Meat, Drink, and Lodging, for no less than Six of the
Afflicted, that so an Experiment might be made, whether Prayer with Fasting,
upon the removal of those miserables one from another, might not put a period
unto the trouble then arising, without giving the Civil Authority, the trouble
of prosecuting the methods of the Law on that occasion. You Will say, how came it
then to pass, that many people took up another Notion of of me? Truly, Satan
knows. Perhaps 'twas because I thought it my Duty always to speak of the
Honorable Judges with as much Honor as I could; (a Crime which I am generally
Taxed for, and for which I have been finely requited!) this made people, who
Judge of things at a Distance, to dream that I approved of all that was done.
Perhaps also my Disposition to avoid Extremes, as it is said, he that Fears
God shall come out of them, causes me generally to be obnoxious unto the
Violent in all parties. Or, perhaps my great Adversary always had certain
people* full of Robert Calefs Malignity, to serve him with Calumnies and
Reproaches.

In prosecution of this design, he formed a Scandalous Libel against both my
Father and my self, pretending to relate what passed in a Visit, which we made
unto a poor E^^rgumen in our Flock. Those men have put off all Humanity who do
not abhor such a Villainous thing, as the Publishing of that Libel: For the man
had been sufficiently Certified that there were almost as many (...) as Lines
in it. There is hardly any thing more Unpardonable in his whole Volume than
these Libels, wherein he Charges us, with Speaking what we never spoke, and not
only leaves out the main things that we did speak, (especially, in our Charging
the poor Creature that she should rather Dye, than Accuse any people on the
account of her seeing their Specter,) but also he makes people believe, that
our Intention was to procure Accusations; Yea, he tries to make them also
believe something or other of us that is Base, and which he himself lately
owned, that he did not in the least Believe himself. And his Printing my Letter
herewithal, can only serve to show, the Height of his own Resolved and
Consummate Impiety His Malice (like that of him, whose Instrument he has herein
made himself) has here gone beyond his Wit. He could not easily have inserted a
thing more likely to render his Book Abominable to all that have the least
Christianity in them. And I believe, there is not one Christian but what would
think of it with Indignation, that when Ministers of the Gospel Faithfully and
Carefully discharge their Duty in their Visits to the Miserable in their
Flocks, little Bits, and Scraps, and Shreds of their discourse (carried away
perhaps by some Idle Eves droppers) should be basely tacked together, to render
them Contemptible; and many Falsehoods, yea and Smutty ones too, and such as
none but a Coal fetched from Hell could could have suggested, be added for the
Blackening of them. It were enough to procure me the Friendship and esteem of
any men, that have the least grain of Honesty in them, if I had it not before,
to see such a Man and such a Book treat me with such Brutish Malignity.
However, I am verily persuaded, that the Holy Lord, whose we are, and whom we
serve, will at some time or other make this man a Magor M^ssabib, for this his
deliberate wickedness. I will say no more of it, but leave it in those hands,
which alone will do right unto us.

About the Troubles which we have had from the Invisible World, I have at
present nothing to offer you; but that I believe they were too Dark, and too
Deep for an ordinary Comprehension: and it may be Errors on both Hands, have
attended them which will never be understood until the Day, when Satan shall be
Bound after another manner then he is at this Day. But for my own part, I know
not that ever I have advanced any opinion in the matter of Witchcraft, but what
all the Ministers of the Lord, that I know of in the world, whether English, or
Scotch, or French, or Dutch (and I know many) are of the same opinion with me.

I Will dismiss the matter with one fresh piece of History, and leave you to
Think wherefore I report it.

In the Year, School. my Reverend Friend Mr. Thomas Jolly, one of the most Holy
Servants that the Lord Jesus Christ has upon Earth, and an Aged and Famous
Minister of the Gospel, Published an Account of a certain Demoniac (one Richard
Dugdale) which had lately been at Surey in his Neighborhood. In that Account,
among abundance of prodigious Things which are Sworn by many Credible men,
before the Lord Willoughby, and other Justices of the Peace; it is particularly
Sworn, That the Young man, or the Demon in him, often told Secret and Future
Things which no Mortal could have told, and would speak Languages which the
Young man had never Learnt: That the Young man being inordinately set upon
Dancing, the Demon that entered into him, would made him Dance on his Knees his
Toes never touching the ground, for a long while together; That the Young man
would be so heavy, that Six or Seven strong men could not lift him, and
presently again so light, that One man with his Hand would lift him Three
Quarters of a Yard high, and hold him a long while, and find him no heavier,
then his Hat, or his Cane: That something like a Mouse appeared about him, and
within him, running up and down under his Clothes, and the Imp sometimes like
the Bigness of a little Dog in his Bed; and Voices were heard coming from it.
These and many more Astonishing Things, continued for a Year together; and
there were Thousands of Spectators, that came from all Quarters to be Witnesses
of those Things. The Nonconformist Ministers, and other Christians, in the
Vicinity, (especially Mr. Jolly) kept many Days of Prayer with Fasting on this
occasion; the Records whereof, he has Transcribed from his Diary into his
Printed History. After all, the Young man was delivered; but as he was a very
Vicious Fellow before his Possession, so he was not much mended after his
Deliverance. When the Tragedy was over, one Zachary Tailor, Printed a Virulent
Book, (Just like our Calefs) which affirmed unto the Nation, That the the whole
Business of Dugdale, was a Cheat, and a Sham, and a Combination of the
Roman Catholics and the Non-Conformists, to put a Trick upon the Nation: and
Reviled that Reverend man of God, Mr. Jolly, as Guilty of much Falsity, and
Forgery, and Blasphemy, and Cursing, and as designing to hurt the Cause of
Revealed Religion, and as worthy to have his Tongue bored through with an hot
Iron, and other Infamous passages, that cannot be Numbered. The Good Old Saint,
published a Vindication of himself; (which is to be Sold at our Book-sellors)
and I shall now recite but this one passage from it:

The Ministers of Christ, under the Cross, whoever they be, may comfort
themselves, in being made Conformable to their Lord and Master, when their
Sayings and Doings are so perverted, when they are Laden with mock Titles, and
Scourged by the lose Tongues of others, who yet have their Hands bound in some
measure, as the Highpriests and Elders, had by a Superior Power.

For fear I should not be Satanically enough Sambenitoed by those passages, he
has lit upon a Third method of Reviling: He falls upon the Ministers as having
opposed the Reassumption of the Old Charter by the people, after the
Revolution; but I must be singled out, as having been above the rest in that
opposition. Come then, you shall have the Truth of that matter too. Let all the
world know, if they please, that I was against our making a Revolution on this
Bottom, that the Condemnation of our Charter was invalid; and that the Judgment
passed upon it in the Court of Chancery, however Hard enough yet) was Null and
Void. On that Bottom it was impossible to have maintained it: neither the
condition of Men and Things here at home, nor the Relation we bore to England,
would have admitted it: No, it was to be Bottomed on the Invasions that had
been given to our English Liberties, rather than our Charter Liberties. Before
the former Governor and Magistrates Reassumed their places, I then thought
(and so did much wiser men) it was necessary, a Convention should give them
assurance that the Colony would yield Obedience. When this was done, the Old
Government was Reassumed, and the Old Charter too was Reassumed, as far as it
was possible to be done; Every thing in the world was done, but only declaring
that the Judgment passed in the Kings Court of Chancery (however it might be
thought a Grievance) did the Charter no Damage; which if some were wiser then
to say, who can help it? Well, did I oppose this Reassumption! They that were
acquainted with me, I am sure, did not think so; and they that sent their Tory
Pamphlets about the Country against me, as an Impudent Youth, or my assisting
the Reassumed Government, I am sure did not think so. Let the things Published
for the supporting of the Reassumed Government; and particularly the very first
Passage in the first Sermon, at the Anniversary Election, which the Deputies of
the General Court called me to Preach and Print, (which by the way, would they
have done, if the Young Man had been such an one, as this man would render
him?) be my Everlasting Apology; and let Calves never Bleat, nor Bulls (of
^ashan) Roar against me, on that point any more.

The last effort of his Malice is a Postscript against the Life of Sir William
Phips: against whose Memory, why any whose throats are an open Sepulcher,
should be so moustrously envious, that like Jackalls, they cannot let him rest
quietly in a Sepulcher, Good men cannot imagine any reason, but the third
Chapter of Genesi^. But all Considerate men will now believe, that the
Invectives of such as this Calef, against that good Spirited and well Meriting
person, are as true as that which Calef says, was uttered before the Kings
Council Board against him, That Sir William stopped the proceedings against the
Witchcrafts, because his own Lady was Accused. A most putid Slander! But as I
have rarely endured a Storm of* being Evil spoken of, but for my speaking Well
of other (and virtuous) men, when I have had nothing of Interest, but mere
Principle and Conscience to move me unto it: so I have endured more than a
little from some sort of men, for my writing the Life of Sir William Phips, and
speaking well of him, without either Doing or Speaking Ill, against any one
Good man under the whole Heavens, in the whole Composure. It seems, I must now
write an Apology, for that Book: for which I have no Confession to make, but,
That I don't wish one Line of it unwritten. I have expressly declared, in the
First Section of it; It is not any Partiality for the Memory of my Deceased
Friend, or any other Sinister design whatsoever, that has Invited me to this
undertaking; but I have undertaken this matter from a sincere Desire, that the
Ever Glorious Lord JESUS CHRIST may have the Glory of His Power and Goodness,
and of His Providence, in what He did for such a Person, and in what He
Disposed and Assisted him to do for Him. Some (I know, why?) have wi^hed, That
Book had not been written, But others, not inferior to them, do Bless God,
that ever it was written. And I think, and so do many more that love their
Country, think, I had Reason enough to write it: If some think, I had not,
however I have done Them no Hurt; and I do not often see Reason, in other cases
as well as This, to be of Their opinion. Gentlemen of as good sense as any of
them, in Letters from England, please to thank me for that Book; adding, They
who find fault with the Character of that person, are men who have not the
Courage to Imitate his Virtues. And Gentlemen of Greater Figure than any of
them, in their Letters, are pleased to say, Your Account of Sir William Phips'
s Life, was a Wise and Seasonable work. But some say; I have Overdone, and
given my Deceased Friend, an higher Encomium than he deserved. And if it were
so, yet we find in other Instances, That the Gentlemen (if they be indeed such)
who criticize upon the Lives daily Published, when they are never so critical,
do never make an Author Criminal, if he over do a little, in setting off his
Hero. But be patient a little, Sirs; The Highest that I have written of my
Friend, is all summ^d up, in p. 105, 106. with these words; I have not all this
while said, he was Faultless. It must be Confessed, lest I should prove a
Flatterer, he had his Infirmities; but, I do from a real Satisfaction of
Conscience concerning him, declare to all the world, That I reckon him, to have
been rea'ly a very worthy man; that few men in the wo^ld, Rising from so mean
an Original, as he, would have acquitted themselves with a thousandth part of
his Capacity or Integrity; that he left unto the world a notable Exemple of a
Disposition to Do Good, and Encountered and Overcame almost Invincible
Temptations in doing it. Now, I believe, the Body of the People of New England,
will own that this is not Overdoing; But for those few Friends of mine, who
will still call it Overdoing, I have two Offers to make them.

First. If the Addresses which the Body of the whole People of this Province,
in the General Court Assembled, made unto the King and Queen for the
continuance of Sir William Phips, in his Government, may be Published, (or at
least the Character, which the General Court with an endeared Satisfaction
heard the Greatest person then in the Province, give of (...) after the Tidings
of his Death;) Ill be ^^ntent that all my Encomium of him, should be
obliterated: I am sure, Sir William would be no loser by it.

Secondly* When the Adversaries of Sir William Phips, have been as hard upon
one of Th^ir^, for his Emblazoning the Virtues, and Magnifying the Praises of
another Governor (whose Mother had her support from the Alms of my Uncles
Church in Dubl^n) in his considerations for the Colo^y of Connecticut, Ill then
Consider a little further, what my Faults are in telling, what many Thousands
know and feel to be True about Sir William.

That History is, I remember concluded with a well known passage in Suida^,
That an Envious man once going to pull down a Statue, which had been Erected
unto the memory of one whom he Maligned, he only got this by it, that the
Statue falling down, knocked out his Brains. It was but Justice and ^rudence,
that one who so deserved of his Country as that Gentlemen did, should have a
Statue, and all that have hitherto gone to hurt it, have only got an ill Name
unto themselves. I would advise those unkind people to desist from such a
Barbarous and Ungenteel way of treating a Deceased Gentleman; for his Friends
are so furnished, that these people will only dash and wound themselves against
a Tombstone that will not be broken. And Considerate men will think, and it
will not be easy to persuade the Body of the people in this Country otherwise,
That Sir Williams Exemplary love to his Country, and the Churches in it, and
his not giving himself up to evil Courses, is all their Quarrel against him.
The History was no sooner abroad, but in the Praeface to the Life of Mr.
B^i^ey, I inserted such words as these; That Malice it self may never hiss with
the least Color of Reason any more, I do here declare; let any man Living,
Evince any one material mistake in any of my Composures, it shall have the most
Public Recantation that can be desired. All men will say this offer was fair.
Well, when mine (and Religions) Adversaries, had with a concocted malice, done
all they could, they thought at last they had found one passage, wherein they
might impeach my Veracity. I had said, That before Quebeck, Sir William lay
within Pistol-Shot of the Enemies Canon, and that his Ship was Shot through, in
an Hundred places, and that it was Shot through, with Four and Twenty Pounders.
(It Is a gross Hardship for any to take my meaning, as if all the Shot had been
so.) And now they fall to Tragical Exclamations; they think Four and Twenty
Pounders to be too small Dimensions, for the Clamours they must Batter me
withal? But, hold Robin, I am not so soon Shot through; and the Statue as I
told thee, has knocked out thy Bra^^s. I wrote no more than the very words,
which I find in a Journal of the Expidition to Quebec; and as any Gentleman may
see it if he will, so there is no Gentleman but what will count this my
sufficient Excuse. Calef himself has lately owned, that that he verily believes
I did so; Where then, my Friend, where was the Conscience of this Outcry on my
Fidelity? However, I began to suspect, that I had been betrayed unawares, to
Flourish this ma^^er with more of a Rhetorical Liberty, th^n Historical
Exactness; and I was almost ready, humbly to beg Pardon for one Paragraph (in
all my poor Treatises) as guilty of aggravating a matter with too florid
Circumstances, But now the matter shall not go over so. Our Friend Calef says,
That they were not nearer the Enemy, then half or three quarters of a Mile, and
there might be in all, Seven Shot that struck the Hull of the Vessel? and that
non^ of them were known to be bigger than Eighteen Pounders, the Enemy having
but one Gun, that could carry an Eighteen-Pound-Ball. Now, behold how the
attempts of my Adversaries to prove a Falsehood in me, Rec^^ upon themselves. I
affirm, that every one of his Assertions are False; and I entreat you to repair
to as honest men, as any aboard the Ship, who if they do not under their Hands
demonstrate, that the Assertions of Calef are every one of them False, and if
they do not also Testify and Justify the T^^^h of what I have written, yea,
that some of those Individual Four and Twenty Pounders have been long used in
some Domestic uses among our Neighbors; I am content, you should say what you
please concerning me. But if mankind will not now Conspire to deny me Justice,
they will acknowledge, that the Truth of my Historical Writings, has nothing
short of a Triumph in this Thing: when my fiercest Enemies (for such my poor
Zeal to serve the Holy Churches of the Lord has procured me) have ransacked as
much as they pleased of what I have written, they can fix but upon one passage,
which after all is found so incontestable.

To take Notice of the many other obnoxious Things in this odd Book, would be
Endless, and Useless. And yet now my Hand is in, I am content, that there be
Two Remarks more made upon it.

First, Can You Comprehend, (for my part, I cannot!) where lies the Ingenuity
or Significancy, of my Neighbor Calefs Argumentations? He pretends, to write a
Book to prove, That there are no such Witches, as do hurt, by Confaederacies
with Devils, and that though the Bible expressly say, concerning the Witch of
Endor, She was a Mistress of a Spirit, yet there is no need of Believing what
the Bible says.) Well, How does he prove it? Thus; If Mr. Mather got several
Ministers, to give him a Testimonial of his Fidelity in his Agency, then there
are no Witches. But he did so; Therefore, -- Again; If Mr. Mather procured Sir
William Ph^ps to be Governor, that he might get himself Established Praesident
of the College, then there are no Witches. But he did so; Therefore, -- Once
more, If the French at Quebec Shot no Four and Twenty Pounders, then there are
no W^tches. But the former is true; Therefore, -- Admirably argued! -- But
because the Consequence in these wonderful Arguments, is beyond my Reach, I
must satisfy my self with only Denying the Assumption in each of them. No
wonder that our Author threatens us, with Refusing to admit unto the work of
the Ministry, those that have been Educated in School-Learning. All our dull
School Learning would never Enable a man, to penetrate into the Sense and Force
of this Incomparable Reasoning. Truly, to penetrate into it, would rather be to
prove That there are Witches: For who but Witches, were able to do it?

Secondly, Though there are many Impious Assertions, in my Neigbour Calefs
Volumn, yet there is but one that I shall observe to you, because the Impiety
of it, out-does all the rest, and almost all that ever I read in my Life. His
words at the Eightieth page, are these: To say, that God did at any time
i^power a Witch, to work wonders, to gain belief to the Doctrine of Devils,
were with one Breath, to destroy root and branch, all Revealed Religion. I pray
Sirs, now turn to Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a
Dreamer of Dream, and gives thee a Sign or a Wonder, and the Sign or the Wonder
come to pass, whereof he spoke to thee, saying, Let us go after other Gods, --
Thou shall not hearken to the words of that Prophet: for the Lord your God
proves you.

Yea, it is expressly said concerning the greatest idolater that ever was in the
world, Rev. 13.14. He Deceives them which dwell on the Earth, by means of those
MIRACLES which he had POWER to do And Rev. 19.20. The False Prophet wrought
MIRACLES, with which he DECEIVED. Whereas, according to Calef, if there do
arise a False Prophet, (which by the way, is a Witch, according to his
Definition of one) and he should have power to do a Sign or a Wonder, and he
should say, I Preach to you another God, besides Jesus Christ, you must let go
all the Revealed Religion of Jesus Christ; We have a sufficient warrant now to
give up all the Revealed Religion of our Holy Jesus, to Turn Mohammedan, or
Deists, or Pagans, or any thing that a Devil shall propose unto us. Calef
teaches us, to go after other God, if a Witch may work wonders to invite us
unto it; and this he does, after he had said, (p. 25.) That a Possessed person
being lifted up, and held a space of several minutes in the Air, [of which
being done in our Neighborhood, he had several uncontrollable Testimonies, of
Neighbors, that are far honester men than himself,] is as true a miracle, as
those recorded in the Scripture. And it is well known, That the Quakers
formerly, and especially that Goblin Tom Case, often did Wonders (not much
inferior to those of Apollonius Tyaneus, of which you have read,) if this were
one, that by Breath^ng or Stroaking on people, they would make them follow
them, like so many Sp^^^els all the Country over; or if this were one, that by
fixing their Eye on some of their followers at any time, they would make them
voluntarily Fall and ^oam and Roll about, until they came unto the Feet of of
these Enchanters, who by a Touch of their Hands would then set them upon their
Feet again. To tell us, we must part with Root and Branch of all Revealed
Religion, if Seducers may get power to work wonders, is as Dangerous and as
Damnable a position, as ever dropped from the Pen of man: it is fit only to be
written with a Quill of an Harpy. Where, I beseech you, where is the Grace or
Sense of such Readers, (or are any such Readers worthy to be Teachers of
others?) who could Read over this Book, and say They saw no Hurt in it! Give me
leave: That vile Book of Tom Maules, which the General Court Condemned unto the
Flames, had not in it a more hideous piece of Doctrine, then this of Robert
Calef. I pray, let Serious Christians Consider it!

And indeed, Serious Christians have already Considered the Book so far, that
this man has made himself too manifest unto all men, for him to proceed any
further with any success* People at first were a little eager to see the Book,
as they would be to see a Prodigy; for they generally reckoned it a very
Prodigy of wickedness. But they are now satisfied, That if he should go on to
write never so many more such Volumns, they would lie upon his hands; no sober
people would vouchsafe to look upon them.

I will give your patience no further trouble. Satan was doubtless in hopes by
these Libels, to damnify my precious Opportunities, of serving the Lord Jesus
Christ: But as I have cause to hope, that the Lord will-requite me Good for the
Cursing that I have encountered; so, my Opportunities to do Good, will be
strangely preserved and increased. They are not in Satan's hands; I commit my
cause to Him that Judges Righteously: and I would humbly hope, That nothing
shall befall me, but what shall promote the Evangelical Interests. In the mean
time, though this Profane Mocker do Scoff at the recording of Remarkable
Providence; and among such, he particulary enumerates this, That the first
person, whose Funeral our new Bell tolled for* was one of my Children, which by
the way, is a gross Lie in matter of Fact; and if it had been true, I know
nothing so very Remarkable in it!] yet I would not have him Scoff too much at
Remarkable Providence; for he does not know, what the Hand of Heaven may do
upon himself.

All I would add, shall be to tell you, what Use I would make of these
Allaetrations. I remember, I have read, That the Muscovites traveling vast
Journies on the Ice, in Sledds drawn by Reine Deer, to make the Deer dispatch
with incredible Diligence, they tie a Dog in the Sled, who by his continual
Barking sets the Deer a running with such speed, as to Draw its burden (they
tell us) Forty Leagues a day. I hope, I am traveling to the Heavenly World,
and carrying as many with me thither as I can: But I Fear I am too Slothful;
through my Slothfulness, I don't use Dispatch enough; (though my Flattering
Friends think this the least of my Faults.) Now, that I may be quickened in my
Heavenly Work, and Heavenward Race, there must it seems, be provided for me
something to Bark at me so Loud, that all the Country shall hear of it. Now,
God forbid, that I should complain of so wise a Dispensation. It will not be long
before I am out of Hearing, and where the wicked cease from Troubling.

In the mean time; SIRS, I am Sincerely Yours; COTTON MATHER


'According to the Desire of this Reverend Person, we have now received several
Testimonies, from Honest men, that were aboard the Ship, mentioned in the
Letter. But because they all concur in the same thing, we shall here transcribe
only one of them, which is as follows;

Being desired to certify, what we know concerning certain passages in a
^ibellous Book of one Robert Calef; affirming, That the Admiral of our Fleet
lying before Quebec was not within Pistol-Shot of the Enemy; and that the Ship
was not Shot through in an Hund^ed places; and that no more than about Seven
Shot Struck the Hull of the Vessel; and none of them known to be above Eighteen
Pounders, the Enemy having but one Gun (says he) that could carry so big as an
Eighteen-Pound Ball. We whose Names are subscribed, can Convict the Fal^^ood of
those Assertions.

We can Assert, That the Enemies Small Shot not only came aboard us, but also
went much beyond us.

We can also to this day reckon up, as we judge, to the best part of
(...)-S^^re particular places, where we can remember the Ship was in one part
or an other Shot through and near Twenty places at least (if not more) in the
Hull of the Ship; and if he that reports it should say, the Ship was S^ot
through in an Hundred places, we could not Contradict it, but rather Ju^^^fie
it.

We were also well assured, that the Enemy Shot Fou^ a^^ Twenty P^u^ders,
because we could not Charge our G^ns with such of them as were preserved,
though some of our Guns carried Eighteen P^unders. And the Gunners also took
the Me^sure of them (and said they likewise We^^^ed them) and found them to be
Four and Twenty Pounders.

Boston, December 3 rd. 1700.

To this Testimony, and to the others, the Names of several very Honest men
then aboard, and some that were (as Gunners and Ca^penters) best able to make
report of these things, are Subscribed with their own Hand^, which we have
ready to produce unto any one that shall ask to see them. And now let the world
say, whether a greater kindness could in effect be done, unto the Reputation of
this worthy man, and the Credit of his Historical Writings, (by which the Lord
has been so much Glorified,) than to see that the only pass^ge, which his Enemy
can single out, turns back upon those that make their Cavils,

We have taken Notice of a certain passage, which bears hard upon Mr. C^tton
Mather. Our Friend Calef, speaking of the Trial of one Goody Glover, who was
Executed, for afflicting the Children of our Friend, Mr. John G^^dwi^; In p.
152. of his Book, he says, Mr Cotton Mather, was the most active and forward
of any Minister in the Country, in those matters, taking home one of the
Children etc. Our Friend, who of all men had most reason to know the Truth,
does declare to Mr. Mathers Vindication, as follows;

Let the World be informed, that when one of my Children had been Laboring
under sad Circumstances from the Invisible W^^ld, for about a quarter of a Year
I desired the Ministers of Boston with Charlestown, to keep a Day of Prayer at
my House, if so be Deliverance might be obtained; Mr. Cotton Mather was the
last of the Mini^^ers that I spoke to on that occasion, and though by reason of
some necessary business, he could not attend, yet he came to my House in the
morning of that Day, and tarried about half an hour, and went to Prayer with
us, before any other Minister came. Never before now, had I the least
acquaintance with him. About three or four Months after this, I desired that
another Day of Prayer might be kept by the aforesaid Ministers, which
accordi^^ly they did, and Mr. Cotton Mather was the present. But he never gave
me ^he least advice, neither Face to Face, nor by by way of Epistles, neither
Directly, nor Indirectly* but the motion of going to the Authority, was made to
me, by a Minister of a Neighboring Town, now Departed. And matters were
managed by me in Prosecution of the supposed Criminal, wholly without the
Advice of any Minister or Lawyer, or any other person. The Ministers would now
and then, come to visit my distressed Family, and pray with and for them; among
which, Mr. Cotton Mather would now and then come, and go to Prayer with us: yet
in all that time, he never advised me to any thing concerning the Law, or Trial
of the Accused person; but after that Wicked woman had been Condemned about a
Fortnight, Mr. Cotton Mather invited one of my Child^en to his House; and
within a day or two after that, the Woman was Executed.

John Goodwin.


Now, Behold how active and forward Mr. Mather was, in transacting the ^ffairs,
relating to this Woman; and be A^^oni^hed, that ever any One should go to
insinuate such things to the world, as are known by most that ever heard of
those Afflicted Children, to be so far different from Truth. We wonder Friend,
what made you to wander so far from the design of your Book, (which you tell
us, p. 3. of your Praeface, is to prevent any more such Bloody V^ct^m^ or
Sacrafice^, and the Vindication of the Truth,) as to do what in you lies, to
lessen the Esteem of those Servants of Christ, (which you make your chiefest
Butts) among the Lords People. S^rely, it was not to P^ove your Princi^^^^
about Witchcraft: that would discover the (...) of your cause, which we don't
desire to meddle with, thinking it fitter for wiser men. Neither was it (we
would hope) to gratify the Ungodly: that would be to appear on the wrong side.
We would gladly suppose, it was not to raise your your own C^edit upon the fall
of Theirs, was it? If so, the stone rolls upon your self. Had you duly
Considered that Text, Zech. 2.8. He that touches you, touches the Apple of
mine Eye; we have Charity to hope, you would never have ventured, as in your
Book you have done, even, to put those Servants of Christ, into Bear Skins, for
you know who to worry them. You cannot but see some such Effects already in what
you have done. We pray God Pardon your Sin, and give you the Grace to Repent.
You may, for all us, write what Arguments you please, for the Defense of your
own Principles, and if you had only done so Now, you would never in this Way
have heard from us; wherefore our Advice to you is (if it be worth taking)
whatever you do, don't venture to insinuate, any more such Slanders and
Falsehoods to the world, as you have already done; but if the Evil Spirit tempt
you to it, Let us entreat you, before you do it* seriously to Consider, Mat.
25.42. where our Savior says, He takes what is done to His, as done to
Himself: For we are sure, according to Charity, you dare not say, they are not
the Servants of Christ, and Faithful in their Generation.

We shall now add no more; But we read, that when some persons not of the
greatest Figure, appeared for the Blessed Paul, against them that were his
Adversaries, all the Churches gave them Thanks. Thus we do believe, that the
Churches, will give us Thanks, for our appearing to Vindicate in this manner
the Reputation of our Pastors; (we are verily persuaded, few will so openly
make themselves partakers of this man's Sins, as to express any dislike of so
Just an action:) Because it was the end of Satan, to hinder all the Churches,
from the Good and Benefit of their Labors. But we shall undoubtedly find Satan
and his Instruments frustrated.

To conclude, we cannot hear of any one Pious person, that does approve of
Robert Caless most Scandalous Book. Many rather think that the writer of it,
ought to have some Exemplary Punishment inflicted on him, that others might
hear and fear, and that none may hereafter do any more so wickedly. He falls
under the weight of many Prayers; For we can assure him, that more than a Few,
have carried him before God, with ^om^laints of the Injuries which he has done
to the Name of Christ, by Slandering His Faithful and Eminent Servants. He has
done Them much wrong, and may fear that the Lord will Reward him according to
his works.

POSTSCRIPT.
WHile these Papers were in the Press, it was understood, That some endeavored
to make this Vindication to be of no Effect, by Cavilling, That it is a
Fallacy, and that it is the Work of the Pastors Vindicated, and none of The^rs
who have set their Names unto it. Now, though the work will sufficiently clear it
self, to all Impartial Readers, and there are other witnesses enough to prove
this Cavil to be False; Yet that no person may be so unreasonable as to mention
it any more, it has been thought not amiss to annex the ensuing Declaration.

THat we may clear our Friends from a Calumny, we hear cast upon them, as if
one of us were the Author, of what goes under their Name, in their Essay for
our just Vindication, we do hereby Declare (each of us for himself,) That the
said Calumny is very False. Yea, we were so far from Composing of this Essay,
that we Earnestly but Fruitlesly, asked of them, to Abate some Expressions, of
their Good and Kind opinions concerning us, which are now Occurring in it.

And if the plain Dissimilitude of Style, were not a sufficient Evidence for
them, yet no man knows the Flock whereto they belong, who does not know, That
there are many persons in it, whose Talents would enable them to write as well
as this Book is written, and much better than that which this has answered.

But what needs any more be said? When One of these Seven Brethren, more than
Ten years ago, had a Discourse of his own Printed, in a Style not inferior to
this; And (not more particularly to mention One of the Seven Subscribers, who
with Joy set his Hand unto this work, while he lay Sick of the Sickness that
carried him to a better World, and went thither the more Joyfully for his
having done so;) Others of them have not improved so little under their
Evangelical Advantages and Exercises, that they should be unable to write as
well as now they do: Though which of them, has been most concerned in it, we
perceive they are not willing to have exposed.

For the Satisfaction of the Public we judge it convenient further to add,
That* we so far despised the Assaults, which our Inconsiderable Adversary had
made upon us, as to think it not worth the while to answer his Impertinent
Libels and Slanders. Nor did we ever propose it unto any O^e of the Brethren in
our Church, to Answer them for us.

And when These, with more Brethren, came to us, with an offer to do, what they
have now done, though we could not but heartily Thank them for their Affection
to us, [ The Lord give Mercy to them and their Houses, who were not Ashamed of
our Cause!] Yet we had never permitted them to do it, if it had not been for
This Consideration; That albeit there was little Hazard, that the Dirt, of our
Adversaries Book (which we bind as a Crown unto us) would at all so stick as to
Damnify our precious opportunities, to Glorify our Lord Jesus Christ in this
Country, where we have been known from our Childhood; but the poor man (whom
we heartily pity) and his Book, had only made themselves Loathsome to all Sober
People: Nevertheless the Dirty Book, was carried abroad unto some of the
Islands, where it was more needful for us to have our Friends furnished with
our Vindication: And we were also sensible, That there were many Good men, who
would be glad of being informed in many Particulars, which are brought now to
light.

But even in this matter also, we were grown somewhat Cold, until some would
have persuaded our Brethren, to desist from their Action, because our Enemies
Threatened, That they would write again, and bring to light other things, (we
know not what) against us. These Threats only Confirmed us in our Consent and
Advice, That our Brethren should go on, and rendered it indeed absolutely
Necessary* For we have not Lived so, but that (through the Grace of Christ) we
can Defy all the Malice (...) our Enemies. Let them tell all the (...) they
can possibly discover concerning us: But if they go on with telling of Lies,
the Insatuated men have already-done so much that way, that they have only laid
themselves open unto the Resentments of Good men, from one end of the Land unto
the other, and (while we were far from doing or wishing them any Hurt) they
have Hurt themselves a Thousand Times more than either of us. Yea, the Glorious
Lord, whose we are, and whom we serve, will cause those that seek our Soul, to
destroy it, (and our Opportunities to do good unto the Souls of others, which
are dear to us as our own Souls) to find first or last the fulfillment of that
word, The mouth of them that speak Lies shall be stopped.

All we have to add is, That we would Bless and not Curse those who Persecute
(...), and fervently Pray to God, for His Best Blessings on the very Worst of
all our Persecutors: and would have them know, That though they may oblige us
to Defend our selves, we hope, they shall not provoke us to Revenge any wrongs
they may do unto us. And if any by their Envious Vexing and Carping, at the
fair Vindication of our Innocence, do make themselves Parties with our
Persecutors, and Partakers in the Sins of their Book, and would make
New England, the only Country where it is a Crime for Innocence to have a
Vindication, we Forgive these also, and Pray, That they may be Forgiven.

INCREASE MATHER. COTTON MATHER.

Jan. 9 th. 1700, 1.

FINIS.
The Reader is desired to mend these small Faults, that ^^ve escaped the Press.
PAge 16. l. 24. r. the open. p. 21 l. 16. dele say. p. 31. l. 28. f. whould r.
would. p. 36 l. l. 10. f. Antiscriptural r. Antiscriptural. p. 37. l. 2. f.
acquainten r. acquainted. p. 41. l. 29. dele could. p. 52. l. 17. dele that. p.
57, l. 3. dele of* p. 62. l. 10. s. had r. has. p. 64. l. 18. dele your.

THere is now in the Press, and will speedily be Published, a Little Book,
Entitled, Triumphs over Troubles. A SERMON upon the Good which GOD intends,
and FAITH expects, for Good Men, from all their Troubles in a Troublesome World.

By the Reverend Mr. Cotton Mather, Pastor of a Church in Boston.

Sold by Benjamin Eliot, Under the West End of the Townhouse. 1701.


