THE Singular Happiness Of such Heads or Rulers, AS Are able to Choose out
their Peoples Way, and will also Endeavor their Peoples Comfort.

As it was Discoursed in a Brief SERMON Preached to the Great and General
Assembly of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay, Convened at Boston in N.
England, on May 28 th. 1701. The Stated day for their Anniversary Election of
Counselors.

By Mr. Joseph Belcher, Pastor of the Church in Dedham.

Psalm. 78.70. He chose David also his servant. 71. To feed Jacob his People and
Israel his Inheritance. 72. So he fed them according to the Integrity of his
heart, and guided them by the skilfulness of his hands. Boston: Printed by B.
Green, and J. Allen. Sold by Samuel Sewall Junior. 1701.

PRinted by Order of the Honorable the Lieutenant Governor and Council.

Isaac Addington, Secr.

A PREFACE TO THE Reader.
WHEN the Lord our God planted these Heavens, and laid the foundations of this
Earth, and said to New England, Thou art my People: I mean when he first
Founded and Erected, both an Ecclesiastical and Civil Constitution here;
together and at once; and thereby made us not only a People, but His People; he
put it into the hearts of his Servants in both Orders to endeavor a Coalition
of both those fundamental Interests, ( viz) that of Heaven, and that of Earth;
which is to say, that of Religion, and that of Civil Government, that the
latter might be sanctified by the former, and our Churches and People be
confirmed and flourish, with both temporal and spiritual Prosperities, under a
concurrence and confluence of all the blessings of both. Hence the first
original, and long continuance of our Religious Solemnities, Celebrated by the
Word of God, Prayer, and Praise, on the morning of our Aniversary Days of
Election, in order to the more solemn and successful management of that great
Affair of those days, under the propitious aspect of Heaven, by Divine Counsel
and Conduct, unto such an happy Choice as might make sufficient provision for
such an Administration of Government successively, as may be effectual unto the
preservation and promotion of our public Weal, in all the respects of it, both
Civil and Sacred; and in this way of waiting upon God, his People heretofore
have obtained signal instances of his Favor, Grace, and Blessing; and which
are hitherunto continued in a degree above our deserts; yet not without a very
humbling diminution of our joy and comfort, from a sense of our own sinfulness
and unworthiness, and of Gods holy and just (though very severe) displeasure,
moved thereby, especially since he has entered into, and so long continued in,
a way of Judgment with us; in which process he has caused us to pass under
diverse very afflictive and humbling Changes and Bereavements; and to see and
feel things hard to bear: It concerns us therefore to know and acknowledge, and
to be very humbly and penitentially sensible, that our not hearkening unto, and
not obeying the voice of the Lord our God by his Ministry, has been the
radical cause of that detection in the life and power of Religion, whereby our
God has been so far provoked against us; especially that we have given no more
profitable effectual attention, unto those more awful awakening voices of his
unto all New England, uttered with the greatest solemnity in our Election
Sermons, delivered with much evidence of the Presence and Assistance of the
Spirit, in the most public Audience of our Great and General Assemblies,
wherein God has commanded his Servants to Cry aloud, and not to spare, to lift
up their voices like Trumpets to show us his people our transgressions and our
sins, and whereby he has plainly charged us with, powerfully convinced us of,
justly and severely judged, condemned, and dreadfully denounced against us for
those transgressions and sins, more especially those ways of sinning wherein we
have been forsaking of him, and breaking covenant with him, and thereby
exchanging our Glory (even our God for that which does not profit (which i^)
the world; but yet withal has by the same voice been calling, commanding,
exhorting, directing, and moving of us most graciously and powerfully, by most
solemn obtestations and compellations, from his word to repent and turn unto
him unfeignedly, with our whole hearts; and that upon most gracious promises of
Salvation, both from Sin and Judgment. And all this (before he actually engaged
in pleading of his Controversy (which is the Quarrel of his Covenant) with us
by these his most eminent Servants, by whose Ministry and Service he first
transported his Gospel and Kingdom into this part of the world, who (as most
able and faithful watchmen) discovered, declared and gave timely, both general
and particular warning of, and against all dangerous evils of sin present and
prevailing; and all those Judgments impending and approaching, which God has
since executed upon us; so that although our Fathers and Prophets have faithfully
signified their Testimony and are removed yet we have been and are forced to
own and acknowledge that Gods word which he commanded them to deliver has
taken bold and that as God thought (and by them said he would) do unto us, so
be has dealt with us; and although God has graciously granted to us some
respite by an interim of outward peace, and prosperity, for our farther
probation; yet we persisting in our former ways of transgression and
provocation may fear (if not conclude) that his controversy will not be issued
with us, nor our Salvation perfected and confirmed, in saving mercy; until we
have heard and obeyed the words which the Lord has cried to us by the voice of
those former Prophets; and until they have had their saving efficacy and effect
upon us in a general Conversion and Reformation: In the mean time we have great
cause, and much matter of thankfulness unto our most gracious and merciful God,
that he has not only spared us and saved us from general destructions and
desolations, and from overwhelming, overturning Changes. But that he has
continued us in the peaceable possession of his house, and all the furniture of
it, his Word, Worship, Ministry, Administrations, according to Divine
Institutions, with so much of the Spirit, and Power thereof as does remain,
though not without very humbling declension therein; and with so much of the
spiritual and gracious presence of God, as he is yet pleased to continue, though
not without very sad and signal degrees of Desertion, by the gradual removes of
the Glory: As also for that God has granted unto us such a Civil Government,
and hitherto so far provided for the just and righteous Administration thereof:
That we have made no better improvement for the time we have enjoyed so great a
benefit, may have moved God in displeasure to remove that noble Personage and
great Patriot whom he had made Governor and Commander in Chief with us; and
also to threaten us with a further (and in that respect) a greater breach, by
removing that Honorable and Excellent Person yet surviving in Chief place of
Government, but living and languishing under very doubtful and dangerous
symptoms: Surely God having so eminently qualified him with Wisdom and grace,
and thereby made him so great a Benefactor and Blessing to his People and
Churches here, it is our duty to give unto God the glory thereof with great
thankfulness, for the great and public benefit of the long labor of his life
past, and to pray sincerely and fervently for the further continuance of both.

As for the Sermon herewith published, the Author desires to be, and to appear
clothed with Humility and Modesty; and therefore to predicate any thing more
of him would be an Injury. Only it is a duty to give unto God that Glory of his
Grace through which his Servant has obtained praise in the Gospel, and
throughout the Churches. The proper and peculiar Commendation of the Sermon it
self is, That it treats directly of some such Principles, Rules and Ends of
Civil Government, which do most Comm^nd it, by setting forth the Goodness of it
in such properties of it as do render it in all respects most beneficial,
comfortable and effectual unto the Public Weal, most honorable to Rulers or
Governors, most acceptable to God, and conducible to his Glory, and the
Peoples good.

Hence therefore it having been commended to the Public by the Authority and
Order of the HONORABLE the LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR and COUNCIL, who first
commanded the Preparation and Delivery of it, I have taken leave to recommend
it to the perusal of all Good People, as a proper means to dispose us all unto
a Religious Subjection unto, with Prayers and Praises for our SOVEREIGN LORD
the KING, as Supreme, and all (with us) in Authority under Him, that under the
Benign Influence of his Favor, and their Justice and Righteousness in
Administration, we may live quiet and peaceable Lives in all Godliness and
Honesty; for this is good and acceptable in the sight of GOD our SAVIOR.

Of whom that we may be all accepted in all Duty,

Is the Prayer of his most Unworthy Servant, Samuel Torrey.
June 25 th. 1701.
THE Singular Happiness OF SUCH HEADS or RULERS As are able to Choose out their
Peoples Way, and will also Endeavor their Peoples Comfort.
JOB XXIX.25. I chose out their way, and sat chief, and dwelt as a King in the
Army, as one that comfort the Mourners.


HOwever it possibly may have been questioned and controverted by some, whether
ever there should have been any Power and Government of man over man, had man
persisted in that primitive Integrity in which he was Created; yet since his
woeful Apostasy and Fall from that Integrity, that there should be a Government
and Power of man over man, is indubitably the Appointment and Ordinance of God.
The Most High, who has Established his Throne in the Heavens and whose Kingdom
Rules over all Creatures, both in Heaven and in Earth; although he be under no
necessity of nature, or defect of Power (as Earthly Princes are, who cannot do
all alone, but are under a necessity to execute by inferior hands) yet has he
been pleased (from the good pleasure of his will, the superabundance of his
Goodness, and in favor and compassion to the Children of men) to make use of
Instruments, and to exert and put forth his power by men, putting the Sword
into the Hands of Creatures of our own kind and likeness. And indeed such is
the immensity of his Perfections, that our frailty cannot bear his immediate
converses; If God should speak to us, and judge us (as when he promulgated the
Law on Mount Sinai) in an immediate way, his appearance would certainly be
astonishing, the Judgment would be most dreadful and terrible. (There being no
man can see him and live) He has therefore, in his abundant goodness, as well
as infinite wisdom, appointed men (who are of our own make, and subject to the
like passions and infirmities with our selves) to be our Rulers, that so there
might be a greater trial of Obedience and Subjection in those who are to obey
and be subject, and a greater ground of tenderness and compassion in those who
are to Rule and Govern. In this way of Government which God has been pleased to
ordain (and which is so convenient and adapted to our present condition and
circumstances) it must be acknowledged that the persons whom he either appoints
or permits to execute the Office, are not all alike Qualified to promove and
advance (which is the common end of Government) the public Weal. Among those
who (in the Providence of God) are vested with Authority of this kind, some are
not so capable to hold the Reins of Civil Government for the public advantage;
we read of Childrens being Princes, and of Babes bearing Rule; and, W^ unto
thee O Land, when thy King is a Child. Among those who are vested with
Authority of this nature, Others there are who are not so faithful in Guiding
of Affairs for the public Good; who are so far from following him, who was
wont to say, Non mihi, sed populo; that they think they never act so wisely
with those whom they have the Rule and Government of, as when (with Pharaoh)
they set over them Task masters to afflict them with burdens, till they sigh by
reason of the bondage; and their cry comes up unto God by reason of the
bondage. But others there are, who are vested with this kind of Authority, who
look upon themselves set in high Station, not so much for themselves, as for
the peoples sake; and accordingly are men seeking the Welfare of Gods Israel;
They seem to be the accomplishment of the Lords promise to his people, Isa.
49.23. Kings shall be their Nursing Fathers, and Queens their Nursing Mothers.
Such is the sincere affection, and tender regard which they carry toward those
whom they have the Government of, that they are as careful in providing for
them, in protecting and defending of them, in dealing compassionately and
tenderly with them, and in extending comforts and consolations to them, as
Nurses are with respect to their Children. It is sometimes such a smile of
Divine Favor to a people, as that those who are in place of Civil Rule, and
have the Government of them, are so wise and prudent in their whole deportment,
so just and righteous in all their Administrations, as is to universal
satisfaction: They are so renowned and famous both for ability and integrity,
that whatsoever they do (as it is said of David, 2 Samuel 3.36.) pleases all the
people; and a specimen we have of this in the Person whom we have giving an
account and pourtrait of himself as a chief Magistrate or Judge, in the Chapter
before us.

At the seventh verse of this Chapter, we have Job beginning to speak of
himself as a Person vested with great Power and Authority. He had before
spoken, how it had been with him in his private capacity, as a man, and Master
of a Family; He there descends to set forth how it had been with him in his
public capacity as a Magistrate, and Ruler of the people. In this Station and
Capacity which he sustained, he was greatly affected and applauded: Respect and
Honor was paid him, not only from a few, or from those only of Inferior
Quality, but universally from persons of all Ranks and Orders. When he went
from his Dwelling through the Streets to the place of Judicature, he was
observed and reverenced both by old and young; and when he came to sit in
Judgment, he was eyed and honored not only by the Body of the people
collectively, but even by those that were chief and highest in Esteem and
Dignity. Such was the respect and honor that was paid him, and this not merely
because of his Power and Greatness, because he was the Greatest of all the men
in the East, Chap. 1.3. Nor was it from any flattering and hypocritical
Courtship used by him, as Absalom once by his plausible and fawning carriage,
stole the hearts of the men of Israel, 2 Samuel 15.6. Nor was it because he
prevaricated in his Office, as if he seemed to bear the Sword in vain, to hold
it only as a Scepter of Ornament for himself, and improved it not as a Sword to
be a Revenger, and to Execute wrath upon them that did Evil (a thing most
pleasing to those who walk after the Lusts of Ungodliness) but it was because
of his pity to the Afflicted, the poor that cried, and the fatherless, and him
that had none to help him: It was because he looked upon himself highly
concerned in matters of Justice: He put on Righteousness and it clothed him,
his Judgment was as a Robe and a Diadem: And because he was Impartial in
punishing the Wicked and Injurious; He brake the jaws of the wicked, and plucked
the spoil out of his teeth: I say such was the respect and honor that was paid
him by all, together with the Conscience of his own universal Integrity, that
he was ready to conclude and persuade himself in this his prosperity, that he
should never be moved, that God by his favor had made his Mountain to stand so
strong, as that he should multiply his days to a Good Old Age, and then come to
his Grave in peace, leaving the precious perfume of a Good name behind him, and
a plentiful Inheritance to his Offspring; and to make it apparent, that this
was no vain imagination, or ungrounded presumption, he proceeds to propound and
illustrate his reasons for this his persuasion and confidence. I shall not
stand to enumerate and make any reflections upon the several things which he
instances in (in the latter part of the Chapter) and by which he argues the
reasonableness of his confidence (in former times) that his flourishing state
should not wi^her, nor his outward prosperity fail; It may suffice to say thus
much, that our Text is the conclusion, or that with which he shuts up his whole
discourse upon that argument; He was a man so able to choose out the peoples
way, and so ready (notwithstanding his Greatness) to comfort them in their
sorrows, that they gave up themselves to his counsel, and acquiesc'd and rested
satisfied in his Government.

I chose out their way, and sat chief, and dwelt as a King in the Army, as one
that comfort the Mourners.

In the words themselves we may take notice of two things.

1. A Copy or Transcript of Jobs Power and Authority; and in this there are two
things observable.

1. The degree of it. I sat Chief.

2. The Illustration of this by the similitude of a King in the Army: I sat
Chief, and dwelt as a King in the Army.

2. Here is an account or relation how he acted in this Capacity or Station;
and here are two things which he asserts concerning himself.

1. He chose out their way.

2. He was as one that comfort the Mourners.

The terms are very obvious, too plain to call for any laborious Explication, I
shall therefore give but a brief paraphrase upon them.

I Sat Chief] The Original Word rendered Chief, signifies a Head: He was the
Head or Chief Ruler of the People. It seems to Intimate as if he had the
Supreme Power and Authority: as one sustaining such a Place, he Sat while
others Stood waiting for his Counsel.

And dwelt as a King in the Army] Some there are who run his Authority so high
as to place him upon the Throne, affirming that he was a King: Several
Expositors contend for this; I don't see that the word of Similitude here as a
King does affirm that he was a King, as it does not deny that he was a King,
but that he was a Magistrate, a Person in great Authority, a Chief in his
Country, is most clear from the account which he here gives of himself. He
dwelt as a King in the Army. As the presence of a King with the Army does
animate, and put courage and cheerfulness into the whole Army, so acceptable
was his presence to his People. As a King is had in great honor when he is
among, or with his Army, so was he in as much honor among his people: But this
is not that which I principally design, and therefore shall not dwell upon it
any longer.

I chose out their way] The word in the Original translated Chose, has some
considerable Sense and Emphasis: It imports not only a Choosing, but a very
careful and diligent Choosing: a Choosing upon good trial and proof, and it may
hold forth thus much, as if he should have said, in all their doubtful and
difficult business they had recourse to me for advice; in all their perplex,
ambiguous, knotty, and most intricate cases, to me they made application for
counsel; I was as it were the Law, or an Oracle to them, and I carefully and
diligently chalkt out their way, I made their path plain, showed them what
course they were to Steer, what methods they were to attend, in order to their
coming to the accomplishment of their desires.

As one that comfort the mourners] I was notwithstanding the comforter of
the mourners: so the vulgar translation reads it. q. d. Though I sat chief and
dwelt as a King in the Army, yet I, was also as one that comfort the
mourners. Some indeed do restrain these words, as one that comfort the
mourners, to the clause immediately preceding, I dwelt as a King in the Army as
one that comfort the mourners. As a King or General in the Army does by his
presence and speech, comfort and encourage his Army, mourning and dejected by
reason of some danger that they are in, or loss which they have sustained: So
Job is apprehended to have dwelt among his People, as a King comforting his
mourning Army But let us take it which way we will (as is observed by those who
best comment upon the place.) It presents us with a most excellent Pattern of a
wise and gracious Ruler, who is ready to sympathize and take part with his
People, and to uphold and comfort their Spirits in their most calamitous
condition: And most clearly may be inferred, most plainly may be read the happy
condition of that people who have such to be their Heads or Rulers, who will do
thus: What can a people desire more in those that have the Government of them,
then that they should be men of such wisdom, as to be able to choose out their
way, and yet men of such compassion as to be most willing to comfort them in,
and rid them of their troubles?

The words present us with a foundation for a far larger Discourse than the
limits assigned at this time can contain^ I shall therefore contract my self
into as narrow a circle as may be, and take notice of these two (among the
many) Propositions or Doctrinal Conclusions which might be raised from the
words.

DOCTRINE I. That it is a necessary Qualification in those who are Heads or
Rulers of a People; that they be able to Choose out the Peoples way.

It Is true, Piety and the Fear of God is the prime and principal Qualification
in those who Sit Chief in Place of Authority: If those who are to Govern Gods
People have not given up themselves to be Governed by God, they are not like to
Govern for him: If they have not devoted themselves to God, they are not like
to devote themselves to the Public Good. We have it therefore laid down as a
principal Character of a Head or Ruler, in that excellent advice of Jethro to
Moses, Exodus 18.21. That they be such as fear God; but yet certain it is, that
the fear of God is not enough to make a person in that Station sufficiently
serviceable unto man. Every Pious Man is not fit and qualified to be a Ruler.
Such must be able men, as well as men fearing God. That which is said
concerning David when God Chose him, and Set him over Jacob his People, and
Israel his Inheritance, Psalm. 78. ult. That he guided them by the skilfulness
of his hands, is a most necessary thing in those who are Heads or Rulers of a
people, they should be able to guide them by the skilfulness of their hands.
They should be men of singular wisdom and prudence for the managing of Public
Affairs. Moses prescribes this wisdom and prudence as a very necessary
Qualification, when he was giving direction to the People of Israel in the
choice of Rulers, Deuteronomy 1.13. Take ye wise men and understanding (Persons of
knowledge, wisdom, and experience) and I will make them Rulers over you; and
this was that which Solomon was so desirous of, and which he obtained. 2 Chronicles.
1.10. Wisdom and Knowledge to go out and to come in before the People. i. e.
That he might be able wisely to conduct them in all their Affairs. And how
requisite this is in those who are Heads or Rulers of a people, will be
sufficiently apparent if we consider these two or three things.

1. Those who are Heads or Rulers of a People, have a very great Trust reposed
in them. This is most clear, if we consider the Relation they bear to their
People: the Heads or Rulers of a People are the Fathers of the People; Kings
are called Fathers, Isa. 49 23. And Magistrates sustain the Relation of a
Father to their faithful People: Job in his Civil capacity speaks of himself as
being a Father to the poor, verse. 16 context. And as careful and provident are
those in Authority to be for their people, as if their people were their
Children; and this is a very great charge and requires a great deal of Wisdom
and Prudence to manage it. A great deal of Wisdom and Prudence is requisite in
the father of a Family for the right discharge of his trust in that Relation,
and if so much be requisite in an Aeconomical father, the father of a Family,
how much more is requisite in a Political father, the father of a Country? When
the Apostles found it necessary to appoint Inferior Officers in the Church for
the casing themselves of their care and burden in serving Tables, and making
provision for the Poor, they give this in charge, Act. 6 3. Brethren, look you
out among you men of honest report, full of the holy Ghost and Wisdom: and if
persons are not fit to manage so inferior a Service as the business of the
Poor, unless they are full of the holy Ghost and Wisdom, how requisite is it
for those who have the charge of a People, that they be like the men of
Issachar, of whom its said, 1 Chronicles. 12.32. That they were men that had
understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do.

2. Those who are Heads or Rulers of a People, have many curious and critical
observers, and are obnoxious to a great deal of censure. A city that is set on
a hill cannot be hid, Math. 5.14. It is obvious to every eye. As long as a man
lives in a private capacity he stands as it were in the crowd, but when once he
comes to sustain a Public, he is erected upon the Stage, and the eyes of all
the People are upon him, as they were upon Saul, who was higher than any of the
People, from his Shoulders and upward. The least aberration in them is
presently beheld, as the least Eclipse in the Heavenly bodies is instantly
observed and taken notice of. A little folly is very prejudicial and injurious
to him that is in reputation for wisdom and honor, Eccl. 10.1. Yea, and how
frequent is it for some to seek advantages against such? to watch for their
halting? And hence, if any evil befall the Public, how apt are they to charge
it upon those who are their Heads or Rulers? When a people are in any
considerable distress, what is more common than to throw the first stone of
complaint at those who (...) over them in Authority? When we prosper never so
much, we are wont to applaud only our selves; when we suffer never so little we
are too apt to murmur only against our Rulers: need have such therefore to have
their eyes in their heads, and to be much in making the Prayer of the Psalmist;
Teach me thy way O Lord, and lead me in a plain path, because of mine enemies,
Psalm. 27.11.

3. When those who are Heads or Rulers of a People, are not able (in some
measure) to choose out their way, it will be difficult and next to an
impossibility to maintain the honor and dignity of Government, which is a
matter of great importance. An ability for this commands respect and honor: a
man's wisdom (and especially a Rulers) makes his face to shine, Eccl. 8.1. There
is scarce any thing that does more affect the hearts of a People, than to see a
Divine Spirit in those that are over them: Solomon's wisdom made him more
glorious and sought to than his wealth; when in one special instance he gave
proof of his ability, the Text says, That all Israel heard of the judgment
that the King had judged, and they feared the King, for they saw that the
wisdom of God was in him to do judgment, 1 King. 3.28. But when such as are
Heads or Rulers of a People, are destitute of those endowments and
qualifications which are necessary for the executing of their Places, they will
be destitute of that respect and honor which otherwise would have been
attributed and given to them in such places. If folly be set in great dignity,
men will be ready to despise that dominion, to speak evil of that dignity. When
the wise are in low place, it is as when a goodly Candle (which on a Table
would give a comely and comfortable light) is put under a Bushel: and when such
as are otherwise, are exalted; it is (as one expresses it) like a little Hay
set up to give light, which with its smoke and smell is offensive to all that
are about it.

4. For those who are Heads or Rulers of a People, to be able to choose out the
Peoples way is a matter of such moment, that when they are incapable of this,
it is very fatal and ruinous to a People. As the want of this is dishonorable
in those that Govern, so it is very Pernicious to those who are to be Governed.
When those that should lead a People are not able to choose out their way,
instead of showing them the right way, they will lead them out of the right
way. Thus we read, Isa. 3.12. As for my people, Children are their oppressors,
and women rule over them (weak and effeminate are they that govern them) and
what follows? O my people they which lead thee, cause thee to err, and destroy
the way of thy paths: and this is fatal and ruinous, Isa. 9.16. The leaders of
this people cause them to err, and they that are lead of them are destroyed.
When those that should choose out their way lead them quite out of the way,
whither will that way lead, but to destruction? If the blind lead the blind,
both will fall into the Ditch, Mat. 15.14

But I might lose my self in multiplying particulars here, for the evincing the
necessity of a peoples having such for their Heads or Rulers as are able to
choose out their way, I have mentioned but a very few of the many things which I
might have named, and possibly many others far more pregnant and pertinent, may
offer themselves to your meditations: we must pass to the second
Proproposition, or Doctrinal Conclusion, viz.

DOCTRINE II. That it is a singular happiness to a people, when those who are
their Heads or Rulers, are able to Choose out their way, and will also be a
Comfort to them.

It is requisite that such as are Heads or Rulers of a People (as we have said)
be able to choose out the peoples way, this is necessary in order to their
making their people happy, but this in it self is not enough to make their
people happy. However, those who are Heads or Rulers of a People may be able to
lead and direct their people; yet if they are not disposed to seek the comfort
and prosperity of their people, such a people may be miserable notwithstanding
such Heads or Rulers. But on the other hand, when those that are in high
Station, and have the Government of a people, are thus able to Choose out their
way, and likewise ready to promote their comfort and weal, it is a singular
happiness to such a people.

I shall mention but a very few things for the Illustration (and to make out
the truth) of this.

1. That for which God has appointed and set up Civil Government in the world,
is the common good of Mankind. It is remarkable that the Scripture applies the
same Title to those that Preach the Word, and to those that bear the Sword;
they are both of them called Gods Ministers; and as they have the same Title,
so they have the same common end: as they are both Gods Ministers, so there is
the same common end of their Ministry, and that is the good and welfare of the
Children of men, Romans 13.4 He is the Minister of God unto thee for Good,
speaking of the Civil Ruler, or Magistrate; q. d. that is the end of his Office;
for this reason has God vested him with his Autho^^^^* Those in Authority are
Rulers over the persons of the People; but yet they are appointed and set up by
God to be Ministers or Servants to the good of the People. As it is the Duty of
all to serve them, so it is their Office to serve all.

2. Hence those that are Heads or Rulers of a People ought to design and
endeavor the good and comfort of their People. This is written with a beam of
the Sun: as God has appointed some to the Dignity of Headship, or to bear Rule
for the Good of his People: So it is the Duty of those who are Heads or Rulers,
to promote and further this. The end of every thing should direct the means;
now that of Government being the Good of the whole, nothing less should be the
aim and endeavor of those who are Governors; the Administration of their
Power should be attended with the exercise of their Compassion: they are called
Gods, Psalm. 82.6 And in this in an especial manner they should imitate God, viz
their mercy should be above all their works; as the Lord, the Lord God,
merciful and gracious, was the first Letter of the Name, whereby God proclaimed
himself of old, Exodus 34.6. So in this is He in an especial manner to be
imitated by those who are called by his name. Those that are Heads or Rulers of
a People should design the love and affection of their People, as well as the
obedience and subjection of their people. He spoke no ways becoming the Head or
Ruler of a People, who said of his Subjects, Oderint dum probent, Let them hate
me so long as they suffer my proceedings to pass. That was more becoming the
Head or Ruler of a People which Macrobius Relates of Octavius Augustus, viz.
that he carried such an entire and fatherly affection to the Common Wealth,
that he called it filiam suam, his own Daughter; and therefore refused to be
called Dominus, the Lord or Master of his Country, and would only be called
Pater Patriae, the Father of his Country, because he Governed it non per
timorem, sed per amorem, not by fear but by love: or as it is said of that
Mirror of men among the Heathen Neminem a se dimisic tristem, he never
dismissed any Petitioner with a tear in his eye, or with a heavy heart. It Is
true, there is sometimes a necessity of using Severity, but it should be the
choice and delight of those in Authority, to exercise Clemency. Though there are
cases wherein severity ought to cast the scale, yet the Sword of Justice (as
one expresses it) should be furbished with the oil of mercy; Rulers are to be
a terror to evil works, Romans 13.3. to punish Evil doers, 1 Pet. 2.14. But it is
the best and most honorable part of their work to comfort the mourners.

3. For a people to have Heads or Rulers, is in in it self accounted a great
and necessary blessing to them. It is a Blessing to the complex body of a
people in general, and also to every private man in particular; and innumerable
are the inconveniences and miseries which will inevitably ensue upon the want
of such. It is prophesied of Israel in their desolate estate, Hos. 3.4. That
they should abide many days without a King, and without a Prince; the word that
is there translated Prince, signifies a Governor or Ruler; and truly it is a
sad condition that a people is in, when they are without any Governors or
Rulers. Even bad Government is acknowledged better than none at all: who is
there but will grant that Tyranny (except it grow to a great extremity indeed)
is better than Anarchy? Through this our very lives are preserved in safety:
and without this the world would Ipso facto, be in a state of War, and fall
into endless disorders. Zedekiah was but a bad man, an evil Prince, and yet the
Prophet gives him this honorable Title, Lam. 4 20. The breath of our nostrils,
i. e. our life; and certain it is that a man may as soon live without breath,
as a people or commonwealth subsist without Government. Those in Authority are
called Pillars of the earth, 1 Samuel 2.8. And certain it is that the world would
soon run into confusion (and upon some accounts) shatter to pieces, if the Lord
had not founded it upon pillars of Government, or set up Governors as the
pillars of it. How vile would multitudes be who have not the fear of God, were
they not restrained and kept back by the Laws of men? It was for want of
Government among the people of Israel, that things went so ill among them, that
every man did that which was right in his own eyes, and to what an height of
Impiety they arrived when they were thus destitute of persons in Authority, we
may Read in the Story of the Levites Concubine.

4. Sometimes God gives such to a People to be their Heads or Rulers, who are
able to choose out their way, and will also be a Comfort to them. Such a Head or
Ruler was Moses; how did he choose out the peoples way? and how sollicitous was
he of their comfort when he wished, if it were possible, that God would accept
of him as a sacrifice in their stead, Exodus 32.32. What destruction had come
upon them, had not Moses by his prevailing intercession prevented? therefore he
said, that he would destroy them, had not Moses his Chosen stood before him in
the breach to turn away his wrath, lest he should destroy them, Psalm. 106.23.
Such a Head or Ruler was Joshua, a man in whom was the spirit, Numb. 27.18.
Full of the spirit of wisdom, Deuteronomy. 34 9. And he faithfully endeavored the
Good of that People. Such a Head or Ruler was David over Gods People Israel; as
he guided them by the skilfulness of his hands, so he fed them according to the
integrity of his heart, Psalm. 78. ult. Sincerely sought the comfort and welfare
of his People; and such an one was Solomon, to whom God gave such a wise and
understanding heart, that no mere man since the Fall ever equalled him in
universal knowledge, and especially the art of well Governing his people, and
it was for their good and comfort as well as his own, that he was so ^arnest
with God for wisdom and knowledge, that he might go out and come in before his
People, 2 Chronicles. 1.10. All those (with many others) were able to Choose out
their peoples way, and also endeavored to be a comfort to them.

5. And when it is thus, when God gives such to a people to be their Heads or
Rulers as ar^ able to Choose out their way, and will also endeavor to be a
Comfort to them, it is a singular Happiness to them. It is a great and
necessary Blessing (as we have said already) for a People to have Heads or
Rulers, and if so, much more is it a great and necessary Blessing to have such
Heads or Rulers as these. God promises such Heads or Rulers as a singular
happiness to his People: when they were pining and languishing under a very
uncomfortable Government, God supports them with this blessed promise, I will
restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning,
Isa. 1.26. i. e. I will give thee such Heads or Rulers as thou had at the
beginning, either of thy Commonwealth, such as Moses and Joshua, or of thy
Kingdom, such as David and Solomon.

And such Heads or Rulers are said to be given in great mercy to a People;
Because the Lord loved Israel, therefore made He thee King, to do Judgment and
Justice, was it said of Solomon, 1 King. 10.9. Yea and such Heads or Rulers as
are courageous and vigorous in promoting the comfort of their People, have the
promise of Gods protection and blessing in their promoting the same, 2 Chro.
19. ult. and considering of this, we may say with the Psalmist, Psalm 144. ult.
Happy is the People that is in such a case.

And now our Propositions being thus cleared, I descend to make a little
Improvement, and shall but little more than mention those things which I might
very largely insist upon.

USE I.
Hence we are informed, What cause of thankfulness the People have who enjoy
such Heads or Rulers as these The Blessings of God call for thankfulness; Such
Heads or Rulers as we have been speaking of, being such a singular blessing,
the People that enjoy them, ought to be very thankful to God for them. When
such as are Heads or Rulers of a People are otherwise, are contrary to these,
it is matter of mourning: The Prophet was greatly affected and troubled upon
the account of those Rulers who sought themselves only, and not the good of the
Public, Isa. 1.23. Thy Princes are Rebellious, and Companions of Thieves,
every one loves Gifts, and follows after Rewards, they judge not the
Fatherless, neither does the cause of the Widow come unto them. So when the
Princes of that People, instead of being Examples of Piety and Virtue, and
promoters of the Public Weal were Patrons and Actors of wickedness, Ezekiel 11.1,
2. The Spirit of God seems to be affected with it, and affects the Prophet with
it. Well, but when such are Heads or Rulers of a People, as we have been
describing, it is matter of joy, and we ought to thank our God always upon the
account of such. It is spoken with respect to Solomon, 2 Chronicles. 9.8. Blessed be
the Lord thy God, which delighted in thee to set thee on his Throne, to be King
for the Lord thy God. God deserves all Blessing and Praise when he advances
such to be Kings, or Governors, or Inferior Rulers of his People.

USE II.
Hence it is a Judgment upon a People, and a matter of deep Lamentation to
them, when God is removing and taking away such Heads or Rulers from them. God
threatens this as a sore Judgment upon Jerusalem and Judah, Isa 3 1, 2. That he
would take away from them the Judge; the Civil Magistrate. And when God frowns
thus upon a People, they ought to lie in the Dust. When the Elders ceast from
the Gate, (their Grave men that were wont to Sit and Execute Judgment there)
Lam. 5 14. it follows, ver. 17. For this our heart is faint, for these things
our eyes are dim. And what cause have we to be deeply affected (and I believe
we generally are affected) with the awful rebuke of Divine Providence in the
removing and taking away by Death the truly Noble Earl of BELLOMONT, His
Majesty's Captain General, and Governor in Chief over these Plantations, a
Governor so able to Choose out our Way, and so disposed as his Lordship was to
be a Comfort to us: Is not this a token of Divine Displeasure? Does not the
Almighty testify against us, and by this course of his Providence, call us to
Weeping and to Mourning? We read that when Nadab and Abihu, the Sons of Aaron
fell untimely by fire which went out from the Lord and destroyed their Lives,
it was commanded, Lev. 10.6. That the whole house of Israel should bewail the
burning which the Lord had kindled. If the Death of such Priests was to be
bewailed, (who died for, and in their iniquity) how is the Death of such a
Governor to be bewailed, who was so ready to Gratify us in all that we could
in reason Desire of him, and to improve his Interest also in the Court of
England, for the promoting our comfort; When our Heavenly Father is thus
spitting in our faces, shall we not be ashamed and humbled?

USE III.
How instant and importunate should a People be with God in Prayer for the
protracting the Lives of such Heads or Rulers who have for a considerable time
chose out their way, and have always been very solicitous of their Comfort. The
Prophets, and other Servants of God, and promoters of the comfort of their
People don't live for ever. David after he had served his own Generation by the
will of God fell on Sleep, and was laid unto his Fathers, and saw corruption,
Acts 13.36. After he had been a Public Good, had lived and governed by the
Rule and Square of Gods Word, he appeared to be under the same Law of Mortality
with other men; and so are all the Redeemed; Death treads with as heavy a foot
upon the Bodies of them, as upon the Bodies of others. Well, but however such
Heads or Rulers many times (in more respects than one) may have lived long
enough for themselves, yet they always dye too soon for their People. It Is
ominous, and bodes very ill to a People, when God threatens the Removal of
such; and therefore the People of God ought for to Pray hard for the reviving
and continuing of such when God is weakening their strength in the way, and
shortning their days; yea, and see to it that they improve and make use of them
to the best advantage while they have them; How careful should we be to neglect
no opportunity of extracting and drawing out of them, what God has put into
them for our comfort, and as Jacob the Angel, resolve not to let them depart
till we have got our Blessing from them?

USE. IV.
The Propositions insisted on afford excellent advice to all such who are
concerned in the Electing of Persons unto any Office of Civil Rule and
Government, among a People. If it be such a singular happiness to a people when
those who are there Heads or Rulers, are able to choose out their way, and will
also endeavor to be a comfort to them, then let the consideration hereof be
improved by those who are concerned in the Elections of this day, to see to it
that they choose such as are able to choose out our way, and will also be a
comfort to us; let such of our Rulers as are to be Elected or Established be
such as are like to make us happy by these things: Choose such as are able to
choose out our way. Look at Wisdom as a most necessary thing; you know very
well that even Royalty without wisdom is but eminent dishonor. The
circumstances of the times are such as require Policy as well as Piety, the
wisdom of the Serpent as well as the innocence of the Dove, in those who hold
the Reins of Government. And yet if you would give God no reason to complain,
as Hos. 8 4. They have set up Kings but not by me, they have made Princes but I
knew it not: Have a respect to Piety and the fear of God in your Elections; if
you would have Gods heart toward this People, endeavor that such may be our
Rulers as are of David's Character, Act. 13 22. Men after Gods own heart: if
such as are our Heads or Rulers have not the fear of God in their hearts, how
can the presence of God be expected in their actions; and how then will our
comfort be promoted? Let therefore all corrupt and sinister ends, which we are
too apt to be misguided by, be abhorred and most carefully avoided; and let no
other spirit seem to act those who are to act in the Elections of the day, but
that of a most sincere respect unto the Temporal and Spiritual comfort of this
People.

USE. V.
To the Honorable and Worshipful Persons who are, or may be called to be the
Heads or Rulers of this People: And here, I may well Apologize for my self with
Elihu, Job 32.6. I said I am of few days, and ye are old. I shall not therefore
presume to go about to inform your Judgments of any thing that you know not,
nor to quicken your practice in that which you do not: but if I might (Honored
and much Esteemed) I would encourage and comfort you in that which you already
endeavor, viz. To choose out our way and be a comfort to us; and with humility
would entreat you to endeavor this more and more. That ye would use all
possible means for our protection and safeguard; you know what a point of
wisdom it is even in times of peace, to be making suitable provision for a time
of War; let not therefore our Forts be to be built when the War is Proclaimed,
the Alarm Sounded, and the Enemy is at the Gates. That ye would do your
uttermost for the recovering us from our Apostasies, for the reviving the power
of Godliness, for the preferring the Interest of the Lord Jesus Christ, and
whatsoever has a tendency thereunto. That ye would exert your Authority more
and more for the Suppressing all manner of Vice and Impiety; and particularly,
if any further methods could yet be taken for the Executing the wholesome Laws,
that are already Enacted against the fearful abominations for which the Land
mourns; and more particularly, for the Suppressing the beastly Sins of
Sensuality, Uncleanness, and especially the Sin of Drunkenness, by which so
many brutify themselves; and that the miserable Indians might not be so
debauched and poisoned by strong Drink, which they are by very many (for the
love of a little Money) notwithstanding all that is already done for the
preventing of this Wickedness: that there may not be so much Idleness, and so
many may not be suffered to Drink away their Time (though they don't Drink away
their Reason) which is the Parent of a great deal of the Poverty and Beggary,
which is to be seen upon many, and whereby they are rendered incapable for to
render to every one their dues: and to mention one thing more, if any thing
could be done, for the better settling and encouraging of inferior Schools
(which too many of our unlearned seem to be possessed with prejudice against)
it would be a singular Service both to the present and after Generations; if
these should sink and fall, the which God forbid (and yet in many places the
coldness, indisposition, not to say opposition, that is in so many to things of
this nature, gives too much ground to fear, that they will in a great measure
sink and fall, if speedy care be not taken to prevent) what a rude,
unacquainted and unserviceable Generation will be our rising Generation; if
therefore there be any thing yet doable as to these things, by your Honors and
the Honorable Representations who make up this Great and General Assembly, the
doing of the same will be a comfort to many whose hearts tremble, and who mourn
in Secret upon the account of these things. Sed quo feror?

Many things I might remember you of (much Honored) to encourage and comfort
you in an endeavoring the Weal and Comfort of your People. Give me leave to
say, that it is highly honorable, it deserves Honor. Some of the worst of
Rulers have had high Encomiums and Praises, but good Rulers deserve high
Encomiums and Praises; it is a truth with respect to those in the Magistracy as
well as those in the Ministry, 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders that Rule well be
accounted worthy of double honor. And as it deserves honor, so it is the way
to have honor. I know some will never be satisfied, will always be murmuring,
let those that are over them do what they can; but yet such Rulers as are a
comfort to their People, are in the fairest way to hear well from their People;
and God who has the hearts of all men in his hands, is wont to give unto such
Heads and Rulers a^ endeavor to be a comfort to their People, a place in the
hearts, and respect and honor from the Mouths of their People. Mordecai (that
Ruler) was great among the Jews, and accepted of the multitude of his brethren,
when he sought the wealth of his People, and spoke peace to all his seed, Esth.
10.3.

And also let me add this, that it will be comfortable both in life and at
Death. When a man as a Head or Ruler of his People, has chose out their way and
endeavored their comfort and prosperity, then may he well desire of God with
the Psalmist, Psalm. 106.5, 6. Remember me O Lord with the favor that thou
bear to thy People, that I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may
rejoice in the gladness of thy Nation, that I may glory with thine Inheritance.
And as Nehemiah, after all his great undertakings for the Public Weal, Think
upon me my God for good, according to all that I have done for this people,
Neh. 5.19.

USE. VI.
To the Body of this People: Let us as we are a People, carry it so toward
those who are our Heads or Rulers, and endeavor to be such a People, as that
God may please to favor us with such Heads or Rulers, as may be able to choose
out our way, and will also endeavor to be a comfort to us. Since such Heads or
Rulers are such a happiness, let us in this way approve our selves studious of
our own happiness.

1. Let us carry it so toward those who are our Heads or Rulers, that they may
be encouraged to this. Let us see to it that we pay them a dutiful Deference,
there is Honor due to them, see we to it that we render it to them, Romans 13.7.
Let us see to it that we are subject and obedient to them, how urgent are the
two great Apostles, Paul and Peter with respect to this, Romans 13.1. Let every
soul be subject unto the higher powers, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King as
Supreme, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the
punishment of Evil Doers, and for the praise of them that do well. Let us see
to it that we are ready to pay a suitable Tribute to them, We are to render
unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, Mat. 22.21. And what can be more
express then that, Romans 13.6, 7. For this cause pay you Tribute also, for they
are Gods Ministers, attending continually upon this very thing, Render
therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, Custom to whom
Custom; and let us see to it, that we are not wanting in paying them spiritual
tribute, according to the Apostles Exhortation, 1 Timothy 2.1. That we make
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions and giving of Thanks for Kings and for
all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty; but these things have been largely insisted upon by such
as have put us in mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, to obey
Magistrates, Tit. 3.1.

2. And to draw to a Conclusion: Let us endeavor to be such a People as that
God may please to favor us with such Heads or Rulers as shall be able to choose
out our way, and shall also endeavor to be a comfort to us; and if we would,
we must see to it, that we are a Reformed People; as long as we retain our
Iniquities, we cannot expect this Happiness; it is said, Hos. 9.7. The Prophet
is a fool, the spiritual man is mad, for the multitude of thine iniquity and
the great hatred. And as God can suffer the Prophets of a People to be fools,
and their spiritual men to be mad, and to delude and misguide a people by
reason of the multitude of iniquity, and the great hatred, so he can suffer the
Heads or Civil Rulers of a People to be so, when a people hate to be reformed;
for the transgression of a Land (the wise man tells us) many are the Princes
thereof. Prove. 28.2. Yea, and many times bad also are the Princes thereof. It
is threatened as an heavy Curse upon that people, Lev. 26.17. That if they would
not hearken to God, and do his Commandments, they that hated them should reign
over them. Pernicious should their Heads or Rulers be, such as were abominable
to God, and most unprofitable to the People: The Hypocrite is sometimes set to
reign for the peoples sins: O then let us follow the pathetical advice that was
given to the People of Jerusalem, Jer. 4 14. To wash our hearts from
wickedness; O that there were such an heart in us that we could fear God, and
keep his Commandments always. If those things that are amiss among us were
rectified and reformed, and we did but set our selves to fear the Lord, and to
serve him in truth with all our Hearts (which was the advice of Samuel to the
people of Israel, in order to their obtaining the smiles and favor of heaven,
both upon their Heads or Rulers, and themselves also, 1 Samuel 12 24.) Then might
we hope to enjoy such Heads or Rulers as are able to lead us in a right way,
and will also be ready to comfort us in all our sorrows: yea, then might we
hope that God would think toward us thoughts of peace and not of evil, and
that he would say concerning us, as Isa. 57 18. I have seen his ways, and will
heal him, I will lead him also, and restore Comfort unto him, and to his
Mourners.

FINIS.

