The Fear of an Oath. OR, Some CAUTIONS to be used ABOUT SWEARING, If we would
approve our selves Truly GODLY. As it was Discoursed in a SERMON, Preached at
Boston, (...); January 30. 1700, 1.

By SAMUEL WILLARD, Teacher of a Church in BOSTON.

Nullum vinculum, ad astringendam fiderem,
Jurejurando majores arctius esse voluerunt.
Cicero, de Officiis. Lib. 3. Boston, in N. E. Printed for Nicholas Boon, at
his Shop, over against the Old Meeting House. 1701.

The Fear of an Oath. OR, Some Cautions to be used about Swearing, if we would
approve our selves truly Godly.
Eccles. IX. 2. As he that Fears an Oath.


I Shall not spend much Time in pursuit of the coherence and occasion of these
words. The wise man tells us, at Verse 16. and 17. of the foregoing Chapter,
how difficult and inextricable he had, upon search, found the works of the
Divine Providence to be; which he proceeds, in the beginning of this Chapter,
to instance in one very observable Remark on the works of God in the
promiscuous and indistinguishable Events which befall the Best and Worst of men:
from whence men have taken occasion Atheistically, to deny the Providence of
God in the Government of Humane Affairs, and ascribed all Events to Fortune, or
Chance; Concluding thereupon, that it is altogether a fruitless thing to serve
God: and Consequently, indulging of themselves in all the mad Courses, which
their carnal Lusts stimulate them unto, till at length they Die like Beasts.
That things do thus indifferently fall out in the world, he readily subscribes
to, and fully declares, in Verse 2. but yet he praefaceth it with a foundation
Article, to prevent Atheism, verse 1. viz^ That all the works of Good men are
in Gods Hand; i. e. under His inspection and management; and Consequently, that
they shall be no losers in the end. Though he was not able to trace all the
reasons of Gods works, yet he resolved, that he would hold this Clue in his
hand, to keep him from being lost in the Labirinth. And truly, if we do not
hold this fast as a principle of Faith, viz. that God wisely Governs all the
affairs of the Creatures, we shall soon lose our selves in tracing the Meanders
of His Providence.

In this Verse, there are two things to be observed.

1. A General Assertion: All things come alike to all; there is one event.
Which must be understood in a limited sense. By, All things, we are not to
understand every Dispensation of God to the Children of men; for God Graciously
reveals Himself in Christ unto some, and leaves others wholly without this
Revelation: And some are so Conducted by His Providence, as to be finally
brought unto Glory; whereas others are left to themselves, and at last fall
into everlasting Misery. But it intends only the outward Dispensation of Gods
Providence, with regard to the affairs of this Life, and all the changes of it,
Health and Sickness, Prosperity and Adversity, Life and Death. And when he
says, There is one Event to all; it is not to be taken Individually, as if
every man were carried through the same Condition of Life, in all the
particular passages of it; the contrary to which, is very obvious to all that
observe the various states of men in this world: Some are in Prosperity, when
others are sunk deep in Adversity; some are in Health, when others are Sick;
some Die in their Youth, while others Live to old Age etc. But he intends it of
all Sorts of men, and of Individuals only so far, as that they are always
liable to, and have no security against the like Condition, none Being exempted
from it. His meaning is, that the events of Providence are in this regard, such
to one and another, that there is no Judgment to be made of their being either
Loved or Hated by God, from the observation that we make upon them; Or, that
this is no Rule for us to Judge of men's State by. Hence;

2. He distributes the Subjects, to whom these Events befall, into two ranks or
orders, viz. the Godly and the Wicked: To one of which Heads, every individual
person is to be annumerated; for there is no middle state between these two.
And he commorates on the Charactarizing of those two sorts, by laying down of
several notes, by which they are differenced one from the other; One of which
is expressed in the close of this verse The Wicked are called such as Swear;
not that every one that Swears is a wicked man, for it is sometimes a Duty so
to do; and the thing it self appertains to the true Religion: but such as are
vain and common Swearers. The Godly are termed such as Fear an Oath; and this
is the only thing that I am now concerned withal in the following Discourse.
Some understand these words to be Synechdochical, and that by the Swearer is
intended every lewd Sinner, who allows himself in a course of wickedness: And
that by him who Fears an Oath, we are to understand such an one, as takes heed
to all his ways lest in any of them he should Sin against God; and such a
manner of Speech is very frequently to be observed in the Holy Scriptures.
However, the mentioning of it under this Consideration, not only intimates that
this is one of the things that belong to true Piety, but also that it has a
special concern in the discovery of it, and for that reason deserves a
particular animadversion to be made upon, it. The word which is here translated
Fears, properly signifies, and is for the most part made use of in the word
of God, for a Reverential Fear, which proceeds from a Venerable respect that we
entertain for the Object of it, which produces an aw in us, which makes us to
apply our selves to it with greatest Caution.

Whence observe this,

DOCTRINE. That every truly Godly man has implanted in him, and practically
maintains a Reverential Fear of an Oath.

This is one Charactaristical note by which the Spirit of God here expresses
the difference between a Godly and a Wicked man; this man Swears at random,
whereas the other stands in aw of an Oath. To wave all other discourse on this
point, this weighty CASE of Conscience may come under our Deliberation, viz.

Quest. What is that Fear of an Oath, that belongs to the Character of one that
is truly Godly?

Answ. In general; Let us observe, that a thing may be said to be
Charactaristical of another thing, in a double respect.

1. Negatively; When, though the being of it does not necessarily infer the
Conclusion, yet the absence of it establishes the Contrary conclusion. There
are some commendable things, which may be found in an Unregenerate man, and
therefore cannot of themselves argue that the person who has them is truly
Pious: yet if he have them not, it will be a notorious proof of him to be
Impious, and Unregenerate. A Natural man may by the light and influence of his
Natural Conscience, abstain from the trade of Common Swearing, and be also very
Cautious about an Oath, when he is called to take one: if then a man who makes
a great pretense to Holiness, is not thus Conscientious and Cautious, he in
works Denies, that which he in words Professes: this therefore is not to be
excluded from the matter under Consideration.

2. Affirmatively: When it is a proper note of the Subject that is enquired
for, and will difference it from all others And this may be Considered either
Specifically or Individually: And under our present Consideration, it is that
which is specifical that we are seeking after; for the Question is, Who is
Godly, and, Who is Wicked? And the resolution of it is to be sought under this
Character. There is therefore such a Fear about Swearing, in one that is truly
Gracious, which is not to be found in one that is Unconverted. And I shall have
regard to both of these Considerations in the resolution of the Case that is
before us.

For a more distinct laying of this matter open, we may as Introductory to the
thing, take a short account of the Nature of an Oath, by which we may discover
the right foundation of this Fear, and what is the genuine operation of it.

An Oath is a solemn Appeal, made by a Reasonable Creature unto God, for the
Confirmation of the Truth and Credit of his Testimony. The use of an Oath is
Civil, it being designed for the upholding of Truth and Credit in Humane
concerns, or matters wherein one man has to do with another, which must be,
whiles man is naturally and necessarily a Sociable Creature. Sinful men are too
much addicted to Falsehood; for, every man is a Liar, as to the inclination of
his Natural Corruption: but an Oath carries awe in it, and has a Moral
Obligation in the very Nature of it, to bind men to the Truth, in that which
they Swear unto, Men are also apt to be Jealous one of another, in point of
Veracity, and have manifold occasions to excite this Jealously; whereas common
Charity bids us to hope, that men have so much of the Dread of an Oath upon
them, as will make them afraid of adding it for the Confirmation of a Lie. And
hence, an Oath is Ever an Appendix to a Testimony, for that is the matter about
which it is concerned: And it is for the better satisfaction of men, in the
maintaining of Communion one with another, of which Truth is the main pillar
and supporter. An Oath therefore is Attributed to God, not Properly, but
Analogically, or speaking after the manner of men, when He ratifies. His
Promises or Threatenings, by such expressions as are suited to our Conceptions.
But, though an Oath be Civil in its use, yet it is Sacred in its nature, it
being an Act of Worship; and is usually referred to the Third Commandment,
having God immediately for its Object, and requiring great Reverence of Him in
the using of it; for, it is an appeal unto God, who knows all things, and as He
is acknowledged so to do, to be a witness of the Truth and Sincerity of the
thing which we attest unto, and of our Hearts in it. It therefore always,
Implicitly at least, if not Explicitly, contains in it an Hypothetical
Imprecation, viz. that the God of Truth would make us Examples of His righteous
Displeasure, if we Lie: thus much, and nothing less is included in every Oath.
And this is the greatest security that men can give to others of their
Veracity; and does morally leave the greatest awe upon the Consciences of men.

Now, an Oath in regard of the matter of it, and as it respects the
Circumstance of Time to which it refers, may come under a double Consideration,
viz. in respect of the Time past, or of the Time to come: For in regard to the
Time present, the thing it self gives its own evidence, and so an Oath about
it, is superfluous. In the former regard it is an Assertory Oath, because it
gives a Testimony that such things or actions have already been, about which
enquiry is made, and the truth of them is thus to be made evident. In the
latter respect it is called, either a Promissory Oath, when we bring our selves
under the most Religious obligation, either to God, and this is usually called
a Vow; or to Men, for the performance of any thing, in which God may be
Glorified, or men may be benefited by us. Or Minatory, when we bind our selves
Solemnly, to take revenge upon men for some injuries done us; an example
whereof is in David, when he Swore revenge upon Nabal for the abuse he had
offered him, 1 Samuel 25.22. Thus we have taken a brief account of the matter it
self, about which this Fear is exercised, in which also we have ground offered
us to observe, the reason why all good men ought to be thus Fearful.

We now proceed to Consider the thing it self, or the Fear of an Oath which the
Godly men are possessed withal: And here, we may first take notice of the
Nature of Religious Fear, and then enquire what influence it has on a Godly
man to Regulate him about an Oath?

1. As to Religious Fear, it is often used in the Scriptures comprehensively,
for all true Piety, consisting in the New nature, or the Graces of
Regeneration, which are infused into us by the Spirit of God in Conversion; and
are the Root and Spring of that New-Obedience which we pay to Him. So Job
23.28. The Fear of God, that is Wisdom. Eccles. 12.13. Fear God, and keep His
Commandments, for that is the whole of man. But more specially, it is used for
that Reverend respect we have for God, which makes us very careful to do all
the things that please Him; and to avoid whatsoever we apprehend will provoke
Him, or grieve His Holy Spirit. It derives from a cordial Love which we have
for God, on the account of His being our God and Father in Jesus Christ, and
all the obligations that He has therein laid us under, by admitting of us into
that precious relation unto Him: And it consists in a Childlike obedience unto
Him; binding us to use our utmost endeavors to return Him a reciprocal Love
agreeable to such a Relation, which is exerted in an universal Conformity to
His revealed Will; and is at all times excited in us, by a practical Esteem
which we carefully maintain in our Hearts, making us to value His Love to be
better than Life it self, and to dread His Displeasure at us far more than
Death. And this is Ever accompanied with a deep sense of our own Sinful
infirmity, and aptness to offend through the Corruption which remains in us,
and the deceitfulness and eagerness which there is in the Law in our Members;
together with the indefatigable endeavor of Satan our great Adversary, to
Tempt and Solicit us unto Sin: which excites in us an Holy Jealousy over our
selves, and puts us upon Circumspection in every step we take in our
Conversation, lest we should do any thing which is unworthy of our Name and
Profession. This is that which is usually called Filial Fear, in opposition to
that Servile Fear which is in wicked men, whose Obedience is not that of
Children, but of Slaves; and though they do many Duties, and abstain from the
external acts of many Sins, yet it is not because they Love God and His
Service, but because their Consciences are terrified with His Threatenings: and
therefore, when they can suppress these Terrors, they can Sin with delight.
Now if a Christian will try himself by any of his actions, whether he be truly
Godly; as he must first enquire, whether he do the things that are proper to be
done, or are agreeable in the matter of them, to the Divine precept; so he must
not Rest there, but reduce them to this Principle and try if they are
influenced by this Reverential Fear of God: for in the other, an Unregenerate
man may possibly go as far as he. But as to the Judgment of Charity, which we
are to exercise toward others, we can but look upon the things themselves that
they do, and the care and constancy which they use about the doing of them, and
the remorce that they express when at any time they fail in their performances.

2. Now let us enquire what influence this Fear has into a Godly man, to
regulate him about an Oath? And here, we must premise, that allowance is to be
made for the remainder of Sinful Corruption, which is in the best of Gods
people, while in this life, which sometimes prevails so far as to lead them
Captive, and draw them into things unworthy of their Profession: but yet we are
to Conclude, that according to the Tract and Tenor of their Conversation in
this world, they will carefully endeavor to live in the exercise of Grace, and
studiously Conform to the directions of the Spirit, given them in the precepts
of His word. There are therefore several things wherein this Fear will discover
its activity in regard of an Oath, and that both with respect to themselves,
and to others.

1. With respect to themselves. The Christians first Care begins at home, how
he may order himself aright, and so as to keep a good Conscience toward God,
and toward man; and this Holy Fear will stimulate him unto it: and upon the
account of an Oath, it will instigate him;

1. Negatively, Not to make him to refuse at all to Swear when he is called
unto it. The Fear of God does not lead men to Superstition, though it makes them
to keep close to the Command: nor is it to hinder Duty, but to put us into a
right frame for the doing of it, and then to make us afraid of bringing our
selves under the Guilt of neglecting it. That all Swearing is forbidden to
Christians in Gospel Times, is Erroneously argued from Mat. 5.34. I say unto
ye, Swear not at all; neither by Heaven, etc. and in James 5.12. where the same
precept is repeated: For our Savior and the Apostle after Him, do there only
forbid Common Swearing, in ordinary Communication; and Swearing by False
objects, to which an Oath ought not to be addressed. Not only is God Himself
frequently brought in Swearing, in the Scripture; And Holy men, both in the
times of the Law, and of the Gospel, doing it after the most Solemn manner; but
God Himself has appointed an Oath, to be the last remedy against endless
quarrels; and to put a final issue to Controversies between men, Exodus 22.11.
Then shall an Oath of the Lord be between them both, etc. Yea, Swearing by Gods
Name, is used for a distinguishing note between the True and False Religion,
Jer. 4.2. Thou shall Swear, the Lord Lives, etc. Zeph. 1.5. That Swear by the
Lord, and that Swear by Malcham. And there are those Calls in the Providence of
God wherein, if a man witholds his Oath, he will both dishonor God, and injure
his Neighbor, and when it is so, this Fear will put him upon doing the thing.

2. Positively, And here are diverse things wherein this Fear will exert it self;

First, He dares not to drive a trade of Common Swearing. There are some that
can hardly speak without an Oath; they account it the best Rhetoric they can
grace their language withal; or to be sure, upon every slight provocation which
is offered them, and particularly, if others do but so much as make a question
about the truth of what they say, it will put them into a great passion, and
they will vent it with Oath upon Oath: But so does not this man, because of the
fear of God. This sort of Swearing is therefore in the Word of God branded as a
note of an Ungodly man, and is observed to be one of the sins which do evidence
a desperate Apostasy, when it is commonly practiced, Hos. 4 2. By Swearing,
etc. They break out: And this is observed by Christ to come from the Devil,
Mat. 5.37. Whatsoever is more, comes of evil, or of the evil one; as the word
seems to intend. So that the habit of this argues that such a man has not the
fear of God in him.

2. He dares not to Swear at all, unless he apprehends that he has a clear
call for it in the Providence of God. i e. When the case and the occasion call
for it, and he is convinced that he shall omit a plain Duty, if he denies it.
When Gods Name will be dishonored, or men will injuriously suffer, either in
repute, or estate, or life; or when crying sins will go unpunished for want of
his solemn Testimony, for their legal Conviction who are guilty of them. He
will not unnecessarily thrust himself upon Swearing, but will wait till either
God, or men also do call him to it. On this account Critics have observed,
that in the Old Testament, the Verb used for Swearing, is never expressed in
the Active, but always in the Passive voice; it is not to Swear, but to be
Sworn; intimating that the Godly man is ever put upon it, by lawful authority.

3. He cautiously abstains from all language which borders upon Swearing. There
is an Explicit, and there is an Implicit Swearing; there is an Oath in the form
of it, and an Oath in the import of it; and that which if it cannot be
absolutely so called, yet comes as near it as can be, viz. strong Asseverations
to confirm what is said by, such, as, in faith, in truth, as I live, by the
life of Pharaoh, as thy Soul lives, etc. And undue Imprecations on our selves
to gain credit by, such as, I wish I may never speak more, if I ly; and many
the like. A Godly man dares not to show himself in this kind of language,
because he fears an Oath, and knows how much of the nature of one there is in
it, and how leading it is to introduce a more daring sort of Swearing. He knows
that this is more than yea, and nay, which our Savior limits our ordinary
Communication unto, and must needs be evil; Mat. 5.37. Let your Communication
be, yea, yea, nay, nay, for whatever is more than these, comes of evil. He
distinguishes between an Assertion, and an Asseveration, and is afraid to
proceed in this latter, except he have a manifest call to it.

4. He dares not to Swear rashly. One quality of a right Oath, is that it be in
Judgment, Jer. 4.2. And this doubtless includes in it the man's using of his
deliberate Judgment about it, before he adventures upon it: and this is quite
contrary to rashness. Which deliberation has reference to every kind of Oath
that a man may be put upon. He avoideth rashness in an Assertory Oath; he will
first ponder well what he Swears, whether it be certainly true, whether it will
be any thing to the purpose for which it is desired, whether he certainly knows
it by his own personal knowledge to be so, whether it be the whole Truth, etc.
In a Promissory Oath; he will not be hasty to bind his Soul, but he will
enquire whether it be a thing lawful, whether he has any just reason or call
to do it, whether he shall not bring himself into an unnecessary snare by it,
whether it be in his power, whether he does cordially purpose to perform it,
etc. And in a Minatory Oath he will consider, whether it be not a Personal
revenge which he is about thus to oblige himself to, and thereby is going about
to take Gods work out of his hands, who has said, Rom 12.19. Vengeance is
mine, I will repay; and thereupon he shall have cause to be ashamed, and repent
of, and revoke his Oath with Repentance, as David did in regard of his, 1 Samuel
25. (and indeed their sin and folly is here to be taken notice of, who think if
they have Sworn, or solemnly protested to do a thing, or not to do a thing,
though it be in itself sinful, they are yet bound to stand by it; as if any
obligation, could make (...) Duty to sin and continue in it.) Or whether it be
in Gods Cause, and he has a clear call from God thus to engage himself in it,
as an Instrument of Gods Vindictive Justice.

5. He dares not to Swear Equivocally. He knows that God has required that if
he Swear, it be in Truth, Jer. 4.2. And he has not learned how nicely to
distinguish between an equivocation and a ly. He is afraid of Swearing
deceitfully; for this is given as one note of a Child of God, Psalm. 24.4. Who
has not lift up his Soul to vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He dares not to
Swear to one thing, and intend another, by a mental reservation, which is quite
contrary. Nor to Swear to a part of the Truth, and hide the other part, which
if it were expressed, would change the sense to a contrary, or at least a
diverse interpretation, and quite alter the case to which he gives in his
Testimony; knowing that the design of an Oath is to advance Righteousness, Jer.
4 2. And not to cover iniquity. He dreads the invoking of the God of Truth, to
bear witness to a falsehood, and he believes that such Oaths as these are no
better.

6 He will Swear by no other Name but that of the true God: The name that we
invoke in Swearing, is therein practically acknowledged by us to be God, for in
it we call him to witness, who both knows the Secrets of our hearts, and can
call us to an account, judge and condemn us, and take vengeance upon us, if we
bear witness to an untruth; and this can be none but God. To appeal to any
other but him in this case, is manifest Idolatry: for we make him our God, whom
we Swear by, and if that be not the true God, it must needs be an Idol which we
thus worship, which every true Christian is afraid to do, lest he should
provoke the God of Heaven to Jealousy. Hence we have that threatening, Amos 8
14. They that Swear by the Sin of Samaria, and say, thy God, O Dan, lives, and
the manner of Beersheba lives, even they shall fall, and never rise up again.

7. He dares not to Swear either in favor of or in prejudice against any
person. He has a respect entirely to the Truth, in the Testimony that he thus
gives in, and is not biassed by any respect unto men. Neither does the fear of
man make him to baulk the truth in one Syllable, nor will he take an advantage
to wreck his own malice, by his Testimony, upon those who have given him any
apparent provocation. This was Doegs Sin, and therefore, though for the
substance he spoke the truth, yet is he on this account charged with a Lying
Tongue, Psalm. 52. begin. But this, he that fears God, abhors.

8. He ever Swears under the awful apprehension that God is both Witness and
Judge. He does it always with remembering that he is now in the presence of the
Great God, who loves, the truth, and hates lying; who knows, and will take
Vengeance. He can truly say, at such time as he thus calls upon God in
Swearing, as David, Psalm. 119.120. My flesh trembles for fear of thee, and I
am afraid of thy Judgments. He thinks of the dreadful flying Roll, and is under
the aw of that terrible threatening in regard of it, Zech. 5.4. I will bring it
forth, and it shall enter into the house of him that Swears falsely by my
Name; and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it, with
the timber thereof, and the stones thereof. And it makes him exceeding
cautious. Hence he dares not to Swear to any thing doubtingly, or upon a mere
surmize, or strong imagination, but only what his Conscience is clear, and
abundantly satisfied in, ever suspecting his eyes, his ears, his memory; till
he be fully assured of the Truth.

2. In respect of Others. This fear is not limited only to himself personally,
but it extends both in Justice and Charity to others also. He is concerned both
for the Glory of God, and for the best good of his Neighbors; and therefore,
whether they are afraid of an Oath or no, yet he fears for them, and will
exercise his fear in this regard, so far as duty calls him to it; and there are
those things wherein his Conscience obliges him to duty on this account. Here
therefore,

1. He trembles at, and will reprove vain and false Swearing in others. There
is a Guilt which may be contracted, by a man's holding his peace on this
account; Levit. 5 1. If a Soul Sin, and hears the voice of Swearing, if he do
not utter it, he shall bear his iniquity. Gods Name is taken in vain by such
things, and this a Godly man cannot bear patiently to hear, Psalm. 139.19, 20,
21. He dares not to be a partaker in other men's Sins, and therefore will some
way or other appear for God, and bear some manifest witness to his dislike of
these things. He will not therefore keep company with common Swearers, but
studiously avoid them, and, as there is opportunity, wisely and zealously
rebuke them.

2. He dares not to solicit, much less to hire any to Swear in a wrong cause.
He does not think it enough, himself to refrain from taking such an Oath, but
is afraid of being any way instrumental of encouraging others so to do. He
knows that what others do by his persuasion, if it be a Sin, will involve him
in the Guilt of it, and expose him to the righteous Anger of God, which he
dreads. If therefore he knows any to offer such a Testimony upon Oath, though
there might accrue an outward advantage to himself by it, yet he rejects it
with greatest detestation: and if any such false Oath be given within his
Cognizance, he will, as far as lies in his power, detect it, and testify
against it. Much less then will he ask and bribe any thus to do. This was
Jezebels Sin, in suborning Knights of the Post, to Swear honest Naboth out of
his Life and Living; and God threatens destruction upon her, and all her
Family, for it: and he takes instruction by this. He loves his Neighbor too
well, for him thus to ruin his Soul for ever; and he loves himself better,
than thus to pull down Gods wrath on his own head.

3. He is afraid of the Judgments of God comeing upon such a Land where this
Swearing abounds. Every Godly man loves and longs for the peace and prosperity
of his people; and therefore, when he teeth any Moral Presages of Gods wrath
impending over them, it makes him afraid, and puts him into bitterness of Soul.
Now he knows that where sinful Swearing prevails, and it comes to be an
Epidemical distemper among a people, it is a certain Symptom of Judgments ready
to break in upon such a Land, because God has Solemnly threatened them for this
Sin. God has told us, Jer. 23.10. Because of Swearing the Land mourns. And
in, Hos 4 2, 3. By Swearing, etc. they break out; therefore shall the Land
mourn, and every one that dwells therein shall languish, etc. And this makes
him to mourn in Secret places, and bitterly to lament the direful Prognostics
of the desolating Judgments which he sees in their causes.

4. If he be a person vested with Civil Authority, this fear will make him very
careful how he Administreth an Oath to others. There are many occasions in the
administration of Justice among men, to make use of an Oath: the sins and
corruptions that are in men, render it very necessary, and it cannot be always
avoided, consistent with Righteousness: men must otherwise lose their right,
and not be able to recover the wrongs that have been done to their Persons,
Names, Estates, and scandalous Crimes which will not otherwise be legally
detected. God has therefore ordained Civil Judicatories for this very purpose,
and authorized men in Authority to manage these Affairs: but it is certain that
a Godly Judge will apply this part of his Authority in fear; and that more
especially in these three regards

1. He will not do it, but when there is a just cause requiring of it. Men's
corruptions will prompt them to obtrude Oaths without reason, and to attempt to
multiply them beyond need, and though two or three are by the Word of God
declared sufficient in any one matter, yet they will urge to have a great many
more, and reckon themselves injured if they may not have their desire in these
regards complied withal; but a righteous Judge will allow or restrain them in
Judgment, Jer. 4.2. For that is as well to be applied to him who admits of the
Oath, as him to whom it is given. Men will often offer Oaths that are
altogether impertinent, and have no tendency in them to clear and confirm the
case, which they are pretended to be brought for: but he will not let them pass
promiscuously, but only admit of those that are to the purpose, and will serve
to the ends of Civil Justice. To take needless Oaths without weighing of them
before hand, is to suffer the Name of God to be taken in Vain, which he dares
not to do.

2. He will carefully enquire into the quality or fitness of the Jurants. Some
men are not fit to give in an Oath at all, and it may not be convenient for
others to do it in some causes, by reason of Prejudice and Interest: and it
belongs to the Judge to consider of this and not rashly to admit men to it
indifferently, without enquiring into their capacity in those regards. Some
persons are not of understanding sufficient to know what they do when they
Swear; some are liars upon record; some have fore stalled themselves by
notorious prejudices, and special malice; some are parties in the cause: and
(...) cautiously put by, in case they (...) themselves.

(...) will see the Oath it self be such as the person is capable of. There be
too many that are very forward and inconsiderate in offering to Swear to such
things, as in every wise man's Conscience does not come within the liberty of an
Oath, and they should not Swear in truth and knowledge. A man may Swear to a
matter of fact, because he may have a through knowledge of it; but to Swear to
the intention the person, viz. that he so said, or so did, meaning thus or so,
is more than any man can with any safety take an Oath to. A man may be morally
certain of a thing, i. e. his reason may be abundantly satisfied that it is so,
and yet he would be guilty of a rash, sinful and unlawful Oath, if he should
Swear to the Truth of it. Men sometimes offer themselves to Swear positively to
a thing that it is so, when, upon enquiry, it will be found, that they had it
only upon hear say, from this or that honest body that told it them of their
own knowledge, and they are very credible. These, and many such like things as
these, are incident in Civil Judicatures, and are sometimes urged with much
importunity; but he who fears God, and fears an Oath, will be very sedulous in
enquiring into such circumstances, before he will dare to administer an Oath to
persons, because of the high respect that he bears to the holy Name of God,
which would hereby be exposed to be profaned.

USE.
Let these Cautions then be duly weighed, and improved in the fear of God, by
us all, according to the Station which God has Set us in, and the occasions
that may be offered us in the Providence of God. What need there is of handling
this Case at this day, I leave it to all serious Christians to consider. If in
these points any of us have been defective, what reason is there to mourn for
it, to repent of it, and to seek pardon of God? If this fear does Rule in us,
we have a comfortable witness of our sincerity: if in these points we are
remiss and careless, we have just cause to suspect and examine our selves; and
although for the present, there may be one event in outward Providence to him
that Swears, and to him that fears an Oath; yet God is a swift witness, and a
righteous Judge of these things: and when he calls us to an account for them,
then will it be found a truth, that Happy is the man that fears always.

FINIS.
Books Printed for and Sold by Nicholas Boon, over against the Old Church, Viz.
JAneway's Token for Children: To which is Added: A Token for the Children of
New England. The Good Linguist: Or Directions to avoid the sins of the Tongue.
Conscience the Best Friend. By H. Stubbs. The Blessed Hope and Glorious
Appearing of the Great God our Savior Jesus Christ: Opened and Applied in
several Sermons. By Increase Mather, Praesident of Harvard College. Military
Discipline: or Complete Soldier.
Stich't Books.
Grace Triumphant. The Great Physician. The Young Man's Monitor, etc.
Where also may be had good Bibles, Testaments, Psalm-Books, Psalters, Primers,
Catechisms, etc. All sorts of Old Books New-bound. Paper, Ink, Pens,
Paper-Books And most sorts of Stationers Ware.


Advertisement.
THere is lately Published a suitable small Book, Entitled, Mutual LOVE and
PEACE among Christians, being Recommended as a Great Duty, in a SERMON
Preached, January 19. 1700, 1.

By the Reverend Mr. Benjamin Wadsworth, Pastor of a Church in Boston.

Sold by Benjamin Eliot, under the West End of the Townhouse.


