ICHABOD OR, A DISCOURSE, Showing what Cause there is to Fear that the GLORY Of
the Lord, is Departing from NEW ENGLAND.

Delivered in Two SERMONS, By Increase Mather

Psalm. 78.60, 61. So that He forsook the Tabernacle of Shiloh; the Tent which
He placed among men: And delivered His Strength into Captivity, and His Glory
into the Enemies hand.

Ezekiel. 20.49. Then said I, Ah Lord God, they say of me, Does he not speak
Parables?

Boston, Printed by Timothy Green, Sold by the Booksellers. 1702.

RELIGION stands on Tiptoe in our Land,
Ready to pass to the American strand.
Then shall Religion to America flee,
They have their Times of Gospel even as we.
Yet as the Church thither Westward fly;
So Sin shall trace and dog her instantly:
They have their Period also, and set Times,
Both for their Virtuous actions, and their Crimes.
V. Herbert Sacred Poems TO THE Reader.
IF there is (as who can say their is not?) a Declension in the Churches of
New England, from what once they were, it is not to be wondered at: For in the
Primitive Days of Christianity it was so; and this whilst the Apostles were
yet Living. In the Churches in Galatia, there was a Superstitious observation
of Holy-daye^, and of Meats and Drinks. And in those in Asia were greater
Errors, and a Scandalous neglect of Discipline in several of them. But in the
very next Age to the Apostles, the Defection from Primitive Purity, was greater
and more general, especially in matters relating to Church Discipline. Then
began the Contest about the Day when Easter should be kept. Polycarp (the
Bishop of Smyrna who was an Holy man, and Dyed a Martyr) and the Asian Churches
with him, pleaded for its Observation on the Fourteenth day of the Month.
Anicetus (the Bishop of Rome) and with him the Western Churches, would keep the
Fifteenth day: The former pretending the Authority of the Apostle John for
their practice, and the latter the Authority of Peter. And how strange is it,
that Polycrates the Bishop of Ephesus in his Letter to Victor at Rome, that so
he might make John to be of greater Authority then Peter, alleged that he was
a Priest, and wore the the Highpriests Golden Crown, when as it is known that
John was of the Tribe of Judah; nor would any Christian put on those Sacerdotal
Ornaments. It is to be admired, that they who lived so near the days of the
Apostles, should pretend their Authority for a practice in the Churches which
they never taught. Ireneus in Eusebius says that in this, Their Forefathers
had delivered to their Posterity a Custom which crept into the Churches
through Ignorance. And Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History, acknowledges
truly, that neither our Savior nor His Apostles, did Ordain the keeping of
that Holiday. Other usages not warrante^ by the Scripture, were observed in
many Churches within a few Ages of the Apostles. We find in Justin Martyr's
second Apology, that they mixed Water with the Wine, at the Lords Supper; and
that the Deacons carried the Elements to such as were absent: both which
practices were not according to Divine Institution: And yet it was thus within
Fifty Years after some of the Apostles were living. Likewise additions to the
Sacrament of Baptism, such as, Oil, Milk, Honey, signing with the sign of the
Cross, and Superstitious Garments; with other Ceremonies, crept into the
Churches in the early Times of Christianity, and made way for Popery. So did
the Glory by degrees depart from the Churches. None of these Superstitions do
as yet obtain in the Churches of New England: But what may in process of Time,
who can tell?

It has been objected to Non-conformist's, that Modes and Forms of Worship, and
Church Discipline, are small Matters, and not Essentials of Religion, and that
therefore men should not Cont^nd about them, or expose themselves to
Persecution on the account of such Inconsiderable matters.

That Pious and Learned Divine (who was Tutor to the late Arch Bishop
Tillotson, when in the University) Mr Clerkson in his Sermons on Rev. 2.10. has
Largely, and Judiciously Answered such Objectors; Showing how the Faithful
Servants of Christ have chosen rather to submit to the extremest Sufferings
then to Sin, though it were but in a circumstance of Divine Worship: And that
things which are but small in their first beginning, may become great in their
Progress and tendency: e. g. Imposed Forms of Prayer, made way for the Mass,
and for all the Coruptions of it. If stinted Liturgies had not been at first
yielded to, the Popish Mass could never have taken place. Again, the first step
to the Popes Throne, was the introducing of a Superiority amongst ordinary
Officers in the Church. This by degrees rose to the Papal Height. The
Commemoration of Saints and Martyrs at the place of their Sepulchers, made way
for the Idolatry of Prayer to them. If the first commemoration had not bee^
admitted, then the other had never followed. If men have power to Institut^ one
Religious Ceremony, they may as well appoint an hundred. Moreover, the
introducing of small matters, may endanger that which is the main Bulwark of
the Protestant Religion. This Principle, That nothing but the Scripture is the
Rule of Faith and Worship, is that Bulwark. If by giving way to small matters
pretended to be Indifferent, we let go that Principle, all our Religion is in
danger. He further adds, that the smaller the matter is which we suffer for,
presuming it to be an Evil, the more Honorable and the more Comfortable will
our Sufferings be. It is a great Honor to Christ, that He has any in the world
who will suffer much, rather then swerve from Him in the least. And it will be
Comfortable to those that Suffer, because this will argue much Love to Christ,
and great Fear of Sin, and so will be a great Evidence of Sincerity. Here is
the greatest Try^l, when we are called to suffer for that which is counted a
small matter* Thus writes the Judicious Author (...) in a M S. which I have
seen, and (...) wish that the Public had the (...) of it.

I hope no one will suppose that (...) for the Platform of Discipline ((...)
has been the Profession, and (...) accordingly, the Glory of the Churches in
New England,) Disrespect is cast on Reforming P^e^byterians in other parts of
the world. For they in their Ius Divinum, (part 1. p. 191.) have declared their
Concur^ence with our Discipline in things of greatest Concernments, and that
the matters wherein they di^^er are not of such Consequence a^* to make a
Schism between them and us. It is well known, that Ministers of that
persuasion, having been men of Holy and Peaceable Spirits, when they have come
into this Land, have Conscientiously complied with what has been the General
Practice of these Churches.

Things at this Day, look with a Dismal Aspect, on all Protestant Churches
throughout the world; so as that some who not long since hoped that the happy
Days promised to the Church on Earth, were at the door, begin now to fear that
the last Slaughter of the Witnesses is yet to come. They that have such
apprehensions are concerned to bear a full Testimony to those Truths which are
like to be the occasion of their sufferings, lest sudden Changes should make
them incapable of doing what at present they have an opportunity for.

England (in whose Peace we shall have Peace) seems to be ripe for Judgment.
The Grievous National sins committed in the late Reigns, have not yet been
accounted for. Never was there a Nation in the world (the Jewish excepted) that
sinned against the light of the Gospel so as the English Nation has. Our Hearts
may (with Eli) tremble for the Ark of God there. I have often wondered at some
very surprising Passages which are in our Renowned Hookers Sermon, on Ier.
14.9. which was the last that he Preached in England. Shall I tell you (says
he) what God has told me, Nay, I must tell you on pa^n of my Life: I am a poor
Ambassador sent from God, to do His Message unto you. And though I be Low, yet my
Message is from above, and He that sent me is Great; And Oh! that He would
grant that this my Message might be believed. What if I should (...) you what
God told me yester-night, that He w^ll lay England waste. It is my Message by
Meditation in Gods Word, that He bid me do to you. I do my Message as God
Commanded me. Do you think well of it? Will you have England Destroyed? Will
you put the Aged to Trouble, and your Young Men to the Sword? Will you have
your Young Women Widows, and your Virgins Defiled? Will you have your dear and
tender Little ones tossed on the Pikes, and dashed on the Stones? Or, will you
have them brought up in Popery, in Idolatry, under a necessity of perishing
their Souls forever, which is the worst of all? Will you have these Temples
wherein we seem to worship God, will you have them and your Houses Burnt with
Fire? -- Do not say, here are many Good Christian. Do you think that God is
beholding to you for your Religion? Surely not: For rather then He will
preserve such as pro^ess His Name, and hate to be Reformed, He will ra^se up of
these stones Children unto Abraham: He will rather go into Turkey, and say to
them, Thou art my People, and I will be your God* Thus speaks that Man of God.
I find that this Sermon of his is by a mistake, Published amongst Mr. Fenners
works* as if it had been Preached by him. Probably, the Booksellers might find
it in Mr. Fenners Study amongst his Manuscripts, and so sent it abroad into the
world under his Name. Reverend Mr. Higginson (the most Aged Minister now living
in New England) was well acquainted with Mr. Hooker, as having been Educated
under him, and he assures me, That after Mr. Hooker had been many Years Pastor
of Hartford, some of his intimate Friends enquired of him, whether he did not
apprehend that the miseries which the English Nation was then bleeding under,
by reason of the Civil Wars at that Time, were not those Desolations on England
which he had foretold? To whom he Replied, That time is not yet come. God will
giv^ to England a a respite after these Wars, and try the Nation whether they
will submit to the Kingly Office of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, which they will not
do: Then will the Lord plead His own cause, in a more dreadful way, so as to
break the English Nation as a Potters Vessel. Such Desolations will come, as
only a Remnant shall escape: and after that, Christ will raise up Churches
which shall be according to His own Heart. Had these things been uttered by an
Enthusiastical Brain, they were not much to be regarded. But all men know that
Mr. Hooker was a man of deep and solid Judgment. And one with whom above many
others, the Secret of the Lord was. Surely the Lord will do nothing but He
reveals His Secrets to His Servants the Prophets. On occasion of Mr. Hookers
Death, our Famous Mr. Wilson (who was himself marvellously endowed with a
Prophetical Spirit) Preached a Sermon on those words, Ezekiel. 33.33. And when
this comes to pass, (lo! it will come) they shall know that there has been a
Prophett among them. It becomes us humbly to leave Future Events with God who
only knows them. Nevertheleless, it will be our wisdom to prepare for the worst
of Times and Things, which may befall us in this present Evil world. We say
Proverbially, It is good to prepare for the worst, the best will help it self.
And this should we the rather do, because the Holy Oracles have assured us,
That in the Last days Perilous Times will come.

Boston, N. E. November 14. 1701.
ICHABOD, OR, The GLORY Departing FROM New England
SERMON I.
Ezekiel. IX.3 And the Glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the Cherib
whereupon he was, to the Threshold of the House.


THE Prophet Ezekiel had diverse Visions of the Glory of God. First, At the
River Ch^bar* s^condly, In the (...). Thirdly, In the Temple. Of which the
words before us speaks. The Prophet was himself in Babylon: but being in a
Divine Ecstasy, he saw what was in the Temple at Jerusalem. He there saw the
Glory Departing.

1. Here is the Term or Place from whence it went; viz. From the Cherub
whereupon it was: or, Cherubims, the singular number put for the plural, as is
usual in the Scripture. By the Cherubims, the Holy Angels are signified. The
Glorious* God is above them. They are His winged Messengers, on whom He is said
to fit. When it is said, the Glory departed from the Cherub; it intends, that it
(...) gone from off the Mercy-Seat, where (...) always dwelt between the
Cheru^^^s.

2. Here is Expressed the Place to which the Glory removed; viz. To the
Threshold of the House. There it stood a while, to show how unwilling the Lord
was to leave His House. As a man that i^ loath to go out of an House, will go as
far as the Threshold and there make a stand, and it may be come back a^ain.
Thus did the Glory of the Lord do. In the Eighth, Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh
Chapters of this Prophecy, which are all of them one Sermon, or an account of
the same Vision, in the several parts of it, we see that the Glory of God did
not go away all at once, but by several steps and degrees.

1* It removed from the North side of the House, to the Threshold of the Door.

2. After that it went back again, to another side of the House.

3. After that to the East Gate, which was out of the House.

4. Then to the midst of the City.

5. Out of the City to the Mountain.

6. From Mount Olivet it went up to Heaven, and returned no more. (...) Sudden,
and yet Gradual Departure, (...) to intimate, that the Lord would sudde^^^ be
gone from them, and yet that He was loath to remove from His People, if they
would have been prevailed with to remove and reform those things which we^e a
provocation to the Eyes of His Glory.

The DORTRINE which the words afford unto us, is,

That when God removes the Glory from a People, He uses to do it Gradually, and
not all at once.

There are Two things to be Enquired into.

1. When does the Glory remove from a People?

2. How does it appear that God removes His Glory by degrees and not all at
once? Or, what are the several steps which the Lord uses to observe in His
dispensations toward His People before He does totally remove His Glory from
them?

^^est. 1. When does the Glory remove from a People?

Answ. 1. When God Himself goes from them, then the Glory is gone. The design
of this Vision was to intimate this. The Jews thought that God would never go
out of the Temple, but that as long as they had the Temple they were sure
enough of the Lords being amongst them. To convince them of the contrary,
Ezekiel saw the Glory of the Lord going out of the Temple. GOD is infinite
Glory. The Hebrews were wont to call God by that Name of Glory. 2 Pet. 1.17.
There came a voice from the Excellent Glory: That is from God, who is Excellent
Glory. And He is styled the God of Glory, Act. 7.2. The God of Glory appeared
to our Father Abraham* And the Glorious Lord, Isa. 39.21. The greatest Glory
which any people have or can have, is in their relation to Him, Jer. 2.11. My
People have changed their Glory. Changing their God was changing their Glory.
No People in the world have such a Glory upon them, as they have who have the
only true God to be their God. Zec. ^.5. For I, says the Lord, will be unto
her a wall of Fire round about, and will be the Glory in the midst of her. God
is His Peoples Muniment, and their Ornament. He is their Glory Actively,
because they ascribe Glory to Him: and Passively in that they receive all their
Glory from Him. Therefore when God goes away, the Glory goes. But He is not
said to go from any People, or from any Place in respect of His Essential
Presence, which (...) impossible; only when He cease to manifest His Gracious
Presence in the midst of them. Judge. 6.13. If the Lord be with us, why is all
this befallen us? When the Lord permits the Enemies of His People to prevail,
and does not Exert His Power for their Salvation, He is said not to be with
them. The Attributes of God (which are His Being variously discovered unto and
appreh^nded by His Creatures) are called His Glory. Joh. 11* ^. If thou would
believe thou should se^ the Glory of God; viz. His power manifested. This is
called, His Glorious Arm. Isa. 63.12. When the Lord is pleased to make
discoveries of His Power and Mercy to His People, He is said to Shine forth,
and to show His Glory, Psalm. 80.1. ^ 90.16* When it is otherwise, He seems to
be gone, and then the Glory is removed from that People.

2. When a Peeple have less of Christ amongst them then once they had, then the
Glory is Departed from them. For He is the Glory of His People Israel, Luke
2.32. It was Christ, whose Glory the Prophet Ezekiel saw. In the Vision which
he had by the River Cheb^^, he saw on the Throne, the likeness of a Man upon
it^ This was the appearance of the likeness of the Glory of the Lord, and when
he saw it he fell on his Fac^; as in the Last verses of the first Chapter is
expressed. Now not God the Father, but Christ the Son of God was wont to appear
unto the Prophets of Old, in the form of a Man; thereby signifying His future
Incarnation. Isaiah had a Vision like this of Ezekiel. He saw the Lord sitting
on a Throne, and heard the Seraphims saying one to another, Holy, Holy, Holy is
the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of His Glory. Isa. 6.3. Because He
did execute Judgment, not only on the Land of Israel, but all the Earth over:
The Seraphims, the Holy Angels, beheld the whole Earth full of His Glory. The
Apostle assures us, that it was Christ whose Glory Isaiah saw, Ioh. 12.41. As
God the Father, so Christ is called by that Name of Glory. Psalm. 85.9. That
Glory may dwell in our Land. When the Son of God was Incarnate, and dwelt for
Thirty Years and more on the Earth, and in the Land of Israel, then did Glory
dwell in that Land. Christ is the King of Glory. The Psalmist Prophesying of
Christ's Ascension to Heaven, speaks as in Psalm. 24.7. Lift up your Heads, O ye
Gates, and be ye lift up* ye Everlasting Doors, and the King of Glory shall
come in. And He is styled, The Lord of Glory: 1 Cor. 2.8. Had they known it,
they would not have Crucified the Lord of Glory. It is affirmed concerning the
Second Temple, The Glory of this latter House, shall be greater then of the
former. Haggai 2.9. And how was that fulfilled? Not in respect of an outward
Glory, consisting in the Magnificence and costliness of the Edifice, for so it
was not to be compared with the former. Ver. 3. W^o is left among you that saw
this House in her first Glory? How do you see i^ now? Is it not in your Eyes in
comparason of it as nothing? Some have pretended, that Herod made a costly
Addition to the Second Temple, so as to make it more Glorious then Solomon's.
Which is far from being true. For besides what Solomon himself expended in
Building that House, for the Name of God, his Father David left him so many
Millions of Gold and Silver to be improved for that Building, as that it is
Questionable, whether all the Kings now living in the world are possessed of so
vast a Treasure. There was more builders employed in Solomon's Temple, then
there were men returning with Zerubbabel out of Babylon. So then, it remains
that the Second Temple was more Glorious then the First, in respect of the
Presence of Christ therein. The First Temple was not honored with the Personal
presence of Christ, the Son of God in it, as the Second Temple was; and that
made it Excel in Glory. If we consider Christ as God, an Infinite and Eternal
Glory is to be affirmed of Him* He is the Brightness of the Fathers Glory, and
the express Image of His Person, Heb. 1.3. A clear Text to prove that Christ
the Son of God is Eternal, if the Father is so. Had it been possible (which is
not possible) for the Sun in the Firmament to have been Eternal, the Brightness
of the Sun would have been so too. There is then an Eternal, and therefore an
Infinite Glory belonging to Christ. And considered as Man, there was such a
Glory seen in Him, as never was seen in any one but in the Son of God Himself.
Joh. 1.14. We beheld His Glory, the Glory as of the only Begotten of the
Father. The Glory of God is to be seen shining in the Humane Nature of Christ,
more then any where else. The Scripture speaks of he Light of the knowledge of
the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ. 2 Co^^ 4.6. The Glory of God was
seen on the Face of Moses, so that the Children of Israel were not able to
behold it. But what was the Glory of God in the Face of Moses, compared with
that Glory in the Face of JESUS CHRIST? There is more of the Glory of God to be
seen in the Humane Nature of Christ, then in the whole Creation besides:
Especially in those Glorious Perfections, wherewith the Soul of the Man Christ
Jesus is adorned: In respect whereof He resembles God more, then any Man or
Angel does There is more of the glorious Grace, of the kindness and goodness of
God to be seen in the Man Christ Jesus, then in any one else: Joh^ 1.14. We
beheld His Glory full of Grace. And more of the Holiness of God. The Angel
Gabriel calls Christ, the most Holy; alluding to the Holy of Holies in the
Temple. Dan. 9.24. To anoint the most Holy. As God he is not said to be
Anointed, but as Man he is Anointed with the Oil of the Spirit of Grace and
Holiness above all others. God, His God has Anointed him above his Fellows.
There is a greater and more Glorious shine of the Divine Perfections in the
Humane Nature of Christ, then in any Object whatsoever. And although we may not
say, nor ought we to believe, the Pe^^ections of the Humane Nature of Christ
^re Infinite, and that it is every where, (as Luthe^ans imagine) or, that the
Incommunicable properties of the Divine Nature belong unto it: Nevertheless,
the glorious Perfections thereof, are next to Infinite. There is a
Similitudinary Omniscience, and a Similitudinary Omnipotence, to be affirmed of
the Man Christ Jesus^ That Man has such Wisdom, and such Power as makes him
more like God then any Angel in heaven. The Jewish writers have a Ce^berated
saying, viz. That the Messiah shall be grea^er then Moses, greater then our
Father Abraham, yeae, greater then the Angels. In which they say true: For all
the Angels in heaven (...) to him: They cover their Faces before ^im, in humble
acknowledgment of his Superlative Glory, Isa. 6.2. They then who have not so
much of Christ amongst them as once they were favored with, have cause to be
sensible of the Glory's removing from them. Thus it was with the Churches in
Galatia. The holy Apostle said to them, I marvel that you are so soon removed
from him that called you into the Grace of Christ, unto anot^^^ Gospel. Gal.
1.6. Paul had Prea^^ (...) the pure Gospel among them, laying nothing besides
Christ in the Foundation, building all hope of Justification in the sight of
God, on His Righteousness only: But others came, and were for those Ceremonies
which Christ by his Death has abolished, and they would have Works and
Righteousness of their own joined with Christ in Justification. Thus was the
glory of the grace of God in Jesus Christ obscured. Gal. 5.4. Christ is become
of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are Justified by the Law, ye are fallen
from Grace. If in respect of the Doctrine Preached amongst them, they were
fallen from Grace, the glory of God* was gone out of their Church Assemblies.
So when a Congregation did once hear much of Christ, they had Ministers of the
Lord who were always Preaching Christ to them, but now, they seldom hear that
glorious Name mentioned; the glory of God is in a sad degree, removed from that
Congregation. Or, if Christ is Preached sincerely, but is withdrawn from his
own Ordinances, then the Glory is not in them. When People have Sabbaths, but
no Christ in them, Sermons but no Christ in them, Sacraments, but no Christ in
them, the Glory is gone from their Souls. When they have the Mantle of Elijah,
but not the Lord God of Elijah. When they have empty Ordinances, without a
Christ gloriously present with them, and breathing on their Souls under the
enjoyment of them, the glory is then gone from the Temple.

Therefore;

3. When the Holy Spirit witholds his wonted gracious Influences and
Operations, the Glory is removed from that People. The Spirit of God is the
Spirit of Glory: 1 Pet. 4.14. If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy
are you, for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you. They that have a
singular presence of the Spirit of God within them, are upon that account, the
Subjects of a Divine glory. This was one of the peculiar glories of the
Children of Israel, in respect whereof they did Excel all other people; in that
that they had such a Presence of the holy Spirit amongst them as no other
people had. Neh^ 9.20. Thou gave thy good Spirit to instruct them. And in
another place it is said, According to the word that I Covenanted with you,
when ye came out of Egypt, so my Spirit remains among you. Hag. 2.5. The
gifts of the Spirit are glorious things. God poured down of his Spirit in a
glorious manner in those Extraordinary gifts, which some among his people, for
the benefit of all were endowed with. But these departed for a long time after
the Temple was Destroyed; which might be one thing signified by the going away
of the glory. Ezekiel. 11.23. The Glory of the Lord went up from the midst of the
City, and stood upon the Mountain. So did the holy Spirit go up to the
Mountain, i. e. to Heaven, and there he abode for a long Time. They saw not
their Signs, nor was there any more a Prophet among them. Under the Second
Temple, there were not until the coming of Christ, those glorious Effusions of
the Spirit which had been under the First Temple. The Hebrew Doctors observe
that there were Five glorious things in the First Temple, which were wanting in
the Second^

1. The Ark.

2. Vrim and Thummim.

3. The Holy Fire.

4. The Shechina, or Divine Presence.

5. The Holy Ghost: under which Prophecy and other Extraordinary gifts of the
Spirit are comp^ehended. And this helps to understand that Scripture, Act. 19.,
2. When the Disciples at Ephesu^,, being asked whether they had received the
holy Ghost, replied, We have not so much as heard whether there be any holy
Ghost. It is not to be supposed, that they had never heard any thing of the
person or being of the holy Spirit, only they had heard nothing of his coming
down from heaven, in respect of those Extraordinary gifts which for a long time
had ceased. But the saving graces of the Spirit are more glorious things then
those Extraordinary gifts were. 1 Cor. 12.31. Covet earnestly the best Gifts:
and yet show I unto you a more Excellent way. Saving grace is more Excellent
then the Best Gifts without that grace. It is a Spiritual and Internal glory.
It makes a glorious Soul. Psalm. 45.12. The Kings Daughter is all glorious
within. There is a gracious and a glorious presence of the Spirit of God among
his People when Sinners are Converted into Saints, and when Saints are built up
in their most holy Faith. Wherefore, the Spirit of God is withdrawn, and the
glory is upon the remove.

1. When Converting work is at a stand. For Conversion is the work of the
Spirit. It is a Renovation of Soul wrought by the power of the Holy Ghost, Tit.
3.5. If a man is set at Liberty from the Dominion of sin, it is the Spirit of
the lord that has done it 2 ^or. 3 17. Men are only instruments therein; the
holy Spirit is the principal Agent. It is true, that God delights to make use
of one man's Ministry more then of another, and of one man's way of Preaching
more then of another: Nevertheless, it is not the man that Preaches, but the
Spirit of God that Converts, and begins a work of Grace in the Soul of a
sinner. If he witholds His Efficacious and Irresistible operations, the ablest
Preacher in the world will never be able to Convert one Soul. 1 Cor. 3.5, 7.
Who is Paul? And who is Apollos? But Ministers by whom you believed, even as
the Lord gave to every man. Neither is he that Planteth any thing; neither he
that Waters, but God that gives the increase. That which Ezekiel speaks
concerning the Dead Bones, is true concerning Dead Souls: Ezekiel. 37.10. I
Prophec^ed as He commanded me, and Breath came into them, and they Lived.
Prophesying will not make them Live, except Breath come into them. Preaching
over Dead Souls will not make them Live, except the Spirit of God come down
into them. What a glorious Presence of the Spirit of God was there in the
Primitive Times of Christianity, when Three Thousand were Converted by one
S^rmon' Act. 2.41. Something like this there was in the beginning of the
Reformation. It is related that in the City of Lions in France, that Famous
Preacher and Reformer, V^^e, was an happy instrument of Converting some
Thousands. In another Kingdom, about Seventy Years since, there were (as a late
Writer informs us) Five Hundred pers^^s Conve^ted by one Sermon^ But when
Conversions become rare; many Serm^ns Preached, and not one Soul Converted,
it is a sign the Glory is going. Alas! It is true; that me^ may sit under a very
powerful and awakening Ministry for many years, and yet not be Converted by it,
but the contrary, even Judicially Blinded and Hardened. What a Pre^c^er was
Isaiah? Did ever man in the Days of the Old Testament, Preach Christ as he
did? Yet there was more Hardened under his Ministry, then were Converted by it.
Isa. 6.10. Because the Spirit of the Lord was withdrawn, and the Glory was upon
the wing, ready to be gone from that People.

2. When they that a^e Converted d^ not grow in Grace, according to the means
of Grace vouchsafed to them, that argues that the holy Spirit is withdrawn, and
the Glory Departing. There are Second Conversions of the same Christians,
though not as to their State, but in respect of Growth in Grace. Christ
therefore said to his own Disciples, Except ye be C^nverted: Mat. 18.3. Further
degrees of Mortification and Sanctificatification are to be endeavored by true
Believers. They are still to be cleansing themselves, and perfecting Holiness
in the Fear of God. It was said to Peter, When thou art Converted strengthen
thy Brethren. Luke 22.32. Yea, and all the Apostles experienced that which was
like a new Conversion; so that they differed from what themselves once were
very much^ A blessed shower of the Spirit descended on them, which caused the
Grace which was in their Souls to grow wonderfully. It is a glorious thing when
Christians grow in grace, so as that all who are acquainted with them, shall
say they are growing Christians; o^e may see that their Souls Thrive. Such were
the Thessalonians, of whom the Apostle says, That their Faith did grow
Exceedingly, and their Charity abounded -- 2 These. 1.3. But when men have no
more Grace in their Souls then they had Twenty Years ago; although they enjoy
precious Means Sabbaths, Lectures, Sermons, Sacraments. When it is so generally
with any Church, the Spirit of God is withdrawn, and the Glory is removed from
that Temple. Much more is it so, when there are visible decays in Churches,
and Godliness in the powor of it is Dying every day. Such Churches as those at
Ephesus, and at Sard^s, unto one of which it was said, You have left your First
Love, Remember whence thou art fallen; and to the other, Thou have a Name that
thou Live, and art Dead, Strengthen the things which remain and are ready to
Die; the Glory is Departing from them. When they have only a Name of being for
Purity and Reformation more then other Churches in the world, b^t Live not
according to their Holy Profession, you may call them by the Name of Ichab^d,
for, where is the Glory?

4. When those Holy Ordinances which be the Symbols of the Divine Presence
among a People are removed, the Glory of the Lord is gone with them. There was
a Symbolical Presence of God in the Temple: On which account, that was to the
Children of Israel their Glory. Ezekiel speaking of the Temple of the Lord,
says, As for the Beauty of his O^nament, he set it in Majesty. Ezekiel. 1.20. And
when this was Destroyed, the Lamenting Church complained, saying, He has cast
down from Heaven unto the Earth, the Beauty of Israel, and remembered not his
Footstool, in the day of His anger. Lam. 2.1. So likewise the Ark, which was
another Divine Ordinance, had the Name of Glory given to it^ Romans 9.4. To the
Israelites pertained the Glory, viz. in rerespect of the Ark of God which is so
called: Over which were the Cherubims of Glory, shadowing the Mercy-Seat. Heb.
9.5. Yea, the Ark is called, The Glory of God, because the glorious God was
pleased therein to reside in a singular manner. When the Philistines had got
the Ark into their Possession, it is said, that God delivered his Strength into
Captivity, and His Glory into the Enemies hand. Psalm. ^8.61. Hence when David
was by means of Saul's Persecution, Exiled, that he could not oome into the
T^bernacle where the Ark was, he said before the Lord, My Soul thirs^eth for
thee, to see thy Power and thy Glory. Psalm. 63.2. So in the Land of Israel
there was a Symbolical Presence of God. Hence it is called, The Glorious Land.
Da^. 11.41. Many Divine Ordinances were not to be enjoyed in any other Land but
that. The design of Ezekiel's V^si^n, was to intimate, that the Ark, and the
Temple should be Destroyed, and the Holy Land Profaned; and that God would
forsake it. All Relig^ous Ordinance^ which God Himself has Instituted are signs
of his Gracious Presence amongst the People who are the subjects of them. And
they are Glorious Things, b^ reason of that of God which is in t^^m. ^ence
David speaks, as in Psalm. 27.4. One thing (...) desired of the Lord* and that
w^ll I seek after, that I may dwell in the House of the Lord all the days of
my Life, to behold the Beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his Temple. And
again, in Psalm. 29.9. In His Temple does every one speak of His Glory. It is
evident that God is in his own Ordinances from the blessed Effects of his
Presence therein. Many a gracious soul has had Doubts resolved and Conscience
satisfied by waiting on the Lord in them. Psalm. 73.16, 17. When I thought to
know this, it was too painful for me, until I went into the Sanctuary of God,
then understood I. There is as an Enlightening, so a Comforting Presence of God
attending His own Holy Institutions Many a Saint has come to a Sermon with an
heart full of sorrow, and has gone away again with an heart full of joy. And
how has the Lord sometimes filled the Souls of His Children with Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory, when Worshipping him in the use of those
Sacraments which himself has Commanded? When in Hezekiahs time, the Lords
people did Religiously observe the Passover, there was great Joy in Jerusalem,
2 Chronicles. 3^.26 As for the true Believers amongst them, the Lord in that
Ordinance Sealed to them the Pardon of their sins for the sake of the Messiah
that was to come, and was to be the Lamb of God, who should be Sacrificed to
take away the sin of the world. This Faith must needs caus^ Joy in them. That
great Man whom Philip Baptized, after he had the remission of his sins sealed
unto him in the Sacrament, had his Heart filled with an holy Joy. Act. 8.39. He
went on his way rejoicing. One of the Ancients says, that in the Primitive
Times, Christians would go from the Table of the Lord so full of the Spirit of
God, as that they were terrible to the Devils themselves. There is a powerful
Presence of God in His own Institutions when duly attended. Gospel Ordinances
are Glorious. The Ordinances of the Old Testament were Glorious, but those of
the New are more Glorious. 2 Cor. 3.^. How shall not the M^n^stration of the
Spirit be rather Glorious? And ver. 11. If that which was done away was
Glorious, much more that which remains is Glorious. For Gospel^ Ordinances
Exhibit Christ more fully and clearly, then can be said of those which were in
force under the Mosa^cal Dispensation. That which was said to the Galatians,
may be said to all who enjoy the Gospel, and the Ordinances thereof. Gal. 3.1.
Before whose Eyes, Jesus Christ has been evidently set forth Crucified among
you.

A little further to enlarge here. The Glory goes from a people;

1. When they are wholly deprived of Divine Ordinances. When the Ark was gone,
it was said, The Glory is d^pa^ted from Israel. 1 Samuel 4.22. This was the case
of the Jews when in Babylon. After the Prophet Ezekiel was Dead, they had not
such Sermons, as they were wont to hear at Jerusalem: nor had they such
Sacraments as once they enjoyed. Hence was that complaint, Psalm. 74.9. We see
not ^n^igns, there is no more any Prophet neither is there among us any that
knows how long? and that complaint, in Lam. 2.9. The Law is no more, (...)
Prophets also find no Vision from the Lord. Nor had they such Sabbaths as once
they were blessed with. Lam. 1.7. Their Adversaries Mocked at their Sabbaths.
And how did they Mock at them? Doubtless, when the beginning of the Year came,
the Babylonians would mock and say, You Will go to Jerusalem to kee^ the
Passover, will you? And at the latter end of the Year, they would mock again,
and say, Will you go to Ie^rusalem to keep the Feast of Taberna^cles? They that
carried them away Cap^tive, required a Song. They would say, Sing us one of the
Songs of Zion* Thus would they J^er at them, when they knew they could not in a
strang^ Land sing the Glorious Songs of (...) Lord This is much more the case
(...) the miserable Jews at this day* and ha^ been so for more then Sixteen
Hundred Years. They have not any Ordinanc^ which is now a part of (...)
Wor^ship, left among them. They who were once the Children of the K^ngdom are
now cast out into outer Darkness* The Glory of God is t^k^n from the^ and (...)
r^side among the Gentiles (...) Christ told them it would be so. Man* 2^.43.
The Kingdom of God shall (...) from (...), and given to a Nation bringi^^ forth
the (...) thence. And the like (...) th^s has happened (...) many Churches (...).
The Love (...) the church (...), that He would remove the Candlestick. Rev. 2
5. Which employed a removal of the Glory. The Light, the Glory which did once
shine in Ephesus, has been Extingui^hed many Ages since.

2. When the Ordinances of God are Cor^upted, then* the Glory cease. If
Purity be gone the Glory is gone with it. There are especially two things which
Corrupt the Ordinances of the Lord, and so cause Him to remove His Glory.

1. When men will be mixing something of their own with Divine Institutions.
Whereas they ought not to add so much ^s a Ceremony to what the Lord has
appointed. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Ye shall not add unto the word which I Command you,
neither shall you diminish ought from ^t. A Pompous and Superstitious worship,
full of Humane addition and intention, is a Glorious thing in the Ca^^al Eyes
of men, but it is not so in ^he Eyes of the Lord. No; such things cause Him to
remove his Glory far from them. For they are Images forbidden ^n the Second
Commandment. Yea, ^mages of Jealousy, which provoke the Lord to go far from His
Sanctuary.

2. Another thing which Corrupts the Worship of God, is, When persons not duly
qualified are admitted unto those Ordinances which they have no right unto. We
know that under the Old Testament, such as were Ceremonially Unclean, might not
partake of Holy things. Lev. 7.20. The Soul that Eats of the Flesh of the
Sacrifice of Peace Offerings, that pertain unto the Lord, having his
Uncleanness upon him, even that Soul shall be cut off from among his people.
This instructs us, that under the Gospel such as are M^^ally Vr^^^ar, must not
partake in the Holy Institutions of Christ. If they know themselves to be such,
they ought not to (...) with Sacred things. The very Heath^n by the Light of
Nature, were sensible of this; and therefore it is strange that any man should
Teach otherwise. There is a Scripture which has respect to Gospel Times*
Consuming the Truth before us, viz. that in Ezekiel. 44.7. You have brought into
my Sanctuary strangers Uncircumcised in Heart, and Uncircumcised in Flesh, to
be in my Sanctua^y to Pollute it. Not only Vncircum^ised in Flesh, but the
Uncircumcised in Heart, ought not to be brought into the Sanctuary. And if they
are known to be such, they that bring them in Pollute the Sanctuary, and cause
the Glory to Depart out of it. When both the Worship and the Worshippers are
such as God approves, there is a great Glory on such Assemblies, and a
singular Presence of the Lord with them, as long as they continue to be such.
Then upon all the Glory shall be a Defense. Isa. 4.5. But as Degeneracy from a
more Reformed state, does by degrees come in upon a people, the Glory goes away
from them gradually, and it may be insensibly.

5. When such Persons who have had much of God with them and in them, and who
can do much toward keeping the Glory amongst a people are removed, the Glory
uses to remove with them. Christians who are eminent for Faith and Holiness
have much of God with them, and by their fervent Prayers stop the Glory when it
is going away. When many of these are removed at once, the Glory does not use
to stay long after them. Especially, this is true of Men in Public place, who
are eminently Faithful. A Magistrate who is not of a worldly, selfish, private
Spirit, but whose Heart is set for God, has a great Presence of the Lord with
him, Judge, 2.18, 19. When the Lord raised them up Judges then the Lord was with
the Judge, and delivered them out of the hand of their Enemies, all the days
of the Judge. As long as that Eminent man Lived, the Glory departed not; but as
soon as he was Dead, sad Changes came upon the Land in a little time. Sometimes
when one Eminent man is removed, the Glory of a People is Buried with him. It
was very much so when Josiah Died. Then did the Lords People say truly, The
Crown is fallen from our Head. Lam. 5.16. Which is in other words, The Glory is
departed from us. A Praying Magistrate may do much toward detaining the Glory
still. So did Moses, when the Glory was going from the Church in the
wilderness, by his Prayers he stayed it. So Ministers who have an Eminency of
Gifts and Grace, have a great Presence of the Holy Spirit with them. It is said
of Barnabas, that he was full of the Holy Ghost. Such are instruments in the
hand of Christ, by whom the Glory is continued. Elijah, and after him Elisha
were as the Chariots of Israel and the Horsemen thereof. It was by their means
that the Glory was kept from being totally removed. In the beginning Times of
Christianity, whilst the Apostles Lived, who were richly furnished with Gifts
and Graces, there was a Glory on the Churches, which after their Decease went
away. Some Errors in Doctrine crept into the Churches before John who outlived
the other Apostles was Dead: And in some Churches, the Discipline of Christ
(...) quite laid aside. And in the very next Age to the Apostles, some
Ministers who were good men, and suffered Martyrdom at last; nevertheless, did
in matters relating to Church Government, degenerate from the simplicity of the
Gospel, and introduced diverse Superstitions, which were never taught nor
practiced by the Apostles, their immediate Predecessors: witness the Contest
about Easter, and other things that msght be mentioned. There has been many a
Church in the world, which might Date the Time of the Glories departing from
them, from the day that the Eminent Minister whom God had honored them with,
was laid in his Grave. When Old El^ Dyed, the Glory departed from Israel. 1 Samuel 4.21.

6. When Sin comes into the Temple the Glory goes out o^ it. The Prophet in a
Vision beheld abominable things in the Temple, and then he saw the Glory
removing. He was brought to the door of the Gate of the Lords House, and
beheld, There sat women weep^ng for Tammuz. Ezez. 8.14. How horrid was that! To
make the Temple a Stews. Tammuz was a filthy Egypt^an Adulterer, whom the
Heathen Idolized, and had Cursed Rites of worship in Commemoration of him. Well
might the Lord remove out of his Temple when such wicked Abominations were
tolerated therein. So as to the Myst^cal Temple: If Scandalous Evils are found
in a particular Church, and not duly Testified against, by a Faithful and
Impartial Exercise of that Holy Discipline, which Christ has Commanded, the
Lord and His Glory will not long abide in that Church. He cannot endure to
dwell where sin is indulged. It is grievous to an Holy man, to be amongst those
that allow themselves in Wickedness. Psalm. 120.5. Woe is me that I sojourn in
Mesech, and dwell in the Tents of Kedar. And will the Holy God dwell in such
Tents as these are? It is a sign that the Lord is withdrawn from men, when they
are left to Scandalous Sins. And when they give way to such sins, they provoke
Him to depart from them more dreadfully, and so to deprive them of their Glory.
Hos. 4.7. A^ they were increased, they Sinned against me: Therefore I will
change their Glory into Shame.

But thus much may suffice in Answer to the First Enquiry proposed. I cannot at
this Time proceed unto what remains. I confess I have many things in my Heart
to speak, which my very Soul is concerned in the Meditation on them. O
NEW ENGLAND! NEW ENGLAND! Look to it, that the Globe not removed from thee. For
it begins to go. It is come to the Threshold of the House, if not to the
Eastgate. And inasmuch as it is on the Departure it may be gone suddenly. It
is easy to see that such things may happen, as will cause much of the Glory to
be removed in a little Time. If God should suddenly take away but Ten or Twelve
Men, (I mean a few) whom the Lord Jesus Christ has made Pillars in His Temple,
if others equal to them (of which there is little prospect) shall not come in
their room, a swift Apostasy would be likely to come on the Churches in
New England! And if the Fountain should fail: I mean the COLLEGE, which has
been one of the Glories of New England; if that should fail, or (which is
worse) become a Nursery not of Plants of Renown, but of Degener^te Plants, who
will forsake those Holy Principles of Truth, which their Fathers came unto this
Land with respect thereunto; the Glory is like to be gone from these Churches
in less then one Generation: so that little or nothing of New England will be
found in New England it self. Let us do what we may to prevent it. And let us
make Moses his Prayer, Psalm. 90.16. Let thy work appear unto thy Servants, and
thy Glory unto their Children.

SERMON II.
We come now to the Second Enquiry proposed, Viz.

Enqui. 2. HOW does it appear that God remo^es His Glory by degrees, and not
all at once? Or, what are the several steps which the Lord uses to obser^e in
His dispensations toward His people before the (...) is a Total departure of
the Glory from them?

Answ. 1. God does not use to depart, or remove the Glory from a People without
giving them warning of it. He does by His Word give solemn warning of His
departure. Jer. 23.39. I will forsake you, and cast you out of my presence. The
Lord stirs up the Hearts of His Messengers, to give notice that the Glory is
going before the removal of it: And this it may be a long time before hand. So
did God deal with the Old world. Noah continued Preaching to them, and Warning
them an Hundred and Twenty Years before the Flood came, which put an end to all
their Glory. Thus also did the Lord deal with the Jews. He sent many Prophets
to them. There are above Twenty Prophets whose Names are mentioned in the
Scripture, by whom the Lord warned that People. The Prophet Jeremiah for Three
and Twenty Years together (as himself takes notice) told them what was coming.
Ier. 25.3. Some write that Forty Five Years expired, before that Prophet
finished the course of his Ministry. Several other Men of God continued
Prophesying that the Glory would be removed, some of them above Fifty Years.
And thus Christ dealt with the Churches in Asia. H^ did not remove those
Candlesticks ou^ of their places without first giving them solemn Warnings
about it* And this is the first step toward the removal of the Glory.

2. God does not use to bring all His Judgments on a People at once, but He is
wont to begin with lesser and so to proceed unto greater Judgments. If a lesser
Judgment will not awaken, then He brings another Seven times greater: and if
that will not do, then another Seven times greater then the former. Thus did the
Lord threaten His People, Lev. 26.21. If you will walk contrary to me, and will
not hearken to me, I will bring Seven times more Plagues upon you, according to
your Sins. And again, he says, 23. If you will not be reformed by these
things, I will punish you yet seven times for your si^s. We find in the
Prophets, that the Lords proceeding with His people, were according to those
holy Threatenings of His word. Isa. 9.1. At the first He lightly afflicted the
Land of Zebulon, and the Land of Naphtali, and afterward did more grievously
afflict her. Thus it was, first one of the Kings of Assyria came against the
Ten Tribes, and put them under Contribution, making them to pay a Thousand
Talents of Silver, which amounted unto above Three Hundred and Forty Thousand
Pounds Sterling. After that, there came another King of Assyria, and
depopulated a considerable part of the Country, making the Inhabitants his
Captives. After that, there came a third King of Assyria, viz. Shalmanasser,
and he destroyed the Capital City, and proved a sweeping Judgment to the whole
Land. So was the Glory Totally and Eternally removed from all the Ten Tribes.
To the like purpose does the Lord speak by the Prophet Hosea, saying, I will be
to Ephraim as a Moth. You know a Moth does leasurely and by degrees consume and
mar men's Clothes. In like manner, from the Death of Iereboam, God had been
weakening Ephraim, viz. the Ten Tribes by various Judgments, especially by
Divisions among themselves. And to the House of Judah as Rottenness; or as a
Worm, as the Original word imports. A Worm does not Rot the wood all at once,
but gradually. Thus was it with the Two Tribes, called The House of Judah:
Lesser Judgments were the forerunners of, and but preparatory to Greater, which
issued in a Total removal of the Glory. It is therefore further added in the
Fourteenth verse, I will be to Ephraim as a Lion, and as a Young Lion to the
House of Judah, I even I will Tear and go away. Thus we see, that lesser make
way for Tearing Judgments at last. The Lord comes on His People first as a
Moth, but after that as a Lion. Now as Judgments come, the Glory goes away: and
are therefore signs and forerunners thereof. The Death of a Professing people
is in the Total Departure of the Glory. Now, as Diseases do by degrees bring
Death on the Body, so lesser Judgments do by degrees insensibly weaken a
People, and make way for that Judgment which at last proves fatal to them.

3. God uses to favor His People with a day of Grace. He gives time for
Repentance. Rev. 2.21. I gave her space to Repent. And He uses means with them
to bring them to Repentance, that so a Total removal of the Glory may be
prevented. Yea, the Lord often visits His People with great variety of means.
What could be done more? He prove^ them with Mercies. He tries whether Goodness
will lead them to Repentance* So did the Lord deal with the Children of Israel.
According to His manifold Mercies, He gave them saviors who saved them ^ut of
the hand of their Enemies: And many Times did He deliver them according to His
Mercies. Neh. 9.27, 28. And He ^ries what Afflictions will do When Public
Calamities come, the voice of those Judgments, is, This People have Sinned, Let
them Repent. And the Lord Graciously waits to see what effect those Judgments
will have, whether men will thereby be brought to Repentance or no. Isa. 30.18.
Therefore will the Lord wait that He may be Gracious to you. In the mean time,
He continues calling on them by His Word, and striving with them by His Holy
Spirit, and this perhaps for many Years together, before there is a Total
removal of the Glory. Neh. 9.30. Many Years did thou forbear them, and
testifiedst against them by thy Spirit in thy Prophets. Nor does all the Glory
always depart as soon as the Day of Grace is expired.

For;

4. There is a Day of mere Patience. The day of Grace may be past with a
particular person, and with a people also, when nevertheless, the day of
Patience may still continue. Was it not so with the Old world? Did not the day
of Divine Patience continue, for the space of an Hundred and Twenty Years after
God had determined that His Spirit should cease striving with them? Genesis 6.3.
Was it not so with the Children of Israel in the wilderness? Unto whom He Swear
in his Wrath that they should not enter into His rest. Psalm. 95.11. The day of
Grace was past when once that Oath was declared. Nevertheless, He did pa^^ently
bear with their manners for many Yearrs after that. Was it not thus with the
Ten Tribes? Was not the Name of Lo^uhamah given to them? Hos. 1.6. Then was the
day of Grace expired: For God had determined not to have Mercy on them. Yet the
days of Patience were not at an end: For after this they had the Name of
Loammi given to them, intimating the Expiration of the Day of Patience as well
as of the Day of Grace. And was it not thus with the Jews? When Christ said
concerning them, that they did not know the things of their Peace, in that
their day: Notwithstanding which, there was almost Forty Years before the Glory
was quite removed from them.

5. At last the Days of Patience are ended. The Lord bears a long time with
the Transgressions of his People, Ezekiel. 2.3. They and their Fathers have
Transgressed against me even to this very day. But He will not bear always.
And when once it is come to that, God departs, and the Glory is gone. No Tokens
of the Lords Gracious and Glorious Presence are any more to be seen in such a
place, or among such a people. God breaks up House then, and says, You shall
see me no more. Mat. 23.38, 39. Behold your House is left unto you Desolate,
for I say unto you, ye shall not see m^ henceforth, till ye shall say, Blessed
is he tha^ comes in the Name of the Lord. There is the Bir^h-day of Final
Ruin, and that takes place from the moment when the day of Patience is
Expired. Jer. 44.22* The Lord could no longer bear. This E^z^kiel calls, The
Time of the End. Ezekiel* 7^2.3. Micah calls it, The Day of the Watchmen; viz. the
Day which the Watchmen had given warning of before it came. Mic. 7.4. And
Zephaniah expresses it, by that of, The Decrees bringing forth. Zeph. 2.2.
When the Decree is big with Judgment, it does not presently bring forth. Thus
have we seen that God removes His Glory from a People gradually. There are
several steps which He takes; and several pauses which He makes before He
utterly forsakes a People, or takes His Glory from them forever. The Jewish
writers have reckoned Ten flittings of the Divine Glory, as also Ten removes of
their Sanedrim from one place to another, before utter Destruction came upon
them.

USE.
The only USE which I shall insist on from the Doctrine thus Confirmed, shall
be of earnest EXHORTATION. Oh, Let us Endeavor that this DOCTRINE be not
verified in and on New England; that there be not after a Gradual, a Total
removal of the Divine Glory from us.

Let me mention some things which should be Awakening Considerations to us.

Consider, I. It is possible that the Glory may depart from us, and that
Totally. Who can say* but that New England will have that Name of Ichab^d
written upon it! That many who look upon us, will sigh over us, and say, Where
is the Glory? We are loath to believe this. But let me a little enlarge upon it,
in setting before you some things, which may easily Convince ^s, that this is
possible.

1. It was been thus in other places, who once had the Glory of the Lord among
them as long and longer then we have had it. Was it not so with Shiloh? Jer.
7.12. Go ye now to my place which was in Shiloh, where I set my Name a^ first,
and see what I did to it, for the wickedness of my People Israel. And what was
it that the Lord did to it? He caused the Ark (and so the Glory) to be removed
from that place, and never to return thither again; although it had continued
there Three Hundred and Forty Nine Years: And the ten Tribes (among which
Shiloh was situated) were delivered into the hands of their Assyrian Enemies.
It is then possible that in after Ages, it may be said, Go and see what God has
done to New England, because of the Apostasy, and the Iniquity of the People
there. Thus also concerning Jerusalem, which was the City of Solemnities; and
there was more of the Glory of God in it, then in all the world besides:
Nevertheless, that Glory was removed from them for Seventy Years together. And,
although the Lord was so Gracious, as in some measure to restore the Glory,
they at last Sinned it quite away. Nor has there been any Glory there for these
many Generations. What is Jerusalem at this day, but a Miserable Town, in which
are no Inhabitants, besides Infidels and Idolaters; not one man in whom the
Divine Glory dwells. And on Mount Sion, yea, in that very place where Solomon's
Temple stood, there is now a Moseh, for Mahome^an Worship. What has God done ^o
the Ten Tribes? Has He not writtn on them Lo-Ammi, as well as Loruhamah,
saying, They are not m^ People, and I will no more have Mercy on them. A^e they
not swallowed up in Heathenism among the Nations where they were dispersed? The
Land of Israel was once the most Glorious of all Lands, but it is at this day
far from being so^ The Divine Glory dwelt in the First Temple Four Hundred and
Twenty Years, and after that removed: And in the Second Temple above Six
Hundred Years; and then departed never to return again. Now what befell the
Lords People of Old is written for our Instruction and Admonition. The design
of Recording those Providence in the Holy Book of God, is to give us to
understand that God will remove His Glory from us, as He has done from them,
if we sin and provoke Him as they have done. Hence when the Psalmist was about
to give a plain Narrative of the Dispensations of God toward the Children of
Israel, he says, I will open my mouth in a Parable; I will utter da^k s^^ings
of Old. Psalm. 78.2. Why does he call a Plain History a Parable, and Dark
sayings, but because there was a Mystery in that History; the Dispensations of
Providence toward them were to be figurative and significative of what should
happen to a professing People in after Ages to the end of the world. So does
the Apostle instruct us, 1 Cor. 10.11. All these things happened to them for
ensamples. (...) The Original word is, as Types; and they are written for our
Admon^tion, upon whom the Ends of the world a^e come. Accordingly, in these
Days of the New Testament, God has removed His Glory from many places where
once much of His Presence had been. There was once a Gracious and a Glorious
Presence of the Lord Jesus Christ in the Churches of the Lesser Asia. He Walked
in the midst of those Golden Candlestick^. Rev. 2^1. But now, the Lord is not
to be seen in that part of the world. What Ephesus was threatened with, is
fulfilled upon them all, The Candlestick is removed out of its place. Those
Churches are all Unchurched. The Gospel an^ the Glory of a Pure Church State is
taken from them. Some who have lately traveled into these parts of the world,
give us a doleful account of the state of Christianity there. And indeed,
throughout all the Ea^tern Parts of the world* the Light which once they (...)
is turned into Darkness. The Prophet Ezekiel was in a Vision brought to the
gate which looks toward the East, an^ beheld the Glory of God coming from the
way of the East. Ezekiel. 43.1, 2. Which might be to intimate that the Easter^
Parts of the world, should be the fir^^ Illuminated with the Glorious Light o^
the Gospel, as we know it came (...) pass. But now Darkness covers tha^ part of
the Earth, and gross Darkness that People. There is something of the Christian
Name in the Greek and i^ other Eastern Churches, but they are miserably
overwhelmed with Ignorance Superstition, and Herisies. And in some parts of
Asia where the Gospel had been Preached, and Churches Planted in the days of
the Apostles, they have quite lost the Christian Name Let (...) look into
Africa,. Time was when there were Thousands of Glorious Churches there: and
many Famous Ministers, some of whose writings are still of use to the Church of
God; such as Tertullia^, Ciprian, Austin. But now the Glory is wholly removed
out of that vast Continent. Look into Europe, and we shall see many places
there from whence the Glory is gone. There was once in Rome it self, an holy
Church. A People beloved of God, called to be Saints, whose Faith was spoken of
throughout the whole world. Romans 1.7, 8. But what is that Church come to? Her
Name is now, THE MOTHER OF HARLOTS, AND ABOMINATIONS OF THE EARTH. Rev. 17* 5.
Since the Refo^mation began in these, latter Ages, the Glory is removed out of
diverse Kingdoms and Provinces in which once it was seen sh^ning. Spain (and
the Spanish Low Countries) had once the Gospel in it There have been (...)
there for the Prote^tant Religion: ^ut the Bloody Inqu^sition has extinguish^d
the Light of the Gospel in that un^appy Kingdom. How is Ruin come (...) the
Protestant Interest in Bavaria, in Austria, and in Moravia, and in other
Provinces? In the Kingdom of Poland, and in Transylvania,, there have been
Famous Churches: But how has Popery and Socinianism darkened that Glory? Bohemia
was the first Kingdom in Europe in which a Reformation was established by
Public Authority: But now, Where is the Glory? They were Famous for the Purity
of their Churches, and the Strictness of their holy Discipline. Tha^ Learned
man Comeni^s who was one o^ them, and who has written the Histo^^ of those
Churches, has an awful ob^servation, That since they had a Pur^ Discipline
amongst them then other Churches had, God whose Judgments (...) to begin at his
Sanctuary, had mad^ them severe Examples of his holy In^dignation. And what has
the Lord done in our days in Hungaria, and (...) both Palatinates, and in the
valleys (...) Piemont, and in that great Kingdom (...) France? Is not the Glory
removed (...) of it? How many Hundreds of Pro^testant Ministers and Churches
were (...) long since known to be there. But (...) this day not one. Has not a
Babyl^^nish King made them ^n empty Vessel Swallowed them (...) a Dragon, and
cast them out? Ier. 5* 34. Now then, if the Glory has been removed from
Jerusalem, and from the ^and of Israel: If from the Less^r and the Greater
Asia? If from Africa? If from so many places in Europe? Is it not possible that
it may be removed from New England also?

For;

2. There is no Promise that it shall not be thus. The Church of Rome pretends
to a promise of Indefectibility (as well as to Infallibility) which is a
promise that God never made to any particular Church in the world. It is true
that there is a promise concerning the Church in general, that it shall never
fail^ It is built on a Rock, and (...) the Gates of Hell do their worst, it
shall stand. Mat. 16.18. Christ ever has had, and ever will have a Church on
Earth. But we cannot say, that He will have a Church in Boston, or in
New England, or in America as long as the world shall stand. The Jews tell us,
that the Lights in the western Lamps of the Golden Candlestick never went out.
And the Scripture gives us* to understand that our Lord will have a Church
somewhere or other in Europe until his Second coming. The witnesses must there
Prophesy in Sackcloth; there be Slain, there Rise again. The Ten Rings which
give their Power to the Beast are in Europe: That part of the world was to be
principally the Seat of the Church of Christ during the Reign of Antichrist,
who must continue until Christ Himself shall destroy him with the Brightness of
His coming. This notwithstanding, we cannot say, that there will always be a
Church in France, or in Spain; or in this or that particular Kingdom in Europe,
much less in America.

3. God has not seemed to take pleasure in the American world, so as to fix and
settle His Glory therein. The Scripture says, The Kingdom of God is like
^eaven hid in Three measure of Meal until the whole was Leavened. Luke 23 22.
Which some take to be a Prediction, that the Gospel should spread through Asia,
Europe and Africae, then the only known parts of the world. What God will do
for the future with America, is not for us to determine. Act. 1 7. It is not
for you to know the Times, and the Seasons which the Father has put in His own
Power. But it is our Duty humbly to observe his Providence. Now the Lord has
not hitherto seen meet to shine upon this so as on the other Hemisphere. The
greatest part of its Inhabitants are Pagans^ Most of those that have any thing
of the Christian Name are really Antichristian. And the generality of them
that pretend unto the Protestant Religion, are a lose sort of men, and a
Scandal to any Religion. There* was an attempt (about an Hundred and Fifty
Years since) to settle the Protestant Religion in the Southern America, and
some Eminent Christians and Ministers, from Geneva were engaged in it; but it
soon come to nothing. And the late miscarriage of the Caledonia design is an
awful Providence, and looks uncomfortably on America. There is more of the
Divine Glory in New England then in all America besides. We have the greater
Cause not to be high-minded, but to fear. Especially if w^

Consider 2. That the Glory is in some measure, and in an awful degree removed
from us already. The Glory of the Lord seems to be on the wing. Oh! Tremble for
it is going, it is gradually departing. Although there is that of the Divine
Glory still remaining among us, which we ought to be very Thankful for;
Nevertheless, much of it is gone, which thought should humble and abase us in
the dust before the Lord. There comes to mind what the Prophet Haggat said to
those that were come out of Babylon. Hag. 2.3. Who is there lest among you,
that saw this House in her first Glory? And how do you see it now? Is it not in
your Eyes in comparison of it as nothing? You that are Aged persons, and can
remember what New England was Fifty Years ago, that saw these Churches in their
first Glory; Is there not a a fad decay* and dimunition of the Glory? We may
weep to think of it: As many of the Lords People did when the Foundation of the
second Temple was laid. Ezra 3.12. Many of the Priests and Levites and chief of
the Fathers, who were Ancient men, that had seen the first House, Went with a
loud voice. So among us; Ancient men, though they bless God for what they Do
see of His Glory remaining in these Churches, they cannot but mourn when they
remember what they Have seen, far surpassing what is at present. Let us look
where we will, and we may observe a lessening of the Glory. Is not our Silver
become Dross, and our Wine mixed with Water? Isa. 1.22. May we not sigh with
the Lamenting Church, and say, as in Lam. 4.1. How is the Gold become Dim? How
is the most fine Gold Changed? Yea, how are the Golden Candlesticks in
New England Changed! Alas! What a change is there in that which has been our
Glory? Time was, when these Churches were Beautiful as Tirzah, Comely as
Jerusalem, Terrible as an Army with Banner^. What a glorious Presence of Christ
was there in all His Ordinances? Many were Conver^ed, and willingly Declared
what God had done for their Souls: and there were added to the Churches daily
such as should be Saved. But are not Sound Conversions become rare at this day,
and this in many Congregations? Discipline in the Churches was upheld in the
power of it, and a special Presence of the Lord Jesus Christ went along with
it; so that as one of the Ancients speaks of the Discipline used in the
Primitive times, that it was, Futu^i Iudicij Praejudicium, it looked like the
Day of Judgment when any that did Iniquity were Cast out of the Lords holy
Kingdom here on Earth. It is a Celebrated saying, and a true one, That
Church Discipline is the Throne in which Christ Reigns. It is reported
conc^rning the Learned Bu^e^, that when he was informed how the Discipline of
Christ was practiced in Bohemia, he fell into Tears, considering how defective
the Churches in Germany were in that point. We may fall into Tears, considering
how the power of Discipline i^ fallen in our Churches. Some Scandalous
practices which not only the Waldenses, but the Reformed Churches in France,
and in ^^^land, have in their Discipline declared to be Censurable Evils, are
now indulged in some Churches in New England. Look into Pulpits, and see if
there is such a Glory there, as once there was? New England has had Teachers
very Eminent for Learning, and no less Eminent for Holiness, and all
Ministerial accomplishments. When will Boston see a COTTON, and a NORTON,
again? When will New England see a HOORER, a SHEPARD, a MITCH^L, not to mention
others? No little part of the Glory was laid in the Dust, when those Eminent
Servants of Christ were laid in their Graves. Look into our Civil State: Does
Christ reign there as once He did? Is there that Glory in Courts as once there
was? Is not our House in diverse parts of this Land, in some danger of falling
for want of Pillars to support it? Look into Towns: How few do we find that are
a Glory to the places where they live? When Vacancies are made, it is a
difficult thing to find persons fit to make up those Breaches. And almost every
where it is so, whether in our Ecclesiastical, Military, or Civil State. So that
wha^ our Great Hoo^^r long since predicted, that the People of New England
would be punished (...) the want of Eminent Men to manage Public affairs, both
in Church and State, is in part sadly verified already. How many Churches, how
many Towns are there in New England, that we may Sigh over them, and say, The
Glory is gone! Look into Families: Are there not those which once were Glorious
ones because of the Religion which flourished in them, which now are not so.
How many Children or Grandchildren (...) there in New England, of whom it may
be said, as in Judge. 2.17. They turned quickly out of the way, which their
Fathers walked in, Obeying the Commandments of the Lord, but they did not so.
What a sad thing was it, that such a Wretch as Nabal, should be a descendant
from such an Here as Caleb was? But it is noted of him as an aggravation of his
Degeneracy, that he was of the House of Caleb. 1 Samuel 25 3. It is often so,
according to the Proverb, Her^um filij (...). It was said to ^she^akim, the
very Ungodly Son of a very Godly and most (...), Jer. 22.15, 17. Did not thy
(...) Judgment, and Justice? But that Eyes, and thine Heart are not but for thy
Covetousness. How many are there among us whose Fathers in coming into this
wilderness, designed nothing but Religion! But They are for another Inter^st.
Their Hearts are not but for the world. And, Alas! What can we think of, that
has been the Peculiar Glory of New England, but the blasting Rebukes of Heaven
have been upon it! That work of Gospellizing the Indians, has been one of the
peculiar Glories of New England: I have in another part of the world, heard
Great and Noble Personages, and those too of several Nations, speaking
Honorably of New England, in that There the whole Bible has been Translated
into the Indian Language: And in that ther^ some that a while since were
Pagans, are now become Preachers of the Glorious Gospel of Christ. I have
received Letters from very Learned men in Foreign Vniversitie^, signifying the
high Respect which their Divines had for New England on this account. But since
the Death of that Apostolical man, Old Mr. Elio^, how has that Glorious work
been dwindling and dying? What is the First Church that was Gathered am^^g the
Natives come to? There was of late a design to divert those supplies another
way, whereby the Preaching of the Gospel has been supported among the Indians
in this Province, but those unhappy proposals are at present happil^ prevented
from taking effect: But how soon there may be new and fatal attempts of that
Nature who can say? The greatest Number of Indians who have given clear
Evidences of a real Conversion to Christ, were in Martha's Vineyard, where
there was of them a considerable Number of serious Christians, but God has sent
Sickness amongst them which has swept away most of those in that place who were
of Reputation for Godliness and real Christianity: As for many of those Indians
who now make a Profession of Christianity, men who pass under the Name of
English Protestants have Debauched them with Drink, and so made them more
Brutish, and (...) Creatures; yea, more the Children of Hell then they were
before the Light of the Gospel came among them. So then, that Glory is
dolefully departing. Once more, It has formerly been said, that our College
has been one of the Glori^^ of New England. In that we have Excelled all other
English Plantatioas. But the long Dissettlement of that Soc^e^y, seems to
look ominously on Posterity, and on the Churches in New England. Some who once
had their Education there, have been of such Eminen^^y for Learning and Piety,
that New England has been Honored for their sakes. But of later Times as to
many of them, it has been much otherwise. It has grieved me to the Heart when I
have received Letters from diverse persons of Quality in England, thus
complaining to me, Young men who had their Education in your College, when
they come over unto us in ^ngland, are Enemies to that which was in a peculiar
manner the Religion of their Fathers. I (...) the Lord (...) a Controversy on
the (...) of unkindnesses shown (not to (...) but) to some who have formerly
Presided there, as well as for Corruptions which have been too much indulged in
that Nursery. I can not but with well* as I have singular cause to do) to the
Poor College. Nor (...) I be without fears that one of these Three things will
happen to it; Either*

First. That for want of a Desirable Charter settlement, it will cease to be a
College, as Four or Five years ago, I saw cause Publicly and in Print, to
declare my being apprehensive that it would be so, and I wish that now I could
see a a good reason to be otherwise persuaded. Due means has not been used to
obtain such a Settlement, which i^ a probability two or three Years ago might
easily have been effected, but now, it seems as if Endeavors after it, were
too late.

Or;

Secondly. That Learning will fail in that Academy, for want of Encourage^ment
unto Grammar Schools. Which (...) Strangers being Learned men should com^ among
us and obser^^, it would be great dishonor both to the College and to the
Country. Nor will pre^tended Scholars defective in Learning be able to defend
the Truth against Learned Adversaries. If an effectua^ course be not taken for
the supportin^ of Schools, in a little Time there will b^ no College worthy
the Name of a College.

Or;

Thirdly. (Which is worst of all.) That it will become a Seminary for
Degenera^^ Plants, who will with their Foolish hands pull down those Houses
which their Fathers have been building for the Name of the Lord in this
wilderness. A Learned man who has written the History of the Bohemian Brethren,
observes that the Ruin of those Churches proceeded out of their College. Let
us Pray that it may never be so with New England.

Consider III. There is sad cause to f^ar that greater Departures of the Glory
a^e hastening upon us. Do you ask what reason is there to fear it? I might
mention a multitude of things which should make us awfully sensible hereof. I
shall take notice of Three or Four.

1. Those sins which have provoked the Lord to remove His Glory from us are not
^eformed, nor like to be. Our Iniquites Testify against us to our Faces, and
our Backslidings are many. That there is a General defection in New England
from Primitive Purity and Piety in many respects, is so plain as that it cannot
be denied. All Good men mourn for it, and have often bewailed it on days of
Humiliation before the Lord. But wherein is there is a General Reformation in
any one Particular? There is not, nor (which is a very sad word to be spoken,
and I wish I might forbear expressing it, but I dare not) is there like to be
for ought that yet appears. For alas! We seem to be incorrigible. May not the
Lord say of us as of His Vineyard of Old. Isa. 5.4. What could have been done
more to my Vineyard, that I have not done in it? Has not the Lord brought
Lesser Judgments upon us and after that Greater? Has He not witholden the Rain
from us, when there was yet Three months to be Harvest, and caused it to Rain
upon one Town, and caused it not to Rain upon another? Has he not smitten us
with Blasting and with Mildew? And yet we have not returned unto Him! And when
these Lesser Judgments would not Reform us, has not the Lord been whetting His
glittering Sword, and his Hand has taken hold on Greater Judgments? Has he not
brought a Sword on New England, to avenge the Quarrel of His Covenant? Has he
not more then once Diminished our ordinary Food? And did he not once, Deliver
us to the will of them that hated us, Ezekiel. 16.27.? And has not God tried in
with signal Mercies, that so His Goodness might lead us to Repentance? What
Deliverances has He wrought for us? What a gracious Respite has he favored
with? But have we known the things that concern our Peace, i^ This our day? Has
not the Lord stirred up the hearts of his Messengers, rising early and sending
them, who have been lifting up their Voice like a Trumpet, Crying aloud, and
not sparing to show unto this People their Transgression, and to New England
their Sins, when they have been met together in respect of the Representative
Body of them? And was there not One and Twenty Years ago a Synod, Convened to
enquire what are the Evils which have provoked the Lord to write his
Displeasure against us in Fiery and Bloody Characters, and to propose
Expedients for Reformation? All these things notwithstanding, there is no
General Reformation, but much of the Contrary. May we not then fear greater
^^^artures of the Divine Glory from us!

2. There are Ministers who are not like their Predecessors, not Principled,
nor Spirited as they were. So far from being so, as that Sundry of them have in
Print Mocked and Scoff^^ at the Holy Covenant, and other Holy Practices which
have been the Glory of these Churches of the Lord. Now as one of the greatest
Tokens for Good unto New England, is, That God has ralsed up Young Men in the
Ministry (and Blessed be God that there are so many of them) who are True and
(...) to the Interest of Christ, and (...) Holy ways which have (...) and
^ractised in our Congregations. (...) is an Evil Omen and (...) Good to
Posterity, when You (...) shall Despise that Glory, which their Fathers had
such a (...) for; under a Specious pretense of Peace, they will part with Truth
and Holiness, and yet at the same time by new Notions and Practices make
Divisions^ Do not some of them Cry down those Truths as Little things, Small
matters not wor^h Comending for, which in the Judgment of the first Ministers
in New England, were of that weight and worth, as that they were willing to
endure Suspensions, Imprisonments, and a Voluntary Exilem^nt out of their
Native Land, in bearing their Testimony thereunto. Are not some, yea and some
who are not the Youngest men, introducing Innovations which our P^esbyterian
Brethren is England, and the Reformed Churches beyond Sea, have Condemned, and
which the English Liturgy it self approves not of. As Innovations not
warranted by Scripture gradually creep in upon us, the Glory will gradually
depart.

3. The Providence of God is threatening to pull down the Wall which ha^ been a
Defense to these Churches. When the Glory was removing from Jerusalem, the
^^ophet took up that complaint in (...) 2.^. The Lord has purposed to Destroy
the Wall of the Daughter of Sion. Things look at this day, as if the Lord had
purposed to Destroy our Wall. That Civil Charter Government which God has
favored with, has been a Wall to the Churches. That Wall is at this day in
great danger of being destroyed^ And yet (which is an astonishing thing) we
have done little or nothing to prevent it; as if we were under a Judicial
dispensation of Heaven. Now if the Wall is removed, will not the Glory remove
with it? What can we then expect, but that many Evils will soon break in upon
us like a Flood!

4. That which some have thought was the special design of Providence in
bringing a choice People into this part of the world, seem^ ^s if it were now
over. It has been by Good and Wise men conjectured, that the Lords more
peculiar design in Planting these Heavens and Laying the Foundation of this
Earth, was, that the world might see a Specimen of what shall be over all the
Earth in the Glorious Times which are Expected, and will certainly be
accomplished in the appointed season of them. In those days what manner of
persons will there be in Power as to Civil Government, and what kind of Laws
shall there be Established? A Prophet has told us, Isa. 60.17. I will make thy
Officers Peace, and thy Exactors Righteousness. And in those days how will
Church Members be qualified? That we see in the same Prophet, Ver. 21. Thy
people shall be all Righteous. It was very much thus in New England many years
ago. But neither our Civil nor Ecclesiastical State is ever like to be what
once it was. All these things considered, we have just cause to fear that a
greater Departure of the Glory is hastening upon us.

Consider IV. How Lamentable our state will be, if the Glory be once Totally
removed. The Angels of Heaven lament over such a people. They mourned over
Jerusalem saying, The Blessed Glory of the Lord is going from his place. Ezekiel.
3.12. So will they mourn over New England if that Blessed Glory should utterly
depart from us. And it may break our Hearts to think that ever such a day
should come upon us. For alas! When once the Glory is quite gone, it seldom
returns again: But as it is said of the Living Creatures in Ezekiels Vision,
Ezekiel. 1.17. They returned not when they went. So the Glory that went away from
the Temple returned not when it went. When the Ark of Old (which did
Symbolically represent the Divine Glory,) was in Judgment removed from any
place it returned thither no more. It returned to Shiloh no more. It returned
to Jerusalem no more, after the Lord had in displeasure caused it to be removed
from those places. Thus when the Lord wholly removes His Gospel from a People,
He is not wont to favor them with it again. Look over all Asia, and Africa,
and you will see dismal Confirmations of this Truth. But if the Glory goes
away and returns no more, what will come in the room of it? What, but woeful
Judgments? Mos. 9.12. W^ to them when I depart from them. Yea, NEW ENGLAND, Woe
to thee in the day that the Lord shall depart from thee: In the bitter and
doleful Day, when the Lord shall Totally depart from thee. Such places as have
been most Eminent for Religion, and the Light of the Gospel (as New England
has) when once they have sinned away that Light become the Darkest and
Miserablest places under Heaven. A Famous Divine in England, relates that he
went on purpose to some Towns where once had been an Eminent Ministry, to see
how it was with them, and whether there were any footsteps of such a Mercy
among them, but (he says) they were all overgrown with Thorns, and Nettles had
covered the face thereof. It is often thus, Bethels do afterward become
Bethav^ns. Was it not said of Jerusalem, How is the Faithful City become an
Harlot? It was full of Judgment, Righteousness lodged in it, but now Murderrs.
Isa. 1.21. If ever the Glory be Totally removed from New England, (which Mercy
forbid) this Land will become one of the dolefullest spots of Ground on the
face of the whole Earth.

But, Is there no way to prevent the Removal of the Glory from us? Yes there
is. I have not spoken these things that we should Despair, but that we might be
Awake^ed to do what we may to prevent further and greater Removals of our
Glory. As yet, our Day is not expired: As yet we have a Gracious Time of
Visita^ion: As yet, we are under a Probationary dispensation. How long or how
short that shall be, is with God. Only i^ does not use to last very long in a
Land of such Light and means of Grace a^ New England has been. The brightest
days are commonly short ones.

But, What then is to be done?

Answ. Let us hearken to the Counsel which Christ from Heaven gives to us,
viz. That in Rev. 2.5. Remember from whence thou art fallen, Repent, and do thy
first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and w^ll remove the
Candlestick out of its place. Oh that New England were now what once it was!
And that the Churches there might ever be as at the first, and the Pastors of
them as at the beginning. Two things let me mention and leave with you.

1. Let the Life and Power of Godliness be revived. That has been the singular
Glory of New England: The generality of the First Planters were men Eminent for
Godliness. We are the Posterity of the Good, Old Puritan Nonconformists in
England, who were a Strict and Holy people. Such were our Fathers who followed
the Lord into this wilderness, when it was a Land not sown. Oh! That the
present and succeeding Generations in New England might be like the First
Generation of Christians, who transplanted and settled themselves in this part
of the world. Then might we with Confidence pray and believe that God would
accomplish for us, that which Solomon prayed for in the behalf of his People. 1
King. 8.57. The Lord our God be with us as He was with our Fathers, Let Him not
leave us nor forsake us. Yea, Let us be as our Fathers were, as to Holiness in
all manner of Conversation, and the Lord our God will be* with us as He was
with them. We shall have the same Glory remaining with us which they had.

2. Let us abide in those Truths respecting the Order of the Gospel, which our
Fathers have left with us as a Legacy. Herein is the difference between
New England and all other Plantations. As for other Plantations, they were
settled with respect to Trade, or some other worldly interest: But it was not
so with New England. Our Fathers in coming into this part of the world, did not
propose to themselves worldly advantages, but the contrary. It was purely on a
Religious account that they ventured themselves and Little ones over the vast
Ocean into this which was then a wast and howling Wilderness. Although of later
Times we have too much changed that which was our Glory, not Seeking ^he
Kingdom of God in the First place, not making Religion, but Trade and Land, and
Earthly accommodations our Interest: And God has remarkably smitten us in that
which has been our Idol. In this we are degenerated from the Piety of our
Ancestors. But what in Religion was it that induced them to come into this
Land? Not the main Articles of Faith, for in those they differe^ not from other
Protestant Churches. Bu^ it was regard to the Order of the Gospel that brought
them hither. That so they might Erect a Spiritual Kingdom for the Lord Jesus
Christ to Reign over. That they might Build Churches which should be Ordered in
all Respects according to the mind of Christ declared in the Gospel. On which
account a Defection from those Truths will in New England be a greater Sin and
Provocation to God, then in any other part of the world. Considering the
Glorious Light which has been shining here, there are practices which in other
parts of the world would be a great Reformation, but in New England a
Degeneracy. No one needs to Enquire What is the Order of the Gospel! You have
it declared in the Platform of Church Discipline, agreed unto by the Elders and
Messengers of these Churches above Fifty Years ago. A Platform which is drawn
out of the Scriptures of Truth, by men Eminent for Learning and Holiness, and
such as were Confessors and great Sufferers for the Testimony which they had
born to the Kingdom of Christ; and in those respects as likely to have the
Truth revealed to them as any men in the world. And that Book was the result of
many Prayers and Extraordinary seekings to God for the se^^ling forth of his
Light and Truth in the matters which were to be debated, and are therein
determined. Blessed Mr. Norton went to Heaven Exhorting these Churches to
continue in the Profession and Practice of that Discipl^ne; withal declaring
that their safety and the presence of Christ with them depended thereon. Some
of his words were these; Let our Polity be a Gospel Polity. This is the very
work of our Generation, and the very work we engaged for into this wilderness;
this is the scope and end of it: that which is written on the Forehead of
NEW ENGLAND, viz. The complete walking in the Faith of the Gospel according to
the Order of the Gospel, -- You have the Platform of Church Discipline given to
you in way of Counsel as the Confession of our Faith in this way of
Church Government -- If any be departed from it, let them look to it -- Our
F^delity in this Cause is our Crown: S^e that it be not taken from us. Thus did
that Great man express himself, in the last Sermon that ever he Preached, which
was but Three days before his translation to Glory. And if I, (who am not
worthy to be compared with him) knew that this would be the last Sermon that
ever I should Preach, (as I know not but it may be so) my Dying Farewell to
these Churches should be the very same. For I know and am persuaded by the Lord
Jesus, that if ever these Churches shall Depart from that Holy Platform, the
Glory of the Lord will Depart from them. And sorry I am, that the
Representatives in the General Assembly the last Year, did not hearken to the
Advice of that Reverend Servant of the Lord, who is the most Aged Mini^ter now
left among us, Exhorting them to walk in the steps of their Predecessors, in
Recommending that Platform to the Churches, and in ordering the Reprinting of
it, for the benefit of Posterity.

And now having spoken these things, I bow my Knees unto the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, in humble Thankfulness for His mercy, in giving me to bear this
my Testimony to His Truth before so many Hundreds of witnesses. And my Dearly
Beloved, you must needs bear me witness at the Last day, that I have not
shunned to declare unto you the whole Counsel of God. Two Considerations have
induced me (at this time lest it should be too late) to Preach this Sermon.
One, is, Because I sometimes hope that I have not long to be in this world.
Full Forty Years are expired since God brought me to dispense His Word in this
Congregation. It is then high Time for me to be thinking what my Last words
shall be. All the men that were belonging to this Church when I first began my
Ministry in Bo^^on, are gone to another world, one excepted. As for you that
are (as most of you are) sprung up since I have been here, I Change you by the
Lord, that you abide in the Truth, and let no Temptation or change of Times
move you from your stedfastness in those. Holy ways wherein you have walked.
See that you continue in them after I am gone from you. But if I must be so
unhappy as to remain longer in this Evil world, I look for Persecution- If
wonderful Revolutions in the world prevent it not, such a Time is hastening, as
upon the whole Protestant Interest, so upon these Churches in a special manner.
In all probability a Storm is coming: And what reason have I to promise my self
an Exemption from suffering in it. I do not mean only Persecution by the wicked
Pens and Tongues of men, in which you know that I have often had a singular
share: But I expect that the days are approaching when Snares will be laid for
my Life. As in one of the late Reigns it was so, when Treasonable things were
by Evil men forged against me. It is Related in the Martyr Books concerning
Cranmer, that when malicious Reports occasioned him some trouble, the King told
him he was in greater danger then himself was aware of, not only in that his
Zeal in the cause of Religion had caused him many Adversaries, but in that it
was an easy matter for his Enemies to procure two or three false witnesses
against him* And, Why not against you (said the King) as well as against your
Master CHRIST! Who then am I, that I should think to escape with better usage
in and from a malignant world? I thank the Lord Jesus Christ, who has made me
willing (if He shall see meet so far to Favor and Honor me) to part with my
Life, in bearing witness to those Glorious ways of the Lord which have been
the Profession and Practice of His Churches in New England. However it shall
b^, in delivering the Messages which God has sent me with this day, I have
delivered my own Soul, and can now lay down my Head in Peace.

FINIS.
Errata. Page. 17. l. 8. r. Isa. 33.21. p. 26. l. 3. r. with. p. 50. l 12. r.
Hos. 5.12. p. 56. l. 12. r (...) p. 61. l^ 5. r. Cyprian. p. 65. l. 16. r.
loose. p. 64. l. 27 r. Luke 13.21. p. 66. l. 22. r. d^m^nution. p. 69. l. 10.
r. Hooker. p. 74. l. 11. dele a.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Epistle to the Reader shows how apt Churches are to Degenerate. p. 1 That
Christians may be called to suffer for their Testimony unto Truths which are
not Fundamentals in Religion. p. 6 That there is cause to fear great Calamities
are impending the English Nation. Mr. Hookers awful Prediction concerning it.
p. 9 The Text. Ezekiel. IX.3. And the Glory of the God of Israel was gone, etc. p.
13 Doct. That when God removes the Glory from a People, He uses to do it
gradually and not all at once. p. 16 Quest. 1. When does the Glory remove?
Answ. 1 When God removes as to His Gracious presence. ibid. 2. When a people
have less of Christ among them then once they had. p. 18 3. When the Holy
Spirit witholds His gracious Influences and Operations. p. 25 Particularly, 1.
When Converting work is at a stand. p. 28 2. When they that are Converted do
(...) grow in Grace, much more when Godliness in the power of it is decaying,
the Glory is departing. p. 30. 4. When Holy Ordinances which be the Symbols of
the Divine presence are removed. p^ 33 The Glory is gone, 1. When a people
(...) wholly deprived of Divine Institutions. p. 37 2. When they are Corrup^ed.
Either, 1. By Humane additions. p. 3^ Or, 2. By prostituting them to unme^^
subjects. p, 40 5. When they who have much of God with them and in them a^e
taken away, the Glory goes with them. p. 41 6. When Sin comes into the Temple,
the Glory goes out of it. p. 44. Q. ^. How does it appear that God removes His
Glory by degrees? Answ. 1. Before the Lord removes His Glory He gives solemn
warning of it. p. 47. 2. He uses to begin with Lesser and so to proceed to
Greater Judgments. p. 49^ 3. He favors His people with a day of Grace. p 51.
4. After the day of Grace, there is a day of Divine Patience. p. 53 5. When the
days of Patience are expired, there follows a Total Removal of the Glory. p.
54. USE. Of earnest Exhortation to endeavor that this awful Doctrine be not
verified (...) and on New England. p. 55. Consider 1. It is possible that the
Glory may depart from us and that Totally. Which appears, 1. In that it was so
with the people of God in the days of the Old Testament, which is written for
our admonition; and has ^^en so in the days of the New Testament, throughout
the Lesser and the Great^^ Asia, and all Africa, and many places in Eu^^pe. p.
56 2. There is no promise nor prophecy in the ^cripture declaring that it shall
not be so in New England. p. 63 3^ The Lord has not hitherto seemed to take
^leasure in the American world. What He will ^o for the future no man knows. p.
64 Consider 2. The Glory is in some measure and in an awful degree removed from
us al^eady, -- Look where we will we may see ^ause to Lament i^. p. 66 There
are awful frowns of Heaven on those things which has been the peculiar Glories
of New England. Particularly, On the work ^f the Gospel amongst the Indians. p.
71 And on the College in a long d^ssettlement, and just fears of at least one
of three Evils coming upon it. p. 73 Consider 3. There is sad cause to fear
that a greater departure of the Glory is hastening upon us^ p. 74 For, 1. The
sins which have caused the Glory to depart from us, neither are, nor are like
to be Reformed. p. 75 2 There are Ministers who are not principled nor spirited
like their Predecessors. p. 78 3 The Lord is threatening to break down our Wall.
p. 79 4 That which may be thought to be the special design of Providence in
bringing a choice people into this Wilderness seems now to be over. p. 80
Consider 4. How lamentable our state will be if the Glory should be totally
removed. p. 82 Quest. What shall we do to prevent it? Answ. Let us hearken to
the voice of Christ speaking to us, in Rev. 2.5. Particularly, 1. Let the Life
and power of Godliness be revived. p. 85 2. Let us abide in these truths
respecting the Order of the Gospel, which our Fathers have left with us as a
L^gacy. p. 86 Two Considerations inducing the Author now (lest ^aply i^ should
be too late) to Publish these Meditations. p. 90, 91.
THE Glorious Throne: OR, A SERMON Concerning The Glory of the Throne of the
Lord Jesus Christ, Which is now in Heaven, and shall quickly be seen on the
Earth.

By Increase Mather.

Rev XX 11, 12. And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, etc.
And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God: and the books were
opened, and another book was opened, which is the book of life: and the dead
were judged out of those things which were written in the books, according to
their works.

Boston: Printed by B. G. and J. A. for Nicholas Boon at his Shop. 1702.

The Throne of CHRIST, the most Glorious Throne.
Matthew. XXV.31. -- The Throne of his Glory.


THIS with the preceding Chapter contains the substance of a Sermon Preached
by our Lord Jesus Christ, unto his Disciples. The conclusion of the Sermon
(which begins with this Verse) contains a description of the Day of Judgment;
wherein there is an allusion unto the Jewish Sanhedrim, or great Court of
Judgment: in which besides the Nasi or Chief Judge, there were Seventy other
Judges; and there were Scribes appointed, some at the Right Hand of the Judge,
who did set down the Votes for Absolution* Others at the Left Hand of the
Judge, who did set down the Votes for Condemnation. There is an Allusion
thereunto, in that Description of the Day of Judgment, which we have in the
latter part of this Chapter. In this Verse there are three things.

1. An Intimation who shall be the Judge in that Day; The Son of Man shall come
in his Glory. That is the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not only a Son of Man, as
the Prophet Ezekiel was often called, Son of man; but Jesus Christ is the Son
of Man. He is that Son of Man whom Daniel in a Glorious Vision saw coming in
the Clouds of Heaven; and that did receive a Kingdom and Dominion over all
Nations. He is also said to be the Son of Man in that he is not only truly
Man, but the Second Adam.

2. Here is mentioned, who shall be the Officers attending the Judge in that
Day; viz. The Holy Angels.

3. We have a description of the Throne, which he shall then sit upon, in the
Words before us, He shall sit on the Throne of his Glory.

The words are an Hebraism, The Throne of his Glory, that is to say, a very
Glorious Throne.

DOCT. Th^^ the Throne of the Lord Jesus Christ is a most Glorious Throne.

The blessed Truth before us may be opened and confi^med in three Propositions.

Prop. I That both a Judiciary and a Regal Power does belong unto the Lord
Jesus Christ.

1 A Judiciary Power. They that Sit on Seats of Judicature are said to Sit on
Thrones. Rev. 20* 1 There were Thrones, and they sat on them, and Judgment was
given to them, that is to say, Power of Judging was given to them. Thus Christ
said to his Apostles, Mat. 19.28. You shall sit upon twelve Thrones judging the
Tribes of Israel. And thence in that expression in the Scripture, of the Throne
of Judgment. But thus is it most true concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, that he
has a Judiciary Power granted to him, and such a Power of Judgment as none else
in the world has, Joh 5.22. The Father judges no man, but has committed all
judgment to the Son When it is said the Father judges no man, the meaning of it
is, that he does not immediately judge, but by his Son Jesus Christ. The Father
judges no man without him, but all men by him. Christ (...) sometimes
represented in the Scripture as Sitting on a Throne in respect of those
Temporal Judgments which he does cause to be Executed on men in this World,
Ezekiel 1.26. The Prophet in a Vision beheld a Throne, and a man sitting on it;
The Design of that Vision is to intimate that the Lord Jesus (...) had p^ssed a
Sentence of Destruction on the Jews, and that he had commanded the Babylonians
to be the Executioners of his Wrath upon them; but especially Christ is
represented as sitting on a Throne, on the account of the S^ntence of Judgment
which he will pass on all men at the Last Day.

2. Regal Authority does belong to Christ. A Throne is, insigne R^gium, that
which sometimes is peculiar to Kings; a King is described to be one that Sits
on a Throne; there is (...) Throne that is a Kingly Throne. It Is sai^
concerning Nebuchadnezzar, Dan. 5.20. That he was deposed from his Kingly
Throne, and his Glory was given to another. Thus then the Lord Jesus Christ,
has a Kingly Dominion appertaining to him. He is the Greatest of all Kings.
Therefore, Rev 19 16 He has a Name written on his Vesture, King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords. That is to say the greatest of all Kings, and the greatest of
all Lords. And he is styled the King of Glory, Psalm 24 7. Open the Everlasting
Gates, that the King of Glory may come in; that is to say, the most Glorious of
all Kings. This then is implied ^n Christ sitting upon a Throne, namely, that
he is both a Judge and a King. In the Context before us, verse 34 He is styled
the King.

Prop. II. That the man Christ Jesus does (...) in Heaven sit upon a most
Glorious Throne. Now in Heaven that man does sit upon the very same Throne
which the Eternal God Sits upon. Rev 3.21. I (says Christ) am sat down with my
Father on his Throne. That man is Co partner with God in the Government of the
World: which is the meaning of that expression, of his being sat down at Gods
Right Hand. Heb 8 1 He is sat down at the Right Hand of the Throne of the
Majesty in the Heavens He joins with God in the Government of all the World And
in this respect, ^oseph was a singular Figure and Type of the Lord Jesus
Christ. The King of Egypt said to Joseph, Gen 41* 40 My people shall be ruled
at thy word, only in the Throne will I be Greater than thou Thus has God said
to the man Christ Jesus, The whole World shall be ruled according to thy word,
only God the Father is greater than Christ considered as Man and Mediator. And
in this respect also Solomon was a special Type of the Lord Jesus Christ, 1
King. 1.48* While David was yet living, Solomon sat on the Throne of David his
Father. The Providence of God did order it to be so; for this cause, that so
there might be a representation of this Glorious Truth, that the Lord Jesus
Christ does sit upon the same Throne that God sits upon. And this is peculiar
unto that Son of Man who is also the Eternal Son of God It is peculiar to him.
It may not be said or believed so concerning any other man, nor concerning
(...) Angel in Heaven, but only concerning (...) man Christ Jesus. Heb. 1.13.
Unto which of the Angels has He said at any time, sit thou at my Right hand?
(...), he never said so unto any of them; but only to the man Christ Jesus. Now
the Glory of this Throne of the Lord Jesus Christ appears in several things.

1. In that he does Exert and Exercise a Dominion over the Souls and
Consciences of men. He does set up his Kingdom in the Hearts of men, namely, in
res^^ct of that Grace that is wrought there. R^m 14.17. The Kingdom of God is
in Righteousness, and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. Christ has a Kingdom of
Grace in the Hearts of his Subjects. He Reigns in the Hearts of all true
Believers; and the Souls of men are subject to him. 1 Pet. 2.25. He is said to
be the Bishop of Souls He is also the King of Souls. He that has R^deem^d
S^uls, may well Exercise a Dominion over them. The Consciences of men are
subject to him He has power to make Laws to bind the Conscience: to make Laws
in matters of Religion, and to ^pp^int how men shall Worship the Lord; and in
what way, and by what Ordinances they shall worship G^d. Therefore Christ has
abrogated the Ordinances of the Old Testament, and has Instituted other ways
and means of Worship: has appointed new Ordinances for the Worship of God As
now, the Christian Sabbath, is an Institution of the Lord Jesus Christ* that
the first day of the week should be (...) as a Day holy to the Lord. Therefore,
Rev. 1.10 It is called the Lords Day: because it is the Day which the Lord
Christ has appointed to be observed in Commemoration of his Resurrection and
Redemption. So He has appointed Sacraments; Baptism and the Lords Supper, are
Sacraments which Christ as King has commanded to be observed among his people;
and no man may dare to appoint any other Sacraments besides those which Christ
has Instituted Antichrist does encroach upon the Kingly Office of the Lord
Jesus Christ, when he does take to himself a power to m^ke Laws in matters of
Religion, and then to impose them on the Consciences of men. This is to assume
a Glory p^culiar to Christ, it is to dethrone Christ, and to invade that which
is his prerogativ^ R^^al In matters pertaining to Divine W^rship* the Word of
Christ is to be our only Rule. We must practice all, and no more than what that
requires. Mat 28 20 There is but one Head of the Church, and that is Christ
Only the Son of G^d is the King of Israel. Ezekiel. 21.27 Joh 1 49

2 The Glory of this Throne of the Lord Jesus Christ appears in the
absoluteness of his Power. In that his Will, his Command, is Law sufficient.
There have been men that would pret^nd to a Despotick and absolute power, that
their will should be a Law to all men; and that their will must be obeyed, let
(...) be never so unrighteous. Such a Tyrant was the King of Babylon; Dan 5 19.
Whom he would, he slew; and whom he would, he kept alive. No mere man has that
power given to him, that whatsoever he commands, must be obeyed; but this is
true concerning that Son of man, who is the Son of God: For he cannot possibly
command an unjust thing. It was said of him, (...). 7 29 That he spoke as a man
that had authority. As one that is (...). That has power to make what Laws He
pleases; and those Laws must be obeyed. He has ^ower to Damn Eternally
whosoever disobeys him: and that is more than can be said of any other man. As
for those that have the greatest power, they cannot hurt the Souls of them that
Disobey their Commands; all that they can do is only to Kill the Body, Luke
12.4. Fear not them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they
can do. But Christ can do more than that, He has power not only do Kill the
Body, but to Destroy the Soul. He has power not only to destroy the Bodies of
them that disobey his Laws, but to order their ^ouls to be cast into Hell, Rev.
1.18. He is represented as having the Keys of Hell in his ^and. He has power
to loose out of the Pri^on of Hell, and he has power to Command into that
Prison when he pleases. This shows the Glory of his Throne.

3. The Glory of that Throne which the Man Christ Jesus does in Heaven sit upon
appears, in the Universal Extent of his Dominion Psalm. 103.19 The Lord has
prepared his Throne in the Heavens, his Kingdom rules over all. The Kingdom of
the Lord Jesus Christ it rules over (...). He has a Dominion in all places of
the World, Psalm 135 6 The Lord has done what (...) pleas^th in H^^ven and on
Earth, and in all (...) places. No place can be mentioned but (...) does what
he pleas^s there. He is the Lord (...) the Universe. He is the Universal
Monarch over all Nations, Jer. 10 7. Who would not fear thee, O thou King of
Nations? The Lord Jesus Christ is indeed in a singular manner the King of his
Church, and is therefore styled the King of Israel, and the King of Saints; but
he is also the King of Nations. Yea, he has a Dominion over all Creatures
whatsoever. He is Lord of all, and therefore has that Title of the Lord of
Hosts given to him, Psalm 24.10 Who is this King of Glory? The Lord of Hosts, he
is the King of Glory: The huge host of Creatures are under his Dominion. All
the host of Creatures in the Upper and the Lower World; all Creatures, whether
Visible or Invisible, they are under the Dominion of this King of Glory. And
although his Dominion does not yet appear to the World, it is not yet acknowledged
by all men in this World; nevertheless, he has now a right to this Dominion.
The man Christ Jesus has so; and the Day is a coming when all the m^n in the
World shall believe and confess it; there is not one man that is, ever shall
be, or that ever was, but shall believe it Heb. 2 8, 9 We do not yet see all
things under his feet, put in subjection to him; but we see Jesus ^rowned with
honor and glory And the Apostle in that Context says, that the World to come
shall be put in subjection to him In the Resurrection World, which is the World
to come, all mankind will believe this glorious Truth. Phil. 2.8, 9, 10. God
has given him a Name above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee
should bow, whether in Heaven or in Earth, or under the earth, and they shall
confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory of God the Father Such a
time will come that every knee shall bow to the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ,
not only they that are in Heaven, but they that are on the Earth, and they that
are in Hell too, that are under the Earth; they all even every rational
creature shall confess that Jesus Christ is the Lord.

4 The Glory of this Throne appears in the Perpetuity of it. As for Earthly
Thrones they don't last always, Prove. 27 24. Does the Crown endure to every
Generation? No Earthly Crown does endure to every Generation. Earthly Kings are
Mortal as well as their Subjects; but the Lord Jesus Christ is a King that is
Immortal, Isa. 9 6 He is said to be the Everlasting Father. He lives for ever,
Behold he lives for ever more. Other Kingdoms as they have their beginnings so
they have their Periods Some continue for more, others for fewer Generations.
It was said to Iehu, 2 King 10 40. That his Children should sit on the Throne
of Israel unto the Fourth Generation; and then that Family was Ex^inct, and the
Kingdom fell into the hands of another Family. Earthly Kings have their
Suce^ssors; but here is a King that has no Successor, Dan. 7 14 His Dominion is
an Ever^asting Dominion, and it shall not pass away. As for all other men in
Power their Dominion passes away from them to others; but it is not so with the
Lord Jesus Christ. Therefore it was said to the Son of God, Heb. 1.8. Thy
Throne is for ever. And it is said of him. Rev. 11.15. That he shall Reign for
ever and ever. It is in respect of Christ, that the Promise made to David
concerning the Perpetuity of his Kingdom is fulfilled. It was promised to
David, that there shall never want a man to sit-on his Throne. Now then this
promise is fulfilled and made good in that Jesus Christ does sat for ever on
the Throne of David; He sits as King for ever, over the Israel of God. This
King of Israel will be so for evermore. Hence the Angel Gabriel said, Luk 1 32.
God will give to him the Throne of David his Father, and he shall rule over the
House of Jacob for ever, and of his Kingdom there shall be no end Thus we see
that his Throne is a most Glorious Throne*

Prop. III That at the last and great Day, the Lord Jesus Christ will remove
his Throne from Heaven to the Earth Now this Throne of Glory is in the
Invisible World, but the day is coming and hastering (Lord let it come very
quickly) when this Glorious Throne shall be in this L^wer World Therefore Job
said, Job. 19 25 That he should for God, and that in the latter days his
Redeemer should stand on the Earth. The Day (...) Judgment is called the ^atter
(...); and often ^n Scripture the last Day, for there will be no ^ay, after
that Day, but all things shall then ^e in Eternity. Time will then be swallowed
up with Eternity. But during the Dispensation of Judgment, the Lord Jesus
Christ will sit upon a most Glorious Throne. What the matter of that Throne
will be, whether some ^lorious Cloud in the Form of a Throne (as ^ome Divines
have Conjectured) or what the matter of it shall be, is not for us to
determine, but this we know that in the last and Great Day, the Lord Jesus
Christ will Exercise a glorious Dominion in and over this lower vi^^ble World,
and in that respect (...) on a Throne of Glory: and then every man in the World
shall be an Eyewitness of His Majesty, Rev* 1.7. He shall come in the Clouds
of Heaven, and every (...) shall see him, and they that have Crucif^ed him. N^w
the Royal Majesty of Christ, the Glory of His Throne will then appear.

1. From the (...) Attendants that shall ^ait upon him in that day. For then
the whole Court of Heaven will come down with ^is King to (...) upon him here
in this ^^wer World, (...) that (as one of the Ancients ^^pr^sses i^,) the
Third Heavens will be left (...) in that Day. The glory of Kings (...) in their
Attendants, in that they have ^^at Ones to wait upon them. Kings have (...) of
the Land, and the greatest in the Kingdom to wait on them: So this Glorious
King when he comes again into the World, when he removes his Throne from Heaven
to the Earth, all the Natives and Nobles of Heaven shall come with him; not
only all the Saints in Glory, but also all the Angels that are now round about
the Throne in that World which is to us Invisible. So it is here affirmed in the
Verse in which my Text is, That the Son of Man shall come in his Glory and all
the holy Angels with him. Angels holy Angels not some but all of them, shall
then come and wait upon this King of Glory, Zach. 14 5. The Lord my God shall
come and all the Saints with thee. When he shall sit on his Throne of Glory, he
has Service for the Holy Angels to be employed in. They shall sound the Trumpet
and Summon the World to appear before this Glorious King. They shall gather the
Elect of God from every corner of the World, Matthew. 24 31. He shall send his
Angels with a great sound of a Trumpet, and they shall gather his Elect from
the four winds, from one end of Heaven to the other. In the great day of
Judgment there shall be an Eternal Separation made between good men, and evil
men* all the Righteous shall stand at the Right Hand (...) the Judge in that
Day, and all Wicked men shall stand at his Left hand. Now the Angels of God
shall be the Instruments of (...) this Separation, Mat* 13 49. At the End of
the World the Angels shall come forth and sever the wicked from the just.
Christ will employ his Angels to do that Service; And they shall see Execution
done on Sinners according to what the Judge Sentences them unto. When once the
Sentence is pass^d from the Mou^h of the Son of God, the holy Angels will see
it put in Execution, and they are fit Instruments for this Service to Christ.
Partly in respect of their Multitude: For the Day of Judgment will be the
greatest Harvest that ever was, and there needs a great Number of Reapers to be
employed in that Harvest. The Holy Angels, they are to be the Reapers. There
are enough of them to do that work for Christ. There are Millions of Millions
of them, D^n. 7.10 The Prophet saw Ten thousand times ten thousand ministering
Spirits, that waited before the Judge; Millions of Angels to attend his Service
So in respect of Power they are fit Instruments for the Lord to make use of as
his Servants They are Angels that Excel in strength Mighty ones* 2 These. 1.7.
He shall be revealed from Heaven in Flaming Fire with his mighty Angels. And
because of their Holiness, they (...) in Z^a^ for God, and in indignation
against Si^ners. As when Sodom was destroyed, the Holy Angels were Instruments
therein, so when all the Reprobate World shall be cast into the Lake which
burns with Fire, the holy Angels shall see that Terrible Execution done, Mat.
13 42. The Son of man shall send his Angels and they shall take them, and cast
them into a Furnace of Fire.

2 The Glory of this Throne of Christ appears in the multitude of persons that
shall then be Judged by him In that he shall Judge not a few particular men, as
Judges in this World are wont to do, but many millions of men: and he shall
then R^ign not over one Nation as Kings do, but over many Nations. Rev. 19.12
He is represented as having on his Head many Crowns, for that he shall Judge
and Rule over many Nations; nay over all Nations; so in the next words to the
Text, He shall Sit on the Throne of his Glory, and all Nations shall be
gathered before him. Yea, every man in every Nation shall then be brought
before him. Act. 17.31. God has appointed a day wherein he will Judge the World
by that man whom he has Ordained. The whole World shall appear before this
Throne, this G^o^ious Iudgment-Seat of Christ. Every man that lives at this
Day, or that has been in the World, must then appear before this Glorious
Throne All the men that Christ shall find alive upon the Earth in the Day when
he removes his Throne from Heaven to Earth, and all that dyed before that time
must appear to be Judged by him. 2 Timothy 4 1. He shall Judge the Quick and the
Dead at his appearing, and his Kingdom, that is to say, such as shall be found
alive at his Coming, and such as dyed before that Day, he should Judge them
all. Every man that has been in the World from Adam the First man, to the last
man that ever shall be born into the World, the whole Race of mankind, every
one of them all must appear before this Judge, this King, this Throne.
Therefore it is a Glorious Throne.

Lastly, The Glory of this Throne appears in the Righteousness of it In that no
Sentence shall pass from this Throne, but what shall be Righteous Psalm 98 ult.
Behold the Lord comes to Judge the World in Righteousness, and the people with
equity. Therefore he is called by the Name of M^^chizedeck, which signifies,
King of Righteousness; His Scepter is a Scepter of Righteousness. And his
Throne is represented by a Saphir Stone. Ez^k. 1.2* Which is an Emblem of
Innocence And for the same cause is said to be a white Throne. Rev 20.11. He
shall Sit on a great white Throne. It was said of David, He and his Throne
shall be guiltless for ever So may we say concerning the Lord Jesus Christ much
more, He and his Throne will be guiltless for ever. Although in that Day, he will
condemn thousands of millions of Men and Women to Eternal Death, yet he will be
righteous; For he will not condemn so much as one except the Righteous Law of
God condemns them; nor will he acq^it any one but those whom God in this Word
declares to be righteous. So then his Throne is a most Righ^^^us Throne,
therefore a most Glori^u^ Throne.

APPLICATION
USE I. The thought of the Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ should be on heart
affecting meditation to us. It should aff^ct all our hearts to think of the
Glory of him that Sits on the Throne of Glory. There were Glorious Types of
him. The High Priest in his Glorious Holy Garments was a Type of Christ; it is
said of him Z^ch 6.13. That he is a Priest upon a Throne; Therefore a Glorious
Priest The Priestly and Kingly Offices were of old the greatest Glories; both
these belong to Christ. Joseph was a Type of him who said to his Brethren, Genesis
45 13. You shall tell my Father of all my Glory. Joseph in all his Glory was
but a Shadow of Christ in his Glory. Solomon was a Type of Christ. Behold King
Solomon with his Crown! Behold a Greater than Solomon is preached among you
this day. One that Solomon in his Glory was not to be compared with. Although
Solomon's Glory was so great, and his Throne such as that the Queen of Sheba was
astonished, and e're dyed away with amazement at it, yet that Throne was not to
be compared with this Throne. As it is said of the Lillies. Mat. 6 29. Solomon
in all his Glory was not arrayed like one of these: So may we say, Solomon in
all his Glory was not arrayed like the Lord Jesus Christ Therefore the thoughts
of it should be affecting to us all. The Angels in Heaven wonder at that Glory.
And the day is coming when all the men on E^r^h will wonder at it It should
then affect our hearts now Had we Stephens sight, it would be so. He saw the
Heavens opened, and the Glory of God, and Jesus Christ standing at the Right
hand of God. Did we (as by Faith we may) see Christ at the Right hand of God,
did we there see millions of Angels round about him, worshipping before him,
and hear them saying thou Holy, holy, holy Son of God, the whole Heaven is full
of thy Glory, this would aff^ct our hearts Well then, let us meditate thereon.
Ministers cannot preach too much of the Glory of Christ, nor people hear too
much of that Glory. It would be well, if not a day might pass us, without some
serious thoughts of the Glory of Christ. O think much and often of the Glory of
Christ* And I am sure you will find that all the Glory of this World will be
disregarded by you: and you will then long to be in Heaven, where he is, that
you may behold his Glory* One of the Ancients meditating on Moses's Prayer,
Exodus 33.18. I beseech thee show me thy Glory, and on Gods answer to him, Thou
can not see my face, for there is no man shall see me and live, m^k^s a pious
R^fl^ction thereupon, then (said he) Let me d^, that so I may see thy face.
that so I may behold thy Glory. And we shall then long for the Day of Judgment,
that so we may see that Son of Man, who is the Son of God, Sitting on the
Throne of his Glory, That our eyes may see the King in his beauty.

USE. II. Let us endeavor to approve our selves such as that when we must
appear before this Glorious Throne, a blessed Sentence may be pronounced upon
us, v^z that, Mat 25 34. Then the King shall say, come you blessed He will say
(...) to ^om^; let us be careful to make sure of it, that we be of those to
whom the King of Glory when Sitting on his Throne of Glory, will say, Come you
blessed. Therefore,

1. Consider, that we must all appear before this Glorious Judgment Seat. There
is no avoiding it: Indeed at Death there will be an appearance before the
Throne of the Lord Jesus Christ. Then as to their immortal Souls, men appear
before the Lords Throne of Judgment. Heb 9.27. It is appointed for men once to
dye, and after that the Judgment. Immediately upon Death there is a Judgment. A
true believer is no sooner dead, his immortal Soul is no sooner separated from
his Body, but he sees Christ. Therefore Stephen when dying, said, Lord Jesus
receive my Spirit He sees Christ in Glory to his unspeakable Joy So when a
wicked man dies, he also has a discovery of the Glory of Christ, but to his
infinite terror. A Sentence is then passed on his Soul, and it is the same that
will be passed on him before the whole world at the last day. It must needs be
an amazing and a soul-confounding thing to a Sinner, that so soon as ever his
Soul is out of his body, (...) knows for certain that the King Eternal is his
Enemy; and where he shall be, and what his condition throughout Everlasting
Ages; but especially at the last day, all men appear before this Judgment Seat.
2 Cor. 5 10. We must all appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, and every
one shall receive according to what he has done in the Body; there is no
avoiding of this personal appearance. All and every one, be they high or low,
rich or poor, great or small, old or young, not a mothers Child shall escape
appearing.

Consider 2. That then either a Sentence of, Absolution or a Sentence of
Condemnation will come out from the Throne concerning us. Either the Lord Jesus
Christ will say, Come ye Blessed or else he will say, Go ye Cursed. There is
not one man here this day, nor in the whole world, but shall hear the Son of
God himself pronounce an E^^rnal irreversible Sentence concerning him. He will
say either, there is a Kingdom prepared for you, or else he will say, there is
an Everlasting Fire prepared for you. Oh how are we then concerned to make sure
that a Sentence of Life, and not of Death be ^assed on us in that Day!

Consider 3. The Coming of the Lord draws ^igh. E're long we shall see him
coming in great Glory and all the holy Angels with him. The first coming of
Christ was to be toward the Evening of the World, Gen 49.1. 1 Cor. 10.11. Now
considering more than One thousand Seven hundred years are since that Expired,
his second coming cannot be far off The things predicted in the Scripture to be
accomplished before Christ's coming to Judgment, are the most of them already
fulfi^led. There were some in the Apostles days, who supposed that the Great
Day would begin in that Age: whose E^ror Paul corrects in his Second Epistle to
the Thessalonians. Where he shows that at the Second coming of Christ, the man
of Sin shall be utterly destroyed, when as he was not in that Age so much as
revealed, and therefore the day of Christ could not then be at ^and. But some
Ages since, Antichrist (...) been both revealed and in a great measure consumed
by the Spirit of Christ in his Word, which is a sure sign that the brightness
of his Coming, that is* His Coming in F^aming Fire, is not far off Moreover, we
that now live see those very things concerning which the Lord has said, When
you see th^se things come to pass, know that the Kingdom of God is nigh at
hand, Luke 21.31. Are we not then concerned to watch and Pray always, that we
may be counted worthy to stand before the Son of Man? And what shall we do that
so we may be able to stand before the Presence of his Glory with Exceeding Joy?

1. Let us make sure that our Sins are pardoned now. Then shall we have a
Sentence of Absolution pronounced on us, when we shall see the Son of Man
sitting on the Throne of his Glory. Now if we would have our sins pardoned, we
must repent of them, and turn from them. Act 3.19 Repent and be converted that
your sins may be blotted out, when the time ^f refreshing shall come from the
presence of the Lord. How are sins blotted out when Christ comes, and is
personally present? but in re^pect of the Sentence of Absolution which shall
^hen be published before the world. When Christ shall say these men
notwithstanding ^hey have been guilty of many sins, they repented of them, and
they are all pardoned and blotted out in my Blood. And if we would hear that
blessed Sentence, we (...) make sure that we have true Faith, and then we are
safe. If we are believers on Christ, our Savior will be our Judge; therefore
we should give our selves to Christ to become his Faith^ul Servants and
Subjects. If we approve our selves the faithful Subjects of the Glorious King
now, when he shall Sit on the Throne of his Glory, he will say, Come you
Blessed.

2. Let us abound in good Works. When Christ comes in his Glory, he will give
to every man as his works shall be. Oh then ^et us abound in works of Piety, in
Reading, ^n holy Meditation, in Prayer, and especially in Secret Prayer to God.
Mat 6 6 Pray to thy Father that sees in Secret, and he will reward thee
openly. When? At the ^^st day there will be an open reward for all works of
Piety. It will be reward enough when Christ shall say in the hearing of the
whole World, this Servant of mine was much in Prayer to God! What a glorious
thing will it be when Christ shall say, though the world knew nothing of it, I
know it. As he said to Nathaniel, I saw thee under the Fig Tree. So when Christ
shall say before Angels and men, this Servant of mine spent many a day in
secret Prayer and holy Meditation which the world knew nothing of it, but I saw
him and will reward him. So to abound in works of Charity is the way to have a
glorious reward in that day. The Apostle prayed for one that o^e^ refreshed
him: God grant that he may find mercy in that day, 2 Timothy 1.18 ^n what Day? in
that Day, when Jesus Christ the Son of God shall sit on the Throne of his
Glory; then shall Onesiphorus find a merciful reward. All works of Charity
proceeding from Lo^^ to Christ, will then be acknowledged by him sitting on the
Throne of his Glory: As is declared in the Context before us In the 4* Verse,
when some shall say to Christ, When saw we thee an hungry and fed thee, or when
saw we thee thirsty and gave thee drink, the King shall say, Inasmuch as you
did it to those my brethren you did it to me. So then, works of Charity, though
i^ be but to the bodies of them that belong to Christ, will be to our joyful
acccount, Much more if we have done good, not to the Bodies of men only, but to
their Souls: If we have been instrumental in the Conversion of any of the Elect
of God, or in building up any of his Children in their most holy Faith, we
shall receive a blessed reward. They that have been happ^* instruments of
promoting the Interest and Kingdom of Christ in the World, the glorious King
will take notice of it when He shall Sit on the Throne of his Glory. The more
good we do, the greater will our B^essedness be in that day. In the
Resurrection World we shall reap the fruit of all. If we sow plentifully, we
shall reap plentifully. A great Harvest of (...) follows a liberal seed time in
doing good; we shall then find that our labor in the Lord has not been in vain.

Lastly, Be willing to Suffer for the Glorious Name of Christ It was said to
the* Phi^lippians, To you it is given not only to Believe, but to Suffer. If we
should be called to Suffer, yea, to Dye for the Name of Christ, it would be a
wonderful Mercy and Gift of God to us. I often wonder at those Christians who
are not willing to Die for the dear Name of the Lord Jesus Christ. We do not
know what the Lord may call us to undergo in a way of Suffering in his cause.
Let us endeavor to be like the holy Apostle, who said, I am ready not only to
be bound but to Die for the Name of Christ, Act. 21 13. If we are ready for it,
i^ willing for it, and should be glad of it, did the Lord see it meet, Christ
will in that Day acknowledge our Love to his Name, and give us the Crown that
belongs to Martyrs themselves. If we Suffer with him we shall R^ign with him.
Let us then be both willing to Suffer for the Lord Jesus Christ, and continue
in doing all the Service we can for him. And then let me speak that which is a
wonderful Word, and so conclude. If we thus approve our selves to him when the
Son of God shall sit on the Throne of his Glory, We shall sit on Thrones of
Glory with Him; for so has our Lord himself from (...) Throne in Heaven assured
us, Rev. ^.21. To him that overcomes will I grant to (...) with me on my
Throne, even as I also overc^me, and (...) sat down with my Father in his
Throne.

Preached at Boston, Nov. 16. 1701.
The END.

