A Modest Enquiry Into the Nature of Witchcraft, AND How Persons Guilty of that
Crime may be Convicted: And the means used for their Discovery Discussed, both
Negatively and Affirmatively, according to SCRIPTVRE and EXPERIENCE.

By John Hale, Pastor of the Church of Christ in Beverley, Anno Domini. 1697.

When they say unto you, seek unto them that have Familiar Spirits and unto
Wizzards, that peep, etc. To the Law and to the Testimony; if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them, Isaiah VIII.
19, 20.

That which I ^^e not teach thou me, Job 34 32.

BOSTON in N. E. Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Benjamin Eliot under
the Town House. 1702

ANy general Custom against the Law of God is void. St. Germans Abridgment of
Common Law. Lib. 1. C. 6.

Omnium legum est inanis censura nisi Divinae legis imaginem gerat. Finch of
Common Law. Lib. 4. C. 3.

Where a Law is grounded upon a Presumption, if the Presumption fail the Law is
not to be holden in Conscience. Abridgment of C. Law. Lib. 1. C. 19.

An Epistle to the READER.
IT has been said of Old, That Time is the Mother of Truth, and Truth is the
Daughter of Time. It is the Prerogative of the God of Truth, to know all the
truth in all things at once and together: It is also his Glory to conceal a
matter, Prove. 25.2. And to bring the truth to light in that manner and measure,
and the times appointed, as it pleases him; it is our duty in all humility,
and with fear and trembling to search after truth, knowing that secret things
belong to God, and only things revealed belong to us, and so far as they are
revealed; for in many things it may be said, what God is doing we know not now;
but we, or others that succeed us, shall know hereafter. Omitting other
Examples, I shall Instance only in the matter of Witchcraft, which on the
Humane side, is one of the most hidden Works of Darkness, managed by the Rulers
of the darkness of this World, to the doing of great spoil amongst the Children
of men: And on the Divine side, it is one of the most awful and tremendous
Judgments of God which can be inflicted on the Societies of men, especially
when the Lord shall please for his own Holy Ends to Enlarge Satan's Commission
in more than an ordinary way.

It is known to all men, that it pleased God some few years ago, to suffer
Satan to raise much trouble amongst us in that respect, the beginning of which
was very small, and looked on at first as an ordinary case which had fallen out
before at several times in other places, and would be quickly over. Only one or
two persons belonging to Salem Village about five miles from the Town being
suspected, were Examined, etc. But in the progress of the matter, a multitude
of other persons both in that and other Neighbor Towns, were Accused,
Examined, Imprisoned, and came to their Trials, at Salem, the County Town,
where about Twenty of them Suffered as Witches; and many others in danger of
the same Tragical End: and still the number of the Accused increased unto many
Scores; amongst whom were many Persons of unquestionable Credit, never under
any grounds of suspicion of that or any other Scandalous Evil. This brought a
general Consternation upon all sorts of People, doubting what would be the
issue of such a dreadful Judgment of God upon the Country; but the Lord was
pleased suddenly to put a stop to those proceedings, that there was no further
trouble, as has been related by others. But it left in the minds of men a sad
remembrance of that sorrowful time; and a Doubt whether some Innocent Persons
might not Suffer, and some guilty Persons Escape. There is no doubt but the
Judges and Juries proceeded in their Integrity, with a zeal of God against Sin,
according to their best light, and according to Law and Evidence; but there is
a Question yet unresolved, Whether some of the Laws, Customs and Principles
used by the Judges and Juries in the Trials of Witches in England (which were
followed as Patterns here) were not insufficient and unsafe.

As for my Self, being under the Infirmities of a decrepit Old Age, I stirred
little abroad, and was much disenabled (both in body and mind) from knowing and
judging of Occurrents and Transactions of that time: But my Reverend Brother
Mr. Hale, having for above Thirty Years, been Pastor of the Church at Beverly
(but Two Miles from Salem, where the Trials were) was frequently present, and
was a diligent Observer of all that passed, and being one of a Singular
Prudence and Sagacity, in searching into the narrows of things: He has (after
much deliberation) in this Treatise, related the Substance of the Case as it
was, and given Reasons from Scripture against some of the Principles and
Practices then used in the Trials of Witchcraft; and said something also in a
Positive way, and showing the right Application that is to be made of ^he
whole, and all this in such a pious and modest manner, as cannot be offensive
to any, but may be generally acceptable to all the lovers of Truth and Peace.

I am the more willing to accompany him to the Press, because I am persuaded
such a Treatise as this is needful and useful, upon diverse accounts. As,

1. That the Works of God may be known; and that God may be more acknowledged
and adored, in his Justice, and in his Mercy: in his Justice, by letting loose
Evil Angels, to make so great a spoil amongst us as they did, for the
Punishment of a declining People: And in his Mercy, by Countermanding of Satan's
Commission, and keeping of him in Chains of restraint, that he should proceed
no further. Psalm. 83. last.

2. That the Truth of things may be more fully known, so far as God shall
please to reveal the same in the use of lawful means; for the Judgments of God
are a great deep, and he is wont to make known truth by degrees; and Experience
teaches us, there is need of more to be said than has been yet, for the
clearing up of difficulties about the matter of Witchcraft. We ought to be
fellow helpers to the truth. 3 Epistle of John 8. v.

3 That whatever Errors or Mistakes we fell into, in the dark hour of
Temptation that was upon us, may be (upon more light) so discovered,
acknowledged and disowned by us, as that it may be matter of Warning and
Caution to those that come after us, that they may not fall into the like. 1
Cor. 10.11. Faelix quem faciunt aliena pericula ca^tum.

4. And that it may Occasion the most Learned and Pious men to make a further
and fuller Enquiry into the matter of Witchcraft, especially into the positive
part, How Witches may be so discovered, that innocent persons may be preserved,
and none but the guilty may suffer. Prove. 17.15.

Verily whosoever shall by the Grace of God be enabled to Contribute further
light in this matter, will do good Service to God and Men in his Generation.

I would also propound and leave it as an Object of Consideration to our
Honored Magistrates and Reverend Ministers, Whether the Aequity of that Law in
Leviticus, Chap. 4 for a Sin offering for the Rulers and for the Congregation,
in the case of Sins of Ignorance, when they come to be known, be not Obliging,
and for direction to us in a Gospel way.

Now the Father of Lights and Mercies grant unto us, that Mercy and Truth may
meet together, that righteousness and peace may kiss each other, that the Glory
of God may dwell in our Land; and that it may be said of New England, The Lord
Bless thee, O Habitation of Justice and Mountain of Holiness.

Finally, That the Blessing of Heaven may go along with this little Treatise to
attain the good Ends thereof, is, and shall be the Prayer of him who is daily
waiting for his Change, and looking for the Mercy of the Lord Jesus Christ unto
Eternal Life.

John Higginson, Pastor of the Church, of Salem. Aetatis 82.
March 23d. 1697, 8.
The Preface TO THE Christian READER.
THE Holy Scriptures inform us that the Doctrine of Godliness is a great
Mystery, containing the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven: Mysteries which
require great search for the finding out: And as the Lord has his Mysteries to
bring us to Eternal Glory; so Satan has his Mysteries to bring us to Eternal
Ruin: Mysteries not easily understood, whereby the depths of Satan are managed
in hidden ways. So the Whore of Babylon makes the Inhabitants of the Earth
drunk with the Wine of her Fornication, by the Mystery of her abominations,
Rev. 17.2. And the man of Sin has his Mystery of iniquity whereby he deceives
men through the working of Satan in signs and lying wonders, 2 These. 2 3, 7, 9.

And among Satan's Mysteries of iniquity, this of Witchcraft is one of the most
difficult to be searched out by the Sons of men; as appears by the great
endeavors of Learned and Holy men to search it out, and the great differences
that are found among them, in the rules laid down for the bringing to light
these hidden works of darkness. So that it may seem presumption in me to
undertake so difficult a Theme, and to lay down such rules as are different
from the Sentiments of many Eminent writers, and from the Presidents and
practices of able Lawyers; yea and from the Common Law it self.

But my Apology for this undertaking is;

1. That there has been such a dark dispensation by the Lord, letting loose
upon us the Devil, Anno. 1691. and 1692. as we never experienced before: And
thereupon apprehending and condemning persons for Witchcraft; and nextly
acquitting others no less liable to such a charge; which evidently show we were
in the dark, and knew not what to do; but have gone too far on the one or other
side, if not on both. Hereupon I esteemed it necessary for some person to
Collect a Summary of that affair, with some animadversions upon it, which might
at least give some light to them which come after, to shun those Rocks by which
we were bruised, and narrowly escaped Shipwreck upon. And I have waited five
years for some other person to undertake it, who might do it better than I
can, but find none; and judge it better to do what I can, than that such a work
should be left undone. Better sincerely though weakly done, then not at all, or
with such a byas of prejudice as will put false glosses upon that which was
managed with uprightness of heart, though there was not so great a spirit of
discerning, as were to be wished in so weighty a Concernment.

2. I have been present at several Examinations and Trials, and knew sundry of
those that Suffered upon that account in former years, and in this last affair,
and so have more advantages than a stranger, to give account of these
Proceedings.

3. I have been from my Youth trained up in the knowledge and belief of most of
those principles I here question as unsafe to be used. The first person that
suffered on this account in New England, about Fifty years since, was my
Neighbor, and I heard much of what was charged upon her, and others in those
times; and the reverence I bore to aged, learned and judicious persons, caused
me to drink in their principles in these things, with a kind of Implicit Faith.
Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem, Testa diu A Child will not easily
forsake the principles he has been trained up in from his Cradle.

But observing the Events of that sad Catastrophe, Anno 1692. I was brought to
a more strict scanning of the principles I had imbibed, and by scanning, to
question, and by questioning at length to reject many of them, upon the reasons
showed in the ensuing Discourse. It is an approved saying Nihil certius, quam
quod ex dubio fit certum: No truth more certain to a man, than that which he
has formerly doubted or denied, and is recovered from his error, by the
convincing evidence of Scripture and reason. Yet I know and am sensible, that
while we know but in part, man is apt in flying from a discovered error, to run
into the contrary extreme.

Incidit in Scyllam qui vult vitare Charybaim.

The middle way is commonly the way of truth. And if any can show me a better
middle way than I have here laid down, I shall be ready to embrace it: But the
conviction must not be by vinegar or drollery, but by strength of argument.

4. I have had a deep sense of the sad consequence of mistakes in matters
Capital; and their impossibility of recovering when completed. And what grief
of heart it brings to a tender conscience, to have been unwittingly encouraging
of the Sufferings of the innocent. And I hope a zeal to prevent for the future
such sufferings is pardonable, although there should be much weakness, and some
errors in the pursuit thereof.

5. I observe the failings that have been on the one hand, have driven some
into that which is indeed an extreme on the other hand, and of dangerous
consequence, viz. To deny any such persons to be under the New Testament, who
by the Devils aid discover Secrets, or do work wonders. Therefore in the latter
part of this discourse, I have taken pains to prove the Affirmative, yet with
brevity, because it has been done already by Perkins of Witchcraft. Glanvil
his Saduciscus Triumphatus. P^. 1. p. 1. to 90. and Pt. 2. p. 1 to 80. Yet I
would not be understood to justify all his notions in those discourses, but
acknowledge he has strongly proved the being of Witches.

6. I have special reasons moving me to bear my testimony about these matters,
before I go hence and be no more; the which I have here done, and I hope with
some assistance of his Spirit to whom I commit my self and this my labor, even
that God whose I am and whom I serve: Desiring his Mercy in Jesus Christ to
Pardon all the Errors of his People in the day of darkness; and to enable us to
fight with Satan by Spiritural Weapons, putting on the whole Armor of God.

And though Satan by his Messengers may buffet Gods Children, yet there is a
promise upon right Resisting, he shall flee from them, Jam. 4.7. And that all
things shall work together for the good of those that Love the Lord, Romans 8.28.
So that I believe Gods Children shall be gainers by the assaults of Satan,
which occasioned this Discourse; which that they may, is the Prayer of, Thine
in the Service of the Gospel.

Beverly, December. 15 th, 1697. JOHN HALE

A Modest Enquiry, Into the Nature of WITCHCRAFT.
CHAPTER I.
Sect. 1. THE Angels who kept not their First Estate, by Sin against God, lost
their primitive purity, and glorious Excellency, as to their moral
qualifications, and became unclean, wicked, envious, liars, and full of all
wicke^ which as Spirits they are capable of (...) I do not find in Scripture
that they lost their natural abilities of understanding or power of Operation.

1. As for their Understanding, they are called Daimon (which we Translate
Devil) because they are full of wisdom, cunning, skill, subtilty and knowledge.
He has also the name of Serpent from his subtilty, 2 Cor. 11.3. And his
knowledge in the Scriptures, and wittiness to pervert them, appears by hi^
quoting Scripture ^o our Savior when he tempted him Mat. 4.

And as there be many Devils, and these ac^ive, quick, swift and piercing
Spirits, so the^ going to and ^o in the earth, and walking u^ and down in it,
have advantages to know a^ the actions of the Children of men, both open and
secret, their discourses, consultations and much of the inward affections of
men thereby; though still its Gods prerogative immediately to know the heart.
Jer. 17.10.

2. As to their natural power as Spirits, it^ very great, if not equal to that
of the Holy Angels: For,

1. They are called Principalities and Powers Romans 8.38. Ephesians. 6.12 Col. 2, 14,
15. compared with Heb. 2 14, 15. Now these are name given to the Holy Angels
Ephesians. 1.21. and 3.10.

2. They are called, Rulers of the darkness of this world, the Prance of the
^ower of the Air Ephesians. 6 12 and 2.2.

3. Such was their power that they contended with Michael and the Angels about
the Body of Moses. 2 Pet. 2.11. Jude 9. That is, as I conceive, about
preventing the Burial of the Body of Moses: For it is said, Deuteronomy. 34.6. The Lord
buried him, and no man knows of his Sepulcher to this day. That is, he did it
by the Ministry of Angels (for the Lord gave the Law, Exodus 20.1. and that it
was by the Ministry of Angels, see Gal. 3.19. so probably was the burial of
Moses's Body) and the Devils endeavor if possible, to discover Moses's Body,
or place of its burial, that they might draw Israel to commit Idolatry in
worshipping at his Tomb (as our Popish Forefathers did at Thomas Beckets in
Kent) from the Veneration they had to him as their Law giver.

4. The Devils actings against Job, Chap. 1. and 2. and what he did to the
Gadarens Swine, etc. Show his great power. So that we may conclude, had the
Devils liberty to reveal all that they know of the affairs of mankind, or to do
all that is in their power to perform, they would bring dreadful confusions and
desolations upon the World.

Sect. 2. The way God governs Devils is by Chains. 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6 ver. Rev.
20. 1, 2, 7, 8. whereby they are kept Prisoners. Men are governed by Laws, by
convictions of Conscience. Romans 2.12, 13, 14, 15. By Scripture Rules, Humane
Laws, and also by Gods Spirit. 1 John 2.20. But Devils have no such Laws, or
tenderness of Conscience to bridle or restrain them. But the Lord has his
Chains, which are called Everlasting, and are always lasting; so that they are
never wholly without a Chain. This Chain is sometimes greater and shorter,
other times lesser and longer, as the Lord pleases, for his own Glory, Rev.
20.1, 2, 7, 8 For as the wrath of man praises the Lord, and the remainder of
wrath he does restrain, Psalm. 76.10. So may we say of the Devils wrath.

Sect. 3. The Devil is full of malice against man, and frames his designs
against him, chiefly to destroy his Soul, as, 1 Pet. 5.8 2 Cor. 11.3 and other
Scriptures abundantly testify. Hence probably at sometimes he does not all the
hurt to man's Body that he could, lest thereby he should awaken man to
repentance and prayer; he seeks to keep men in a false peace. Luke 11.21. Yet
at other times he disturbs and afflicts men in Body and Estate; as Scripture
and experience show. Among the Devices Satan uses to ruin man, one is to
allure him into such a familiarity with him, that by Sorceries, Enchantments,
Divinations, and such like, he may lead them Captive at his pleasure. This
snare of his we are warned against. Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. and in other Scriptures.
This Sin of men hearkening after Satan in these ways, is called Witchcraft; of
which it is my purpose to treat: But first I shall speak something Historically
what has been done in New England, in prosecution of persons suspected of this
Crime.

Sect. 4. Several persons have been Charged with and suffered for the Crime of
Witchcraft in the Governments of the Massachusetts, New Haven, or Stratford and
Connecticut, from the year 1646. to the year 1692.

Sect. 5. The first was a Woman of Charlestown, Anno, 1647. or 48 She was
suspected partly because that after some angry words passing between her and
her Neighbors, some mischief befell such Neighbors in their Creatures, or the
like: partly because some things supposed to be bewitched, or have a Charm upon
them, being burned, she came to the fire and seemed concerned.

The day of her Execution, I went in company of some Neighbors, who took great
pains to bring he^ to confession and repentance. But she constantly professed
her self innocent of that crime: Then one prayed her to consider if God did not
bring this punishment upon her for some other crime, and asked, if she had not
been guilty of Stealing many years ago; she answered, she had stolen something,
but it was long since, and she had repented of it, and there was Grace enough
in Christ to pardon that long ago; but as for Witchcraft she was wholly free
from it, and so she said unto her Death.

Sect. 6. Another that suffered on that account some time after, was a
Dorchester Woman. And upon the day of her Execution Mr. Thompson Minister at
Brantry, and J. P. her former Master took pains with her to bring her to
repentance And she utterly denied her guilt of Witchcraft; yet justified God
for bringing her to that punishment: for she had when a single woman played the
harlot, and being with Child used means to destroy the fruit of her body to
conceal her sin and shame, and although she did not effect it, yet she was a
Murderer in the sight of God for her endeavors, and showed great penitency for
that sin; but owned nothing of the crime laid to her charge.

Sect. 7. Another suffering in this kind was a Woman of Cambridge, against whom
a principal evidence was a Watertown Nurse, who testified, that the said Kendal
(so was the accused called) did bewitch to Death a Child of Goodman Genings of
Watertown; for the said Kendal did make much of the Child, and then the Child
was well, but quickly changed its color and dyed in a few hours after. The
Court took this evidence among others, the said Genings not knowing of it. But
after Kendal was Executed (who also denied her guilt to the Death,) Mr. Rich
Brown knowing and hopeing better things of Kendal, asked said Genings if they
suspected her to bewitch their Child, they answered No. But they judged the
true cause of the Child's Death to be thus, viz. The Nurse had the night before
carried out the Child and kept it abroad in the Cold a long time, when the red
gum was come out upon it, and the Cold had struck in the red gum, and this they
judged the cause of the Child's death. And that said Kendal did come in that day
and make much of the Child, but they apprehended no wrong to come to the Child
by her. After this the said Nurse was put into Prison for Adultery, and there
delivered of her base Child, and Mr. ^rown went to her and told her, It was
just with God to leave her to this wickedness as a punishment for her Murdering
goody Kendal by her false witness bearing. But the Nurse dyed in Prison, and so
the matter was not farther inquired into.

There was another Executed, of Boston Anno 1656. for that crime. And two or
three of Springfield, one of which confessed; and said the occasion of her
familiarity with Satan was this: She had lost a Child and was exceedingly
discontented at it, and longed; Oh that she might see her Child again! And at
last the Devil in likeness of her Child came to her bed side and talked with
her, and asked to come into the bed to ner, and she received it into the bed to
her that night and several nights after, and so entered into covenant with Satan
and became a Witch. This was the only confessor in these times in this
Government.

Sect. 8. Another at Hartford, viz. Mary Johnson, mentioned in Remarkable
Providence, p. 62, 63 Confessed her self a Witch* Who upon discontent and
s^uthfulness agreed with the Devil to do her work for her, and fetch up the
Swine. And upon her immoderate laughter at the running of the Swine, as the
Devil drove them, as she her self said, was suspected and upon examination
confessed. I have also heard of a Girl at New Haven or Stratford, that
confessed her guilt. But all others denied it unto the death unless one
Greensmith, at Hartford.

Sect 9. But it is not my purpose to give a full relation of all that have
suffered for that Sin, or of all the particulars charged upon them, which
probably is now impossible, many witnessing Viva voce, those particulars which
were not fully recorded. But that I chiefly intend is to show the principles
formerly acted upon in Convicting of that Crime; which were such as these.

1. The first great principle laid down by a person Eminent for Wisdom, Piety
and Learning was; That the Devil could not assume the shape of an innocent
person in doing mischiefs unto mankind: for if the Lord should suffer him in
this he would subvert the course of humane Justice, by bringing men to suffer
for what he did in their Shapes.

2. Witchcraft being an habitual Crime, one single witness to one Act of
Witchcraft, and another single witness to another such fact, made two witnesses
against the Crime and the party suspected.

3. There was searching of the bodies of the suspected for such like tears, or
spots (which writers speak of) called the Devils marks; and if found, these
were accounted a presumption at least of guilt in those that had them.

4. I observed that people laid great weight upon this; when things supposed to
be bewitched were burnt, and the suspected person came to the fire in the time
of it. Although that Eminent person above said condemned this way of trial, as
going to the Devil to find the Devil.

5. If after anger between Neighbors mischief followed, this often bred
suspicion of Witchcraft in the matter. In fine, the presumptions and
convictions used in former times were for substance the same which we may read
of in Keeble of the Common Law, and in Bernard, and other Authors of that
subject.

Sect. 10. About 16 or 17. years since was accused a Woman of Newbury, and upon
her trial the Jury brought her in Guilty. Yet the Governor Simon Bradstreet
Esquire and some of the Magistrates repreived her, being unsatisfyed in the Verdict
upon these grounds.

1. They were not satisfied that a Specter doing mischief in her likeness,
should be imputed to her person, as a ground of guilt.

2. They did not esteem one single witness to one fact, and another single
witness to another fact, for two witnesses, against the person in a matter
Capital. She being reprived, was carried to her own home, and her Husband, (who
was esteemed a Sincere and understanding Christian by those that knew him)
desired some Neighbor Ministers, of whom I was one, to meet together and
discourse his Wife; the which we did: and her discourse was very Christian
among us, and still pleaded her innocence as to that which was laid to her
charge. We did not esteem it prudence for us to pass any definitive Sentance
upon one under her circumstances, yet we inclined to the more charitable side.

In her last Sickness she was in much darkness and trouble of Spirit, which
occasioned a Judicious friend to examine her strictly, Whether she had been
guilty of Witchcraft, but she said No: But the ground of her trouble was some
impatient and passionate Speeches and Actions of hers while in Prison, upon the
account of her suffering wrongfully; whereby she had provoked the Lord, by
putting some contempt upon his word. And in fine, she sought her pardon and
comfort from God in Christ, and dyed so far as I understood, praying to and
resting upon God in Christ for Salvation.

Sect. 11. The next that Suffered was an Irish Woman of Boston, suspected to
bewitch John Goodwins Children, who upon her Trial did in Irish (as was
testified by the Interpreters) confess her self guilty, and was condemned out
of her own mouth; (as Christ says, Luke 19.22. Out of thine own mouth will I
Judge thee.) The History of which is published by Mr. Cotton Mather, (and
attested by the other Ministers of Boston and Charlstown,) in his Book,
Entitled, Memorable Providence, Printed Anno 1689. Thus far of the History of
Witches before the year, 1692.

CHAPTER II.
I. IN the latter end of the year 1691. Mr. Samuel Paris, Pastor of the Church
in Salem-Village, had a Daughter of Nine, and a Neice of about Eleven years of
Age, sadly Afflicted of they knew not what Distempers; and he made his
application to Physicians, yet still they grew worse: And at length one
Physician gave his opinion, that they were under an Evil Hand. This the
Neighbors quickly took up, and concluded they were bewitched. He had also an
Indian Man servant, and his Wife who afterward confessed, that without the
knowledge of their Master or Mistress, they had taken some of the Afflicted
persons Urine, and mixing it with meal had made a Cake, and baked it, to find
out the Witch, as they said. After this, the Afflicted persons cried out of the
Indian Woman, named Tituba, that she did pinch, prick, and grievously torment
them, and that they saw her here and there, where no body else could. Yea they
could tell where she was, and what she did, when out of their humane sight.
These Children were biuen and pinched by invisible agents; their arms, necks,
and backs turned this way and that way, and returned back again, so as it was
impossible for them to do of themselves, and beyond the power of any Epileptick
Fits, or natural Disease to effect. Sometimes they were taken dumb, their
mouths stopped, their throats choked, their limbs wracked and, tormented so as
might move an heart of stone, to sympathize with them, with bowels of
compassion for them. I will not enlarge in the description of their cruel
Sufferings, because they were in all things afflicted as bad as John Goodwins
Children at Boston, in the year 1689. So that he that will read Mr. Mathers
Book of Memorable Providence, page 3. etc. may Read part of what these
Children, and afterward sundry grown persons suffered by the hand of Satan, at
Salem Village, and parts adjacent, Anno 1691, 2. Yet there was more in these
Sufferings, than in those at Boston, by pins invisibly st^ck into their flesh,
pricking with I^ons. (As in part published in a Book Printed 1693. viz. The
Wonders of the Invisible World.) Mr. Paris seeing the distressed condition of
his Family, desired the presence of some Worthy Gentlemen of Salem, and some
Neighbor Ministers to consult together at his House; who when they came, and
had enquired diligently into the Sufferings of the Afflicted, concluded they
were preternatural, and feared the hand of Satan was in them.

II. The advice given to Mr. Paris by them was, that he should sit still and
wait upon the Providence of God to see what time might discover; and to be much
in prayer for the discovery of what was yet secret. They also Examined Tituba,
who confessed the making a Cake, as is above mentioned, and said her Mistress
in her own Country was a Witch, and had taught her some means to be used for
the discovery of a Witch and for the prevention of being bewitched, etc. But
said that she her self was not a Witch.

III. Soon after this, there were two or three private Fasts at the Ministers
House, one of which was kept by sundry Neighbor Ministers, and after this,
another in Public at the Village, and several days afterward of public
Humiliation, during these molestations, not only there, but in other
Congregations for them. And one General Fast by Order of the General Court,
observed throughout the Colony to seek the Lord that he would rebuke Satan, and
be a light unto his people in this day of darkness.

But I return to the History of these troubles. In a short time after other
persons who were of age to be witnesses, were molested by Satan, and in their
^its cried out upon Tituba and Goody O. and S. G. that they or Specters in
their Shapes did grievously torment them; hereupon some of their Village
Neighbors complained to the Magistrates at Salem, desiring they would come and
examine the afflicted and accused together; the which they did: the effect of
which examination was, that Tituba confessed she was a Witch, and that she with
the two others accused did torment and bewitch the complainers, and that these
with two others whose names she knew not, had their Witchmeeting together;
relating the times when and places where they met, with many other
circumstances to be seen at large. Upon this the said Tituba and O. and S. G.
were committed to Prison upon suspicion of acting Witchcraft. After this the
said Tituba was again examined in Prison, and owned her first confession in all
points, and then was her self afflicted and complained of her fellow Witches
tormenting of her, for her confession, and accusing them, and being searched by
a Woman, she was found to have upon her body the marks of the Devils wounding
of her.

IV. Here were these things rendered her confession credible. (1.) That at this
examination she answered every question just as she did at the first. And it
was thought that if she had feigned her confession, she could not have
remembered her answers so exactly. A liar we say, had need of a good memory, but
truth being always consistent with it self is the same to day as it was
yesterday. (2.) She seemed very penitent for her Sin in covenanting with the
Devil. (3.) She became a sufferer her self, and as she said for her confession.
(4.) Her confession agreed exactly (which was afterward verified in the other
confessors) with the accusations of the afflicted. Soon after these afflicted
persons complained of other persons afflicting of them in their fits, and the
number of the afflicted and accused began to increase. And the success of
Tituba's confession encouraged those in Authority to examine others that were
suspected, and the event was, that more confessed themselves guilty of the
Crimes they were suspected for. And thus was this matter driven on.

V. I observed in the prosecution of these affairs, that there was in the
Justices, Judges and others concerned, a conscientious endeavor to do the
thing that was right. And to that end they consulted the Presidents of former
times and precepts laid down by Learned Writers about Witchcraft. As Keeble on
the Common Law, Chapt. Conjuration, (an Author approved by the Twelve Judges of
our Nat^on.) Also Sir, Matthew Hales trial of Witches, Printed Anno 1682.
Glanvils Collection of sundry trials in England and Ireland, in the years 1658,
61, 63, 64, and 81. Bernards guide to Jurymen, Baxter and R. Burton, their
Histories about Witches and their discoveries. Cotton Mather's Memorable
Providence relating to Witchcrafts, Printed Anno 1689.

VI. But that which chiefly carried on this matter to such an height, was the
increasing of confessors till they amounted to near about Fifty: and four or
six of them upon their trials owned their guilt of this crime, and were
condemned for the same, but not Executed. And many of the confessors confirmed
their confessions with very strong circumstances: As their exact agreement with
the accusations of the afflicted; their punctual agreement with their fellow
confessors; their relating the times when they covenanted with Satan, and the
reasons that moved them thereunto; their Witch meetings, and that they had
their mock Sacraments of Baptism and the Supper, in some of them; their signing
the Devils book: and some showed the Scars of the wounds which they said were
made to fetch blood with, to sign the Devils book; and some said they had Imps
to suck them, and showed Sores raw where they said they were sucked by them.

VII. I shall give the Reader a taste of these things in a few Instances. The
Afflicted complained that the Specter which vexed them, urged them to set
their Hands to a Book represented to them (as to them it seemed) with
threatenings of great torments, if they signed not, and promises of ease if they
obeyed.

Among these D. H. did as she said (which sundry others confessed afterward)
being overcome by the extremity of her pains, sign the Book presented, and had
the promised ease; and immediately upon it a Spectre in her Shape afflicted
another person, and said, I have signed the Book and have ease, now do you
sign, and so shall you have ease. And one day this afflicted person pointed at
a certain place in the room, and said, there is D. H. upon which a man with his
Rapier struck at the place, though he saw no Shape; and the Afflicted called
out, saying, you have wounded her side, and soon after the afflicted person
pointed at another place, saying, there she is; whereupon a man struck at the
place, and the afflicted said, you have given her a small prick about the eye.
Soon after this, the said D. H. confessed her self to be made a Witch by
signing the Devils Book as above said; and declared that she had afflicted the
Maid that complained of her, and in doing of it had received two wounds by a
Sword or Rapier, a small one about the eye, which she showed to ^he
Magistrates, and a bigger on the side of which she was searched by a discreet
woman, who reported, that D. H had on her side the sign of a wound newly healed.

This D. H. confessed that she was at a Witch Meeting at Salem Village, where
were many persons that she named, some of whom were in Prison then or soon
after upon suspicion of Witchcraft: And the said G. B preached to them, and
such a Woman was their Deacon, and there they had a Sacrament.

VIII. Several others after this confessed the same things with D. H. In
particular Goody F said ( Inter alia) that she with two others (one of whom
acknowledged the same) Rode from Andover to the same Village Witch meeting upon
a stick above ground, and that in the way the stick brake, and gave the said F.
a fall: whereupon, said she, I got a fall and hurt of which I am still sore. I
happened to be present in Prison when this F. owned again her former confession
to the Magistrates. And then I moved she might be further questioned about some
particulars: It was answered, the Magistrates had not time to stay longer; but
I should have liberty to Exami^ her farther by my self; The which thing I did;
and I asked her if she rode to the Meeting on a Stick; she said, yea. I
enquired what she did for Victuals; she answered, that she carried Bread and
Cheese in her pocket, and that she and the Andover Company came to the Village
before the Meeting began, and sat down together under a tree and eat their
food, and that she drank water out of a Brook to quench her thirst. And that
the Meeting was upon a plain grassy place, by which was a Cart path, and sandy
ground in the path, in which were the tracks of Horses feet. And she also told
me how long they were going and returning. And some time after told me, she had
some trouble upon her spirit, and when I enquired what? she said, she was in
fear that G. B. and M. C. would kill her; for they appeared unto her (in
Spectre, for their persons were kept In other Rooms in the Prison) and brought
a sharp pointed iron like a spindle, but four square, and threatened to stab her
to death with it; because she had confessed her Witchcraft, and told of them,
that they were with her, and that M. C. above named was the person that made
her a Witch. About a month after the said F. took occasion to tell me the same
Story of her fears that G. B. and E. C. would kill her, and that the thing was
much upon her Spirits.

IX. It was not long before M. L. Daughter of said F. confessed that she rode
with her Mother to the said Witch Meeting, and confirmed the substance of her
Mothers Confession. At another time, M. L. junior the Grand Daughter, aged
about seventeen years, confesses the substance of what her Grand mother and
Mother had related, and declares, that when they, with E. C. rode on a stick
or pole in the Air, She the said Granddaughter with R C. Rode upon another;
(and she said R. C. acknowledged the same) and that they sat their hands to the
Devils Book. And ( inter alia) said, O Mother, why did you give me to the
Devil? twice or thrice over. The Mother said, she was sorry at the heart for
it, it was through that wicked one. Her Daughter bid her repent and c^ll upon
God: And said, Oh Mother, your wishes are now come to pass! for how often have
you wished that the Devil would fetch me away alive? And then said, Oh! my
heart will break within me; Then she wept bitterly, crying out, O Lord comfort
me, and bring out all the Witches. And she said to her Grandmother, O
Grandmother, why did you give me to the Devil? Why did you persuade me, O
Grandmother do not deny it. Then the Grandmother gave account of several things
about their confederates and acts of Witchcrafts too long to rehearse.

CHAPTER III.
NExtly I will insert the Confession of a man about Forty years of Age, W. B.
which he wrote himself in Prison, and sent to the Magistrates, to confirm his
former Confession to them, viz God having called me to Confess my sin and
Apostasy in that fall in giving the Devil advantage over me appearing to me
like a Black, in the evening to set my hand to his Book, as I have owned to my
shame He told me that I should not want so doing. At Salem Village, there being
a little off the Meeting House, about and hundred five Blades, some with
Rapiers by their side, which was called and might be more for ought I know by
B. and Bu. and the Trumpet sounded, and Bread and Wine which they called the
Sacrament, but I had none; being carried over all on a Stick, never bring at
any other Meeting. I being at Cart a Saturday last, all the day, of Hay and
English Corn, the Devil brought my Shape to Salem, and did afflict M. S. and R.
F. by clitching my hand; and a Sabbath day my Shape afflicted A. M. and at
night afflicted M S. and A. M. E. I. and A. F. have been my Enticers to this
great abomination, as one have owned and charged her to her Sister with the
same And the design was to destroy Salem Village, and to begin at the Ministers
House, and to destroy the Church of God, and to set up Satan's Kingdom, and then
all will be well. And now I hope God in some measure has made me something
sensible of my sin and apostasy, begging pardon of God, and of the Honorable
Magistrates, and all God people, hoping and promising by the help of God to set
to my heart and hand to do what in me lies to destroy such wicked worship,
humbly begging the prayers of all Gods People for me, I may walk humbly under
this great affliction, and that I may procure to my self, the sure mercies of
David, and the blessing of Abraham. Concerning this Confession. (1) Note it was
his own free act in Prison. (2) He says the Devil like a Black] This he had
before explained to be like a Black man (3) That on a certain day was heard in
the Air the sound of a Trumpet, a Salem Village ^igh the Meeting House, and
upon all enquiry i^ could not be found that any mortal man did found it. (4)
The three persons he says the Devil in his Shape afflicted, had been as to the
times and manner afflicted as he confess^th (5) That E. I. confess^d as much as
W. B. charge her with. (6) Many others confessed a Witch Meeting, or Witch
meetings at the Village as well as he.

Note also that these Confessors did not only witness against themselves, but
against one another; and against many if not all those that Suffered for that
Crime. As for example, when G. B. was Tried, seven or eight of these Confessors
severally called, said, they knew the said B. and saw him at a Witch Meeting at
the Village, and heard him exhort the Company to pull down the Kingdom of God,
and set up the Kingdom of the Devil. He denied all, yet said he justified the
Judges and Jury in Condemning of him; because there were so many positive
witnesses against him: But said he dyed by false Witnesses* I seriously spoke
to one that witnessed (of his Exhorting at the Witch Meeting at the Village)
saying to her; you are one that bring this man to Death, if you have charged
any thing upon him that is not true, recall it before it be too late, while he
is alive. She answered me, she had nothing to charge her self with, upon that
account.

M. C. had to witness against her, two or three of her own Children, and
several of her Neighbors that said they were in confederacy with her in their
Witchcraft.

A. F. Had three of her Children, and some of the Neighbors, her own Sister,
and a Servant, who confessed themselves Witches, and said, she was in
confederacy with them. But alas, I am weary with relating particulars; those
that would see more of this kind, let them have recourse to the Records.

By these things you see how this matter was carried on, viz. chiefly by the
complaints and accusations of the Afflicted. Bewitched ones as it was supposed,
and then by the Confessions of the Accused, condemning themselves, and others.
Yet experience showed, that the more there were apprehended, the more were
still Afflicted by Satan, and the number of Confessors increasing, did but
increase the number of the Accused, and the Executing some, made way for the
apprehending of others; for still the Afflicted complained of being tormented
by new objects* as the former were removed. So that those that were concerned,
grew amazed at the numbers and quality of the persons accused* and feared that
Satan by his wiles had inwrapped innocent persons under the imputation o^ that
Crime. And at last it was evidently seen that there must be a stop put, or the
Generation of the Children of God would fall under that condemnation.

Henceforth therefore the Juries generally acquitted such as were Tried,
fearing they had gone too far before. And Sir William Phips, Governor,
Reprieved all that were Condemned, even the Confessors, as well as others And
the Confessors generally fell off from their Confessions; some saying, they
remembered nothing of what they said; others said they had belied themselves and
others. Some brake Prison and ran away, and were not strictly searched after,
some acquitted, some dismissed, and one way or other all that had been accused
were set or left at liberty.

And although had the times been calm, the condition of the Confessors might
have called for a melius inquirendum; yet considering the combustion and
confusion this matter had brought us unto; it was thought safer to under do
than over-do, especially in matters Capital, where what is once completed
cannot be retrieved: but what is left at one time, may be corrected at another,
upon a review and clearer discovery of the state of the Case. Thus this matter
issued somewhat abruptly.

CHAPTER IV.
HEre was generally acknowledged to be an error (at least on the one hand) but
the Querie is, Wherein?

A. 1. I have heard it said, That the Presidents in England were not so exactly
followed, because in those there had been previous quarrels and threatenings of
the Afflicted by those that were Condemned for Witchcraft; but here, say they,
not so. To which I answer.

1. In many of these cases there had been antecedent personal quarrels, and so
occasions of revenge; for some of those Condemned, had been suspected by their
Neighbors several years, because after quarrelling with their Neighbors,
evils had befallen those Neighbors. As may be seen in the Printed Trials of S.
M. and B. B. and others: See Wonders of the Invisible World, Page 105. to 137.
And there were other like Cases not Printed.

2. Several confessors acknowledged they engaged in the quarrels of other their
confederates to afflict persons. As one Timothy Swan suffered great thin^ by
Witchcrafts, as he supposed and testifye^* And several of the confessors said
they did so torment him for the sake of one of their partners who had some
offense offered her by the said Swan* And others owned they did the like in the
behalf of some of their confederates.

3 There were others that confessed their fellowship in these works of
darkness, was to destroy the Church of God (as is above in part rehearsed)
which is a greater piece of revenge, then to be avenged upon one particular
person.

2. It may be queried then, How does it appear that there was a going too far
in this affair?

A^ 1. By the numbers of the persons accused which at length increased to about
an hundred, and it cannot be imagined that in a place of so much knowledge, so
many in so small a compass of Land should so abominably leap into the Devils
lap at once.

2. The quality of several of the accused was such as did bespeak better
things, and things that accompany Salvation. Persons whose blameless and holy
lives before did testify for them. Persons that had taken great pains to bring
up their Children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord: Such as we had
Charity for, as for our own Souls: and Charity is a Christian duty commended to
us. 1 Cor. 13. Chapt. Col. 3.14. and in many other Scriptures.

3. The number of the afflicted by Satan daily increased, till about Fifty
persons were thus vexed by the Devil. This gave just ground to suspect some
mistake, which gave advantage to the accuser of the Brethren to make a breach
upon us.

4. It was considerable that Nineteen were Executed, and all denied the Crime
to the Death, and some of them were knowing persons, and had before this been
accounted blameless livers. And it is not to be imagined, but that if all had
been guilty, some would have had so much tenderness as to seek Mercy for their
Souls in the way of Confession and sorrow for such a Sin. And as ^or the
condemned confessors at the Bar, (they being reprieved) we had no experience
whether they would stand to their Self-condemning confessions, when they came
to dye.

5. When this prosecution ceased, the Lord so chained up Satan, that the
afflicted grew presently well. The accused are generally quiet, and for five
years since, we have no such molestations by them.

6. It sways much with me that I have since heard and read, of the like
mistakes in other places. As in Suffolk in England about the year 1645, was
such a prosecution, until they saw that unless they put a stop it would bring
all into blood and confusion. The like has been in France, till 900 were put
to Death. And in some other places the like; So that N. England is not the only
place circumvented by the wiles of the wicked and wisely Serpent in this kind.

Wierus de Pr^stigiis Demonum, p. 678 Relates, That an Inquisitor in the
Subalpine Valleys, enquired after Women Witches, and consumed above an hundred
in the Flames, and daily made new offerings to Vulcan of those that needed
Helebore more than Fire Until the Country people rose and by force of ^rms
hindered him, and refer the matter to the Bishop. Their Husbands men of good
Faith affirmed that in that very time they said of them, that they played and
danced under a tree, they were in bed with them.

R. Burton of Witches etc. p. 158. Says, That in Chelmsford in Essex, Anno
1645 were Thirty tried at once before Judge Coniers, and Fourteen of them
hanged, and an hundred more contained in several Prisons in Suffolk and Essex.

If there were an Error in the proceedings in other places, and in N. England,
it must be in the principles proceeded upon in prosecuting the suspected, or in
the misapplication of the principles made use of. Now as to the case at Salem,
I conceive it proceeded from some mistaken principles made use of; for the
evincing whereof, I shall instance some principles made use of here, and in
other Countries also, which I find defended by learned Authors writing upon that
Subject.

CHAPTER. V.
1. IT has been believed that Satan cannot assume the Shape of an Innocent
person, and in that Shape do mischief to the bodies, or estates of mankind.

This maxim has been as the Primum mobile, turning the wheel of accusation
upon persons condemned for this Crime in England and else where, (so far (...)
my reading goes.) See Baxter and Glanvil, and other Authors on this Subject.
For the inference drawn from hence was, That when a person suffers by
Diabolical agents and is supposed to be bewitched, and in their sufferings see
a Spectre in the exact image of any person, that person so represented must be
accounted the Witch.

Keeble on the Common Law, gives this for a ground to suspect a person for a
Witch. Their Apparition to the sick party in their fits etc.

In opposition to this Maxim, I shall lay down three Propositions.

1. Satan may and often has represented to the Imaginations of persons under
bodily afflictions by him, the shape or image of innocent persons hurting them.

2. Satan can represent himself to mankind in a bodily visible likeness.

3. Satan's representing himself to the fight of men in the shape of innocent
persons doing mischief to man, may be without prejudice to, or perverting of
Gods Ordinance of Civil Justice.

1. Satan may represent himself to the Imaginations etc. I lay Imagination; for
the Appa^tion of a person to the sick (or obsessed) person in their fits, may
be often times only to their Imaginations. Some of our afflicted persons have
when they come out of their fits declared, that in them they saw an army of men
in rank and file; other times the representation of heavenly beauty, white men*
and then again fire and hellish torments. Now all these might be only the
working of their Fantasies, by Satan's presentations to Imagination, and the
like may be of other things and persons. Yea some such have complained of their
own Parents seeming to them to torment them, which mig^ be the abuse of
Fantasy.

Yet persons not under such Diabolical impressions, may by some disease or
sores and vapors thence ascending, have the Images of persons represented to
their Imagination.

Mr. John Phillips of Boston, told me, That he had a sore swelled Leg, and
lying in the warm bed with Eyes open, he saw, as he thought, Women in silk
clothing come to his bed side, and spoke to them: but a man that stood by said
there were no Women; whereupon be suspected the man of Conjuring tricks; which
moved him to send for a Physician three Miles off (for it was nigh Black point)
and all the time the Messenger was gone, was he haunted with these Women, as
they seemed to him. The Physician sent word, that the vapors ascending from
his f^re Leg had caused a water in his Eyes, and disturbance in his Brains,
by means whereof he was troubled with such Visions; and sending an eye water to
wash his eyes with, and a cordial to take inwardly; upon the use of these, this
disturbance vanished in half a quarter of an hour. If a disease may do this,
what may Satan working upon bodily distempers and vapors impose upon the
Imaginations?

2. Prop. Satan can assume a bodily likeness and represent himself therein to
man's bodily eyes, that is, if the Lord permit him.

1. He that could make a fire in the Air to come down upon Jobs Sheep, etc. Job
1.16. Can make a visible Shape and appear, and act in it as he did in that fire
to consume Servants and Sheep: But so did Satan. Therefore.

2. He that could by Pharaohs Sorcerers represent to him Serpents, Froggs and
Blood; and to S^ul dead Samuels Shape; can assume a bodily likeness, etc. but
so did Satan, as Exodus 7. and 8. Chap. 1 Samuel 28 of which more hereafter, etc.

3. Our Savior signifies that a Spirit may appear in likeness of a man. Math.
14 26, 27. v. compared with Luke 24.36, 37, 38, 39, 40. For, (1.) The disciples
supposed the Person of Christ to be a Spirit. Phantasma, that is a Spectre.
Pneuma, a Spirit i. e. in bodily likeness, which shows they had such an
apprehension, that a Spirit could assume a visible bodily likeness. (2.) Christ
in answer does not say, there can be no such visible representation; but seeks
to satisfy them, by convincing them that it is himself: And therefore shows
them his hands and feet. Luke 24. thereby to convince them that he is not a
Spirit. (3.) Christ speaks of a Spirit in general, which comprehends an evil
Spirit as well as a good one.

4. That Satan appeared to our Savior when tempted, Mat. 4.3. at the end of
forty days in a visible Shape, I prove by these arguments.

1. It Is said Christ was tempted of Satan all the forty days, Mark 1.13. and
Luke 4.2. yet Mat. 4.2, 3. It Is said when he had fasted forty days, and was
hungry, the Tempter came to him ( prosethion auto) which implies another manner
of coming to him, and tempting of him, than had been the forty days before,
and now he spoke. Eipen. Mat. 4. 3, 6, 9. Legei. These expressions note Satan
speaking with an audible voice, which implies a visible bodily shape speaking.

2. He said these Stones. Mat. 4 and Luke 4. This Stone, as if he had pointed
with the finger, or bodily Organ at some peculiar Stone or Stones, as a
corporeal agent.

3. It is said, Satan takes Christ up into the Holy City, sets him on the
Pinnacle, takes him up into an high Mountain, and shows him, brought him to
Jerusalem. These words Taking, Bringing, Setting, (in Greek, (...)) are words
which are used to no^e the actings of one bodily agent to another usually.

5. Satan shows to the Man Christ, all the Kingdoms of the World, and the
Glory of them, in a moment of time (En stigme Chronou) in one point of time.
Now we know the World is ^ound, and that a man can see but a small part of it
at once. Therefore that which Satan set before the eyes of Christ, was not all
the Kingdoms of the World themselves, but an image and representation of them,
and of their Glory, which Satan had framed. And of these might Satan say, as,
Luke 4 6. All this power will I give thee and the glory of them: for that is
delivered unto me, and to whomsoever I will, I give it. If then Satan can make
an Image of the Kingdoms of the World, and of their glory which is the greater,
then can he make the Image of a man, which is the lesser, and appear to man in
such an image: And so appearing can speak and act in and by it as he spoke and
acted of old by the Serpent unto Eve, and by the Possessed in the Gospel.
Whether Satan makes such a visible body by gathering the rays called Species
Visibiles, which flow from every body, whereby its shadow is represented in a
Looking-glass and Water, or as the rays of the Sun invisibly scattered in the
Air are by a burning glass contracted and condensed so as to kindle a Fire, or
by other means, I determine not. But History as well as the Scripture
abundantly testify, that such Spirits, or Aieral Bodies have appeared unto
men, called Apparitions or Ghosts. See Increase Mathers Remarkable Providence,
Baxter of Apparitions, and other Authors. I have also spoken with very credible
persons of discretion and piety that have told me they have seen such
Apparitions when in their perfect health and senses. But I spare to enlarge.

3. Proposition is, Satan may represent himself doing mischief in the shape of
an innocent person, without prejudice to, or perverting of Gods Ordinance of
Civil Justice.

1. If Satan (can assume the likeness of a man, as is above proved) then it is
alike easy in it self for him to personate an innocent, as a guilty person, if
we look to his natural power: For according to natural causes by which he
works, ones Image is as easily formed as the others. And no doubt he will
sometimes personate the innocent, unless the Lord restrain him.

2. That Satan has so done is proved by Mr. Increase Mather, in his Cases of
Conscience, Printed Anno 1693. by several Histories. To which I shall add one
out of W^rus de Prastigiis, etc. p. 661.

Among us (says he) A Praetor went to a Con^er, and by his discovery
apprehended many Women, and had them burned (that is for Witches) at last the
Conjurer told him, he would show him one Witch more if he would not take it
amiss, and impeached the Pr^tors Wife, and prefixed an hour, when he should see
her in a Dance with other Witches* The Praetor consents and calls his friends
and kindred to feast wi^h his Wife at that time, and rising from the Table,
commands his Wife and Friends to sit still at the Table till he returned. Being
carried by the Conjurer where he pleased, be showed him a Company of Witches in
their Dances and unlawful pleasures, and the Pretors Wife with them. Then
returning home, he found his friends in the same order he left them, and his
Wife with them, and by the testimony of all present, found upon studious
enquiry that his Wife had kept her place in his absence. He opened the matter
to them, repenting for punishing the innocent.

3 Satan personating the innocent in doing mischief is no prejudice to Civil
Justice, if it can be found out that the mischief so done is the act of Satan,
and not the act of the person represented. For what wickedness Satan does,
Satan shall be judged for, and what man does, man must be judged for. Every one
shall bear his own burden. Gal 6 5. And Satan's wickedness herein may be found,
(most commonly, if not always) by such means as those, if thorough care and
diligence be used.

1. If it can be proved that the party represented was in another place at that
time: As was the case of the Pretors Wife above mentioned.

2. If when the afflicted complain they see John or Thomas upon them, pinching,
or hurting of them or others, can neither see any person there, nor by feeling
perceive any flesh or bones, they may conclude there is not the very person
complained of, but either an abused Imagination, or the Devil personating to
the afflicted the person complained of. For Christ's rule is, Luk 24.39 A Spirit
has not flesh and bones as ye see me have.

3. If the supposed person come into the room through the Key hole, or when
there is no place open for a person to come in by, then conclude, its not the
person but the Devil seen there. A Spectre can come in by a pin-hole: but Satan
cannot bring in the body of a man or woman in at such a place: for if so then
Satan could work a miracle property so called, which he cannot do. When Christ
^ame bodily into the midst of the room the doors being shut. Job 20.19, 20. It
was a miracle beyond all Satan's signs and lying wonders. The Gospel is
confirmed by Gods testimony with signs and wonders and diverse miracles. Such
Satan cannot do, for then he could subvert our Gospels confirmation.

4. When a supposed person is seen in their full proportion and then changed
into the form of another Creature, as a Cat, etc. This is a Spectre not the
person. The turning Lots Wife into a pillar of Salt was a proper Miracle beyond
the power of Devil or Angel of themselves to perform. But a Spectre can change
its shape like the Wind under Ice running upon the water. This well weighed
will confute many fond Stories that have passed, that such a Woman is a Witch,
for she was seen in her full proportion, and then turned into a Cat, and back
at last into a Woman; for all this was either a fantasy in the brains, or a
Phantasma before the Eyes.

5 If a person (or so esteemed) pass by us on the soft Snow, or dirt, and leave
no footsteps behind them, this is to be esteemed a Spectre, and not the real
person, unless the person were carried by Satan in the Air. This was brought
for an Evidence against a Woman, that she was seen nigh Malden in a Moonshiny
night passing on the Snow, and left no footsteps behind her; when she might be
in her House at Newbury, and either the Fantasy of the Witness was abused, or
a Spectre passed by him in her Image. Yet if it had been her person so carried
by Satan, this would not prove her a Witch, unless her consent were given to
it. Goodwins Children were carried in the Air by Satan, as says Memorable
Providence. P. 14, 15.

6. If the prints of biting of teeth, pinching with fingers, pricking with pins
or irons be made on the Bodies of the Afflicted, and no hand, mouth or Body can
be seen or felt to do it, this is to be imputed to Satan, and not to a real
person doing of it.

By these or such like means, due circumspection being used, when Satan
personates the innocent, his fallacy and malice may be discovered, at least
ordinarily. Yet if the Lord should suffer Satan so to act, and not be
discovered after all means used to find the fallacy (which I never yet read or
heard he did) this must be reckoned among the unsearchable acts of Divine
Sovereignty, which men may humbly admire; but not make rules upon such a
supposal for humane judicature to proceed upon. These premises considered, we
may inter, That if Satan may personate an innocent party to one tormented by
him; then, if the Lord permit it, to two, yea to ten. And if once he may do so,
then twice, yea, twenty times, if suffered, and yet the person so represented
be innocent. And all the danger of injustice being done to that innocent party,
arises not from Satan's acting, so much as from man's mistaken faith and
suspicion about Satan's act.

Hence then we may confute a vulgar error of people, that will conclude, that
such a Woman is, or was a Witch, for she was seen in the Air one night flying
Southward, another time to a Vessel, and other times up into the Country. When
all this time the Devil through Divine permission either did it, or imposed upon
the Imaginations of the Spectators. And here we may take notice, that a true
faith is so pleasing to the Lord, that he does great things for his Servants,
for their faiths sake; so that Christ says, Mat. 8.13 As thou have believed,
so be it done unto thee. All things are possible to him that believes. Great
is thy faith, be it unto thee, as thou will. Thy faith has made thee whole.
Mark. 9.25. and 10 52. and 15.28. Why may not a false faith in these matters
provoke the Lord to say unto us, As you believe, be it unto you? And let Satan
loose to do strange things as the Accuser of the Brethren, to mislead them to
accuse one another.

CHAPTER VI.
ANother Principle much insisted on, is; That the Devil when he does harm to
persons in their Body or Estate, it is (at least most commonly, generally and
frequently) by the help of our Neighbor: That is, some Witch or Conjurer, or
such like in Covenant with the Devil. Sir Matthew Hale, in his Printed
Observations upon the Trial of those Witches he Condemned, (Printed Anno 1682)
draws this inference from hence, That the Devil when he hurts the Body or Goods
of men, is in some sort subject to Humane Justice, though not in himself, yet
in his Covenant Servants, by whom he is set a work to do such mischiefs.

The unsoundness of this principle appears by the Scripture instances of
Satan's so afflicting man when we read of no Witch to set him on work. As,

1. When God let Satan loose to try Jobs patience, Job 1 and 2 Chap.

2. When Satan bound the Body of a Daughter of Abraham eighteen years.

3. When Satan tried the affections of the Gergesens, and was Gods Instrument
to punish their Worldliness by drowning their Swine, who ran violently down a
steep place (as if they had been bewitched, according to the opinion of many
now a days) into the Sea, being driven of the Devils.

4. We have many Instances of the possessed with the unclean Spirits that were
tormented and vexed by Satan, to quicken men to prayer, Mat. 17.21. and to show
Christ's power.

5. Some by their own presumptuous dealing with Satan, have given him power, or
at least opportunity to strip and wound them; as the Exorcists, Acts 19.13. etc.

Seeing then we have so many instances of Satan's afflicting, without Witches
help, and no clear Scripture instance of his afflicting mankind in Body, or
Estate by Witchcraft; It Is unsafe to conclude generally that those that are
under Diabolical molestations are bewitched. For when persons are persuaded
their Relations are bewitched, they presently enquire, who is the Witch? and
who should they fasten their suspicions upon, but on these that the Afflicted
cry out against in their fits?

Q. But is it not evident, that the Afflicted at Salem Village, and parts
adjacent, Anno 1691, 2. were Bewitched?

A. Whether those Sufferings by Satan proceeded at first from Witchcraft or no,
I shall leave to a further disquisition.

But as for the most of those Sufferers, I conceive they were such as in the
Gospel are called, Daimonizomenoi. Mat. 4 24. Daemoniaci Daemoniacks: I do not
mean in that degree of Internal Possession, as those out of whom the Spirits
were cast out. Mat. 8.16. But with such a degree of external possession or
obsession of Satan, which rendered them like the Demoniacks mentioned, in many
things.

1. As they were grievously vexed with the Devil. ((...)) as the Damsel. Matt
15.22. compare this with Mark 7.25. She had an unclean Spirit. So were ours
vexed with invisible agents, biting, pricking, pinching and vexing of them.

I will not say but among so many thus Suffering, some of them at some time
might counterfeit part of their Sufferings, and it might be from Satan's policy
to entangle the whole affair. But for the most part they were as those we read
of, Luke 6.18. Vexed with unclean Spirits.

2. We read, Mat. 17.15. of them that ofttimes fell into the fire and into the
water, being Lunatic; but were cast this way and that by an Evil Spirit. Mark
9.17, to 30. So were some of ours by an evil spirit transported from place to
place, and in danger of being burnt, or drowned, but that Satan was restrained,
as in case above said.

3. The possessed man, Mark. 5.4. had more than humane strength in breaking
fetters and chains. So some of these in their fits performed that which was
above their own strength.

4. The possessed damsel, Act. 16.16 did by the Devil soothsay; that is,
discover secrets in a prophetical way: (she did manteuein.) So some of these
did by the Devils means tell of persons and things, absent and future, as when
such another fit should come again, etc. where such a person absent was, and
what he did: insomuch that had they been Sui juris, persons free from
Diabolical obsession, and overpowering force, they might justly have been
questioned for dealing with a familiar Spirit. But the force they were under
was their vindication, as it was here, Act. 16.16.

5. The possessed of old were some of them exceeding fierce. Mat. 8.28. So were
some of these afflicted persons fierce, troublesome and mischievous in their
fits, beyond their natural temper and behaviors at other times. From these
things compared together, why may we not judge these demoniacks, as well as
those in the Gospel? And that its possible for Satan in these times to afflict
thus without Witches, as well as in those? Seeing these did also in their fits
foam, gnash their teeth and pine away, as he did, Mark 9.18.

And here we may observe the weakness of the signs given by the Common Law, to
know who is bewitched; (which signs as Keeble says, are taken out of the
trials in Lanehashire, and from Bernard:)

For the first sign given is; The wasting of a person and the cause unknown:
This sign is very fallible: for,

1. The wasting may proceed from an unknown disease. And the ignorance of
Physicians may ascribe that to Witchcraft which proceeds from a natural hidden
disease.

2. Jobs sore boyles from head to foot came from Satan without Witchcraft, and
the cause of them was most probably hidden from the common practice of
Physicians.

The second sign they give is, When two persons are taken together in the like
strange fits. This may be a sign of persons possessed, and happened often in the
experiences at Salem, among the persons possessed, as abovesaid

The third sign given is, When the afflicted party truly tells what the
suspected person is doing at a distance. This is rather a sign of a person
possessed.

And we find the two men possessed, Matthew. 8. 23 etc. had like fits, for both
kept among the Tombs, both were exceeding fierce, so as to hinder persons
passing that way, both together made the same outcry to Jesus, that he should
not torment them. These things show a unity among the Devils afflicting them:
but no unity of Witches joining with them.

Fourth sign is, When the afflicted out of their fits know nothing what they
did, or said in them. But this (if our obsessed or possessed persons said
truly) often fell out in the tormented at Salem.

Fifth sign, Supernatural strength in their fits. Now this is a sign of the
possessed, Mark 5.4. Who in their fits brake chains and fetters.

Sixth sign is, When the afflicted vomit pins, nails, irons, etc. To this I
say, whether these pins, nails, etc are by the Devil brought invisibly to the
mouths of the persons so vomiting and so cast out from their mouths, but not
out of their stomachs or throats; or whether they are insensibly conveyed by
the working of Satan into the stomachs or throats of the persons vomiting, and
so vomited forth, neither the one nor the other, can certainly prove the
vomiter bewitched, unless it be made manifest that Satan does thus vex the
party by confederacy with a Witch. But where Satan has a permission to vex and
possess a person he may do these things, as well as other things he did unto
the possessed mentioned in the Gospels.

The seventh sign is, The afflicted person having the sight of the apparition
of the suspected party, and when the mischief of a fit or the like following
shortly after. Now it having been already proved, that Satan can represent, to
those that are possessed, innocent persons: it is not to be wondered that Satan
should represent to the eyes or imagination of a possessed sufferer, a Spectre
representing a suspected innocent person just before he casts them into a
fit, especially seeing hereby he gains upon the credulity of the possessed,
and their friends, for the accusing an innocent, and it may be a godly person;
for this helps forward his design as the accuser of the brethren. Rev. 12.10.

I would then from these considerations infer, That if a party handled as in
the seven particulars above expressed, cannot thereby be said to be bewitched,
Then there is no need, unless somewhat else appear, to trouble our selves to
enquire who is the Witch that troubles such a party.

CHAPTER. VII.
3. ANother principle improved in these Enquiries is, When the party suspected
looks upon the parties supposed to be bewitched, and they are thereupon struck
down into a fit, as if struck with a Cudgel. This bewitching by the eye is an
opinion Seventeen Hundred years old, Nescio quis-teneros oculis mihi fascinat
agnos.

Virgil.

Mr. Gaul in his Book, Printed 1648. page 128. Says, Some Witches by
inspecting, or looking on, but to a glance, or squint, or peep at with an
envious eye, is sufficient to effascinate. And we may find much use made of
this experiment in Trials in England mentioned by Baxter, Glanvil and Burton.
And however this seemed a presumption at Salem Village, yet at length it was
apparent to be a delusion of Satan. For this experiment was found at the Trials
of persons when the Accused sought to clear themselves, and it cannot be
conceived that then they would act Witchcraft to hasten their own Condemnation:
And no person can be said to act Witchcraft against their own will and consent.

Again, we read, Mark 9.20. That when the possessed was brought unto Christ,
and saw Christ, then the Spirit tare him, and he fell to the ground and
wallowed foaming. So that the Devil chose this time and place to cast the
possessed into a fit even in the presence of Christ. Let us then consider these
Afflicted to be Demoniacks, and we must own, it is in Satan's power to cast them
into a fit in the presence, and upon the sight of the Accused. And if this may
increase the suspicion against the Accused, it is for his interest to choose such
a time.

4. Another presumption made use of has been to cause the suspected to touch
the party supposed to be bewitched, and if that touch bring the party out of
their fit, this has been esteemed by many a strong suspicion at least, as may
be read in some of the fore cited Authors.

And Mr. ^lanvil supposes a Philosophical reason for it, viz. that the Witch
by the cast of her eye sends forth a Malefick Venom into the Bewitched to cast
him into a fit, and therefore the touch of the hand does by a sympathy cause
that venom to return into the Body of the Witch again. As when a person is
stung by a Snake, the application of the Body or flesh of the same Snake to the
wound will draw back the poison into its former fountain. But the truth is both
these effects depend upon the Devils free agency: And he frames his things much
according to the opinion of the Spectators, with intent to deceive. I never
could see reason to justify such a kind of Trial (though allowed by Bernard as
lawful to be used;) but since I have more considered it, I look upon it very
unwarrantable to be used, being as it were the putting a staff into the hand of
Satan, to try what he will do with it. For the recovery of the party out of the
Fit hereby must be from a natural or divine cause, or from the Devil* We cannot
prove either of the two former and if the third, its but the Devils testimony,
and therefore not to be used by us.

5. Another practice has been when the party suspected is in Prison, and the
Afflicted cry out they are miserably tormented by them; If then the suspected
party be bound, and the afflicted person thereupon, have ease or release of
their fits, then this is a presumption that the suspected party is guilty. This
was used at Isanbal, Anno 1661. (see Glanvil, page 168.) and the success
answered the expectation.

But this is no ground so much as of suspicion, because it depends either upon
some physical efficacy in binding to give the party ease, or upon the
precontract of the suspected made with Satan, or from the voluntary act of the
Devil ceasing to afflict at such a time; neither of the two former can be
proved: not any physical virtue in the binding the party; for how can cords
bind a Spirit, and as for the Contract with Satan, that remains yet to be
proved, and if such there be, yet the terms of it are to us unknown; and the
Devil being a Liar from the beginning, will keep or break his own promises, so
as suites the interest of his Kingdom. So that in such cases we can ascribe the
release of the afflicted only to Satan's agency and policy by such a vile
abusing the mischief of those which make the trial.

6. The like is to be said when a Demoniack finds ease of their fits upon the
apprehending, or condemning, or Execution of the person complained against. For
that ease may come by Satan's policy, desisting his rage to confirm our error:
or from Divine Favor in answer of prayer, or pity to the distressed.

CHAPTER. VIII.
7. A Seventh principle is, If the party suspected appear in Spectre to the
afflicted, and the afflicted give a blow with a knife, sword, etc. unto the
Spectre (or some other in their behalf) and the Spectre seems wounded, or
bleeding, or to have their garment torn, or slit by the blow received. And that
the party Spectrally represented be presently searched, and there is found upon
their body a wound, or blood, etc. on the same part of their body, or a rent,
or cut upon the same part of the garment, which appeared upon the Spectre unto
the afflicted. This has been counted a strong evidence to prove the party
suspected to be a confederate with Satan in afflicting t^ complainer. As by
Judge Archer in Coxes cas^ Executed at Taunton, Anno 1663. (See Glanv^ part 2.
p. 196) But let us search this to the bottom; and there is no ground of
suspicion in such a kind of probation. For the ground of the suspicion arises
hence viz. That what wound or mark is given to the Spectre (that is to the
Devils aerial assumed body) is translated thence unto the person setting this
Spectre on work to afflict; or to their garments, if the mark be on that. But
we have no sufficient ground to know this.

1. For if it must be so, it must be either (1.) From some sympathy in nature
between the Spectre and the party represented by it. But this we have no ground
in reason to conclude; for whence or how should such a sympathy be between an
humane body, and the Devil in the Image or likeness of it? Or if it were, how
can there come such a sympathy between the garment of a person and the Devil
appearing in the likeness of that garment? Surely the garment was not in any
league with Satan? (2) Or this comes to pass by virtue of the Covenant between
Satan and this confederate: if so we say, I ask how come we to know there is
such an article in the bargain with the Devil? or if we know there were such an
article in their agreement, how can we tell, that the Devil will stand to his
own Covenant? Or, (3.) This comes to pass by the Immediate hand of God making
such a translation of a wound etc. unto a Witch that they may thereby be
discovered; which if so, it is preternatural if not supernatural. And we have
no ground from Scripture to expect such a sign from God; and therefore to
expect it is to be guilty of the sin of that Wicked Generation, that sought
after a sign. Math. 16.4. Which should not be given to them. Or (4) This
translation comes (if there be any such) from the Devil as a free and powerful
Spirit, afflicting the body or affecting the garment so marked: And if it be
from hence, its the Devils testimony which ought to be no credit with mankind.

2. The true state of this case seems to be this; That the person or garment so
represented to the Afflicted by a Spectre was wounded, or bleeding, or cut or
rent before. And the Devil knowing this, represents to the afflicted (or
striker at the Spectre) that part of the Spectre which answers the Body
wounded, or garment rent or torn, the Searchers finding such wounds upon, or
rents about the person suspected are ready to conclude it was done by the
stroke at the Spectre which was done before. I shall confirm this by instances.

There was at Ghelmsford, an Afflicted person, that in her fits cried out
against a Woman, a Neighbor, which Mr. Clark, the Minister of the Gospel there
could not believe guilty of such a Crime. And it happened while that woman was
milking her Cow, the Cow struck her with one horn upon her Forehead and fetched
blood, and while she was bleeding, a^ Spectre in her likeness appeared to the
party Afflicted, who pointing at the Spectre, one struck at the place, and the
Afflicted said, you have made her forehead bleed. Hereupon some went to the
woman, and found her forehead bloody, and acquainted Mr. Clark with it; who
forthwith went to the woman, and asked how her forehead became bloody, and she
answered by a blow of the Cows horn, as above said, whereby he was satisfied
that it was a design of Satan to render an innocent person suspected.

Another instance was at Cambridge, about forty years since: There was a man
much troubled in the night with Cats, or the Devil in their likeness haunting
of him, whereupon he kept a light burning, and a Sword by him as he lay in bed;
for he suspected a Widow woman to send these Cats or Imps by Witchcraft to
bewitch him. And one night as he lay in bed, a Cat or Imp came within his
reach, and he struck her on the back; and upon enquiry heard this Widow had a
sore back: this confirmed his suspicion of the Widow, he supposing that it came
from the wound he gave the Cat. But Mr. Day the Widows Chyrurgeon cleared the
matter; saying, this Widow came to him and complained of a sore in her back,
and because she could not see it, desired his help; and he found it to be a
Boil, and ripened and healed it as he used to do other Boyls But while this was
in cure, the supposed Cat was wounded as already rehearsed.

But some may say when such wounds or rents come, it is not the Spectre that is
struck but the real person or garment is there present, but by virtue of the
Charm, or Witchcraft, a mist is cast between the Witch and Spectators in the
room, whereby the person becomes invisible to all of them except the bewitched
Sufferer. As some juglers have seemed to creep through a Tree or Log, when
indeed its only upon the Tree or Log; but by enchantment a shadow of the Log or
Cloud is cast over the Log between the Jugler and Spectators, whereby they are
deceived.

I Answer, If it were so, then those that strike with Sword, or other
Instrument, and wound the party might feel some body, or garment stopping the
force of their blow; for a Body can be felt if it cannot be seen, as above
showed. But when the stricken instrument feels no harder substance than Air to
stop its force, and there seems to be a person in the way to the Afflicted's
eye: We may conclude its but a Spectre, or deluded imagination.

CHAPTER IX.
8. IF after Cursing there follows Death, or at least some mischief: This says
Perkins (in his Discourse of Witchcraft, Chap. 7. Sect. 2.) This is a
presumption. For Witches are wont to practice their mischievous facts by
cursing and banning. This also is a sufficient matter of Examination.

I acknowledge when persons curse or threaten others to kill them, or do other
mischief to their Bodies or Estates, and the mischief threatened is performed as
threatened; here is ground so far to suspect the theatner, as to question them
about it, unless it appears to be performed by some other person or cause. So
if after Cursing there follows Death, etc. And it appears to be done by
Witchcraft, this is a ground to suspect and examine the threatner, unless there
be grounds to suspect some other Author of the Witchcraft. But as the
proposition is laid down generally by Mr. Perkins, as a general rule I conceive
it is unsafe.

1 Because such death, or mischiefs oftimes proceed from other causes, so that
there is no ground to impute them to Witchcraft. For,

1. Some persons are of such hasty spirits and unruly tongues, that their mouth
is daily full of cursing and bitterness, Rom 3.14.

2. There be few Housekeepers, where are many in Family and a Stock about
them; but that by the hand of God, Death at some times enters upon some person
in the Family, and Cattle sometimes dye by Diseases and Casualties: Who is
there that has an Estate, but at some times they meet with losses?

3. Hence it falls out that these calamities, some of them happen at or nigh
some one time of their angry neighbors cursing, who had cursed them ten times
before, or threatened them, and yet no such calamity ensued. And this their last
threatening had no more influence upon the evil befalling the Family, than the
ten causeless Curses that went before, as Prove. 26.2. What then does all this
prove? A tongue set on fire, and it may be from hell; but not a Covenant with
Hell to procure the calamities that befall their Neighbors.

Again, some are of such a suspicious temper, that they are apt to impute all
sad accidents that do befall them, to proceed from Witchcraft, and thereby in
suffering times are apt to be jealous of their Neighbors that come frequently
to their Houses in their day of adversity, as causers of these afflictions by
some charming or enchantment.

Again, It may be Queried, Whether Satan may not sometimes take advantage upon
the times when neighbors contend with, and threaten those that live by them,
to do some hurt to the Bodies or Goods of those threatened, that thereby he may
cast upon the party threatened, the imputation of Sorcery. Doubtless as he is
the Accuser of the Brethren, Rev. 12 He would so do if the Lord will permit him
to endanger the life of the threatner. And who can tell but that the Lord may
permit him at sometimes so to do, for a just punishment to such unbridled
tongues? I remember, that above forty years ago, when there was a great
discourse about Witches; A very holy man heard his Wife say, she desired a
sucking Pig; and be going to a Neighbors house, saw a Sow with a litter of
Pigs, and took a fantasy to one of them in particular for his Wife, and asked
the Owner for that Pig; the Owner denied him: Hereupon he went away in a great
passion, very unsuitable to such a person. And that very Pig left its dam and
Company, and followed this man to his home. This was observed in the day of it,
it was supposed Satan might have some hand in it, taking advantage upon the
passion of so good a man, to render him suspected by such an accident if he
could.

9. If any person, man or woman be notoriously defamed for such a party. This
Perkins ( eodem loco) makes a presumption. But in truth there is no weight in
this, unless those neighbors among whom the suspected party lived had good
grounds for their suspicion: Because many persons have drunk in false
principles about the tokens by which a Witch is to be known; and judge of
persons accordding to those false principles (some of which are above recited)
which may asperse the most innocent and righteous person living. Our Savior
was slandered as if he cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, Mat.
12: 24. And the Disciple is not above his Master, Mat. 10.25. Some persons will
put an evil construction upon an innocent action, and so raise an evil fame
against a person; and then others believing it, are apt to look upon other
actions with a squint eye, and through the multiplying glass of their own
jealousies, make a Molehill seem a Mountain, to render an hated or despised
neighbor evil spoken of.

10. If the party suspected be the Son or Daughter, or Manservant, or Maid
servant, or familiar friend, near Neighbor, or old Companion of a known and
convicted Witch. This may be a presumption, says Perkins. But unto all these
it may be said, there is no more ground to suspect any person of this crime
upon such relations or circumstances, then there is to presume a person is a
Thief, or Murderer, or Drunkard, etc. because he is the Child, Servant,
Neighbor, etc. of a Thief, Murderer, Drunkard, or the like, convicted
Criminal. Which may be, or may not be if the Lord incline the heart of him or
her that is so related, to abhor such wickedness. As the Wheat and Tares grow
together in the same Field: So Good and Wicked in the same Neighborhood,
Family; yea, and lying in the same Bed, so that one shall be taken, and the
other left, Mat. 24.40, 41. Luke 17.34, 35, 36. The Lord says, The Son shall
not dye for the sin of the Father, Ezekiel. 18.14 and 21. ver. If the Son,
(Servant or Neighbor, or Companion) sees the sins of his Father, etc. and
does not the like, etc. he shall not dye, etc. which shows that these so
related may and sometimes do see and abhor the ways of wickedness, those so
near unto them walk in, and abhor them, therefore they are not to be suspected,
merely upon that account.

11. Some make this a presumption. If a person sick and dying, does take it
upon his or her Death, that such an one has bewitched them. See Perkins Chap.
7. page 210. So Keeble on the Common Law, says, the testimony of the person
hurt upon their death complaining against a person, that they appeared to them
and bewitched them. Now in this ease it must be considered whether this dying
person were not under Diabolical Molestations, or an abused fantasy, or under
ungrounded suspicions of the party they complained of before they were so sick.
And the grounds of their suspicions are to be thoroughly considered, before the
survivers make this a ground of suspicion. Sure all this may proceed from false
principles (as there Expressed) drunk in by a well meaning, but mistaken dying
person.

CHAPTER X.
12. SOme says Perkins, do add this for a presumption. If the party suspected
be found to have the Devils mark: for it is commonly thought, when the Devil
makes his Covenant with them, he always leaves his mark behind him. Bernard
makes it a ground of Conviction. ( Gaul only a presumption.) And Tertullian
(who lived above 1400 years ago) says, It Is the Devils custom to mark his; and
note, says Bernard, That this mark is insensible, and being pricked, it will
not bleed, sometimes like a teat (and the Devil sucks, or touches them:)
sometimes but a bluish spot, sometimes a red one, and sometimes the flesh sunk.

I conceive such a mark is neither ground of conviction or suspicion.

1. Because the Lord sometimes in anger, and sometimes for trial of his
Servants, sends such marks upon the Bodies of men, as are unusual; as the
Emerods upon the Philistines, 1 Samuel 5, 6, 7 Which made those Heathens say, The
Hand of the God of Israel is sore upon us. And Deuteronomy. 28. 27, 35. God threatens
to punish his people for their sins, with a botch, emerods and with the Itch
whereof they could not be healed. So then some of these sores might constantly
be moist as if they had been sucked.

2. Many persons have naturally, or by some sickness or hurt, received some
sores, like, if not the same with those they call the Devils marks. I knew a
man, that lived and dyed without the least suspicion of that crime, that told
me he had a natural issue upon his breast from his youth up, which distilled
about a drop or two in twenty four hours, so that it was always moist, and
conduced much to his health. And as for the weaker Sex; The Lord has said unto
Eve, and her Daughters, In sorrow shall be thy Conception; but instanceth not
in the particulars. But experience has showed upon some sober and pious women,
after hard Travels and the like, that they have had those Excrescences which
are called, Pili Uteri And I have been informed by a skilful Midwife that has
known virtuous women that have had those Piles, and that they are without sense
of feeling, sometimes and after cold, handling, etc. are apt to draw up into
the Body. Satan knows who has (by the hand of God) such suspected marks, which
the Lord lays on them as their affliction, and if he can by other means get
them to be suspected, and their Bodies searched, he will hereby expose them to
greater suspicion, if not Condemnation; if we take this for a ground of
conviction or presumption of guilt. But if he attains not that, yet hereby
shall sober and innocent persons be exposed to the reproach of such, who when
they understand God has loosed their cord, and afflicted them, will as Job
speaks, mar their path, set forward their calamity, and not spare to spit in
their face. Job 30.10, 11, 12, 13. For he or she that is ready to slip with his
or her foot, is as a lamp despised in the thought of him that is at ease. And
there may be such Excrescences from a natural cause, which yet Learned
Physicians cannot find out, the reason of Man knows but in part the Works of
God, Eccles. 11. 5. For he does great things, and unsearchable; mavelous
things without number.

3 If we enquire how these are known to be the marks of one in league with
Satan? It must come from the Confession of Witches, that have owned such things.

Now among the many Confessors at Salem, there were sundry declared they had
such marks on them: one in her head which she said the Devil in likeness of a
bird came daily, and pecked, or sucked. I saw the sore place and there was
nothing to be seen to make it to differ from another sore coming by natural
causes. Another said, she had the Devils mark upon her leg, which was a blew
spot as broad as a Shilling: her Husband testified, that he saw the spot, but
little suspected it to be the Devils mark. Others had sores on other parts of
their bodies, which they said the Devil sucked; but by all that, I could learn
by those that saw them, there was nothing to demonstrate that they came in a
preternatural way by Satan; but only the parties own affirmation: which whether
true or false I leave to God and time farther to discover. And I suppose we had
as many confessions and demonstrations to render what they said credible, as
has been known at any one time in some Ages. But be it so, that by the
confessions of known Witches there have been upon some of the baser sort (as
Bernard says) of them, such teats, or marks. These may come by natural causes,
or violent casualties, and by Satan be perverted to such an use. But if they
come from Satan immediately as the confessors acknowledge. This can only tend
to the conviction of those that so confess, and where those marks are found:
but make nothing to the proof, or suspicion of other persons to be guilty of
that crime, who having such marks deny the crime, and ascribe these bodily
marks to other causes. So that its far more safe wholly to lay aside the
practice of searching after suspected persons teats or Witch marks, unless in
those who confess themselves to have them, and that for trial to see whether
they say true or not; then by using it to lay stress upon a fallible sign.

13. Another unsafe principle is to lay weight upon the testimony of Ghosts, as
they are called; that is to say, Specter appearing in the shape of the dead,
and personating them. Satan by his wiles in this kind has gained too much
credit, in hours of Temptation. For it has so happened, that when in the death
of some persons there was any notice of a circumstance which might give unto a
jealous eye, any color for suspicion, that any one was accessory to their
death; the Spectre personating them has cried out to the afflicted for
vengeance against such an one for murdering them, telling the manner how, by
relating the circumstances of their death: and presently people were ready to
say, I remember those very circumstances in the dying of such a person. Well,
it is very probable such an one murdered the party. And hereby the person
suspected is accused of Witchcraft and Murder together, and by joining these
accusations together, both seem the more probable and credible. But that there
is no reason to hearken to such accusations will appear if we consider.

1. That Satan can assume the shape of living innocents, as above showed, and
therefore of the dead also; as of dead Samuel: and that shape being assumed can
say what he pleases, or seem to the Imagination of daimoniacal persons so to
speak. And he being a Liar from the beginning, Joh. 8.44. By his lies he
fastens what accusation he pleases of murder, or other crime upon the living.
And if hearkened unto will, as the deceived Eve, by falsely accusing God,
deceive us by falsely accusing our Neighbor to us.

I know Hystories speak of Ghosts discovering murders, at sometimes, and moneys
lost, or acts of injustice done in the life time of the person represented by
the said Ghost; which some have conceived to be the very Soul of the deceased:
(and by this opinion many Papists have been confirmed in the error of
Purgatory:) Some a good Angel sent in that Similitude to procure justice to be
done: and some have conceived it to be the Devil compelled, Volens Nolens, to
discover injustice, or tranforming himself into an Angel of Light, as 2 Cor.
11.14 by seeming zealous for justice. I should digress too far from my intended
scope to discuss, what may be said pro or con in this matter. It suffices in
the case, Anno 1692. To say we have had so much experience of the wiles of
Satan appearing in the likeness of the living, that we have no reason to
believe him in the likeness of the dead.

2. The hearkening after Ghosts, if we take not heed, may hurry us unawares
into that sin forbidden, Isai. 8.19. Viz. Seeking for the living to the dead?
What? shall we hearken to or enquire of the dead, what they can say against the
living? This has a tendency to that iniquity forbidden, Deuteronomy. 18.11. by the
name of Necromancy: in Hebrew it is, Vedoresh-el Hammethim. A seeker unto the
dead.

A like unto this deceit of Satan, was another of his devices. Viz. He would
appear Spectrally in the shape of a Neighbor unto the afflicted, and say, I
killed such and such a person, and relate in that shape the manner of the
deceased's departure out of the world, by plausible and seemingly true
circumstances which was in the day of it, too much credited to augment
Suspicions against the accused: But the invalidity of such accusations appears
by what is already spoken concerning the Apparition of Ghosts.

CHAPTER. XI.
14. SOme have laid great weight upon this, When something supposed to be
bewitched, or to contain the charm by which the enchantment is wrought is
burned in the fire, and the party suspected comes to the fire, or seems to be
burnt after it, or by such like ways concerned; this has been esteemed a
farther presumption that they are guilty. As in Sir Matthew Hale his condemning
Amy Duny, Printed Anno 1682. A toad found in the blanket of Durent (said to be
bewitched) was held in the fire till it made an horrible noise, and the next
day Amy Duny (who was suspected to bewitch Durent) was found all grievously
scorched with the fire. The use of such experiments is justly condemned by
Perkins and others, as after a sort a practice of Witchcraft: Yet the seeming
discovery hereby made has found entertainment by those that oppose the means
used.

But before we give credence to such a discovery, we must be very circumspect
least we be deceived by humane knavery; as happened in a case nigh Richmond
Island, circiter Anno 1659.

One Mr. Thorpe a drunken Preacher, was gotten in to Preach at Black point
under the appearance and profession of a Minister of the Gospel, and boarded at
the house of Goodman Bailey, and Baylyes Wife observed his Conversation to be
contrary to his calling, gravely told him his way was contrary to the Gospel of
Christ, and desired him to reform his Life or leave her house. So he departed
from the house, and turned her Enemy, and found an opportunity to do her an
injury: and it so fell out that Mr. Jordan of Spurwink had a Cow dyed, and
about that time Goody Bailey had said, she intended such a day to travel to
Casco-Bay. Mr. Thorpe goes to Mr Jordans man or men and says, the Cow was
bewitched to death, and if they would lay the carcass in a place he should
appoint, he would burn it, and bring the Witch: and accordingly the Cow is laid
by the path that led from Black point to Casco, and set on fire that day Goody
Ba^ly was to travel that way, and so she came by while the Carcass was in
burning, and Thorpe had her questioned for a Witch: But Mr. Jordan interposed
in her behalf: and said his Cow dyed by his Servants negligence, and to cover
their own fault they were willing to have it imputed to Witchcraft; and Mr.
Thorpe knew of Goody Baylyes intended Journey, and orders my Servants (said he)
without my approbation, to burn my Cow in the way where Bailey is to come; and
so unriddled the knavery, and delivered the innocent.

But suppose the case where there is no such deceit, and the suspected party
comes to it, when such a thing is burned, or seems extraordinarily hurt or
concerned at such a time, how will this prove the party guilty of the crime, he
or she is suspected of? If any way, it must (1.) Proceed from some natural
cause, or sympathy in nature, between the thing burned, and the Witches Body;
but no reason can be given of this; for a charm is wrought by the Devils power,
and not by any natural power of the Sorcerer, conveying any natural venom from
their own body, which by the operation of the fire should revert back into it
again, as to its center or fountain. (2) Or from the immediate hand of God,
causing this effect for discovery of the Guilty; which we have no warrant from
the Word of God to expect (as was said in another case, Chapt. 8.) (3) Or by
means of the person burning the thing, and using it as a charm to find out the
person that laid the enchantment upon the thing burnt; which if it be affirmed
truly, would rather prove the burner the Sorcerer; and so tend to clear the
suspected. (4.) Or it proceeds from the Compact made between the Devil and the
Sorcerer; which if any affirm, I ask how know you there is any such Covenant
made? that is first to be proved, and then that this is one article in that
Covenant, and that the Devil will attend to, and keep his part of the Covenant
inviolable. Neither of which can be demonstrated. (5.) Or this suffering is a
mere fantasy, or the free agency of the Devil, who is a liar from the
beginning, and therefore not to be he^ded. This Experiment is like the ways of
trying by water, fire, bottling of Urine, etc. all which have been justly
condemned as a sort of charms to be rejected by Christians.

Among the Confessors, Anno 1692. was a Negro Woman, who charged two women to
make her a Witch, describing how she see her mark in the Devils Book. And said,
if she might be permitted, she would fetch the things whereby she tormented the
afflicted complainers. And accordingly brought an Handkerchief, wherein several
knots were tied, rags of Cloth, a piece of Cheese and a piece of grass. And as
I was credibly informed, some compelled her to swall^w the grass, and that
night she was burned in ^er flesh; and one took a piece of her ragg and burnt
it in the fire, and one of the Afflicted that had complained of her, was
presently burned on the hand. Another piece of her rags was put under water,
and then others complainants were choked, and strived for breath as if under
water: And another ran to the River as if she would drown her self. Here note,
that the rags on which, as the Confessor said, the Witchcraft was laid, did
when put into fire and water, affect the persons supposed to be thereby
bewitched more than the Charmer her self. And probably the cause may be, that
Satan, the Lord permitting him, may inflict his mischief on the person, the
Spectators or Actors herein suppose to be concerned, suiting hereby his design
to man's faith about it. And if so, the reason why any suspected person is
hereby concerned is not because they are guilty, but because they are suspected.

15. If the above named Signs singly taken, are not sufficient to prove a
person guilty of this Crime; then when many, or most of these suspicions above
named center upon the same person, they cannot prove them guilty. Nay, all of
them may be fixed upon the same person, by the wiles of the Devil, and yet the
person be innocent. For if Satan can assume and afflict any one in the shape of
an innocent, as has been already proved, he may also in shape of a Ghost of
the deceased accuse them, and so act over the suspicions mentioned.

Quae singula non prosunt junct a non juvant. I find in the trials and
condemnations that have been in England and Ireland, several of them have
proceeded upon sundry of these suspicions put together; and so the total thence
arising has amounted to a condemnation. See Glanvil, part 2 page 118. to 209.
In particular in the case of Julian Cox before Judge Archer, An. 1663. page 191.

But probably it may be said, that the methods which I except against have been
used with good success, for by such things Witchcrafts and Witches have been
discovered, and some brought to confession and repentance, and given undeniable
demonstrations of the reality of their guilt, and recovery after it out of that
snare of the Devil and therefore such ways of discovery are still to be used.

Ans. 1. Let us take it for granted, that these means have occasioned the
discovery of Witches; yet if any of them a^ (...) lawful they are not to be
used because of fo^mer success. Many things have been done irregularly which
God has turned to a good event; as the lying of Jacob to get the birthright;
the Selling of Joseph by his Brethren. Yea, the diabolical divination of
Nebucadnezar. Ezekiel. 21.21. to 25. verse. proved prosperous to him. And Balaams
enchantments to procure a curse, God turned into a blessing to Israel* Yet none
of these things are to be imitated by us upon hope of the like event to follow.

2. If the discovery abovesaid has followed upon the use and dependence upon
the means abovesaid, it may be said to come from Satan (overruled by the Lord
to subserve his glorious purposes) as the instrument of discovery, who exposes
at some times his own Vassals to humane justice, that he may cut them off from
the earth: and therefore assumes their shapes or otherwise renders them
suspected to their Neighbors upon such kind of presumptions, as may wrap in
the guilty and innocent together, and thereby working upon the erroneous
principles of men, does (as we use to say, kill two birds with one stone,)
deliver up his own Servant to ruin, and give occasion for the condemnation
thereby of an innocent person. But Satan is not to be trusted when he speaks
truth, or does that which eventually proves good, because his aim is always to
do mischief thereby. Our Savior Christ would not accept Satan's worship and
testimony when he spoke true. Mark 5 6, 7, 8 And Paul was grieved in spirit
when the Devil gave an high testimony of him to be the Servant of the most high
God. Act. 16.16, 17, 18.

CHAPTER. XII.
16. BErnard says, Witches may be convicted by their Ecstasies: with the
delight whereof, Witches are so taken, that they will hardly conceal the same:
or however at some time or other they may be found in them. But the
insufficiency of this kind of proof will appear by considering the various
sorts of Ecstasies, and the diverse subjects of them. Ecstasies are either
natural, divine or diabolical.

1. Natural, which proceeds from the constitution of the body, and some violent
disease, as Fever, etc. whereby the imagination is strangly transported, and
the party conceives himself to be in some glorious place and company etc.
which proves but a mere dream of a man eating and drinking, but when he awaketh
his soul is empty. Isa 29 8.

2. Divine, as the trances of Peter, Act. 10.10. and of Paul, Act 22 17.

3. Or Diabolical, of Witches, persons Obsessed, or Possessed.

Some Histories speak of strange Ecstasies of confessed Witches. R. B. of the
kingdom of darkness. p. 69, 70. Tells us of a Woman confessing her self a
Witch, who pretended she had been turned into a Wolf and killed a Sheep and Cow
in that shape, and the Cow and Sheep were killed at that time. And of a man
Wolf that was suspected in that shape, to devour Cattle, and his face had
several scratches and hurts, which they said were given him by the Dogs that
took him for a Wolf, and he confessed himself, that twice a year he was changed
from a man to a Wolf. But this change could not be real, but an abuse of
Fantasy, either from a distracting Melancholy called Lycanthropia, whereby he
imagined he was transformed into a Wolf. Or else, if he were indeed a Wizzard,
the Devil cast him into a profound trance, whereby he imagined he was killing
Cattle as a Wolf; while the mischief done was other wise, and probably by a
real Wolf.

But those that have been obsessed have had strange Ecstasies; as some of our
afflicted persons have had their trance fits; in which they lay long time in a
Swound, and when they came out of them declared they had been carried to
delectable places, and had seen glorious sights of Men and Angels; as is in
part declared above, Chapt. 5. So that its easier to find a person possessed or
distracted by such Ecstasies, than to prove a person hereby in voluntary league
with the Devil.

17. I come next to consider the testimony of such as confessing themselves to
be Witches, do witness against others as partners with them in the same crime.
This has been accounted sufficient proof by the Common Law. See Keeble.
Ibidem. And Glanvil. Ibidem, p. 141. etc. The ground of it is from the received
Maxim, That Socii criminis, partners in a crime confessing their own guilt, and
discovering their companions, are fit and sufficient witnesses against those
their companions. As is frequently proved in cases of Murder, Treason, Robbery,
Theft etc. and why not as well in Witchcraft? Perkins makes this only a
presumption. But Bernard makes it a convictive evidence, when one or more
fellow-Witches, confessing their own Witchcraft, and bearing witness against
others; if they can make good the truth of their witness, and give sufficient
proof of it: As that they have seen them with their Spirits; -- or that they
have been together in their meetings, and such like. Now in the Examinations
and trials at Salem, there was great plenty of this kind of Testimony; for
about Fifty confessing, they most of them if not all accused others as partners
with them at their Witch meetings; as at a great Pond nigh Andover, some of
them said, they met together, and some at Newburyfalls, and were Baptized there
by Satan. And some at Salem Village as above showed, Chap. 2. and 3. Some said,
they stole an horse and rode upon it in the air from Andover to Salem Prison,
and there through the grate discoursed with one whom they accused. Another
declared that she with widow S. went to Capt. W. and she said S. gave him a
blow with a great stick, and yet were to him invisible: Capt. W. declared he
had a sore blow as if with a great stick, but saw no body. Widow S. denied that
she struck him; then M. G. the confessor very boldly looked up in her face, and
said, G. S. you know you did strike him, and I saw you do it, and then told the
manner how it was done, and how they came to him and returned. There were many
such instances which seemed exceeding demonstrative in that day. Yet upon an
after review of the whole these confessors testimony appears to be very
doubtful, if not utterly false. Yet I would not deny all evidence of confessors
to be rejected: for the case may be so that persons may give such infallible
signs of their own guilt of this, (as well as other crimes) and such tokens of
real repentance for the same, as may render their testimony notwithstanding
their former transgression as credible, as the testimony of any other
confessing Malefactor. As Manasseh who used Witchcraft, and dealt with a
familiar Spirit; and afterward besought the Lord and humbled himself greatly
etc. 2 Chronicles. 33.6, 12, 13. Was as fit (had he been a Subject) to be a
competent witness in any Court of Judicature, against those that had been
partners with him in those abominations, as any other man.

Here we must distinguish between Penitent Confessors, and Impenitent Magicians.

If a Magician or white Witch (as they are called) come in to discover and
testify against another to be a Witch; This ( as Perkins says, Chap. 7. p.
209.) is no more then the Devils testimony, because by the Devils help he
reveals the Witch. And indeed such are but the Devils tools to do his work at
his beck, and so will as readily accuse the innocent as the guilty. But the
reasons that sway with me to question the truth of the confessors, Anno 1692.
notwithstanding their seeming repentance for such crimes, are such as these.

1. These confessors by their plausible confessions and accusations of others
begetting credit, have been a great if not the greatest Engine of Satan to
carry on the accusing and apprehending of others, until this matter came to
such an height, that if it had not been stopped might have brought the best
Christians in the Country, under the imputation of that abomination, and have
involved all in confusion or blood. The kingdom (...) Satan being so evident in
the winding up of that whole contrivance, leads us to see his finger in this
principal means, for the managment of it.

2. Some of these confessors were first under diabolical vexations, (as the
other afflicted or obsessed persons were) and under those torments did, as they
say, sign to a Book presented to them, real or imaginary, by which they
obtained ease of their pains: And then Satan in their shapes afflicted others
who accused them until they confessed. And after such confessions against
themselves, they also accused others, as being with them, and they were
afflicted themselves, as they had been at the first and complained against
their Neighbors as others did. So that these persons may justly be esteemed
Daimonizomenoi, under some kind of obsession and delusion of Satan all this
time, and so their Fantasies and Senses abused by him all the while; Satan
sometimes tearing of them as a devouring Lion, and at other times beguiling of
them, as a Subtle Serpent.

3. Others that were not so afflicted before their Confessing, were so
presently after it, and so may be reckoned in the same predicament with the
others.

4. I am jealous, and I hope with a godly jealousy, that some by these their
accusations of others, hoped to gain time, and get favor from the Rulers. And
that some of the inferior sort of people did ill Offices, by promising them
favor thereby more than they had ground to engage. And that some under these
temptations regarded not as they should what became of others, so that they
could thereby serve their own turns. And I have been credibly informed, that
some have since acknowledged so much.

5. These Confessors since deny their Confessions, and accusing of others, or
say they remember nothing of what they said or did in that day, whether truly
or not, will be more manifest another day. We may then well question the
validity of those Testimonies which the Testifiers themselves do not stand to
justify now the scean is changed.

18. I come in the next place to consider a persons evidence against him or her
self by their Confession upon examination and trya^ This is by Scripture
declared to be sufficient Evidence against persons Compotes mentis, of a sound
understanding, Luke 19.22. Out of thine own mouth will I condemn, or judge
thee. Yea, sufficient to justify an Execution upon it, whether the person speak
truly or not. As David said to the Amalekite that affirmed he had killed Saul.
Thy mouth has testified against thee, 2 Samuel 1.16. Yet its very probable that
Saul slew himself without the help of any other. 1 Samuel 31. 4, 5. But there
have been excepted, self-accusers when distracted, demoniacks, Lunatic, under
witted, over-watched, and persons surprised upon sudden fear or hope of favor
to be thereby gained. So that we may hope some of those at Salem belied
themselves.

1. Those that being grievously vexed with the Devil did, and said they well
understood not what themselves. As above said.

2. It Is probable, some being accused, and their own Relations among others,
suspecting them, and vehemently urging them to confess themselves guilty, were
so surprised and amazed, that they confessed that in their haste, which they
have cause to repent at leisure. And having once accused themselves, they
feared to retract it presently lest a worse thing should come upon them. But
since they have recanted, those Confessions, and some such there were, whose
conversations before and since that day have been sober and blameless, and give
cause to hope better things of them.

3 But there were others, whose Confessions seemed more free and demonstrative
of reality, and some who confessed upon real or pretended horror of
Conscience; and these attended with such circumstances, that some will say,
there is no believing mankind confessing their guilt of any C^ime, if these
must not be believed. But I leave the true state of their case, to a farther
discovery, when the Lord ^lease, in this life, or when God shall Judge the
secrets of men.

CHAPTER XIII.
HAving spoken of many supposed presumptions to discover a Witch, and showed
the invalidity of them. I shall enquire what is meant by a Witch. Exodus 22.18.
For the clearing whereof, I shall enquire who are the Criminals condemned,
Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. Concerning whom.

1. Observe, That they were all Heathens, who being ignorant of the true God,
worshipped the Devil instead of God; so that all the crimes there condemned,
are crimes which so far as they related to any Deity, respected the Devil as
their God.

2. That all the nine crimes there condemned were of a like nature in general,
and are either diverse names for the same thing, or set forth sins very like one
to another. (1.) This appears in the frequent putting of sundry of them
together, when they are prohibited o^ condemned, as, Lev. 19.31. and 20.6, 31.
The Wizard, and him that has a familiar spirit are condemned together; and
Mic. 5.12. Witch crafts and Soothsayers. And Jer. 27.9. Diviners, Dreamers,
Enchanters and Sorcerers, that is Witches, are put together. Dan. 2.2, 27.
Magicians, Sorcerers, Astrologers, Soothsayers are conjoined. So, Isa. 47.9,
12, 13. and 1 Samuel 28.3, 8, 9. Isa. 8.19. and 19.3. (2.) The same persons are
frequently charged with the guilt of the abominations, signified by several of
these names together. As Manasseh is charged with six of these abominations. 2 Chronicles. 33.6. viz. Causing his children to pass through the fire, observing
times, using Enchantments, using Witchcrafts, dealing with a familiar spirit,
dealing with Wizards. Ahaz is charged. 2 Chronicles. 28.3. with the first of these.
The ten Tribes are charged with three of these abominations, 2 King. 17.17.
viz. Divination, Enchantments, and causing their Children to pass through the
fire. (3.) Sundry of these crimes are ranked with the gross Idolatrous
worshipping of false Gods of the Apostates from the true God in Israel. As
Manasseh, is charged with worshipping Baalim and the Host of Heaven, and then
with observing times, etc. 2 Chronicles. 33.2, 3, 5, 6. So Ahaz, 2 Chronicles. 28.3, 4,
23, 25. So the ten Tribes. 2 King. 17.7, 8, 11, 12, 16, 17. And Judah, Isa.
2.6, 7, 8, 9. They are said to be like the Philistin^ in Soothsayings, and
worship Idols, etc. See Psalm. 106.35, 36, 37, 38. 2 King. 23.5, 8, 10, 12, 13,
24. (4.) There seems then in all these abominations to be some idolatrous
worship of the Heathen Gods, that is the Devil, whereby some special service
was done to him; and that in expectation of some great good or benefit they
expected to receive from him thereby. So the Egyptians in their distress sought
to the Idols, Charmers, Wizards, and to them that had familiar spirits. Isa.
19.3. That is that by those persons and means they might implore and obtain the
assistance of their Gods, to deliver them from the calamities felt or feared.

1. The first then is making thy Son to pass through the Fire, that is to
Moloch, or any false God, forbidden and condemned, Lev 18.21. and 20.2. The sin
of Ahaz. 2 King. 16 3. and of Manasseh. 2 King. 21.6. who observed times, used
enchantments, dealt with familiar spirits and Wizards, and used Witchcrafts. 2 Chronicles. 33.6. So that we may observe this iniquity has some affinity with
Witchcraft and the sins mentioned, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. partly because joined with
them in this place; and also because this and Manassehs Witchcrafts, etc are
joined together in the places above mentioned. And this sin is also reckoned
with the Divinations and Enchantments of the Ten Tribes. 2 King. 17.17, 30, 31.
Judah fell to it. This iniquity was a solemn dedication, or sacrificing their
Sons and Daughters to the Devil, Psalm. 106 37. though under the name of a God,
as of Moloch Lev. 20.2. or some other false Gods. Deuteronomy. 12 30, 31. And this
Dedication was as the Ancients describe it, of two kinds.

1. By burning their Children to death in the Fire, as a Sacrifice to the
Devil; which seems to be signified by the burning in the fire, Deu. 12 31. and
Psalm 106.37, 38. For they shed the innocent blood of their children. So the
Graecians sacrificed to Diana, Agamemnons Daughter, to procure a good Wind for
their Fleet. Ovid Metamorphosis, lib. 13 This Sacrificing by the apostate Jews,
in Jeremiah's time, was in Tophet, in the Valley of the Son of Hinnom. Jer.
7.31 and 19.5, 6. From hence it is that Hell is called in the Greek, Geenna.
Mat. 5.22, 29, 30. From the hebrew Gehinnom, and Tophet. Isa. 30.33. God hereby
showing the detestation he had of their Idolatry and Cruelty in those
Sacrifices.

2. There was another sort of passing through the Fire; when the Child passed
between two fires, as a solemn dedication of him to that false God they
sacrificed unto. This probably was Manasseh's sin, 2 Chronicles. 33.6. For it is
said, be caused his children to pass through the fire. But he did not sacrifice
to death all his Children; Though he might by such a dedication, consecrate
them to the host of Heaven, or to the Heathen Gods. By either or both these
ways, such Idolaters did make or confirm a Covenant with the Devil by
sacrifice. As Gods people did make a Covenant with God, by sacrificing to him,
Psalm. 50 5. And did thereby show their seeking help from the Devil, their
invocation of him, and dependence upon him for some great things they supposed
he could supply them with. So that here was one kind of charming or enchantment
used to a fall God, which was condemned to death. Exodus 22.20, For by the
using these abominable Ceremonies, they did invocate the Devil to do them some
great good. As the Graecians sacrificed Agamemnons Daughter to procure a Wind
for their Navy, and having a fair Wind, afterward imputed it unto their
Sacrifice. And by that Law, Lev. 20.2, 3. He that gives any of his seed to
Moloch, shall surely be put to death. These Sacrificers in Israel, ought to dye.

2. The second Sin foretold, Deuteronomy 18.10. is, That uses Divination. Kosem
Kesaamim in Hebrew, from the verb Kasam to divine, which is in its derivatives
sometimes used in a good sense. Prove. 16.10. Isa. 3.2. Kos^m, The prudent. But
Deuteronomy. 18 10. used in an evil sense. And Ezekiel. 12.24. for a flattering
divination; such was Balaam, Josh. 13.22 A soothsayer, or diviner: the
Philistine Priests 1 Samuel 6.2. Judahs false Prophets, Ezekiel 13 6, 7, 23. Jer 14
14. Ezekiel. 22.28. Micah 3 6, 11. Zech. 10.2. Jer. 29.8. Though they prophesied
in the Name of the Lord: but false and vain visions Applied also to the
Babylonish Priests, Ezekiel. 24. 21.23. and to their diviners, Isa. 44.25. And
Saul's rebellion is compared to the sin of Witchcraft, 1 Samuel 15.23. Or of
Kosem, that is divination, which shows it was a great sin: whether the divining
were by, or in the Name of the true God, or a false God: And it was a
prophesying of things to come true or false, or using means whereby they might
foreknow future contingencies, and so be able to foretell them, as Ezekiel. 21.21,
23.

3. Is an observed of times. Hebr. Megnonen. Always used to show a wicked
practice, as 2 Chronicles 33.6. It Is one of the sins of Manasseb. It Is forbidden, Lev.
19 26. Neither shall ye observe times. A sin of the Philistines, imitated by
the wicked Jews, Isa 2.6. there translated Soothsayers: and from this, some of
them are called, Sons of the Sorceress, Isai. 57.2. Of Gnonenabi A sin of the
Amonit es, Moabites, and other heathens condemned, Jer. 27.3, 9, 10. translated
Enchanters; when they prophesied a lie to them; saying, ye shall not serve the
King of Babylon. Some of the Hebrew Doctors derive the word from Gnajin, an
eye, and interpret it of them that hold and abuse the eyes, so as to make men
think, they see what is not really so. Some others derive it from Gnanan, a
cloud, and hold it to be a kind of divining by the cloud^. And others from
Gnon, time, who by their pretended skill foretell what times are good, or evil
to attend any weighty business in. Such are called Soothsayers, Micah 5 12 And
observer of times, Deuteronomy. 18.14. The Greek translation (which was before the
birth of Christ) call him Cledonizomenos; a foreteller of things to come, or a
fortune tellers.

4. Name is an Enchanter. Menachesh of the verb Nichesh, which is used in a
lawful sense, Genesis 30.27. I have learned by experience. And of Joseph's divining
by his cup, Gen 44.5, 15. Which Ainsworth rendereth, searching, search
diligently (that is) by this cup: Or (as it may be translated) make trial of
you; that is, whether you are such men as you profess your selves to be. And
indeed by this cup in Benjamins sack did Joseph try and search out his
brethren, to prove what love they did bear to their father Jacob and brother
Benjamin, which I understand to be the divining of Joseph there intended. But
mostly the word is used to signify some wicked practice: As for the
enchantments of Balaam, Numb. 24.1. and 23.23. Of Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33.6. Of
the ten tribes, 2 King. 17.17. And is condemned, Lev. 19 26.

5. Abomination is a Witch. Mechasheph Note this word is always used to set
forth some wicked abomination, and the worker of it. The Egyptian forcerers are
charged with it, Exodus 7.11. Who are called Sorcerers, or Witches. Mechashepim
And Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33 6. used Witchcraft: and the wise men of Babylon, that
Nebucadnezer sent for to tell and interpret his dream, are called, Dan. 2.2.
Mechashepim Witches, or as it is translated Sorcerers. Such also were the
Prophets of the Edomites and heathen Nations, Jer. 27.9. called there
Sorcerers. And the Babylonians are (...) guilty of Witchcrafts, called
Sorcerys, Is^ ^7.9, 12. And Niniveh is called a Mistress of Witchcrafts, Nabum.
3.4 And Jezabel is charged by Jehu with this wickedness, 2 King 9.22. And Judah
also is charged with this abomination, Micah 5.12. Yea after their return from
Babylon, Mal. 3.5. Where the Lord threatens to be a swift witness against the
Sorcerers, or witches among them. The Septuagint Greek translation render this
word, which is by us called in the Scripture Witch and Sorcerer, by the name
Pharmacos, and their Witchcrafts and Sorcerys, they call Pharmaca and
Pharm^ceia: and so these Greek names are in the New Testament translated,
(which very much follows this Greek translation in quoting the Scriptures of
the old Testament) Gal. 5.20. Witchcraft, Sorcerys, Rev. 9.21. and 18.23. And
Sorcerers, Rev. 21.8. and 22.15.

6. The sixth iniquity here condemned is, A Charmer. Hebr. Chobe Chaber; a
Charmer of Charms: of Chaber, to join together in Society. Sometimes used for a
lawful Associating; but in Deuteronomy and other places, for a wicked joining
Society, as Isa 47.9, 12. translated Enchantment: stand now to thine
Enchantments, etc. And Psalm. 58.5. used to express the Charming of a Serpent.
The Greek call such an one, Epaiodan Epaioden: the Charmer of a Charm.

7. The seventh word is, A consulter with familiar Spirits. Hebr. its Shoel Ob,
that asks of Ob, the familiar Spirit; rendered by Buxtorf, Pytho, a sin
forbidden, Lev 19.31. So that the regarding those that have familiar Spirits is
prohibited, Lev. 19 31. and Lev. 20.27. The man or woman that has Ob, that is,
a familiar Spirit, shall be put to death. See Lev. 20 6 This was one of
Manassehs sins, 2 Chronicles 33 6. 2 King. 21.6. And for going to such a Woman the
Lord killed Saul, 1 Chronicles. 10.13. See of these, Isa. 8 19. and 19.3 and 29.4.
Such as these are commonly joined with Wizards, as in the Scriptures quoted.
And such Saul cut off, 1 Samuel 28.3, 9. and yet after that sought to such an one
to his own destruction, 1 Samuel 28 7, to 21. namely to the Witch at End^r. The
Greek translators in the Scriptures above quoted, call them, Eggastrimuthai:
persons that speak in or from their bellies, because of old time as Histories
mentioned, those who prop^ecved or spoke by inspiration of the Devil, or
heathen Gods, spoke as from their bellies, when they gave answers to the people
from their heathen oracles. Which probably is pointed at, Isa. 8. 19 Where such
are said to peep and mutter; and Isa. 29 4. To speak out of the ground, and out
of the dust.

8 The Eighth name for these abominable persons is, A Wizard. Hebr. Jiddegnoni;
of Jadang to know. But here notes such an art and way of knowing as is wicked,
not allowed of by God, and therefore not proceeding from nature, or lawful art,
or divine Revelation; therefore from Satan Such are condemned as worthy of
death. Lev 20.27 And it was one of the Iniquities of Manasseh, 2 Chronicles 33.6. He
dealt with Wizards. Gnashah Jiddegnoni; He prepared, obtained or made use of
Wizards. This name is commonly joined with the having familiar spirits; as,
Levit 19 31 and 20.6, 27. 1 Samuel 28. 39 2 King. 9.21.6. and 23, 24. Isa. 8.19
and 19.3. So that it seems to be another name to signify one that has a
familiar spirit, for his knowledge thereby, or at least to agree in the main
with such.

9. Name is, A Necromancer, Doresh El. Hammethim, a Seeker to the Dead. This
was the sin of the Witch at Endor to seek unto dead Samuel to give counsel to
living Saul, 1 Samuel 28. which is also condemned. Isa. 8.19 Should a people seek
for the living to the dead? This opinion was among the Heathen, that the Dead
might be raised, and give them advice. So Pomphey in his distress desired the
Ghost of a dead Soldier might come to him, to give him counsel what to do. And
by such means, the Devil counterfeiting himself, this or that dead person,
often deceived them And by such kind of Apparitions, the Doctrine of Purgatory,
and other Superstitions have been much rivetted among the vulgar with the
Papists. By viewing the crimes condemned, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11. as they are
mentioned in other Scriptures, we shall find, they all speak of sins very like
one to another, and some of them but diverse names for the same crime. The Lord
aiming in this place to condemn all those diabolical Artists, by whatever names
they were known among the Israelites, or Canaanites. For we shall find several
of these names fixed upon the same person, as on Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33 6. Six
of these names, or crimes are fastened upon him. And the Witch at Endor is
mentioned, 1 Samuel 28. as one that was a Necromancer, a Wizard, and having a
familiar spirit, and a Diviner by it. See also, Isa. 47. 9 12, 13. Jer. 27.9.
Hence then the way to understand the crimes pointed at in the prohibitions
mentioned in Deuteronomy. 18. is to examine what were the crimes those stand charged
with in Scripture who are branded with any of these names.

I begin with the Sorcerers or Witches of Egypt, Exodus 7. These did imitate the
real Miracles of Moses, in making frogs, and turning his Staff into a Serpent,
and water into blood: And this was done by these Sorcerers, either by some
humane power, art and dexterity, or by the assistance of the Gods of Egypt
(mentioned, Numb. 33 4. 2 Samuel 7.23.) that is by the Devils aid. But they could
not do these things by humane power, art, or dexterity; therefore by the
Egyptian Gods. i. e. the Devils. This will appear, if we consider what was the
case between Moses and Pharach, and why Pharaoh sent for his Sorcerers. Moses
by the Lords commission said to Pharaoh, Exo. 5.1. And the Lord (or Jehovah,
for so it is in Hebrew) the God of Israel says, Let my people go, etc. Pharaoh
answered, Who is Jehovah that I should obey his voice? As if he had said, I
know not this Jehovah, I worship other Gods, even the Gods of Egypt. Now then
Moses must prove Jehovah ought to be obeyed, and that must be by working a
Miracle as a sign to Pharaoh. This Pharaoh asks of Moses, and God promises
that he will do for and by Moses, Exodus 7.3, 5, 9. The case between Pharaoh and
Moses, was somewhat like the case between Elijah and Baals Prophets. 1 King.
18. Whose God should be worshipped? and this must be tried by some sign, as
here by frogs, lice, locusts, etc. So there by fire fetched from Heaven to
consume the Sacrifice; and in both cases, the Lord shows he is greater than all
Gods, as Jethro acknowledged; For in the thing wherein they dealt proudly, the
Lord was above them. In prosecution of this Commission, Moses and Aaron turn
their Rod into a Serpent, and the water of Egypt into blood, and bring frogs to
cover the land of Egypt: Here were real Miracles, which prove that Jehovah
ought to be obeyed. For that Message which is confirmed by evident Miracles,
comes from the God of Power and Truth, and therefore ought to be obeyed.
Pharaoh now will try if his Sorcerers cannot do as much as Moses and Aaron,
that he may invalidate the Miracles of Moses, and it is said, they did in like
manner, Exo. 7.11, 12, 22. and 8.7. Gnashashu Chen. They did somewhat like to
what Aaron had done. If it were by humane power and dexterity only, then it
must be by bringing Serpents, Blood and Frogs under their garments, or the
like, and by slight of hand, slipping them down before the company with such
celerity, that the things first presented, might seem to be transformed into
another nature. But that it was not so appears,

1. In that they could not be provided before hand with Serpents, blood and
frogs, to present before Pharaoh at those times, because no humane art could
tell them beforehand, what Miracles Aaron would work, to enable them to stock
themselves with such provision before hand.

2. Had they so done by mere humane art, there had been no comparison between
the actings of Moses and theirs; and so no argument to direct whose God was to
be obeyed, whether Jehovah, or the Gods of Egypt. For Pharaoh and his
Courtiers, yea, and Moses also could easily discover such legerdemain, and
indeed it would have rendered the Magicians ridiculous, and Pharaoh for
improving of them. For Pharaoh was convicted that what Aaron did was a reality;
for Aarons rod devoured the Magicians rods, and the blood was so over all the
land of Egypt, that the fish died, and the River stank, and the Egyptians
wanted drink, and the frogs so covered the Land of Egypt, that Pharaoh
acknowledged they came by Jehovah. For he requesteth Moses and Aaron to entreat
Jehovah to take the frogs away, Chap. 8.8.

3. If they had only brought Serpents, Frogs, etc. from other places, and
thrown them down by juggling slight of hand; then when Aaron brought lice upon
man and beast, they could have taken lice also, and scattered them about; for
they tried by their enchantments to bring forth lice, but could not: and yet
lice were as easily, if not more easily obtained than frogs and serpents, and
they were men still, and had their hands and feet to act with now as well as
before: But now they are convinced and ^onfess, This is the finger of God; that
is of a greater God than any we worship and work by.

4. The Magicians brought frogs up upon the land of Egypt. ver. 7 which shows
they produced frogs in more places than just where they stood and acted; and
therefore did not act merely by slight of hand.

Hence we may conclude, that the Serpents, Blood, and Frogs the Magicians
showed, were effects above man's power, and not by Jehovah, therefore by the
Devil, the God of Egypt. Whether the Devil did only delude the sight, and
bewitch the eyes of Pharaoh, and the Egyptians, or make real frogs and serpents
out of the putrid matter in Egypt, or make aerial bodies like them, or that it
was the Devils assuming such like shapes, I determine not: But we may observe,
that here the Devil, and his Magicians went very far, and farther than at other
times; for now Moses is at hand to overcome their delusions by the power of
Jehovah, and to convince beholders, that there is no God of the Heathen, can
work like the God of Israel. Yet for a time the true Miracles of Moses, and the
seeming ones of the Magicians seem to be pretty much alike. For it is said, they
cast down every man his rod, and they became Serpents. It is not said, and they
shuffled in Serpents instead of their rods, but their rods were serpents, at
least in outward appearance. These effects then so like to Moses zeal Miracles,
might move the Magicians to try a fourth time if they could not by their
enchantments produce lice, but here their power failed. And the true reason
was, their God was in chains, and the Lord bound him that he should proceed no
further to delude men by his pretended miraculous power.

2. I Enquire what was the Crime of the Woman at Endor, that had a familiar
spirit? 1 Samuel 28.7, etc.

A. She was such an one as Saul had cut off as being a Wizard, and having a
familiar spirit. ver. 3. and 9. In hebrew they are called, Eth Haobeth; that
is, those that have Ob. and ver. 7. Esheth bagnalath Ob. A woman that is
mistress of Ob. that is rendered one that is Mistress of Pytho, a Prophesying
Spirit. Enggastrimuthos as above declared; one that speaks as from her belly by
help of the Devil.

Q. What then was this Pytho, or Ob?

A. It was a divining spirit; to divine by the Devil. Whence the possessed
Damosel, Acts 16.16. is said to have the spirit of Pytho, which was the Devil
that possessed her, by whom she did Soothsay. The Jewish Rabbi, Aben Esra
says, they were called Ob, because from a belly swelled like a bottle, they
gave out their Oracles. And Oboth is translated bottles, Job 32.19. Ainsworth
on Deuteronomy. 18.11. says, such Magicians are so called, because they speak with an
hollow voice as out of a bottle.

This Woman at Ender was then one that only played tricks with a bottle, or one
that was mistress of Ob the Devil as her familiar spirit to wait upon her; not
the former, therefore the latter. For (1.) By this her Spirit, she offers to
bring up to Saul whom he desired. v. 11. (2.) She brings up the supposed
Samuel, ( i. e. as I conceive, the Devil in Samuels likeness) That does so much
resemble Samuel for his Age, Complexion, Mantle and Voice, that Saul takes him
to be real Samuel: And makes answer to him as if he were the real Samuel. ver.
15. And receives a sad message fr^ him, as if it had been spoken by Samuel
himself ver. 16, 17, 18, 19. So that this Woman was a Necromancer in raising up
dead Samuel, or the Devil in his likeness. Some indeed do plead that this woman
only played tricks with a bottle, and a cunning knave assisting of her,
counterfeited the voice of Samuel, and deceived Saul thereby. And they plead
that Oboth is in one place translated bottles, viz. Job 32.19. Whether truly or
not, I now stay not to discuss; but if it were truly translated so here, yet in
fourteen other places, Ob. and Oboth is translated a familiar spirit, or
spirits; and we are to compare this in 1 Samuel 28. with those many Scriptures
where it is rendered so as referring to an Evil Spirit.

But say they Manasseh, 2 Chronicles. 33.6^ dealt with a familiar spirit: hebrew,
it is Gnashah Ob. which they would render he made Ob. Now say they he could not
make a familiar spirit, although he might a bottle.

To which I answer.

1. The verb Gnashah, signifies to get, obtain, or set up (as the Dutch
translate it) so that here is nothing in this place to make for their turn; for
though he could not make a familiar spirit, yet he could obtain, or set up a
familiar spirit.

2 Manasseh his sin in this was like his Sacrificing his Children through the
fire, which was certainly a kind of invocation of a false God, i. e. the Devil;
and the description of his apostasy, v. 3 to 8. shows that he was turned from
the true God to the Gods of the heathen, to worship, and invocate them, and why
not to have a spirit to obtain answers by, called Ob? But that this Witch at
Endor did more than play tricks with a bottle, appears. (1) Because her sin
was a capital crime, and they that sought to such persons were cursed of God,
Lev. 19 31. and 20 6, 27. Isa. 8.19. And it cannot be apprehended that she and
others would hazard their lives merely to play tricks with a bottle, or that
the people heathens and Israelites should be so exceedingly addicted to follow
such, as to need such severe prohibitions, and punishments therefore. (2.) Saul
had put many such to death for having Ob: And its not likely this woman after
this would keep such a bottle to play with to the hazard of her life. (3) Saul
and his Courtiers that had cut off so many of them, must necessarily know what
the crime was, they were put to death for. (4) Saul fought not for one that
could play tricks with a bottle; but for one that by the help of her familiar
could raise Samuel (or a Spirit in his likeness) which was agreeable to a
corrupt opinion among them, that they might seek help from the dead: forbidden
Isa. 8.19. Should a people seek for the living to the dead, i. e. to the Souls
of the Dead. (5.) If she had only played tricks with a bottle, how could she or
any other personate Samuel, as he did speaking to Saul, v. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19?
If it be said, she had a man, a knave, to come in such a garb to personate the
voice and mantle of Samuel: Then I ask, how in the night time this woman
without notice given could have a counterfeiting knave and mantle in such a
readiness? For Saul came to her in the night, and without warning, v 8, 9. (6)
A mere juggling knave or queen could not prophecy the victory of the
Philistians, the death of Saul and his Sons, Jonathan and the rest, as the
supposed Samuel did. But Satan might so know and prophesy (as I may farther
show hereafter.) For Saul dyed for this very sin, in going to ask counsel of
one that had a familiar Spirit, to enquire of it, 1 Chronicles. 10.13, 14. And this
the Lord might discover to Satan for the punishment of Saul, as he did the
death of Ahab unto Satan, upon a like account. As Micaiah was showed in a
vision, 1 King. 22.19, to 23.

3. I enquire, What was the professun and practice of the Babylonian Sorcerers
mentioned, Isa. 47.9, 12, 13, 14 Ezekiel. 21.21. Dan. 2.2.

A. 1. They were like the Sorcerers of Egypt, for they have the same general
names of Sorcerers and wise men.

2. They were Chotsim bacochabim; that is, Prophets by the Stars: (translated
Stargazers) for Chotsab is used to signify a Prophet, or Seer. Isa. 30.10. 2 Samuel 24 11. 1 Chorn. 21 9, and 25.5. 2 Chronicles 9 29 and 12.15. and 19.2. and
29.25. and 35.15. Amos 7.12 Here are ten times or places where this word is
used to signify a Prophet; which give light unto this place, to show that these
Stargazers did prophesy by the Stars. And it cannot be understood of any
foretelling by them, of signs, seasons days and years, which God ordained them
for, Genesis 1.14. For that is a knowledge lawful and commendable, and attainable
by lawful art and study: but what the Prophet charge them with here was
unlawful, and therefore such a kind of prophesying, as proceeded from a false
God, that is the Devil.

3. They are called Monthly Prognosticaters. Modignim lechadashim, knowers by
the months; Modignim proceeds from the same Radix with Jiddegnoni, a Wizard,
and has some affinity with it here. These then were a sort of foretellers of
things to come, by the Months or Moon.

4. Add to this, that v. 9. and 12. they are charged with the guilt of Sorcerys
or Witchcrafts, and Enchantments, which shows what kind of Prophets they were.

2. They used Witchcraft in a way of operation, whereby they endeavored to
deliver their Country from the evils coming on them. This appears, (1.) By
the challenge Isaiah makes to them, v. 12. Stand now to thine enchantments,
etc. if so be thou shall be able to profit, if so be thou may prevail. q. d.
They hoped to put off the mischief and desolation that was to come upon them,
by their Witchcrafts, etc. (2.) He tells them, their Astrologers etc. should
not save them from the things coming on them; but should be as stubble and the
fire should burn them etc. v. 13, 14, 15. Which intimates, that these
Astrologers etc. did strive and endeavor it with hopes to pre^ail; but the
Lord would ovetrule and disappoint their endeavors.

3. Compare this with Ezekiel 21.21. Where their diviners used divinations to know
secret futurities, viz. Whether they should go to Jerusalem and prosper, or to
P^ath and prosper. That this was a diabolical ^nation may be seen, if we
consider. (1.) The thing they sought for was a future contingent event to man
unknown. (2.) The means they use to discover this secret were, by Images or
Teraph^ (which were the Devils oracles,) and by arrows, and by looking into
the liver, for signs of direction to know which of these places they should
first go to, and whether they should pro^per in their way. And these means had
no virtue in them to make any such discovery. (3.) Therefore they did by these
rites and ceremonies invocate their gods to reveal these things to them. The
Lord indeed did unknown to them overruled the divination so that according to
their Superstitious imaginations they were inclined to go against Jerusalem,
and God made it to prosper; not thereby approving, or excusing their invocating
false Gods: but that thereby he might use them, as the rod of his wrath against
the people of his wrath. (4.) By comparing these two Scriptures above, we may
see of what stamp the wise men of Babylon were, who were sent for by
Nebuchadnezar, to tell and interpret his dream, Dan. 2.2. And to interpret his
other dream Dan. 4.6, 7. And by Belshazzer, to read the hand writing and
interpret it, Dan 5.7. viz. Men that had peculiar intimacy with, and special
aid from their false Gods, as the Sorcerers and diviners mentioned, Isa. 47.
and Ezekiel 21. For (1.) They have the same name, Michashpim Sorcerers and
Witches: and Chartummim, one of the names of the Sorcerers of Egypt, Exodus
7.11. (2) This was agreeable to the end those Kings sent for them, viz to
discover secrets which other men could not. And they confidently profess a
skill to interpret the Dream, if they may know what it is. Dan. 2 6. Which
seems to hold forth that they depended upon a power superhumane, to discover to
them the interpretation of Dreams; yet they confess they cannot reveal the
dream it self. And good reason, for the Gods they served knew it not. Yet they
say the Gods whose dwelling is not with flesh, could reveal it. Which shows
they acknowledge a Divine Power that knew the greatest secrets, who is indeed
the true God unknown to them. And when Daniel had revealed the Dream and its
interpretation. Dan. 2. And afterward interpreted another dream. Dan. 4. He is
acknowledged to excel all the Wise men of Babylon in that, in him was the
spirit of the Holy Gods. Dan. 4.8. and 5.11. That is, the spirit of a God above
their Gods; a God that was as Nebuchadnezzar confesses, Dan. 2.47. A God of
Gods, and a Revealer of secrets. The High God. Dan 4.2. Yet this hinders not
but that the Magicians, etc. had more of the spirit of their Gods, than others
had, though not equal to Daniel.

Q. 2. What was the sin of the Sorcerers, etc of Edom and other Nations, for
which Jeremiah warns them not to bearken to them? Jer. 27.3, 9.

A. It was a prophesying a lie unto them, in the name of their false Gods,
saying to them, ye shall not serve the King of Babylon, which was the way to
destroy them, ver 10, 11. I say, in the name of false Gods: For they attended
to dream^ (not to your dreamers) as a way of Revelation whereby they were
persuaded so to prophesy. Dreams are either, (1.) Natural, as Eccles. 5.3 7.
Isa. 29.8. Job. 7.14. (2) Or Divine, as the dreams of Nebuchadnezzar, Daniel,
Joseph etc Or (3) Diabolical, Deuteronomy. 13 1, 2 Z^ch. 10 2. The Diviners have told
false dreams. But the dreams of the Sorcerers. Jer. 27.9. were not Divine, nor
Natural; therefore Diabolical, and so from a false God. Here note, that
Divining or Prophesying by diabolical and false dreams, is one way of Sorcery
and Witchcraft: And that these false Prophets are Sorce^ers, in undertaking to
reve^l things to come, by a false God, though what they reveal do not come to
pass. They no doubt sought to their God for help in this matter, and went as
far as they could. So I conceive all Baals four hundred and fifty Prophets, 1
King. 18.26. were Sorcerers, in seeking with all earnestness to Baal to bring
down fire from heaven (though they could not perform it) for they did all they
could to oblige the Devil to help them; but their God wanted power, and so the
wonder was not wrought at that time. These Prophets of Baal deserved therefore
to dye by the Law. Exodus 22.18. and by the Law. Deuteronomy. 18 20. The Prophet that
shall speak in the name of other Gods, even that Prophet shall die. As also by
the Law. Exodus 22.20. He that sacrifices to any God, save unto the Lord only,
be shall be utterly destroyed: For those sacrificed to Baal. But if any would
thence conclude, that all the Heathen Sacrificing Priests should be put to
death* I say, it follows not, for the Heathen among the Heathen know no better.
But these did it in Israel, where they had the means to know the true God, and
professedly endeavored to draw men from the Lord unto Baal.

Q 3. What was the sin of the Prophets in Judah, who are called dreamers, Jer.
29 8.9. and said to use divination, Jer. 14.14. Ezekiel. 13.6, 7, 9.23. and in
other Scriptures?

A. They are not called, Mechashepim, Witches, as the false Prophets of the
Heathen; yet they were very like them. As (1.) Both sorts used wicked
divinations. (2) As Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses; so these withstood the
counsel of God spoken by Jeremiah, Jer. 27.3. to 11. and 29 8.9. (3.) The
divinations of both sorts of Prophets were false, as to the matter of them;
they divined a lie. Jer. 27.10. with 29.8, 9. Ezekiel. 13.6, 7. (4.) As the
Heathen diviners were guided by dreamers, which came from a lying spirit. Jer.
27.9 Nor to the dreamers of dreams, etc. so these hearkened to false dreams
which they dreamed, Jer. 29 8. which came by Inspiration or instigation of
Satan. Yet they differed in this; Those prophesied in the name of a false God,
but these prophesied a lie in the name of the true God. So that these deserved
to dye by the Law. Deuteronomy. 18.20. But the Prophet which shall presume to speak a
word in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak, even that Prophet
shall dye.

Q 4 What were the Witchcrafts Jehu charged Jezebel with? 2 King 9 22.

A. 1. Either they were some practices of Witchcraft she used, not expressly
mentioned in Scripture; or they were her protecting and providing for, and
maintaining of Baals Prophets who were Witches, and her making their cause her
own; as see, 1 Kings 16.31. and 18. 19 and 19 1, 2. She seems to be guilty of
both. 1 King. 21.25 26. She made the Prophets of Baal's Sin her own. As David
is said to slay Uriah, when he did it not in his own person; but contrived how
it should be done by others. And we may note that one reason why the false
Prophetess in Thyaetira is called Jezabel, is, because she called her self a
Prophetess, and taught the people to eat things sacrificed to Idols; which was
thereby to commit Idolatry. So that Ahabs Jezebel might be one of the Devils
Prophetesses among the Israelites, and so be guilty of Witchcrafts that way; as
a teacher of Idolatrous worshipping Baal. And we may note that the false Gods
had their female Prophetesses and Diviners as well as Males, as we see the
Witch at Endor.

CHAPTER. XIV.
HAving spoken of the Scripture use of those evils condemned, Deuteronomy. 18.10, 11.
And of the persons charged with those abominations, we may hence see who those
Witches, Sorcerers, Diviners etc. among the Heathen were, viz* they were a sort
of Priests and Prophets of the Heathen Gods, who had a more special dedication
and approaches to them, than the ordinary sort of Heathen had, whereby they
obtained or at least endeavored to obtain special help from those Gods, who
were indeed the Devils.

1. Note, they were reckoned among the Priests and Prophets of those Idol Gods,
as 1 Samuel 6.2. The Philistans called for their Priests and diviners. And Jer.
27.9, 10. they are commanded not to hearken to their Prophets, nor Diviners,
nor Enchanters, nor Sorcerers or Witches. So when Josiah put away the Priests
of the false Gods, he together with them put away them that had familiar
Spirits, Wizards, Teraphim and Idols, 2 King. 23.5, 10, 24. And when the ten
Tribes are condemned for their heathenish Idolatries, and Sacrificing their
Children through the fire; their divinations and enchantments are reckoned with
these abominations, 2 King. 17.10, 11, 12, 16, 17. And the false Prophets of
the Jews in Chaldea, though they prophesied by the true God, yet prophesying
falsely, are called Diviners, Jer. 29.8, 9. Though they pretended a Warrant
from Jehovah, because of their likeness to the heathen Prophets and diviners.
So Zech. 10.2. Mich. 3.5, 6, 7. Those Prophets are called Diviners.

2. Hence as Gods people were to have recourse to the Lords Priests and
Prophets, to seek and know the mind of God, and to obtain help from him by
them, 2 Chronicles. 20.20. Mal. 2.7. 1 King. 22.7. So the Devil had his Priests and
prophets by whom the people did enquire, and to whom they came in difficult
cases, as to the God of Ekron, 2 King. 1.2. So Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezer,
Belshazer etc. Send for their wisemen and Sorcerers to consult with and help in
their great cases; as the Servants of the Lord sent to their wise men, the
Priests and Prophets of the most High God, to consult with and help in their
difficult cases. Note, All the Heathens were worshippers of the Devil, 1 Cor.
10.20. Yet all were not Sorcerers, diviners, soothsayers, etc. but some
peculiar ones. So Balaam among the Midianites, was a Soothsayer or diviner, and
a Prophet, Josh. 13.22. with 2 Pet. 2.2. Baal had his prophets four hundred and
fifty, 1 King. 12.22. And the Prophets of Egypt, Isa. 19.3. are called
Charmers, Wizards etc. to whom they sought. As among Gods worshippers all are
not Prophets, 1 Cor. 12.29.

3. As the gifts and seize of the Lords Prophets were differing, and so
their operations, as 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6. So Satan, who is the god of this world,
does act like the most high, in distributing his gifts, etc. to his devoted
Servants. As had Moses and Aaron, the gifts of miracles, so Satan had the
magicians of Egypt that shall come by counterfeit or seeming miracles, as near
or like to Gods Prophets as he can. Has the Lord his Prophets to prophesy of
things to come? So Satan has in some degree like them, who shall give a sign
or a wonder that some times shall come to pass, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. Did the Lord
reveal himself to some of his Servants by dreams? So Satan reveals himself to
some of his prophets by dreams at some times, as Deuteronomy. 13.1. If there arise a
prophet or a dreamer of dreams. So the Sorcerers of the Heathen, Jer. 27.9.
had their dreams or dreamers. Did the Lord give to some the gift of
interpretating dreams, as to Joseph and Daniel? So Satan had his officers that
pretended at least a skill to interpret dreams, as Dan 2.7. Did the Lord call
Abraham and his Priest to Sacrifice his Son Isaac, Genesis 22 2. So Satan had his
Priests by whom the Heathen, did Sacrifice their Sons and Daughters to him; and
cause them to pass through the fire, etc. Lev. 18.21. Psalm. 106 35, 36, 37, 38
And this may be the reason why causing Children to pass through the fire is so
often in Scripture mentioned with Witches and Witchcraft. Because this was one
abominable way whereby the Sorcerers Sacrificed, to their Devil gods, to
implore their help. And as the Lord did more freely and familiarly reveal
himself and his counsel to some more than others: As to Moses, Exodus 33.11. To
whom the Lord spoke face to face, as a man speaks to his friend. So Satan had
some of these his devoted Servants, to whom he was more open and familiar in
converse. And such were those that had a familiar Spirit to appear at their
call: as the woman at Endor, by her familiar Spirit divining, brings up the
counterfeit Samuel. And as the people did seek unto Moses, and such Prophets of
the Lord as had more especial acquaintance with the Lord. So the heathen did
seek unto those that had these familiar Spirits, as persons that had more
especial intimacy with their gods than themselves had. Hereupon the Lord
strictly forbids the Israelites seeking unto such, Lev. 19.31. and 20.6. Isa.
8.19.

And from this intimacy between the Magicians and their god, and Satan their
god, being as it were, at their call or beck; she that had a familiar Spirit is
called Bagnalath Ob, 1 Samuel 28.7 rendered, that has a familiar Spirit, but it
signifies a mistress of Ob: The spirit being subservient to the Witch, as if
she were his mistress.

And hereupon it is that Writers speak of Witches being in Covenant with Satan,
explicit or implicit; because Satan is so ready to act at the call of a Witch:
as to make or bring frogs real or seeming, and other things at the Magicians of
Egypts endeavor, and to bring up Gods Elohim, i. e. Spirits invisible,
likeness or shapes out of the earth, at the call of the Witch at Endor.

But some have denied all such famaliarity with the Devil, because say they,
The Devil being a Spirit there cannot be such commerce or intimacy between Men
and Spirits, as amounts to a Covenant engagement between them?

To which I answer, there may be a covenant engagement between Men and Spirits.
For,

1. There may be a Covenant between God and man: All Israel was in Covenant
with God, Deuteronomy. 29.12, etc. That thou should enter into Covenant with the
Lord thy God. And all Gods people did make a Covenant with God by Sacrifice,
Psalm. 50.5. And before Moses and Aaron wrought their Miracles before Pharaoh,
they were not only in covenant with God, but God had especially covenanted
with, or promised to them, that upon their doing as he commanded and directed
them, these miraculous effects should follow, Exodus 7.10. etc. Why then may not
men be in covenant with Satan who is but a finite Spirit? And as an effect and
token of it come after the working of Satan, with all power and signs and lying
wonders, 2 These. 2.9.

2. The Lord forbids his people making a Covenant with the Heathen Gods, Exodus
23.32. Thou shall make no covenant with them, nor with their Gods, that is,
with the Devils, Deuteronomy. 32.17. It there had been no danger of Isreal's making
such Covenants, they would not have had such a prohibition.

3. Satan discoursing with the Man Christ Jesus, Math. 4 8, 9. Offers to make a
bargain or covenant with Him, wherein he promises, Quid pro Quo Satan offers
on his part to give all the kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them; and
the condition he proposes on Christ's part, is, That Christ shall fall down and
worship him. Had our blessed Savior agreed to these propositions there had
been a bargain: but that was not possible, for when the Prince of this world
came to our Savior, he found nothing in him; that is, no matter for his
temptations to work upon, Joh. 14.30. But alas, how many wicked men and woman
are there in the world, that would accept of such bargains? Some have been so
set upon obtaining their desired ends, that to have their wills, they will do
as he said in the Poet.

Flectere si nequ^o superos Acberonta movebo.

If I cannot obtain my wish and will from God, I will to Hell to fetch it
thence. And if persons are prepared for it, and Satan sees it his interest, he
will offer conference with them, as he did with Eve, Gen.; And readily promise
them all the world can afford them according to their hearts desire, to the
uttermost of his power, and make no scruple of lying, and if mankind believes
him, Satan profers some condition to be performed on man's part, as he did to
Christ; If thou will worship me. And when mankind believes and accepts the
seeming good desired and offered, upon performance of the conditions required,
here is a Covenant explicit or implicit. But say some, what ever Satan is said
to do or reveal by a Witch, cannot he do the same things without a Witch?

A. 1. Satan has done great things without Witches, as in the afflicting Job,
and the possessed, as abovesaid.

2. Yet Satan does also do and discover things by magicians, etc. as in the
cases of the Egyptian Sorcerers, and woman at Endor, above expressed. And this
may proceed, (1) Partly from the righteous Judgment of God, giving Satan both
permission and commission at such times, to do great things in punishment to
those that seek unto him in that way. As when Ahab goes to the Prophets that
were not the Prophets of Jehovah or the Lord, 1 King. 22.7. but of the Devil,
to enquire, whether he shall go to Ramoth-Gilead: The Lord gives the Devil a
commission to deceive Ahab, who by going to these Prophet went to the Devil, 1
King. 22.20, 21, 22, 23. Who will persuade Ahab? And a Spirit said, I will
persuade him, -- I will be a lying Spirit in the mouth of his Prophets. Now
hear Satan's commission: Thou shall persuade him and prevail also: go forth and
do so. (2) Satan may in policy do many things (the Lord permitting) at the
devotion of his Votarys, which he will not do at other times if he could,
because hereby he carrys on his design of destroying Souls; both of his
Votarys, and of them that go unto them. For there be many that have so much
natural Conscience in them, and so much aversation from the Devil, and horror
at his presence, that they will not seek immediately to the Devil, who yet will
be drawn to seek unto Wizards, and such as have familiar Spirits, and so fall
into the Snare of the Devil, to the ruin of their Souls.

We know Satan is called the God of this World, and by imitating the Lords
methods in showing mercy to man, he seemed to the Heathen to be like the Most
High: As Lucifer said, Isa. 14.12, 14. Had the Lord his Ark, Temple, etc. where
to give answers to his people? So Satan had his Temples and Oracles, and
Priests, whereby to give answers to his Worshippers, as at Ekron, at Delphos,
and elsewhere; see Acts 14 13. Did the Lord require faith in them that came to
him? So Satan requires especial faith in them that seek to him for help. Does
the Lord hearken to the voice of a man in working wonders? Josh. 10.14. So
Satan will hearken to the voice of his Magicians, etc. Does the Lord require
particular actions to be done by his Servants, when they work wonders in his
Name? As Aaron must cast down his rod at one time, smite the rock with it at
another time, speak to the rock at another time. Elijah prays at one time on
his face between his knees, at another time otherwise, 1 King. 18.42. So Satan
had his various ceremonies, words and actions to be observed by those that
obtained special help from him. As Charmings, Mutterings, Peepings, speaking
low, etc. Isa. 8.19 and 29.4 And diverse Sacrifices made to him, whereby he was
honored by the Heathen as a God. Deuteronomy. 32.17. And Satan being thus served by
them, did also some things for them, and that not only in way of operation, as
for the Egyptian Magicians; but also to some he did reveal truly some future
events; as appears by the warning given, Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3. where it is showed
that a Prophet in the name, and by the help of a false God, may foretell a Sign
that shall come to pass.

And doubtless Beelzebub did it at Ekron sometimes foretell truly future evens,
or else Ahaziah would not have sent to him to know whether he should recover at
that time or not. But the essence of their being a Witch or Sorcere^ did not
consist in their obtaining the desired assistance from their God; but rather in
their putting themselves into that way of endeavoring to get help of their
Gods. For the Astrologers, etc of Babylon are called Sorcerers or Witches. Isa.
47.12. Though by their Enchantments and Sorceries they could not profit
themselves. And the Prophets of Edom, and other heathens, Jer. 27.3, 9. are
called Sorcerers for prophesying by Satan, though they prophesied falsely. And
so I conceive the Four hundred and fifty Prophets of Baal, did all use Sorcery
or Enchantments in their invocation of Baal, and using actions they esteemed
acceptable to him, that they might procure by him fire from Heaven to consume
their Sacrifice, although they could not obtain it. 1 King. 18.22. to 30. And
so justly deserved death by the Law. Exodus 22.18. and by the Law. Exodus 22 20.
For Sacrificing to a false God.

Thus we see who were the Witches among the Heathen: We may then query, Who
were the Witches among the Israelites that were to be put to death?

A. 1. Those that having the knowledge of the true God, or at least the means
whereby they might know him, did so far forsake the true God, as to sue unto,
and depend upon the Devil, or another God, as the Heathen Priests and Prophets
that were Sorcerers did. As by having a familiar spirit as the Witch at Endor
had; or by using Witchcrafts as Manasseb did. These as Apostates from God, and
Votaries of the Devil, were to dye by the Laws Exodus 22.18, 20. As is said of
Boals Prophets. And such if they prophesied in the name of those false Gods
(whether the Prophecy were true or false,) were to dye by the Law. Deuteronomy.
18.20. The Prophet that shall presume to speak in the name of other Gods, that
Prophet shall dye.

2. Those persons who did prophecy a falsehood in the name of the Lord; or
prophecy in his name when he sent them not, are called Diviners, though they
pretended to speak (not in the name of false Gods, but) in the name of the true
God; as, Jer. 28.8, 9. Mich. 3.7. Though they are not indeed called Witches or
Sorcerers, but Diviners, which note a crime near to the former. Because they
were so like unto the Diviners of the Heathen in prophesying falsely, and were
alike capital offenders by that Law. Deuteronomy. 18.20, 22. The Prophet which shall
presume to speak a word in my name, which I have not commanded him to speak,
shall dye, etc. So that although they are not called Witches, but Diviners, yet
they were to dye by the Law, as well as the other.

Here then we may observe, who is to be, esteemed a Capital Witch among
Christians viz. those that being brought up under the means of the knowledge of
the true God, yet being in their right mind, or free use of their reason, do
knowingly and willingly depart from the true God, so as to devote themselves
unto, and seek for their help from another God, or the Devil, as did the Devils
Priests, and Prophets of old that were Magicians.

The end of such devoting to another God is for some supposed benefit. As, 1.
To get help from him; So Abaz seems to be a Witch or Sorcerer, in that he
sacrificed to the Gods of Syria, that he might obtain help by them. 2 Chronicles.
28.3, 23. His burning his Children in the fire, after the Heathen abomination,
is also a sin reckoned with Witchcraft; see, Deutr. 18.11. He was if not a
Witch in sacrificing himself, yet at least one that did seek after Wizards and
the like, to Sacrifice for him.

2. Another end in seeking help, is thereby to do strange things, as did the
Egyptian Sorce^ers as above-shewed. And such a Sorcerer the beast, Rev. 13.13,
14. prophesied of, seems to be, for he makes fire to come down from Heaven, on
the Earth in the sight of men. And this was the work of Satan upon Jobs Sheep
and Servants, Job 1.16.

3. Another end is for the discovery of Secrets; as above showed, from Deuteronomy.
13.1, 2, 3. and 1 Samuel 28.

4. Another end is to prevent or remove some evil felt, or feared; as the
Sorcerers of Babylon, that by their Sorceries sought to prevent, or save them
from the evils coming upon them. And though they did not obtain the help aimed
at from their Gods, yet they are styled Sorcerers, Isa. 47.12, 13, 14. and 44
25.

2. I say, brought up under the means of the knowledge of the true God; for
though many Witches were among the Heathen Nations, yet they were not to be put
to death, because they knew not the true God, they knew no better. But as for
thee, says God, The Lord thy God has not suffered thee so to do; and there
shall not be found among you an Enchanter, Witch, etc. Deuteronomy. 18.9, 10, 14. And
therefore the Lord made this Law, as an hedge to keep his people from going
away from him to Devils, to Gods whom they knew not, and whom their fathers
feared not, Deuteronomy. 32.16, 17. And so this Law has some affinity with that
capital Law, the next verse, but one step, Exodus 22. ^0. He that Sacrifices to
any God, save unto Jehovah only, shall be put to death. So that Daniel did well
in seeking to save the Babylonian Wise men, though Witches, Dan. 2.14 etc. For
they fell not under the Law. Exodus 22.18. But being ignorant of the true God,
needed to live and be instructed, that thereby they might be made sensible of
their evil practices, and turn unto the living God.

3. The object sought unto is the D^e woun^ another God. Some of the Heathen
did not seek to the Devil, as a Devil, that is, as a malicious, wicked, and
unclean spirit: but as to their God whom they thought ought to be Worshipped by
them. And some of the Israelites had an opinion of many Gods, as Ahaz, 2 Chr.
28.23. Manasseh and Amaziah, Chap 25.14. and 33 3, 4, 6. And so sacrificed to
the Heathen Gods, as well as to their own. And this was very abominable to the
Lord to be ranked thus with Idols and Devils, Isa. 42.8. Jehovah will not give
his Glory to another.

4. The person I say, that has the free use of their reason; hereby are
exempted from the guilt of this crime, persons possessed or obsessed of the
Devil, who did by the power of Satan, strange things, as breaking chains, and
Lunatic persons, upon whom the Devil took advantage by reason of their Lunacy.

5. They devote themselves to Satan, or their other God, and to seek to him;
which was done diverse ways; as by enchantments, charmings, peepings, muttering,
sacrificing, cutting themselves, prayers, etc. And though of later times Satan
as a cunning Fisher changes his baits, yet still all that seek to him, as his
peculiar Votaries, have their Ceremonies, Ordinances by which Satan is
invocated and worshipped. Here we must distinguish between those that not ^and
seek to Satan immediately, and (...) ^at seek to him by the mediation of a
Wizard, etc. as Saul by the Witch at End^r. The former sort only are called
Witches, or dealers with familiar spirits: But the latter is a great sin
prohibited and condemned, Lev. 19. 31. and 20.6. and elsewhere.

6. I say; do knowingly and willingly seek, etc. And here I excuse a tanto,
though not a toto, those that ignorantly use charms, spells, writings or forms
of words, etc. being taught them by others, which are a kind of Witchcraft; but
those that use them are not sensible, that they are but various ceremonies to
invocate the Devil, and that the effects following these charms, etc. are done
by the Devil. So some have pulled fish bones out of a wound, cured tooth ach,
agues, warts, and stopped blood by such devilish means. Such have an implicit
faith that the means used, shall produce the effect desired, but consider not
how; and so are beguiled by the Serpent that lies in the grass unseen.

I knew a man in the East, who professed the art of curing wounds, and
stenching blood by a form of words. I discoursed him about it, and he told me,
he had been in the practice of it; and believed it to be the gift of healing
given him from God, upon the use of some Scripture words be used, as he had
been taught by an Old woman, and had tried it upon himself; having cut his leg
almost half through with an Adds, and only bound up the wound with a cloth, and
said over the wound those words, and without other means the wound was cured in
a few days. I desired to hear the words, and he related them to me; and I found
him almost as ignorant in Scriptures, as an Heathen, and found he could not
read. Whereupon I informed him that part of his words were Scripture, and part
not; and that those words upon which the greatest stress was laid in order to
the cure, were a perverse addition to the Scriptures: a mere fiction of man's
invention; and declared to him, that if any such healing followed upon such a
form of words, it could not come from the efficacy of the words themselves, or
from a divine concurrence working a wonder, because of those words, which were
indeed a lie in the additions made; therefore if any virtue were in them, it
came by the Devil, and so those words a kind of Sorcery. The man hereby seemed
convinced of his error, and promised reformation. I do not believe this man was
a Wizard (though in danger of it) because he did it ignorantly in misbelief.

I fear some young persons through a vain curiosity to know their future
condition, have tampered with the Devils tools, so far that hereby one door was
opened to Satan to play those pranks; Anno 1692. I knew one of the Afflicted
persons, who (as I was credibly informed) did try with an egg and a glass to
find her future Husbands Calling; till there came up a Coffin, that is, a
Spectre in likeness of a Coffin. And she was afterward followed with diabolical
molestation to her death; and so dyed a single person. A just warning to
others, to take heed of handling the Devils weapons, lest they get a wound
thereby.

Another, I was called to pray with, being under sore fits and vexations of
Satan. And upon examination I found she had tried the same charm: and after her
confession of it and manifestation of repentance for it, and our prayers to God
for her, she was speedily released from those bonds of Satan. This iniquity
though I take it not to be the Capital crime condemned, Exodus 22. Because such
persons act ignorantly, not considering they hereby go to the Devil; yet
borders very much upon it: and is too like Saul's going to the Witch at Endor,
and Ahaziah sending to the God of Ekron to enquire.

CHAPTER. XV.
I proceed now to speak of some kinds of these Devilish artists, not by an
exact distribution of them into their several species. For though they are
distinguished by several names and practices, yet they all agree in the general
crime of Witchcraft, and being thereby as it were the Devils Priests and
Prophets, depending upon his aid and oracles; so that he that is of one kind
may be also of another, or all the rest, according to their several ends for
which, and ways by which they make their applications to the Prince of
darkness: and as he is pleased to communicate of his skill or power to the
answering of their expectations for a reward of their dependence upon him. And
as of old, they had several names, as Magicians, Diviners, etc. So of late
times, they have their several names, and in part several kinds of skill, or
power, as Conjurers, Astrologers, Cunning men, Mathematicians, Witches, etc.
But all of them if they have their knowledge, or skill, or working by the
Devil, are in Satan's black list of Witches. Some such there have been who
divine by representing a person, or coffin, or thing sought after in a looking
glass, to discover to the person enquiring somewhat secret, or future. I have
heard several credible Stories of such Conjurers; and shall relate one here
that I suppose was never in Print. An ancient Woman related to me, That when
she was a Maid, she had a curiosity to know who should be her Husband, and was
informed of a Doctor that would show Maids their future Husbands in a glass: To
him therefore she went with her Money in her hand, to know who should be her
Husband; and be carried her to a great looking glass, where she saw a man in
his full proportion whom she never saw before. And a while after met this man
(represented in the glass) in the street, and having on the same Clothes he was
represented with from head to foot; and soon after he came a Suitor to her, and
she was Married to him, and was her Husband when she made this Relation. In
this relation observe,

1. It was no doubt a truth, for she told me this in way of craving my advice,
whether she had done well or evil in going to the Dr. and I told her, she did
evil in going thereby to the Devil. 2. It was no delusion of her fantasy, or
affection working toward any person; for it was one she never saw before, that
was now showed unto her. 3. The Dr. could not bring into the glass the shadow
of a man absent and unknown, by any natural cause, or means by him used.
Therefore it was from the Devil, who raised this Spectre in likeness of a man
then unknown. 4. And the Dr. doing this frequently for his Money, must know he
did it by a familiar Spirit, and therefore was a Conjurer in some league
explicit, or implicit with Satan. And I have heard and read of other Stories
of this kind very credible, which satisfy me, that this was not the only
Conjurer in England. But it may be queried,

Q. How could Satan foretell this woman who should be her Husband, it being then
a future contingent thing?

A. In this case, it might be easy for Satan to give a very probable
conjecture; for the man was a Newfoundlander that came to England for a Wife,
as directed by his friends unto this young woman: And the Devil knew of his
coming, he being at that time upon the Sea thitherwards, or newly come on
shore; and the Devil knew his errand, and the quality and conditions of both
parties (as he is a discerning, peircing spirit;) and so knew it very probable
to be a Match. And by this representation in the glass imposes upon her
Superstitious, ignorance, a kind of belief of a necessity to accept him when he
came. But in other cases, its not so easy.

Q. Here then we may enquire, How can the Devil know things to come? Is not
this Gods prerogative? Isa 41.22, 23.

A. Its true that the Lord alone knows things to come, so that neither man or
Angel can know future events, unless the Lord make them known, or afford means
whereby the creature may attain to know them: Show us things to come hereafter,
that we may know that ye are Gods. Of that day and bout knows no man, no not
the Angels of Heaven, Math. 24.30. Rev. 5.8, 4. None in heaven, or earth, or
under the earth, was able to open the book (sealed with seven seals) and to
loose the seals thereof. Many other Scriptures speak of our ignorance of
things and times to come, Prove. 27.1. Eccl. 8.7. and 6.12.

2. Yet God affords means whereby men, who are far less discerning than
Spirits, come to know many futurities certainly, and of others probably to
guess, so as generally or for the most part it proves according to man's
foresight. A wise man fore-seeth the evil, Prove. 22.3 and 27.12.

1. By visions and revelations and such like, so God revealed to Abraham and
David, the conditions of their Posterity for a great while to come, 2 Samuel 7.19.

2. The Prophecyes, promises and threatenings in Scripture are a standing
revelation of futurities, in matters religious, civil, political and natural,
as the changes of seasons, etc. Gen 8.22.

3. Many things are fore-known by their causes. As that wood thrown into the
fire will be burnt, etc. And thus many Physicians foresee the death of a person
sick of an incurable disease, when neither they nor their relations are
sensible of it.

4 Many things are fore known by the usual signs that go before them, which
though they are not proper causes of the effects following, yet are concurrent
with them. As when the Fig trees branch is tender Summer is nigh, Math. 24.32.
A red sky in the evening is a sign of a fair morning; and a red sky in the
morning lowering of soul weather, and so it comes to pass, Math. 16.1, 2, 3.
Luke 12.54, 55, 56.

5. Some things men foresee very probable to come to pass, because themselves
or others have intended and contrived how to bring them to pass. As Saul fore
tells to Jabesh-Gilead; They shall have help to morrow by that time the Sun be
hot, 1 Samuel 11.9. Because he intended and contrived it.

6. By observation and experience of the usual events of providence, in the way
of Gods governing the world; a wise man fore knows probably at least, what will
come to pass under like circumstances. And among men, one fore sees things to
come farther than another; as he excels another in prudence. As the prudent
fore sees, when the simple pass on and are p^shed, Prove. 22.3. Or has had a
larger experience than another, Eccl. 8.5. A wise ^ans heart discerns time
and judgment.

1. In all the above mentioned ways, except the first, Satan has the same
advantage to know future events as man has; and many advantages above man.
(1.) As he is more knowing, wise, and of a larger understanding than man. (2.)
In that as a Spirit, he pierces more into the insides and secrets of persons,
actions and things. He cannot know the heart of man immediately, that is Gods
prerogative, Jer. 17.10. Yet so far as the heart discovers it self by its
operations, upon the senses, external and internal, and other members of the
body, Satan will find it out. (3.) By the swiftness and multitude of those
Legions of unclean Spirits; they are present in all Companies, Counsils,
Cabals, and affairs of the Children of men, even with the Sons of God when they
worship God; and with the Sons of men in all the compass of the earth. Job 1.6,
7. (4) They have their experiences of five thousand years standing. (5.) When
they intend and contrive any design upon the children of men, they a^e not in
danger of being prevented by death (as men often are) for Spirits cannot dye;
and so more probably foretell the events of their own counsels. And by all the
means and advantages abovesaid, Satan can foresee future contingent events
much farther off than man can, and so foretell (the Lord suffering) a sign or
wonder which shall after come to pass.

2. Satan has also the advantage of foreknowing, and fore showing future
things by some way of divine revelation at some times, for the punishment of
men. So God by some means (the way whereby to us unknown) lets the Devil know
the death of Saul and his Sons, and reveal it to Saul for his punishment in
going to seek to Satan; and so Satan knows the way to destroy Ahab, and that
from God; and contrives a way to bring it about, viz. by being a lying Spirit
in the mouth of Ahabs Prophets.

3. Yea, the Lord succeeds the diabolical divinations of the King of Babylon,
to prophecy success unto him against Judah, for the punishment of Judahs fins.
Ezekiel. 21.18. to 25. From this place observe, (1.) That the King of Babylon
intending War against Rabbath and Jerusalem, knew not which to go first unto.
(2.) Therefore he uses divination by arrows, by consulting an Image or
Teraphim, and by looking into the liver of some beasts (always used by the
heathen) so that if the divination favor the right hand, he will go first to
Jerusalem: If the left, to Rabbah. (3.) Those divinations had no natural power
in them to direct them, but they were means whereby they enquire of their Gods,
that is the Devil. (4) The Lord so over rules the divination, that is the
Devils Oracle by the Image, etc. that the answer shall be, Go to Jerusalem and
prosper; and accordingly he goes and prospers. (5.) The Lord grants such
success (not appointing the sin) unto these devilish divinations for the
punishment of his apostate people. But when ever the Lord pleases, he
disappoints all the Devils. Ordinances. So that the Devil cannot know, or
cannot discover to his Vassals what shall come to pass. Isa. 44.25. He
frustrateth the tokens of the liars, and makes diviners mad, and makes their
knowledge foolish.

1. Then Enchantments, Sorceries, Astrologers, etc. shall not be able to save
from evil, or to profit, Isa. 47.12, 13, 14.

4. If all the ways above said so fail the Devil, that he cannot foretell what
shall be hereafter, he has an art by the ambiguity of his answers, to salve
his credit, be the event which way it will. So 1 King. 22.6. He tells Ahab; The
Lord shall deliver it into the hand of the King; but does not determine which
King, whether of Syria, or Israel. So in his Oracles of old to Cresus. Cresus
Halyn penetrans magnam disperdet opum vim. Like the Sophism used against King
Edward the Second. To shed King Edwards Blood refuse to fear, I count it good.
And this shall suffice to speak of this kind of Divining.

2. Another sort of Diviners are they that reveal secrets, as where Stolen
Goods are hid, or how Persons and Vessels do at Sea, or in other Countries,
which they pretend to know by the Stars, and Positions of the Heavens; but
indeed by a familiar spirit. These are by way of distinction called,
Astrologers, Mathematicians, etc. Such, Isai 47.13 are called, Heberei
Shaemajim, Observers of the Heavens, (translated Astrologers) And Hachotsim
Bechochabim, Beholders of the Stars, or Star gazers. But whatever men pretend,
the Stars cannot reveal such secrets.

1. Suppose two men go to Sea in the same Ship, from England to Barbados, and
one dies, and another lives; they go out, continue at Sea, and come to the
Island both of them under the same position of the Stars. How then can the
Heavenly Bodies tell the Astrologer in England, that one man is dead, and the
other alive? So Perkin and Paulet steal each an Horse out of the same Stable,
at the same time; Perkin carries his stolen Horse to Bristol, and Paulet
carries his to Exeter, both at one time; how can the Stars direct the
Mathematician to find one Horse at Exeter, and the other in Bristol? they
cannot, but the Devil can.

2. The Stars have their regular motion continued the same, according to the
Law God laid upon them at first, Psa. 19.4, 5, 6. and 104.19. The fixed Stars
continue in their orb, and the planets in theirs, whether men steal or be
honest, go abroad or stay at home, are sick or well. They are for signs and
seasons; but not to point out the arbitrary actions of or contingent events
upon men. Mr. Lee, the ^te learned Minister of the Gospel in New Bristol,
related a credible Story of a Gentleman in Hartford-shire, Who had studied the
Rules of Astrology, and being much urged, tried by them to find for his friend
a stolen Horse; but when by all the rules of his art, he could find nothing,
sat musing with his eyes shut, and just such a Horse as the man described, was
represented to his Imagination, going with two men into a Stable, at such an
Inn, in such a Town: He directs the man to go thither: he did so, and found his
Horse, and returned to thank the artist The Astrologer told him it was the
Devil suggested it to his Imagination, and thereupon resolved never more to
meddle with that art.

3. The insufficiency of these rules of themselves appear, in that those that
seek for help by these artists, must have a belief, that they can help them, or
else they cannot discover any thing to them. But if it were by pure art, the
rules would be as effectual when people come without such a faith, as with it.
I knew a very pious Matron, who when she was young in England, had lost some
goods, and in her ignorance, went to a cunning man to find them. He told her he
could not help her, unless she did believe he could. She answered, she believed
in God, (or hoped in God) he could. Nay replied he, if you believe in God, I
cannot help you. And so she returned without her goods, but with a conviction
that she had gone to the Devil for help, and was not aware of it. Another
relation like this, Mr. Sherman of Boston told me concerning himself. He being
in England was unawares brought into the Company of such a Mathematician, to
whom diverse came and gave him Money, to tell them, how, and where their
friends and vessels were, that went over sea. And he after he had raised his
Scheams, and made his calculations gave them such informations as they were
satisfied in. And at length, understanding Mr. Sherman was a New England man,
asked, (...) h^ would know the state of his friends in New England. Sherman
replied, there were (...) of his Art in New England: (Oh that it may be always
so said of us!) but he had heard of this profession: it was said, they could
inform none that did not believe they could help them: And he did not believe.
The Artist replied, he did it by pure Art, and would have Sherman try him,
which at last he did. Tell me, said he, where my Father and Mother now are, and
how they do. The Astrologer asked him many questions, and after he had tried
the rules of his Art, said; They were both alive in good health in Boston in
New England. This is not so, said Sherman, for they were both dead before I
came thence; and I told you, that you could not help me unless I did believe.

These two Relations agree with what Mr. Perkins urges against Judicial
Astrologers. Chap. 3. p 80 Viz. That they cannot help those that come doubting
of their ability, or in a way to tempt the Astrologer.

3. A third sort of these Diviners are such as pretend to tell persons their
Fortunes (as they call it) or future Condition by looking into their hands. I
have been acquainted with some who have acquainted me with strange futurities,
these Fortune tellers have informed them of, which after came to pass; such as
man could not foretell but by the Devil, no nor the Devil, but by some Judicial
Act of God over ruling their Predictions, as he did the divinations of
Nebuchadnezzar. Ezekiel 21.21. above mentioned: The vanity and falsehood of the
pretended Art of Chyromancy to predict by, appears (1) In that there is no
such variety of strokes or marks in the hands or faces of men and women, as
there be variety of conditions in man's life which they pretend to find out by
these marks. (2) If there were any such predicting Characters stamped by nature
upon the bodies of persons; these Fortune Tellers are the most unlikely to know
them; they being generally illiterate, ignorant of nature, art, religion,
reason, history, and experience, and scarce a degree above b^uit beasts.

Let all be warned then of the great sin and snare that is in hearkening to
such Soothsayers; the scope of their profession being to draw men off from
dependence upon God and his guiding Providence in obedience to his Scripture
Commands, with faith resting upon his promises, to lean upon the predictions of
Fortune tellers, who whether they prophecy good or evil, ensnare those
exceedingly that enquire of them: for if they prophecy good, they are eagerly
lifted up with doubtful expectations of its accomplishment. If it be evil, they
are hanging upon a wrack of doubtful fears and terrors which rob them of the
comfort of their times of health and prosperity, contrary to the advice given
them, Eccl. 2.24 and 3.12, 22. These above named use Witchcrafts in way of
divination.

4 There be a fourth sort, whose exercise is more in operation, viz. such as
cast a mist before the eyes of others by their Witchcrafts, who are alluded
unto, Gal. 3 1. by the Greek word Bascaino quasi phaesi Kaino. They have their
eyes so held or darkened, that they cannot see things as they are: So the false
teachers did bemist the eyes of the Galatians, viz the eyes of their minds,
that they could not see Christ Crucified before their eyes. Alike unto these
are they who raise the Devil, or Specter in diverse forms, doing strange things
thereby. Of this sort was Dr. Lamb the notorious Conjurer, kill^d by the Mobile
in London, in Charles the first his Reign. Mr. Baxter of Spirits, Chap. 7 p.
155, 156. Relates a well attested Story of Dr. Lamb, his raising in the middle
of a room, a Tree, little fellows, apes, baskets, etc. all which soon vanished.
I refer the Reader to Mr. Baxter, for the Story at large.

5. Another sort are such as they call white Witches; that by spells, charms,
etc. will cure Diseases, and that more easily than men can, and fetch fish
bones out of men's hands, etc. (1) Note here that the Devil has more skill in
the knowledge of all healing medicines than any man: and more ability and
dexterity to convey them insensibly unto any fore, than any mortal creature.
(2.) That some have such an ambition to excel in Physic, and curing variety of
wounds and diseases, that they will rather go to the Devil, then fail of their
desired skill and honor thereby. Many credible Histories I have heard of this
kind; but I spare to enlarge in these things which have been so fully handled
by Perkins, and others.

CHAPTER. XVI.
I come now to speak concerning those that are called Black Witches, or
Malefic^ Witches, who by their enchantments do call in the Devils aid, for
revenge, to do hurt to the bodies, and health of their neighbors, or to their
cattle, goods, and the like. These are the persons commonly called Witches, and
against whom the spirits of men and the laws of men are most bent, for their
prosecution and punishment. Now that I have concerning such to say, I shall
comprehend in the ensuing Propositions.

Prop. 1. There have been many evils that have befallen man and beast, which
have been ungroundedly ascribed to Witchcraft, and so to Witches, which proceed
from other causes: As from natural operations though hidden from those that so
suspect: or from the hand of God immediately, or from the hand of Satan without
the concurrence of man kind; as has been in part showed already in this
enquiry above. Should an herd of Swine run violently down a streep place into
the Sea in these days and perish in the waters, as did the Gergesens Swine,
Math. 8.32. People would conclude they perished by Witchcraft; and yet there
was no such cause of the destruction.

Prop. 2 Melancholy and Imagination has fancied many things to proceed from
Witches, when there is no ground for it.

Prop. 3 Many impossible things for Witches, or the Devil to do by them, are
related to be done by Witches: As the transmutation of bodies from men to
beasts, etc. The going in Spirit to places far distant, and leaving their
bodies behind; as if the Devil could separate the Soul from the body, and
restore it again at pleasure, which is to ascribe to him a divine power to
restore the dead. Such things are either devised fictions, or abuses of the
imaginations of them that so sav^ of themselves: they, being only laid in a tr^
o^ dream, and so conceiting a change in them that never was. So some have
affirmed they have been carried many hundred miles through the air, to remote
places and brought back again in an hour or two, which cannot be without a
miracle; for so swift a motion through the air, would take away the breath of a
person so transported, without an almighty power to sustain them.

Prop. 4. It must be granted that there is no clear instance of any such
Malefick or Black Witch in Scriptures. The Magicians of Egypt or Babylon, or
those mentioned Act. 8.9, ^ 11. and 13.8, 9, 10. Jer. 27.9. Isa. 47. Dan. 2.
and 4. and 5. chap. are not charged with any such crimes. The only instance I
remember given of such an one in Scripture is Balaam: but he cannot be proved
to be such an one. (1) Its pleaded that Balak sent to him to come; For I wot,
(says he) that he whom thou cursest is cursed. And this indeed shows what an
opinion Balak had of him, Numb 22.6 But when Balaam answers the messengers. he
tells them; As the Lord, i. e. Jehovah, shall speak to me, I will bring you
word: And Jehovah refuses to give me leave: And the word that God puts in
my mouth, that shall I speak v. 8, 13, 38. So that whatever opinions Balaam
might have of plurality of Gods, yet he owns he could not curse Israel but by
the true God. See Numb. 23 1, 3 with Deuteronomy. 23. 4, 5. Josh. 24 9, 10. The
Scripture shows that Balaam sought not to curse Israel, but by the everliving
God. (2) And if it be said, that Balaam saying, There is no enchantment against
Jacob, neither divination against Israel, Cap. 23. 23. Intima^eth, That there
may be enchantment and divination also against other people; yet it does not
signify that Balaam used to curse any without the assistance of the true God.
For he says, v. 8. How shall I curse whom God has not curse? or how shall I
defy, whom the Lord has not defied? He speaks as a man convinced, that the
power of all false Gods was unable to bring a curse without Gods leave. And if
Balak would give him an house full of Silver and Gold, he says, he cannot go
beyond the word of the Lord, or Jehovah, my God, to do less or more Where note,
that Balaam openly professes to these heathen, that Jehovah is his God, and
him he will obey, Numb. 22.18. And when the Angel of Jehovah opposes him, he
submits so far to him as to offer, if it displeased him, he would go back
again. And when he comes to sacrificing, still it is to Jehovah. For he said,
Chap 23 3 after he had offered, Peradventure Jehovah will come and meet me,
etc. and where God met him, He said unto him, i. e. to Jehovah. I have offered
upon every altar a bullock and a ram, and this was repeated again, and still
Balaam went to meet Jehovah, and Jehovah met him once and again, and put a word
in his mouth. And Balaam spoke the word Jehovah put into his mouth: and when
Balaam saw it pleased Jehovah to bless Israel, Chap. 24. 1 All the
circumstances of the place show that all his addresses were unto the living
God, that by him he might procure such a curse upon Israel, which might do more
against Israel then all the armies of Balak could do.

Q Why then is Balaam called a Soothsayer or Diviner, and said to use
Enchantments? and what are those Enchantments? and why so called?

A. These enchantments were the Sacrifices mentioned, Chap 24. which were
offered to the true God For its said, He went not as at other times to seek for
Enchantments: This plainly refers to the times when he sacrificed as abovesaid
Heb. Che^agnam, bepagnam, i. e. not this time as the former time; namely the
times when he sacrificed. Thus Ainsworth in locum; all his former altars and
sacrifices were by the art of enchantment, or observing fortunes. But how these
were enchantments, seeing they were not as the heathen enchantments to a false
God, and that sacrificing was an Ordinance of God, is a difficulty to
understand. But I conceive they are so called, because Balaam did pervert the
end and use of Gods O^dinance, and therein imitate the Heathen. For God had
said to him, Thou shall not curse the people, for they are blessed Yet Balaam
by these Sacrifices will try to curse them. So heathen nations are said to do,
before they warred against any people to endeavor by prayers, sacrifices and
enchantments to turn the favor of God from them. Before the Heathen Romans
Besieged any City, their Priests, called out the God, under whose tutelage the
City was, that he would forsake the people, Temples and holy things, and be
Provost unto them, and accept of their City, etc. vowing to him, if he would so
do, to honor him with Temples, etc. And then offered Sacrifices to the
Dictator or Emperor, devoted, or cursed the Enemies Cities and Armies, that
they might be filled with fear, terror, etc. Balaam acts his like. These and
like the Charmers, Maim^ny speaks of, who whisper over a wound, or read a verse
out of the Bible: likewise he that reads over an infant, that it may not be
frighted; or that lays the Bible, or the Phylacte^ies upon a child that it
may sleep: Such says he, are Inchanters or Charmers, because they make the
words of the Scripture; medicine for the body, whereas they are not, but
medicine for the Soul. So Balaam makes a charm of an Ordinance of God: For
neither Balak nor Balaam aimed to give honor and glory to God thereby, but to
use them as it were a bribe, to try if thereby they could prevail with the Lord
to reverse his word, whereby he had said of Israel, They are blessed. For when
he sees he cannot prevail, he says, God is not a man that he should^ly; and he
has blessed, and I cannot reverse it. Again, what Balaam did herein, it was
not sincerely for God, but for his hire, Neh. 13.2. Even for rewards of
Divination, Numb. 22.7. For the wages of unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2.15. Possibly
also there might be somewhat like enchantment in the manner of his sacrificing;
as Sacrificing in the high places of Baal, and on the top of Peor, places
formerly dedicated to Baal-Peor. Thus Balaam by his Enchantments deserved the
title of a Soothsayer or Diviner and mad Prophet.

Prop. 5. Though there be no plain example of a Mal^fick Witch; yet from what
the Scripture says of the power of Satan and his malice against man, and of
the wickedness that is in the heart of man; we may see there is a possibility
of such abominable creatures to be found in the black list of Satan's guard. For,

1. Satan has power when the Lord permits him, to do mischief to the bodies
and estates of mankind, as already proved in the instances of Job and others.

2. There be some persons so wicked that Abaz like, they will sacrifice to and
serve the Devil, that he may help them. And if in other things, why not in
revenging them upon those they hate, as well as in other matters? As Israel
slew their brethren in a rage that reached up to heaven: so some will pursue
their adversaries with a rage reaching down to hell. And excess of anger gives
great advantage to the Devil, Ephesians. 4.26, 27. Let not the Sun go down upon your
wrath; neither give place to the Devil. If sinful anger gives the Devil a
place, how much more such a rage as whereby men go to hell for aid against
their toes? When men seek to Satan for revenge, he will be ready to further
them in it; by discoursing with them, (as he did with Eve, yea with Christ
himself, Math. 4.) to see what he may gain upon them thereby: or by tempting
them to sacrifice to him, or use his ceremonies and ordinances, whereby, Satan
is implicitly at least invoked for to do his utmost on their behalf. And Satan
that promised to the spotless Lamb of God, all the kingdoms of the world, will
be ready to promise such miscreants to revenge them on their adversaries, or
any mischief they desire, if they will serve him. And at some times to perform
his promise if the Lord suffer him, as the roaring Lion that seeks to devour:
or at least will pretend himself author, of the harms the envyed person
sustaines. But if he cannot, yet be can answer such deluded creatures, that
either they did not observe his direction, or that God has set an hedge about
the party maligned, or the like, and so keep up his credit still.

Mrs. Got, a very credible and pious woman, told me, That her father Mr. Palmer
lived nigh a man that acknowledged himself to be a Conjurer. On a certain day
there came a violent wind upon Mr. Palmers house, as if it would blow it down:
but it only blew down an Elm tree that stood in his Court yard. In process of
time this Conjurer came to Mr. Palmer and confessed that he had a grudge
against him, and thereupon did invocate the Devil to do Palmer a mischief, and
he promised to blow down Palmers house; but only blew down the Elm^ whereupon
the Conjurer taxed the Demon with breach of promise: But he answered, Palmer
was a Praying man, and God had set an hedge about all that he had need of, and
so he had no power over his house; but the Elm being only for show and
recreation, he had power over that.

As for matters of fact, I must refer to histories that speak of Malefick
Witchcraft, wherein though many things are certain or fabulous, there may be
truth in some of those relations. And by the abovementioned, and other such
histories, we meet with of that kind, we may gather, That when persons will
seek to the Devil for revenge, he will either do harm to those they hate, or if
the Lord inflict by his hand upon such persons hated by the Conjurers, Satan
will persuade the Conjurer, that he effected it in persuance of their quarrel.
But if the desired mischief be not effected, the Devil will have a plea to
excuse himself. But however they which by themselves immediately invocate the
Devil to help them, to avenge themselves on those they hate, are hereby
Malefick Witches, whether they obtain his help or not.

CHAPTER XVII.
HAving said thus much to show what the Witches condemned by Scripture are, I
shall reflect upon some assertions laid down in a Book dispersed about Salem,
Anno 1695. Entitled, Truth held forth etc. Published, by Thomas Maul, page
221. He says, What is the Devil, or Hell but nothing? that God never created
them, for they were Non Entity, a not being, which is contrary and perfectly
opposite to Entity and Being: And this might be the Devil that dwelt in Adam
which seduced him, Page 185. He insinuates, That if people keep Gods Commands,
or are righteous persons, they cannot be possessed or bewitched by the Devil or
his Instruments; for the cause of their being possessed, or bewitched, has
been through a life of disobedience to God, Page 190. Says, The way to know
one that is a Witch from one that is not a Witch, is by that wisdom, by which
the Damosel, Acts 16.16. was known to be a Witch. Unto these assertions, I
answer, (1.) By the said Thomas Maul and his Wife: For when B. B. was upon her
Trial, the said Mauls Wife came in and testified against the said B.B. to prove
her a Witch, in order to her Condemnation for Witchcraft: And the same day said
B. was Executed, T. Maul said in my hearing, that if he had been desired to
pray with her at her Execution, he would not; for he believed she was guilty of
that sin the Scripture says, we must not pray for it; for he believed she was
a Witch, and had covenanted with the Devil, and forsaken God; and that was the
sin we ought not to pray for. He said also that he could have come in a witness
against her, if he would; and that he believed she had bewitched to death a
Child of his. And he believed most of those in Prison were Witches. From hence
I gather, that in the year 1692. T. Maul did believe the Devil to be an Entity,
and that a Witch by him had power to bewitch to death the Child of him that he
esteemed a righteous person; believing as others did, save that he counted a
Witch guilty of the unpardonable sin. But when others find an error in
proceeding too far in these matters, he comes to see it also: And to avoid it,
runs into another extreme; which I prove by the ensuing Propositions.

Prop. 1. The Devils were once holy Angels, created by God, and so Entities.
This appears by many Scriptures before mentioned: As by his tempting our
Savior, Mat 4. Who had no corrupt quality within him; being the spotless Lamb
of God; yet him did Satan tempt, yea take him up into the holy City, and set
him on the pinnacle of the Temple, and into an high mountain, and show him all
the Kingdoms of the World, and the glory of them. These things could not be
done by a Non Ens. I shall add some farther confirmation from other places, (1)
Jude 6. Angels were created by God. The Devils are Angels. (2) They that left
their own habitation are Entities. But the Devils left their own habitation:
Therefore Entities* (3) They that sinned, and for their sin are delive^ed into
Chains of Darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment, are Entities: But so did the
Devil, 2 Pet. 2 4 Therefore, etc. (4.) He that is the Prince of this World, the
God of this World, the Prince of the power of the Air; be that goes to and fro
in the earth, and walks up and down in it, is a Bring an Entity. But such is
the Devil Job 1 7 Job 14 30.2 Cor. 4. 4. Ephesians 2.2. Therefore. So then the
denying the Entity of the Devil, is a reviving the old Doctrine of the Sadduces
Act 22.8. Who said, There is neither Angel nor Spirit.

Prop. 2. There was no Devil dwelt in Adam to seduce him before he was tempted
by Eve, to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and evil. The Devil, says he,
is not a Being, yet dwelt in Adam, and seduced him: By this Devil in Adam then
he means a sinsul quality in Adam before he was tempted to eat, or it was a
name without signification. But there could be no such evil quality in Adam
before so tempted: For i^ it were, it must be created with him, or enter into
him before Eve did tempt him: But neither of these, therefore not at all. Not
the former, for he was created upright, Eccl 7 29. Very good, and in Gods
Image, Gen 1.26, 27, 31. Not the latter, for the Scripture gives no intimation
of any evil in Adam before seduced by the woman (2) Nay the Devil that seduced
him was without him, even the Serpent or Devil in the Serpent, that seduced Eve
first by talking with her, and by her was he deceived, Genesis 3.1. to 6. 2 Cor.
11.3. 1 Timothy 2.14. Adam was not deceived (that is first) but the woman, etc.
(3.) The Lord in punishing that first sin, does distinctly punish Adam, Eve and
the Serpent (in which is comprehended the Devil that old Serpent. Genesis 3.14,
15. with 2 Cor. 11.3. Rev. 20.2.) as three distinct Entities or Beings;
therefore the Devil was without, ad extra, before Adam was beguiled.

Prop. 3. All wicked men are not Witches; as T. Maul holds forth, p. 183. and
193. etc. Saying, All that live a life of disobedience are Witches in some
degree, with more to that effect. For if all wicked persons were Witches in the
sense intended, Exodus 22 18. Deuteronomy. 18.10. Then all wicked men should have been
put to death by the law of Moses. But there was no such thing. Nay all the
heathen Idolaters were not called Witches, or Sorcerers in Egypt or Babylon,
but only some peculiar persons among them. And if all had familiar Spirits,
there had not been that need of such a warning, Regard not them which have
familiar Spirits, nor seek after Wizards, etc.

Prop. 4. God has no where promised all people that keep Gods Commands, or are
righteous persons, that they shall not be possessed or bewitched by the Devil
or his Instruments. Indeed it is sometimes so, as Numb. 23.21, 23 There is no
enchantment against Jacob, neither any divination against Israel; when God has
not beheld iniquity in Jacob, nor seen perverseness in Israel. And our best
shield against Satan is faith in Christ, with prayer and an holy life. Yet Job
a perfect man did suffer more in his Body, Goods, Servants and Children then
most wicked men in the World have done. And it was a Daughter of Abraham whom
Satan bound eighteen years, Luke 13 16. And a Mother of whom it is said, O
woman great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou will; who had a Daughter
grievously vexed with a Devil possessing of her. So that God in his Sovereignty
makes all things come alike to all when he pleases; so that no man knows lo^
or hatred by any thing that is before him.

Prop 5. The hewitching spoken of, Gal. 3.1. is not to be understood of a
proper or literal bewitching, but in a Metaphorical sense, where by way of
^llusion, the false Teachers are compared to Witches, as being like them; for
as Witches have bewitched the eyes of the Body, so they bewitched the eyes of
the mind. And though Witchcraft be one kind of the works of the flesh
mentioned, Gal 5.19, 20, 21. Yet the Text does not say, all the works of the
Flesh are Wi^chcraft: But this is distinct from Murder, Drunkenness and the
rest, as they are distinct each from other.

Prop. 6 The Wisdom of God does no where say, that the Damosel mentioned, Act.
16.^6 was a Wi^ch. But it describes her to be a person possessed with a spirit
of divination, or having a spirit of Python within her: Whom Paul in the name
of Christ commanded to come out of her, and so he was cast out. That Spirit
that calls her a Witch, does consequentially at least call the Damosel, Mark
7 25. a Witch, because she had an unclean spirit; and so would render all the
possessed in the Gospel, worthy of death by Moses Law; which is to subvert all
the Scriptures which condemn that abomination. It was therefore a blasphemous
comparison which he made, who said, There was as great mistakes in the
Scripture, as in T. Mauls Book; presuming therein to equalize to the lively
Oracles of God, a Book abounding with gross mistakes in Doctrine and History.

Q. How may a Witch; Sorcerer or Conjurer be proved to be such as being legally
convicted to receive the punishment appointed? Exodus 27.18.

A. I answer from 1 Samuel 28 Chap. We find there that Saul put away th^se that
had familiar Spirits, and Wizards out of the Land, verse. 3. Yet one was left at
Endor, v. 7. Saul then had a way to convict them; and the Woman at Endor points
at the way, v. 9. For Saul had said to her, Divine unto me by the familiar
spirit, and bring me him up whom I shall name unto thee: The Woman answers,
Wherefore then layest thou a snare for my life, to cause me to dye? q. d If it
be proved by sufficient witness, that I Divine by a familiar Spirit, and raise
a Ghost from the Dead, I must die by the Law. But Saul swears to her by the
Lord, As Jehovah lives, there shall no punishment happen to thee for this
thing. And then she proceeds. Note, that this woman though she dealt with and by
the Devil, has so much knowledge of Jehovah, and confidence in an Oath made by
him, that she ventures her life upon it. Again, v. 21. After she had raised the
supposed Samuel, she said unto Saul; I have obeyed thy voice, and have put my
life in my band. As if she had said, I have done that in obedience to thee;
that were it proved against me, would take away my life. Here then we see that
if it can be proved against any, that they have divined by a familiar spirit,
or done such like act of communion with the Devil, or raised the Dead by him
that is the Devil in likeness of the Dead; then such a person is proved to be a
Witch that ought to die: So in like manner, if any be proved to use Sorceries
(as did the Magicians of Egypt) among Christian people, such ought to dye, or
proportionably by familiarity with the Devil to do, or come to know strange
things, or work signs, lying wonders, or miracles by him, as they are called, 2
These 2 9 Rev. 13 13, 14. Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2

Q. But by what way may such Divinations and Sorceries be proved?

A In the same way that Murder, Theft, and such like crimes are provable. As
(1.) By the testimony of two Witnesses, that the party suspected bath us^d
Sorcery, etc. (2.) Confession may in some cases be taken in this crime as well
as others, as has been above-shewed; If the persons be compotes mentis, and
give as clear demonstration of their guilt of the fact, as Baanab and Rechab
did of their slaying Ishbosheth, when they brought his head to David, 2 Samuel 4
^, etc. (3) The testimony of partners in the crime in some cases, as above
showed, Chap. 11. (4.) Circumstances antecedent to, concomitant with, or
suddenly consequent upon such acts of Sorcery, have like force to fasten a
suspicion of this crime upon this or that person; as the like circumstances
have to fasten a suspicion upon any for another crime attended with them;
mutatis mutandis.

Here it may be enquired, Whether persons obsessed, possessed, or under bodily
torments or vexations by Satan, are fit witnesses?

I answer in the ensuing Propositions.

Prop. 1. Those whose Bodies are sorely afflicted by the Devil, and yet their
understandings clear and free, are fit to be Witnesses as well as others. As
was Job* who when Satan had smitten him with sore boyls from head to foot, yet
was a fit witness for God. Job 42.7. Speaking of God the thing that was right.

Prop. 2. Some under these molestations of Satan have their understandings so
darkened and fantasies so abused, that they are not in their right mind, till
delivered from Satan, as was the case of the man among the Tombs, Mark. 5.2, 3,
15. So the Damosel, Acts 16.16, 17. Though she gave a true testimony concerning
Paul and Silas, yet she was no fit witness, because she spoke by the
instigation of Satan, and not of her own knowledge. So it may be proportionably
in persons under the influence of enchantment, or obsession by Satan, although
in a lesser degree.

Prop. 3. Hence it may follow, that a person under these assaults of hell, may
be fit for a witness at one time, when free from these fits, which darken his
understanding: But not another time, viz. when the senses are beclouded by the
violence of their fits. Again, they may be fit to testify to some things;
namely to what they feel and suffer upon their own Bodies. But not of what they
see at some distance, or about external and remoter objects; because their eyes
and fantasies may be under some kind of fascination (as I may call it) of the
Devil; so as to mistake one thing for another.

Obj But is it not then according to the principles laid down above, impossible
to prove any person to be a Witch; seeing the workings between Satan and them
are so secret? How can they be discovered?

A. Other Malefactors work secretly and in the dark, hoping never to be
discovered. Job 24 14, 15, 16, 17. The Murderer, Thief, Adulterer, say, no eye
shall see me, and disguise their faces, dig in the dark, etc. But the Lord
searches out such Malefactors, when settled on their lees, with his candle of
judgment, though they dig deep to hide themselves from men; yea, and if it were
possible, from God himself. They say, Who sees us? who knows us, Zeph. 1.12.
Isa 29.15, 16. Yet the Lord brings all to light before men when he pleases. So
the Lord can and does discover Sorcerers Magicians, and all sorts of Witches,
when, and as often as he pleases; and sometimes leaves them to discover and
betray themselves: And sometimes over rules their Master whom they serve, to
entrap and deceive them: Pro. 26.26. Whose hatred is covered by deceit, his
wickedness shall be showed before the whole Congregation. Which is to be
understood when the Lord pleases to bring to light these hidden works of
darkness.

CHAPTER XVIII.
I Shall conclude this Discourse with some Application of the whole.

1. We may hence see ground to fear, that there has been a great deal of
innocent blood shed in the Christian World, by proceeding upon unsafe
principles, in condemning persons for Malesick Witchcraft.

2. That there have been great sinful neglects in sparing others, who by their
divinings about things future, or discovering things secret, as stolen Goods,
etc or by their informing of persons and things absent at a great distance,
have implored the assistance of a familiar spirit, yet colored over with
specious pretenses, and have drawn people to enquire of them: A sin frequently
forbidden in Scripture, as Lev. 19 31 and 20.6. Isa. 8.19, 20. and yet let
alone, and in many parts of the World, have been countenanced in their
diabolical skill and profession; because they serve the interest of those that
have a vain curiosity, to pry into things God has forbidden, and concealed
from discovery by lawful means. And of others that by their enchantments, have
raised mists, strange sights, and the like; to beget admiration, and please
Spectators, etc. When as these divinations and operations are the Witchcraft
more condemned in Scripture than the other.

3. But to come nigher home, we have cause to be humbled for the mistakes and
errors which have been in these Colonies, in their Proceedings against persons
for this crime, above forty years ago and downwards, upon insufficient
presumptions and presidents of our Nation, whence they came. I do not say, that
all those were innocent, that suffered in those times upon this account. But
that such grounds were then laid down to proceed upon, which were too slender
to evidence the crime they were brought to prove; and thereby a foundation laid
to lead into error those that came after. May we not say in this matter, as it
is, Psalm. 106 6. We have sinned with our fathers? And as, Lam 5.7. Our fathers
have sinned and are not, and we have born their iniquities? And whether this be
not one of the sins the Lord has been many years contending with us for, is
worthy our serious enquiry. If the Lord punished Israel with famine three years
for a sin of misguided zeal forty years before that, committed by the breach
of a Covenant made four hundred years before that: 2 Samuel 21.1, 2. Why may not
the Lord visit upon us the misguided zeal of our Predecessors about Witchcraft
above forty years ago, even when that Generation is gathered to their Fathers.

4. But I would come yet nearer to our own times, and bewail the errors and
mistakes that have been in the year 1692. In the apprehending too many we may
believe were innocent, and executing of some, I fear, not to have been
condemned; by following such traditions of our fathers, maxim of the Common
Law, and, Presidents and Principles, which now we may see weighed in the
balance of the Sanctuary, are found too light. I heartily concur with that
direction for our public prayers, emitted December 17. 1696 by our General
Assembly, in an order for a general Fast, viz. That God would show us what we
know not, and help us wherein we have done amiss, to do so no more: And
especially that whatever mistakes on either hand, have been fallen into, either
by the body of this people, or any order of men, referring to the late tragedy
raised among us by Satan and his Instruments, through the awful Judgment of
God: He would humble us therefore, and pardon all the errors of his Servants
and People, that desire to love his Name, and be attoned to his land. I am
abundantly satisfied that those who were most concerned to act and judge in
those matters, did not willingly depart from the rules of righteousness. But
such was the darkness of that day, the tortures and lamentations of the
afflicted, and the power of former presidents, that we walked in the clouds,
and could not see our way. And we have most cause to be humbled for error on
that hand, which cannot be retrieved. So that we must beseech the Lord, that if
any innocent blood has been shed, in the hour of temptation, the Lord will not
lay it to our charge, but be merciful to his people whom he has redeemed,
Deuteronomy. 21.8. And that in the day when he shall visit, he will not visit this sin
upon our land, but blot it out, and wash it away with the blood of Jesus Christ.

5. I would humbly propose whether it be not expedient, that some what more
should be publicly done then yet has, for clearing the good name and
reputation of some that have suffered upon this account, against whom the
evidence of their guilt was more slender, and the grounds for charity for them
more convincing. And this (in order to our obtaining from the Lord farther
reconciliation to our land,) and that none of their surviving relations, may
suffer reproach upon that account. I have both read and heard of several in
England, that have been executed for Capital crimes, and afterward upon sense
of an error in the process against them, have been restored in blood and honor
by some public act. My Lord Cook relates a story. A man going to correct a
Girl his Neice, for some offense, in an upper room, the Girl strove to save
her self till her nose bled, and wiping it with a chath, threw the bloody
cloth out at the window, and cried Murder; and then ran down stairs, got away
and bid her self. Her Uncle was prosecuted by her friends upon suspicion of
Murdering her, because she could not be found. He declared that she made her
escape as above said. Then time was allowed him to bring her forth, but he
could not hear of her within the time, and fearing be should die if she could
not be found, procures another Girl very like her, to appear in Court, and
declare she was his Neice that had been missing: But her relations examine this
counterfeit, until they find her out, and she confesses she was suborned and
counterfeited the true Neice. Upon these presumptions the man was found guilty
of Murdering his Neice, and thereupon ex^cuted. And after his execution his
true Neice comes abroad and shows her self alive and well. Then all that saw it
were convinced of the Uncles innocence, and vanity of such presumptions. The
Printing and Publishing of this relation Vindicates the good name of the Uncle,
from the imputation of the crime of Murder. And this is one end of this present
discourse, to take off (so far as a discourse of this nature can) infamy from
the names and memory of such sufferers in this kind, as do not deserve the same.

6. Here it may be suitable for us to enquire, What the Lord speaks to us by
such a stupendeous providence, in his letting loose Satan upon us in this
unusual way? Ans. 1. We may say of this, as our Savior said of his washing his
disciples seat, Joh. 13. What I do thou know not now, but thou shall know
hereafter. The Judgments of the Lo^ are a great deep, Psalm. 36.6. How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out? 2. Yet somewhat
of his counsel at present for our instruction may be known, by comparing the
Word and works of God together.

1. As when Josh^a the high Priest though an holy chosen man of God, stood
before the Angel, Satan stood at his right hand to resist him, or to be his
adversary: And the advantage Satan had was by the filthy garments Joshua was
cloth^d with before the Angels: That is, some iniquity which yet was not passed
away, Zech, 3.1, 3, 4. So we may say here were among Gods own Children filthy
garments. The sins of Lukewarmness, loss of our first love, unprofitableness
under the Gospel, slumbering and deeping in the wise, as well as foolish
Virgin^, worldliness, pride, carnal security, and many other sins. By these and
such like sins the accuser of the Brethren got advantage to stand at our right
hand (the place of an Accuser in Courts of Justice) and there accuse us and
resist us.

2. When the Egyptians refused to let Israel go to sacrifice and keep a feast
to the Lord in the Wilderness: The Lord cast upon the fierceness of his wrath,
by sending Evil Angels among them, Psalm. 78.49. Egypts sins were (1.)
Coveteousness, they would not let Israel go, because they gained by their
labors. (2.) Contempt of God and his Instituted Worship, and Ordinances. They
did not count them of such concernment, that Israel should go into the
Wilderness to observe them. Both these sins have too much increased in our
Land. (1.) Coveteousness, an inordinate love of the World gave Satan advantage
upon us. (2.) Contempt of Gods Worship and Instituted Ordinances. The Errand of
our Fathers into this Wilderness, was to Sacrifice to the Lord; that is, to
worship God in purity of heart and life, and to wait upon the Lord, walking in
the faith and order of the Gospel in Church fellowship; that they might enjoy
Christ in all his Ordinances. But these things have been greatly neglected and
despised by many born, or bred up in the Land. We have much forgotten what our
Fathers came into the Wilderness to see. The sealing Ordinances of the Covenant
of Grace in Church Communion have been much slighted and neglected; and the
fury of this Storm raised by Satan has fallen very heavily upon many that
lived under these neglects. The Lord sends Evil Angels to awaken and punish our
negligence: And to my knowledge some have been hereby excited to enter into the
Chamber of Gods Ordinances, to hide themselves, until the indignation be over
past.

3. David when he removed the Ark from Kirjathjearim, had the Ark put into a
new Cart, which should have been carried by the Kohathites. Numb. 3 31. And
David thought this was right, until the Lord slew Uzza for touching the Ark:
But then he looked more exactly into to the will of God; and confesses that
the Lord made a breach upon them, because they sought him not after the due
order, 1 Chronicles. 13.5, 7, 9, 10. and 15.11, 12, 13. Had not the Lord made that
breach upon them, they had persisted securely in their error. So I may say in
this case. In the prosecution of Witchcraft, we sought not the Lord after the
due order; but have proceeded after the methods used in former times and other
places, until the Lord in this tremendous way made a breach upon us. And hereby
we are made sensible that the methods formerly used are not sufficient to prove
the guilt of such a crime. And this I conceive was one end of the Lords letting
Satan loose to torment and accuse so many; that hereby we may search out the
truth more exactly. For had it not been for this dreadful dispensation, many
would have lived and dyed in that error, which they are now convinced of.

4. The Lord delivered into the hand of Satan, the Estate, Children, and Body
of Job, for the trial of Jobs faith and patience, and proof of his perfection
and uprightness. So the Lord has delivered into Satan's hand men's Children and
Bodies, yea names and estates into Satan's hand for the trial of their faith and
patience, and farther manifestation of the sincerity of their professions.

7. From that part of the discourse which shows the power of Satan to torment
the bodies, and disturb the minds of those, he is let loose upon, Chap. 6. I
would infer, that Satan may be suffered so to darken the minds of some pious
Souls, as to cause them to destroy themselves by drowning, hanging, or the
like. And when he has so far prevailed upon some, that formerly lived a
Christian life, but were under the prevalency of a distracting Melancholy at
their latter end: We may have Charity that their Souls are Saved,
notwithstanding the sad conclusion of their lives. I speak not to excuse any
that having the free use of their reason willingly destroy themselves, out of
pride, discontent, impatience, etc. Achitophel who out of height of Spirit
because his Counsel was not followed, and to prevent David's executing of him,
for his rebellion and treason, destroyed himself, has left his name to stink
unto all generations. And Judas who for his unparalelled treachery in betraying
his Master, and the Lord of life, was justly left to hang himself; and the
rope breaking or slipping he fell down head long, or with his face down ward,
so that he burst asunder in the midst, and all his bowels gushed out, Math.
27.5. with Act. 1.18. left by his sin and punishment in the last act of his
life the black character of a Son of perdition. But those that being out of
their right minds, and hurried by an evil Spirit, as persons under a force to
be their own executioners, are not always to be ranked with these.

8. Seeing we have been too fierce against supposed Malefick Witchcraft; ^et us
take heed we do not on the contrary become too ^avourable to divining
Witchcraft: And become like Saul who was too zealous against the Gibeonites,
and at last turned to seek after one tha^ had a familiar Spirit, to his own
destruction. Let us not, if we can help it, suffer Satan to set up an ensuring
office for stolen Goods. That after he has brought the curse of God into the
house of the thief by tempting him to steal: he may not bring about the curse
into the houses of them from whom the goods were stolen; by alluring them to go
to the god of Ekron to enquire. That men may not give their Souls to the Devil
in exchange, for his restoring to them their goods again, in such a way of
divination. The Lord grant it may be said of New England, as is prophesied of
Judah, Mic. 5 12. I will cut off Witchcrafts out of thine hand, and thou shall
have no more soothsayers.

9. Another extreme we must beware of, is, viz. Because ^u^ fathers in the
beginning times of this Land, did not see so far into these mysteries of
iniquity, as has been since discovered. Let us not unde^value the good
foundations they laid for God and his people, and for us in Church and Civil
Government. For Paul that eminent Apostle knew but in part; no wonder then, it
our Fathers were imperfect men. In the purest times in Israel, there were some
Clouds of ignorance over-shadowing of them. Abraham, David, and the best
Patriarchs were generally ignorant of the sin of Polygamy. And although Solomon
far exceeded Nehemiah in wisdom; yet Nehemiah saw farther into the evil of
Marrying Outlandish Women, than that wisest of Kings, and mere fallen men. Neb.
13.26. Josiah kept the Passover more exactly, than David, and all the
Reforming Kings of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 35.18.

All the godly Judges and Kings of Judah were unacquainted with, and so
negligent of the right observation of the feast of Tabernacles, until it came
to Nehemiahs time: And he understood and revived an ordinance of God, that lay
buried in oblivion, near about a thousand years. Now he that shall reject all
the good in doctrine and practice, which was maintained, professed and
practiced by so many Godly leaders, because of some few errors found among
them, will be found to fight against God. A dwarf upon a giants shoulders, can
see farther than the giant.

It was a glorious enterprise of the beginners of these Colonies, to leave
their native Country to propagate the Gospel: And a very high pitch of faith,
zeal, and courage that carried them forth, to follow the Lord into this
wilderness, into a land that was not sown Then was New England holiness to the
Lord, and all that did devour them, or attempted so to do, did offend, and evil
did come upon them. And the Lord did graciously remember this kindness of their
Youth, and love of their Espousals; In granting them many eminent tokens of his
favor; by his presence with them in his Ordinance^, for the Conversion of
Souls, and edifying and comforting the hearts of his Servants: By signal
answering their prayers in times of difficulty: By protecting them from their
Enemies: By guiding of, and providing for them in a Desert. And the Lord will
still remember this their kindness unto their Posterity, unless that by their
Apostaly from the Lord, they vex his Holy Spirit, to turn to be their Enemy:
And thereby cut off the Entail of his Covenant Mercies; which God forbid. Oh
that the Lord may be with us, as he was with our Fathers; and that he may not
leave us, nor forsake us!

FINIS.

