FAITH Victorious. AS It was Represented IN A SERMON Preached to the Honorable
Artillery Company in Boston, on the day of their ELECTION of Officers, June 1
st. 1702.

By Benjamin Colman, Pastor of a Church in Boston.

BOSTON: Printed By B. Green, and J. Allen, for Samuel Sewall Junior. 1702.

To the READER.
I Have a just Claim to thy utmost Candor, and am blameless, what fault soever
there may be in this Public Appearance; except it be a Fault to yield unto
Those who would take no Denial, whose Persons both by Inclination and Duty, I
love and honor, and to whose Advice I owe a great deference. Possibly I have
gone beyond the Rules of Decency in the obstinate Excuses I have made, if it
might have been to avoid both the Preaching and Publishing the following
Discourse. But I am Overruled: and only entreat on the one hand, that the
Gentlemen who have pressed me to this Service would not judge my backwardness to
comply with their respectful desires; nor on the other hand the Reader my
weakness in Emitting a Discourse with so many Defects; as I must needs own I
see in this, and yet could not supply without making it anew, and swelling it
too big.

I confess the Subject seems to me well chosen and seasonable, were the
management answerable. A serious Call to the Exercise of Faith can never be
unsuitable to a Christian People: but peculiarly proper is it in such a
Calamitous Day as this; a Day of Distress to the whole Protestant World. The
Word of God almost every where and always calls us to this Duty: and at times
his Providence has the same voice, and loudly tells us -- when it is especially
the Duty of the present Day

I hope the Reader will not expect here an Essay to unfold the Doctrine of
Faith, as it lies in the Body of Christian Religion: that would require a
Volumn by it self, and a more masterly hand to draw it Wherefore I have not
attempted to consider it any further than in its strictest connection to the
Character and Duties of Soldiers: and even as to them I have but given hints,
and left the understanding Christian to infer more of his Duty.

The Week after I had prepared this Discourse, arrived to us the astonishing
News of His Majesty, King William's Death, our late most Gracious Sovereign:
Which sore Afflistion makes the Subject here discoursed on the more seasonable.
Wherefore I took the sad Occasion to drop a Tear (as in duty bound) into the
Torrent of Grief, which overflows our Bereaved Nation.

May it please God to give us all a most affectionate Regard, and deep Concern
for the Prosperity of his Church: And may he make this poor Discourse, by his
Grace accompanying it, to Subserve hereunto, by putting us more on Faith and
Prayer.

May the Blessing wherewith Moses the man of God blessed the Children of Israel
before his Death, come upon us and all the People of God in the World 1 There
is none like the God of Jeshurun, who rides upon the Heaven in thy Help, and
in his Excellency on the Sky. The Eternal God is thy Refuge, and underneath are
the Everlasting Arms: Happy art thou, O Israel: Who is like unto thee, O People
Saved by the Lord, the Shield of thy help, and who is the Sword of thy
Excellency!

Boston, June 8. 1702. B. Colman.

FAITH Victorious.
Hebrews XI. 33. Who through Faith subdued Kingdoms.


THE Power of Great and Excellent Examples is so confessed by all men, that
they have gained the preference to other modes of Instruction, both for
Facility and Efficacy: they are more easily perceived, and do more powerfully
incline to practice, than bare Precepts: they insinuate into the minds of men,
and leave very strong Impressions there. And as good Examples are apt to teach,
so do they strictly oblige the Conscience: they condemn the evil practices of
others, as Noah did the Old World; and bind us to imitate, leaving us steps
which we ought to follow. But among all the blessed Patterns which the
Christian has before him to govern himself by, none are so commanding as the
Illustrious Saints on Sacred Record; the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles of
the Church; of whom we ought to be followers as they were of Christ. And of all
the Graces which adorned those holy men of God, no one shone in them more
conspicuous than Faith, and none more worthy or necessary than this to be
imitated by us.

Faith, which is a grace dignified in Scripture, as of the first Order and
Magnitude, which is most beautiful and honorable in the sight of God, and most
beneficial unto us, both as to present privileges, and future Blessedness.
Faith, which is the principal precept of Christianity, the root of Spiritual
Life, and the comprehension of all Grace and Duty, the most useful part of the
Christian armor (above all taking the shield of Faith) and the Victory that
overcomes the world. Faith, by which (as the Apostle in the Context teaches
us) the Just shall live, which is to the Saving of the Soul, which is the
substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, and without
which it is impossible to please God. Faith, which is the praise of all the
Saints: -- In this especially are they Examples to us, and so proposed and
commended by the Apostle in the Chapter before us. Wherein the most excellent
Persons are celebrated for this most excellent Gift, and that for its blessed
fruits and mavelous effects. The particular Grace, or divine Gift here
celebrated is Faith, the miraculous effects of it are many and various; which
are amplified on by an induction of many famous Instances among the Children of
God, from Abel to Abraham, from Abraham to Moses, and so through the succeeding
Worthies renowned in Scripture for the glorious Atcievements of their Faith.
Among this so great a cloud of Witnesses, the Saints of a Military Order make a
very considerable figure, both for Name and Exploits. And these were so many,
that the Apostle does but name a few, and says, the time would fail him to
speak even of their Heroic Faith: v. 32. What shall I more say? He elegantly
breaks off his enumeration, and intimates it to be a thing endless to go about
to number, much less to enlarge on all that could be instanced in. For the time
would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Sampson, and of Jephteh,
of David also and Samuel, and of the Prophets; who through Faith subdued
Kingdoms, -- Escaped the Edge of the Sword, -- waxed valiant in fight, turned
to flight the Armies of the Aliens.

Who through Faith: the Proposition (...), is of very various signification: It
is a note both of a condition and a cause; but especially of the former when
with a Genitive Case, as it is in the Text.

Subdued Kingdoms: (...), signifies to fight, strive, labor fervently. It is
to contend with a kind of Agony of Spirit, i. e. with such a degree of concern
and earnestness. The word is often used in the New Testament, and in our
T^ansla^ion is rendered by Striving for Mastery, ^ Cor. ^.25. Laboring
fervently, Col. 4.12. Figuring, 1 Timothy 6.12. and Contending earnestly, Jude v.
3. All which phrases import vehemence of mind, an engaged resolution, and
unwearied Endeavor to finish what we undertake, and accomplish what we
propose. The word seems not only to note the effect it self, that Kingdoms have
been Subdued through Faith, but also the nature of that Faith which subdued them:
how operative, laborious and fervent it is.

DOCTRINE. That the Victories which the People of God have gained, or the
Salvations and Deliverances they have received from their Enemies in this
World, may under God nextly and principally be ascribed to their Faith.
The Doctrine contains several distinct Truths. As,

1. That the Church and People of God have Enemies in the World, and are often
unavoidably engaged in cruel War. War is very far distant from the Design and
Spirit of the Gospel of Peace; but yet the present evil world necessarily
renders the State of the Church Militant. Not that the Religion of Christ
propagates it self by Fire and Sword, by Force and Blood shed: Let Impostors
wear that brand, and bloody. Mahomes, force down the throats of his Proselites
that with the rest of his shameful Doctrines. The reason is, because the
Kingdom of Christ is Spiritual, and not of this world: for said our Lord to
Pilate, Joh. 18.36. If my Kingdom were of this world, then would my Servants
fight; then would they propagate the Faith by violence and force of Arms. Yet
however, the Church of Christ is in an evil world, full of sin, and
consequently full of confusion and misery, the fruit of sin: and hence come
wars and fightings even of men's lusts; which fill them with enmity one against
another, but especially against God and his Interest.

It would be too great an excursion here to Enquire, In what Cases a Christian
State (which is also a Church of Christ) may Wage War? I shall only say, That
to be sure the Lust of Dominion, whether temporal or spiritual; whether over
men's civil properties and liberties, or over men's consciences, does
sufficiently authorize it. Which is indeed the very thing that fills the World
with the noise and rumor of War at this day, the thirst of an insatiable
Prince to inslave the world, and stretch all men's consciences to his own size:
the very Menace whereof will justify the Confederacy against any such baneful
Power, not only as just, but also pious and necessary.

2. Another Truth employed in the Doctrine is, That the People of God always
have been, and will be finally victorious over their Enemies, and saved from
them. Not that Success always waits on the just side, or that in particular
Wars or Conflicts, God does not often give the victory to his own and his
peoples Enemies. Nay particular branches of the Church, even whole Nations may
be given as a prey to their teeth; and it has been at that pass, that there has
been no appearance of a true Israelite left; so that Elijah thought he had
reason for that bitter complaint, 1 King. 19.10. I* even I only am left, and
they seek my life, to take it away.

Yet nevertheless, the distressed Interest of God has always out lived such
Oppressions and seeming Extirpations. There nave been Reserves, whose knees
have not bowed to Baal, nor with their mouths have they kissed his Image. Whom
the Grace of God has kept, and his Providence guarded possibly even from the
suspicion of retaining their Integrity; and at long run these poor Remains have
seen the ruin of their proud Oppressors, and trampled on the Power that once
tyranized over them. Let Antichristian Tyrants boast that they have made
through work of it, and that their next Successors shall scarce know what the
name of a Hugonot means; yet God may have many Names there, whom we may name in
a double sense his Invisible Church, who have not defiled their Garments, while
the world wanders after the Beast. Thus it was in the tenth and last general
Persecution of the Church, under Dioclesian, and some of his Successors: So
incredible numbers of Christians were Martyred, that these Pagan Emperors
thought their work completed, and in an ancient Inscription they tell the
World, That they had effaced the name and superstition of Christians, and
restored the Worship of the Gods: i. e. the Pagan Idolatries. But as Christian
Historians have well observed, 'They were so much deceived, that this only
hastened the destruction of Paganism, and shortly after Christianity became
victorious and triumphant over all the Powers and Artifices of Mankind.

The foes of Christ will be made his footstool; and let them rage and imagine
what they will; their spite and their counsel He has equally in derision; He
will break them with a rod of iron, and dash them in pieces like a potters
vessel. So Daniel prophesies of the Everlasting Kingdom of Christ, Dan. 2.44.
-- The God of Heaven shall set up a Kingdom which shall never be destroyed; and
the Kingdom shall not be left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and
consume all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever.

3. Another truth contained in the Doctrine is, That to God ultimately are all
the Church her Salvations and Victories to be ascribed. Not to Means nor
Instruments, not to power nor policies, not to courage nor conduct: for as the
whole Disposal of every thing is of the Lord, so we cannot ascribe it to any
lesser cause, without denying God and his governing Providence, and placing our
selves in Gods stead. An arrogance which even Heathens have condemned and
abhorred, who though they had very wretched Ideas of God, yet durst they not deny
this Honor to their lame Deities. So the Historian tells us of the brave
Timoleon, That he did always modestly ascribe all his Successes to the Sole
favor of Providence, and would be often saying, that he was very thankful to
God, who having a mind to preserve Sicily, was pleased to honor him with the
Name and Title of that Deliverance he vouchsafed it. And yet this Superstitious
Warrior had no better Notion of a Deity, than having built a Chapel in his
house, he dedicated it unto Good Hap, and Sacrificed thereunto as to some
Sacred Genius that favored him. And yet verily this ridiculous Superstition of
a blind Heathen will judge the profane Christian, who knowing more of God and
his Providence, yet less reverences and honors him.

We read of Constantine the Great, that upon the first Conviction he received
of the truth of Christianity, he caused a Royal Standard to be made in fashion
of a Cross, and to be born before him in his Wars, as an Ensign of Victory and
Safety: and when he had rescued miserable Rome from the Tyranny of Maxentius,
and was Saluted by the People in the style of their Father, their Savior, and
the Author of all their Happiness, he taught them to ascribe all to God alone,
and attribute nothing to him. Moreover, in the right hand of the Statues, that
were erected to his Honor by Decree of Senate, he caused to be engraven the
figure of the Cross, with this Inscription on it, In this Overcome Which
action, however dangerous in its Consequence, leading to Gross Superstitions,
yet carries this Instruction in it too, That the Christian Warrior is to
expect all his Victories from, and to ascribe all he gains unto, his Almighty
and once Crucified Redeemer.

The Holy Scripture abounds with many plain Assertions to this purpose;
teaching us, That the Race is not to the swift, nor the Battle to the strong:
The Horse is prepared against the day of Battle, but safety is of the Lord,
Prove. 21.31. That there is no King saved by the multitude of an Host: a Mighty
man is not delivered by much strength: A Horse is a vain thing for safety, etc
Psalm. 33.16, 17. We therefore find David after all his Victories giving the
honor of them all to God, Thine, O Lord, is the Greatness, and the Power, and
the Glory, and the Victory, and the Majesty: And so Israel on the banks of the
Red Sea triumph in their Savior, I will sing unto the Lord, for he has
triumphed gloriously; The Lord is my Strength and Song and he is become my
Salvation: The Lord is a Man of War, the Lord is his Name.

4. And lastly, The last and chief truth to be insisted on is, That nextly and
principally under God, the Church her Salvations and Victories, may be ascribed
to Faith. So in the Text, who through Faith subdued Kingdoms.

It is necessary that this be first proved as to matter of Fact, and that we
then enquire whence Faith receives this Power and Efficacy.

1. It is a matter of Fact asserted; and it is to be proved by Testimony; and
this from the Record and History of the Churches Wars, especially that part of
them which is transmitted to us by God Himself, in the Holy Scripture. Which do
afford us many plain Instances of the Power and Prevalency of Faith, in the
Victories which the people of God have from time to time gained over the
Enemies of God. To name a few in the Order wherein they ly in Scripture.

The Salvation and Victory of Israel at the Red Sea, was the fruit of Faith: v.
29. By Faith they passed through the Red Sea, as by dry Land; which the
Egyptians assaying to do were drowned. On the Bank of the Flood stood the
Believing Prophet, and issued out this only Order to the Army of Israel, Stand
still and see the Salvation of the Lord, which he will show to you to day: This
was all they had to do in this famous Overthrow of Pharaoh and his Hosts; to
wait upon God with a quiet composed frame of Spirit, and a believing
expectation of Deliverance.

What was it but Faith, that defeated Amaleck? In vain did Joshua fight below,
when Moses in the Mount let down his Hand. The Rod of God in the hand of Moses
did more than all the Spears, Darts, and Instruments of War, wielded by the
whole Army of Israel.

What but Faith subdued Jericho? v. 30. By Faith the Walls of Jericho fell
down, after they were compassed about seven days. No battering Engines were
applied to lay level the Impregnable Walls, nor ladders to scale them. They
compassed the City day after day, but scarce beseiged it; and on the seventh
day no general Assault was appointed, to carry the place by Storm: Only the
Priests blew with the Trumpets, and Faith ( which can remove Mountains,) shook
down the strong Fortifications; her proud Walls and lofty Towers.

It was Gideons Faith that discomfited the Host of Midian: It was the Sword of
the Lord and not his that smote them. What weapons of War did he and his poor
Army bear? Every man his Trumpet, his Pitcher and his Lamp: Faith sometimes
needs no more to conquer by.

Nor was it so much the Jaw Bone in Sampsons hand, that slew so many Heaps of
the Philistines: but Faith gave the Odd weapon temper and an edge; and
strengthened the hand that held it.

Samuels Faith also routed the Invading Philistines, as we read, 1 Samuel 7.10.
And as Samuel was offering up the Burnt offering, the Philistines drew near to
Battle against Israel: but the Lord Thundered with a great Thunder on that day
upon the Philistines, and discomfited them, and they were smitten before Israel.

Faith stormed the Philistines Garrison. Let us go over (said the Heroic
Prince, to his Armor-bearer) unto the Garrison of these Uncircumcised; it may
be that the Lord will work for us: for there is no restraint to the Lord, to
save by many or by few. 1 Samuel 14.6.

By Faith David Encountered and Slew the formidable Monster of Gath. His Faith
obtained Saul's leave to enter the lists with the prodigious Champion: Thy
Servant (said he to King Saul) Slew both the Lion and the Bear: and this
Uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them, seeing he has defied the
Armies of the Living God: David said moreover, The Lord that delivered me out
of the paw of the Lion and out of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out
of the hand of this Philistine. And Saul said, Go, and the Lord be with thee.
Faith opposed a Shepherds Crook and a pitiful Sling to the Giants Armor and
weighty Shield: Thou come to me with a Sword and with a Spear, and with a
Shield; but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of Hosts the God of the
Armies of Israel, whom thou have defied. Some of the Fathers have made David's
Staff to be an Emblem of the Cross of Christ; and the Stone he slung, an Emblem
of the Omnipotence of Faith.

To name no more, Hezekiah by Faith overthrew the Hosts of blaspheming
Seunacherio. The good Kings Prayers obtained invisible succors, and the Angel
of the Lord smote in the Camp of the Assyrians in one night, 185000 men.

Let none say, that these Instances are fetched from the Age of Miracles, when
wondrous appearances of God were frequent; but that Faith is not of any
efficacy in our days under the Gospel. I might Answer* That the grounds of
Faith are more clearly revealed, the Spirit of God who works Faith in us is
more shed abroad, and the Primitive Christians at least even excelled the Old
Testament Saints in Heroical acts of Fortitude. It was indeed mostly in a
passive way, (like the Faith celebrated in the close of the Chapter) but yet in
a short time the Faith of the Confessors subdued the Empire. And when
Christianity had gained the Countenance of the Supreme Authority, and had the
Armies of the Empire for its defense, though Miracles grew rare, (as there was
less need of them, and indeed if they were wrought on the Churches behalf, yet
could be less discerned,) yet who dare thence infer that Faith then lost its
virtue or efficacy, and that ever since it has had no hand in the Church's
deliverances or enlargement? God forbid, a Christian should make his Faith so
vain a thing.

But this will appear in a better light, if we proceed to the Second thing
proposed; which is,

2. To enquire, Whence Faith receives its Power and Efficacy, to be able to
effect such Salvations and Victories for the people of God? And here it is
necessary to observe, both that there is nothing in Faith to hinder or obstruct
the Christian Soldier in Conquering his Enemies, and on the other hand, there
is much employed in Faith to promote and effect it.

1. There is nothing employed in Faith to hinder and obstruct the Christian
Soldier in pursuing and obtaining victory in War. Indeed were the conceits of
some men just, and according to truth, never had Faith subdued Kingdoms; but
Infidelity had run away with the Empire of the World, and all carnal Conquests.
Did Religion only require of us (...), a mere belief, without the ordinary
exercise of prudence and reason, or the use of proper means to defend our civil
or sacred Rights; then indeed a Chistian would be the most unmeet of all men to
bear Arms, and would do least with them. But it is far otherwise in truth:
Faith neither supposes the use of Arms to be needless nor unlawful. Not
needless, for it supposes Prudence in Exercise: it is quite another thing than
Presumption: it does not encourage the Drone to be idle, in expectation that
the Dew to morrow morning will be transubstantiated into Manna; nor the
Soldier to lay down his Arms, and look when the Stars in their Courses will
fight for him. Much less does Faith condemn the study and practice of War as
unlawful. The study of the Art of War is not only lawful, but also honorable,
and a necessary duty: and so is it (when God calls us) actually to engage in
it. Prayers wont do without suitable Endeavors. While Moses is in the Mount,
Joshua must fight below, and show his utmost skill and courage too in Engaging.
David went against Goliath in the name of the Lord of Hosts, but yet he took a
Sling in his hand. And observe it, That where God wrought without Means he
usually appointed some Sign, he required some Action from his People, before he
would work for them: they must shout, or blow the Trumpets, or break their
Pitchers and show their Lamps, if they did no more. And where no such positive,
arbitrary sign was appointed, they were always to use the ordinary means in
Confidence of the Divine help. And so are we at this day: Faith looks unto God,
but in the way of Blessing, which is the use of proper and appointed means. The
Historian (if it be lawful to name here a Heathens notion of Trust in God)
records it as a shameful Instance of the Cowardice of King Persens, That when
Battle begun, he would withdraw under pretense of Sacrificing, while his
Conqueror Emilius prayed for Victory with his Sword in his hand.

2. There is much implied in Faith to promote and effect Salvations and
Victories for the People of God. And that in two respects; As it gives Courage
and Resolution, and as it engages the help of God.

1. Faith is a Grace which in its own nature tends to beget, and inspire the
Breast with Courage and Resolution. It carries something of boldness and
assurance in the very name, and is a principle that prompts unto daring
actions. It has been an old Observation, That the boldest in War are some of
the very best or worst of men: the last act like wild Creatures, and it is their
brutality and stupid thoughtlessness that gives 'em boldness. But the gracious
heart is truly valiant, and acts upon the best Principles while it shakes off
Fear, and faces death undaunted. As,

1. Faith tends to inspire the breast with courage, in that it realizeth the
Presence of God, and confides in his Help. It enters the field of Battle with
this sense, that we have an absolute Dependence on God in every thing we
undertake: that nothing can fall out beside his order and allowance: that a
more special Providence concerns it self for the safety of his own Interest:
that the presence of God with us is security enough: that he can succeed means,
and even work without them: give skill, or deprive of counsel: inspire with
courage, or dispirit as he pleases. Now if the Faith of the Presence of so
glorious a Being with us, will not fill the Soul with courage, what can do it?
The Lord is on my side, I will not fear, what can man do unto me? Psalm. 118 6.
From hence slow'd David's courage, and he grows so confident upon it that he
beats a Defyance to the whole World should they arm against him single and
alone: Psalm. 27.1, 2, 3. The Lord is my light, and my Salvation, whom should I
fear? The Lord is the strength of my Life, of whom shall I be afraid? When the
wicked, even mine Enemies and my foes came upon me to eat up my flesh, they
stumbled and fell. Though an Host should encamp against me, my heart shall not
fear: Though War should rise against me, in this will I be confident.

Faith sees the Invisible Hosts that encamp where God vouchsafes to reside; as
Elisha beheld the Mountain covered with Horses and Chariots of Fire, and could
then comfort his dispirited Servant, and bid him not fear, for they that be
with us are more than they that be with them. Even Heathens have took courage
from the belief of the divine Presence with them: When it was told Numa once
that the Enemy was near, he answered with a smile, That he feared 'em not, let
'em come at their Peril, for he was then Sacrificing Much more may we expect
from the Worshippers of the True and Living God; and so indeed we find it to
have been: When the army of Israel sent for the Ark of the Covenant to the Camp
to Save them, they received it with Shouting so that the Earth rang again: It
gave new Spirit, life and vigor to them. On the contrary, how disheartning is
the apprehension of the want of Gods gracious presence with us, or his being
with those whom we are against? So the Philistines when they heard the noise of
the shout in the Camp of the Hebrews, and understood that the Ark of the Lord
was come into the Camp; they were terrifyed exceedingly, for they said, God is
come into the Camp: Woe unto us: Who shall deliver us out of the hand of these
Mighty Gods? Despair seized 'em to the last degree (though God made use of
their desperateness, (which next to Faith has done most wonders in War) to
correct the fond and Superstitious Confidence of his own People, who foolishly
thought that the Ark, the outward Symbol of the Divine presence only, could
save them.) The Prophet Habakkuk in his Divine and Triumphant song, elegantly
represents this Matter; how justly the Tokens of Gods Majestic Presence daunt
his Enemies, and may encourage his People: God (says he) came from Teman, and
the holy One from Mount Paran, his glory covered the Heavens, etc. -- Then I
saw the tents of Cushan in affliction, and the Curtains of the land of Midian
did tremble, Hab. 3 7

2 Faith gives courage, in that it makes the Soldier act in Conscience of Duty
to God and his Interest. Some List into War out of a barbarous delight in
Blood, some for hire and Plunder, and some for Fame and Posts of Honor: but
none of these will animate to Battle like the Conscience of duty. To March
against an Enemy with this thought, I owe this to God and to my Country; the
Church of Christ requires this Service of me: the cause is Gods, and my call to
engage in it is clear; I am in my way, and Religion forbids me cowardly to
desert and betray it --: What can more strengthen the hands to fight?

So I have seen in this Land, a devout and heavenly Commander (whose Praises
should be in the Churches, especially on this occasion and to this Audience)
take leave of his friends with great comfort, pressed with the Conscience of
duty to his Lord, and with love to his Members. He went out in the Spirit of
the good Saint John, as one convinced that he ought even to lay down his life
for the Brethren: and in the hour of Battle so he fought, with a boldness which
Faith only could Inspire, and some extraordinary Impulse only could warrant: He
dyed truly like a Christian Hero, encouraging his Soldiers, and praising God
for the little advantage gained; and scarce ever was the Power and Fortitude of
a gracious Principle more visible than here. The Conscience of duty should be
the best Argument in the Soldiers Breast, and the spring that impels him to
act. This Argument Joab used to his Brother Abishai, 2 Samuel 10.12. Be of good
Courage, and let us play the men for our People, and for the Cities of our God.

3. Faith is courageous, in that it acts in the hope of a blessed Immortality.
Such is the Faith celebrated in the Context, which is the substance of things
hoped for, etc. Such was Abraham's Faith, v. 10. For he looked for a City which
has foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Such was the Faith of Moses,
v. 26. For he had respect unto the Recompense of Reward. And such was the Faith
of all the rest, who all hoped for a better Resurrection, v. 35. And it was
this blessed hope that heightened their Courage: for Death loses its Terrors to
him that has made his Peace with God, and is assured of going to Heaven. We may
indeed well grow Giddy when the prospect before us is only a Gulf without
Bottom: the profane man may well stagger at the sight and flinch back: But to
lift up our eyes to Heaven, and be able to say, Let the worst come that can,
let Death meet me, yet I go thither; What is there to dispirit such a Saint?
Why does the Coward turn back and fly from the Battle? Surely, it is the
Conscience of his own wicked life, and the wretch fears to die: Judgment and
Hell are before him, and truly then the least danger of Death is a fearful and
astonishing Risque. But the Righteous has hope in his Death; What great Hurt
can he see in it? If he falls in Battle, he is yet Victorious in the best sense,
a Conqueror over his worst Foes, and is near a better Triumph than Earthly
Victors can have decreed them.

We see then that Faith does in its own nature tend to inspire courage, which
is one reason why so much is ascribed to it. But there is a better reason yet
behind; which is,

2. Faith is a Grace which does especially engage the Help of God. To be sure,
it is He gives salvation unto Kings, and carries victory in His Almighty Hand.
If then Faith engages God on our side, it renders us Invincible. Now this it
does, (1.) By promise; and (2.) In it self, being what God must needs delight
in.

1. By Promise. It is the Sovereign Pleasure of God, and his positive
determination, that if we would engage his presence and help, we must be found
in the exercise of Faith. Of all those Martial Saints in the Context it is said
that they obtained a good report through Faith; but without Faith it had been
impossible for them to have pleased God, or obtained his help. In every strait
Faith is to be in Exercise, and in every difficulty it has the promise of Help
from Christ: Mark 9.23. If thou can believe, all things are possible to him
that believes. Suppose now that Faith were merely an arbitrary Precept, and no
other reason could be given for its obligation but the will and good pleasure
of God; yet since God requires it of us if we would engage his help, it must
needs be necessary to, and effective of Salvation to the Church: for the
Strength of Israel will not lie nor repent. Add unto this,

2. That Faith in its own nature is a Grace wherein God cannot but delight. As
without Faith it is impossible to please God, so on the exercise of it, it is
impossible he should be displeased; and no doubt but he will afford his help
where he places his delight. Now that Faith is so pleasing and delightful to
God is easily argued, and necessarily inferred; in that,

1 It takes us off from all unlawful means and actions, in whatsoever we
engage. These forfeit and lose the Presence and Protection of God, and are like
Achan to the Army of Israel, to cause them not to stand before their Enemies,
and to provoke God to say, I will not be with you any more, except ye destroy
the accursed from among you. Faith puts the Christian Soldier upon seeing to
it that the Cause be just wherein he engages, and his Call sufficient. It will
not act out of a delight to oppress, which is inhumane cruelty; nor for the
lust of Dominion, which is unjust Robbery and Pyracy. It will maintain truth
and keep faith when once given, nor seek advantages by treacheries and
perfidiousness. It will keep up the reverend exercise of Religion in Armies,
and banish vices out of the Camp; where they too often do abound, --
Debaucheries, Profaneness, Stealth, Sloth, Disobedience to Superiors, criminal
Emulations, Envies, Contentions, Hatred, Murders, etc. Where there is no
regard had to these things, there is no ground to hope, for the Divine
Presence. God will not lead such licentious Hosts, who if they gain Victories
will but seek the Enlargement of Hell, to add to the Territories of Satan in
the world, and to propagate their own vile spirit of Atheism, profaneness,
cruelty and luxury; in open contempt of Gods Name and Laws.

2. Faith in the Soldier must needs be very pleasing to God, for therein he
most consults Gods Glory. It takes him off from trusting in himself, or
ascribing success to means and instruments. It debases second causes in honor
of the First, that He may be exalted. Psalm, 44.6, 8. I will not trust in my
bow, neither shall my sword save me, In God we boast all the day long. --

Faith owns the Being and Providence of God: and gives him the Glory of his
Infinite Perfections. It confesses his Power, his Righteousness, Truth, Wisdom
and Sovereignty; relying on these, and resigning to them. Now God delights to
see his Creatures (and more his Children) acknowledge him in all their ways:
for the End of all things is his Glory. Plutarch tells us, That the Romans of
old thought it of more importance to the Public Safety, if the Magistrates
reverenced the Gods, than if they overcame their Enemies.

3. Faith must needs be pleasing to God, and of great efficacy with him,
because it (...) us upon Prayer; and serious, humble, fervent, constant seeking
to him. Faith is most exercised, and best expressed in Prayer; and Faith makes
Prayer prevalent. The Lord is far from the wicked; but he hears the Prayer of
the Righteous. Prove. 15.29. And again, Psalm. 145.18, 19. The Lord is nigh unto
all them that call upon him; to all that call upon him in truth. He will fulfill
the desire of them that fear him; he will also hear their cry, and will save
them.

Faith gives us suitable Dispositions of Soul in Prayer. It comes from a
gracious heart, the frame of the mind is good, and heavenly and devout.

And Faith fills the mouth with proper arguments to plead with God in Prayer.
It will plead the Divine Goodness and Compassion: an Argument most suited to a
gracious nature. It will plead the Promises of help, which God has made to his
People: and the Truth of God affords a fast hold for Faith. It will plead the
Helplessness and wretched weakness of the People of God in themselves, Amos
7.2. Then I said, O Lord God, forgive I beseech thee: by whom shall Jacob
arise, for he is small? It will plead the Power, and Pride, and Blasphemy of
the Enemies of God: Wherefore should the Heathen say, where is their God? and,
Lord! What will thou do for thy great Name? Finally, It will plead Gods All
sufficiency: that he is able to save; That Our Father in Heaven is greater than
all, and none can snatch them out of his hand. Thus Faith will pray and
wrestle, and carry Heaven by violence, and like a Prince have power with God
and prevail.

4 thly and lastly, Faith cannot but be delightful to God, and of great
efficacy with him, in that it implies Holiness both of heart and life. This is
ascribed to Faith, that it purifieth the heart, and is Twin with a good
Conscience. It infers a new Nature, and the work of Sanctification to be
wrought in us. And consequently it implies a holy life, and exemplary
Conversation: together with the Being, the Practice also of all other
Evangelical Graces. Faith looks unto Christ as our Great Commander, the Captain
of our Salvation, prepares to follow him our Leader, is careful to observe his
Orders, dutiful to his Commands.

And will Christ forsake such his faithful Followers? Will he not afford unto
such his Presence and Assistance? What qualifies us for it, or gives a title to
it, according to the promises of truth and grace, if not Holiness. Psalm. 5.
ult. Thou Lord, wilt bless the Righteous, with favor will thou compass him as
with a shield: Unto the Righteous Nation, that keeps the truth, God will
appoint Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks: thou will keep him in perfect peace
whose mind is stayed on thee, because he trusts in thee, Isa. 26.1, 2, 3.
This was Gods Covenant with Israel of old, as Moses numbers it among the
Blessings of Obedience, Deuteronomy. 28 9, 10 The Lord shall establish thee an Holy
People unto himself, as he has sworn unto thee, if thou shall keep the
Commandments of the Lord thy God, and walk in his ways: And all People of the
earth shall see that thou art called by the name of the Lord, and they shall be
afraid of thee.

Thus Faith engages the Almighty's Help by attracting his delight: and from him
come the Churches Victories and Salvations.

USE.
I shall Improve this Doctrine in one single Inference, and so close in a brief
Address to the Honorable Company who have called us together.

The only Inference I shall offer, is, That we may hence learn one great reason
of the poor Condition which the Interest of Christ in the World is fallen into
at this day. Truly, the Church of Christ has lately been in sorrowful and
bleeding circumstances: the doleful cries of suffering Saints have been loud,
and so have the Blasphemies of their Oppressors. What Convulsions do the
Nations at this day feel under the presages of bloody War, and threatened with a
deluge of Popery? The Reformed Interest is far less potent, and at a lower ebb,
than in Ages past. And what may be the reason of this sore frown of God upon
his Interest? Alas, the reason is too visible, Faith, and the necessary fruits
of Faith are wanting. It Is partly through foul avowed Apostacies from the
Truth, and more through the general corruption of Manners among those that retain
a Form of Godliness.

Do you ask, Where are the Churches Victories now? Where her Triumphs? Why does
she not Increase, and enlarge her Borders? And may I not as well ask again, (as
I remember an excellent Person does in a like case) Where is Faith to be found
in Exercise? Where are Believers? How cold and dead is our modern Profession?
Can Faith be without Holiness and good Works? or can it consist with
profaneness, debaucheries, and every abomination? These are the Foes that lay
waste the Heritage of God: These the false Traitors that undermine the Church.
The lusts of Professors are the worst Weapons formed against that Community
which they pretend to be a part of; and sheathed with unnatural bruitishness in
the bowels of their common Mother. No wonder Amaleck prevails, when there are
so few holy and clean hands lift up in the Mount. So that if the Church of
Christ have lost ground instead of gaining, yet it argues not that Faith could
not have rendered it victorious, and can yet do it: but it is rather a shrewd
sign that Faith is wanting. Hear ye me Ala, and all Judah and Benjamin, The
Lord is with you, while ye be with him; and if ye seek him, he will be found of
you; but if ye forsake him, he will forsake you.

It remains now only to do my Duty to You Gentlemen of a Military Order, who
have placed me here this day. I have laid before you a piece of Armor that has
been proved: a ^hield famous for its Antiquity and its Use, having been the
Ornament and defense of every Heroic Saint from the first War of Cain.
Doubtless I do well to bespeak you as Christians, and Good Soldiers of Jesus
Christ: and under such a Character Faith within is as necessary an
Accomplishment, as Arms without and skill to manage them. Nay it is plain that
you expect we should consider you as Christian Soldiers, inasmuch as you have
not now invited us into the Field, but to the Church, the House of God. We all
now take it for granted, that you appear here with real and honest Intentions
actually to engage for the defense of the Cause and Churches of Christ, if War,
or Invasions should come upon us, (which may it please God to forbid.) Why else
do you solemnly call us together, to ask a Blessing from God on these your
Preparatory Exercises, and to encourage you from Gods Holy Word? but that you
give us leave to expect that when War invades us, you will stand in the Front
of the Battle; and as men studied and experienced in these Affairs, will lead
on to every Danger. God is not to be mocked, nor Holy things to be played with?

You know your own character too well (Much Honored Fathers, the ancient
Chiefs in our Military Orders, whom Age and Office, and we hope Grace have long
since dignified) You know your own Character too well, to have honored the
Exercises of this day with your Presence, where they only Lusory and Sportive.
And (I hope) You the Younger Gentlemen in Arms are come hither in conscience of
the Duty you owe to God and your Country; and that you consider the Character
of a Minister too well, and the Solemnity of this Place and Presence, to have
called me hither to Sport with you.

I am sure the Subject you have been Entertained from is awful and serious. The
Examples set before you are most Grave and Venerable: Men Eminent for Holiness
as well as Courage, and all of them the Children of the Most High.

You see (and I might have made particular Inferences to this effect) that,
other things equal, the more Religious you are, the better Soldiers are you.
You see your Calling, and what must accomplish you for it: What is to render
you Invincible, and more than Conquerors. This is not in you by nature, nor is
it an acquired gift: You cannot command it when you list, but yet are not
Complete in your Arms without it. How say ye, we are mighty and Strong men for
War? Jer. 48.14. Faith only can make you truly so, and that is to be received
from God.

Be Exhorted then to seek It of God, and be always found in the Exercise of
this Grace. What could I urge with more hopes at once to Serve the Land in
general, and your Souls in particular? What could I press of a more universal
Concern than this Precept of Faith? It concerns every Soul present: Those of
us, whose Age, Office or Constitution excuses us from engaging in War, yet even
We may by Faith and Prayer help on the Churches Victories.

The very Women, who are not made for the Hardships and Dangers of War, yet may
become Famous, and celebrated for their Faith, and worthy to be named with the
Best of men: As the Apostle does 'em this Honor, in the 35 th. Verse of this
Chapter. The Prayers of a Gracious Woman in the Closet at Home, may be louder
before God, than the Thunder of the Captains and the Shouting. Nay a Woman's
Faith has been needed to encourage the Soldiers Heart in Gods Cause: So
Deborah to Barak, Up says she, For this is the day in which the Lord has
delivered Sisera into thine hand: Is not the Lord gone out before thee.

Moreover, The State of Gods Church in the World at this day, makes it most
suitable that we should exercise Faith as well as Arms. If ever Faith was
needed in War this is the day? How formidable is the Increase of the Power of
Persecutors? the Union of France and Spain. Were there not an Overruling
Providence, and were not Christ the King of the Church, King also over all the
Children of Pride, how desperate might the poor Protestant Interest seem. Our
Faith and Prayer is all the assistance we can lend to the Armies abroad who may
be Fighting in Gods Cause; and truly we have nothing better to trust unto, for
our own Defense and Security at home.

And as an Illustrious Instance of Martial Faith, I would crave leave to name
our late Sovereign Lord KING WILLIAM the Third, of Glorious Memory: than whom
as no Prince was ever bolder in Battle, so none ever fought more by Principles.
His Belief imbold'ned him in all the Dangers He faced. I am satisfied,
Gentlemen, you desire no better Example, and a^^er those on Sacred Record,
there is none more agreeable can be presented to you.

And having named this Royal Person, I cannot but call to mind the many
Salvations and Victories, which Faith has obtained, and the Church of Christ
has received, by His Arms. We our selves have seen the strange, and next to
Miraculous, effects of Faith and Prayer in our days. What was it that Saved
England, and routed an Unhappy Prince at the head of a vast Army, and yet
scarce a drop of blood shed? When Tyranny was trampling on the State, and
Popery stood ready to mount the Pulpit, when Law and Religion were forced to
couch before the Assumed Absoluteness of the Court, and were Sold at a cheap
price by Mercenary Judges. Dejected Britain then called for our dutiful Tears
and Prayers, under ten thousand Omens of evil, and no door of Deliverance
visible. Then God arose, for the Oppression of the Poor, for the sighing of the
Needy, to set him in safety from him that puffs at him. Then God moved the
Brave and Generous Prince to attempt our Deliverance: God gave him Faith and
unknown Hopes, else however Mighty His Mind was, he could not have engaged a
Power so Unequal. We stood amazed at the Miraculous Salvation: We wondered how
it was effected, and could only adore the Might and Grace of God our Savior.
Millions of Prayers went up from gracious hearts, and Faith subdued, or rather
Saved, Three Kingdoms.

Lo here an Instance of what Courage Faith can inspire, and what Help it can
engage from God. By this which we have seen at home, and in our day, we may be
convinced, That Faith can yet Subdue Kingdoms, escape the Edge of the Sword,
make Valiant in Fight, and put Armies of Aliens to the Rout.

Let all this strengthen your hands, and encourage your heart in the work
wherein you are Engaged. Be always in this Spirit; let Faith animate you, and
it will also prosper you.

Here I had ended my Address to you, but that the Providence of God has put a
more Melancholy Argument in my mouth, and sent us the loudest call imaginable
to the duty now pressed upon us The Death of the best of Kings, and most
Renowned in Arms, is an awful Alarm to us, to be the more in the Exercise of
Faith.

It cannot be denied but that among all means and instruments of Safety, the
Presence of such a Sovereign, both at the Council Table, and in the Field of
War was most to be relied on. A Prince of Unequaled Wisdom, Courage and Virtue.
How confidently could we rely on God under such a Judge and Savior,
miraculously raised up for us? While he Presided in every Resolve, directed in
every Important Step, in Person headed the most great Attempts, and by his
Example spirited the backward to the boldest Actions? If Greatness of Mind,
Magnanimity and Courage; if expertness in War and Insight into Policies and
Stratagems; if a conspicuous Piety and Reverence of God-, -- might promise
help. A Prince in whom his Army as it were lived, and triumphed in his Name and
Conduct. A King of many Prayers, the delight of his People, the Sanctuary of
Oppressed Nations, the Scourge of Tyrants, and in the prime of his Age.

Snatched away in so critical a point of time, when the World seems just
entering into War, and the eyes of all men were upon him, their greatest
Expectations (under God) from him, and Empires and States waited for his
Determinations, to take their Measures by. The Fall of such a Prince, and in
such a time, how general is the Calamity! Certainly it will heighten the Pride
of the common Enemies and Oppressors of Mankind; and Faith must support and
respirit the Bereaved Interest of God in the World. The God of Armies, the Lord
of Hosts yet lives! The God of Jacob is our Refuge.

I little thought, Gentlemen of the Artillery, to have Mourned before you this
day, the loss of Him who was the Head and the Glory of your Order. How justly
may you now Fold up your Flying Ensign, and hide it under some Sable Veil:
March -- not in wonted cheerfulness and State, but with folded Arms, and
dejected Eyes, and trail your Pointed Weapons in the dust: Nor let your Warlike
Music sound, but in Hoarse and Solemn Notes of Grief.

Yet to despond, though under this Amazing Dispensation, were an Injury to the
Great God, who first gave what he has taken away; who has often delivered, and
in whom we trust that He will yet deliver.

We are too apt to Deify Mortal men, and Idolize those whom God honors to be
the Instruments of His Church's safety. Far be it from us to do this, and deny
the God that is above. Let us remember those, who through Faith out of Weakness
were made strong: Let us pray to God, for a double Portion of the Spirit of
Wisdom, Courage, Piety, and Holiness to be poured out upon Her Present Majesty,
Our Sovereign: God Grant the QUEEN a Long and Victorious Reign, to finish all
that which has been so Happily and Piously undertaken for the ^^fence of His
Church: and the Lord Sell Sisera into the Hand of a Woman!

So it becomes us to Hope and Pray, -- but always with this Caution, which God
Himself has seen it necessary to give us -- Put not your Trust in Princes, nor
in the Son of Man, in whom there is no help. His Breath goes forth, he
returns to his Earth: in that very day his thoughts perish. (His noble
Purposes, his good and great Designs die with Him.) But Happy is he that has
the God of Jacob for his Help; whose Hope is in the Lord his God; Which made
Heaven and Earth, -- which keeps Truth for ever: which executes judgment for
the Oppressed: -- The Lord shall reign for ever, even thy God, O Zion, unto all
Generations. Praise ye the LORD.

FINIS,

