The Peril OF THE TIMES Displayed.

OR The Danger of Men's taking up with a Form of Godliness, But Denying the
Power of it.

Being The Substance of several SERMONS Preached:

By SAMVEL WILLARD, Teacher of a Church in Boston. N.E.

Sumenda sunt amara Salubria.

Aug. Boston, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen. Sold by Benjamin Eliot. 1700.

TO THE Reader.
THERE are Pretenders unto Godliness, whose Religion does chiefly consist in
being of this or the other particular Party of men making a Profession of
Christianity. If that is all their Godliness, supposing them to fall in with
those that have most of Truth in their more peculiar Persuasions, they have
only the Form without the Power. In our Nation, which has the Name of
Protestant and Reformed, some are of the Episcopal, others for the
Presbyterian, others for the Congregational, others for the Antipaedobaptists
Form. These differ not in the Fundamental Articles of Faith; and from thence it
is, that there are amongst them, all, some, with whom Godliness in the Truth
and Power is to be found: and yet some under all these Denominations, who have
only the Form. That the Churches in New England which in their Primitive
Constitution consisted of the Good Old Puritan Nonconformists, were famous for
Religion in the Purity and Power of it, cannot be denied. Nevertheless, in our
first and best Times, there were Tares and Chaff mixed with the Wheat. That
there is now a great Decay amongst Professors of Religion in this Land (would
to God it were not so amongst Professors of our way in the other England also)
must likewise be confessed. There is in that Practical and Judicial Discourse
^mitted herewith, a faithful Testimony against those Apostasies, which do
witness to our Faces that this Generation comes short of what their
Predecessors sometimes were. The Reverend Author observes, That, As to many of
the Rising Generation, there is a fondness after New Things, and that they are
become Disputants for those Things, which their Fathers left a Pleasant Land
for the Avoidance of. And that many stand off from Communion, because they
would not be under Discipline: That there are some Intemperate Church Members,
who spend their precious Time in frequenting Public Houses, and keeping loose
Company: That Professors are ready to comply with the vain Customs of the
Times. These and many the like Passages the Reader will find in the following
Sermons. It is therefore sadly evident, that Religion in the Power of it is
decaying and dying. Alas! There are now crept into some of our Churches such
Things, as the Discipline in the first Reformed Churches in France has
condemned as Censurable Evils: and which the National Synod held at Dort in
Holland, declares to be Levity unbecoming Christians, an Offense to the Godly,
and tha^ those who persist therein, after Admonitions, shall be excluded from
Commnion.

If these things be so, is not that which was once a Noble Vine and wholly a
Right Seed, degenerating apace? There are some Churches in the World, that
never had that Purity of Discipline amongst them, which the Churches in
New England have been advantaged with, who notwithstanding, of late years, are
blessed with a Young Generation abounding in these Duties, of Faith and
Obedience, in which Godliness in the Power of it, does very much consist. I
remember, that ten years ago, that Excellent Person Dr. Walker, then Minister
at Aldermanbury in London, assured me that in that Parish, there were a
considerable Number of Young persons, who often met together to Pray and
Conferr about the things wherein their Souls were concerned, and that every
month, in order to their more prepared Coming to the Lord's Supper, they spent
a Day in Prayer together. When the Doctor told me this, I was surprised with
astonishing joy, at the Hearing of it* But it is much more surprising, that
there is Printed the last year at London, An Account of the Rise and Progress
of the Religious Societies in that City, and of the Endeavors of the
Reformation of Manners, Published by Mr. Josiah Woodward, a worthy Conformist
Minister, who says, that it is the practice of those Societies to partake of
the Holy Supper of the Lord frequently, thereby to devote themselves afresh to
their Good Master, and as a means of receiving Spiritual Strength from Him; and
that many of them have, by the Grace of God, attained to that Excellent
Primitive Temper of frequent Communicating without growing formal. Moreover, he
has these words, which I could not but set a special Remark upon. It is (says
my Author in p 61.) required of such as join themselves to them, that they give
the Society a solemn account of their sense of spiritual things with the real
Motives, which lead them to this Undertaking, and what they seriously purpose
as to their future Life. This is many times done in Writing; and I have perused
some of their Papers, and have found them penned in such an honest affectionate
and undisguised style, with such pious and sensible Expressions, and in ^o
modest and humble a manner, that they would mightily affect any pious person to
read them, and move him to break forth into pathetick praises to God, who has
given such Grace to young men in so Degenerate an Age. Thus Mr. Woodward, a
Divine of the Church of England. He further relates, that there are many
Hundreds of Young men freely and solemnly engaging themselves to Live strictly,
and as becomes our Holy Religion. Some of the Articles or Orders, which they
consent unto, and promise to walk accordingly, are these following (vid. p.
121. and 130.) That the Members of this Society shall meet together, one
Evening in the week, at a convenient place, in order to encourage each other in
Practical Holiness, by discoursing on Spiritual Subjects, and Reading Gods Holy
Word, and to Pray to Almighty God, and to Praise His Name together. That none
shall be admitted into this Society, without giving notice thereof to the
Stewards, who shall acquaint the whole Society therewith; and after due
enquiring into their religious purposes and manner of Life, the Stewards may
Admit them to Subscribe their Names, if the major part of the Society allow it,
and not otherwise, and with the like joint consent they may Exclude any Members
proved guilty of any misbehaviour after due Admonition, unless he gives
sufficient Testimony of his Repentance and Amendment before the whole Society.
It is recommended to every person concerned in this Society, to consider the
many Inconveniences (and many times Sins) which attend Alehouses and Games,
and wholly decline them, and to shun all unnecessary Resort to such Houses and
Taverns, and wholly to avoid lewd Play Houses. The Respective Members of this
Society, shall heartily endeavor through Gods Grace, to be just in all their
dealings, even to an Exemplary Strictness. To Pray many times every day,
remembering our continual Dependence upon God, both for Temporal and Spiritual
Things. To partake of the Lords Supper, at least once a month, if not prevented
by a reasonable Impediment* To practice the profoundest meekness and humility.
To watch against Censuring others. To accustom themselves to holy thoughts in
a^l places To shun all foreseen occasions of evil. To think often of the
different Estates of the Glorified, and the Damned in the Unchangeable
Eternity, to which we are hastening. To examine themselves every night, what
good or evil, they have done in the day past. To keep a private Fast once a
month, (especially near their approach to the Lords Table) if at their own
Disposal. To shun Spiritual Pride, and the effects of it, as Railing, Anger,
Peevishness, and Impatience of Contradiction. To pray for the whole S^ciety, in
their private Prayers. To rea^ pious Books often, for their Edification, but
especia^ly the Holy Bible. These mentioned are some of the particulars agreed
unto by the Religious Societies now in London, with several other Articles, in
which the Spirit of Godliness does appear, but for brevities sake I omit them.
I have here recited not only the things, but the very words expressed by the
aforesaid Mr. Woodward; whose Piety, notwithstanding his Conformity, has
rendered him Lovely and Honorable in my Esteem; and I give him great Thanks for
his Narrative, wherein the things, above mentioned are contained. The last
Article these Societies consent unto, is, That every Member of this Society
shall (after mature deliberation and due Trial) subscribe his Name to these
Orders; to express his Approbation of them, and his Resolution and Endeavor to
Live up to them; ^n order to which he shall constantly keep a Copy of them by
him.

Now, wherein does that Account of the work of Grace, usually observed in the
Churches of New England, at the Admission of Members into their Communion, or
our Church Covenant, yea, our Renewed Covenants, exceed what is beginning to be
practiced among the Godly Conformists in the Communion of the Church of
England? These things are so affecting and encouraging, as that I could not but
take this Opportunity to publish them. And although it is a sad and mournful
thought, that Godliness in the Power of it, is languishing in New England, it
is a joyful Meditation, that it seems to be revi^ing in England, which brings
to mind the Poetical, (shall I say) or Prophetical Rapture of pious Mr.
Herbert, many years since, who conjectured, that notwithstanding Religion was
then going into America, it would like the Sun return from the West to the East
again.

Concerning the Reverend Author of these Sermon^, it is needless to say any
thing. Many of those Discourses, which he has formerly written, discover him to
be one of rare Accomplishments in respect of the Gifts and Graces of the Spirit
of Christ richly adorning him. The Subject here treated on, is of the greatest
Importance. It is the Present Truth, nor can any thing be more seasonable and
proper to be insisted on, considering that not only the Power of Godliness, but
something of the Form too, is in danger to be lost among us. The manner of
delivering the Truth, is with such clearness and plainness, as that ordinary
Capacities may understand, and be edified by what is here presented to them.

The good Lord grant, that it may prove effectual for the Awakening of these
Churches, To Remember whence they are fallen, and to Repent, and do their first
works, lest the Lord Jesus come quickly, and Remove the Candlestick out of his
Place.

Increase Mather.
Boston, New England November, 1699.
THE Peril of the Times Displayed.
2 Timothy ^.5. Having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof.


WE need not to look far back for the Analysis of our Text. Paul, in the
beginning of this Chapter, gives warning to Timothy of a great Apostasy that
should come in the latter days, in which there should be a general defection of
Professors. By the Last Days, is in the Gospel intended, or in them is
comprised, the whole time between Christ's Ascension. and the Great Day of
Judgment. However, there are some earlier, and some later periods pointed to in
this Era. This Prediction may comprize generally the whole time: and this
signifying, That the times of clear Gospel light, shall not be free from men of
perverse minds, notwithstanding their making a profession of Christ. There may
also be aimed in these words, the giving us a Description of the Apostasy of
Antichrist, of which there are warnings not a few offered in the New Testament;
and indeed the Spirit of Antichristianism is here abundantly deciphered. But it
is applicable to all times of defection among Professors of Christianity; and
may have respect to the last and worst times, preceding the great Reformation
which is expected, of which our Savior, Luke 18 8. When the Son of Man comes,
shall he find Faith on the Earth? The word Perilous signifies, hard,
difficult, molestful; and such times do expose men to danger, and are therefore
Perilous. It intends, that it will be hard for a man to live like a true
Christian, because he will expose himself thereby. Now the Apostle does not
only give warning in general of such times, but he proceeds to characterize
them, by the genius and carriage of men in them: for, they are the evil hearts
and carriages of men that make the times evil. There are a great many notes
which the Apostle here lays down, which I shall not particularly enquire
into: but the words of our Text contain in them one of these, and the last
mentioned, but not the least: to all of which he subjoyns in the latter end of
this verse a direction to Christians how to carry it to such men, viz. to
withdraw from their Communion. All the former that are mentioned, were open and
slagicious Crimes that men fall into; but this directs us to a more covered
wickedness, hiding it self under a pretense of Piety: of which sort of men
there is the greatest peril of all.

In the words then we have the description of a Church Hypocrite, or of one
that pretends to be Religious, but is indeed impious. If we take all these
particular notes to go into the making up of the character of one Apostate, we
have a monster indeed; but we may look upon them as distributive, and to be
found, some in one, some in another, and all together making up of a general
Apostasy. In the words then we may observe, these persons described in two
parts, and these do contradict each the other: for it is of the nature of
Hypocrisy, to pretend to one thing, and intend another; to have the face one
way, and the heart quite contrary.

1. We have their pre^ention and outward, carriage; Having a form of Godliness:
What is intended by this, will be afterward considered. Only observe, that
Critick^ tell us, that the word Form, here used, does not signify the
essen^ial, but accidental form of a thing; and hence some translate it, a
Species, or Show.

2. We have the reality of what they are, and may be discovered to be, but
denying the power of it. The word, deny, properly signifies that which is
verbal, but it is sometimes used for practicing against a thing: and so it is
here to be understood; and we are to observe, that the form and the power are
here opposed: they have the one, and are without the other. The words may also
be considered as merely negative, viz. a form without the power; and both of
these respects will after be considered. Hence,

DOCTRINE. The Times are very dangerous, when Professors generally take up with
a Form of Godliness, and deny the Power of it.
There are two Propositions contained in the Doctrine, viz.

1. That sometimes the Professors of Religion do generally take up with a Form
of Godliness, and deny the Power of it.

2. That these times are very dangerous:

These may be distinctly laid open.

PROPOSITION I.
That sometimes the Professors of Religion do generally take up with a Form of
Godliness, and deny the Power of it. Our Apostle not only presumes that there
may be such times, but gives warning about it, and says, that such times
shall come, under the Gospel Dispensation.

There are two things that may be here enquired, viz.

1. When men may be charged with thus doing?

2. Whence it is that a people in general do come to do so?

1. When men may be charged with thus doing?

A. That we may rightly take this up, we must ask,

1. What it is to have a Form of Godliness?

2. What it is to deny the power of it?

1. What it is to have a Form of Godliness?

A. The word Godliness, here used, signifies Right Worship, and is in the
strict sense, restrained to the Duties of the First Table, which refer to the
Worship of God, both Natural, and Instituted; both the manner, and special
times of it. But it is frequently used Synechdochrically, for all Religion, and
comprizeth under it all the Duties required in the Gospel, both toward God,
and toward man, considered as done in Obedience to the Command or revealed
Will of God: and we may here take it in the most comprehensive sense. And we
before observed, that the word Form intends not that which is Essential, but
Accidental; and indeed, where there is the Essential Form, it includes the
power in it: for, the essential form of it, is the Sanctification of the
Spirit, whereby the Law of God is written in our hearts, and this will appear
in our lives, for the operations of things are according to their essential
forms But there are two other senses of the word, as it is used in the Greek
Language, which may both come under our present consideration, as being
separable from the Power.

1. The word is sometimes used for the Rule which a man professes himself to
be under the obligation of, and pretends to follow in his actions. Hence we
read of a form of knowledge, Romans 2.20. and that is as much as a sound Creed.
We read of the Doctrines according to Godliness. Now there a form, or a scheam
of sound words, 2 Timothy 1.13. and when men do understand the System of the
Christian Religion, and openly profess that they do believe those Articles, and
resolve to stand up in the defense of them, these may be said to have a form of
Godliness, i. e. they have it in their heads, and in their mouths, and possibly
they make no little noise in standing up in defense of them, against such as do
professedly set themselves to withstand and undermine them. Now this form of
Godliness is not in it self contrary to the power, but a thing necessary for
all those who desire rightly to exert it in their Conversation. Godliness is a
Reasonable Service which we owe to God, as we are Creatures endowed with the
faculties of understanding and will, Romans 12.1. How can we lead godly lives,
unless we are acquainted with the Rule pointing of us thereunto: and the Gospel
teaches us that Rule, for this is that Grace of God, of which we are told,
that it teaches us to deny ungodliness, etc. Tit. 2.11, 12. However, this may
be where the other is not: men may know, and yet not do; they may make an
Orthodox profession, and yet lead an irregular Conversation; we are told of
such, Tit. 1. ult. They profess that they know God, but in works they deny him.

2. Sometimes the word is used for an outward show or pretense; for a mask, or
a vizard, or an outward appearance. When a man pretends to be what he is not,
and endeavors by his carriages before others, to make a specious show as if he
we^e such an one, he is said to take such a form upon him. Thus when a man
would fain persuade others that he is a Godly man, and uses such words and
actions as may serve to impo^e upon their credi^, and in the mean while he has
not the root of piety in him, but is in the gall of bitterness; he may then be
said to have a form of Godliness; and such an one was Jehu, 2 Kings 1^.16.

2. What it is to deny the Power of Godliness?

A. To make this clear, let us observe;

1. That the power of Godliness comprehends two things in it. The word power,
used in our Text, signifies the virtue, efficacy, and force of a thing: and
also the faculty or principle from which it proceeds. Hence, in the power of
Godliness there is contained.

1. The inward principle of Sanctifying Grace; which is the root of Godliness
in a Christian. The power of a thing consists in the internal virtue that it
has in it: Now Grace is the very life of Godliness; nor is any a Godly man,
who has not this Grace in him. God always regards the heart, and he knows it,
and he will acknowledge no man to be Godly, but him whose heart is right. That
therefore was it which spoiled all their fair pretenses, Psalm. 78.37. their
heart was not right with him. An Unregenerate man cannot be a Godly man,
because he has no principle of Godliness in him. He that is Godly, loves God,
fears God, delights in his Law, hates sin, mourns for it, and restlesly seeks a
deliverance from it. This is the very disposition of that Grace which he
receives from God, Tit. 2.11, 12.

2. The Efficacy of this principle is in the exercise of a Godly life. This is
Metonymically called Power, because it is an effect flowing from it, and so is
a discovery of it: for by the actions the habits are to be discerned, and
judged of. Hence, according to the life of a Professor, accordingly is this
power evidenced. And hence we read of weak Grace, and strong Grace. When a
Christian lives so in the work of his Generation; as to Glorify God, in a
zealous resolute pursuance of Holiness, and withstanding of Sin, in opposition
to all that would withstand or hinder him, or discourage his pursuit of it, he
shows this Power; and this power is opposed to weakness or infirmity. Peter had
faith, but he did not discover power in it, when he began to sink, Mat. 14.32.
O thou of little faith, why did thou doubt? Abraham had not only faith, but a
powerful faith, when he believed in hope against hope, etc. Romans 4.19, 20, 21.
and both these respects may come under the consideration of the matter before
us.

2. A thing may be said to be denied in two respects.

1. Verbally and professedly: and that is the first signification of the word;
but it cannot be universally so understood here: for, for a man to profess the
true Religion, and at the same time professedly to deny it, is a contradiction.
Though it must be granted, that a man may profess a thing in the gross, and yet
deny it in some of the main parts of it, as will appear in the sequel. But this
is not all, nor yet the thing which is principally here designed.

2. Practically; and so the word is very often used Met^phorically, when men
live contrary to their Profession, they a^e said to deny it: and there cannot
be a more effectual denial than this is; and hence these two are set in direct
opposition, in the forecited, Tit. 1. ult. Now the thing here said to be denied
is the Power of Godliness; and there are two things in which this consists,
answering to the two forenamed respects, in which we were told, the power of
Godliness consists.

1. When men pretend to be Godly, and yet by their lives, discover themselves
not to be so; and this is a thing too frequent. There are indeed those
Hypocrites who deceive the People of God, and act Godliness so speciously, that
they are not discovered* but there are others, who for all their stickling and
noise, do yet express such vanity, and want of any favor of Piety in their
lives, that give, at least to discerning Christians, if not to others, just
reason to suspect that the root of the matter is not in them: such an one was
Simon Magus, unto whom Peter plumply says, Acts 8.23. I perceive that thou art
in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity. He that no has grace, cannot
be said to have the power of it in him: such then as lead Unregenerate Lives,
say that they are such, Psalm. 36.1. The transgression of the wicked says in
mine heart, there is no fear of God before his eyes; and yet such as these
flatter themselves; ve^se 2.

2. When men make a great stir about Godliness, and yet there is very little of
the life of it appears in their Conversation. These do not proceed so far as
the other in discovering themselves; they do something in prosecution of their
profession, and Godly men have charitable hopes concerning them; but yet they
are rather Negative than Positive, because they act so faintly and irresoultely
in all they do. If there be the root of the matter in them, yet the activity of
it is very little: a small temptation allureth them, a little opposition
dishearteneth them; they give too much scope to themselves in things which they
plead a liberty for; and every trial is ready to lay them open, and discover
their irresolution: whereas, if Piety were powerful in them, it would not be
so. Now it is the former of these which our Text more immediately and directly
aims at, however we need not to exclude the latter; and here we may take a
more distinct account of those things wherein this ill state or frame of
Professors does appear, for our help to judge of our selves, and of the times
we live in.

There are then these things which are the symptoms of men's denying the power
of Godliness, though they make never so fair a profession of it.

1. When, though men make never so fair a profession of the Christian Religion
in general, yet they deny or reject some of the main Articles of it. A sound
belief of the Evangelical Truths, necessarily belongs to Godliness: and
though there is no Theological Truth, but is of great weight, and the denial of
it is so far a coming short; yet there are some that are so Essential to Piety,
that the denial of them undermines the very foundation of Christianity, and
puts men off from the very foundation on which it is built; and yet there are
those who glory in the name of Christians, and would be reckoned among the
best, who hold such unhappy tenants as prove them to be none. The Apostle
speaks of another Gospel, which yet he tells us is not another, but only a
perverting of the Gospel of Christ, Gal 1 6, 7. and he refers it to those that
would bring in the Law over the head of Christ. It is certain that Christ is
the only foundation of the Christian Religion, 1 Cor. 3.11. and all true
Godliness derives from him. Faith belongs to Godliness, both as the ground of
our hope for Salvation by Christ, and as the root of our acceptable Obedience
to him; we are therefore told, Heb. 11.6* Without faith it is impossible to
please God. The Righteousness of Christ must be our Justification; they
therefore who deny the Imputation of that to our Justification, deny the power
of Godliness; and Christ is not only our Righteousness, but our Sanctification
too, God has made him so, -- 1 Cor. 1.30. they therefore who hold a power in
fallen man by himself to perform true Obedience to God, and that he needs not a
new power and principle to be infused into him for it, deny Godliness; and
Christ requires Obedience of his people, in conformity to his will, Joh. 14*
15. if ye love me, keep my Commandments; they therefore who pretend to a
discharge from the Moral Law as a Rule, deny the power of Godliness: and many
other like things might be instanced in.

2. When all their Religion resolves it self into mere forms, and they look no
further. ^^ere is indeed a duty lying on men, to perform Service to God with
the outward man, for the whole man* the Body as well as the Soul, is engaged
for his glory, 1 Cor. 6.20 They therefore who under a pretext of Spiritual
Service, reject all External Religion, are far from the power of Godliness.
However, when men have taken upon themselves a formality, and seem to be very
Religious in their attendance upon it, and are care^ul not to neglect it at any
time, and show much of zeal during the season of performing it; but as soon as
ever it is over, their Religion ends, and they mind it no more till the
revolution of those fo^malities comes again: these show themselves to be void
of true Godliness. They do indeed lose the proper end of these formalities,
because the design of all the Institutions of Christ in his Gospel, is to
promote a Religious Life, and ought for that reason, to influence the man's
whole Conversation. When men are zealous and earnest at Prayer, and no sooner
gotten off from their knees, but they return to their vanity and folly, they
prove there was not any of the power of Godliness in those prayers: and so of
the rest of Duties of Worship, and that may be charged on them, Isa. 29 13.
with their lips do they honor me, but have removed their hearts far from me.

3. When all their zeal spends it self in matters of Worship, and they are
careless in duties of Righteousness. The whole revealed will of God is the Rule
of Godliness; and for men to divide, and take but a part of it, and neglect the
rest, is to prove that they are Hypocrites; and as there are some who think it
enough to follow their Callings, and to do no man any wrong, and to be strict
in the Duties of the Second Table; which things they ought to do; but these
alone will not declare them to be Christians: ^o there are others who suppose
that if they be but careful and constant, in doing the Duties of Natural and
Instituted Worship, they are truly Godly: if they read the Word, pray in their
Families, attend on the Dispensation of the Ordinances of Gods House, and do
show life and forwardness in these things, they may bolster themselves on this,
and in the mean while neglect the business of their Calling, ly, steal,
oppress, use deceit in their Dealings, carry it very loosely in all matters of
Sobriety and Righteousness; these are not Godly, but by thus doing they deny
it, and say that their Worship is Hypocrisy; that is a standing truth, 1 John
4.20. if a man say, he loves God, and hates his brother, he is a ly^r.

4. When they use the pretensions of Godliness for a Cloak to cover their
iniquity; though they talk of Godliness, yet they have perverse designs to hide
under it. This was a thing which our Savior charged heavily on the Scribes and
Pharisees, Mat. 23.14. they devour Widows houses, and for a pretense, make long
Prayers. When Jezebel had a design to perpetrate an horrible Murder, she
directs to the calling of a Fast for an introduction to it, 1 Kings 21.9. and
how many are there who can pray and confess their sins, and then sin upon a new
score; and it may be then to their confessions and prayers again, and so in a
round? What pretenses had that Harlot for her insinuations into the Simple
Young man? Prove. 7.14. I have peace offerings with me, this day I have paid my
vows; and herein the Ungodliness of those Jews is deciphered by the Prophet,
Jer. 7.9, 10. Steal, Murder, etc. and come and stand before me in this house,
which is called by my name, and say we are delivered to do all these
abominations. What is this but to make Godliness a shelter for impiety, than
which what greater contradiction can there be?

5. When they abuse their Christian liberty to defend and encourage the abuse
of the things of this life. I^ ^s a precious truth, that Christ has purchased
a right for his people to these things, which no Unregenerate man can claim;
they are all theirs, for their use, and to Serve God withal: but as there is an
use, so there is an abuse of these things; and that not only when the heart is
set upon them, and they reckon them to be their happiness, but also when they
allow to themselves an inordinate use of them. When they transcend the bounds
of that moderation which Christ has limited the use of them unto, and thereby
transgress the Rules of Sobriety. When meats, drinks, apparel, recreations are
made use of to excess, and to the just scandal of serious Christians. When men
insist upon lawfulness, and never consider what is expedient. Hence there are
cautions given in the Gospel about these things, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31. Romans 13
13. 1 Pet. 3 3. all of which are to put a restraint upon men's taking their
liberty too far: Such licentiousness is a denying of Godliness in the power of
it.

6 When they can accommodate themselves to m^n in all their humors. There is a
p^e^ence of love, and charity, and condescendency, which men make and plead
Religion for it; and when it is rightly limited, it is good; but how many are
there who abuse that of Paul, 1 Cor. 9.23. I am made all things to all men.
They are like the Planet Mercury, good with good, and bad with bad: When they
are among serious Christians, who more religious and demure in their words and
carriages than they are? but when they get among loose company, and carnal men,
they can presently turn the Tables, and are like pictures that have the Devil
on one side, and a Saint on the other. They can pray, and hear, and receive the
Sacrament with the people of God, and they can Drink, and Swear, and Game, and
Health, and what not, with lewd men; and are good Companions for all sorts of
Company: and is not this to deny the power of Godliness?

7. When they are easily allured or discouraged from the strict Serving of God.
They set out bravely in a Profession, but a little thing stops them, and makes
them either to drive heavily, or to stand still: for, when they go quite off,
they then lay aside the form too. If a temptation of profit or credit among men
offers it self, they are ready to follow it, and their zeal is damped: or
when difficulty or disgrace present themselves before them, they are ready to
flinch and turn aside* This is an argument, at least, that the power is
decayed: if not that there never was any; and to this head do those also
belong, who in times of Apostasy, let the vigor of their profession fall, lose
so^e things altogether, which belong to the practice of Religion, and others
are ready to die, as they are charged, Rev* 3. begin. In all these respects men
may be laid to deny the power of Godliness.

2. Whence is it that a people in general come to do so?

A. This will be discovered by the following conclusions.

1. Man is naturally a stranger to the power of Godliness. He is so far from
the vigorous activity of it in him, that he has not so much as the principle
of it. The state of nature since the Apostasy, is a state of alienation from
God. Grace, which is the root of true Piety, is not radicated in the nature of
fallen man, but it is a supernatural gift of the Spirit of God, bestowed on us
in our Regeneration, till which we are full of all the principles of Impiety;
we have a full description of a natural man given us, in Romans 3.10, to 20. and
there is nothing in all of it, but what is directly contrary to Godliness; and
yet thus it is with every Child of Adam by reason of that woeful fall of his;
and the Children of Godly men have it in them as well as others: Jew and
Gentile share alike in this, Romans 3.9. they are all under sin. The difference
between the one and the other is only in this, that the one have the means, and
advantages to seek and obtain a deliverance from it, which the other have not.

2. Men that are born and brought up under Gospel light, have some common
resentments of the excellency of the Christian Religion. It is true, the
natural man has no spiritual discerning of the glorious things of God,
revealed in the Gospel, 1 Cor. 2.14. However, there is so much of Conviction,
in the rational discoveries of the truths of the true Religion, accompanied
with a common wo^k of the Spirit on the Consciences of men, as works with
some force upon their Affections, so as to raise in them an esteem for these
truths, as we find in the stony ground hearers, Mat. 13.20. he hears the
word, and anon with joy receives it. Besides, the force of a good and pious
Education, together with the common Credit and Commendation which the Christian
Religion has obtained among men that have taken up a profession of it, makes
men to stickle for it, upon carnal principles; and hereupon it comes to pass,
that though they do not love the life of it, yet they are pleased with a form
of it, and drawn to engage in the taking of it up, and making a show of it.
They covet to be accounted Christians by those that they live among, though
they do not care to be Christians indeed.

3. There is a natural enmity in the hearts of Unregenerate men, that makes
them not to receive the truth in the love of it. They can easily enough receive
it in the form of it, upon sinister ends, and because by their so doing, they
have advantage to nourish their carnal lusts, and many times promote their
fleshly designs; screw themselves into credit and applause; and because they
count gain to be Godliness, when the show of it will gain them any thing in the
world, it contents them. But all this while there is a direct contrariety
between the lusts of the flesh which rule in Sinners, and the rules of strict
Godliness, so that they cannot yield themselves to be subject unto them, for,
Romans 8.7. the carnal mind is not subject to the law of God, nor indeed can be.
True Godliness will not suffer lust to reign in the man, but will mortify it:
the man that will be Godly, must mortify himself, renounce his darling sins,
cut off his right hand, pluck out his right eye; he must be sober, righteous,
godly, and that in this present world; and this he can in no way comport
withal, whiles sin bears rule in him. This is the Offense of the Cross: and
till he have a new principle put into him, it will remain, and keep him off
from real piety.

4. This natural enmity, whiles it is accompanied with the force of a natural
enlightened Conscience, makes men to profess in Hypocrisy. When the Spirit of
God makes forcible impressions upon the Consciences of men, they dare not but
to do something, which may quiet and ease them, because they would otherwise
lead them an intolerable life. Herod, though an ill man, yet could not but do
many things, because of the force that John's Ministry had upon him, Mark 6.20.
But still the malignity of the heart remains, and that accompanied with
Atheism, which is lodged in the heart of the natural man, Psalm. 14.1. makes men
take up with a form, a show, a pretense, and they hope to put God off with it
as easily as to deceive men, and bribe their own defiled Consciences; and this
is that which makes men Hypocrites in Religion: they dare not but to do
something, to prevent inward disturbance, and yet do it not in love and liking,
but on constraint.

5. And God does often Judicially leave them to a false heart. It is certain
that if God leave men to themselves, they will Apostatize: and it is awfully
observable, that when men live under the Gospel, and enjoy the clear and
convincing Dispensations of it, and are not thereby wrought to a sincere
embracing of Christ and his ways, but content themselves with a form; God in
righteous judgment, punishes them with such a desertion. If they only make a
profession of the truth, and do not love it, they are sometimes left to believe
a lie; which the Apostle informs us was leading to the Great Apostasy, 2 These.
2.9, 10. and now every deceiver impos^th on them: If they make a Profession,
and mean while some lust or other keeps them off from an utter renouncing of
sin, and entirely giving themselv^s up to Christ, he righteously delivers them
over into the hands of their lusts, and they follow them to a notorious denying
of the Power of Godliness: awful is that remark of the Psalmist concerning
Is^ael, in Psalm. 81.11, 12. Israel would none of me, so I gave them up to their
own hearts lusts.

6. And the natural tendency of all this is to a growing Apostasy. When men are
once le^t of God, and begin to deny the power of Godliness, who can tell
whither it will grow at length, one thing will fall to decay after another.
They may begin at things more tolerable, and less scandal^us, but that will
make the way to introduce far greater abominations; and when men take one step
in this way, there will be no limits short of that which God restrains them
from. If they let go their hold, they are in hazard of falling to the bottom;
and if it proceed from denying the power, to the casting off of the form too,
it is not to be wondered at; for evil men, if left of God, will grow worse and
worse; and such a declining is very in^ectiou^* and will not only hazard to
take effectually with those who have no saving principle of piety in them; and
whose carnal reasonings, which led them to an outside profession, not only fail
them, but are now every whit as c^gent on the other hand, and stimulate them to
run with a multitude to do evil; but will also be too influential on Godly men
themselves, to damp their vigo^r, yea possibly to draw them to carnal
compliances, whereby they will be led to a neglect, or perfunctory performance
of many duties, if not to the doing of many things derogatory to their
profession.

PROPOSITION II.
That these times are very dangerous. When this grows to be a prevailing
distemper among a professing people, it is sadly symptomatical. How and wherein
it comes to be so, will be evident by the following Conclusions.

1. That it is a great privilege for men to enjoy the Gospel, in which the
Christian Religion is revealed to them. Fallen man had lost the way to life and
happiness, and was gotten into the path of misery and destruction, nor could he
ever have recovered himself again, or so much as have known how it might have
been brought about, if God had not revealed it. All the wisdom of the Worlds
wise men, has proved it self to be very foolishness on this account; and all
the contrivances which they have laid out with greatest curiosity, for their
compassing of happiness, have in the issue, but entangled them the more in
ruin. We are therefore told how the way of man's Salvation came to be known, 2 Timothy 1, 10. has brought life and immortality to light by the Gospel. God has
not seen meet to impart the Gospel unto all; nay, there are but a few in
comparison, to whom the clear light of it is revealed: and this is the
privilege which they enjoy by it, that Salvation is come to their doors, and
the things of their peace are offered to them; whereas others that have it not,
remain in darkness, and in the regions of the shadow of death; according to
that awful word, 2 Cor. 4.3 if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are
lost. This therefore is mentioned as Isreal's prerogative, Psalm. 147.19, 20* he
gave his laws to Jacob, etc he has not dealt so with any Nati^n. For though
there are many other Religions in the world, yet there is none of them will
afford fallen m^n any h^lp to escape eternal misery, under which all are held
by nature, and to obtain eternal felicity, which every one is grasping after:
this is the alone prerogative of the Christian Religion.

2. That it is a great and singular kindness of God so to reveal this Religion
unto men. There needs no more to prove this, then to consider the former head,
viz. the singular privilege which is enjoyed by it, and the unavoidable misery
of those that have it not. But this will farther appear, if we consider, that
God owed it to none. The Salvation it self that is discovered by it is such as
none of the race of fallen men deserved to be made to partake in: it was Gods
mere good will which provided it for them; and if he had left all Adams
^o^^e^ity to have been for ever without it, he had therein declared his
Justice, and done them no wrong. Besides, that all those to whom he sends ^h^se
glad tidings of peace, and offers of Salvation, were in themselves no better
than others, who are left without them, nor could make a better claim to them,
than they; he was under no greater obligations to these than to those from*
whom he has with held them, and so leaves them to dye without knowledge They
were equally Children of wrath with the other, Ephesians. 2.3. they were not in
themselves better disposed or inclined to give entertainment to this Salvation,
than the rest of mankind. Nor could God foresee any better inclination in them
to accept of this grace, then what he purposed of himself to bestow upon them;
they were every way as bad; thus the Apostle remarks, Tit. 3 3 4 we our selves
were sometimes foolish, disobedient, etc. but after the kindness and love of
our God and Savior toward man appeared, etc.

3. That the great business which the Gospel points to, and calls for of man,
is Godliness. What is intended by Godlin^ss has before been observed. Now this
summarily comprehends the aim of the Gospel, taking it in the more large sense
of it. It is certain, that the Christian Religion is not merely Theoretical,
but Practical. It is called a Rule, and the use of a Rule is to guide to the
practice of that which it is a Rule of. Now that which the Gospel gives us
instruction and direction about, is Godliness: it teaches us to deny
ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in
this world, Tit. 2.11, 12. It calls upon all men to live a godly life, and it
shows them the things wherein they are to do so in all respects; and points
them whither to go that they may be enabled so to do, who of th^mselves have no
ability to do any thing as they ought, Mic. 6.8. he has shown thee Oh man,
what is good, etc. It was for this that God gave his Word and Ordinances to
men, and in this it is that he commands them thus to live. When M^ses had given
Gods Statu^es and Laws unto Israel, which were no other than a more da^k and
shaded Dispensa^ion of the Gospel, he reduc^th their duty upon it hither, Deuteronomy.
10.12 and now Israel, what does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear
the Lord thy God, to walk in all his ways, and to love him, etc.

4. That true Godliness is always accompanied with life and power. It is true,
in the exercis^ng of it, there is no^ always the same force and efficacy of
this life exerting it self, and appearing in the prosecution of their Christian
Conversation: and the reason of it is, because the grace which is in the
children of God is too often overcome with the remaining corruption which is in
them, and hinders them from doing that which they would. But this
notwithstanding, true Godliness has always in it a principle of Spiritual
Life, which shall never be extinguished: Grace is the root of it; and that is a
living principle which is put into the man: and where this life is, there is
power; for life is a power of performing life acts. When God infuseth a Spirit
of Godliness into the Souls of any, he is said to quicken them, Ephesians. 2 1. You
has he quickened, who were dead, etc. There is no man that is really Godly, but
such an one as has received the Spirit of God, who dwelling in him by his
Grace, efficaciously enableth him to serve and glorify God, by believing in
Christ, and following of Holiness: and where this great change has not past
upon the man, he is not Godly, but remains under the powerful dominion of sin
and impiety.

5. Hence, where there is only a form without the power, it contradicts the
very end or design of the Gospel. If by a form we only understand the order and
method of outward Worship and Service of God, and the practice of those several
Duties which are required of Christians in the Gospel; this is that which ought
to b^ because God has commanded it, and if men allow themselves in the neglect
thereof, they do both despise Gods au^hority over them, and do what in them
lies to hinder themselves of the power, inasmuch as God has made this the way
in which we are to have communion wi^h him, who is the author of all saving
influences: it is therefore certain, that God requires of all Christians, that
they live in outward conformity to his revealed will. But if men rest here, and
look no farther, they take up with an ou^side, and content themselves with it;
much mo^e if all their design be to make a show in formalities, and all their
zeal expireth in that, they come short of what God requi^eth and expects of
them. This therefore is that which our Savior taxes the Scribes and Pharisees
withal, Mat. 23.23. ye tith mint, anise and cummin, and have omitted the
weightier matters of the law. God requires inward sincerity in the Serving of
him, Psalm. 51.6. thou desire truth in the inward parts. Whereas this is only
a cover of falsehood and deceit. Men by it seek to hide a treacherous heart, and
pretend to put off the All-seeing God with an outside and empty Religion: and
for this reason we have God so often testifying against it in his word, as a
thing which he is very much displeased at; see for this, Ezekiel. 33.31. they come
as my people comes, etc. but their heart goes after their Coveteousness. Isa.
1.11, etc. to what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices, etc. 48.1. they
make mention of the God of Israel, but not in truth and righteousness.

6. Hence when this grows general, it must needs produce Perilous Times. It is
dangerous in regard of every individual Professor that is acted by such a
spirit, and he not a little exposes himself hereby to the righteous
displeasure of God: needs then must it have a common influence, when it is a
growing and prev^^li^g malady among a people; and this will be evident in
several particulars.

1. Such a people show that they have (...) a sincere love to God and his
(...); this is an evidence that their Profession is not built upon right
principles. All true Obedience, is in the Gospel, called Love: and the reason
of it is, because love is the root and spring of it, and so it is the more
distinguishing note between sincerity and hypocrisy. Now the love which God
requires, is an hearty love, Matthew. 22.37. thou shall love the Lord thy God
with all thine heart, and all thy soul; this therefore is the charge that God
lays upon them, in Isa. 29.13. they have removed their heart far from me. The
want of this shows that men have taken up their profession for by and sinister
^nds; that the Glory of God is not their bottom design in it; for i^ they did
indeed love God with their whole heart, they could not be content in a mere
form: if they loved God, they could not rest satisfied in the outside
performance of duties, and in the Service it self, and boast themselves merely
in the duty done. They would take no content in any Ordinance or Performance,
in which they did not meet with God, and enjoy Spiritual Communion with him,
which is the true end and usefulness of all the duties which we are commanded
to attend upon. He who indeed loves God, will seek in all things to Glorify
him, as that which is the very end of his being and operation: now God is not
glorified by a mere form, but so far as the power of Godliness is denied, in
any thing which the man does, so far his name is dishonored; and the more by
there being a form, because hereby their profession is contradicted by their
practice, and a discovery is made that they were not indeed concerned for his
honor, but indeed do reproach him; and this must needs be very dangerous.

2. Scandalous Sins will grow apace among such a people. A mere form, let it be
never so fondly insisted on, is no fence against the growth of iniquity; but
indeed an inlet and introduction to it. It is so far from making men take heed
to themselves, lest they should (...) cover u^^der which they seek to hide
their abominations. It is the power of Godliness in men, which makes them
afraid to sin themselves, and puts them upon doing the utmost they can in their
places, to stop the breaking of it forth in others* whereas a mere form makes
them cold and careless on these accounts; and a^ they will take very little
heed to themselves, so others will grow bold upon it, when they see that there
is but a very little of zeal appearing in their bearing witness against them.
If Professors be cold in the life of Godliness, Profane persons will thereupon
grow bold in all manner of exorbitances; yea, and Professors themselves will
grow drowzy and careless, and take little heed to their lives, but grow
licentious, whiles they place their whole Religion in their formalities; the
abounding of iniquity, and growing cold of love, are ^oyned together by our
Savior as things concomitant, Mat. 24.12. and indeed, if strict enquiry be
made into this affair, we shall find, that evermore Apostasy has in this way
crept into the Church of God: men have been very much in the maintaining of
their forms, and spent their heat there, and so have grown lukewarm in their
respects unto God, and hearty love of him, and thought all was well, because
Religion carrried a fair outside among them; and thereupon scandals* have
broken forth, and one ^in after another, has dared to look abroad barefaced:
and when the first love has been lost, the first works have been neglected.

3. They will by degrees lose the form too. Things that are mere Engines, and
have no internal principle of life in them, but are moved by the external force
of weight, and springs, will soon be down, and then they will stand still, how
forcible soever their motion was before. A Strict Formality at one time serves
a worldly interest, the man can carry on a carnal design by it; and so long as
it is thus, it has its weight to keep it going, and it will move swiftly, but
the time may come when it will disserve that interest, and cross the desig^^ of
it, and now the man is ready to knock off. Our Savior instanceth thus the
Stony* ground Hearers; Math. 13.21. when tribulation, or persecution arises
because of the word, by and by he is offended; and also in the thorny, verse
22. the cares of this world, and deceitfulness of Riches choke the word, and he
becomes unfruitful. Besides, the strict outward attendance on the Duties which
are prescribed in the Gospel, is not easy for the carnal minds of men to
comport withal; and the gratification of many fleshly lusts is hindered by it,
the cravings whereof are so eager, that they will prompt the man to neglect,
sometimes one, and sometimes another; and if they can still but keep up some
semblable show, and quiet their minds with that, they are well sufficed
there^withal. Strictness of Discipline maintained i^ the Churches of Christ, is
very uneasy to them, and they would fain have a latitude and elbow room, and
large allowances given them; and so usually decays in Religion begin there
(...) others must be born wi^hal, that we may be indulged, and we will connive
at their scandals, that we may have the same measure from them. Constancy in
Secret Duties of reading the word, meditation and prayer, is too spiritual a
business for them, and because they are out of sight and observa^ion, they can
without open scandal neglect them, and so they at first in^ermit, and at length
totally omit them* (...) Worship is a cumbe^, and it gives them too much
hindrance in their worldly business, and their diversions a^ong their
companions, which they must allow to themselves; and if they do but attend the
Worship of Gods House carefully, they shall still make a fair show, and be in
good repute; and so these shall be first slightily attended, and soon dismissed
with a short complement, and in fine utterly neglected. This might have been
instanced in many other things, but these may suffice; and thus it comes to
pass, that some things are generally le^t off, and quite lost among a
Professing People, and other things a^e but little better. Thus it was with
that Church, in Rev. 3. begin and these are fair, or rather foul steps to the
loss of all.

4. Their Profession will be exposed to the reproach of vile men: and truly
there are none that do give more occasion for the ways of God to be evil spoken
of, than such as these. There are those that hate all Godliness, and thereupon
the very strict and formal profession of it is grievous to them, and this
makes them to look with an evil and watchful eye upon those that are so
engaged. Now when men make such high pretenses to Religion, and in their lives
they contradict them; ungodly ones will soon catch it up, and reflect it with
bitter reviling: It is indeed a preposterous way of arguing, to condemn the
Religion ordained by God himself, which must needs therefore be holy and wise,
for the abuses which pretenders to it do put upon it; but wicked men are
strangers to that, and can rise no higher in their judgments, than by their
observing how those who speak high of it, do manage themselves with regard to
it; and for that reason will say, these men talk a great deal of Holiness, as
if it were a real thing, but they can indulge themselves in acts of lewdness;
they can be very zealous when they are engaged in the duties of Worship; but in
their converse with men, they can ly, cheat, dissemble: they can be very demure
when they are among their own company, but when they get amongst us, they can
Drink, and Health, and Game, and Swear, and sit up till midnight in our
company; yea, they can outdo us in all such things as these are. They were such
as these whom the Apostle speaks so severely to, Romans 2.2.21, etc. thou which
teaches another, teach thou not thy self, etc. and adds that remark, verse
24. the Name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles through you. They make
nothing of these things among themselves, but excuse one another in them, for
they pretend to no better: but in such as make an open profession of
Christianity, they tax highly, and put all the aggravation they can to their
reproaches; and it must needs be an horrible shame when these reproaches are no
slanders.

5. Those that are truly Godly will be exposed to grievous persecution. It has
been a thing of frequent observation, that such as have spent the heat of their
zeal upon forms, have been most virulent against them that have been careful to
maintain the power of Godliness. Christ himself had no such furious Persecutors
as were the Scribes and Pharisees; these also were they who most bitterly
prosecuted his Apostles; Paul tells us what a formalist he had been, and how he
had employed the zeal of it, Gal 1.13, 14. beyond measure I Persecuted the
Church of God and wasted it; being more exceedingly zealous of the traditions
of my fathers: and if men deny the power of Godliness in them selves, they will
not be able patiently to bear it in others: and by this means Apostasy grows to
that pass, that it will not be safe for any to stand up for real Holiness, as
the Prophet complains of those times, Isa. 59 15. truth fails, and he that
departs from evil makes himself a prey. Hence it comes to pass, that if any
will be more strict than his neighbors, in the leading of a Godly life among
men, and be a Nonconf^rmist to the licen^iousness of the times and places that
he lives in, he shall be revi^ed for it, jeered at by his neighbors, censured
for an Hypocri^e, and ridiculed for a tender Conscience; and men would further
show their (...) them, if it were in the power of their hands. This we have the
Psalmist making a bitter complaint about, Psalm. 69.9, etc. the zeal of thine
house has eaten me up, and the reproaches of them that reproached thee, are
fallen upon me: which he proceeds to show in diverse particulars: and tongue
persecution is not a little mischievous, especially when it proceeds from those
who pretend to Christianity.

6 The Rising Genera^ion is hereby woefully exposed Children are either the hope
o^ ^ear of pious Parents, and by observation of their frame and in^l^nation, a
sh^ewed conjecture may be made of what times are like to be when they are dead
and gone; for this reason, the duty of Training up their Children in the fear
of God, and in the way which they ought to go in, is so much urged and
inc^lcated in the Scriptures, as a duty of very great importance. But if the
power of Godliness be lost in the present Generation, and Religion among them
is dwindled up to an empty formality, there is no^thing that does more
fearfully forebode the extirpation of it in those that follow. Children are apt
to imitate their Parents, by a natural respect that they have for them; and
most of all in that which is evil, because of the sinful corruption that
dwells in them naturally. Certainly then, if Parents are formal, loose,
heedless to themselves, their Children will most likely add to it, and become
an increase of sinful men. Yea, and when it is thus, Parents will become
negligent of the careful Education of their Children, and take little regard to
acquaint them with the things of their peace, and so they will grow up to be an
ignorant Generation, that kniw not the God of their Fathers: and not only for
want of being well taught, will they take liberty to rebel against Parental
Government; (and it is just, if they teach them not the fear of God, that they
be le^t to deny that honor to their Parents, which is due to them by the
command of God) but also by their examples, they encourage their Children: for
they have no reason to wonder, if they take liberty to themselves, if their
Children will do so too, and justify themselves in it; thus did they entertain
the Prophet with scorn, Jer. 44.17. we will certainly do, etc. as we have done,
we and our fathers; hence that caution, Psalm. 78.8. that they might not be as
their fathers, a stubborn and a rebellious Generation.

7. And such a people are hereby exposed to Gods fearful Judgments. God expects
faithful Service from a people that profess his name, according to, 2 Timothy
2.19. let every one that names the name of Christ depart from iniquity; when
therefore they degenerate to a mere show,, they provoke his jealousy against
them, and thereby a door is opened for the breaking in of his wrath upon them;
and that both;

1. In Spiritual judgments; and these are the most fearful, though usually the
least regarded by a degenerate Generation. When God leaves men up to a spirit
of giddiness and heedlessness, and licentiousness, to grow loose in their
principles, and inconsiderate in their practices, he therein plagues them
terribly: and this is an usual fruit and recompense of Hypocrisy, and
Atheistical contenting themselves, and hoping to put God off with an outside;
how awful is that prediction? 2 These. 2.9, 10* because they received not the
love of the truth, for this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that
they should believe a ly; and we have such an account given of them, Psalm.
81.11, 12. Israel would none of me; so I gave them up to their own hearts
lusts. God withdraws his spirit from such a people, which before enlightened
and restrained them, and abandons them to their own follies; and now iniquity
breaks in as a torrent, and bears all down before it; now men grow weary of
Gods ways, and follow their own; now the word hardneth, instead of softning:
now wholesome Doctrines are despised, and close application is provoking to
men; they cannot bear to have their sores rubbed, and must have none but smooth
things preached to them: now a spirit of slumber invades them, and they are
become insensible of their decays, though never so great; and this is a
tremendous condition.

2 In Temporal Judgments. The truth is, this very frame among a people, is that
which opens the gap to let in all those provocations, which will pull down
heavens vengeance upon them. As long as the power of Godliness was preserved
among them, such sins were kept out, at least from bringing of Public guilt
along with them, because there was a suitable care taken to prevent their
breaking out, and due testimony was born against them, if* at any time they
looked abroad, and endeavors were attended to suppress them: but now they
abound, and become daring* and when it is so, God can no longer withhold. God
tells them that all the Judgments threatened were for the avenging of the
quarrel of his Covenant, Lev. 26.25. and though many particular immoralities
usually forerun such Calamities, yet they flow from hence, and the foundation
of them is laid here: God therefore threatens Laodicea for her Lukewarmness, to
spue her out of his mouth, Rev. 3.16 and Ephesus for the loosing of her first
love, to remove the Candlestick, Chap 2.4, 5. and if we will make a through
Enquiry, we shall find that this is it which has laid waste populous places,
and blown up sometimes famous Churches, and made them a desolation. Surely then
such are Perilous (...).

USE I. For Information in a few things.
1. We may hence learn, That the best judgment that we can make of Professors,
is but of Charity. There is a judgment which one Christian lawfully may, and
sometimes ought to pass concerning another: and it is our duty, whenever we so
do, to judge righteous judgment; and that is such which answers the Rule which
God has given us in his Word, to direct us in the censure that we pass one
upon another. Now God has seen it meet to reserve the knowledge of men's hearts
immediately to himself; and our judgment can reach no farther than to the
outward appearance; such is the difference expressed, 1 Samuel 16.7. man looks
on the outward appearance, but the Lord looks on the heart; and this is very
uncertain. I cannot certainly know another state to be good, but by
Revelation; though I may know the state of some to be bad, by observation, as
he, Psalm. 36.1. The transgression of the wicked, says within mine heart, there
is no fear of God before his eyes. The bond therefore of Christian Communion is
Charity, which ought to think and hope the best of another, allowing for humane
infirmities, and judging well of his honest and religious actions, and putting
the best and most fair interpretation upon his dubious carriages; and there is
a double charity here to be observed; sometimes that which is only Negative is
the farthest that we can safely proceed unto; viz. we are not to conclude men
to be in a state of sin, for such Spots as Gods Children may catch; and yet we
cannot be without some fears or jealousies about them, when we see little or
nothing positively to encourage us; however we suspend our determinate
judgments; sometimes we have room for an Affirmative Charity, when we see that
proceed from them, which bespeaks them in our hearts, to be Godly, and zealous
Christians, because of their good and excellent Conversation. Now when our
judgment proceeds upon these grounds, it is a regular, and therefore a
righteous judgment; and this may be right when we are mistaken about men. A man
may be in a state of nature, and yet I should sin if I judged him to be so; and
he may be in a state of Grace, and yet it may be my duty to be suspicious about
him; and the ground or reason of this lies before us plain in our Doctrine,
viz. because a man may have the highest and most commendable form of Godliness,
and yet be utterly a stranger to the power of it: now the former of these is
open and manifest; it is exposed to public view, and every one may see it,
whereas the latter is secret, and hidden from men, and known only to God, and
the man's own Conscience. David had an excellent esteem for Achitophel before he
discovered himself, Psalm. 55.13, 14. mine equal, my guide, and mine
acquaintance; we took sweet counsel together, and walked to the house of God in
company; and he did not amiss so to think of him. The Disciples were more ready
to suspect each one himself than Judas when Christ told them that one of them
should betray him; and they were not to be blamed for it. Paul was much
endeared to Demas, and made use of him in his Travels and Ministry, and it was
right for him so to do: and yet all these were ungodly men, and their hearts
were unsound all this while. A man may carry it among men with greatest
forwardness and constancy in outward performances, follow all the means of
grace in season, and out of season, and carry it very reverendly at them,
discourse very knowingly and loftily about the mysteries of the Gospel, pray
like an Angel, highly commend the ways of God, be very circumspect in his words
and actions, exceeding charitable and honest in his Dealings with men, diligent
in the Calling that God has set him in; and yet his heart all this while not
righs with God, but he may pursue it for by and sinister ends, and upon
pitifully mean motives: and yet make no discoveries of this falseness to us,
or of any thing that so contradicts his profession as should undermine our
Charity: how then should we look on him as any other than a Saint? when yet he
may be a Devil, or a Wolf in sheeps clothing; a mere Hypocrite. Hence no
wonder, if good and wise men are sometimes forced to change their opinions
about men, as David did respecting Achitophel; and the blame is not in them,
but in those that give the occasion for it; and this may be a caution to
Professors, to beware how they build the confidence of their safe estate, upon
the charible thoughts of good and discerning men; they may often give shrewd
guesses, but yet they may be mistaken in you: and remember that you must ere
long be called to give an account of your selves to him who searches the
hearts, and tries the reins of men.

2. We may here see a satisfying reason why some that have been Eminent
Professors, do afterward prove fearful Apostates. That there have been some
that have so done, we have awful instances left on Scripture Record: and we
need look no farther for examples of this kind, than those three who were
mentioned under the former head, who in their time, were renowned for their
profession, highly advanced in the Church of God, and were accounted of by the
best men they conversed with, and yet are left upon register for their
horrible-falls, and as awful instances of Gods amazing Judgments.
Ecclesiastical History also affords us plenty of such examples in every Age of
it. Now men may be apt to be amazed and wonder at it, and enquire how it comes
to be so? and some have made misimprovement of these instances, and endeavored
to establish from them, the false Doctrine of the total Apostasy of the Saints,
and to undermine the precious Doctrine of Perseverance. But the truth in hand
will direct us to a fair account of this matter, and render it a thing that
needs not to be so much admired at. It is a certain truth, that none who have
had the least spark of saving grace in them, did ever utterly lose it again.
They have indeed fallen far, when it has pleased God to leave them to
themselves, that he might try them, and let them know what is in them, and that
it is by Grace that they stand: Such remarks are made upon David, Solomon,
Peter, and others. But such woeful Apostasies as we are now considering of, are
not a falling from true Grace, but a discovery that they never had it. (...)
observation of the Apostle is to be made upon all such, 1 John 2.19. they went
out from us, because they were not of us: for, if they had been of us, they
would no doubt have continued with us; but they went out, that they might be
made manifest: and indeed, it is that which is to be expected, b^th in the
nature of the thing, and in the righteous judgment of God. If men take up an
high profession, and engage themselves in all the formalities of it, without a
sound principle within, or a root of saving Grace in the heart, they build upon
the sand without a foundation, and it is not to be counted a strange thing, if
a Storm of Temptation makes that, specious house to fall. Men that become
Religious for base ends, and have some ignoble and fleshly design in it, will
sooner or later find those unworthy ends to sail them, and something or other
to come athwart them, which will contradict the design they are driving, and
then the efficacy of them cease. That Profession that has no life in it,
will of it self run out in a little time, and come to nothing if it be let
alone. Besides, there is nothing wherein God is more affronted, or his honor
more reflected on, then by men's thinking to put him off with a show, and to
hide the deceitfulness of their hearts from him, as if it were possible for
vain men to impose a cheat upon him: no wonder then if he, in his righteous
judgment suffers them to lay aside their vizar, and appear to the world in
their own true colors; leaves them to throw off the form, who took up
contented with a mere form; and thereby God righteously lays them open to the
view and discovery of men, who before had deceived them; and makes their name
to rot above ground whose only care had been to provide themselves with a name
on Earth. Let it not then stumble any serious Soul, when Tall Cedars fall, when
great Professors, and such as have had a great name, come to nothing, and
either turn aside to damnable heresies, or immerge themselves in grossest
Immoralities: but adore the wisdom and holiness of God, in laying men open, and
making them to appear in their own colors; and let it be a solemn warning to
such as are ready to boast themselves of their great profession, and to grow
confident thereupon; and invite them, not to be high-mended, but to fear.

3. This will let us see a reason why Gods awful Judgments do sometimes break
in upon a people which make a great Profession. God must be acknowledged to
Govern all the Affairs of this world: all the evils and calamities that break
in upon men at any time, are of his bringing, both as to the things themselves,
and the time of them. The Famines, Pestilences, and Wars which overtake a
people, and bring them low, and carry in them a witness of the Divine
Displeasure, are of his ordering; hence that, Amos 3.6. Is there any evil in
the City, and the Lord has not done it? Now these Calamities do not only
befall such places and people as have not known God, nor had his name called
upon them, but live without him, and drench themselves in all manner of
Enormities, and heaven daring abominations: the light which is in the natural
Consciences of men, will easily satisfy them in the reason and equity of such
Providence as these are, and men will rather wonder at the patience that bears
so long with them, than the severity which is exercised upon them. But the
Temptation lies on the other hand, and men are apt to be amazed at the
Providence of God, which breaks in upon a professing people with terrible
Judgments. When a people that are called by Gods Name, and are engaged in a
profession of his Worship, and make a great show of zeal in it; they stand up
for the preservation of the purity of it, and withstand those that would
introduce any Innovatio^s: do yet feel severe Dispensations of this nature, the
world is startled at it, and say, What means the heat of this Indignation?
and they themselves are prone to find fault, and expostulate with God about it,
as they, Isa. 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see not, etc. whereas
if we follow up the Doctrine under our consideration, to the right improvement
of it, we may be satisfied in the reason of this. I confess, it is hard to
censure Gods Children individually, or personally for the afflictions which
they meet with in their particular Concerns; for the design of these is very
often for their trial; such were Jobs, and yet they were very sharp and sore:
it would therefore be very injurious to charge them as Hypocrites on this
account. But, when God brings sore and wasting Calamities of Sickness, Famine,
and War, on a professing people, and they are wasted and brought low by them,
we are, according to the whole tenor of the Scriptures, to allot this to the
anger of God; and God is not angry without a cause, Amos 3.4. Will a Lion roar
in the forest, when he has no prey? Now we may safely conclude that the
Displeasure which God has taken at them, is not for their profession it self,
or for their care to maintain the outward Forms and Ordinances, that he himself
has Instituted, and made the means of Communion with him; hence that, Psalm 5^*
8. I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, or thy burnt offerings, to have
been continually with me; but it must be something that his holy and jealous
eye sees amiss in their Serving of him, and that must be something wherein
they do, to his observation, deny the power of Godliness which they pretend to;
and because this may be, and a people that have a name to live, may be de^a,
Rev. 3.1. it is not to be wondered at, but is a great call to them, not so much
to enquire whether it be so, for the language of Providence awfully speaks
that, but to search after it, that they may find it out, and seek to get it
removed by true Repentance, and to call upon each other in their language, Lam
3.40. Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord; and where it
is so, there is a Rule also to judge of their state, when Judgments are
removed, viz by enquiring whether the cause be taken away; and if not, they
should look upon it only as a respite, and space to repent, which if they do
not so improve, worse things are to be looked for in a little time.

4. This tells us, that if we would make a true judgment of Professors, we must
observe how their lives agree with their Profession. It is true, men may in the
management of their Profession, carry it very fair, and behave themselves so
cunningly in their visible Conversation, as to deceive the most judicious
Christians; but yet it is a frequent thing, and God shows his just and holy
displeasure at men, in suffering of it to be so, that those who are Hypocrites,
and make a great noise in a form of Godliness, do in something or other
notoriously deny the power of it: not only do they sometimes display too much
of sinful folly and corruption, for so may the best of men do, whiles the law
in their members has so much of power and influence in them: but there is
something wherein they do egregiously discover their hypocrisy, and offer just
grounds to serious Christians to suspect that all their formality, is nothing
else but a piece of pageantry. Jehu did this, notwithstanding his great zeal in
reforming the Kingdom of Israel, from the Idolatrous Worship of Baal, 2 Kings
10. 29. howbeit from the sins of Jeroboam, Jehu* departed not from after them;
and it is certain, that let men be otherwise never so formal, yet if there be
some sin which they live in the constant practice of, which is against the
light of the Word and Conscience, and contradictory to the life of Holiness, it
is too manifest a sign that such a lust is not mortified in them: and if there
be one that is not so at all, there is none that is so really; and one such
Spot is enough to disgrace all the other fair colors of a specious profession.
It is not enough to observe how a man carries himself in the house of God, or
in his attendance on the observable Religious Duties that are practiced among
Gods People; but we must follow him to his other, and ordinary conversation,
and observe his carriage in that, how he behaves himself in his particular
relations among men, and if these do not agree with the other, we have reason
to be afraid that all is not as it should be with such a person. Our Savior
Christ would not have us to value the tree by its fair leaves, and flourishing
blossoms, but to see what are the fruits it bears, and by those we are to
conclude concerning them, Mat. 7.16. ye shall know them by their fruits.

USE II.
Let it be for Trial; and it may be applied both on a public, and on a
personal account.

1. On a public account; and here let us make our remarks on the present times
by this Rule,; and see how it is with us in this regard, and that both in
respect of Symptoms, and of Prognostics; and I think that we have a loud call
to engage in this scrutiny at this day; and therefore to move us to be serious
and thorough in this Examen, let us consider;

1. Christ has made it our duty to know and discern the times. The times are
not always alike; it is a world of Change that we live in; and as there are
Changes of Times which pass over the Children of men, so there are the Symptoms
of them, by which a rational and probable conjecture may be made about them
before hand, and we may, by observati^^ ^oresee what is like to come, and it is
the prudence of all such as live in this world, to have an insight into these
signs. It is true, the Symptoms of the Times are of two sorts, viz. Natural,
which are to be read in the order and posture of second causes, for, though
there be a contingency belonging to these things, yet there is a natural
eonnexion between such causes, and such effects, which in the ordinary course
of Providence will be produced, unless they be some way overruled and
prevented. When the Kingdoms are moved one against another, when animosities
increase between them, when there are tumults and disquietments, these are the
usual leaders to miserable devastations, etc and these things are not to be
despised, because God makes use of second causes in accomplishing his purposes;
but this is not the main thing. There are therefore Moral Symptom^, and these
are peculiarly to be minded; in calculating whereof we are to proceed according
to the tenor of Gods dispensing himself to a people, as such who are in
Covenant with him; which are to be read in his word; and that both in the
warnings there given, and in his wonted courses taken with his people in such
circumstances. Now by a right application of these, the times may be
discovered, whethey be good or evil, safe or perilous, and Christ reproves them
for want of skill and observation in this regard, Mat. 16.3. ye hypocrites, ye
can discern the face of the Skies, but can ye not discern the signs of the
times.

2. It many ways concerns every one of us to know the peril of the times that
we live in. Nor indeed can we do well without it, for,

1. There is a special Generation work lying upon every Christian, according as
the times are. It is true, every Child of God ought to endeavor to do the
whole will of God, and to neglect no known duty at any time; we owe our whole
life to his Glory, and in this respect all times are alike to us: but still as
the times change, the special and more peculiar deportments required of
Christians do change with them; and hence there is one thing which is the work
of one Generation, and something else the work of another. It is observable,
that God commends Noah with this remark, Gen 7.1* thee have I seen righteous
before me in this Generation. Which in part at least, intends that he had
Served him according to the present condition of the Generation he lived in.
Hence it is said of David, Acts 13.36. that he Served his own Generation by the
will of God; and it is certain, that there was one work for David, to do in his
time, and another for Solomon to do in his.

2. It is every ones duty in his place, to thrust into the gap, that he may
keep off the evil threatened. When there are fad Prognostics of the times; when
the Clouds begin to gather apace, and mischief apparently impends over a
professing people; when Gods anger is inkindled against them, and sin has
opened a wide gap for it to come in, and evil begins to crowd in at it, all
that fear God should endeavor to please God, to pacify his anger, and prevent
the mischief: hence that Admonition given upon a threatening, Amos 4.12. thus
will I do unto thee, Oh Israel; and because I will do this unto thee, prepare
to meet thy God, Oh Israel. There is a way to hold Gods hands, and turn away
his displeasure; we read that Moses did so, Psalm. 106.23. and we find that God
complains, that when he looked for such an one, there was none; and he gives
that as the reason why the torrent of his fierce Indignation brake in upon that
unhappy people, Ezekiel. 22.30, 31. I sought for a man, etc. therefore have I
poured mine indignation upon them. It is true, every one is not in an equal
capacity to this work, or of doing alike public Service, for the putting away
of that sin which is the provocation; there is a work lying upon persons in
Public Place, such as Moses, and Phineas were, who may, if they are faithful,
do a great deal upon this account. However, there is no Christian, but if he be
upright, and ^ill be industrious in the station wherein God has set him, may
do something with God, which may contribute not a little to the public good;
for God has assured us that he has a respect for such as these, Isa. 66.2. to
this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
that trembles at my word.

3. They are the sins of the times that make them peculiarly perilous. The
great danger that a people are exposed to, is from the anger of God which is
kindled upon them: if he be pleased with them, they are safe, nor need they to
be afraid of the threatening of the world; they have the name of God to run
into, and that is a strong tower, Prove. 18.10. But if God be displeased at
them, and his wrath begins to wax hot, they now ly open to every mischief;
their defense forsakes them, and every evil will make a prey of them. Now, if
God be displeased at a people, Sin always is the procuring cause of it: he
takes pleasure in them whiles they do faithfully Serve him, his delight is in
those that fear him: but sin is the thing that he cannot endure; and when he
has so warned them against it, as Jer. 44.4. Oh do not this abominable thing
that I hate, and yet they will indulge themselves in it, he is now grievously
provoked; and such a people ly open to his Judgments: his Holiness, Justice and
Truth do oblige him to punish them, for he has said that he will do it, except
they repent; and if he engage in this work, it will be terrible.

4. Hence they that would prevent the danger, must do what in them lies, to
put away the sins that have exposed their people thereunto. They that would
keep off threatened Judgments, must thrust out the sin that has exposed them
thereto; the cause must be removed, if the effect be either prevented or made
to cease: all the other courses that men can take, let them seem to be never so
probable, will never avail, whiles this is neglected. Sin will blow up the
strongest Fortifications, and turn the edge of the best tempered weapons, take
away the vigor of the most courageous spirits, and turn the most mature
counsels into foolishness. Jehu spoke the truth to him who demanded, is it
peace? 2 King. 9.22. What peace so long as the Whoredoms of thy mother Jezebel,
and her Witchcrafts are so many? we are told, in Prove 21.30. there is no
wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the Lord. Now all these counsels
are against him, by which men devise to fortify against the threatenings of
God, and resolve still to retain these sins, for which he brings his Judgments
upon a revolting people. God himself therefore makes such a demand of them,
Jer. 5.7. how shall I pardon thee for this? etc. and this is the direction
which he gives them, as that which is alone like to succeed; viz. to put away
their sins, and return to their God again; this is the best prudence, because
there is a promise of good made unto it, whereas all other courses are
threatened, whiles this is neglected; Jer. 7.3, 5. Amend your ways and your
doings, and I will cause you to dwell in this place, etc. Hence there a^e none
that can do any kindness to such a people, but those who thus do: hereupon God
so upbraids those Pastors, Jer. 23.22 if they had stood in my counsel, and had
caused my people to have heard my words, then they should have turned them from
their evil ways.

5. And there are usually some peculiar sins which God brings his Judgments
for, and has a special aim at. True, when God draws up an Indictment against a
people, he puts a great many articles into it, as in Ezekiel. 22. but yet there is
something particular that he bears upon, as that which is leading to the other,
and so carries a more aggravated provocation in it. There are the causes and
the beginnings of an Apostasy, which are not only sins themselves, but are
chargeable as leading the way to all the rest. When God comes to root a people
up for their sins, they are grown to the height of provocation, as 2 Chronicles.
36.14, 15. he used means to reclaim them, till there was no remedy; but other
Judgments of his do often come upon places, when iniquity is not arrived to
such a prodigious height; and sometimes God charge one, and sometimes another
as the leading evil, thus Isa. 57.17. for the iniquity of his Coveteousness I
wa^ wroth with him; and in 2 Samuel 21. begin. the Famine is said to be for Saul's
slaying the Gibeonites.

6. Hence without observation men cannot do their duty in this regard. Unless
we know what is the provocation, we shall not understand what is the instant
duty that God requires of us: the sins must be found out, before they can be
particularly provided against, and be suitably repented of, and turned from,
and so the proper means be used for the putting of them away: and how shall
this be but upon observation and search? and that by taking notice what are the
commands of God, and the Rules of his word; and viewing the frame and practice
of men generally, and comparing them herewithal? and hereupon want of
consideration is a thing which God looks upon as a great aggravation of their
sins, and charge them with stupidity on the account of it, Isa. 1.3. my
people does not consider. Jer. 8.6. no man repented of his wickedness, saying,
what have I done? and when God has a controversy with them, he invites them to
consideration, Hag. 1.5. now therefore thus says the Lord, consider your ways.

7. Formality, attended with denying the power of Godliness, is the first bad
Symptom in a professing people; we have observed, that Apostasy from a fair
profession is not wont to be all at once, but it has its gradual steps, and
may have many removes before it comes to the height: But all Apostasy begins
with the defect of the power and vigor of Grace in men. So that whatsoever
will be an argument to discover men's declining from what they sometimes
maintained, will also give evidence to their denying of the power; it being of
it self a practical contradiction of that piety which men would have the world
to believe, that they do sincerely profess.

Here then let us take a brief prospect of the frame and genius of this people
on this account; and for our help in this necessary duty, let me offer at the
following remarks.

1. That there is a Form of Godliness among us, is manifest. Let us take the
notion of a form in either of the senses before observed in the explication of
the Doctrine, and it will appear to be so. If we look upon it as intending an
outward species, show or pretense, whether the thing it self be sincere, or
only in pretense; it is certain that the generality of this people do give it
out, that they are the people of God, that they acknowledge him to be their
Sovereign, that they are engaged in his Service, and that they do stand up for
the Gospel Ordinances and Order. Or if we take it for the Rule that men declare
themselves to be under the obligation of; we have a found confession of the
Faith, which we declare that we adhere unto; and are not a little zealous for
the upholding of those Ordinances which Christ has instituted in his Gospel;
these things are evident, and possibly there may be more of this among us, than
in most other places.

2. But the great enquiry is, whether there be not too much of a general
denying of the power of it? God forbid that any discouragement should be
offered to those who are serious and watchful Christians, whose hearts are
truly set for the Glory of God, and the promoting of his interest: and let it
be the encouragement of all such, that if there be but a few names in a
degenerate Sardis, God does not overlook them, nor will he forget them. See how
comfortably he speaks to such, Rev. 3.4. thou have a few names even in Sardis,
that have not defiled their garments, and they shall walk with me in white, for
they are worthy. But if the other frame be grown too general and prevailing,
the Symptoms are bad; and let us remember, that there are many discoveries
which may be made of such a spirit, which, though they are not all found in
every one, yet if they are found distributively, and spread generally, it will
amount to the thing that we are enquiring after. When God charge a people in
this regard, he does not always say you are all ^^us and so, but such are found
in thee, see Ezekiel. 22.7, etc. and is it not too much thus with us? Whence else
is it, that there are such things as these that follow, to be observed.

1. That there is such a prevalency of so many immoralities among Professors? I
confess that it must be granted, that in the best times, and in places where
the power of Godliness is most flourishing, there have been, and will be those
that have not the fear of God before their eyes: there were so in the times of
the greatest Reformation that we read of in the Book of God. In this world we
must expect that Wicked men will be mixed with the Godly, and such as will dare
to show their wickedness in their Lives, and not be afraid to Transgress in a
Land of Uprightness. But when such are not countenanced, but due testimony is
born against them; when they are contemned in the places where they live, and a
note of infamy and scandal is put upon them; this will not be charged on such a
people for Apostasy: But when such sins grow frequent, and those that have
taken on themselves a name of being Religious, begin to indulge themselves
herein; and men that allow themselves in such things are not Reproached for it,
but are in as good Credit as the best, it then becomes a bad symptom, and says
that the times are declining and perilous. Much more when such as these will
undertake to justify, and patronize such things: and are there not sad
complaints made on this account? I shall here instance only in some that are
more notorious. Are not Gods Sabbaths woefully neglected? How little care is
there used in making of due preparation for them? How woefully can such as would
be esteemed Godly, encroach upon holy time, and be engaged, either in secular
business, or in vain Company, and possibly in public houses, when they should
be at home, in their Closets, or with their Families, Sanctifying of Gods day,
and showing of the Honorable esteem they have for it? And I am well satisfied,
that where the strict Observation of Gods Sabbath is lost, there the Power of
Godliness is gone. How much complaint is there made of woeful Dishonesty in
their dealings, practiced by such as can talk high of their Religion? How many
fallacious tricks they can use in their Commerce? How deceitful in their
Labor? How false to their words and promises? as if dissembling and lying were
no reproach to the name of Christians. How many Intemperate Church Members are
there reported to be, who spend their precious time in frequenting Public
Houses, and keeping of loose and lewd Company? who can come to the Lords Table
on the Sabbath, and wrong themselves by excessive Drinking on the week days?
How much Animosity, Contention, and implacable bitterness of Spirit, breaking
forth in indecent words and carriages, between such as are bound in the
strongest Evangelical ties to Love one another, and meekly to bear with each
others infirmities? How much raising, spreading, and receiving of Sla^ders and
Defamations one of another; contrary to that Charity which ought to Cover a
Multitude of sins? These, and a great many more of like nature, which might
have been added, so far as they spread and prevail, and begin to grow common,
are an ill Omen; for, they are indisputable denials of the power of Godliness,
at least in the vigor of it, in those who are Guilty of them, for that
teaches men to Live Soberly, Righteously and Godly.

2. That there is so little Success of the Gospel, notwithstanding the clear
dispensations of it that are enjoyed among us. The Gospel is the Great
instrument which God has seen meet to make use of, both for the sowing of the
seeds of Godliness in the hearts of men, in the great work of Conversion, and
for the strengthening and establishing of it where it is already sown: and this
efficacy it will have when it becomes the power of God to Salvation in men, as
we are told it is, in all that believe, Rom 1.16. True Godliness discovers it
self in a Cordial compliance with the Gospel in its designs, which are these:
and when these fail, and the work of Conversion and edification are at a stay,
it is a sign that Piety is gone to decay: and the more plenty God affords to a
People of these means; and ^he more of light and life they are dispensed
withal, the more notorious is this symptom. What there has been enjoyed among
us upon this account, God knows, and this people also shall be made to know
that there have been Prophets among them. How few through Conversions are to be
observed? How scarce and seldom? Men go from Ordinance to Ordinance, and that
from year to year, and it may be they are sometimes a little touched, awakened,
affected, and make some stir for a while; but how few are there who are
effectually and thoroughly turned from sin to God? It is to be hoped that there
are more than we know of; this work of God is Secret, and in some it is wrought
without a noise: however, this is a certain observation which may safely be
made, that where there is no outward Conversion, Charity has no ground to
proceed upon, to believe that there is an inward one; for, were the heart
savingly changed, that would influence and alter the life. Yea, were men but
pricked at their hearts under the Ordinances that they frequent, they would cry
out for help and direction, and we should hear of them: So that if m^n take a
great deal of delight in the means of Grace, and yet can be content without
settling a saving interest in Christ, who is presented and offered to them
therein, it ^aith that they are settled on a form without the power; it is a sad
complaint which the Church makes in, Isa. 64 7. There is none that calls on
thy name, that stirs himself up to take hold on thee. And may not there be
found just reason to revive it in this day? And how little is there to be
discerned of a growing Grace, in them who pretend to have experienced a work of
Conversion in them? Grace is of a thriving nature, when it is indeed Planted in
a good heart, made so by the operation of the Spirit; and more especially when
it is planted by many Waters; when it has plenty of suitable means afforded to
it, and the Spirit of God influencing them: and if men did savingly profit by
the Gospel, would it not make some discernible discoveries of it self? would
there be no fruits by which it might be judged to thrive? and yet what do many,
who have had all manner of helps afforded them in Gods Vineyard, for a great
many years; and that have used much diligence in their outward attendance upon
them, more than they did at first? do they not seem rather to grow downward
than upward, to have lost rather than gained? did they not seem to express more
of life, vigor, watchfulness over themselves, endeavor to walk worthy of the
Gospel, when they first sat out, then they do now? do not the things that
formerly looked lively and flourishing, now languish, and appear as if they
were ready to expire? whereas we are told, in Prove. 4.18. the path of the just
is as the shining light, which shines more and more unto the perfect day.

3. That so many grow weary of Christ's yoke, and seek for more liberty. The
Lord Jesus Christ has provided a yoke, which he req^i^eth all that will be his
Disciples to ^ake upon them, Mat. ^^.29. take my yoke upon you; and for our
encouragement he has told us that it is easy, v^rse 30. my yoke is easy, and
my burden is light; and it is certainly so to all those in whom there is the
power of Godliness: The Apostle tells, us, 1 John 5.3. his Commandments are not
grievous; nay, it is so far from being so, that David cries out, Psalm. 119.97.
Oh, how I love thy Law! It is burdensome only to the carnal and corrupt part in
man; and when it becomes intolerable to any, this says that they are wholly
corrupt. That which is connatural will not be burdensome, and love will make
every thing which it embraces, easy. Christ has taken off the heavy yoke of
the Jewish Ceremonies, of which Peter says, Acts 15.10. neither we, nor our
fathers were able to bear it. But he has not discharged them that are under
the Gospel Covenant from duty and subjection. Gospel Liberty is far another
thing from ^^^^^tiousness. When therefore men will not Serve Christ, unless
they may live as they list, and without any control, they may indeed talk of
his Service, but in truth they deny it: and no man of prudence will entertain
such a Servant in his Family. But then there is a peculiar yoke of Christ,
which he demands of all Christians that they submit themselves unto, viz the
Discipline which he has appointed to be dispensed in his Church, and a
subjection to all the Orders and Ordinances of the Gospel. But alas! how many
are there who cry out, What a weariness is it? that seek to pluck up the
hedges, and remove the wall that Christ has set about his Vineyard, and lay it
open in Common; and if they may not be a^ Lambs in a large place, will stand
off from Communion with the Churches of Christ? How many Religious pretenses do
many make for their neglecting of the known duties of the Gospel, and solemn
Institutions and Injunctions of Christ? when there is a great deal of reason to
suspect, that it is nothing else but an unwillingness to engage themselves in
the strict ways of Holiness, and bring themselves under the bonds of the Gospel
Covenant, lest it should lay too severe a restraint upon those lusts of theirs,
which they are resolved not to part withal, whatsoever comes of it: whereas
were there the power of Godliness in them, and did they feel, and bewail the
deceitfulness, and unruliness of the corrupt part in them, they would gladly
come under the most potent obligations to Holiness, and reckon it so far from
being an injury, that it is their real privilege to be fast bound to the ways
of God.

4. That there is so much of Contempt cast upon the Gospel Ministry: The Lord
Jesus Christ has appointed a Ministry for the outward Dispensation of his
Gospel unto men, and for the promoving of Godliness among them; and has made
it an ordinary necessary medium to this gre^^ end, according to that, Romans
10.14. How shall they believe in whom they have not heard? and how shall they
hear without a Preacher? and how shall he Preach exc^pt he be sent? and for
this reason, there is a good esteem to be had for this Ordinance of his, by all
that would approve themselves pious. It is true, there is a difference to be
acknowledged between the work it self, and the persons that are employed in it.
As to the persons in the Ministry; though it be scarcely probable that men
should profit by their Ministration, whiles they despise their persons, or
entertain a low and a base esteem for them, and therefore it is said of the
better times, Isa. 52.7. how beautiful are the fe^t of him that brings good
tidings, that publishes peace? etc. yet certainly when God has put them in
this Service, and has made them both wise and faithful in the discharge of
their work, they are to be well accounted of for their works sake. When
therefore their zeal for the glory of God, and their fidelity in not shunning
to declare the whole counsel of God to men, makes them to be sc^rned and
reproached, it bodes ill: and such carriages to them, speaks in his language, 1
King. 22.8. I hate him, for he does not Prophecy good concerning me, but evil.
But this must be confessed, that the work it self is an Ordinance of Christ;
and when men grow weary of the thing, look upon it as a needless charge, had
rather live without a Ministry, than to bear the burden of it; or count so
meanly of the work it self, that they think any one fit enough to be employed
in it, who is so bold as to thrust himself upon it, though he has nothing else
to commend himself to it, but noise and nonsense; and those that are both able
and faithful are despised; as also, when men think it no great matter to
neglect their attendance on the Dispensation of the Ordinances by them, every
small occasion is enough to make an excuse of, from Coming to the House of God:
or if men do come, and afford their bodily presence there, yet they little
regard the Doctrines taught, but at best, carry it like them, Ezekiel. 33.31. they
hear thy words, but they will not do them, etc. If they reprove sin, and come
^lose to their darling lusts, they are either enraged at and revile them, or
(...) them: ^f they (...) Duty never so clearly and earnestly, yet if they like
it not, they will not believe them, nor be at the pains of those Bereans, who
searched the Scriptures daily, to see whether those things were so, Acts 17.11.
and how much of this nature are we acquainted withal?

5. The loose Conversation of Professors. The more ample men's declared Creeds
are, the more scandalous must their licentious Conversation needs be; because
they visibly deny, what verbally they own; their Profession and their
Conversation do, in the Consciences of all men directly contradict one the
other. I am verily persuaded, that the Name of God suffers more by the
uncautious Conversation, of those that call themselves* the Children of God,
and seek the reputation of being Saints, than by any others in the world; for
these pretend, by their lives, to exemplify the Holiness required in the
Gospel, and to set others a copy of what is a Godly life, according to the mind
of Christ revealed in his word: and if this be to be Christians indeed, may not
the carnal worldlings upbraid them, and say as many do, What do these more than
we? When all the difference between the one and the other, is only at their
devotions, which the one carefully attends, and the other carelessly neglects;
but follow them from thence, and observe their carriages among men, and you
shall scarce, if at all be able to discern which is the Professor, and which is
the Profane person; yea, possibly they will allow themselves to do such things,
which the other scorns to do. God has made that the duty of all that declare
themselves to be his, Ephesians. 5.15. see that ye walk circumspectly, not as fools,
but as wise; and Paul could appeal to them on this account, 1 These 2.10. you
are witnesses, and God also; how holily, and justly, and unblameably we behaved
our selves among you that believe; this was to confirm the power of Godliness.
But when those who c^ll themselves Children of the light, and of the day, have
fellowship with the unfruitful morks of darkness, how much do they herein deny
that piety which they talk so much of? but alas! how little is this Holiness
practiced among us? how much of the contrary is to be seen? certainly, where
men that profess Christ, are yet ashamed of him, and afraid to lead another
manner of life than the generality of men do; but are as prodigal in their vain
communication, as licentious in their talk, and as obscene in their carriages,
as ready to comply with the vain customs of the times and places they live in,
as passionate in their carriages as others are; and have no more of the pure
Religion and undefiled, than is to be found in Publicans; and this grows to be
a prevailing and common distemper, it bespeaks the loss of the vigor of
Religion; and all men's fair talk, and pretending to be of strick principles,
will not salve them, but the more disgrace them; and it says that the power of
Godliness is so far lost.

6. The grievous neglect of Family Worship. There is a Worship which is due to
God from men; and it does not only concern men personally, but relatively to^,
in the several combinations which God has ordained to be among them. The most
public Religious Worship which was at first performed by men, seems to have
been in Families, before it came to be attended in the more open and frequented
Assemblies, which is thought to have begun in the days of Enos, Gen 4 26. nor
does the making of this latter a duty now give men a discharge from the former
any more than that did from secret Worship. The principal parts of Family
Worship, are the Reading of the Scriptures and Prayer; and the reason of it is,
because every Governor of a Family has a charge lying upon him, to see to the
Religious management of it, that so it may be a Family consecrated to God. As
to Prayer, it is of it self a piece of Natural Worship: and the light of nature
in mere Heathen, taught them, not only to pray to him whom they accounted God,
but to perform it in and with their Families; and that they had a Worship in
their Houses, is fully testified in Pagan Antiquity; for this reason there is
such an imprecation used against the Heathen Families that call not on Gods
Name, Jer. 10.21. and it shows them to have been guilty of sinning against the
Law given to man at first, else this neglect would not have laid them open to
such a curse; and this is certain, that Family which is without their daily
joint prayers unto God, is an irreligious Family, and exposed to the dreadful
vengeance of Heaven; and for men whom God has betrusted with the care and
charge of Families, to bring up their Children and Servants without prayer, is
to bring them up in* Atheism; and yet there is lamentable complaint of this
neglect even in this place, where there is so much of conviction offered unto
men of their duty: and how many have there been, who, when God has opened
their eyes, and given them a true sight of things, have bitterly* lamented
themselves, that they have lived in Prayerless Families? and that which makes
it to be the more doleful, is that they have not been the Families of such as
have made no profession, but been openly profane, but of such as have made an
acknowledgment of their Engagement to God, and have before men espoused the
Gospel Covenant, and made promises to God that they would observe his
Commandments to do them. There are some who pray not at all with their Families
from one end of the year to the other; others who it may be on a Sabbath day
find a time to pray for all the week. If Godliness had any power in them, it
would not be so: Their sense of the need of Gods blessing upon their Family
Affairs; their belief that it is of him to preserve their Houses from
Desolation, their Substance from Casualties, their Fam^lies from mischief;
their apprehension of the need which their Children and Servants have of being
brought up in the fear of God, and the danger of their losing the very face of
Religion, by such neglects as these; yea, the aw of God^ indignation for such
contempt offered him, would make them afraid of living in the frequent, much
more the constant omission of this duty. If this grow to be a common distemper
in the midst of us, it says, we are departed from God, and we have just cause
to look for some fearful departure of his from us.

7. The woeful ignorance that prevails among us. The knowledge of God, and of
his ways is so necessary an help to the power of Godliness, that the Word of
God frequently expresses true piety by the knowing of God: and ungodly men are
often stigmatized with that title, such as know not God. It is therefore
mentioned as a great blessing, when God bestows upon a people, the means
whereby they may be helped in obtaining of this knowledge, Jer 3 15. I will
give you Pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you* with knowledge
and understanding. When therefore a people enjoy plenty of means, and have the
clear Gospel Dispensations in the midst of them, and all manner of advantages
to store themselves with a treasure of this knowledge, and yet for all
ignorance abounds, and increases among them, and that grows to be too general
a fault with them, which the Apostle charge them withal, Heb. 5.12. when for
the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again which
be the first Principles of the Oracles of God; it says that the life of
Religion is much decayed among them. If there were that love for God, which men
would be thought to have in them, they could not but earnestly desire to have
acquaintance with him, and that would encourage them, yea, and stimulate them
thankfully and industriously to husband such rich opportunities as are afforded
them for this purpose. We are told of some who tell God, they desire not the
knowledge of his ways, Job 21.14. and would we know who they are, we shall find
that they are the wicked verse 7. and I fear that there will be a great many
such wicked ones found upon search, who have but a little distinct knowledge in
the very Fundamentals of the Christian Religion; nor do they seek after it, but
are very well contented to live without it; nor are indeed able to distinguish
between ^ound Doctrine, and pernicious Error: and I believe that this will be
as fearful an indictment against this Land, as any place in the Christian
World; because there has been so much light shining in the midst of us, well
may God expostulate with us, as Prove. 17.16. Wherefore is there a price in the
hand of a fool to get wisdom, seeing he has no heart to it? and it will be
righteous with him, if he should take away this light from us, because we no
better improve it.

8. The little savor of Godliness in the private Conversation of Christians.
If there be a powerful activity of Grace within, it will certainly break out in
the life; and the tongue, which is the great instrument given us to glorify
God withal, will readily make discovery of it; what says he, Psalm 45.1. mine
heart is inditing of good matter, my tongue is as the pen of a ready Writer;
and where will this be more ready to discover it self, than in the converse of
Christians one with another? these having one heart, and being all bound one
way; the heart that is full of God, will be like a vessel that is filled with
new wine, which must have vent. David could not hold long in, though in wicked
Company, Psalm. 39.2, 3. I was dumb, etc. my heart waxed hot, etc. then spoke I
with my tongue. But there is a Communion of Saints; David says, in Psalm.
119.63. I am a Companion of all them that fear thee; and he tells us that all
his delight is in these, Psalm. 16.3. and why so? but because they are suitable
for that Communication which his heart breathes after. What made him so to love
Achitophel whiles he seemed to be Godly? he tells us, Psalm. 55.14. we took
sweet counsel together; and we are told, Mal. 3.16. that they that feared God,
spoke often together; and what do we think it was that they discoursed about?
An heart that is filled with Grace, is then in its element when the man is
discoursing about the Kingdom, and the affairs of that; hence we have that
advice, Ephesians. 5 18, 19. be filled with the spirit, speaking to your selves in
Psalms, etc When therefore Professors, either shun the company of the Godly,
and seek intimacy with vain persons; or when they (...) together, spend their
time, either in vain, foolish, and hurtful discourses, or at best about the
affairs of this world, and not one warming word about the concerns of their
Souls and Eternity, it says that there wants the power of Godliness; if their
treasure were in heaven, their hearts would be there too; and it so, they would
delight to be talking of their own Country, and the glorious things of that:
whereas it is too notorious, that such Conferences are very rare; and let a
serious Christian begin them, and he shall find the most to be silent about
them, and look as if they were put out of their Element; but if we divert to
worldly affairs, or idle Stories and Slanders, they are full of matter. If
Godly Communication be burdensome to us, it plainly says that our show of
Godliness is but a show, and ha^h no life in it.

9. The bad Symptoms that are upon the Rising Generation. It has been a
frequent observation, that i^ one Generation begins to decline, the next that
follows usually grows worse, and so on, till God pours out his Spirit again
upon them; and for the most part some desolating Judgments intervene. Thus it
was with Israel soon after they came into Canaan, Judge. 2.10. there arose
another Generation, which knew not the Lord; and then, verse 14. the anger of
the Lord was ^ot against Israel, etc. The decays which we do already languish
under, are sad, and what tokens are there on our Children that it is like to be
better hereafter? we are going off, and they are coming apace on the Stage, and
the management of the great concerns of Religion will in a little time be
devolved upon them; and what aspect has this upon it in the observation of
serious Souls? God be thanked, that there are so many among them that promise
well, and the Lord add to, and greatly increase their number; But alas, how
does vanity, and a fondness after new things abound among them? how do young
persons grow weary of the strict profession of their fathers, and become strong
disputants for those things which their Progenitors forsook a pleasant Land for
the avoidance of, and that not only for themselves, but that their posterity
might be removed from the temptations of? Besides, it is almost a general
complaint of Family Governors, that their Children and Servants are weary of
the yoke, and are not willing to be under their Command, or observe the good
order in the Family which they require them to attend: that they are in
combination one with another, and do join hand in hand in refusing of that
subjection which they owe to their Superiors, and debauching of themselves
with their ^ight revels, and meetings in bad houses, to drink and game: they
force the reins into their necks, and will be no way curbed in from their
exorbitances; and these also the Children of Godly Parents, and such as have
been carefully and religiously Educated, and many a time solemnly charged with
tears and earnest adjurations, to Serve the God of their Fathers with a perfect
heart, and a willing mind, and warned of his fearful departure from them if
they do not. How far this decay is to be imputed to the neglect of Family
Governors, either in a prudent managing of their authority, or in a careful
setting of a good and holy example before their Families, is a matter of awful
consideration; for certainly they are sorely afflicted in this matter, and
ought to judge themselves upon the account: however, this plainly discovers
that the life of Religion is panting and gasping among us.

1^. The inefficaciousness of Gods severe Judgments. The Judgments which God
brings upon a professing people, are witnesses of great decays in Godliness,
for that is even the controversy which he manageth by them. But when these
Judgments come upon a people, and are often repeated, and God follows them
with a long series thereof, and they are bruised, and broken, and brought
exceeding low by them, and yet they do not work to the declared end of them,
which is to reclaim them from their lifelessness, and to quicken them to
express the vigor and power of Grace, but they are stupid and ^ottish
children, and do not lay to heart these Dispensations of his, as he complains,
Isa. 42.25. he poured on him the fury of his anger; and it has set him on
(...) about, yet he knew not, and it (...) him, yet he laid it not to heart;
yea, when God complains as one that is we^^y of correcting them, and upon it
th^eatens to leave off, because it is fruitless, and there is no good comes of
it, as Isa. ^.5. Why should you be smitten any more? ye will revolt more and
more. Hos. 4.17. Ephraim is joined to his Idols, let him alone. This is a token
that the power is not only decayed, but expired; and let us make diligent
enquiry upon this account; we have been for a long time haras^ed with Judgment
which h^ve been brought upon us, and wasted us; there have been many of them,
and they have been continued* God has manifestly witnessed his Anger and our
Apostasy by them; and he has waited long in the way of his Judgments, for our
Repentance; and after all he has changed the course of his Providence to us
ward, and has again restored us to peace and plenty, and afforded large
measures of health among us: but it is still a solemn enquiry to be made by us,
viz whether Gods holding back his correcting hand, and opening of his bountiful
hand to us, be because he is reconciled to us, or because his patience is
wearied with our insensibleness of, and stupidity under his judicial
dispensations: if it be the former, all is well, and we may abundantly rejoice
in it; but if it be the latter, there is then a sad prognostic in it. Well,
this may soon be determined. What of the power of Godliness is recovered among
us by all this? nay, what outward Reformation is there wrought by it? or are we
not more stupid and senseless under all? let us not account these remarks to be
trifles, or things not worthy our enquiring after; but let us be serious in our
observation; and if it be thus we may be sure that we live in perilous times,
and may by thus doing obtain the character of Prudent, for we are told, Prove.
27.12. the prudent foreseeth the evil.

2. Let us make this Trial upon a personal account. Let every one of us apart
prove himself by this Rule, and see how it is with him in this regard; whether
we have the power of Godliness accompanying, or have only taken up with a form
or show of it; and this also is a matter of no small importance, for,

Consider,

1. It highly concerns every serious Soul, in perilous times, to secure
himself. It is true, every one, as he is a Member of the Body, ought to do his
utmost for the safety of the whole, for if the body suffer, he must expect to
have a share in it, which will be grievous; yea, and will be peculiarly so to
his conscience, if he has not done his endeavor to prevent it; and we
observed, that there is no Christian, but has more or less of advantage, in
his place to do something that way. But yet sometimes all that he can do will
not avail; Iniquity will abound, and perils will grow on apace. Now there is a
prudence which he ought to use, in seeking to save himself; and for that end to
take the observation of the hazards which the public is exposed to, to awaken
him to this duty, according to the forecited, Prove. 27.13. the prudent
foreseeth the evil and hides himself. It was Noah's great wisdom, that he took
the warning of the approaching Flood, and provided himself with an Ark against
it came, whereby he was saved, when the world was drowned in a deluge, Heb.
11.7. God therefore invites his peculiar ones, to get into their Chambers
before such a time, Isa. 26.20. Come my people, enter thou into thy Chambers,
hide thy self, till the indignation be over past.

2 The Apostasy, which denotes the times to be perilous, is laid in
Individuals. The reason why the power of Godliness decays in any place, is
because it does so in this, and that, and the other particular person, and by
this means it comes to be generally so: So that if every one in particular
would carefully see to himself, and to his own heart and life, and endeavor to
be upright with God, and put away his own sin, there would be a general
reformation, and Religion would again flourish in the vi^als of it. He then who
would keep himself free, and not be guilty of contributing to the public
sto^k, and filling up of the Ephah, must take care of himself, and let others
do as they will, he must see to it that he be not involved in the sins of the
times, which render them perilous: and he has the more need of caution and
resolution on this account when such sins grow common, and there are a great
many of evil examples that invite him to a compliance; on this account we have
that precept, Exodus 23.2. thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil.

3. There is a common interest in public Calamities which such times bring,
which is unavoidable. Every man as he is a member of the whole, and has his
outward concerns in this life involved with them, cannot but be touched and
afflicted with the evils which come upon the places they live in, and will,
without doubt, feel much of the smart of them: and God is not to be charged
with wrong dealing in his Providence, by reason of this, because herein he
treats with them as a Community,; than which manner of treatment, there is
nothing* more agreeable to the common sentiments, of humane reason, and is
therefore practiced, and justified among men. If War, Sickness, Famine, break
in upon a people, the good as well as the bad will feel the trouble of it; the
thought whereof is a good incentive to us all to do our best to prevent them;
and if they come, it should engage us to be humble under them; hence how does
the Prophet resent such a time? Jer. 4.19. my bowels, my bowels, I am pained at
my heart, etc.

4 There is yet a way to keep clear of the sins of the times which provoke God
to bring such Calamities; and out of doubt every Child of God is concerned to
think of, and endeavor it. There will be a vast difference in the Soul, or
inward man, between being accused by our Consciences in this regard, that we
have contributed to them, and having a witness within, that we have maintained
our integrity, in the midst of all the evil examples, and temptations offered
us to allure us from i^; that we have stood our ground, when others have
quitted their post. Certainly, a seda^e spirit then, will help us to bear up
under all that we encounter, with great tranquillity. I^ is the Psalmists
demand, Psalm. 11.3. if the foundations be wholly overthrown, what has the
righteous man done? so some Translations read it; q. d. he has kept himself
from the blame of it; and it was no small inward relief to those pious ones,
who could in a dismally dark time, make that appeal, Psalm. 44.17, 18. All this
is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely
in thy Covenant; our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined
from thy way. Surely then, every one that fears God, and studieth his own best
interest, will take heed to himself in this regard.

5. And God has some special favors in reserve for them that thus do; though
they may meet with much of trouble, yet there is a distinguishing dispensation
of Gods Providence toward these at such a time, though there be much of his
holy Sovereignty acted in it, and the difference which he puts between these,
and those who have been guilty of the Apostasy, does not always appear to the
common view. Sometimes God strangely preserves them in times wherein his
Judgments are dispensed among their people; those great privileges engaged to
them that fear God, mentioned, in Psalm. 91. do belong to such as these, and
when it is best for them, they shall experience them. We find that in order to
the astonishing destruction which God would bring upon Jerusalem, there must be
a mark for preservation set upon some; and we are told who they are, and what a
charge is given concerning it, Ezekiel. 9.4. The Lord said unto him, go through
the midst of the City, through the midst of Jerusalem, and set a m^rk upon the
foreheads of the men that sigh* and that cry for all the abominations that be
done in the midst of it. We have accordingly special promises made to such; to
Baruch, Jer. 45.5. thy life will I give thee for a prey; to Ebedmelech, Chap.
39.16, 17, 18. Sometimes God mercifully takes them away from the evil that is
coming, and they are lodged safe in heaven before hand, Isa. 57.1. the
Righteous is taken away from the evil to come; and thus God accomplished his
promise to Godly Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 34.28. thou shall be gathered to thy fathers
in peace, neither shall thine eyes behold the evil that I will bring upon this
place; and sometimes, yea very often, he reserves special favors for the
Children and Posterity of such; they shall have some remarkable blessings
bestowed upon them: thus God promised to Jeremiah, Jer. 15.11. verily it shall
be well with thy remnant; we find that God threatens to cut off the Posterity
of, and the very name of such as are Ringleaders in Apostasy; see Jer. 29:32.
he shall not have a man to dwell among this people. Whereas we have singular
favors promised to the Successors of those that kept close to God in times of
the Decays of Godliness, see for this, Ezekiel. 44 11.48.11.

6. Hence it greatly concerns each of us to try our selves, how far we are
personally guilty of, or free from this Sin. If we be not careful on this
account, we may deceive our selves; there are many ways in which we may
contract Guilt upon this account; and how deeply should it abase us when it is
so? and if by the Grace of God, we have been preserved, it will be matter of
inward consolation under the greatest troubles that are before us. But how
shall we know this, but by a diligent self search? Let us then, at such a day
as this is, be very industrious and curious about it; and here let us in
general observe, that it is not enough for us to cry out of the evil of the
times, and make a great many of pathetical complaints about the degeneracy of
the age, and the decays which are come upon Religion, and lay abundance of
blame on this account, on this or that person, or order of men among us; there
is a great deal of this zeal to be seen and heard proceeding from such as are
evidently themselves not a little guilty on this account: yea, such is the
deceitfulness of sin that is lodged within us, that if we take not the more
heed to our selves, it will draw us to hide our own formality and hypocrisy,
under this very disguise; and thereby, not only blind others with it, and cheat
them in a good opinion of us, whiles we cover our sin with it, but put a cheat
too upon our own Souls, by persuading our selves that this heat proceeds from a
sincere heart, when it is a mere imposture. Give me leave then to offer a few
Rules of Trial, and let us deal faithfully with our own Souls in the
application of them.

1. Are we content with a name, or do we restlesly seek after the truth of
Godliness? It may be we have made a fair and formal profession, and carried it
very acceptably to those whom we live among, and have the good word, and
abounding charity of the best, who take us for Israelites indeed, and have
given us a great room in their hearts and affections. It is no doubt but that
every truly Godly man accounts it to be no small blessing to have the hearts
and love of those that fear God; hence Paul desired prayers on this account,
Romans 15.31. Strive in your prayers for me, that my Service may be accepted of
the Saints. But it is another thing to do all for applause, and look no further
in the things that we do, than to be seen of men, and to have praise from them
on account thereof: Our Savior taxes those Hypocrites w^^h this, as that
which belonged to their character, and an evidence that they were such, Mat. 6.
begin* and you may know whether you do thus or no, by this enquiry, viz. if you
do obtain the good word of men do you take up with this, and satisfy your
selves in it as a good reward, and count it enough to settle you in this
persuasion, that all is well, and so you trouble your selves no further in
searching into your own estate, but conclude upon it, that all must needs be
right. He who builds his assurances on the good opinion which holy men have of
him, and seeks not for a better establishment of them than that amounts to, is
a mere Formalist: Whereas, if you have any of the power of Godliness in you,
you will allow this but its due, and when you enjoy the greatest measures of
it, you will reflect and say, it is indeed a mercy in it self, and if I am
sound, i^ is a fruit of Gods love to me, to give me such a room in the hearts
of his Children; but I may not, I dare not rest here, I have to do with the
heart searching God; I may deceive the wisest and most discerning Christians,
who cannot see my inside, or know what are my principles or aims, but I cannot
impose upon him who sees my inward parts, and will ere long call me to the
strictest trial, and lay me open; and this will put you upon a deeper search;
it will be so far from nourishing carnal security in you, that it will stir you
up to the exercise of an holy jealousy, as knowing that none can see into your
inward state and frame but only God and your own Consciences. Thus Paul speaks,
1 Cor. 4.3. It is a very small thing that I should be judged of you, or of man's
judgment: and we know that Sardis had a name to live, and yet was dead. Rev.
3.1.

2. Do we lay out all our care and cost on the out side of duties, or are we
most sollicitous about the inside of them? There is the External part of the
duties that we are called to do, and we are not to be negligent in it: there is
a right and decent carriage of our bodies in the worship of God, which is not
to be neglected; a suitable expressing of our selves in our words, when we
address our selves to God in our Prayers; a decorum to be used in every Service
that we engage in the performance of: but still this is the least thing that is
to be minded in it; but if we make this our all, or if it be the principal care
that we concern our selves about, and we think we have done enough if we have
been accurate in this, it argues Hypocrisy. If, when we come to an Ordinance,
our utmost concern is, to lift up our hands, or turn up our eyes, or frame our
selves to an outward reverential (...): or if when we pray, all our business is
to put our Confessions, or Petitions, or Thanksgivings into handsome words or
expressions; or curious Language, or laying out our gifts, and making a
flourish with them, in any duty that we are engaged in, this is mere formality.
If there be any power of Grace stirring in us, our great business in addressing
our selves to any duty, will be to search for our hearts and see where they
are, and how they are disposed; and in pursuing the discharge of these duties,
to look after our hearts, and see that they do not steal from us, and get into
the Corners of the earth; we shall be sollicitous that our Graces may be
brought into exercise; that in our hearing of the word of God dispensed to us,
we may be waiting to hear what the Lord has to say to us and that with a
preparedness of Soul to submit to his will, and receive his truth in the love
of it: that in our Prayers to God, we may have an active, lively sense of our
Spiritual wants, and that our faith be in a suitable exercise. David in this
regard, first takes notice of his heart. Psalm. 57.7. My heart is fixed, O God,
my heart is fixed, I will sing and give praise.

3. Do we content our selves with doing of Religious duties; or do we
insatiably seek after Communion with God in them? God has appointed the
Ordinances of the Gospel, and the several Duties which he has Commanded in it,
to be a medium of Communion with him in this life: nor is there any real saving
benefit or advantage that accrues to us by them, but so far as this fellowship
is enjoyed. There is much of bodily exercise in these Services, but it
profits little if Godliness does not influence it. God indeed has reserved
immediate communion with him for another life, when there will no more need of,
or occasion for these things; but if we hope to enjoy any with him here, it
must be in way of the means enjoined: but if we intend nothing else in all this
labor that we are at, but only to do the Services themselves, and count them
as our task, which if we can get through, we are contented, and think that we
have done a great deal: if we attend upon them constantly, and that is the
thing that we make our boast of; that we go to hear Sermons in season, and out
of season; that we read so many Chapters in the Holy Scriptures every day; that
we pray morning and evening, and do not neglect thus to do; that we come to the
Lords Table and receive the Sacrament in the seasons of it; and reckon that we
have done a great deal of Service for God by all this; we deceive our selves we
are but mere Formalists; such were they, Isa. 48 1, 2. But if we value every
duty that we perform, according as we find God manifesting himself to our Souls
in it; if we enjoy his presence, and blessing upon us in it, we are satisfied,
this he lots upon, Psalm. 63 3* 5. To see thee as I have seen thee, etc. and my
Soul shall be satisfied as with marrow and fatness. If we miss him there, we
are exercised with trouble, and cannot rest till we find him again; this is the
proper spirit of real Godliness.

4. Do we conform, or carefully live contrary to the iniquity of the Times? We
before observed, that when the power of Godliness decays among a people, there
are many sins that will thereupon grow into common practice, and when they are
so, it becomes a reproach to them that will not run in the stream, or who dare
not to join with others in them: Now here is a notable trial of the strength of
Grace in the Children of God, and if it hold its own here, it is powerful
indeed. There are no such ill practices introduced, but it is with a pretense
of lawful liberty, and their Consciences are censured as being needlessly nice,
that boggle at them, or are scrupulous about their joining in with them; as if
the custom of an evil thing, took the evil from it, and it must needs be good,
because it is come in fashion. How is it now? are you afraid of crossing the
humors of the Generation? are you ashamed of standing alone? are you
affrighted at the bug bear harange of Singularity? and can you thereupon allow
your selves practically to comply with such things, because they are customary,
and the generality of people make no bones of them, though you find your own
minds uneasy about them, and something within that tells you, these things
ought not to be? this may convincingly tell you, that you want a great deal of
the power, which the people of God ought at such a time to express; for God is
now proving of you, and trying your integrity; and if in such small temptations
as these are you cannot withstand, but are carried away by them, how then will
you do, when you are called to encounter with fiery trials? But if you
resolutely maintain your integrity, and are not drawn to entertain the
allurements that are offered you, but resolve by the Grace of God, to keep your
selves pure from these things, and not join in with the excesses and
exorbitances which are prevailing in the Generation which you live among; this
will be a good witness for you, that the work of faith acts in you with
power. This is the advice which God gave to the Prophet, in Jer. 15.19 Let them
return unto thee, but do not thou return unto them.

5. Do we do what in us lies to reclaim others? It is not enough for us to
complain of the evil of the times, and cry out of the Apostasy which the
present Generation is fallen into; though this also we ought to do, with a due
resentment on our hearts, but God many times puts advantages into our hands, to
be instrumental in preventing the breaking forth of such sins, or of bearing a
full testimony against them, if they do appear: Some have larger opportunities
than others upon this account; Magistrates in their Station, and the Ministers
of the Gospel in theirs; but more private Christians are not without a price in
their hands neither; and though the blessing of endeavors depends on the Grace
of God, who only can make them effectual, yet Conscience obliges them to their
duty; and Parents and Family Governors owe it to their Families; and one
neighbor unto another: and surely, if our hearts have any life in them, we
will not be wanting in this, so long as there is the least hope of our doing
any good by our endeavors. If thus you appear on Gods side, it will be a good
testimony for you* but if you either regard not how things go, and think it
enough to look to your selves* that you stand clea^, and do not join hand in
hand with sinners; or if you are afraid to do your duty, lest by it you should
provoke others to anger, and expose your selves to their scorns and reproaches,
you show that the Grace in you is very faint in its actings; we have that
command on this account, Ephesians. 5.11. have no fellowship with the unfruitful
works of darkness, but rather reprove them.

6. Do we cordially and seriously mourn for the sins of the times? Sometimes it
is so, that the Children of God can do little else but grieve at the iniquities
which they see. This indeed is not enough, when we may do more; but many times
it so falls out, that the more endeavors are used to suppress the evils of the
times, the more does iniquity abound, and men are hardened in their wicked ways,
and grown beyond all counsel or restraint: and when it comes to this, it
increases the g^ief of serious souls; they do herein see how much Gods name is
dishonored, which is very bi^ter to them; herein also they discover the misery
that is upon sinners, and the fearful calamities that are boded by this frame
that is upon them: and the tender pity which they have in them for their
people, and for the souls of men thus exposed to eternal ruin, fills them with
sorrow; so we have the Psalmist expressing of himself, Psalm. 119.1, ^. Rivers
of tears run down mine eyes, because men keep not thy law; and verse 158. I
beheld the transgressors, and was grieved. Thus the Prophet expresses his
resolution, Jer. 13.17. if ye will not hear it, my soul shall weep in secret
places for your pride, and mine eyes shall weep sore, and run down with tears;
thus good Lets integrity is expressed, 2 Pet. 2.8. this righteous man dwelling
among them, in seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous. soul from day to day,
with their unlawful deeds; and how acceptable this spirit is to God, appears by
the care that he takes of such in an evil day, Ezekiel. 9.4. And this mourning, if
it be right, will drive you to importunate prayers unto God, and hard
wrestlings with him for such a people, and for such persons, that he would give
them Repentance and spare them. How is it then with you in this regard? is it
thus? Are you secretly affected with all the decays you see in the midst of us?

7. Are we constant in maintaining close Communion with God in secret duties?
It is true, an Hypocrite may do the matter of secret Duties as constantly as a
godly person, though usually when he does them, it is with a trumpet blown at
the door: but it is certain that there is more of Temptation, either to neglect
altogether, or else to be very slight and perfunctory in the performance of
such services as have no witness of them, but God and our own Souls; hence
there is not a better proof of the power of Godliness to a man's own Conscience,
than what may be observed in the carriage of himself before God in secret. If
you are not only conscientious to do the duties themselves; for that a natural
enlightened conscience may prompt a man to, and make him afraid to neglect it:
but if you are as careful of your hearts, as if all the world stood by and were
able to read them; if you really seek God in these performances, and are not
satisfied but in the manifestation of himself to you, and the experience of the
fruits of his grace in you, and do truly bemoan your deadness, and
indisposedness in these duties, and humbly seek to him for the pardon thereof,
and help against it, you have then a witness within you, that you are more than
formalists; and a testimony which is better than all the applause and
commendation of the best, and most discerning Christians. Let us not then be
perfunctory, but thorough in these enquiries, as knowing that it is of
unspeakable concernment that we be not mistaken in this affair.

USE III.
Let this Doctrine serve for Exhortation: And that,

1. In general to us all; for we are all concerned in it, and there are several
lessons of advice which it will afford us; especially these.

1. Beware that you do not reject the external part of Godliness on this
pretense. There is an unhappy Generation of men in the world, who would fain
persuade others to think that they have arrived at higher degrees of perfection
than their neighbors; and among other their egregious follies, this is one,
because God condemns the form which is without the power, they thereupon cast
off all form, and call all external Worship so; and because God is a Spirit,
and requires of them that Worship him, that they do it in spirit and in truth;
they upon this, restrain all Worship to that which is internal, and reject all
that is bodily, to the Old Testament, and Legal Dispensation, and that which is
antiquated now in the days of the Gospel; whereupon they pronounce all those to
be carnal, who plead for or practice it: It is upon this score that they will
acknowledge no such thing as a Sabbath, or separated time that is made holy by
Gods so separating of it for the holy Services of his people, giving out that
all time is now holy to the people of God, and every day a Sabbath to those
that are spiritual. They will have no Humane Preaching, because they are all
taught of God, and have the Spirit in them to lead them into all truth, and
that anointing whereby they need not that any should teach them. They despise
the Gospel Sacraments as carnal things, and spare not to mock at them, and
plead, they have already received that which is the spiritual design of them,
and it would be a thing superfluous in such as them any further to make use
thereof: yea, they endeavor to make a ridicule of the Ordinances themselves,
and of the Elements which are made use of in them: Yea, to that height of
spiritual frenzy are they arrived, that they cast contempt on the very written
Word of God, and they call it a dead Letter, paper Divinity* and strenuously
deny it to be a perfect Rule of Faith and Manners; and say, that all those that
bind themselves to it, and take it for their directory, are guilty of despising
the spirit, and his teachings This, and a great deal more of such like stuff
they seek to infect men's minds withal. But these are so far from being truly
spiritual, that they are in truth enemies to the power of Godliness, and it
concerns us all to avoid them as filthy dr^amers. Here then, to establish you
in this point, Consider,

1. There is an external part of Religion required of us by God. God indeed
requires the heart, and without it, all the rest will not be accepted; but he
requires not that only, but the body too. Man consists of these two parts, and
he is to glorify God with them both, being both bought with a price for that
very end, 1 Cor. 6 19, 20. The body is the Souls Organ, and it is to perform
its Imperate acts in and with it; and if the heart be right set, the whole man
will follow after it. For this reason, God has prescribed in the Gospel,
external Duties to his people, and requires of them a Conformity thereunto: he
has appointed the Dispensers of the Gospel for the benefit of men, and in this
respect, they are reckoned among the Ascension Gifts of Christ, Ephesians. 4.10, etc.
these are to preach the word in season and out of season, 2 Timothy 4.2. and what
use would there be of these, if there were none to be hearers? Christ has
appointed Sacraments to be celebrated in remembrance of him till he comes;
they are therefore to continue of use until then: yea, all the parts of Outward
Worship are laid down in the Gospel* and it is not for nothing; and Christians
are warned not to neglect the assembling themselves together, H^b. 10.25. and
to exhort one another daily, Chap. 3 13 Surely then we cannot omi^ or neglect
much more reject these O^dinances of Christ, without bringing upon our selves
the guilt of negle^^ing his Command.

2. Hence, true inward Godliness will make men to be Conscien^ious of attending
on these Duties. Godliness teaches men to worship, fear, and reverence God,
and this fear if genuine will exert it self in Obedience to his precepts; they
are put together, Eccle. 12.13. Fear God and keep his Commandments. If
Godliness be rooted in the heart, it will sanctify the Soul to the discharge of
its work, and that belongs to it, to use the outward means as an instrument to
help us in our Serving God, and as the things wherein we ^estify our
acknowledging his Authority over us; and in this it eves his precepts as the
Rules by which it is to act; So that when it sees that God has required such
duties as these of us, it disputes not the rationality of them, nor demurs
about the natural efficacy there is in them for the advancing the design of
them, but it acquies^eth in the will of God, and dares not but to ^ay
conformity thereunto. This therefore all Christians are to be taught by the
Ministry of the word. Matthew. 28 20. Teaching them to observe all things,
whatsoever I have commanded you.

3. It must then needs follow, that to cast off the form of Godliness, is a
farther step of Apostasy. We have already observed, that to be content with the
form without the power, is a woeful degeneracy, and shows that men do contradict
their own Profession: but yet it is a more audacious discovery of men's being
departed from God, and having forsaken his fear, when they put off their vizar,
and appear bare faced in their Irreligion. The former supposes them to be in
their Consciences convinced of the worthiness of the true Religion, and that it
is a thing which God requires of men, though they want a love for it; but this
casts the greatest open contempt upon it that can be: and, let men please
themselves as they will with their own deceivings, yet they are nothing better,
who reject it upon Spiritual Pride, then such as do so to gratify their own
Carnal Lusts.

2. Beware of censuring these for Hypocrisy, who are careful to keep up the
form which God himself has prescribed to us. That God has not only directed
us how we are to Serve him with our inward man, but that he has also told us
how he expects that we worship him with the outward man, is a truth
unconfutably grounded in the Second Commandment. Now there are many that make
nothing of this, but can take up with any form: and if there be any who pretend
Conscience to keep close to what God has revealed of his mind in this respect,
and not to dare to go beyond it, they are ready to charge Hypocrisy on them;
but let us consider:

1. That the most powerfully Godly, will be most Conscientious in this matter.
True, to stickle here, and to regard nothing else, but in other things to lead
a loose Conversation among men, is enough to detect men of falsehood, and shows
that it is not the fear of God which acts them in this regard. But it is a
thing to be observed, that God has, in all ages of the Church, made his
Institutions the great Test of the External Obedience of his professing people:
and herein he has asserted his Prerogative to appoint what shall be the Media
of Communion between him and them: and hereupon if we look into the affair^ of
the Church of God in former times, we shall find that the most holy men, have
been the most afraid of deviating here: and those mysterious Prophesies in the
latter part of Ezekiels Visions, have an eye to Gospel times, and we there find
how God speaks to the Prophet, Ezekiel 43.11. Show them the form of the house, and
the fashion thereof, and the goings out thereof, and the comings in thereof,
and all the forms thereof, and all the Ordinances thereof, and all the Laws
thereof. Again, there are some who are more careful than others in attending on
external duties, they dare not to neglect them, or put them off upon vain
pretenses; and how many are there who condemn them for this as if they did it
all but for a show? that they read, hear, pray in their Families, and wait upon
the public Ordinances in season and out of season, only to make men think them
better Christians than others; whereas doubtless the most h^ly men are the most
careful in these performances, only they dare not to rest in these things.

2. Thus to censure them, is to usurp Gods Prerogative in judging the heart.
When men do their duty in the outward part of it, it is so far well; and though
it be a truth, that there are those that make a great show, and yet do all with
a false heart, yet all that use care in this, are not such; and it is a great
sin for you to judge all, because we are told that there are some such, and the
more sinful is it, when we have no other reason for our thus judging of them,
but only because they are more careful in the doing of the things which God
has commanded them, than we are; as if it were a crime for any to out do us in
the practice of Religion; or as if it were necessary that men must be profane,
if they would escape (...) the brand of Hypocrisy set upon them by a loose
Generation which they live among. If men discover the falsehood of their hearts
by any evil acts of theirs, and they be such as do manifestly declare them to
be false, and we censure them accordingly for it, we do then judge of the tree
by its fruits, and it is a right judgment, according to Mat. 7.20. by their
fruits ye shall know them; but if there be no such thing appears, but in all
things they carry it regularly, and yet we condemn them, we take Gods work out
of his hand, and may be guilty of condemning the Generation of the just.

3. This is also to sin against the Rule of Christian Charity. We observed,
that Charity is the very bond of Christian Communion in this World. Now the
proper nature of Charity is to think the best of others, so far as we may have
any encouragement so to do; surely then, when we see men to be zealous for the
Ordinances of Christ, and careful in doing according to his commands therein,
and therein showing a respect to all his Precepts; this bespeaks in our
Consciences that they do well: and unless we have reason from their other
conversation among men, to condemn them, we ought to judge them sincere; nor
are the common infirmities incident to the Children of God in this life, to
weaken our Charity on this account. If we are mistaken in this, it will do us
no hurt, and to their own master they must stand or fall; but if we wrong them
in our censures of them, we bring guilt upon our selves, and provoke Gods just
displeasure against us.

3. Have a care that you do not take up with, and rest in a form of Godliness;
and it concerns us all to take great heed to our selves on this account, and
that upon these three considerations.

1. There is great danger of it. It is a thing which sinful man is in great
hazard of, as will be evident, if we consider;

1. The natural deceitfulness and wickedness of the heart; we are told, Jer.
17.9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and d^sperately wicked. Now the
wickedness which is in the heart naturally, inclines us to all manner of sin,
and is continually prompting of us that way, Genesis 8.21. the imagination of man's
heart is evil from his youth. So that it will do its utmost to keep out every
thing that is truly good; and if we add to this the guile which it is full of,
and the innumerable cunning tricks that it has to impose upon men by, yea,
upon the man himself, we may be convinced that we have great reason to be
afraid of being trapanned by it. It is certain, that true Godliness is a thing
contrary to the resentments of the corrupt heart in us; if therefore it can but
reach to the sinister ends upon which unregenerate men do engage in the
profession of Religion, and yet keep sin upon the throne within, it will
certainly do it; and it will encourage the man to go through all the
formalities of it too, with the greatest show that can be; and if you trust to
i^ you will beyond question be imposed on, and never go beyond a form: hence we
have that advice, Prove. 28.26. He that trusts in his own heart, is a fool.

2. These declining times afford great Temptations to it. It is an hour of
great trial upon this account; it is a day wherein men generally content
themselves with a form of Godliness, and count that to be sufficient, yea,
there are a great many who esteem that too much. Observe the frame of many
Professors, and it looks, as if they were afraid of having too much of
Religion; as if heart piety were a needless thing; as if it were not a credit,
but rather a reproach to a man to be sincerely Godly. If you will do as the
most do, a form will be enough for you; if you will go farther, and resolve to
live up to the Rules of the Gospel, and lead a Conversation in all things
worthy of Christ, and carefully avoid the appearances of evil, you must expect
to meet with scorn, and reproach, and cruel mockings; you will hereby
^^actically condemn the Generation you ^ive in, if you will now build an Ark,
they will malign you for it, and you must look to have it cast in your dish, as
a matter of ignominy. If now you will consult with flesh and blood, and hearken
to carnal reasonings, they will bid you to be content to do as others do, and
tell you that you shall fare as well as they; and that it is pride in you to
think your selves wiser than your neighbors, or suppose that none shall obtain
heaven and happiness, but such scrupulous persons as you are. Certainly then
you ly open to no small h^zard.

2. There is great danger in it, if you are thus imposed on, it will certainly
expose you, and you will sooner or later find it to your sorrow; for consider:

1. You cannot impose upon God. You have not only to deal with men in this
matter, but with the heart searching God: now God requires your hearts in all
your duties, as well as the careful observance of the duties themselves; they
are put together, Prove. 23.26. My son, give me thine heart, and let thine eyes
observe my ways; we are told, Psalm. 51.6. that God requires truth in the
inward parts. When you go about any Service, God does not only see what
formality you use; but he enquires where your hearts are; those Jews were as
fair and plausible in their carriage as could be, but God made that observation
upon them, Ezekiel. 33.31. Their heart is gone after their coveteousness; and you
cannot, by all your curious and cunning contrivances, deceive him: all your
covers and pretenses hide not from him, Psalm. 139.12. the darkness hides not
from thee: We are therefore warned on this account, Gal. 6 7. Be not deceived,
God is not mocked. God remarks, not only what men do right, but whether they do
it with a perfect heart; such a note is made upon him, 2 Chronicles. 25.2. He did
that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart.

2. You will therefore perish for all this. All the formality which you can
possibly use in your profession, will not save you from destruction, if you
rest in that; you may take all manner of pains in it, be very curious and exact
in the performance of the duties of Worship toward God, and of righteousness
toward men* (...) may (...), read, con^fer, be diligent in your Calling,
honest in your Commerce, charitable in your distributions, and yet loose all
your works, and be your selves numbered with the workers of iniquity, and doomed
to depart with them, Luke 13.26, 27. when God comes to reward all men according
as their works have been, he will not recompense you according to your
formality, but according to your hypocrisy, and that will be a fearful thing:
God threatens them that come to enquire of him, and set up their idols in their
heart, that he will answer them according to their Idols, Ezekiel. 14 4.

3. Nay, there will be less hope of you than of others: Your Salvation will
hereby be rendered far the more desperate of all the men in the world, there is
none in more fearful danger of unavoidable perdition, than such an one as has
taken up with, and sheltered himself under a form of Godliness, without the
power of it. There is more hope of a profane and prodigal sinner, who has
allowed himself in the greatest neglects of duty, and excesses of immorality,
than of him. It is a fearful word of Christ to the formalists of that time when
he was conversant among men, Mat. 21 31 Verily, I say unto you, that the
Publicans and the ha^lots go into the Kingdom of God before yo^* We can easier
reach the consciences of such, which will more readily accuse them of the
enormities which we apply the awful threatenings of the Word of God unto, and
say unto them, thou art the man. Whereas these are secure* and confident in
their good estate, and can put away all awakenings, and warnings, and counsels
from them, as things that they are not at all concerned with; and can sleep in
a whole skin* under all the rousing truths that are spoken to them in the
Ministry. If once you arrive hither, you are settled on your lees, and little
hope is left of your being converted and saved; beware then of this frame, lest
you rue it for ever.

4. You will be guilty of making the times perilous. Our Text tells us that
this is one, and a principal cause of their being so God is a God of Judgment,
and he will bear witness against this wickedness, as well as any other; and the
more there are of such persons, the more do such a people ly exposed. When Gods
Judgments come upon the Land, there are none that have more reason to look upon
themselves as the procurers of them, than such as you are. When you look upon
all the evils that overtake a sinful people, you ought to acknowledge that it
is for your sakes that the land mourns: You are very forward to charge
Drunkards, Whoremasters, Swearers, and Mockers at Religion, for being the
troublers of Israel, but know and be assured, that you have as deep an hand in
the provocation as any of them; and God has threatened that he will punish the
uncircumcised in heart, as well as the uncircumcised in flesh, Jer. 9.25, 26.

^. You lay your selves open to be peculiar monuments of Gods Judgments in such
times. Not only are you to expect the common calamities of the times, but also
to have some peculiar brand set upon you in such a day: I do not say, that God
always does so by men in this world; for some men's sins go before hand to
Judgment, and others f^llow after; and God does arbi^^arily on this account:
but that you do give him special provocation thus to deal with you, and that it
will be a righteous thing with him so to do. And, though it is not for us
rashly to judge of others, by the providence which pass over them; but to be
very sober in our censures of men* when they are strangely visited; yet men
have reason to call themselves to a strict account* when Gods hand so lies
upon them: and how often may they be able to lay their finger on this sore.

3. The thing it self is unreasonable. Of all the men in the world, the
formalist acts the most irrationally, and contrary to the very sentiments of
common reason: and if you would but ponder on the matter according to the
Principles of the light of nature, it would afford you sufficient conviction of
your egregious folly: either the Religion which you thus formally profess, is
worthy of your cordial embracing of, or it is not; if it be not, why then do
you take up so much as a form of it? if it be, why then no more but a form? Out
of your own mouth you will be one day judged in this matter. If Godliness be
the way to eternal life, it requires your cordial and sincere profession of it;
if it have nothing of saving good in it, nor will profit you for happiness, why
will you, by a formality, hinder your selves of that which you think will do
you good? The lewd sinner, who pretends to nothing more, but to seek his
happiness in this life, and expects it from the fruition of the World, and
thereupon gives scope to himself, to take all the carnal satisfactions in it,
which he can extract out of it, acts more according to Principles than you. He
that cannot give a good reason why he should be through and upright in the
practice of Holiness, cannot give one why he should take up a form of it. And
if you conceive an excellency in the form; reason should tell you how much more
excellent the power of it must be: let me then say as he, 1 King. 18.21. H^w
long halt ye between two opinions? if the Lord be God follow him, but if Baal,
then follow him.

2. To those that are truly Godly: be you Exhorted to preserve the power of
Godliness in times wherein there is little of it to be found. And to move you
hereto, Consider;

1. The Glory of God is now peculiarly concerned in your so doing. When there
are but a few that seek his honor, it is a special call to all such as are
truly Godly, to stand up and appear for it. Certainly, if you have any spark of
real goodness in you, if you prefer the Glory of God above all, and do
cordially desire that all men would seek it, it cannot but put you upon being
the more careful to your selves about it. When the Lord Jesus Christ has but a
few Friends in the world, and there are so many that dishonor him, they that
are indeed his friends, are loudly call^^ upon the more eminently to appear so;
and you cannot otherwise show your selves true and faithful to him. When there
were a great many pretended Disciples that deserted Christ, and walked no more
with him, he put that close question to the twelve, Joh. 6.67. Will ye also go
away? When the Ten Tribes revolted from the true worship of God, and turned
aside to Jeroboams Superstition and Idolatry, God gave that admonition to the
Kingdom of Judah, Hos. 4.15. Though thou Israel play the harlot, yet let not
Judah offend. And when the body of that people had turned from God, and made
them a Golden Calf, and prostrated themselves to that, Moses calls aloud to the
people, as, Exodus 32.26. Who is on the Lords side? let him come unto me. And we
find that the Tribe of Levi presently appeared, and they obtained a blessing
upon it. Hereby is a special advantage afforded you, to approve your selves
sincere, and upright in heart, and to bring much glory to God.

2. Your own comfort, in all changes, will be greatly helped by it. We have
observed, that the best must look to meet with trouble, when God comes to
visit a people for these things: nor can they tell how deeply they may
personally suffer in such times. However, there is a way by which the people of
God may come to have much inward tranquillity in their Souls, and be able to
commit themselves to God with a sedate Spirit, when the Storms of Judgments are
most furious, and Sinners in Zion are afraid* and fearfulness surprizeth the
Hypocrites: and this is worth our utmost endeavor, and the peace of it will
make full amends for all the labor we can use about it. And I am sure that
there is nothing that will more largely contribute hereto than this, viz. the
Testimony of our Consciences to our sincerity, in standing by, and upholding
the power of Godliness, in the most degenerate times. This will give rejoicing
in the greatest afflictions that can befall us. Paul sets a Probatum est upon
this, 2 Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our Conscience, that
in simplicity and Godly sincerity, we have had our Conversation in the World.
This will help to fix our hearts in times when the most threatening Symptoms of
evil appear, and the Clouds are gathering thick and fast: So it is with him who
is upright. Psalm. 112.7, 8. He shall not be afraid of evil tidings; his heart
is fixed* trusting in the Lord: his heart is established he shall not be
afraid. Whereas the want of this integrity, or some notorious defect in it,
touching the Conscience, and making it to reflect upon the man, will offer more
inward molestation, and heart disquietment, than all the outward troubles which
he can encounter withal.

3. You will meet with great Temptations, which will offer to discourage you at
such a time. What they are has been before taken notice of; and let Godly ones
who have the root of the matter in them, beware of despising this warning, or
thinking themselves out of the reach of these Temptations. Godly men have a
corrupt* part remaining within them, which they do find work enough to suppress
at any time, and it will certainly take advantage to urge hard, when it has
motives from without to back its suggestions withal: nor will all your
Confidence secure you against the assaults of it, but it will be too hard for
you, if you be not very headful to your selves. You have awful instances of
this to give you warning. Peter for all his resolution, and repeated purposes,
was yet fearfully over come when the trial was upon him. Matthew. 26. Barnabas
was drawn into a Scandalous dissimulation, when Peter had begun, Gal. 2.12. You
had need to be well provided, if you will stem the stream of the times, and
hold out against all that would allure you from your fidelity to Christ, when
you may be called to part with every thing else, though never so dear to you,
if you will preserve your integrity immaculate; and for your help on this
account.

1. See to your hearts that they be right in all that you do in your
profession. If God mainly regards the heart, it concerns all that would approve
themselves to him, to do so too. If you can once get them to be right, your
main business is done, and till you have made this sure, you cannot do any
thing well. See then to your through Conversion; that indeed is not all that
you have to do, but it is the first thing, because there can nothing be done
right without it. It is impossible that an unconverted heart, should be a
sincere heart in Gods account and acceptance; till you have gotten a new heart,
you can never go beyond formality in any thing you do; and if you would have
such an heart as this, you must go to God for it: It is he alone who can give
it to you, and you must ask it of him, Ezekiel 36.26. a new heart will I give you
You must also call for your heart, every time that you go about any duty, and
be sure to take it along with you, if you would be cordial in it; it will be
away, if you do not heedfully look after it; and too often does a Godly man
perform this and that Service in formality, because of his inadvertency in this
regard; or because he trusts his heart too much, which a^ often as he does so,
deceives him; how careful is David in this respect? Psalm. 57.8. Awake my
glory, awake psaltery and harp; I my self will awake early.

2. Set your selves ever in the presence of God, as of one who sees and hates
Hypocrisy. We are indeed forbidden to do eye-service to men, as of a thing
which proceeds from a false heart; but eye-service to God is every where
approved; and there is nothing that can be a more powerful and awful
consideration on our minds, to make us afraid of doing any thing in hypocrisy,
than to think of those two things, and always carry the deep impression of them
upon our hearts, viz. that God stands by, and looks on, and that he cannot
abide dissimulation; for he is our Law giver, and our Judge, who will call us
to an account, and he will judge righteous Judgment, and cannot be mistaken in
it. Hence holy men on Scripture Record, have always been wary of this, when
they were in a right frame, and made use of it as a caution to excite them to
sincerity; thus did Job, Chap. 31.4. Does not he see my ways, and count all my
steps; and David says, Psalm. 16.8 I have set the Lord always before me. It is
therefore the character of wicked men, that they think not of God, Psalm. 10.4.
God is not in all his thoughts; and they suppose him to be unconcerned about
the affairs of the children of men, and so not to be feared, Ezekiel. 8.12. They
say, the Lord sees us not, the Lord has forsaken the Earth.

3. Maintain and strengthen your love to God, and his ways. See that you have
this principle in you: where this love is not, the best that you do will be but
formality; and you had need to be always nourishing this principle in you, and
getting of it coroborated: you will meet with many things that will offer to
damp it. If you can but attain to do every thing in true love to God,
delighting in his ways, and desiring his glory above all things, this will be
the best help to do all things uprightly; this will make you see to the matter,
and manner, and principle, and end, that all be accommodated to Evangelical
directions and designs; and according to the strength and activity of this love
in you, such will be the power of Godliness appearing in your lives. If the Law
of God have that virtue and sweetness with you, thar it had with ^^^vid, who
could say, Psalm. 19.10. More to be desired than gold, than much refined gold,
sweeter also than honey, and the honey comb; this will cause you to lay your
selves out to the utmost for him, and that will be very acceptable to him.

4. Labor to experience Communion with God in your serving of him* there is a
Communion which Godly men have with God in this life; he could say, 1 John 1.3.
Truly our fellowship is with God the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ;
this is it which a sincere Christian has an aim at in all that he does, and
there is nothing that can content him without it: Now this Communion is to be
had in the way of duty. If you can do du^y contentedly without the enjoyment of
it, and if this be your constant guise, you are Hypocrites; but if you
restlesly seek it, and he affords it you, make much of it, prize it above every
thing in the world, endeavor to be able to say of it as he, Psalm 84.10. A day
in thy Court^s is better than a thousand; and this will certainly put you upon
longing for more of it, and make you to say, as Psalm. 63.1, 2. My soul
thirsts for thee, to see thy power and thy glory, as I have seen; and there
is nothing can carry out your hearts more intensly after the expressing
sincerity in your Services, than the value you have for this, and the fresh
apprehension, of the delight which you have found in it.

5. Despise all the contempt and reproach of carnal and formal men. You must
expect to meet with enough of it from men of such a spirit, if you will go one
step before them in the ways of Godliness; and if you are so nice and delicate,
as not to be able to bear the blast of them, you will be put upon it to play
the Hypocrite many a time, and can by no means avoid it: You must live among
them, and have some unavoidable conversation with them; and they cannot
forbear: you must therefore endeavor to imitate your Lord Christ, of whom it
is said, Heb. 12.2. That he endured the Cross, and despised the shame; and
remember what Christ has warned you on this account, Mark 8.38. Whosoever
shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous and sinful
generation, of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he shall come in
the glory of his Father, with the ^oly Angels.

6. Seek to, and depend upon Christ to preserve you in your integrity; and
there is besides the keeping of Grace alive in you, which is an effect of his
power, the upholding of the lively efficacy of it in exercise to be sought of
him; else you may fall under those decays, which will grievously wound you, and
bring sorrow upon you; this was the Psalmists request unto God, Psalm. 25 21.
let integrity and uprightness preserve me; and he acknowledges that he had a
gracious answer of this prayer, Psalm. 41.12. as for me, thou upholdest me in
mine integrity. Be therefore ever jealous of your selves, sensible of your own
insufficiency, and renounce trust in your own grace, and let that keep you in
an humble dependence upon Christ.

7. Pray to God to revive dying Religion. Truly you cannot keep up the power of
Godliness in your selves without this; your hearts cannot but be affected with
the present state of Christianity; and it is God only who can, and he can
revive it in the midst of the days: and if you either love the glory of God, or
seek the weal of Zion, you cannot be silent; see for this, Isa. 62.1, 6, 7. For
Zions sake, I will not hold my peace, etc. ye that make mention of God keep not
silence, and give him no rest till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a
praise in the earth; pray that he will pour out his spirit upon the dry places,
and turn the wilderness into a fruitful field; and thus shall you prove your
selves to be Israelites indeed.

8. Keep upon your thoughts an expectation of the hastening account that you
shall be called unto. If Ungodly Sinners, who please themselves with their
outside pretenses, did really believe and meditate more upon this, how would it
help to awaken them? and if the Children of God would be more conversant with,
and realizing of this day to themselves, it would put them upon the more solemn
preparation for it; and if we could be always helped to do every thing that we
engage in, with such a respect and caution, that it will shortly be called over
before Angels and men, and that not only the action it self, but the spirit
with which it was done, how would it be a continual guard against empty
formality, and put us upon endeavors to express the power of Godliness in all
things; and it would make us to answer every temptation that would draw us away
from our sincerity, with his reflection, Job 31.14. What then shall I do, when
God rises up? and when he visits, what shall I answer him?

FINIS.

