THE Soldier Defended and Directed: AS It was Delivered in a SERMON Preached
to the Artillery Company in Boston, on the day of their ELECTION of Officers,
June 2d. 1701.

By Ebenezer Pemberton, Pastor of a Church in Boston.

BOSTON. Printed by B Green, and J. Allen, for Samuel Sewall Junior. 1701.

THE SOLDIER Defended and Directed.
Luke III. 14. And the Soldiers likewise demanded of him, saying, And what
shall we do? --
THE Life of man in this present world is celebrated by many Masters of
Morality among the Heathen, under the notion of a Warfare: but these were never
able by their most exalted Theories to state the true nature, or prescribe the
just rules for the successful discharge hereof: For after all their Essays,
the undisciplined Combatant will need direction; and the saint hearted,
encouragement in the day of Battle. But now Christianity does supply all these
defects: This gives us a more exalted notion of this Warfare; and lays down the
best rules for the conduct of the Christian Soldier from his first Entering the
Line of Battle, till death shall raise the Camp, and give him a discharge. Here
the Conduct and Prowess of the General, under whose Banner he is to fight, is
displayed; the power and policy of those Enemies, which he is to agonize and
conflict with, is laid open; the good cause, in which he is to Engage,
discovered; and the glorious praemium, or prize, which he is to contend for, is
set forth, and assured to the Victor; a Prize sufficient to inspire every
breast that has the best sense of true honor, with all the Essentials of an
heroical resolution, and unbroken courage.

How a Soul shall discharge this Warfare, as becomes the honor of Christ his
Leader, the goodness of the Cause, and the glory of the reward is a Quaery of
no common importance: The resolution of which in short is, that the faithful
discharge hereof consists in a punctual observation of his Commanders Orders.

These Orders are plainly and fully contained in the (...) Oracles of Truth,
which if observed, the Combat will be crowned with Victory, and the Victory end
in an everlasting Triumph: Now these Orders are exceeding large; as extensive
as the Law of God, which the Royal Prophet tells us, is exceeding broad: The
latitude of which Orders consists in their being adapted to all the Children of
men under their various circumstances, and Employments. There is no post,
station or profession but what they extend to, and afford conduct in: They
reach the King on the Throne, and stoop to the Beggar on the Dunghill: They are
directive, and obligatory to the Priest at the Altar, to the Judge on the
Tribunal, and the Soldier in the Camp, and in all his preparations here for:
So that by a faithful discharge of the duties of their respective posts on
Christian Principles they will make glorious advances to the unshaken Kingdom
of Eternal Light and Love.

Agreeable to all this, Christ, the Believers Commander, having withdrawn
himself as to bodily presence from his Militant Camp on Earth, and being
advanced to the head of his Triumphant Armies in Heaven; has in admirable
wisdom Substituted an Order of men, to represent his Person, act in his name as
Under Officers; and these stand obliged by the duties of their function to
publish, explain and apply his Orders in their full extent and latitude. Hence
it is the character of one wise and faithful in this sacred Order, to bring out
or his Storehouse things new and old, and to give every one their portion in
due season; and neither hopes nor fears are to move them from this duty of
their charge. A Gospel Minister in the discharge of his Office, is not only to
declare the general duties of Christianity, which respect all in common, that
are Listed under Christ Jesus; but as opportunity calls, to make a more close
application of particular duties to men in their respective capacities; and to
warn them against those temptations which endanger their welfare in their
several Stations. When Christ's Ambassadors do thus, they are not to be treated
as deserters of their proper charge; nor voted guilty of an usurpation, or an
Invasion made on another Province: But it is to be accounted a specimen of
that wisdom and fidelity, which become the character of Stewards in Christ's
Household. A glorious instance of this prudence and faithfulness we have before
us in John the Baptist, in his treatment of persons of diverse Orders, agreeable
to their several characters.

I shall not essay a critical Analysis of our Context. It shall (...) in
general to say: That when the fullness of time was almost come for the
appearance of the Eternal Son of God in humane nature; under which Veil he was
to screen the insufferable brightness of his Divinity in order to the
Redemption of his Chosen Israel according to the Everlasting Counsel or peace:
how God was pleased to dispatch John the Baptist the promised Elias, as an
Herald of the approaching Messiah, as the Morning Star to usher in the Sun of
Righteousness: This fore runner of Christ was authorized by his Doctrine and
Baptism to prepare sinners of that day for the reception of this Prince of
Peace. In order to this we find him Preaching the Doctrine, and Administering
the Baptism of Repentance: which he Enforces with the consideration that the
Kingdom of God was at hand; and withal alarms his Auditory with an awful
prediction of Destruction, if they refuse to comply with his Doctrine: The
success of which Dispensation we have an account of. Many of his Auditors were
awakened, brought to some serious thought; so as to address him for further
direction. Thus we find many of the people, the Publicans, and the Soldiers
seeking to the Baptist for further Instruction.

Our Text is the address made by men of Military Order. The Soldiers likewise
demanded of him, saying, and what shall we do? In which we may observe,

1. The persons addressing; and they are Soldiers: These were the Roman
Soldiers posted there to maintain Rome's Conquest of Judea: An Order of men
ordinarily too much devoted to blood, plunder, and rapine: Too many of which
choose to fight in Satan's Camp; to march in his forlorn in the way to
destruction; as if they were resolved to Storm the Kingdom of Darkness, and
take it by violence.

2. We may observe the person addressed to; viz. John the Baptist, for that is
the antecedent to the Relative him in our Text: which intimates to us, that
Christ's Ambassadors are proper persons to be consulted with, about matter of
duty, by persons of all orders and degrees. The Priest's lips must preserve
knowledge; and we are to ask the Law at his mouth.

3. We may observe the address it self: viz. They demanded of him, saying, what
shall we do? Which is as if they had said, Sir, we have heard your Doctrine of
Repentance; we have observed the terrors of the Lord, which you have set in
battle array against the impenitent; we apprehend our own danger; and we who
are no better than briars and thorns dread to confront Consuming Fire: and
since Repentance, and the fruits thereof are necessary to our Escape; instruct
us, O thou Man of God, how we may order our lives; and particularly in that
Post that Divine Providence has placed us in, that we may escape the Wrath to
come, and be prepared for the Kingdom of God.

From the words there are two Assertions which shall employ our present
meditations.

Assertion I. That Military Men, or Soldiers, are an Order of men allowable
and proper in a Christian State.
This is a truth that every one, who is not blinded by prejudice, must assent
to as incontestable: Who can dispute the lawfulness of this Order, that do but
take a view of those principles, which the God of Nature has originally
implanted in humanity; who do consider the History and Doctrine both of the
Veiled and Unveiled Gospel; and withal observe the Dispensations of Divine
Providence in the world? Yet this has been confronted by the strongest efforts
of Wit, and Art: Thus it has been assaulted by Socinus, and the main body of
the Racovian Rout, together with many giddy Enthusiasts, who listed under their
Banner to defy and fight against the Truths of the Living God.

It must indeed be acknowledged that War to which Military men bear a relation,
is an evil to be deprecated: The tragical Records of all Ages do speak in
bloody characters what fearful desolation it makes: and this is given by some
as a reason why in the Sacred Records the same word is sometimes used to
signify War, and Harvest: because in War men are reapt and mown down by the
Sword; as Grass and Corn by the Scyth and Sickle. Every Battle, faith the
Evangelical Prophet, is with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood. Isa.
9.5. But yet this does not argue that War is Subversive of Christianity; or
that this Order of men, who are to transact in this affair is not to be allowed
in Gospel Days: for Soldiers are not only allowable, but proper and necessary
in a Christian State. To state and illustrate this Assertion, let us remark.

1. That there would have been no occasion for men of Military Order, had man
retained his primitive integrity. This was not from the beginning. The Original
State or Nature is not a state of War. Had the Divine Image on man, which
consisted in the inde^ective rectitude of all his powers, remained in its
created brightness; had not the glory of humane nature been sullyed by sin;
there would have been no foundation for men of a Military quality. There would
have been no Armies to confront or guard against; no Passes to be forced; no
Seiges to be raised; no Garrisons to be Stormed Unblemished Innocence would
have preserved mankind in perfect Amity. This Order therefore is consequent
upon the Apostasy: Had not man deserted that Past God at first placed him in,
turned Revolter; and put himself under a foreign jurisdiction; and jovn'd with
the Rebel Host of Apostate Spirits in the cursed conspiracy against God; there
would have been no (...), nor discord among men. Had not Sin drawn the flaming
Sword of Divine Justice, men would never have drawn the Sword against one
another: The whole Earth would have been a Sanctuary of Peace, whereas Sin has
now made it an Aceldama, a field of blood, a Stage on which the most bloody
Tragedies have been acted.

2 Were the principles of Christianity fully entertained and acted upon in the
world, there would be no need of Military men. Peace among men is one blessing
which the Gospel of peace naturally tends to introduce. The holy principles of
our blessed Religion are admirably adapted to inspire men with a Catholic love
and tenderness to each other: They tend to remove the causes of Wars and
Contentions. The Gospel when entertained gives check to men's malicious lusts,
regulates and controuls their exorbitant passions: and these are they that draw
the Sword, Jam. 4 1. From whence come wars, and fightings among you? come they
not hence, even of your lusts, that war in your members? The blessed rules of
Christ observed will mortify the inordinate Ambition of aspiring Monarchs, they
will keep them from transgressing the boundaries of just and good, to enlarge
their Territories, advance their Empire, and satiate their hellish Pride, to
which whole Kingdoms many times fall devoted Victims. Were the perfect law of
liberty universally and practically received as man's only Direction, that
Prophesy would have a litteral accomplishment, Isa. 2. 4 They shall beat their
Swords into plow shares, and their Spears into pruning books; Nation shall not
lift up sword against nation; nor shall any learn War any more. We should be
continually entertained with the soft Airs of Zion's pleasant Songs of Peace;
and never be started with the sound of the Trumpet, and the alarm to War: The
whole earth would be a Jerusalem; a vision of Peace.

3. This notwithstanding the Public weal requires such an order of men in a
Christian state; and consequently they are by the rules of Christianity
allowable and proper. The Gospel has not obtained such full entertainment in
the world, as to make Wars to cease on the Earth. A Christian state is exposed
to the insults and outrages of the sons of Violence: and this violence is to be
repelled by men expert in martial accomplishments. It is high handed
presumption for a Christian people to depend on God, by the miraculous
interposition of his Providence, to shield them from ruin, while they neglect
the proper means for their own security: For though God can, and sometimes does
save, without, nay contrary to means, yet his ordinary and stated way is to
appear by his blessing on means for the Salvation of his Israel. Hence
according to the ordinary Series of Providence, it is many times impossible for
a People to maintain Peace at home, secure their Civil and Sacred Liberties
from the invasion and encroachments of unreasonable men, unless the Sword be
drawn. The public tranquillity sometimes makes a War eligible: It is indeed a
devourer, but out of that eater meat will come forth. At certain Times the
Public Calamities (as one says) are of that nature, that preparations of
Steel are found to be the most succesful Antidotes: and there is no possibility
of curing these maladies but by these Chaly beats: Now Military men are
necessary to apply this remedy to a sick and languishing State: Hence by the
Law of self preservation, on, that fundamental Law of humane nature, such an
Order of men are to be upheld in a Christian Common Wealth: And if natural
principles oblige hereto, Christianity will not prohibit it: Christianity does
not subvert any of Natures Laws; but confirm and exalt them. Soldiers
therefore being a proper medium to a laudable End, viz. the public good, it
must be allowed the approbation of the true Religion, and of a duly regulated
Conscience: There is no prohibition in Scripture against a Military Profession:
were there; Why did not the Baptist disband the Soldiers in our Text? Why did
not our Lord and Master deplume the Centurion that came to him? Why did he not
command him to lay down his Commission, as inconsistent with that faith, which
in Israel it self, had not its parallel? In a word, Why in Scripture are
Monuments Erected in honor of such as have been remarkable for their Martial
Achievements; their names mentioned with the character of honor; by which
they are consecrated to Posterity? By all which the Assertion before us is
fixed as a principle readily to be granted, rather than a problem, to be
disputed. We pass to the second Assertion, which challenges our thoughts, viz.

Assertion II. That there are Duties incumbent on Soldiers, which Christianity
obliges and encourages them to the discharge of.
Designed brevity will permit me only to give a resolution to this Enquiry, viz.

What are those duties which Christianity does oblige and encourage Soldiers
to the discharge of?

And here, I shall not insist on those duties, which are not only incumbent on
Soldiers, but also on all in common, who are Entered into Christ's Muster roll.

There is but one way that leads to the City of the Living God; and in that way
both the Prince and Peasant, bond and free, both Gown, and Sword men, must
Storm the Kingdom of Heaven, and take it by violence.

But that my discourse may in some measure ly level to the occasion of the
present day, I shall only consider the duties that our Religion obliges
Soldiers unto, as such; which have an immediate aspect upon them in their
Military Capacities. And that my thoughts here may be distinct, it seems not
improper to distinguish between Soldiers only in preparation by their Military
Exercises for real Service; and such as are actually called to real Service, to
jeopardise their lives in the high places of the field. It seems to be no great
decorum in treating Soldiers at home, in peace, with the same address as is
suited to those that are engaged in War, actually confronting an insolent
Adversary. Here then we may essay a short account of the duties, which by the
Laws of Christianity, are incumbent on each. And.

1. As to the duties which Christianity obliges Soldiers to discharge, who are
only by their Military Exercises at home in preparation for War. And the duties
of these may be ranckt under five general heads: As,

1. Christianity obliges Soldiers to engage in these preparative Military
Exercises for a right end, such as God may approve of. It is the Prerogative of
man, by which he is raised above the level of the inferior Creation, to act
upon deliberation, and free Election, as a cause by Counsel of his own actions:
hence he must act for some End; which he is to have in his eye, and make the
measure of his actions; which End ought to be something worthy and
proportionable to those intellective and elective powers, with which humane
nature is Ennobled. And this is one principal hinge on which the moral good, or
evil of his actions does turn. For though the Intention of a good End be not of
it self sufficient to legitimate, or consecrate an action, as some have vainly
asserted; yet the want of it will desecrate and profane the best.

Such therefore, as would engage in any affair, so as to observe therein the
dictates of the Christian Religion, must look well to their end; that it be
such, as may be approved of at the Tribunal of God, and the bar of unprejudiced
reason; to both of which man stands accountable. Here then, by the rules of
Christianity, the Soldier in these his preparatory Exercises stands obliged to
have a good end in his intention. And this ought to be the same end with that,
for which the Art Military was first contrived and instituted. In this affair
that maxim of the Schools is not to take place, Non Idem finis Artis et
Artificis: the end of the Art and Artist is not here to be distinguished: Now
this end is as ultimately the honor of God, in the good and safety of the
Common weal, so nextly to be prepared for real Service, when the public safety
calls for it. Military Exercise is not to be looked on as a play fit for
Children, but as a work and business for men: Men are to engage in these
Exercises not merely for diversion, but with an actual design to get themselves
ready to stand in the high places of the field, to speak with the Enemy in the
gate, when Providence shall call them forth. This end, it is be feared, is far
from the thought of the most, that put themselves under discipline: The most
never dream of real Service; they think of an innocent diversion, to make a
goodly appearance, to look big and strutt in Armor; and no wonder if such be
crest fallen when an Enemy invades the Land, and danger approaches. By the want
of this end the Christian Soldier violates his Christian obligation: without
this design of real Service these Exercises, with what pomp so ever managed,
are but a vain show; which according to the rules of Religion will deface the
Character of a Martial Spirit. The Soldier, that has not this preparation for
real Service in his Eye, can give no tolerable account why he appears in Arms;
unless to fill up an empty space with something as empty and void: such are no
better than Ciphers placed at the left hand of an Account, which no whit
advances the Sum; they add not to the number of the chosen men of Israel, men
prepared for war.

2. Christianity requires a due caution against all those things that are
subversive of this end. That which obliges us to intend and will the end,
obliges us to nill and refuse every thing that tends to frustrate that end: If
therefore the Soldier, while at home and in peace, is bound in his Military
Exercises to aim at a preparation for real Service; it then naturally follows,
that he is under the same engagement to take heed, that he avoid all that will
impede this his preparation, or render him unfit for Service: left when
Providence shall open the Campaign, and post him in the line of battle he be
found faint hearted and dare not; or, undisciplined, and so knows not how to
maintain his Post when vigorously assaulted. And there are many things, which
the Soldier is obliged by Christianity to take heed against, as that which
will subvert his end in these preparatory Exercises: we may hint at some of
them.

Tbus the Soldier is obliged to take heed against luxury and debauchery. For
these will emasculate and effeminate his Spirits, and so unfit him to enter the
list against an hardy foe. He that striveth for mastery, faith the Apostle, is
temperate in all things, 1 Cor. 9. 25. Intemperance enfeebles the body, and
renders it unfit for heroic actions; it softens the mind, and so indisposes
the man for any noble and great resolves; but prepares him to be an easy prey
to an insulting Enemy. This proved fatal to Benhadad and his confederate
Princes, I King. 20 16.

Again, Sloth and Idleness the Soldier at home is obliged to watch against. A
Military life is a life of action; and whatever unfits for action unfits for
that Service. Now sloth by a Physical efficiency abates the vigor, and damps
the noble purposes of the Soul; it rusts the Spirits, and causes the faculties
of operation to contract an unaccountable hebitude and dullness. Idleness is a
sort of Lethargy that benums the active powers of the Soul, and lays them
asleep. It renders the Soldier averse to undertake and incapable to undergo
the fatigues of a Martial Expedition. The slothful is never like to blazon his
own glory, defend his Country, or advance its renown by his Exploits in the
field of War. (...) therefore is to be condemned as destructive of the true end
of Soldiery, and as such, prohibited by the rules of Christianity, What ever
thine hands find to do, do with all thy might: Be not (...) in business, etc.
These are documents of Christianity.

Again, The Soldier must avoid every thing that tends to nourish Security
Security will keep him from due preparations; and expose to inevitable ruin,
when danger approaches. This was that which laid Laish desolate Judge. 18. 27
She was quiet and secure, and so soon surprised into ruin; the inhabitants cut
off by the Edge of the Sword, and the City burnt with fire

Again, Christianity obliges them to take heed that they do not over rate, and
value the present life. An over value for life will unfit a Soldier for that
Service, in which he must carry his life in his hand: it will indispose him to
Sacrifice it in the field of honor, for the preservation of the public
tranquillity. The estimate, which Pomp^y made of life, was highly becoming the
Character of a Christian Soldier, when with great violence (...) by many from
Embarquing in a violent storm, replied with in heroic bravery, My Voyage is
necessary, my Life is not so.

Finally, Christians obliges that they take heed of an ungovernable Spirit.
Such a Spirit in Soldiers threatens all with confusion: it is the spring from
whence all mutinies, and insurrections proceed: when this spirit troubles the
Camp, nothing but desolation is to be expected: it is the worst of plagues,
that can invade an Army; it is infectious, and threatens the whole; it spread,
like a gangreen; and is ordinarily cured by no lennives, but only by the
sharpest corrosives of Martial discipline. Christianity therefore requires
Soldiers while at home in peace in these Exercises, to take heed against this
ungovernable spirit, as that which is obstructive to the true end of Souldery:
And the prevailing of this Spirit is judged by persons of thought and
observation to be not the least ill Omen that attends the Military affairs of
this Land. Now against all these things, which are impedimental to the end of
Military order, our Religion enters a caution.

3. It obliges to diligence in the pursuit of this End by the most proper and
accommodable means. He that is obliged to will the End, is obliged to choose,
and diligently to pursue the means that lead to that End. Hence Soldiers being
obliged in their present Exercises to make preparation for real Service, in
order to the public repose; they stand obliged by the same rule, to use the
most proper means to get ready. To this end Christianity requires, that the
Soldier get furnished with proper Armor, or Martial Weapons: Without these he
cannot be prepared for Service; neither to defend himself, nor to offend his
Adversary. And it is no season to seek for Arms, when called into the Field. It
is no wonder the uncircumcised Philistines did obtain an easy Triumph over
Israel, when there was not a Shield or a Spear found among forty thousand of
Israel, Judge 5. 8. As the Spiritual Soldier is not prepared to maintain his
post against the Militia of Hell, unless arrayed with the whole Armor of God;
so the proper Soldier will not be prepared to prevent, or repel the violence
of his adversaries, unless provided with Arms. Religion and reason demand this
provision And such trifle with duty, who neglect it.

Again, it obliges Soldiers to a due care that they may attain Military
Science. Weapons are to no purpose without skill to use them. He that in these
preparatory Exercises does not attain expertness therein, when called to
Engage, will find his Armor almost as uneasy and useless, as the Stripling
David did Saul's; and for the same reason because he had not proved it. Skill in
the Art Military is a necessary medium to that End which Christianity propounds
to the Soldier. And the most polite Nations have most endeavored after
proficiency herein. It is the opinion of some verst in antiquity, that the Jews
had their School for the Soldier, as well as the Prophet; by which they
maintained their Glory. Sure we may be it was the wisdom of the Patriarch
Abraham to discipline his Household. Genesis 14. 14. It was David's prudence, after
Saul's defeat at Mount Githoa, to order the instruction of the men of Judah in
the use of the bow, 2 Samuel 1. 18. Dexterity in this Art lays the foundation
for Martial Glory. Without this skill an Army for number most formidable may be
put to the rout by a few well disciplined Troops. We shall find abundant
witness of this, if we consult the records of Antiquity: This it was that
Crowned Alexander with victorious Laurels, and loaded him with the Spoils of
his undisciplined Enemies: This advanced Caesar to a Triumphal Chariot: By this
Rome enlarged her Dominions, and her Inhabitants vanquished in Battle double
the number of Enemies, who possibly might equal, if not surpass them in natural
strength and courage. The Glory of most Kingdoms has ebbed and flowed with this
skill. This therefore is a necessary medium to real Service: It is not
therefore to be looked on as a matter of indifference, but of Christian
obligation, in the present state of the world.

Another medium which tends to fit the Soldier for Service is Good Orders.
Religion therefore obliges to due care for the preservation hereof. Order is
the beauty of the Universe; the Strength and Glory of all Societies; without
which they would disband and crumble into nothing: Without Order a Bethel will
become a Babel, an Army a confused Rout. Now this Order among Soldiers
consists in every one's keeping to the duties of their respective places: When
the Officers duly give out their Orders; and those under Command do not contest
them; but with quick obedience move in the line of duty: It is fatal to a
Military Body to have this Order broken: The preservation of it is one good
step to make it unconquerable. Agreeably we have this description of an
invincible Army. Joel 2 7. They march every one in his way; and none shall
break their ranks. The wisdom of all Nations has judged the greatest severity
of Martial Discipline justifyable toward such, as break this Order. And the
greatest Generals by the Execution of this Discipline, have in all Ages
signalized their steady conduct. Memorable is the account we have of Papirius
the Dictator, who was with great difficulty persuaded to spare the life of
young Fabius, the Master of his Horse, for fighting, though successfully, in
his absence, and against Order. Famous is the Story of Titus Manlius, who
condemned his own brave Son to Death; for the like victorious attempt; being
repugnant to Order. No Order, without indisputable Obedience; this therefore,
as one says, is the Key stone of the Arch, which binds and sustains the whole
fabric.

Now if Order be thus necessary to an Army when called abroad to fight, it
follows that the maintenance of it at home is a necessary preparative to real
Service. None can in these preparatory Exercises wink at a breach of this
Order, but they betray that trust, which God and their Country have reposed in
them. The mildest Commander must make conscience while at home, to preserve
this Order by a due Execution of Discipline on such as violate it: Otherwise
they will train up Soldiers, who, when called forth to Service, will be
prepared, not to obey, but mutiny; not to fight, but run, to the reproach of
their Leaders, scorn of their Enemies, and ruin of the Public.

4 Christianity requires that they get their minds arrayed with those Christian
virtues which will qualify them for the attainment of this End. The former
were external media, these internal. Let the Soldiers industry be never so
great, his application never so close to the outward means, that tend to fit
him for Service; yet there are Christian virtues, without which he will remain
unready when the Signal is given, to take the Alarm, and arm for Battle.

Thus the Soldier should labor after a Public Spirit. That Soldier is
unqualified for Service, that cannot lay claim to this Ornament of the Soul. A
private Spirit, under the government of narrow and stingy principles, is not a
Martial Spirit; it is a blemish to the Man of War. This will quash all just
hopes of Service from such: Such will prefer their own private interest before
the common tranquillity: A man of a private Spirit, though very solicitous
about the safety of his own Cabbine; yet is little thoughtful for the Welfare
of the bottom, in which his all is Embarked. Such a one is not prepared to
venture his Life in a generous and hazardous Enterprise for the common Weal.
The Soldier therefore must labor after a public Spirit; a Spirit to resent
all the calamities, and to be passionately concerned for the prosperity of his
Country. With this Spirit we find those Worthies endued, Gid on, Baruch,
Sampson, Jephthab, and David; and with this Armor they came prepared to fight
the Lords Battles.

Again, Magnanimity, or Greatness of Spirit, is another virtue, which qualifies
for Service; and this Christianity commands; and the Soldier in his present
preparations is to seek after. By Magnanimity the Soldier will be qualified to
engage in any noble and generous attempt; and will choose rather to sacrifice
his own life, than the public peace, or his own honor. The truly great
spirited Soldier is prepared to bear up against all the hardships of the
warmest Service, with an unbroken and erect mind; when the Cause of God and his
People shall press him into their Service. This Spirit rested upon good
Nehemiah, when he cried out, as Neh. 6. 11. Shall such a man as I fly? This
Spirit inspired that noble General, who when deserted by his Army in heat of
battle, thus did reprimand them: Go, says he, tell the Living that I die
FIGHTING; while I go and report to the Dead, that you live FLYING.

Finally, True Piety is a necessary qualification for a Soldier in his
preparation for Service. The pious man, caeteris paribus, will be found most
ready to engage in the most bloody Encounters for the public defense. Piety
will secure the Soldier the proper protection of Divine Providence; which as
an impenetrable helmet will defend him; it inflames the mind with the strongest
resolution. Hence we find it the character of the Righteous. Prove 28. 1. The
righteous are as bold as a lion. It was by Faith that those Worthies waxed
valiant in battle, subdued Kingdoms, and put to flight armies of Aliens, in
Heb. 11. 34. A guilty and defiled Conscience is a bad preparation for Service.
Such while under a stupefaction through inconsideration may be fool hardy, but
not truly brave and valiant: But once they come to have their eyes opened, and
take a view of themselves with respect to the future state; they will dread
their Enemies Artillery as if charged with hell and damnation: God, as well as
man will appear marching in the Camp to confront them; and no wonder then if
their hearts saint, and they turn the back in the day of battle. These virtues
are preparative qualifications. If therefore the Soldier would get ready for
Service, he must endeavor to get his mind arrayed with these, Christianity
obliges hereto: And the Camp is not the most proper School to learn them in.

5. It requires a dependence on God for his Blessing to make all means
successful to the designed end. The Christian in all his ways ows a deference
to God as the fountain and author of all blessings. It was the Wise man's
advice, Prove. 3. 6. In all thy ways acknowledge him; and this the Soldier is
bound to in these his Military Exercises; and this is done by a dependence on
him for a blessing, that so he may not in vain attend this business, but may be
prepared to fight the battle of the Lord against the mighty. It is Gods
prerogative thus to prepare the Soldier. Military skill, courage, and all
other martial accomplishments, are his gift; hence David, that man of War, does
ascribe to God the Glory, Psalm. 144. 1. He teaches my hands to war, and my
fingers to fight. Without this Divine blessing, all means will fall short, and
leave the Soldier unready. They may make bright their Armor, and gather the
Shields together, yet if God raise not up the Spirits of men, all will be to no
purpose: The Soldiery will be only fit to adorn and advance their Enemies
triumphs. Thus we have considered the duties of Soldiers at home, or in a time
of peace, engaged in these preparatory Military Exercises; which duties not
barely moral prudence, or state policy, but Christianity obliges to the
discharge of. This is the work of the Lord: and there is a Curse Entailed on
those, that do this work deceitfully, Jer. 48* 10. It remains that we pass to
the second thing, viz.

2. We are to consider the duties incumbent on Military men, when called to
real Service; and these duties may be disposed under these heads.

1. Christianity obliges them to see that their cause be just. No War is just
but what is levied upon just reasons: The Sword of the Lord, as well as of
Gideon, must be the signal to battle. What those things are, which are
requisite to legitimate a War, is not my province to determine. To be sure it
is just, when the necessary defense of Religion, the prevention of the ruin of
the Civil State, do call for it. I shall not essay critically to (...), men in
private capacities are to enquire into the reason of making War: It would
require more time to a just determination hereof, than is allowed me; not it is
a case to be determined with great caution and tenderness; since all the
reasons of (...), which will render a war lawful and necessary, do not ly level
ordinarily to the capacities of private persons. However no private person can
with a good Conscience engage in a War evidently unjust, and oppressive; To
engage in it under such circumstances, is to engage in Rapine and Murder; and
such combatants, if they fall in the battle, are in danger of the tragical Exit
of those spoken of, Ezekiel. 32. 27. Who are said to descend to bell with their
weapons of war. The light of nature, as well as Christianity, does require that
there be a just cause of engaging in hostile attempts. The Romans of old seemed
to have a just sense hereof; hence they instituted a College of Priests, who
were termed Feciales, or Heralds at Arms; whose business it was to inquire into
the reasons of War, and only on sufficient reasons to proclaim it: and until
this was done, their Armies were to abstain from all acts of hostility. The
justness of the cause of War is required in the jus feciale, or law of Arms,
which is one branch of the law of Nations; and this the Soldier according to
the regulation of Christianity must have regard to.

2. It requires that they have a sufficient Call to engage herein. Without this
the justness of the cause will not avail; Some Casuists with no small vigor
dispute, whether a Military employment do properly belong to a Christians
general or particular Calling; whether it be institutum vitae, or munus, a
profession of life or an office strictly speaking; but it seems a needless
combat. All must own that it cannot be undertaken, as many other civil
professions may, jure proprio, by a man's own original authority; but jure
delegato, by authority derived from others who have sufficient authority, the
power of life and death in their hands. Now since it is so, none are to engage
in real Service but such, as have a sufficient call thereto. The Capital
offender deserves death; yet none but such, as hold the Sword of Justice, can
warrant his Execution. The reason is the same in the case before us, to kill in
War ought to be only an Execution of Justice, which men must be authorized to:
Indeed it is lawful may highly laudable and noble for men voluntarily to offer
themselves to the public Service; but yet they must carry to receive their
orders from such, as have authority to grant them: without this they will have
no call to engage; unless forced to it in their own necessary defense.

3. It requires that in their Engagements they should quit themselves like men;
and that on the principles of Christianity. It requires that they engage with
that vigor, resolution, and courage, which becomes the Cause of God they are
engaged in, and the hopes of a glorious immortality, which Christianity sets
before them. When Gods people of old were called forth to Battle; the Priests
were commanded thus to address them. Deuteronomy. 20. 3. Let not your hearts faint
fear not and do not tremble, neither be ye terrified because of them. The want
of this courageous and manly deportment, Soldiers will betray the Cause of God
and their Country, in which they are engaged; and bring a lasting reproach and
infamy on their own names: The want of this resolution will procure the
Soldier Captive Chains instead of Victorious Laurels: Instead of Riding, it
will cause him to be Led in Triumph, dragged at the Conquerors Chariot Wheels.
The Soldier therefore in Battle must signalize an undaunted Spirit, as a
defendant in bearing up against the force of the assailant; as an aggressor in
giving the Enemy sufficient proof of his skill and strength. In all the
Soldier must quit himself like a man; and this must be done on Christian
principles; having an eye to the recompense of reward; to the Crown not of
fading laurels, but of immorcessible Glory, which before he had secured,
through the merits of Christ a flawless title to: and with this prospect, which
only Christianity can give, he may mock at fear, defy danger, and not give
ground, when the quiver, the glittering spear, and the shield rattles against
him: knowing that whether he stand or fall, he shall be Crowned as Victor in
the other World.

4. It requires that they watch against those Temptations that are more
peculiar to their Post. Every Station, that Divine Providence places any of the
Children of men in, is beset with its peculiar temptations. Hells policy, the
Worlds flattery, the Hearts treachery, cause it to be thus. And the Station of
a Soldier in the Camp is no ways exempted: while he breathes continually on
the borders of the Territories of the King of Terrors; he walks amidst more
dangerous snares, laid by the Destroyer, to take away the life of his Soul. He
is beleagured by more Temptations, sworn Enemies to his Spiritual tranquillity;
than with Enemies to his outward peace: There are sins, which are peculiarly
ready to trouble the Camp; and infect the Soldiery. Of this nature are those
Evils which the Baptist in our Context warns the Soldiers against, viz. Do
violence to no man; accuse no man faisly; and be content with your Wages. Now
with respect to these Temptations, the life of a Soldier ought to be a life of
circumspection. He should be always upon his guard, left he be surprised taken,
bound, led in triumph, and made the sport and pastime of these Philistine
Lusts, that war against the Soul. These not guarded against, will preserve some
accursed thing, which will trouble the Camp of Israel.

5. Lastly, It requires that they do all, that in them lies to Engage Gods
presence in their Camp. The best disciplined Army under the conduct of David's
Worthies, without this presence of God, will never render a people successful
in War: The Race is not to the swift; nor the Battle to the strong. Eccles. 9.
11. God is the Lord of Hosts; the God of Battle. His presence will put life and
vigor into the most feeble host, and cause them to do valiantly: With this
presence the Thistle may challenge, and look in the face the Cedar of Lebanon.
When God marches in the Camp, an handful of men shall vanquish puissant
Armies; one shall chase a thousand, and ten put ten thousand to flight.
Whatever side God takes shall prove victorious. This presence of God therefore
the Soldier is obliged to Engage with him; as that which is necessary to his
success. From a full persuasion of this it was, that whenever the people of
Israel went out to Battle, the Ark, that Symbol of Gods Presence, and the
promised Messiah, was carried into the Camp: On the presence of which they more
depended than on their own strength, skill or number. And when ever an Army can
Engage their Enemy with that triumphant Song in their mouths, Psalm. 46 7. The
Lord of Hosts is with us; and the God of Jacob our refuge. They need not fear
the number, power, or policy of their adversaries. Such are immured in God, as
in an impregnable fortress; a fortress that can never be taken by Storm or
Battery; or betrayed by treachery or stratagem. This Divine (...), or Presence,
it becomes the Soldier to secure; that so it may appear that the Battle is the
Lords.

USE I.
This teaches us. That the good Christian is like to make the best Soldier.
Indeed others may be masters of as great or greater natural strength, courage,
and policy; but yet the good Christian, when all other things are equal, is
like to prove the best Martialist. For he is the best Soldier that best
performs the duties that Christianity prescribes the Soldier; and consequently
he is most like to prove the best Soldier, who is most like to observe these
duties; and the Religious man will in all probability make most Conscience to
observe these directions: Hence the Devout Soldier is like to make the
greatest proficiency in Military Accomplishments, and so to be best prepared
for Service: He is likely to atchieve the greatest Exploits when called to look
danger in the face. Antoninus the Emperor found this verified in that
Thundering Legion of Christians under his conduct; who essayed and performed
Miracles in Chivalry And happy is that Prince; happy is that State who have
their (...) filled with these; they shall not be ashamed to speak with the
Enemy in the Gate.

USE II.
This teaches us who are fittest to be put upon real Service: viz. Such as are
best prepared to perform the duties incumbent on the true Soldier: Such as
have the greatest ability, obligation and fidelity to discharge the duties of
their post. The halt, the lame, and the blind are as unfit to serve God in the
Field, as at the Altar. Men, of no love to the public, of no interest in the
State, of no honor nor conscience, of little Martial Skill, and of less
Courage, are not fit to make up a detachment to Engage an Enemy, and fight the
Lords Battles: When such are culled out, and dispatched into the field, or
posted in Garrisons, Forts, as good enough to serve in such important posts;
the Common Weal is in effect betrayed, the most probable method pursued to
secure the Enemies Triumph, and a peoples own defeat, and ruin. Those that
devote such as these unqualified ones to public Service, do but too much
imitate the profane Priests of old, in their defective oblations; as if they
were destined to the same design, viz. to Sacrifice. Yet this is an error that
most places are apt to fall into.

And unless critical Observers are deceived, this Land cannot plead Not guilty,
to such a charge. Are such our Chosen men, who are thus employed? Are they the
most fit and proper for their Stations? Surely they are not the Chosen men of
our Israel: if they be, it is an awful Judgment, which calls for the deepest
lamentation. Tell it not in Gath, nor publish it in the Streets of Askelon;
left the daughters of the Philistine rejoice; and the daughters of the
Uncircumcised triumph.

USE. III. Let it be an Address, with all due Respect, to men of Military Order.
Gentlemen, You have pressed me to this Service; and I trust I shall not defeat
your expectations, sure I am I shall not break my great Commanders Orders, by
vigorously addressing you for your punctual regards to the duties of your
Station. Quitting therefore the consideration of the duties of such asare in
real Service, which through the indulgence of Heaven, is not our case this day:
Be persuaded to comply with those duties, which you stand obliged to in these
Military Exercises, which are Preparatory to Service. Let then real Service for
the Cause of God, your King and Country, be your Aim: Watch against all that
which is impedimental hereto: be diligent in your preparation: let all your
present Exercises be adapted and levelled at this design: get those Divine
v^rtues, which will qualify you herefor; and seek Gods Blessing and Acceptance
herein. Enter the present Field of Exercise with this noble resolve, that when
the Public Safety shall call you into the field of Blood, you will enter with
inclination; Prove now your Armor, that you may not be forced to quit it in
the day of Battle: This well becomes your Character.

The disciplined Soldier, that makes a figure at home, must not shrink back
when Providence calls him to March abroad to confront a Public Enemy: It is
not sufficient for a Trained Soldier to Excel in these Military Exercises at
home; but when called must enter the list: he must not take up with Jehoash's
taunting advice to Amaziah, 2 King. 14. 10. Glory in this, and tarry at home.

That Soldier, that has not a due regard to Service, is a disgrace to
Chivalry: all the Encomiums that are given to the true Martial Spirit, are to
him biting Sarcasms; every Panegyric an invective, a cutting Philippic.

To Enforce this Address, let two considerations be weighed.

1. In probability you will be called to real Service. The Clouds seem to be
gathering from all quarters, on every side appear fearful Prognostics of an
approaching Storm of War and Blood, and, if all Signs imaginable fail not, it
will not be long before we shall see Hannibal at our gates. Remember that
Balack King of Moah has devised, and Bala^^, the son of Peor has Counseled.
The Enemies of our Religion, our King, Nation, and I and are in their triumph,
and think the day is their own: In this dark day the Lord of Hosts seems aloud
to utter that voice in our Ears. Joel 3. 9, 10. Prepare war, wake up the mighty
men, let all the Men of War draw near, let them come up: beat your Plow shears
into Swords, and your Pruning books into Spears. Never more reason to raise
those melancholy notes with the Prophet. Jer. 4. 19. My bowels, my bowels, I
am pained at my very heart; my heart makes a noise within me; I cannot hold my
peace; because thou have heard, O my Soul the sound of the Trumpet, and the
Alarm to War. God seems in his Providence to be giving about the Cup of his
Indignation, red with blood, and we in these Ends of the Earth, cannot expect
but to drink deep of it. To be sure our gross abuse of the blessings of peace;
our high handed iniquities, by which we have managed a fatal War against
Heaven; give us no small occasion to expect it. And when this day comes, it
will be seen who has proved his Armor.

II. God and man justly expect that you should be prepared. Man justly expects
it; because this is the very design of your Military Appearances: and if we
Enquire into the reason of first Erecting an Artillery; we shall find it to be
this: viz. That the State might be furnished with a sufficient number of persons
Expert in War, Each of them like the Son of a King, who might be fit to lead
and command, when War invades the Land.

God expects this of you: for it is the duty that does naturally result from
year Station, and without a design and endeavor to answer Gods expectation
herein, a day devoted to these Exercises will be no better than a day devoted
to play and pastime; and to speak freely, there will be found no great decorum
in a Prayer or a Sermon as a Prologue to such Ludicious Exercises. Labor
therefore to get your selves in all respects prepared for real Service, that
you may not frustrate the just Expectations of God and man.

To wind up all:

Let me not be thought a deserter, if I add, while you are engaged in these
Military Exercises, forget not your Spiritual Warfare: Remember you have
Enemies, which must not only be contested with, but vanquished; Enemies whose
malignity is inveterate, whose policy is deep, whose diligence is
indefatigable, and stratagems almost unfathomable: Remember your safety lies in
the Strength, Wisdom and Conduct of CHRIST your Leader. See that you be
faithful in the discharge of this Warfare; and hereby you will be fitter for
the Service of a proper Soldier among men. In the Name of the Lord of Hosts
Erect your Banners, and do valiantly. And for your encouragement, know it; that
if you be faithful in this work of the Lord, ere long you shall be honored not
only with a Slight Ovation, but a proper Triumph. The City into which you shall
Enter, a City whose foundations are precious Stones, all whose Gates are entire
Pearls, whose Streets are paved with pure Gold, is already prepared. Into this
City you shall make your Entrance, Riding in a Triumphal Chariot, attended with
Glorious Hosts of bright Intelligences; here shall triumphal Arches be Erected
as Trophies, and Monuments of your Prowess and conduct; Palms shall adorn your
hands, Songs of Victory shall fill your Mouths, and Coronets of untarnisht
Glory shall incircle your Victorious brows: The whole Consistory of Heaven
shall do you honor, and your Names shall be had in Everlasting Remembrace.
Saints and Angels at your Entrance shall renew and raise their HALLELU JAHS;
with whom you will join with transports of joy, Saying,

AMEN, Blessing, Honor, Glory, Might and Dominion, to HIM that Sits on the
Throne, and unto the Lamb for Ever and Ever; In whose service you are to fight;
and in whose name you shall Overcome.

FINIS.
Errata.
PAge 2. line 16. for, best r. least. Page 5. l. 5. for, how r. now. P. 14. l.
II. for, ranckt r. rankt. P. 22 l. II. for, Orders r. Order.

Advertisement.
THERE is lately Published, A new Book, Entitled, The Christians Exercise by
Satan's Temptations: Or, an Essay to discover the methods which this Adversary
uses to Tempt the Children of GOD; and to direct them how to escape the
mischief thereof. Being the substance of several Sermons Preached on that
Subject. To which is Added, Brotherly Love described and directed. As it was
Casuistically handled in two Sermons, Preached on the Lecture in Boston, in the
year, 1701. By the Reverend Mr. Samuel Willard, Teacher of a Church in Boston.

Sold by Benjamin Eliot, at his Shop under the West End of the Town House in
Boston.


