THE DOCTRINE OF THE HOLY Apostles and Prophets the Foundation OF THE Church of
Christ, As it was Delivered in a SERMON

At Her Majesty's Chapel, at Boston in New England, the 14 th. of June 1702.

By George Keith, M. A.

BOSTON.

Printed for Samuel Phillips at the Brick Shop. 1702.

The Doctrine OF THE Holy Apostles and Prophets the Foundation of the Church of
Christ.
Ephesians II. 20, 21, 22. And are built upon the Foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, etc.


ST. Paul sets forth in some of the foregoing Verses of this Chapter, the
lamentable estate that those Ephesians were in, before they received the
Christian faith, viz. That they were without Christ and aliens from the common
wealth of Israel, strangers to the Covenant of promise, having no hope and
without God in the World, Verse. 12, 13, 14. And that they were dead in their
Sins and Trespassies, v. 1. But in the Text I have read, and in some other
Verses preceding, he shows the happy condition they now were in, since they had
heard and believed the Gospel: They were now no more strangers and foreigners,
but fellow Citizens with the Saints and of the household of God: being built on
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the
chief corner stone. The words may be said to be a true description of the
Church of God in general, and of every part of it in special. For what St. Paul
here says of those Ephesians, is true of all other true Churches, and of all
the true members of the same.

The whole Catholic Church and every member thereof is built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, and c.

I find in Scripture four several significations at least of the word
Foundation, taken in a Religious sense.

I. Christ himself is called the foundation, Isa. 28.16, 1 Cor. 3 11. Compared
with 1 Pet 3 6, and the words of the Text, That Jesus Christ himself is the
chief corner stone, are quoted by St. Paul out of Psalm. 118. 22. Which our
Savior applies to himself, Matthew. 21. 42. and so does St. Peter, Act. 4. 11.

To the head of the corner is the word in the Text equivalent, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner stone.

II. The Doctrine of Christ as it is delivered to us in the writings of the
holy Prophets and Apostles, concerning the way of life and Salvation by him, is
called the foundation, as here in the Text. As the Doctrine delivered by Moses
and the Prophets, is called by Christ Moses and the Prophets, Luk 16. 29. So
the Doctrine delivered by the Prophets and Apostles, by the like Metonymy, is
here called the Prophets and Apostles.

III. The two Evangelical virtues Faith and Repentance, are called the
foundation, Heb. 6. 1. As being radical and fundamental virtues, out of which
all other Christian virtues do spring and rise, and upon which they are built
as on a foundation; as Justice, Temperance, Patience, Meekness, Humility, Joy,
and c.

As in the building of a material House, not only the ground on which the House
is built, is called the foundation, but the ground work, or what is first laid
on the ground, be it stone, brick or wood, is also called the foundation.

IV. Good works are called a foundation, and a good foundation, 1 Timothy 6. and
19. and especially works of Charity and Mercy: Charge them that are rich in
this world, that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in
the living God who gives us richly all things to enjoy, Verse 17. That they do
good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate, Verse 18. Laying up in store for themselves a good foundation
against the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life.

Good works are called a good foundation, in a Secondary and subordinate
respect to Christ and his Doctrine, and also to faith and repentance, which
necessarily are before all other good works, in priority of Nature, as the
laying the foundation go's before the Superstructure. And as faith and
repentance are a foundation to good works, such as charity, humility,
temperance, patience, and c. So the good works which we perform in this life,
are a foundation of that Superstructure of Glory, that we shall enjoy in the
world and life to come.

As in the building of a Material House, not only the ground work that is laid
on the solid earth or ground, is called a foundation, but when a house is built
to a middle height, as one or two Stories high, what other Stories are built on
it, the first Superstructure is a foundation to the latter, whereas all is
still built on the principal foundation. The highest pitch of virtues and good
works, that the best Christians do or can attain unto, in this Militant state
upon earth is as a low building, to that high and most excellent superstructure
of glory that in the triumphant state in the world and life to come, shall be
built upon it.

And as a good stock of Earthly Riches is usually called a good fund or
foundation for that man who has it to grow much more rich; so the good works
which we acquire here in this militant state, whereby we become rich in Grace,
will be a good fund for to increase the riches of heavenly glory that we shall
obtain hereafter.

As a weak or unsound Foundation cannot bear a weighty Superstructure, so nor
can an unsound faith and a bare profession of Christianity bear that weight of
Glory that in the future state shall be revealed to and in Gods Children.

By our Saviors Doctrine, Mat. 7. 24. He who hears his words and does them,
is like a Wise man that built his house on a Rock; and the good works that we
perform on earth, are treasures that we lay up in heaven, where neither moth
nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal, Mat 6.
19, 20.

Two of these significations of the word foundation are more directly contained
in the Text. The third and fourth are employed in the word built. Ye are built
on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, viz. on their Doctrine, called
metaphorically a Foundation, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone.
These words in the Greek being put in the Genitive, absolute, and not agreeing
in Syntax with the word rendered Foundation that is in the dative, is a clear
proof that by the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets St. Paul did not mean
Christ himself, but the Doctrine of Christ delivered by the Apostles and
Prophets. The Doctrine of Christ which is faithfully delivered by his Holy
Apostles and Prophets is so the foundation of our faith, that it is founded on
Christ himself, who is the great and principal foundation of the Doctrine of
the Apostles and Prophets, and of them also, and of the whole Church, and every
true member thereof. He is the foundation of foundations, fundamentam
fundamenti, as some have translated Isaiah 28. 16.

Thus far I have considered the first verse of the Text. In the two following
verses we are to take notice.

I. The excellent frame or composure of the Church of Christ expressed in the
Text by the words, fitly framed, That is duly and aptly in excellent order
joynted, joint with joint as the Greek bears it.

II. That this Building of the Church, and of her members and their Evangelical
Graces and Virtues is not only upon Christ (...) upon a most sure foundation,
but is in him as intimating a greater nearness and union betwixt Christ and
Believers, than is betwixt a Material building which stands on its foundation
but is not in it; whereas true believers as they are built on Christ their
foundation, so they are in him according to the words of the Text; in whom all
the building fitly framed together, etc. And he is in them according to Isaiah
28. 16.

III. The nature of this Building it is of a living, growing nature, it grows
unto an holy Temple in the Lord, and that both extensively, with the continual
addition of new members, according to Acts 2 47. and 5. 14. And intensively, by
the continual growth of their evangelical virtues and graces, as faith, hope,
charity, knowledge, wisdom, temperance, justice, patience, etc.

IV. The end of the Building, to be an habitation of God, that God may dwell in
it, not only by his gracious presence and operations here, but by the
Revelation of his exceeding great glory in them in the future state, according
to Romans 8. 18. 2 Cor. 4. 17.

V. And lastly, The words through the Spirit, do import the great Author and
Master Builder, to wit, the Holy Spirit, jointly considered with the Father and
the Son.

Having thus given a view of the several weighty things contained in the Text,
I shall now come to some necessary Doctrinal Observations.

I. That the Doctrine of Christ, or Word of God contained in Holy Scriptures of
the Old and New Testament, is essentially necessary to the being of the Church
of Christ, and every member thereof, as the foundation is essentially necessary
to the being of an House, so as that a House cannot be, or subsist without a
foundation, no more can the Church of Christ, or the particular members
thereof, be or subsist without the Doctrine of Christ, and Word of God
contained in the Holy Scriptures.

I shall not insist to branch forth the analogy betwixt the Doctrine and Word
of God, and the foundation of a Building in other particular respects, but
shall keep only at present to this one, wherein the analogy is very clear and
apparent: That as necessary as the foundation is to a house, so necessary is
the Word and Doctrine of God and Christ delivered by his holy Prophets and
Apostles to the Church, and every member thereof, not only for their first
founding, but for their continual preservation and increase.

The like necessary use of the Word, viz. of the Doctrine of Salvation by
Christ Jesus, is expressed in Scripture by sundry other Metaphors, as that of
Seed, 1 Pet. 1. 23, 24, 25. compared with Mat. 13. 18. Luke 8. 11. Jam. 1. 18.
Also it is compared to Milk, wherewith Babes are nourished, as well as to Strong
Meat, wherewith men are nourished, 1 Pet. 2 2. Heb. 5 13, 14. 1 Timothy 4. and 6.
And the work of the Ministry is not only for the begetting of Saints, but for
the perfecting them, according to Ephesians 4. 12. which Ministry is called the
Ministry of the Word, Act. 6 4.

The word of God is compared also in Scripture to a Sword, and is called the
sword of the Spirit, Ephesians. 6. 17. Heb. 4. 12. That as managed by the Spirit as
the Sword is by the hand of a strong and skillful man, is effectual to cut down
all false doctrines and errors and heresies whatsoever, that oppugn the
Christian faith. The which if duly attended will discover to us not only the
errors of other men, but our own errors, and these not only of our words, but
of our thoughts, Heb. 4. 12.

The word and doctrine contained in the holy Prophets and Apostles, is also
compared to a light and lamp, Psalm. 119. 105. Prove. 6. 23. 2 Pet. 1. 19. And
besides the metaphorical names given to the word of God. i. e. the doctrine and
holy revealed will of God, concerning our duty and the way to eternal life and
happiness: It is so abundantly set forth in the holy Scriptures, both of the
old and new Testament, with such Characters, uses and services, as most
evidently prove it to be so necessary to the Church of Christ, and so to every
member thereof, [ Psalm. 1. 1, 2, 3. etc.] that neither the Church nor any
member thereof can subsist without it, Psalm. 19 7, 8 and 9. verses. As there
has been a Church of God in all ages from Adam to this day, and ever will be a
Church of God to the end of the world. So it never has been nor ever will be
without the word, I mean, the doctrinal external and declarative word.

The Church of God in the time of the Prophets, was built on the foundation of
the prophets, i. e. upon those Doctrines and Doctrinal truths delivered by
them. The Church of God under the new Testament, is built not only on the
foundation of the Prophets, but of the Apostles, Rev. 21. ^4. Yet as the Church
both under the Old and New Testament, is but one in substance; so the
foundation is but one the foundation of the Apostles is not another foundation
then that of the Prophets, only it is the same foundation more clearly and
fully discovered: and it is called by St. Paul the foundation of the Apostles
and Prophets, not only to show the harmony of Doctrine betwixt the Apostles and
Prophets, but that as to all the fundamentals of Christianity, with respect to
articles of faith, and precepts of holy life: The Doctrine delivered by the
Prophets, is the same with that delivered by the Apostles, though by them more
clearly and fully.

The Faith of Gods Church and People in all Age, is the same in substance, and
is the one faith once delivered to the Saints. Jude 3. compared with Ephesians. 4 and
5 To wit first of all to the Patriarchs more hiddenly, and then to the
succeeding Prophets more clearly, and by them to the people. And lastly most
clearly by our Savior himself, and his holy Evangelists and Apostles. And
their faith had the same foundation, to wit the doctrinal and declaratory Word,
as well before it was committed to writing as since; the committing it to
writing, changes not the nature of it, for it was the same before it was
committed to writing as since, when preserved in the hearts and mouths of the
faithful, in the Patriarchal Dispensation, to whom God gave a long age, that
with the greater security and safety it might be conveyed and transmitted from
one generation to another, until the times of Moses, and the Prophets.

God Almighty never taught his Church only and alone by an internal word, light
or revelation, but only some particular persons he was pleased so to teach;
that by them he might build, feed and nourish his Church. He gave some to be
Apostles, and some to be Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers for the perfecting of the Saints, etc Ephesians 4 11, 13, 14. But never in
any Age did he promise, that all his people should be Prophets; but according
to his infinite wisdom and good pleasure, he thought it most fit, that there
should be an outward Ministry, and an outward Word, to continue to the end of
the World.

I. This serves fully to detect and refute a gross and dangerous error of the
Church of Rome, which makes the Tradition of the Church, the foundation of
Faith and of the Scripture, i. e. of the Word of God contained in the
Scripture, and not the Scripture the foundation of the Church, contrary to the
words of the Text.

II. And also of those ( viz Quakers) who pretend to build all their faith and
knowledge, not upon the foundation of the external Word and Doctrine delivered
to us in the holy Scriptures but on the inward word and light as they call it,
which some of their chief teachers say is sufficient to Salvation without any
thing else, which is a plain overthrowing the faith, and setting up Heathenism,
or Deism, or refined Paganism in its stead, for they confess that the light
within them as it is common to all mankind, and no other light do they own,
does not discover one article of the Christian Faith, peculiar to it as such, i
e. not one entire article of the Apostles Creed, containing the fundamentals of
the Christian Faith, according to which their confession, they have no other
Religion, but that justly called natural Religion, common to them with the more
refined Heathens and Pagans who acknowledged one God, but were wholly ignorant
of Christ Crucified.

And though God Almighty taught his Prophets by an internal word and light, yet
it was the same Doctrinal word that he now teaches us by the written word. The
things taught them was the same in substance with what he now teaches us by
the written word, the difference not being in substance, but in the method and
manner of Gods teaching; which was to them considered as such without the
Ministry of men, and is delivered to us by the Ministry of men.

By which internal word and light God also taught the holy Apostles, considered
as such. And St. Paul plainly declares, Acts 26. 22. That he witnessed both to
small and great, saying none other things than the Prophets and Moses did say
should come. That Christ should suffer, and that he should be the first that
should rise from the dead, and should show light to the people and to the
Gentiles. And St. Peter says the like, Acts 10. 43. To him give all the
Prophets witness, that through his name whosoever believes in him, should receive
Remission of sins.

Quest. But how is the Doctrine of Salvation as delivered by the Prophets and
Apostles, the foundation on which the Church is built, and every member thereof?

Answ. No other way but as that Doctrine sets forth Christ Jesus to us, the
great and principal foundation of our Faith, and of our whole Christianity.
Therefore St. Paul did well add the following words in the Text, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner stone.

DOCT. II. Jesus Christ himself is the chief and principal foundation of our
faith, viz. The Second Person of the ever blessed Trinity, with respect to his
twofold Nature, viz, that of his God head and Manhood, personally united, and
his three Offices of Prophet, Priest and King; as he is given of the Father to
us, and as he gives the holy Spirit to be our Sanctifyer, together with the
Father and the Son; so that to say Christ is our Foundation, is not to exclude
the Father, and the Holy Ghost, but inclusively, the Son together with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, each of them jointly, and also distinctly considered
in the work of our Salvation, is our foundation. For the Father did not become
flesh, but gave us his Son the eternal and essential word, who became flesh,
and was conceived by the Holy Ghost, and was born of the blessed Virgin, died
for our sins, was buried, rose and ascended. Nor was the Holy Ghost incarnate,
conceived and born, but the Son, yet all three were jointly concerned in the
work of our Salvation. The Father gave and sent his dear Son to take flesh, and
dye for our sins, and both the Father and the Son gave and sent the Holy Spirit
to be our Sanctifyer, and to lead and guide us into all truth by means of the
written word; so that it is neither the word without the Spirit, nor the Spirit
without the Word that does set forth Jesus Christ to be the great foundation of
our faith, but both jointly the Word and the Spirit go along together,
according to Isaiah 59. 21. Joh. 17. 3. Joh. 2 9. And hence it is, that
sometimes we find in Scripture, our faith and knowledge of God and Christ,
ascribed to God, to Christ and to the Spirit, and all the good that is wrought
in us; and sometimes to the Word as it is Preached to us, or as it may be read
by us; both which are very consistent: To the former as chief and principal
Agent or Agents, Cause or Causes. To the latter as the means, or secondary
subordinate and instrumental cause.

Now that Jesus Christ is the foundation of our Faith, not as God or the word
only, as some false teachers and wild Enthusiasts affirm, nor as man only, as
other false teachers affirm, but as both God and Man, and yet One Lord Jesus
Christ, One Savivour, Redeemer, Reconciler, Mediator, King, Priest and Prophet,
is evident from many places of Scripture. Particularly such as, Isa 42. 16. Isa
49. 5, 6 Psalm 118 22 Matt 21. 42 Acts 4 10, 11, 12. Act 11. 41, 42, 43. Matt 16
13, 16, 18. Rom 10. 9, 10. Romans 15 12. compared with Isa. 11. 12.

III. The third and last Doctrine I shall observe from the Text, is, The Unity
of the Church of Christ.

All true particular Churches are but so many parts of the one true holy
Catholic Church, as the several members and joints of the natural body of a
man, are but one body, animated with one Soul or Spirit, so all particular
Churches of Christ are but one mystical body of Christ and one holy temple;
according to the words of the Text fitly framed, joint with joint, like the
several walls of a house united by the corner stones. Thus Jesus Christ our
Corner Stone, considered as both God and Man, unites believing Jews and
Gentiles, making them up One Church, One House, One City, One Kingdom, of whom
he is the One Head, and giving them One Rule to walk by, One Law, One Faith, One
Hope, One Spirit, and One way of worship. Hence St. Paul does so much enjoin
all the faithful to be One, Ephesians. 4. 3, 4, 5, 6. and of one mind, agreeing
together with one heart and mouth to seek the Lord, to worship and call on him,
and give him thanks; and where they agree together to ask any thing in his
name, according to Gods will, he has promised to answer them: so that what was
said of Jerusalem, Psalm. 122. 3. may be said of the Church whereof Jerusalem
was a Type, Jerusalem is built as a City that is at Unity in it self. The which
unity is wrought by the holy Spirit, by means of the true faith and knowledge
of the Son of God, from whence springs the true Charity, which knits their
hearts together and makes them, as it were one Soul as well as one body, Ephesians. 4
13. Phil. 2. 1, and 2. verses. The which unity as it is exceeding necessary,
for the being and well being of the Church, so division and Schism is exceeding
hurtful and destructive to them that divide from it: there is no promise of a
blessing to them that separate and divide from the Church of God; let them
pretend never so highly to the spirit and spiritual enjoyments, Jude 18, 19.

But where Brethren dwell together in unity, there the ointment runs down from
our head and high Priest Christ Jesus, to the lower skirts of the Garment, i.e.
to the lowest Members of his Church, and as the dew that came down upon Mount
Hermon and Sion, Psalm. 133. 4. For there the Lord Commands the blessing, or,
for there the Lord promised his blessing [as in the old translation,] and life
for evermore. That to divide and separate from the true Church of Christ, is a
great sin and evil, is not only evident from the holy Scriptures, but from
woeful experience, ever since the Reformation from Popish Idolatry and
Superstition began. The great divisions that have happened amongst Protestants,
though about the lesser matters, when agreeing in the main, have mightily both
strengthened the Popish faction, and weakened the Protestant Churches, not only
withdrawing from one another in external acts of worship unwarrantably, but
many born and bred in the Church of England, denying her to be a true Church of
Christ; which God has so eminently owned to be his, and which has had so many
noble Martyrs and Confessors; and had and still has so many worthy persons,
both Ministers and others, whose praise is in all the reformed Churches abroad,
both for their great piety and excellent gifts of divine Knowledge; as the many
pious Works, and Books, made public do prove: The which Church began the
Reformation from Popery in the English Nation, and in that respect is the
Mother Protestant Church of them all. And whoever denis or disowns her as too
many do of various sorts, do show themselves to be undutiful Children, unless
they can prove her to be degenerate, which I am well persuaded they can never
do.

And for my part, I freely acknowledge my great error and sin, in my
uncharitable censures of her, and separation from her some time ago, and I pray
God to open the eyes of others, as he has in his great mercy opened mine, to
see their error and sin of uncharitableness and separation, that they may
confess it, and return into the bosom of their Mother, which is open to receive
them, as it has been open to receive me and many others, upon our repentance
and amendment.

My whole design and aim in all this, is no other but to heal up the breach if
possible, and be a Peacemaker to all such, as with a peaceable and calm spirit
are willing to hear, and would to God we had many Peacemakers, for blessed are
the Peace makers, for they shall be called the children of God, Mat. 5. 9. And
in order to this, I beg your patience a little further, to suffer me to deliver
to you very briefly and plainly a few general good Rules in Divinity, that will
bear the test of Scripture and good reason, the which if duly observed, will
bring all who agree in fundamentals with the Church of England to communion
with her, not only in heart and affection, but to join with her in external
acts of Worship.

The First Rule.

What ever is Enjoined by our Superiors, if it contradict not Gods Commands in
holy Scripture, ought for conscience sake to be obeyed, according to, 1 Pet. 2.
13, 14. Romans 13. 5. Heb. 13 7, 17. And if what they enjoin, be not made a
command of God, or an article of faith, or a means of grace.

The Second Rule.

Whatever Church holds the fundamentals of Christian Religion, and has the Word
of God duly Preached, and the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper duly
administered; such a Church is a true Church of Christ, and to separate from
such a Church in external Communion, and in external acts of Worship, is a sin,
the which sin is the sin of Schism, that is very heinous, Romans 16 17. 1 Cor.
12. 25. 1 Cor. 1. 10, 13. and nothing can excuse from the guilt of that sin,
unless when any thing is enjoined to persons that is really sinful, and
contrary to Gods Commands given us in the Holy Scriptures, not what men by
prejudice of Education, or by wrong information say is sin, but what really is
so, and can be clearly proved to be so out of the holy Scriptures: And if they
cannot join in one or some external acts of Worship, because sinful, yet in
other acts they ought to join that are not sinful.

The Third Rule.

What things we see amiss in particular persons, are not to be charged upon the
whole Church, unless the Church do justify those persons in those things, and
what we cannot amend, we ought to bear; for there is no Christian Society on
earth, but has some particular persons that do amiss, and all Diffenters when
particular failings of particular persons are objected to them, give the like
excuse.

The Fourth Rule.

To join in external acts of public Worship where the matter is sound, though
there be a great mixture of unsound members, with others sound, is no sin, but
our duty, for which we are warranted both by the practice of the Prophets, and
other holy persons in the ancient Jewish Church, who never did separate from
the public worship of God when the matter of it was found, notwithstanding
that things were very much amiss among them in practice, and also by the
example of Zecharias and Elizabeth, and all other holy persons that were then
in the Jewish Church; and by the example of our Savior himself, and his
Apostles, who frequented the Temple Worship, and also the Worship performed in
the Synagogues before our Saviors Passion, that put an end to Circumcision and
Sacrifices, and other Types of the Old Testament.

The Fifth Rule.

What things soever were commanded of God, or allowed and practiced lawfully
under the Old Testament that were neither any part of the Ceremonial Law, nor
of the Jewish Polity peculiar to that Nation, are still binding to us under
the New Testament, or allowed and practiced lawfully; and a proof out of the
Old Testament in all such cases, is as good as a proof out of the New.

The Sixth Rule.

Set Forms of Prayer and Thanksgiving (where the people pray vocally with the
Minister) are a duty as well under the New Testament as the Old, and that it
was practiced under the Old, is clear from Isa. 29. 13. Joel 2. 17. Hos. 14. 2,
3 Mat. 15. 8. etc. And under the New Testament our Savior gave a Form of
Prayer to his Disciples, which he commanded his Disciples to say; and John the
Baptist taught his Disciples a Form of Prayer, Luke 11. 2. and many of the
Dissenters use the form of benediction after Sermon, The Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. And they use the forms of words that Christ taught both in
Baptism and the Lords Supper. Under the Old Testament they were to pray with
the Spirit, and with sincerity of heart and affection, as well as under the
New; and therefore if praying in a form was not then inconsistent with praying
by the Spirit, no more is it now. But whereas some object, that our Savior
taught his Disciples that Form of Prayer, and commanded them to use it only for
that time of their weakness, before the holy Spirit was given them in that
plenty as it was given after his Ascension: This is but a faint evasion,
without any ground; the Contents of that prayer, as they suit with the weakest
true Christian, so they no less suit with the strongest, and did suit with the
Apostles highest state and growth in Christianity, after they received that
plentiful effusion of the Holy Ghost, the which form of prayer was used in the
Christian Church in St. Cyprians time, who flourished about the year of Christ
250. and upon which he writ a Commentary, and showed how it was then in use
with other forms of prayer, some of which are in the Church Liturgy; and he
says thus of the prayer of the faithful in the Church, Publica nobis est et
communis Oration, i.e. Our Prayer is public and common, and this he does not
relate as any new practice begun in his time, and therefore it may be safely
concluded, that it began in the very days of the Apostles, though as it appears
from St. Chrysostom, that for some time after the Apostles, there was an
extraordinary gift of Prayer, by extraordinary Inspiration given to some
persons in their Public Assemblies, which afterward ceased, as did the other
extraordinary gifts of Tongues, Miracles, etc. By the like faint evasion some
most erroniously reject those Divine Institutions of Baptism with Water, and
the Lords Supper in the use of the Elements of Bread and Wine, alleging that
they were only commanded to be used for that time of the Disciples weakness,
and that they were continued only by permission. The Spirit of God does assist
the faithful in Prayer, with holy desires and affections, and in the exercise
of their heavenly graces, as faith, hope and charity, etc. but does not dictate
to them immediately the words of their prayers, but the words of our prayers we
are to learn out of the Holy Scriptures, and seeing many are so weak, that they
have not sufficient understanding to make a fit collection, or to put the
petitions and thanksgivings into due form, to take the help of others,
especially the Ministers and Pastors for public Prayer is most convenient and
necessary.

Why should people be so much for a continued novelty of forms of Prayer, that
a new form must be used every time, that is in a great part more a natural art,
than any spiritual gift or grace of prayer, this novelty argues as much
vanity, as who would put on a new Suit of Apparel, or new Shoes every day,
which a King would not do. That Shoes are Metaphorically applied in a spiritual
sense, in other cases, see Ephesians. 6. 15. Cant. 7. 1. therefore no offensive
similitude as used by me in this case.
I have read concerning that great Instrument of God in the Reformation from
Popery, M. Luther, that daily in his private devotions he never omitted to use
those three Forms, to wit, that of the Apostles Creed, and that of the
Decalogue, and that of the Lords Prayer, the which three indeed contain as it
were a sum of our whole duty, and afford excellent matter to our daily
devotion, according to which it is made a special part of the Liturgy of the
Church. A River runs best that keeps the ordinary Channel, and but at
extraordinary times it overfloweth, and takes another Channel; a person that
has at extraordinary times spiritual overflowings, does best to keep them
private, known to God and himself, as St. Paul said, 2 Cor. 5. 13. Whether we
be beside our selves it is to God, or whether we be sober it is for your cause;
or if he think fit to reveal them, and impart them to others, that is more
safely done in private, than in public acts of Worship. The public Minister
of the Congregation, whatever enlargements he may be supposed to have in a
spiritual gift of prayer, yet it is not safe, nor proper for him to screw up
the peoples devotion to the height of his private strains, but rather to
condescend to accommodate himself in his devotion, to the general state of the
faithful in the Assembly where he Officiates, which is best done by his using
the public prayers of the Church, where the people do pray with him as with
one mind, so with one mouth according to St. Paul's direction, Romans 15. 6. That
ye may with one mind, and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ. As this one mind does not signify the mind only of the Minister,
but the agreement of the minds and hearts of the whole Congregation, jointly
praying together with the Minister; so by the like parity of reason, this one
mouth does not signify the alone mouth of the Minister, but the joint vocal
prayers, confessions and thanksgivings of the peoples mouths together, with the
mouth of the Minister, and thus the People as well as the Minister offer to God
the Calves of their lips; the which it accompanied with the inward contrition
and sincerity of heart, is accepted of God, but not without it. For seeing God
Almighty is the Creator, Preserver and Nourisher of our Bodies, as well as of
our Souls, and both our Souls and Bodies are Redeemed by our blessed Savior,
and both are sanctified, and will be eternally glorified: Therefore a bodily
worship belongs to God and Christ from all of us, as well as that of our Souls,
not only by bowing the knee, and other reverend and humble posture of our
Bodies, but by using our mouths, tongues and lips in this Service; and if any
say, this is to be done in private, or in the Closet, I answer, that it is as
much a duty in public, as in private, or rather the argument holds stronger
for the public, because in private our prayers are to be secret, so as to be
heard only of God, which he hears without any noise of words; but in public
our confessions, prayers and thanksgivings should be heard of others, that they
may the better join with us, and be the more excited in their devotions by us.
But some are so much against this practice of joint vocal prayer of Ministers
and people, that they will scarce allow the people to say so much as Amen to
the Ministers prayer, plain contrary to, 1 Cor. 14. 16. What prayers are
fittest for the public, and for general use to the whole Church, must needs be
owned, are to be the work and office of the most public Officers in the
Church, to form and compose them, who are called Builders in Scripture. Men may
have good materials of Stone or Brick, yet many who have these materials, have
not understanding to build a regular house with them. There is a Spiritual sort
of Architecture that is necessary in the Church, as well as a natural for
building in a literal sense.

All Protestant Churches beyond the British Sea, as in Holland, France,
Germany, etc. both allow and practice set Forms of Prayer and thanksgiving, but
the Church of England has this advantage over them all, that the people pray
vocally with the Minister, and give thanks vocally with him, (which cannot be
well or safely done, without Set Forms) wherein she comes nearest not only to
the Jewish Church, but to the Primitive Christian Church in the purest times,
for which we have not only the testimonies of ancient Christian Writers, but of
Pliny, an heathen adversary, in one of his Epistles to Trajan the Emperor,
about the end of the first Century, who affirms, that the Christians used to
meet early, and to say an Oration, [ dicere Carmen ] to Christ as God, ad
invicem, or alternately, i e. one after another, in responses, Confession with
the mouth from every one in order to Salvation, as well as faith in the heart,
is required in the New Testament, and not only confession of our faith, but
confession of our sins is required in order to forgiveness of sins in the holy
Scriptures, as well as reformation of life.

And why Singing with the Book (a thing practiced by many Dissenters) is
consistent with singing with the Spirit, and yet that praying with the Book is
not consistent with praying with the Spirit, is unaccountable.

The whole Church of God is called in Scripture a Royal Priesthood or Kingdom
of Priests, and a holy Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 5. So that all the faithful have
so far a part in the Priestly Office, as to offer up their souls and bodies a
living sacrifice to God, so to offer their prayers, each one with their own
mouth, as well as by the mouth of the Minister, which cannot be done without
some set Forms etc.

Now that we all may be built on this Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets,
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, etc. God Almighty Grant for
his dear Sons sake, to whom, to wit, to God the Father, God the Son, and God
the Holy Ghost, who are one only God, be all Honor, Glory and Praise for ever
and ever.

FINIS.

