The work of a Christian. An Important CASE of Practical RELIGION OR,
DIRECTIONS. How to make Religion ones Business.

Found in the Handwriting of the truly Religious, MR. THOMAS CROSBY, Of
Harwich: (Who Dyed Suddenly at Boston, June 27. 1702.)

Accompanied with another Discourse, about, Preparation for Sudden Death; which
does also bear this Company in the present Publication.

Printed at Boston, in the Year 1702.

An Important CASE of Practical Religion.
Phil. III. 13.14. This one thing I do, I press toward the Mark;


QUESTION. How may we do to make Religion our business?
1 Rule. YOU must thoroughly acquaint your selves with the Rule and Compass that
Religion steers by. The Word is a believers Compass, a believers Rule, Gal.
6.16. As many as walk according to this Rule, etc. A believer walks by Rule,
and by this Rule, The word of God. You can never thoroughly manage the great
business of Religion, except you do thoroughly know, and often eye your Rule,
and put the Rule to your work. The Commandment is exceeding broad, and
prescribes you Rules for your whole man, and for the right behaving of your
selves in every part of your Conversation; Oh hide the word in your hearts; lay
up the Rules you are to work by, the Rules that you are to give by, the Rules
that you are to speak by, to hear by; be sure there be no part of your
Conversation but that you have some Rules that you set to your selves about it.
How can you carry your selves Religiously in your Relations, unless you do
Conscientioussly observe the Rules you are to carry your selves by? If Wives do
not know their Rules, and Husbands their Rules, Children their Rules, and
Servants their Rules? Oh, if ever you would make any thing of Religion, know
the Rules of your places, set it down with your selves, these are the Rules we
will walk by.

2. Rule. You must have the whole Lump of the heart leavened and seasoned with
Religion. Mat. 13.33. The Kingdom of Heaven is like unto leaven which a woman
hid, etc. The Word is this Leaven, the Heart is this Lump, in which this Leaven
is hid; now when the whole Lump is thoroughly Leavened, there will be such a
suitableness betwixt the heart and the work, that Religion will become a
pleasure. A true Christian has the Law of God in his heart; a Transcript of
the Word in his Soul; now where the Law of Religion is in the heart, there will
be a love of delight in, and prosperity to the work of Religion. Psalm. 40.8. I
delight to do thy Will, thy Law is within my heart. Where Religion has taken
deep root in the heart, the concerns of Christ will become its natural care,
Phil. 2.20. now that which is natural is delightful; and when a man loves his
work, he will be much in it. Again, that which is natural is constant, so that
when the heart is naturalized and habituated to Religion, the man will
constantly follow it. To a heart thoroughly Sanctified, Religion is the very
Element it lives in, when the heart is renewed and made spiritual, 't will
naturally mind the things of the Spirit, Romans 8.^.

3. Rule. You must have these Six Principles inwrought and deeply engraven in
your Souls.

First, That Religion is the very end of your being, that you were made and
maintained for. This is the end and use of all your powers and faculties, that
you may serve and glorify the God that made you; He made you for himself, Prove.
16.4. For His pleasure you are and were Created. Rev. 4.11. Oh man, look upon
thy self; think, whence thou art, what a little while since thou wast not, how
came thou to be? Has not the hand of God framed thee? Think with thy self,
wherefore serve all these powers and faculties? To what end were they given me?
What to Eat, and Drink, and Sleep, and Sport? If I had been a Bruit, I could
have done this; wherefore have I reason above the rest of the Creatures, but
that I should answer the Law of my Creation, and the end of my being, and know
my Makers end, and do His pleasure? Better I had never been Born, than not to
answer my end; better I had been a Bruit than a Man, unless I Glorify God with
my understanding, and employ my powers and faculties in his service. Oh let
these thoughts live daily upon your hearts. Fix it upon your Souls that you are
of no use nor worth in the world, except you serve your Makers ends.

Secondly, That look as you do manage the great business of Religion, so you
are made or marred to all Eternity. Settle it upon your hearts, that if this
business miscarry, you are undone for evermore; You may miscarry in any other
business, and yet do well enough at last, but if you don't go through with the
business of Religion, you are undone men. Believe it, Religion is no trifling
matter; if thou be careless and idle, and remiss here, thou art a Damned man.
The reason why Religion is minded with so little care, is, because men do not
consider the Consequence of Religion. Can you Die? Can you Burn? If not, take
heed of trifling in Religion, and of selling Heaven for want of a little pains
taking. Oh, wherever you be unserious, be sure you be serious and in earnest in
the business of Religion. And that you may be so, let this ever dwell upon
hearts, that halving and trifling will undo all.

Thirdly, That nothing is well done, except it be Religiously done. Do all in
the Name of the Lord Jesus. Col. 3.17. Do all to the glory of God. 1 Cor.
10.31. Remember the Rules of Religion don't only reach your Praying, Hearing,
etc. but your Eating, Drinking, Trading, etc. Count that hour lost, that is not
spent Religiously; Your lying down, and rising up, must be managed Religiously,
or else they are not well managed; and you must impose it upon your selves, to
be serving God, not only on your knees, but in your Shops, in the Field, at
your Tables, in your Journeys, that God may be Glorified by you in all things.

Fourthly, That the trade of Religion, of all others, yields the sweetest
pleasure, and surest gain. A Religious Holy life is a Spiritual trading. Mat.
25.16. Now there is no trade to this. A Christian is a Merchant that deals for
no small matters, but for goodly Pearls. Mat. 13.5. A believer trades for Grace
and Glory. Oh how Glorious is the prize, and how excellent and unvaluable is
the income of Religion! Wisdom is more precious than Rubies; all the things
thou can desire are not to be compared to her, the merchandise of it is
better then the merchandise of silver, and the gain thereof then fine gold.
Read Prove. 8.11. and Prove. 3. to 19. Every man will be dealing in that
Commodity that yields great profit. The reason why men have so little heart for
Religion is, because they have secretly an opinion that there is little to be
got by it. They say in their hearts it is vain to serve God, Mal. 3.14. and,
what profit shall we have if we pray unto Him? Job 21.15. But when a man tastes
the pleasure, and finds the gain of Religion, then he will set to it to
purpose, and like the wise merchant, employ all his stock here. Mat. 13.44. As
ever then you would wake Religion your business, get your hearts thoroughly
possessed with the advantage and profit, the pleasure and the gain, that comes
in by Religion. There are two great pillars upon which Religion stands the one
is, A belief that God is: and the other is, That he is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek him. Heb. 11.6. Then let this dwell upon your hearts, that you
cannot better your state, nor promote your happiness any way in all the world
so much as by Religion, no pleasure nor profit to that of Religion: Riches and
Honor are with her, all her ways are pleasantness; She is a tree of Life to
them that lay hold upon her, and happy is every one that retains her, Prove.
3.17.

Fifthly, That your time is short, your work great, and must be done now or
never. Remember with Christ, that now you have a day to work in, and it but a
Day, and the Night is hastening upon you when there is no work to be done; no
more Praying, no more Hearing etc. Let it ever dwell upon you, that there is no
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the Grave whither thou art
going. And this will put you upon doing the work of Religion with all your
might: Be convinced of the weight of your work, remember of what dreadful
Consequence it is, your Salvation is at stake, and therefore you must work it
out with fear and trembling.

Sixthly. That except you make it your business, all your Religion is in vain.
While you halt and halve it in Religion, you come but half way to heaven.
Settle it upon your hearts, that except you are throughout Religious, you are
Religious to no purpose. Be sure you shall never come to heaven, except you
seek it in Gods order. Mat. 6.33. Seek first, etc. It were not suitable to the
wisdom of God, so to undervalue His Christ and Glory, as to throw them away
upon those that account other matters better worth their pains and care.

4. Rule. You must have the Love of God, and Religion, lying next your hearts;
Love is a busy Grace, 1 These. 1.3. Your labor of love. Love will constrain
you, and put you upon a willing and diligent keeping Gods Commandments. Get
your hearts in love with the Laws and Ways of God; who more busy then David,
thinking and talking of God and his ways all the day, and all (...) his Love
to them. Psalm. 119.97.

5. Rule. You must beware of taking too much of the world into your hands. If
Marcha will trouble her self about many things, the One thing needful will be
neglected. Luk 10.41, 42. You must Buy, and Trade, and Marry, and Weep, and
Care for these things, as if you did it not; not laying too much stress upon
these things, not engaging too eagerly in seeking after them, or else you will
neglect the better things; and learn to Pray, and Read, and Hear, as if you did
it not. 1 Cor. 7.30. It Is true that the work of your Callings is part of your
business for heaven; but then you must be sure to keep your affairs at command,
as that you may have so much room for Prayer, Meditation and Self-reflection as
may season your worldly business with Religion, and sanctify it to you, that it
may become a help and not a snare.

6. Rule. You must always work as under your Masters Eye. When the Masters eye
is known to look on, there is as much work done in an hour, as many times is
done in two when the fence of his oversight does not quicken the workman. Psalm.
16.8. I have set the Lord always before me.

7. Rule. You must ever carry your eye upon your Mark. So did Paul; I press
toward the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ. The Mark
that a believer aims at, is, Gods Glory, and his own, that God may be Glorified
in him, and he with God. This glorious prize will animate you to your work, and
swallow up the sense of labor and difficulty, and make you for the joy set
before you, endure the Cross and despise the Shame. Heb. 12.2. Paul carried the
Crown incorruptible in his eye, and that made him with patience invincible to
run, and fight, and keep under his body. 1 Cor. 9.25, -- Keep Heaven in sight,
and your work will go on with pleasure, and all your difficulties will seem
light and easy.

8. Rule. You must at the entrance of every action remember the Rules that you
are to act by. Else in vain, do you receive and lay up Rules, if when occasion
is, you do not apply them to the particular case. As ever you desire to make
any thing of your Religion, remember when you come to your Tables, the Rules
you are to eat by, when you come to your Callings, make Visits, Read, or hear
the Word, be sure you think on the Rules that you are to work by, discourse by,
read by, hear by. etc.

9. Rule. Be sure every morning to set out to a right point of the Compass.
Never rise from your Beds but with such thoughts as these, I will set forth
this day in the Name of God; Religion shall be my business this day; I will
surely spend this day for Eternity. David would begin with God, Psalm. 139.15.
When I awake I am still with thee.

10. Rule. Let the present days practice be still the mending of the past days
errors. Else to what purpose are your Self-examinations? In vain do we think on
our ways, except we turn our feet into Gods Testimonies. Psalm. 119.59.

11. Rule. You must Deny your selves, and keep under your Carnal Lusts and
Affections. If you suffer your Lusts and Carnal Affections to command you, to
be sure they will find you work enough you will then have little room and
little leisure: but these will be all the day long calling upon you to gratify.
Your Lusts will find you work Night and Day, and your Employment will be to
make provision for the Flesh: Get these therefore under, or the business of
Religion can never go on.

An Important CASE of Practical Christianity, Daily and deeply to be Considered
by every Christian. Or, a brief Discourse on that Question; Seeing no man has
ones days certainty of Life, what may we do to be secured from being surprised
by Death?

Found in the Handwriting of the Exemplary Religious, MR. THOMAS CROSBY, Of
Harwich: Who Dyed very Suddenly at his Friends House in Boston: (going to Bed
well at Night, was found Dead in the Morning,) June 27. 1702.

Published for the special Benefit of the Neighbors, to whom these Holy
Lessons may arrive under the special Advantage of having been written by One in
whom this Important Case was notably Exemplified.

Printed at Boston, in the Year 1702.

An Important CASE of Practical Christianity, On that Question; Seeing no man
has one Days certainty of Life; what may we do to be secured from being
surprised by Death?
1. SIT loose from the World, that you may be able to pack up and be gone upon
sudden warning. If you would be fit for your great Journey to your long home,
you must lay aside every weight, and in special, the incumbring and intangling,
and insnaring burden of worldly Affections; you must take heed to your selves,
Lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with Surfeiting and Drunkenness,
and the Cares of this Life, if you would not have that day come upon you
unawares. Study to be Crucified to the world; to use all Earthly Comforts in a
mortified manner, as those that are taking their last leave; and let Death find
you Dead beforehand, and then let it come when it will, and do its worst.

2. Intreach not upon Gods Prerogative, in carving out the Future time. Reckon
not upon Hereafter; It was the unhappiness of that rich Fool in the Gospel, he
counts upon many Years: God had given him much Goods, and now he is so bold, as
to cast upon many Days to spend them: but God is angry at his usurpation, and
seeing he will presume to be his own carver, God rebukes his boldness, and will
show His Prerogative, and will cut him short enough This Night shall thy Soul
be required. Remember your times are in Gods hands; improve with all possible
diligence, your present allowance; He gives you wealth to lay up for Hereafter,
but He keeps your ^imes in his own hands; so that you shall not know one day
whether ever you shall have another, or be allowed to live till the next. Cast
not upon to morrow, live this day well. When shall we learn to practice the
received lesson, To live every day as if it were our last? Blessed men should
we be if we would but live up to this short Rule. Does Conscience witness that
we live up to this? If the Rule be good why do we not conform to it?

3. Store up in Heaven apace, and see that you be rich toward God. Give your
selves to Prayer, let Reading the Word, Meditation, self-Examination be your
daily Exercises: Do good to all men, serve your Generation with diligence,
study to be Useful, fill up your Relations with Duties, and when you have done
all, go out of your selves, look wholly unto Jesus, and live by Faith, this do
and you shall have treasure in Heaven, and let Death come when it will, it will
but set you in possession of Glory.

4. Be the Death of your Sins. Mortify your Corruptions, and then the
bitterness of Death is past: Sin is the Sting of Death, that makes it Dreadful,
that makes it Hurtful: Death cannot hurt you but by the weapons that you put
into its hand by your Sins. If Sin be dead, Death is conquered; this is the top
of misery, when Sin and Death shall fly upon a poor Creature together; when
Death shall set all a man's sins upon him, and besides the terror of its own
appalling looks, shall show him the more ghastly and affrighting looks of those
fiends and furies, his Unpardoned Sins; this is the Sting of Death, and makes
that the King of Terrors.

5. Observe the approaches of your Enemy daily, and remember that you are, for
ought you know, more than half dead already. Let not gray heirs be here and
there upon you, and you know it not: Observe all the warnings of Death, and
consider in all your pains and infirmities, that these are but the Twitches and
Items from Death. How often is Death knocking at your doors? Death has a great
part of you already in possession: whatsoever is past, is Deaths; how little,
how very little is to come, God knows; to be sure nothing is yours but the
present time; as Death comes daily toward you, do you labor to provide
accordingly, and make preparations for it every day. Let somewhat be mended
every day; forget not that holy Counsel to meditate every Evening, that seeing
thy days are numbered, there is one more of thy number spent, and thou art now
nearer to thy end by a Day.

6. Dare not to Live in such a case or course that you would not dare to Die in.
How know you but your next step may be into the Grave? Would you be found in
your Sins? How do you know but that Death may meet you at the next turning? And
Oh how unwelcome a meeting will it be, if you be found by it laden with your
Lusts? Would you have Death to find you out of your Harness? Would you meet
your Enemy without a Weapon? Or be found by him in a careless, secure and
sleepy posture? If not, how dare you live at such a rate? Are you at an
agreement with death?

7. Be always about your Fathers business, your Lord and Masters work, that
Death may not be able to find you doing evil, or doing nothing. Blessed is that
Servant whom his Lord when He comes shall find so doing. Remember in what you
undertake that Death may overtake you before you have ended; therefore see you
go about nothing without Gods warrant; carry this with you, and you need not
fear Deaths surprizal; Woe unto you if Death find you with your work to do: This
was Paul's joy, I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have
kept the Faith, henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness.

8. Get Conscience to be your Friend, lest that should set Death upon you to
worry you, when you come to die. Beware you mistake not the Slumber of
Conscience for a settled Peace; Death will rouse the Sleeping Lion, and then,
Oh fearful work that he will make! If you be wise, get and keep a Good
Conscience; carry it to the Fountain opened for sin and for uncleanness, get it
sprinkled with the Blood of Christ. Exercise your selves to keep a Conscience
void of offense toward God, and toward all men; In all your undertakings let
Conscience have the casting voice; ask counsel of it diligently, hear its
rebukes patiently, thankfully, as a precious Balm that will not break your
heads; make it to give in its Judgment about your Estates; if it be Con^, be
sure it be upon Scripture evidence; if it be Doubtful, get it well Settled in
time; if it Condemn ^ou, away with speed to the Redeemer; sue out your Pardon,
get it purified and pacified, please Conscience rather than all the world: Keep
her and she shall keep you.

9. Remember your Sickbed Resolutions, and set a mark upon those things that
did most trouble you, and make Death look most ghastly. We to you if sickness
find you again in the same sins which formerly Stung you; what will you say to
Conscience, or how will you look Death in the face, if you be found at last to
have been false to your Sickbed Vows?

10. Keep no long Reckonings; but let Conscience bring you in the Accounts
every day before you sleep. Keep a day-Book in your own hearts; speedily make
up any Controversies that may fall out betwixt God and your Souls; it will be
sad to find old things to reckon for when you come to Die. Study to keep all
clear and even daily within; Daily Self-Examination will make you live holily,
and die comfortably; but if you let things run long you will be all at a loss.

11. Look often into your Coffens, and behold your bones and dust; as shortly
others shall, when turned out of your Graves; be not strangers to the thoughts
of Death; expect it, wait all the days of your appointed time when your change
shall come; familiarize the thoughts of death to your selves, that you may be
always safe. You must never be secure: You must pray, and set a watch, and be
always upon your guard; walk every day some serious turns with Death. Let it
never come unlookt for; Consider your latter end, learn to number your days;
God does number them why should not you* If the man of the house had known what
hour of the night the Thief would have come, he would have watched, and not
have suffered his house to be broken up; but it is too late to think of it when
the house is rifled. Be not of them that put far off the evil day; it is the
remembrance of of Death puts life into our Prayers, and into all our motions;
he that remembers not his end, remembers nothing as he should.

12. Above all, Speed to the City of Refuge. First, Get into it, close soundly
with Jesus Christ: Oh dreadful work that Death makes with those that are not
found in Him; it tears the Body and Soul asunder, it drags the Soul to Hell,
and locks up the Dust in Prison until the terrible Judgment, it puts an end to
all comforts, and enters the sinner upon unchargeable misery, and delivers over
the Prisoners to the Tormentors. But if you give up your selves entirely
beforehand to Jesus Christ, and accept him by believing on his own terms, this
will secure you in him, then the danger of this is over. Look to this what ever
you neglect, once in Christ and you have the Victory; you may send a challenge
to Death, and with Paul triump'r, and go with shouts of Joy, and palms of
Victory, and garments of Salvation, to encounter with, or rather make spoil of
your already conquered Enemy. Secondly, Keep you in it. When you have received
Christ Jesus the Lord, you must walk in Him: wander from Him and you betray
your safety. Oh look to it, that Death find you not venturing out of your
refuge by loose walking.

13 Lay in a stock of Promises now in time against the assaults of Death. Let
that come when it will, thou may have a Cordial ready, and be provided with
an Antidote. Delight thy Soul in meditating on the 6th of John, and 1 Cor. 15th
Chapter, and 2 Cor. 5th. Chapter.

14 Suffer not the state of your immortal Souls to ly any longer at
Uncertainties. Put to it with all your might for Assurance; try an hundred
times, and make diligent search into the state of your hearts; how can you live
one day, or die without some Evidence that it shall be well with you for ever
'Ah the woeful case the poor trembling Soul must needs be in, when it thrusts
out into the Ocean of Eternity, not' knowing whither it is going, whether it
shall be landed in the Region of Eternal Darkness, or the Land of Light.

FINIS.

