THE BLESSED HOPE, And the Glorious Appearing of the Great GOD our SAVIOVR,
Jesus Christ.

Opened and Applied, In Several SERMONS.

By Increase Mather, Praesident of Harvard College in Cambridge, and Preacher
of the Gospel, at Boston, in N.E.

2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which
the Lord the Righteous Judge, shall give me at that Day: and not to me only,
but unto all them also that love His Appearing.

1 Pet. 1.13. Wherefore gird up the loins of your mind, be sober, and hope to
the end, for the Grace that is to be brought unto you at the Revelation of
Jesus Christ.

Boston, Printed by Timothy Green, for Nicholas Boon, at his Shop over against
the Old-Meeting-House. 1701.

TO THE READER
AT the Time when (a few Months past) these Sermons were Preached, I had not
the least thought of Printing them. But several of my Hearers have not only
importuned my Consent thereunto, but brought me transcribed Copies as they were
taken from me in Shorthand, with a desire that they might be sent to the
Press; and that therefore I would first peruse them: which I have done; and
must assure the Reader, that if he does expect any thing Curious or Critical in
what is herewith emitted* he will find himself disappointed, There is nothing
Elaborate therein more than what is usual in the ordinary Course of my
Ministry. Only the great saving ^ruths of the Gospel are plainly delivered,
wiib (...) Inculcations as I have thought might be proper and edifying in a
Popular Auditory.

If CHRIST shall be Glorified, and the Souls of any of his Elect Benefitted by
this Publication, I shall not repent of my Consenting thereunto, in the Blessed
Day of His Appearing. Let Him Come Quickly.

December. 18. 1700.
Advertisement.
COnscience the Best Friend upon Earth: Or the Happy Effects of keeping a Good
Conscience.

By Henry Stubbes.

The Resolved Christian; pursuing the Designs of Holiness and Happiness, in
ordering, First his own Heart and Life, and then his Family. With further
Directions upon the Great Points, of spending our Time, and of Minding our End,
and of Behaving our selves well under all our Trials.

The Good Linguist. Or, Directions to avoid the Sins of the Tongue; as well
False Swearing and Vain Swearing; yea all False Speaking, and all Vain
Spea^ing: The too Common Errors in men's Communication: As more especially. Men's
Evil-Speaking, one of another.

Sold by Nicholas Boon, at his Shop, (...) against the Old-Meeting-House. 170^.

The Blessed HOPE, And Glorious Appearing of JESUS CHRIST.
SERMON I.
Tit. II.13. Looking for that Blessed Hope, and the Glorious Appearing of the
Great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.


THE Apostle in this, with the preceding and following Verses, Exhorts
Believers to adorn their Profession of the Gospel, with an Holy Conversation.
There are several Motives mentioned, whereby this Exhortation is urged.

1. Because the Gospel it self does so Teach men. The Grace of God which brings
Salvation, the Gospel which is a Doctrine of Grace, and which does bring to men
the Tidings of Salvation, teaches them to deny all Ungodliness, that they
should be careful of being Guilty of Sins against the First Table of the Moral
Law: and to deny all worldly Lusts, that they should Abstain from all Sins
against the Second Table of that Law: and that they should Live Soberly in
respect of themselves: i. e. that they should be Temperate, and Live
Righteously in respect of men. And that they should Live Godly, which implies
the Exercises of Duties of Piety and Religion, which have God for their Object.
This does the Gospel Teach men.

2. Another Motive the Apostle uses, is, in that such a Life is the way to
Blessedness; as in the words which have been read. Holiness is the way to
Happiness. They that bring forth Fruit to Holiness, shall in the End have
Everlasting Life. Against this might be objected, we see Holy men many times
miserable in Outward respects, and they that ^ive Godly are Persecuted. The
Gospel assures us, that we shall be exposed to Reproaches* and many Sufferings
in this world. True, (says the Apostle) but then you must remember, there
another World besides this; and in that you shall be Blessed: In that other
World, which (...) take place, at the Appearing of the Great God, and our
Savior Jesus Christ. The Great God, and our Savior; The meaning i^, the Great
God, even our Savior. The Greek word (...) which is translated Appearing, is
not in Scripture Attributed to any, but the Second Person in the Trinity. There
is a twofold Appearing of Christ.

1. His Incarnation is called His Appearing 2 Timothy 1.10. By His Appearing* He
has brought Life and Immortallity to light. The Son of God did appear in the
form of a man to Save the world, and therefore to Die, that He might accomplish
Salvation for all that should believe on Him.

2. But then, there is a Second Appearing of Christ, which is yet to be
expected, Namely, His Appearing to Judge the world. He has once Appeared to
Save the world, He will again Appear to Judge the world. And this is by way of
Eminency called His Appearing. The Original word signifies an Illustrious and
Glorious Apppearing.

The words afford unto us Three Doctrines.

1. That there is a Blessed Hope, which Believers Look for. 2. That Jesus
Christ is the Great God, and our Savior. 3. That there will be a Glorious
Appearing of Jesus Christ, when Believers on Him, shall enjoy their Hoped for
Blessedness.
1. That there is a Blessed Hope which Believers Look for.

The Truth before us may be opened, by enquiring into three particulars.

1. What is meant by this Blessed Hope? 2. What is employed in Believers looking
for it? 3. What Reason they have to look for it?
Q. 1. What is meant by this Blessed Hope?

For Answer, Hope is here put for the Good hoped for. It Is a Metonimical
Expression usual in Scripture. So Fear is sometimes put for the thing most
feared; as we read concerning Jacob, that when he took a solemn Oath, he did
Swear by the Fear of his Father Isaac, Genesis 31.13. That (...) by that God who
was the chief Object of the (...) of his Father Isaac, that God whom his ^^ther
Isaac did fear above all things. So Love (...) sometimes put for the thing most
loved, ^^^ent. 2.7 Christ is called the Believers Love, (...) being the chief
Object of his love. So the good contained in the Promises, is called the
Promise Heb. 10.36. Tha^ you might receive the Promise. The meaning is, the
good contained in the Promise. Thus Hope is put for the good hoped for, Gal.
5.5. For we through the Spirit, wait for the Hope of Righteousness by Faith. By
the Hope of Righteousness is meant the Righteousness which we hope for. We
(says the Apostle) do by the assistance of the Spirit of God, Hope for a
Righteousness that will Justify us, that will make us appear Just and
Righteous before God; not by our own works, but by Faith, Colos. 1.5. For the
Hope which is laid up for you in Heaven. The meaning is, the good hoped for
which is laid up in Heaven. And this is called a Blessed Hope, on a double
account.

1. In respect of the Subject of it, Namely Blessed Ones. Such as are made
partakers of Regenerating Grace, 1 Pet. 1.3. He has Begotten us again to a
Lively Hope. None have a lively hope but such as are begotten again, and have a
right unto the Inheritance which is Reserved in Heaven.

2. It Is called a Blessed Hope, in respect of the Object of it, Namely
Blessedness: that is it which Believers hope for. They hope for a ^reater
Blessedness then that at present they enjoy. Their Blessedness is indeed, begun
in this Life Joh. 3.36. He that Believes has Everlasting Life. He has it in
the beginnings of it. A man whose Sins are Pardoned, is a Blessed man, Psalm.
32.1. Blessed is the man whose Sins are forgiven, and unto whom God does not
impute Iniquity. That man that has Spiritual Blessings bestowed on him, (in
which Blessedness does chiefly consist) is truly a Blessed man, That man that
has Grace in his Soul, and that has a sure Title to an inheritance in Heaven,
is a Blessed man. Nevertheless, though Believers here are as to their State
Blessed, they are subject to many miseries, many afflictions and sorrows must
they undergo while in this world; As Job said, Job 2.10. Shall a man receive
good at the hands of God, and not evil. In this world Believers do not receive
only good, but evil. But in the World to come, they shall then receive good and
not evil. It was therefore said of Lazarus, Luke 16.25. That in his Life time,
he had his Evil things, but now he is Comforted; now he is gotten into the
other World, there is no more evil things attending of him, there is nothing
but what is comfortable. But to speak more particularly, there are several
things comprehended in this Blessedness, which is the object of the Believers
Hope.

1 They hope for Salvation at the Appearing of the Great God our Savior Jesus
Christ. When He appears He will appear to them as a Savior. And all that Good,
all that Blessedness which is contained in this Comprehensive word, Salvation
is that they hope for, 1 These. 5.8. Putting on the Breastplate of Faith, and
Love, and for an helmet, the hope of Salvation. There is Salvation in respect
of Deliverance from outward Evils. This Believers hope for, Isa. 60.20. The
days of thy mourning shall be ended. And there is Salvaton in respect of
Deliverance from Spiritual and from Eternal Evils. Sin is a Spiritual evil; the
temptations of Satan are spiritual evils; and the Torments of Hell are Eternal
Miseries. There is the Worm that Dies (...) and the Fire that never shall be
Quenched. Believers hope for deliverance from this, Isa. 45.17. Israel shall be
Saved in the Lord with an Everlasting Salvation. Deliverance from Everlasting
Misery, is an Everlasting Salvation. And this is that which Believers expect,
at the Appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ. The Salvation of them all, will not
be perfected till then, Heb. 9.28. He shall appear the Second time without Sin
unto Salvation. The Redemption of the Children of Israel out of Egypt, was a
Type of this Salvation. Moses then said to them, (as in the 14. Exodus 1^) The
Egyptians which you have seen this day, you shall see them again no more for
eve^. So when Christ shall Appear, those evils that have been Afflictive to His
People, they shall see them no more for ever. Neither Temporal Evils, as
Hunger, Thirst, no more Pain, no more Crying, nor any Spiritual Evils, neither
Sin nor the Temptations of Satan, shall molest them any more for ever. Now then
this will be a Blessed Day, and therefore the hope of it is a Blessed Hope.

2. Believers hope that at the Appearing of the Great God our Savior Jesus
Christ, their dead bodies shall be restored to Life again. Isa. 26.19. Thy dead
men shall live together with my dead body shall they arise. As for dead
Believers, when the dead Bodies of the Prophets shall arise they shall arise
too. The Resurrection of the Body is a special object of the Believers Blessed
Hope. It was therefore a principle thing in the Doctrine Paul Preached, and
that he was Persecuted for, Act. 23.6. For the Hope of the Resurrection of the
dead am I called into Question. And again, Act. 24.15. I have Hope toward God,
that there shall be a Resurrection from the dead. Notwithstanding, their
immortal Souls must be separated from their Bodies for some time, they know not
how long, and in the mean time their bodies consumed in the rotting Grave.
Believers hope that then they shall have the very same Bodies restored to them
again, which their immortal Souls were in before Death made a separation, but
wonderfully and gloriously Changed as to the qualities thereof. It Is true also
concerning Unbelievers, wicked men, that they shall rise out of their Graves,
and enjoy the very same Bodies that they had in this world. We may not think,
that the Bodies that have sinned, shall escape the Fire of Hell, and that
another Body that never sinned, shall suffer instead of it. Thus as to
Believers, they shall have the very same Bodies. That Body that did serve God
and Glorify Him in this world, shall be made to live again in that Day. As the
Body of Christ now in Glory, is the very same which did lie in the Grave. That
very Body that was Crucified, is now at the Right Hand of God. So shall it be
as to Believers on Christ, 1 Cor. 15.53. For this Corruptible, must put on
Incorruption, This Corruptible and not another. And the Resurrection of the
Body which is the Blessed Hope of all Christians, will be at the Appearing of
Christ, 1 Cor. 15.23 We shall rise every one in their own order, they that are
Christ's at His Coming. It will be at the Last Day. Martha said to Christ, when
He told her that her Brother should rise again, Joh. 11.24 I know that he shall
rise again, in the Resurrection at the last day. And this is also signified and
sealed to Believers in the Sacrament. When they partake at the Lords Table,
this Glorious Truth is signified, and the Promise of it sealed unto them. Joh.
6.54 He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood has Eternal Life, and I will
Raise him up at the last day. That very Body, that did Sacramentally eat the
Flesh of Christ, and that did drink of the Blood of Christ, He will Raise it up
at the Last Day. And this blessed truth, has ever been the Faith and Hope of
Believers, even in all ages of the world. This was that Job did hope for and
was assured of, Job 19.26 I know that my Redeemer Lives, and that He shall
stand on the Earth at the latter day, and though after my skin worms destroy
this Body, yet in my Flesh I shall see God. It is as much as if he had said, I
know that there will be a Glorious Appearing of the Great God my Savior, and
that though my Body be consumed in the rotting Grave, it shall be restored to
Life in that Blessed Day.

3. Believers hope that at the Appearing of the Great God our Savior Jesus
Christ, their Bodies shall undergo a Blessed Change. Not only that they shall
be restored to Life, but be Blessedly Changed from what they are. They are now
subject to many infirmities, which will then be perfectly and forever removed
from them Phil 3.21 He shall Change our vile Bodies. We look for a Savior from
Heaven that shall Change our vile Bodies: whatever it is makes our Bodies
subject to vileness, to meaness, that shall be done away. There are Bodily
infirmities which are the fruit of Sin, and some part of the Curse. So are all
Bodily Diseases. There are some Bodies subject to Chronical diseases, which are
Ludibria Medicorum, all the Physicians in the world cannot cure them. Asa was
Diseased in his Feet, and sought to the Physicians, and doubtless had the
Advice of the Ablest Physicians in the Kingdom, but they could not help him.
The Resurrection will Cure all Diseases. The Diseases which the Bodies of
Saints carry to the Grave with them, shall not come out of the Grave, again.
There are Bodily infirmities also, which are not the effect of Sin, which men
would have been subject unto if they never had sinned; such as Hunger, Thirst,
want of Sleep, and the like. If Adam never had sinned, his Body would have
stood in need of Food, that so it might be continued in Life. Therefore before
ever he had sinned, God said to him, Genesis 2.16. That he might eat of all the
Trees in the Garden of Eden, one only excepted. And we find Adam subject to
Sleep before ever he sinned against God. But after the Resurrection, they shall
be freed from the sinless infirmities of Humane nature, Mat. 22.30. In the
Resurrection they are as the Angels of God in Heaven. Now the Angels of God in
Heaven, never Sleep, Eat, Drink, nor need they any such thing to support their
Natures. So shall it be with Believers after the Resurrection. They shall
Hunger no more, neither Thirst any more. Their Bodies shall then be endowed and
adorned with Glorious properties, which the body of Adam in his first Estate
had not. They will be more happy in respect of their Bodies, then Adam in
Paradise was. They will have a greater Glory on their Bodies than he had. 1
Cor. 15.43. The Body is ^own in Dishonor, it shall be raised in Glory. That
Glory may in special intend a Luster, that the body will have on it; like that
which was on the face of Moses when he had been with God in the Mount And like
that which was on the Face of Christ, when transfigured in the Mount, and His
Face did shine like the Sun. Their bodies shall have no Impediment to the
operation of their Souls. Now their bodies are a great hindrance to the
operation of the Soul. They will not be so after the Resurrection. Yea, and
they shall be Immortalized bodies. 1 Cor. 15.52, 53. The Dead shall be Raised
incorruptible and we shall be changed. For this Corruptible, must put on
Incorruption, and this Mortal must put on Immortality. In that respect also,
they shall be more happy then Adam in his first Estate was. Luke 20 36. They
shall be Equal to the Angels, neither can they Die any more. This is more then
could be said of Adam. His body was not so immortal that it could not dye, for
it did dye after he sinned. But as for Believers, at the Appearing of Christ,
their Bodies shall be made like to that Body which Christ has now in Heaven.
Phil, 3.21. He shall change our vile bodies, that it may be fashioned like unto
His Glorious Body. Therefore it is said, they shall bear the Image of the
Heavenly: 1 Cor. 15.49. As we have born the image of the Earthly, so also we
shall bear the image of the Heavenly. As we have born the image of the Earthly
Adam in respect of the Mortality of our Bodies, we shall bear the image of the
Second Adam in respect of Immortality as to our Bodies.

4. Believers Hope that at the Appearing of the Great God our Savior Jesus
Christ, they shall see Him with exceeding Joy. True it is, Unbelievers in that
day shall see Christ: they that have slighted Him, despised Him, and would not
believe the Gospel, they shall see Him in that day. Yea, all the men in the
World, or that ever were, or shall be; they shall see Him in that day. The Jews
that Crucified Him, Pilate that Condemned Him, shall see Him in that day; but
little to their comfort. Rev. 2.7. Every Eye shall see Him, and all they that
pierced Him, and all the Kings of the earth shall wail. They shall see Him to
their Woe and Wailing, when then they shall think with themselves, This is He
that we h^ve despised, now we see that He is the Great God, who will Judge us
for all our slighting and despising of Him. Thus they will see Him to their
Amazement and Everlasting Terror. But believers shall behold Him to their
unspeakable Joy and Comfort. Therefore the Apostle having described the manner
of Christ's coming to judge the world, adds 1 These. 4.18. Comfort one another
with these words. This was that which comforted Job under all his afflictions,
that at the last day he should see Christ. Job 19.27 In my flesh shall I see
God, with these Eyes shall I see Him. That is one Reason why Believers shall
have their bodily sight restored to them at the last day, that so with their
bodily Eyes they may behold the Glorious Body of Jesus Christ. That is a
blessed thing: to have seen Christ though in his state of Humiliation, was a
blessed and desirable thing: therefore did Christ say Mat. 13.16, 17 Many
Prophets and Righteous men have desired to see the things that you see and have
not seen them. But blessed are your Eyes for they see, and your Ears for they
hear. The holy Prophets desired nothing more then that (if it had been the Will
of God) their Eyes might have seen the Son of God appearing in Flesh. But what
a blessed thing will it then be, to see Him in His state of Exaltation? Joseph
knew it (...) be a joy to his Father to hear of his Glory, and therefore said
to his brethren, Genesis 45.13 You shall tell my Father of all my Glory. What then
will it be, not to hear of, but to see Christ in all His Glory? We have a
blessed Promise, Isa. 33.17 Thy Eyes shall behold the King in His Beauty.
Believers will at H^s Glorious Appearing see Him with exceeding joy.

For,

1. He Will then Declare before all the world, that they are Faultless: That
there is no Guilt on them. Jude 24. They shall be presented Faultless before
the presence of His Glory, with exceeding joy That must needs cause Exceeding
joy, for them to be presented Faultless. Christ will say concerning them, as
for their sins He has washed them away in His own Blood. And that although they
were some of them Guilty of very grievous sins before their Conversion, and
many infirmities after their Conversion, notwithstanding that, His Father for
His sake, has forgiven them all. Acts 3.19 That your Sins may be blotted out,
when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord. Christ
will then Declare before all Angels and Men, that their sins are blotted out.
Were not their sins blotted out before Christ's Glorious Appearing? Yes, but
then all the world shall know that they were so. Their Absolution will then be
Declared, their Pardon will then be Read before all Angels and Men. All the
World shall then see Christ giving them the white Stone; See them placed at His
Right hand, Mat. 25.33 which is a Declaring them to be acquitted. Amongst the
Jews in their Judicatures, such persons as the Judge on trial acquitted, were
set at his Right Hand.

2. The Lord Jesus Christ, will with His own Blessed Mouth Commend them and
Praise them in that day when He Appears. And therefore they will see Him with
Exceeding joy. Christ will then Commend them for their Love and Fidelity to
Him, and to His Interest. We find in the 2 nd. Rev. that Christ did commend
those Ministers of the Churches that were most Faithful to Him. Without doubt
those Ministers, when they received such a Commendation from Christ in Heaven,
by the hand of His Servant John, were filled with joy. But what joy will the
hearts of Believers at the Great Day be filled with, when they shall see and
hear Christ Himself commending of them. Mat. 25.21 The Lord will say, Well done
thou (...) and faithful Servant* Enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord* That is a
Blessed thing indeed, to hear Christ say to a man, Well done thou Faithful
Servant, I know that when thou wast in the world, thou wast faithful to me, and
to my Truths, and to my People, well done thou faithful Servant* For a man to
hear Christ speak thus to him in the hearing of the whole world, surely it is a
blessed thing. Hence the Apostle sp^aks, as in 1 Pet. 1.7* That the trial of
your Faith, may be found to praise and honor at the appearing of Jesus Christ.
When Jesus Christ appears for Him to praise you, for your Faith, and so for
your Obedience, that will be blessed honor indeed. It was a happy day for
Jacobs Children, when their Eyes did see Joseph their Brother, and hear him
speaking comfortable words unto them, Genesis 45.12 Joseph said to them, your Eyes
see, and the Eyes of my Brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaks to
you* But! O how Glorious will it be, when believers shall see, their Eyes shall
see the mouth of Christ speak unto them, and commend them for the Service they
did for His Name while they were in the world.

3. Christ will Reward them. Therefore shall they see Him with Exceeding great
joy. Rev. 22.12 Behold I come, and my Reward is with me. When He comes, He will
give a Reward to his Servants. And what is that R^ward? It is no less than a
Kingdom, Luke 11.29 I app^^nt unto you a Kingdom, as (...) Father has appointed
unto me. They shall be advanced to no less a Glory, then that of sitting on a
Throne, Rev. 3.21* I am sat down with my Father on His Throne. To him that
overcomes, will I grant to sit with me on my Throne. It Is no less a Reward than
that of a Crown, that Christ will then give unto them, 2 Timothy 4.8 He will give
to me a Crown of Righteousness, and not to me only, but all that love Hi^
Appearing. The day of Christ's appearing will be to Believers their Coronation
day. It may well then be a day of the Gladness of their hearts: they shall
Reign then, they Suffer with him, and they shall also Reign with him. And what
shall they reign over? Not over one Nation only, as Kings on the Earth are wont
to do; but over the whole world. Dan. v.27. The Kingdom and Dominion, and the
Greatness of the Kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people
of the Saints of the most high. Therefore does the Apostle say, The Saints
shall judge the world. 1 Cor. 6.2 Know you not that the Saints Shall judge the
World? Well shen, the Saints cannot but be filled with Exceeding Joy, when they
see Christ appearing.

5 Believers Hope that at the Appearing of the Great God our Savior Jesus
Christ, when He has judged the world, and so finished his Reign here upon the
Earth, they shall return with him into Heaven. Is^. 33.17 Thine Eyes shall see
the King in his Beauty, they shall behold the Land that is very far off. Thus
when Christ comes, Believers shall see the King in his Beauty, shall see Him in
all his Glory, and shall go with him to the Land that is very far off. Heaven
is the Land that is very far off. Christ has assured believers it shall be
thus, John 14.2 In my Fathers House are many Mansions; that is in Heaven, which
is compared to a Glorious Palace. I go ^o prepare a place for you, and if ^ go
I will come again, and take you to my self, that where I am you may be also.
Says Christ, I will come again at the Last day, and take them to himself. He
will not go back to Heaven and leave them behind him. No* they shall sit
together with him in Heavenly places. The Armies of Heaven will follow him.
When He shall come to judge the world, the Saints in Heaven will come with him;
so when he has done judging the world, they shall follow him going into heaven.
The Blessedness believers hope for, is not an Earthly but a Heavenly
blessedness, Col. 1.5 The hope which is laid up for you in Heaven. Heaven is a
blessed place. Peter said when he had only a glimpse of heaven, It Is good to be
here: So they in Heaven, are never weary of being there, they do not desire to
change their place. Many a Child of God, has been weary of being on Earth, and
has longed to be gone from hence; but never did any one long to be out of
Heaven that once got thither: For there it is that blessedness in the uttermost
perfection of it, is to be enjoyed. Blessedness in the Perfection of it, is in
the Bea^^fick Vision, in having an immed^tate sight of the Great God, and the
full enjoyment of his Glory, Mat. 5.8 Blessed are the pure in Heart, for they
shall see God. That is blessedness in the perfection of it, for to see God. The
happiness of believers here, is in that little that they see of God in his
Ordinances: therefore said David, a Day in thy Courts is better than a Thousand
elsewhere. But in Heaven, they shall not have Communion with God in such
Ordinances as here they have fellowship with him in. They shall have no need of
Sacraments there, but they shall have immediate Communion with him, beholding
of him face to face: as the Apostle says, here we see through a Glass darkly;
the Glass of Gospel Ordinances, but in Heaven we shall See Face to Face. We
shall there with open face look on the Glory of God. It is Blessedness to be
taken up for ever in the contemplation of that infinite Glory

6. Believers Hope that at the Appearing of the Great God our Savior Jesus
Christ, they shall enjoy this Blessedness to all Eternity. Tit 1.2 In hope of
Eternal Life. Eternal Life is the Object of the believers hope and they hope
that when Christ shall appear at the Great Day, they shall Appear with Him, and
that they shall never be separated from him any more throughout the days of
Eternity, 1 These. 4.17 We shall ever be with the Lord. The Glory they hope for
in heaven, it is not like the Glory of this world Transitory; but it is that
which will abide throughout Eternal Ages, 1 Pet. 5.10 It Is a Crown of Glory,
that fades not away. The God of all Grace does call us to his Eternal Glory, by
Jesus Christ. One hour in heaven, will make amends for all the Sorrows,
Afflictions, and Miseries we meet with here in this vale of Tears: but what
shall be said then, of an Eternity in heaven, and the Glory there to be
enjoyed? In this respect, Believers are more blessed then Adam was before he
fell: For Adam when in Paradise, forfeited his Life, and his Right unto the
Tree of Life: But it shall not be so as to believers, when once they are in the
Heavenly Paradise, Rev. 22.14 They have a Right to eat of the Tree of Life. The
Tree of Life, was to signify to Adam that if he did obey the Command of God, he
should Live forever. In this respect also, Believers are more happy than ever
were the Angels that sinned. They fell from their First Estate. They that are
now Devils in Hell, were once in Heaven; but having sinned against the Great
God, HE banished them forever from that holy place. But it shall not be so with
believers, therefore did David say, Psalm. 41.12. Thou will preserve me, and
keep me in my Integrity, and set me before thy face forever. Thus you see what
is meant by this Blessed Hope

USE.
Alas! For those that Look not for this Hope. And truly there are but few that
do: The Generality of men, yea, and of those that call themselves Christians
too, do not really believe that Christ will appear. If they did, they would
not, they could not, Live such Unholy Lives as they do. 2 Pet 3.11, 12 What
manner of persons ought you to be in all Holy Conversation and Godliness?
Looking for the coming of the day of God. Ay, if men really Looked for that
day, they would live after a more Godly manner than many do. When a Profane man
said to a late Deist (or Atheist rather) that ridiculed the Scriptures, and all
Discourses of Christ's coming to Judge the world, That he wondered at his
Incredulity; The other replied, I wonder at you more, for Living as you do; for
(said he) if I did believe that there is another World* and that there will be
such a day of Judgment, as you say you believe there will, I should be afraid
to commit such Sins as you make light of. This was a sharp Reply: But sure it
is, that a wicked Life is a sign of Unbelief reigning in the Heart. Alas,
Sinners seldom think of Christ's Glo^ious Appearing: They are far from being
like that Ancient. who said, Wherever I go, and whether I eat or drink, or
whatever I do, meth^nks I hear the last Trumpet Sounding, and that Voice, Arise
you Dead and come to Judgment. Oh! how many are there that live whole days
together, without having so much as one thought in their hearts about the
Glorious Appearing of the Great God our Savior Jesus Christ? Much less do they
wish for it. It is related concerning that Excellent Young man, and Young
Scholar, John Ianeway, that when there was a Discourse about the nearness of
the Day of Judgment, and some discovered fear and a concernedness of Spirit
about it; I wonder at you, (said he) If I were sure that Christ would come to
judgment within this hour, my Heart within me would leap for joy. I doubt not,
but that there are some in this Assembly, that can say after him. Nevertheless,
I am afraid that there are more than a Thousand of you, that cannot say so. How
many are there, that if they should hear that Christ would Appear before the
next week, it would be sad News to them: It would fill them with dismal Horror
and Amazement, but they would not rejoice at such Tidings.

And how few are there, that prepare for the Lords coming? They that prepare
not for the Blessed Hope, do not Look for it, as should be more fully showed
the next opportunity. In the mean time, I conclude* Let us Watch and Pray and
be always Serving God. Blessed is that Servant whom the Lord when He comes,
shall find so doing.

SERMON II.
We proceed unto the Second Enquiry.

2. Enqui. WHat is employed in Believers Looking for this Hope?

Answ. 1. It does imply a firm belief concerning what is here expressed. For a
man will not look for that which he does not believe* Ever shall be* No more
will they look for the appearing of Christ, that do not believe that he will
appear This Hope is an assured hope. Believers so Hope for, so Look for Christ's
appearing, as that they are sure that they shall see him, Job 19*25 I know that
my Redeemer lives, and that He Shall stand on the Earth in the Latter Day, and
that in my flesh I shall see God. The Apostle also says, 1 John 3^2 We know
that when he shall appear, we shall be like him. It Is true, that there are
believers who do not know their own interest in this Blessedness, that have
Doubts and Fears, through the weakness of their Faith. Nevertheless, this they
know and beli^^e, and are sure of, that Christ will appear from heaven. They
that do not believe this, do not look for the Blessed Hope.

2. This Looking for the Blessed Hope does imply frequent thoughts concerning
it. As a person that looks for the return of an absent Friend, has frequent
thoughs concerning him, so they that look for Christ's coming, will have
frequent thoughts concerning him* David says, Psalm* 94*19* In the multitude of
my thoughts within me, thy Comforts delight my Soul^ He had multitudes of
thoughts, but there was one thought that did in a special manner delight his
Soul, that did comfort him, (...) no thought did delight and comfort more than
that of desiring the coming of the Messiah. A man that looks for this is still
remembering of it. As the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 42.6 I remember thee from the
Land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the Hill Missar. Jordan was
Eastward of the land of Canaan, Hermon was Northward, Missar (as some observed)
was Southward. Thus they that look for the appearing of Christ, where ever they
be, in what part of the world soever, thoughts concerning Christ's Apppearing
come into their mind.

3^ This Looking for the Blessed Hope does imply a Longing for it^ The man that
looks as he ought to do for the Appearing of Christ, Loves that Appearing. 2 Timothy 4.8 He longs to see that Blessed Day. Believers in the days of the
Old Testament, who did look for the First Appearing of the Son of God, they
wished for, longed for, prayed for it continually, and did desire nothing more.
Mat. 13.17 Many Prophets and Righteous men have desired to see those things
which you see. That was to see the day when Christ would appear in the world.
Abraham saw it and was glad^ It was a joyful Meditation unto him, to think that
Christ should come into the world. When God told him' that in Him all Nations
should be Blessed: In which was employed, a promise of the Messiah, that made
his heart glad within him^ So they that look for the Second Appearing of
Christ, wish and long for it. 2 Pet. 3.12 Looking for, and hastening unto the
Coming of the day of God. They that Look for it as they ought to do, hasten to
it; that is with holy wishes and desires. Cant. 8.14 Make have my Beloved, and
be thou like to a Roe on the Mountains of Spices: The words are a Prayer for
the coming of Christ. The Spirit and the Bride say Come; as in Rev. 22.20 Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly. That is the Spirit of one that does aft^r a due
manner look for the Blessed Hope, and the Appearing of our Savior Jesus
Christ, his heart within him says, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Therefore,

4thly. and Lastly, This Looking for, does imply a Preparing for the Blessed
Appearance of the Lord Jesus Christ. As one that looks for another to come,
especially if it be a Great person, he will make suitable preparation for him
So they that look for the Appearing of the Great GOD our Savior Jesus Christ,
will make a suitable preparation. They are a People ready, a People prepared
for the Lords coming. Mark 13.33 Watch and Pray for you, know not when the time
is. You know not when the Lord will appear, therefore you must be always upon
your Watch, and always Praying, and live a life of Prayer, always Watch
against those things that would unfit you for the Appearing of the Lord Jesus
Christ. Thus for the Second thing, pass we to the Third.

3. Enqui. What Reason have Believers to look for the Blessed Hope?

For Answ. 1. The Reason why they should look for this Blessed Appearing of
Christ, is because of the Certainty of it. If it were a doubtful matter, they
would not have so much reason to look for it. But it past all doubt* Their Hope
is that that shall not be disappointed, Romans 5.5* Hope makes not ashamed. When
Believers hope for the coming of Christ, they shall not be ashamed by being
disappointed. As for the time of Christ's Appearance, and of their arriving at
the Blessed Hope, it may be sooner than they look for, or longer; but as to the
thing it self, they never shall be disappointed. The Anchor of their hope, it is
an Anchor that will hold, Heb. 6.19 Hope is the Anchor of the Soul, su^e and
steadfast. Therefore it is called a Good Hope, 2 These. 2^16 God has given us
Everlasting Consolation, and good Hope through Grace. That is a good Hope, when
a man hopes for good and shall certainly attain that good. Believers are as
sure to enjoy their hoped for Blessedness, as if they now had it in actual
possession. They are as sure to rise out of their Graves at the Last Day to
Eternal Life, as if now it were done. They are as sure when the Judgment is
over to go with Christ to Heaven, and to be with Him there to Eternity, as if
now they were there. Ephesians. 2.6 He has raised us up together, and made us sit
together in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus. We are as sure to be raised up
together in that Blessed day, when the Great God our Savior Christ shall
appear, and as sure then to ascend into Heaven, as if now we were there. This
is Evident from several things.

1. In that the Good and Blessedness which they hope for, is in a sure Hand and
in a safe Place. In whose hands is it, but in the Hands of the Almighty God, 2 Timothy 1.12 I know whom I have believed, who is able to keep that I have
committed unto Him. What was that Paul had committed to God? It was his Soul,
his Salvation, and all that Good he hoped for in another World. He had
committed it all into the Hands of God, whom he knew was able to keep it for
him. As a man that has a Jewel, and is afraid of losing it, if it were in his
own keeping, therefore does commit it to the keeping of a faithful Friend, that
is more able to secure it for him^ So it is here: And it is well for us that
our Blessedness is not in our own keeping, for if it were, we should certainly
lose it. Our First Father did so. Adam his Life was put into his own hands, and
he lost it, and proved a bankrupt when the Stock of the whole world was in his
hand. But now the Blessedness of Believers being in Gods hand, who has engaged
to keep it for them, they are sure of it. None shall deprive* them of it. As
Christ says concerning His Sheep, they shall have Eternal Life, John 10.29 My
Father is Greater than all, and none is able to pluck them out of His hands. As
for Believers, and their Eternal Life, it is in the Hands of God. And as their
hoped for Happiness is in a sure hand, so it is in a safe Place. That sure hand
keeps it in a safe place* The Scripture speaks of a Treasure in Heaven, Mat.
6.20 What is that Treasure in Heaven? It Is that same thing with the Blessed
Hope. There no Thief can break through and steal. It Is Laid up there, Col. 1 5
The hope which is laid up for you in Heaven^ The Blessedness you hope for, is
laid up in a safe place: it is laid up in Heaven for you. It Is therefore said to
be Reserved there, 1 Pet. 1.4 An inheritance reserved in Heaven for you. This
is mentioned as the reason why the Hope of Believers is so sure and steadfast,
because what they hope for is out of sight. It Is in Heaven, Heb. 6.19 Here they
are in a tempestuous Sea; but come what Storms can, they are safe enough,
because of their Anchor-hold, which is within the Va^l, h. e. They cast Anchor
in Heaven.

2. The Believers Hope of Blessedness is built upon a sure and never failing
Foundation. And therefore, it is a sure Hope they have reason to look for it.
For what is the Foundation of it?

1. God H^mself is the Foundation of the Believers Hope. The Blessed God is the
Object of the Blessed Hope, Psalm. 71.5 O Lord my God thou art my hope. Jer.
14.8 The hope of Israel and Savior thereof, in the day of trouble. He is
therefore styled The God of Hope, Romans 15.13 the God of hope, not only He that
is the Author of the Grace of hope, but the Object of the Believers hope. The
Glorious Attributes of God, is the Foundation that the believers hope is built
upon. Psalm 147.11 He takes pleasure in them that hope in his Mercy. Then the
Divine Mercy is the Object of their hope. Now the Mercy of God will not fail.
Lam 3.22 His Compassions fail not. Therefore the hope that is built thereon,
will not fail. The Love of God is the Foundation of the Believers hope, and
that is unchangeable. Jer. 31.3 I have Loved thee with an Everlasting Love. The
Faithfulness of God is the Foundation of the Believers hope, and that fails
not. Psalm 89.31 He will not suffer his Faithfulness to fail

2 The Word of God is the Foundation that the Believers hope is built upon.
Psalm 119.49 Remember the word upon which thou have caused me to hope The word
of Promise, the Covenant of God is Unchangeable and Everlasting, Isa 55.3 I
will make with you an Everlasting Covenant, even the sure Mercies of David. The
Blessedness and Mercy which God has promised to Believers, shall surely be
performed, because His Covenant (...) an Everlasting Covenant. Their hope is
built not on the Covenant of Works, but on the Covenant of Grace. Their hope is
Built (...) on that Covenant that does insist on perfect (...), but on that
Covenant in which (...) has promised to forgive the Iniquity of (...) and to be
Merciful to their (...) is the Covenant of the Gospel, that (...) is built
upon, Col 1.23 The Hope of the Gospel. Were it not for a Gospel Covenant, they
could have no hope: But that gives them sufficient ground of hope, since
therein God has promised Eternal Life to them that truly beli^ve on Jesus
Christ. As surely as they hope for nothing but what God has promised, they may
be sure they shall have all the Blessedness they hope for. Tit 1.2 In hope of
Eternal Life, which God that cannot Lie has promised Heb 6.17* 18 That by two
immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a
strong Consolation, who have fled for Refuge to la^ hold upon the Hope set
before us^ What is that hope but the Covenant of God? And there are two
immutable things in it, in which it is impossible God should Lie: there is the
Promise of God, and the Oath of God. When God did Swear to Abraham that he
would give the Land of Canaan to his Children, that was not all God intended by
that Oath to Abraham, but he intended this also, that to Abraham's Spiritual
Children, viz. Believers on Christ, He would give Everlasting Blessedness in
the Heavenly Canaan, that was employed in the Holy Oath of God unto Abraham

3 Christ is the Foundation of the (...) hope. He is therefore called Their
hope (...)* 1.3 Christ who is our hope. If it were (...) Christ no man in this
world would (...) had any ground of hope for Salvation: (...) would never have
promised Life to a sinner, if it had not been for Christ. That Covena^nt of
Grace, which God has made with Believers is built upon the Covenant of
Redemption, which He has made with his Son Jesus Christ. Isa. 53.10
Notwithstanding the Mercy of God, they could have had no hope, had it not been
for Christ, because God is Just as well as Merciful. And who could have
satisfied the Justice of God? Who could have made Atonement for the sins of
men? Yea, for the sins of all the men in the World, that shall believe on the
Name of Christ? The Angels of Heaven could never have satisfied the justice of
God, for any one sin: Only Christ the Son of God could do it. And he has done
it by the Price of his own Blood. Heb 10 19 We have boldness to enter in^o the
holiest of all by the Blood of Jesus. We have good Hope that we shall be
blessed in Heaven to Eternity because of the Blood of Jesus. Heb* 7.19 The Law
made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did. What is that
but Christ? That Sacrifice Christ as our Priest has offered, is a better hope.
That is it believers may build upon: they may safely venture their Souls on the
merit of Christ's most precious Blood; that has purchased for them all the
blessedness they hope for. Moreover, the Resurrection of Christ is a ground of
Hope to believers. For what can hinder men from being Blessed but only Sin? Now
from the Resurrection of Christ, a believer may conclude his Sins are Pardoned:
that God has been satisfied in the Death of Christ, otherwise He would never
have been raised from the Grave. Therefore does the Apostle say, Romans 4.25 He
arose again for our Justification. For Christ was brought to the Prison of the
Grave as our Surety. Well, but in as much as God let Him out, and by an
Almighty Arm broke the gates of the Grave, and let the Prisoner go forth, we
may conclude the Debt is paid; that Christ has made full satisfaction for all
our Sins, and therefore we shall not fail of the Blessedness we hope for.

4. Believers hope is built upon their Union with Christ. Col 1.27 Christ in
you the Hope of Glory. Therefore believers have a sure hope of Glory, because
Christ is in them. Christ dwells in them by his Holy Spirit. He has taken an
Eternal possession of them. Were it not for this, notwithstanding all that
Christ has done, men could not hope for Blessedness: But now the believer may
say, in as much as Christ is in me and I in Him, therefore shall I live
forever, Joh 14.19, 20 Because I live therefore you shall live also, you in me
and I in you. I am United to you says Christ, therefore as sure as I live, you
may conclude you shall live also. So long as a man's Head is above water, he
cannot be Drowned. Christ is the Head of Believers: They are the Members of his
Mystical Body, being by Faith United to Him* That Head lives forever, and is
now in blessedness; and therefore (...) all they be also in Gods time. As long
as their Union to Christ abides they need not fear, and that Union never shall
be dissolved. Therefore it is set forth in Scripture by that of a ^onjugal
Relation, Hos. 2.19 I am betrothed to thee forever. So long as the Eternal Son
of God, and the Immortal Soul of the Believer shall live so long shall the
Relation between Christ and him continue.

2. Another Reason why Believers should look for this Glorious Appearing of
Christ is, because of the Exceeding Greatness of that Blessedness which they
thus hope for. Ephesians. 1.18 That being enlightened, you may kn^w what is the hope
of His Calling, and what the riches of the Glory of His inheritance in the
Saints. Riches of Glory is called an Inheritance, because Saints have a right
to it by virtue of being made Heirs. They are Adopted, God has Adopted them, so
do they become heirs. Therefore the inheritance is theirs, and there is Riches
in it. Men give Portions to their Children according to their Riches. Well, but
the Portion that God will give to His Children, HIS Inheritance is Unspeakably
great. Therefore should they Look for it, Wait for it* it is worth Waiting,
Looking, and Preparing for. All the pains that can be taken, when it comes, it
will infinitely make amends for. There is nothing more desirable than Life.
This Blessedness is called Life, Rev. 2 10 I will give thee a Crown of Life. A
Kingdom is the greatest Happiness men on Earth are capable of enjoying.
Therefore this blessed hope is expressed by that of of a Kingdom, Jam. 2.5 The
Poor of this world, Rich in Faith, Heirs of the Kingdom, which He has promised
to them that Love him. No Heart can conceive, no Tongue can express the
Exceeding Greatness of this Glory: 1 Cor. 6.9 Eye has not seen, Ear has not
heard, neither has it entered into the Heart of man to conceive, what God has
Prepared for them that Wait for Him: that Look for this Blessed Hope. Thus we
see the Doctrine Confirmed in the things that have been mentioned.

USE I. For INSTRUCTION.
This instructs Believers on Christ, what manner of persons they ought to be,
and how they should carry it.

1. They should be Patient under their Affl^ctions* 1 These 1^3 Patience of
Hope. They should wait patiently. They should be Patient in Tribulation, for
this Blessed Hope will more than compensate for all Afflictions, that here we
undergo. It does far surmount and transcend all evils of Afflictions. Our Light
Afflictions which are but for a Moment, shall work for us a far more Exceeding
and Eternal weight of Glory.

2. They should be very Holy. For Blessedness and Holiness go together, Rev.
20.6 Blessed and Holy is he that has part in the First Resurrection. Believers
from the consideration of the blessed hope, endeavor after much holiness
Therefore the Ap^stle having spoken concerning the appearing of the Great God
and our Sav^o^r Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3 11 says, What manner of persons ought
you to be in all Holy Conversation and Godliness. Since we look for such
things, let us give all diligence to be found of him without blame. A great
part of the blessedness of Believers at the app^aring of Christ will consist in
their perfect Holiness, Ephesians. 1.4 He has chosen us that we should be Holy.
Therefore ought they now to strive if by any means they might attain to the
Resurrection of the Dead.

3 They ought not to be dejected and desponding, but rather cheerful in their
way and work. Thoughts of the Blessed Hope should make them Joyful in their
Serving God. And if they be otherwise, it will be a blemish to Religion. If
always dejected and discouraged, it will discourage others, and make them
think that Religion is a Malancholy thing. I have heard of two Eminent
Ministers, Old Nonconformist Puritans, who traveling together, as they came
to an Inn in the Rode, they were very Cheerful. The Innkeeper wondered at it,
and said to them, I thought such men as you are had always been Sad and
Malancholly: One of the Ministers replied, Let them be so that must go to Hell
when they Dye; we know that God has a Crnwn of Glory in Heaven for us, when
Christ shall appear we shall appear with him in Glory, that makes us Cheerful.
At which words, the Innkeeper was so affected, as that he became a Converted
man, and a Puritan. Wherefore Believers should chide themselves out of
Groundless dejections. Psalm 42.11 Why art thou cast down O my Soul?

USE II
How Miserable are they that have not a well-grounded Hope of Blessedness. The
greater the Blessedness the greater will their Misery be that shall not enjoy
it, but be deprived of it. And alas! there are many such: All Christless
Sinners are without a well-grounded Hope, Ephesians 2.12 Being without Christ having
no hope. Ah Christless Sinner, thou have no hope: 1 These. 4.13 That you sorrow
not even as others that have no hope. They that have not an Interest in Christ
are described to be such as have no hope. How should they have hope, that are
not interested in Christ, who is the sure Foundation for all our hope to be
built upon? If our hope is not built upon CHRIST, it is like a house built upon
the Sand. All that are in a state of Unregeneracy, have no well-grounded hope,
1 Pet 1.3 He has begotten us again to a lively hope. That man that has a lively
hope, that has hope of Eternal Life in another World, if it be well-grounded,
he is Begotten again. How should they that are in their Unregeneracy have a
well-grounded hope, when Christ with his own mouth has said, Joh. 3:3 Verily,
verily I say to you, that except you be Born again, you cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God. Well then, all Unregenerate Souls have cause to tremble: And, O
Lord God, how many are there here this day, that have cause to tremble as being
in an Unregenerate Estate, since the Lord has said, they cannot Enter into the
Kingdom of God. So as for all Ungodly ones, that Live Ungodly lives; there is
no hope that they shall be Blessed, if they go on in their Trespasses: 1 John
3.3 He that has this hope in him, Purifies himself, as He is pure. Have they
that live Unholy lives, a well-grounded hope? A Drunkard, has he any hope to be
Saved? Poor Wretch, it is impo^sible. So as to every Vicious person. He that
lives in Transgre^sions against the First Table: A profane Swearer, has he any
hope to be Saved? Some Ungodly men Swear by their hope, in saying, As I hope to
be Saved: Ah poor Wretch! hope to be Saved. if thou had any true hope to be
saved, thou would not dare to Swear by thy Salvation. So they that live in a
careless neglect of God, have they a well-grounded hope? They that live without
Prayer: God knows how many such are here this Day. Some that do not Pray in
their Families, others that do not Pray in their Closets* And what do they hope
to be Saved? Do they hope for Blessedness; when the Lord has said, All that
Forget God shall be turned down into Hell. As sure as this Bible is the Word of
God, if they Repent not it will be so. And all that are in a state of
Hypocrisy, have no well-grounded hope: Job 8.13 The hypocrites hope shall
Perish. He may hope while he Lives: But when will his hope be when he comes to
Dye? The Righteous indeed have hope in their Death: But the Hypocrite has none
then. Job 27.8 For what is the hope of the hypocrite though he has gained,
when God takes away his Soul? When Death come* and separates between his Soul
and Body, what becomes of his hope then? Such will be most Miserable, because
they Deceive themselves with a False hope; and it may be were never sensible of
it until their Souls were out of their Bodies, and dropped into Hell; and there
the First Cry will be, What am I come hither! I hoped to have gone to a better
place. How Doleful will that be?

USE III
1. Let Sinners be Exhorted to make sure of an Hope of Blessedness that will
not fail them. Other hopes will fail If men make Gold their hope, that will
fail them. If they make Creatures and worldly Comforts their hopes, they will
also fail them; and if their hopes of Heaven fail them too, what a Condition
will they be in? Know that Now, now is the time to make sure of a well-grounded
hope To him that is joined to the Living there is Hope. Yea, there is hope that
he may make sure of an Interest in Christ, Repent of Sin, and become a New
Creature, and so go to Heaven when he Dies. But when Life is gone, all hope is
gone with it: Isa 38.18 They that go down into the Pit, cannot hope for thy
Truth O think of it, Poor Sinful Creature; thou will ere long be gone down into
the Pit: If thou make not sure that thy Hope of Blessedness shall not fail
before that Day thou art lost fo^ever. Wherefore, make sure of your Effectual
Calling, Ephesians. 4.4 Even as you are Called in one hope of your calling. If you be
Effectually Called, then may you Hope for Eternal Life, and Glory in another
World.

2 Walk with God. Though true Believers cannot be deprived of their Hope, yet
if they do not walk with God, they may be deprived of the Comfort of it. Live
then Holy and Righteous Lives. The Crown of Life is Promised to those that have
an Interest in the Righteousnes^ of Christ. And that live Righteously as they
that are in Christ do, and cannot but do. And if it be so with us, then may we
say with the blessed Apostle, 2 Timothy 4.8 Henceforth there is laid up for me a
Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me at
that day, and not to me only, but unto all them also that love His Appearing.

SERMON III.
We proceed now to the Second Doctrine.

2. Doct. THat Jesus Christ is the Great God and our Savior.

At this time, we shall Discourse on the first of these;

Namely, That Christ is the Great God.

Several things may be mentioned as Demonstrations of this great Truth.

1. The Scripture Declares that Christ is God, yea the Great God. Thus in the
Text before us, HE at whose Appearing believers shall be Blessed, is said to be
the Great God. Now the Scripture says, 1 Pet. 1.7 Your Faith shall be found to
Honor and Glory, at the Appearing of Jesus Christ. Hence Christ is said to be
the Strong and Mighty Lord: Psalm. 24.8 He is the Lord, Strong and Mighty. And
He is not only said to be God, but He is styled The Mighty God: Isa. 9.6 To us
a Child is born, to us a Son is given, His Name shall be called Wonderful,
Counselor, The Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. And He
is said to be God over all. Romans 9.5 He is said to be Gods-Fellow: Zech. 13.17
Awake O Sword against the Man that is my Fellow, says the Lord of Hosts. And
he is said to be above all: Ioh. 3 31 He is above all Men, above all Angels,
above all Creatures* therefore is He the great God.

2 Christ is in respect of Nature God. And that is true concerning Him only,
who is the great God. For those gods that the Gentiles Worshipped, had not the
Nature of a Deity in them* Gal. 4.8 You did Service (says the Apostle) to
those which by Nature were not Gods. There are Creatures that have the name of
Gods given to them, but have not the nature of God in them. There are those who
in respect of Similitude are said to be Gods: Psalm 97.7 Worship Him all ye
gods; that is to say, all ye Angels, who resemble God more than any other
Creatures. And some are said to be Gods in respect of Office: So Magistrates,
especially Sovereign Princes: Psalm. 82.6 I have said you are Gods, but you
shall Dye like men. There are those that are Gods in respect of Reputation and
the vain Opinion of them that worship them, thereby making them to be Gods that
are not so* 1 Cor. 8.5 There are Gods many, and Lords many; that is to say, who
are reputed to be such. But there is but one that has the Nature of God in him^
Only one that is the True God. Therefore the Israelites said when they saw the
Miraculous Fire descending from God out of heaven, 1 King 18 39 The Lord he is
the God, the Lord he is the God. That is to say, the true God that has the
Nature of a God in him. Therefore others are not the Great God; That is a Style
peculiar to the true God, and cannot be given to any other without Blasphemy.
And to him must it be ascri^ed; Deuteronomy. 10* 17 The Lord is God of gods, and Lord
of lords; a great God, Mighty and Terrible. Greatness, Infinite greatness, must
be ascribed unto him. Great is the the Lord, and greatly to be Praised, his
greatness is Unsearchable* Psalm 145 3 But the Lord Jesus Christ is in respect
of Nature God. Most true it is, that Christ in respect of his Nature is Man
also, which is a wonderful thing. It Is an amazing Mystery, that the great* God
should b^come a man; 1 Timothy 3 16 Great is the Mystery of godliness, God manifest
in the Flesh. Jesus Christ is but one Person, but he has two Natures belonging
unto him; a Divine Nature and a Humane Nature; Phil 2.6, 7 He was in (...) form
of God, and in the likeness of Man. There is an Essential form, an Essential
likeness. Christ had in him the Essence both of God and also of Man^ The Jews
believed Christ was Man, when he did in the days of His Fle^h converse with
them; therefore they could not believe that he was truly God, that he had the
Nature of God in him, but they Blasphemously thought that Christ was guilty of
Blasphemy, because he did Declare himself to be God. For which cause they cast
Stones at him. For which of my good Works said Christ, do you Stone me; Not for
any good Works, (say they) Joh. 10.33 but for Blasphemy because thou being Man
make thy self God. But their Forefathers, the holy Patriarks of Old, did
believe and did take comfort in the Faith of it, that God would Assume the
Nature of man. Thus David believed, Psalm. 110.1 The Lord said to my Lord. The
Messiah was to be David's Son, yet he calls him his Lord. So then, he did
believe that his Lord would become a Man, that the great God would appear in
Humane Nature, and that He should be of his Family too. And long before David,
Job had the same Spirit of Faith, he believed that God would appear in the
Nature of man. Says Job 19.26 In my Flesh I shall see God. He did then believe
that God would become a Man; for the Divine Nature cannot be seen with bodily
Eyes. God is the Invisible God. Job knew that with his bodily Eyes he should at
the latter day see God, and therefore that God would assume the Nature of Man,
in which he would become Visible to men. That Christ has the Nature of God in
Him, is Evident;

1. In that the Essential Names and Titles of the True God are given to Him in
the Scriptures* e. g. That glorious Name of JEHOVAH. None but the great God may
be called by that Name. The 83 Psalm 18. He whose Name alone is Jehovah. But
Christ is called by that Name. Gen 22.14 Abraham called the name of that place
where Christ appeared to him Iehovahjereh. Jehovah said to him, in Blessing I
will Bless thee. That is not to be understood of God the Father, for He that is
there called Jehovah, is also called the Angel of the Lord: the Father is never
said to be an Angel, only the Son of God in respect of his Office, many times
is so called in Scripture. Jer. 23.6 Christ is called Jehovah Tzidkenu, as 't^s
translated, The Lord our Righteousness. In Rev. 1.8 He is said to be He that
is, that was, and that is to come, which is an Explication or Interpretation of
the Name Jehovah. Again, there is that title of I AM, which is peculiar to the
true God. When Christ appeared to Moses, He assumed that Name, Exodus 3.14 I AM
THAT I AM, thou shall say to the Children of ^srael, I AM has sent me to you.
Christ did assume that name to Himself, Joh. 8.58 Before Abraham was I am. So
there is that Name of The Lord of Host^, which is peculiar to the true God; and
yet it is in Scripture given to the Lord Jesus Christ: Psalm. 24.10 Who is the
King of Glory? The Lord of Hosts is the King of Glory. The words are spoken
concerning Christ These are Titles fit for none but the great God.

2. It is evident that Jesus Christ is in respect of Nature God, in that He is
Gods own Son. Romans 8.32 God spared not His own Son. Christ is not (as Believers
are) the Adopted Son of God, but His Own Son in respect of Nature, in respect
of Eternal Generation. And therefore is styled in Scripture, The Begotten Son
of God: Joh. 1.19 We beheld His Glory, the Glory as of the only Begotten of the
Father. Now a Father and an own Son, are of the same Nature. So is Christ of
the same Nature with the great God. And in that respect He is as great as God
the Father: Joh^ 5.18 He said that God is His Father, making himself equal with
God. Christ in respect of his Humane Nature, is not Equal with God, but
infinitely Inferior to Him; and in respect of his Office as he (...) Mediator,
though on that account, He is Superior to all Men and Angels yet Inferior to
God. Therefore did Christ say, Joh. 14 28 My Father is greater than I.
Considered as Mediator, the Father is greater than He. But then in respect of
his Person, as he is the Son of God, so the Father and He are Equal: My Father
and I am one. Ioh. 10.30 That is the Second Demonstration of the Truth before
us.

3. The incommunicable properties of the Great God are to be affirmed of Jesus
Christ. There are Properties and Attributes of God which are Communicable, such
are Wisdom, Holiness, Goodness and the like. But they are not in Creatures in
that proportion as they are in God. All the wisdom and goodness that is in all
the Angels in Heaven, is like but as a drop of water to that which is in the
Ocean, compared with that which is in God. But then, there are also
Incommunicable Properties of the Divine Nature, which cannot be affirmed of any
but the Great God.

As now, Eternity is an Incommunicable Property of the great God. Deuteronomy. 33.27
The Eternal God shall be thy Refuge. He alone is the Eternal God. That is
Eternal, which has neither beginning nor ending. There are some Creatures which
shall never Die; Angels and the Souls of men are Immortal. But there is no
Creature which has not had a beginning. But God is from Everlasting: Psalm. 90.2
From Everlasting to Everlasting, thou art God. This must be said, and it is
necessary unto Salvation that we should believe this, concerning Christ. We may
not think that He was not, until he was born of the Virgin Mary. He was God in
Heaven before he was Man on Earth. Therefore, Ioh. 6.62 What do you say, (says
Christ) if you shall see the Son of Man ascend up where He was before? Christ
was before in that Heaven whether he did ascend, even before ever he was seen
among men in this world. Abraham lived about two thousand Years before Christ
was born, and yet Christ was before Abraham: Joh. 8.53 Before Abraham was, I
am, says Christ. He was then before he came into the world: when the world
began Christ was. Time began with the world: but in Ioh. 1.1 it is said, In the
Beginning was the Word, that is Christ, and the Word was with God. When the
world began Christ was with God, yea before the world began: Joh. 17 5 The
Glory which I had with thee before the world began. And therefore from all
Eternity: Mic. 5.2 Whose goings forth has been of Old, from Everlasting.
Christ is from Everlasting, therefore He is the great God.

Again, Omnipotency is another Incommuninable Attribute of the Great God. There
are Creatures which are said to be Mighty. Angels are styled Mighty Ones: Joel
3.11 But there is no Creature which is Almighty: But Christ is so. Rev. 1.8
Christ there says, I am the Alpha and Omega. He is styled, the Lord God
Omnipotent. When the day shall come (and it will come, and God grant it may
come quickly) when Christ shall Reign Gloriously before the whole World, then
will it be said, as in Rev. 19 6 The Lord God Omnipotent Reigns. Christ is the
Lord God Omnipotent, and therefore He is the great God.

Again, Omnipresence is an Incommunicable Attribute of the Great God. Ier^
23.24* Do not I fill Heaven and Earth says the Lord. That is peculiar to God
to fill Heaven and Earth, to be in all places at the same time. And ye^ this is
to be affirmed concerning Christ: Joh. 3.9 None has ascended into Heaven, but
the Son of Man who is in Heaven. To be in Heaven and on Earth too at the same
time, is peculiar to the great God: Yet it is true concerning Christ Therefore
Christ said, in Mat. 18.20 Where there are two or three gathered together in my
Name, there am I in the midst of them. Where ever there are Christians
Assembled together in the Name of Christ, there is He in the midst of them; yet
they may be far distant one from another, it may be Ten Thousand Miles, as far
as the East is from the West.

Again, Omniscience is an Incommunicable Property of the great God There are
some men that know a great deal, that have very enlarged Understandings, and
Angels know much more than they; but none of them knows all things: none of
them has an Infinite Understanding; that is proper to the great God, Psalm 147.5
Great is the Lord, his Understanding is infinite. But this must be affirmed of
Christ, that he knows all things, as Peter confessed to him, Joh. 21.17 Lord
(says he) thou know all things. To see what ever is in the hearts of men,
is peculiar to the great God: 1 King. 8.39 Thou only know all the Hearts of
the Children of men. And yet this is to be said concerning Christ: He knows how
the hearts of men stand inclined and affected; He knows what ever is there.
There is not a thought in the heart, but it is known unto Him. The Son of God
has Eyes like to a flame of Fire. Rev. 2.23 He Searches the Reins and Heart:
therefore he is the great God. That is the Third Demonstration.

4. Jesus Christ has done, does do, and will do such things, as none but the
great God can do. He has done that which none but the great God can do. None
but God can Create: Isa. 40.28 The Eternal God, the Creator of the Ends of the
Earth. None but the great God is the Creator: But Christ is the Creator. There
is is not any Creature in the world, but came out of his hands, it was made by
him: Joh. 1.3 The world was made by him, and there was noth^ng made without
him. All Creatures are either visible or invisible, belonging either to the
upper or lower world, all of both those were made by Christ: Col. 1.16 He has
Created all things that are in Heaven or on Earth, Visible and Invisible, by
him and for him they were Created^ So to be the Author of that which is a true
and proper Miracle, is peculiar to God: Psalm 136.4 He only does great Wonders.
That God only who is the God of Nature, can change the course of Nature, and
act above the Constituted order of Nature, when ever he shall please. But
Christ has done glorious Miracles, and that by His own Power. The Jews had a
mavelous expectation that when the Messiah came, he would do wonderful
things; that he would be the Author of many Miracles. They had reason to expect
it from the Scriptures of the Old Testament. And when Christ came, some said,
When the Messiah comes, shall he do more Miracles than this man does? He did
such Miraculous things, the like was never done in the world before. Ioh. 9.32
The man that had been Born blind, and was by Christ made to see, says, Since
the world began it was never heard, that a man should open the Eyes of one born
Blind. It Is true, the Apostles did Wonderful things, Miraculous things; but it
was not they, but Christ by them that did them. Therefore Peter said to some,
Acts 3.12 Why do you look on us, as though we had by our own Power done this.
No, it was by virtue of the Power of Christ, that we did it says the Apostle^
But when Christ did Miraculous things, they were done by him through his own
Power. Therefore he said to the Leper, Mat. 8.3 I will be thou Clean. I will,
none but the great God might speak such a word, or say I will that it shall be
so. It shows, that Christ had an all Powerful Will; that he can do what ever he
will do. And therefore He is the great God.

And there are such things done by Christ at this day, as do Declare him to be
the great God. None but the great God can preserve and uphold the world in
being. All Creatures would return to their first nothing, if the infinite Arm
of God did not uphold them: Neh. 9.6 Thou even thou art Lord abo^e, thou have
made Heaven and Earth, and all things that are therein, and thou preservest
them all. It is Gods work to preserve the Creatures that are in the world. Now
this is true concerning the Lord Jesus Christ: Heb. 1.3 He upholdeth all
things. The Son of God upholds all things by the Word of his Power; then he is
the great God. Therefore Christ says, Joh. 17.5 I work hitherto. Namely in
upholding the world, in preserving the world, in governing the world and all
Creatures therein. Preservation is a continued Creation; and so does Christ
work hitherto.

And He will do such things as Declare him to be the great God. For he will
raise the Dead from their graves, and none but the great God can do that: Acts
26.8 Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should
Raise the Dead? Were there not a God of infinite Power, it were impossible as
to those Bodies that have been devoured by Fishes in the Sea, and by wild
Beasts upon the Land, which has been the Fate of many a true Believer. It was a
common thing in the days of the Roman Pagan Emperors, to throw Christians to
the wild Beasts to Devour them. Now that those Bodies that have been Devoured
by Beasts should be restored to Life, how incredible may it seem to carnal
Reason? The Pagan Persecutors, would burn the bodies of Christians many times,
and throw the Ashes into the Rivers on purpose to confute their fancy, that
their bodies would arise again. Who but an infinite God, can make those very
bodies to come together and live again? But Christ can do it, and will do this
very thing. Joh. 6.14 He that Believes (says Christ) I will raise him up at
the Last Day. When Lazarus Died, and had been Dead and Buried four Days,
Christ stood over his grave, Joh. 11 43 and said, Lazarus come forth; and he
that was Dead did come forth at the word of Christ. So at the great Day (which
Lord let it com^ quickly!) Christ will stand over the Earth and say, Ye Dead
come forth out of your graves And all the Dead shall come forth, every one in
his own order^ Therefore, John 5.25 28 says Christ* The hour shall come when
the Dead shall hear the Voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it shall
Live; and all that are in their graves shall come forth. He then is the great
God, that can command all the Dead to come to Life again. That is the Fourth
Demonstration of the Truth before us.

5. The great God only is the Object of Divine Worship. Matthew. 4.10 Thou shall
worship the Lord thy God, and Him only thou shall Serve. God only is to be
Served, that is with Religious Service and Worship. But Christ is so. We have
instances in Scripture, of those that Worshipped Christ: The wise men of the
^ast, Mat. 2.11 and the Disciples, L^k. 24 52 W^rshipped him. And so do we at
this day, our being here is a worshipping of Christ* our observing the
Christian Sabbath, is a worshipping of Christ: And in our subjecting to Baptism
and the Lords Supper, we wor^^ip the Lord Jesus Christ. Baptism is to be
Administered in his Name: Acts 19.5 They were Baptized into the Name of Christ.
We may not Baptize into the Name of a Creature. So Prayer is a part of
Religious worship. Christ is the Object of Prayer: Dying Stephen Prayed to
Christ to receive his Soul: Acts 7.59 Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. All
Christians Pray to him: 1 Cor. 1.2 All that call on the Lord Jesus Christ our
Lord, both theirs and ours. All christians do call on the Name of Christ; and
therefore, He is the Object of Religious Worship. Yea, and all the Angels in
Heaven, are commanded to worship him: Heb. 1.6 Worship him all (...) Angels.
And they all do worship him. There ^s not a Saint in glory, nor an Angel in
heaven, but what does wors^^p Christ continually: Rev. 5 13 All that are in
Heaven are Singing, Blessing and Honor (...) to Him that sits upon the
Throne, and to the (...) for ever, and ever.

6. God only is the Churches Lawgiver. Isa. 33.22 He is our King, he is our
Lawgiver. God alone has power over the Souls of men. Conscience is subject to
him only: It was a wise Speech of a famous King, That to have an Empire over
the consciences of men, is Gods Prerogative. But Christ has so: He is the
Churches Lawgiver. Nathaniel said to him, Joh. 1 49 Thou art the Son of God,
the King of Israel. He is the King of the church: He has power to give Laws in
the worship of God. Therefore, Mat. 28 20 Observe all things what ever I
command you Christ has power to command what shall be Observed, and to appoint
Ordinances for the worship of God, which shows that he is the great God

7thly. and Lastly. Only God has power to Forgive Sins. Who is like to thee? O
Lord that Pardons Iniquity. The Pharisees were right in their Doctrine,
though wrong in their Application: Mar* 2.7 Who can Forgive Sins, but God only?
But Christ has this Power: Mat 9.6 He has power to Forgive Sin. Therefore he
himself says, Rev* ^.17 I will give him a white Stone. I will acquit and
absolve: It belongs to him to Forgive Sin, and to none else: Rev. 1 18 He has
the Keys of Hell and Death. Has he not Power then to Deliver from Hell, and to
send Sinners down into Hell? These things show that Christ is the Great God.

USE I.
If Christ is the great God, then it was an infinite Condescension in Him to
become a Man. I do not say, that his Incarnation was part of his State of
Humiliation, as his Sufferings were: For His State of Humiliation is now past,
whereas His State of Incarnation continues, and will do so to all Eternity. But
it was an act of condescension, and in that respect He humbled himself. God
condescends infinitely, if He does so much as look on any of his Creatures: If
he does so much as look upon the most glorious Angel in Heaven, it is an
infinite condescension in him; Psalm 113.6 He humbles himself to behold the
things in Heaven. He stoops down infinitely, to behold the Angels in Heaven.
The Angels there, acknowledge that they are not worthy that the Son of God
should look upon them* Isa. 6.2 they are represented as covering their Faces
before His glory, thereby confessing, that they are not worthy that the Son of
God should look upon them. If the Son of God should have assumed an Angel into
Personal (...) with Himself, what an Infinite condescentio^ would that have
been? But he has condescended more than this; For men are beneath Angels.
Christ in respect of his becoming a man, is made a little lower than the
Angels^ But then, Oh! how great was his condescension, in that He was willing
to be not only a man, but a Poor mean man, in the Opinion of the world; 2 Cor
8.9 You know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though He was Rich, yet for
our sakes He became Poor. He was Rich, all the Riches in the world belong to
God. Christ the great God, though he were Rich, yet became Poor for our sakes.
A Poor Man, one that had not where to lay his Head* One that was Mocked at,
Scoffed at, Spit upon, Buffeted, Crucified. That HE who is the great God should
condescend to this, what a wonderful thing is it? That He should condescend not
only to be a man, but to be Enosh, a Sorrowful Man. We read in the Gospel, of
his Weeping; we never read of Christ's Laughing, but of his Weeping more than
once. He Wept over the grave of Lazarus; He Wept over Jerusalem. And we read of
his Sighing; He fetched deep Sighs and Groans, several times. But we never read
any thing of his Mirth. He was a Man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief.
Sorrow was no stranger to him. Now, that God should condescend thus for our
sakes, how wonderful is it?

USE II.
We see the Reason of several Glorious things which are to be Affirmed
concerning the Lord Jesus Christ. As now, we see here the reason why Christ did
not faint, and sink under that Burden of his Office, as Mediator* It was
because He is the great God. Had any mere Creature had that burden on him, were
it an Angel, he could not have subsisted under it. He is able to perform His
Office of a Mediator in all respects^ Christ is able to discharge his
Prophetical Office, to Instruct all the Elect of God, in all Ages. There are
Hundreds of Thousands, yea, Millions of Souls, that he has instructed as a
Prophet: This is because he is the great God; otherwise if he had been no more
then a man, then a creature, he could not have done it. Whence is it he did not
sink under the weight of his Sufferings? Christ suffered such things, as no man
in the world ever did the like. It is said, His visage was marred more than any
of the Sons of men. Yet he did bear up under those sufferings. He suffered, not
only in his Body, but also in Soul, when he made His Soul an Offerring for Sin.
How should he have been able to bear up under the Wrath of the Father, that lay
upon him when he was Surety for the Elect of God, but that he is God? And so
his Divine Nature did support his Humane Nature, and made him capable of
enduring such things, as never man did or could do. Likewise, we see the reason
why the Sufferings of Christ were infinitely Meritorious, viz. because he was
God. That the Elect of God might be redeemed from Death, it was necessary that
a Life should be given for them, yea, and a Life that was more worthy, then the
Life of all Men and Angels was given for them; that is the Life of him who is
God: 1 John 3.16 God laid down his Life. That cannot but be a Life that is
infinitely precious Some men's lives one of them is more precious then a hundred
thousand of other men. Well, but the Life of Christ is of more value, then the
lives of all the men in the world, because he is the great God. Therefore his
Blood has infinite Merit in it. Acts 20 28 God has purchased his Church with
his own Blood. God, that is Christ, who is the great God. That Blood which is
the Blood of Him who is the great God, must needs be of infinite worth and
value: Nothing else could Redeem one Soul; nothing but the Blood of him who is
the great God; and that is of value sufficient to Redeem Thousands, yea
Millions of Souls. Nothing else could make Atonement for Sin, no not for the
least sin that ever was committed; but the Blood of Christ, because he is the
great God is enough to make Atonement for the greatest sins that ever men were
guity of. Suppose they have been guilty of never so many sins, there is Merit
enough in Christ's Blood to obtain the Remission of them all, because he is the
great God. This also is the Reason, why the Man Christ Jesus is exalted above
all Men and Angels: It is because that Man is one person with the Son of God,
therefore is he set above all Angels, and Arch-Angels^ Angels in heaven are all
made subject to him. He did no sooner ascend into Heaven, but God made him to
sit down on his Throne: Rev. 3^21 I am sat down with my Father on His Throne.
He is sat down on the Right Hand of the Majesty on high. All the Angels in
heaven are become Servants to this Lord. In respect of Christ there are
wonderful things to be said. Our Nature is exalted and dignified above the
Nature of Angels. There is not an Angel in Heaven, of whom it can be said, that
Angel is the great God. But there is a Man in heaven, a Man now at the
Right Hand of God, of whom it may be said and must be said, that Man is the
great God. This is mavelous indeed*

USE III.
If Jesus Christ is the great God, then Woe and ten Thousand Woes for ever,
shall be to them that refuse the Lord Jesus Christ. Heb. 12.25 See that ye
refuse not him that speaks, for if they escaped not who refused him that
spoke on Earth, much more shall we not escape if we turn away from him that
speaks from Heaven, whose Voice then shook the Earth. It is Christ whose
Voice shook the Earth. Moses tells us, that when the Lord came down from Heaven
on Mount Sinai, the Mount quaked exceedingly; it was the Voice of the Son of
God that made that Mountain to quake exceedingly. And shall not sinful
Creatures quake before him, and be afraid to Disobey him? Who can stand before
him who is the great God, when once he is Angry? Rev^ 6.16, 17 There we may see
how the great Ones, the Captains, the Mighty men Cried to the Rocks to fall on
them; O ye Mountains cover us from the Face of the Lamb, for the great Day of
his Wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? Woe to the hardness and
blindness of the Hearts of men, who are less afraid of the great God than the
Devils themselves are. The Scripture says, that the Devils believe and
tremble. They believe that there is one God, and they tremble before him. They
believe that Christ is the great God, and they tremble before him. The Gospel
informs us how the Devils Prayed, and Begged that he would not cause them to be
Tormented before their time. And what shall men that call themselves
Christians, be worse than the Devils? It may be there are here some this Day,
that never Prayed to Christ, that never said to him, Lord! let not me go down
into Hell, into the place of Torment!

You will say, who is it that does not Obey the Voice of Christ? O that there
were not many such! But has not Christ commanded men that they should Repent of
Sin, and that at the Peril of their Souls: Luke 13.3 Christ there says, Except
^e Repent, ye shall all likewise Perish. Are there no Impenitent ones here this
Day? Is there never a one in this Assembly, that has not Repented of Sin to
this day? Well then, thou art the person that refusest to Obey Christ the great
God. And has not Christ commanded men, that they shall live Holy and Righteous
lives, as ever they would go to Heaven. Does not Christ say, Mat. 5 20 I say to
you, except your Righteousness exceeds the Righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. But Oh, how
many that hear me this day are there, whose Righteousness does not exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees. You are they that refuse to Obey
the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the great God. Has not Christ said, Pray in
Secret every day, Mat. 6.26 Enter into thy Closet, (says Christ) Pray to thy
Father who is in Secret. But are there none here this day, who live in the
d^ily neglect of secret communion with God? Young men, hear* the word of the
Lord. Children, hear the word of the Lord, do you not live without secret
Prayer? Be it known unto you, that you are they that Obey not the Voice of
Christ, the great God. Now then, what do you think will become of your Souls
for ever? Your Immortal Souls? The Word of the Lord, this Bible tells you what
will become of them, Acts 3.23 It shall come to pass, that every Soul that will
not hear him, shall be destroyed. That will come on it. Every Soul that will
not hear Christ, that will not Obey the Voice of him who is the great God,
every such Soul shall be Destroyed forever.

USE IV.
Lastly Let us then give unto the Lord Jesus Christ, that which is due to the
great God alone. Let us give him our very Souls: Prove. 23.26 Give me thy Heart.
That is the Voice of Christ, thy Heart, thy Soul, give it to me. We may not
give our Souls to any Creature. But to Christ, we may and must, and trust him
with the Salvation thereof. Depend we upon him for Eternal Life to be given to
our Souls^ And let us love Christ more than any creature in the whole world,
for he is Worthy of it: He is the great God. It is impossible we should love
God more then we ought to do. We^l then, we can never love Christ more then we
ought to do. And if we do not love him more than any thing whatsoever, we are
not worthy to be his Disciples. We should love Him with all our Heart, Soul and
Might. And let us honor Christ above all: He is worthy of it, because he is
the great God. We must give him that honor, that we give God the Father: For
he is one with the Father. Joh 5.23 All judgment is committed to him, that so
all men may Honor the Son as they Honor the Father. God would have us to do
so. Let us then make the honor of Christ, the glory of Christ the great Design
of our lives. What should we care to live in this sinful wo^^l wo^ld for, but
for this one thing* that we may Glorify Christ, promote his Honor and
Interest in the world while we are here, which after we are Dead we cannot do.
Well then, let that be our chief design, Phil. 1.21 For me to Live is Christ.
That should be the reason why we should be willing to live, that we may do
service for, and glorify the Name of Christ. And that man that can say, For me
to Live is Christ, may also say, For me to Die shall be Gain

SERMON IV.
We come now to speak to the latter part of the Doctrine;

Namely, THat Jesus Christ is our Savior.

For Clearing the Truth before us, three Particulars may be Enquired i^to.

1. How it does appear that Jesus Christ is a Savior?

2. What manner of Savior He is?

3. For whom He is a Savior?

Q. 1. How does it appear that Jesus Christ is a Savior?

Answ^ 1. It is Evident from the Names which are given to him in Scripture.
This Name of SAVIOR, is given to Him; 2 Pet. 3.18 Our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. Very often in Scripture is he described by this Name. Yea, he is called
Salvation it self: Luke 2 30 Simeon said, Mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation.
Because he had with his Eyes seen Christ, whom he calls Salvation. Therefore
the Name of Jesus is given to him. An Angel from heaven, did declare that he
should be called by that Name, and for this reason, in that he should be a
Savior. Mat. 1.21 The Angel said to Joseph concerning Christ, Thou shall call
his Name Jesus, for he shall Save his People from their Sins. Jesus signifies a
Savior. It comes from the Hebrew word, Iasha, Salvavit, as much as to say, He
that Saves. So that Name Shiloh is given to him: Genesis 49.10 Until Shiloh come:
that is until Christ come. Shiloh is as much as to say, one that is the Author
of tranquillity, and safety. And he is called by that Name of a Redeemer: Isa^
59 20 A Redeemer shall come to Zion^ When Christ came into the world, then did
a Redeemer come to Zion. And in the next words to the Text before us, it is
said, He gave himself that he might Redeem us from all Iniquity. And he is
called a Deliverer. Moses was a Typical Deliverer, whence Stephen said of him,
Acts 7.35 That God sent him to be a Ruler, and Deliverer of the People. Moses
was a Deliverer from Pharaoh, and from the Egyptians, but Christ is a Deliverer
from the Pharaoh of Hell, and the Egyptians of Hell. It is from him that we are
Delivered from the Powers of Darkness. Col. 1.13

2. Jesus Christ and he only, is a fit person to be a Savior for the sinful
Children of men. He that shall be our Savior, must be both God and Man, which
is true concerning Jesus Christ, and of him only.* Our Savior must be God. The
great God he is called a Savior: Isa. 43 11 God says, I am the Lord, and
besides me there is no Savior. And in Isa* ^5.21 He is a Just God, and a
Savior. If Jesus Christ had been a man only, he could never have been the
Savior of one Soul Nor might we then have trusted to him for salvation: Psalm.
146.3 Trust not in the son of man, in whom there is no help. If Christ had been
the son of man only, there could have been no help, no salvation in him, or to
be hoped for by him. It is said, Ier. 17.5* Cursed is he that trusts in man,
and that makes flesh his arm. But therefore Christ is God. We are by reason of
sin, fallen into the hands of mighty Enemies; such as all the men in the world
could never have saved one soul out of their hands: Isa. 49.24 Shall the Prey
be taken from the Mighty, or the lawful Captives be delivered? The Mighty had
made a prey of the Souls of men: and no Mortal could take the prey out of the
hands of those Mighty. Moreover, we were fallen into the hands of Almighty
justice. And who could save us from the Omnipotent hands? God says, Deuteronomy.
32.39 I wound and I heal, neither is there any that can deliver out of my hand.
He then that can deliver out of the hands of Divine Justice, by making
Atonement for sinners, must needs be more than a man. And yet it is necessary,
that the Savior should be Man, that so ^e might in a way of Suffering, make
satisfaction for the sins of men. It was requisite that the same Nature that
had sinned, should suffer that so satisfaction may be made for sin: Heb. 2.14
Forasmuch as the Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also himself
took part of the same: that through Death, he might destroy him that had the
power of death, that is the Devil. He did not take to him the Nature of Angels,
but the S^ed of Abraham; the same Nature that Abraham had. If Christ had been
God only, then he could not have suffered for sin* for the Godhead cannot
suffer. It Is said, Acts 17.79 We ought not to think that the Godhead is like
unto Gold or Silver, or Stone graven by art and man's devices. So we ought not
to think the Godhead can suffer any thing. No* Eternity cannot Dye. Therefore
God must become Man, that so he might be a Savior for man. This is according
to that Eternal agreement which was between God the Father and the Son, before
the world began; that the Son of God should assume the Nature of man, and be
made a sacrifice for the sins of men. Heb. 10.5 It is said, Sacrifice and
Offering thou would not, but a Body have thou prepa^ed for me. When it is
said, God had no pleasure in sacrifices and offerings, the meaning is, that all
the Sacrifices and Offerings appointed by the Mosaical-Law could never appease
God, or satisfy Divine Justice. Could never purge the Consciences of men from
the guilt of sin, it was impossible that they should; therefore a Body is
prepared by God for Christ. The Son of God must therefore assume a Humane Body,
and a Rational Soul; and that Nature must be made a sacrifice for the sins of
men. And for such a Person as the Son of God to be sacrificed, is an infinitely
greater thing then if all the men in the whole world had been made a sacrifice.
Thus then Jesus Christ is a Savior, being both God and Man.

3. Jesus Christ is vested with a Glorious Office, that so He might be our
Savior. There is a Salvation-Office that does belong unto him. And in respect
of that, he is said to be not only Jesus, but Christ: Mat. 16.16 Thou art
Christ the Son of the Living God. And he is said to be the Messiah: Joh. 1.41
We have found the Messiah, which is by Interpretation Christ. Messiah and
Christ are words of the same signification, only Messiah is an Hebrew word, and
Christ a Greek word; and both of them signify the Anointed: Psalm 2.2 They
imagine a vain thing against the Lord, and against His Anointed. In the Hebrew
it is against His Messiah* which in our singing Psalms is well Translated,
against His Christ. The Priests and Kings of Israel, who were Anointed with
Oil, were in that respect Types o^ Christ; who was Anointed not with any
material Oil, as they were; but with the Oil of the Spirit of God This
Anointing does imply both his call unto, and fitness for his Office. Psalm 45.7
The Lord thy God has Anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness, above thy Fellows.
In respect of his Office, he is said to be a Shepherd: Joh. 10 11 I am (says
Christ) the good Shepherd. It belongs to a Shepherd to save his sheep from
Wolves and Devourers. So Christ as the good Shepherd, has saved his Elect from
the Devourers of Hell, that would have Destroyed them. In respect of his
Office, he is said to be a Bishop of Souls: 1 Pet 2.25 He is the Shepherd and
Bishop of our Souls. A Bishop must endeavor to the uttermost of his power, the
salvation of the souls of those under his care. And in respect of his Office,
he is said to be a Messenger: Mal. 3.1 He is the Messenger of the Covenant.
That Covenant of Grace, which speaks of salvation was made for Christ's sake, is
confirmed by his Death, and the salvation therein promised, is for his sake
also bestowed. Again, on the account of his Office, he is said to be a Surety.
He is the Surety of a better Covenant. Heb. 7 22 He has undertaken to perform
all that was needful to be done in order to our Salvation; to pay our Debts,
and to satisfy the Law for us; therefore is he called a Surety. In respect of
his Office, he is said to be a Mediator: Heb. 12.24 Jesus the Mediator of the
New Covenant. He is the Mediator of the New Covenant, because He does interpose
between God and Man, and in a way of Mediation obtains our salvation. And
hence, he is said to be a Prophet; and by way of Eminency That Prophet: In Ioh.
6.14 He is That P^ophet that should come into the world. Sinners have Blind
Minds, Darkened Understandings: they are out of the way unto salvation, and
cannot of themselves find the way. But therefore the Prophetical Office of
Christ is a Remedy against that Misery. For Christ as a Prophet has instructed
us in the way unto Salvation; and has declared unto us all that is needful for
us to know that we may be saved. The Woman of Samaria, could say, Joh. 4.25
When the Messiah comes He shall tell us all things. Christ as the Prophet of
His Church, has told us all things, that are necessary to be known. No man
needs to know any more, in order to his obtaining Eternal Life, then what
Christ as a Prophet has Revealed. The Scriptures are able to make wise unto
Salvation. Now Christ as the Great Prophet of His Church, has given the
Scripture to His People. Again, Christ is said to be a Priest: Heb, 3^1 He is
the High Priest of our profession. Aa^on was the high Priest of the Jewish
Profession: Christ is the high Priest of our Christ^an Profession. And he has
therefore made Atonement for the sins of His People. Sin has made a breach
between God and Man. No doubt when the Devil had caused man to sin, he hoped he
had Ruined him for (...) and (...) question but the holy Angels stood amazed,
and looked on man as a lost Creature, until they knew that the Son of God
interposed and undertook to be a Priest for them, and to make Atonement for
them by being Bruised, that so their sins might be satisfied for. By Him we
receive the Atonement, and He is a Propitiation for our sins. It belonged to
the Priest also to offer Incense, and to intercede for the People. So has
Christ done, and in that way does he perfect our Salvation. Heb 7.25 He is able
to Save unto the Uttermost, since he ever Lives to make Intercession. Christ
has also a Kingly-Office belonging to Him. The Jews when they write of the
Messiah, are wont to call him, the King Messiah. So does the Scripture say of
Him that he is a King. Joh. 1.49 Thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of
Israel. The Son of God is the King and Ruler of the Universe, but of Israel of
his Church, of the People of God, in a peculiar manner. And therefore he is
their Savior* Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, He
will Save us. It belongs to a King to protect his Subjects against their
Enemies, to save them from those that would Destroy them. So does Christ do:
Acts 5.31 He is a Prince and a Savior. Inasmuch as He is a Prince, He is a
Savior. He is the Prince of Life, for that he is the Author of Life and
Salvation, to those whom God has given to him. And this Office that Christ is
vested with, it is God that has called him to it. He is the Christ of God:
Hence Luke 2.26 He is called, the Lords Christ. So that God has called him to
this Office. And he is therefore said to be sent of God. The Father has sent
his Son to be the Savior of the world. 1 Ioh. 4.14 God has given him a
commission under the great Seal of Heaven: Joh. 6.27 Him has God the Father
Sealed. Christ did not undertake to be the Prophet of His Church, without a
call from God thereunto. Deuteronomy 18.18 I (says God) will Raise up a Prophet, and
will put my words into his Mouth, and he shall speak all that I shall Command
him. Christ is the Prophet there spoken of. Nor did Christ make himself a
Priest, without being called of God to that Office: Heb. ^.4, 5 No man takes
this Honor to himself, but he that is called of God; so also Christ glorified
not himself to be made a High Priest. He did not interpose in the Controversy
between God and man, until God called him to it. So as to that Office of a
King, Christ was called of God unto it. Therefore, Psalm. 2.6 God says, I have
set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion. God calls Christ His King, as being
appointed by Him to that glorious Office of a King, over the Souls of men.
Therefore it is said, Psalm. 4.3 Know that the Lord has set apart him that is
Godly for Himself The words are partly indeed to be understood concerning
David's being set apart to the Kingly Office, but principally concerning Christ,
who was set apart to be Prophet, Priest and King, God set him apart thereunto.
In respect of this Office that Christ is vested with, in order to his being a
Savior, He is styled Gods Servant: Isa. 42.1 Behold my Servant, whom I uphold
mine Elect, in whom my Soul delights. Gods Servant, for this was the greatest
undertaking that could be. And Christ has done the greatest Service for God
then ever was, in saving his Elect. Joseph did great service for the King of
Egypt, when he saved the Lives of all his Subjects. The Egyptians confessed to
him, Genesis 47.25 Thou have saved our Lives. In that Joseph, was a Type of
Christ, who has done wonderful service for God the King of Heaven; in that He
has saved the Lives of all His Children, all His Elect. So then we see that
Christ is a Savior on the account of his Office.

4. Jesus Christ has purchased our Salvation, and therefore he is our Savior.
That is one way in which Captives are Redeemed, viz. when a Price is paid and
their Liberty Purchased for them So it has been here* We were all in miserable
Servitude and Slavery, but Christ* has laid down a Price, whereby he has
purchased our Freedo^: 1 Cor. 7.23 Ye (...) bought with a ^rice, says the
Apostle. With a Price, what was that Price? It must ne^ds be some great matter:
For an Immortal Soul is more worth than all the world. Therefore must it be
some great matter that shall Purchase the Redemption and Salvation of Souls.
All Men and Creatures in Heaven and in Earth, were not able to lay down a Price
sufficient, to Purchase the Redemption of a Soul: Psalm. 49.8 The Redemption of
their Soul is precious, and cease forever. But Christ could do it, and has
done it. He has laid down that which is a Price sufficient. He has given that
for their Redemption, which is worth as much as all the Souls in the world are
worth, and infinitely more. For in 1 Timothy 2.6 He gave Himself a Ransom for
many. Himself is more worth than all the men in the world. They said to David,
2 Samuel 1^.3 Thou art worth ten thousand of us. Christ is more worth than Ten
Thousand worlds. And yet he has given Himself to Purchase the salvation of his
People. He has given his own Life for it: Mat. 20.28 He ga^e h^s Life a Ransom
for man. And who can say what that Life is worth. For whose Life is it? The
Apostle John tells us, 1 John 3.16 Hereby percei^^e we the Love of God, because
he laid down his Life for us. It is the Life of God. Christ has given his own
Blood to Purchase our salvation: Acts 20.28 The Church of God which he has
Purchased with his own Blood. That is which Christ who is the great God, has
Purchased with his own Blood. The Blood of a man is a precious thing, of more
value then the Blood of all inferior Creatures. How Precious then is the Blood
of that man, who is the Great God? We were in slavery to sin, but Christ by his
Precious Blood, has Purchased our Redemption from that Captivity. 1 Pet. 1.19
Ye were Redeemed from your vain Conversation, not with Silver and Gold, but
with the precious Blood of Christ. We were become the subjects of Satan, but
Christ by Death, has Purchased our Deliverance from that misery: Heb. 2.14, 15
Through Death he ha^ destroyed the Devil, and delivered them that were in
Bondage. We were miserably in Debt, and not able to pay our Debt; but were in
the hands of a cruel Jailer, that would hold us in Prison as long as possibly
he might. But Christ Purchased our Liberty by paying the Debt for us. He paid
the Debt not to the Iaylor, no, but to the supreme Judge, who was also our
Creditor: Ephesians. 15.2 He gave himself an Offering to God. Christ has been offered
to God. Now God the supreme Judge being satisfied, because our Surety has
answered the Law for us, the Jailer must let the Prisoners go. He can hold them
no longer* The Jailer of Hell can hold the Prisoners no longer; Christ has paid
their Debts, therefore they are set at Liberty* By means hereof, instead of
being Slaves to Satan, as once they were, they become the Servants of God. Rev.
5.9 Thou have Redeemed us to God with thy Blood. So then, we see Christ has
Purchased our Salvation, and therefore He is our Savior.

5thly* and Lastly, Christ has by His Almighty Power, overcome and subdued the
Enemies of our Salvation. That is also one way whereby Captives are Delivered.
Sometimes by Price, and sometimes by Power. Christ has Redeemed those that are
his, in both these respects. He has by the Price of his own Blood made
Atonement with God for them, and he has by his Almighty Power subdued the
Enemies of their Souls, and so Delivered them. Therefore does Christ say, in
Isa. 63.^* My own Arm shall bring Salva^ion. As the Children of Israel were
Redeemed out of Egypt by a Mighty hand and the Outstretched Arm of God. Exodus
32.11 So has Jesus Christ brought his Elect out of Spiritual Egypt with great
Power, and by a Mighty hand* The Children of Israel were delivered by their
Enemies being subdued. Exodus 15.6 Thy Right Hand is Glorious in Power, thy
Right Hand O Lord has Dashed in pieces the Enemy. The Right Hand of God, the
Power of God did dash in pieces Pharaoh and the Egyptians, and then his People
were saved. So has the Right Hand of Christ, dashed in pieces the Enemies of
our salvation. There (...) not one Enemy but Christ has subdued it. Sin is the
worst Enemy we have, and Christ has caused it to be Condemned: Romans 8.3 He has
Condemned Sin. By shedding his Blood, he has caused sin to be Condemned. And
then by the Power of his Almighty Spirit, he subdues the sins of his People.
Mic. 7.19 Thou will subdue our Iniquities, and wilt cast our Sins into the
depth of the Sea. Pharaoh and his Host were subdued by being cast into the
depth of the Sea. Thus does Christ by his Almighty power, subdue the iniquities
of his People. He Redeems us not from the Damnation of sin only, but from the
Dominion of it. The World is an Enemy, but Christ has overcome it: Joh. 16.33 I
have overcome the world for you. Death and Hell are our Enemies, Christ has
overcome them too. Where is thy S^^ng O Death? Where is thy V^ctory O Grave? We
read of Sam^son, that he rose at midnight, and by his strength carried away the
gates of the City. In that he was a Type of Christ, who in the Night arose out
of the Grave, and carried away the gates of Death and Hell, and has obtained a
glorious Victory over them. Satan and his Angels, are great Enemies of our
salvation. In respect of them, we had Enemies too strong for us. As David
complained, Psalm* 142^6 M^ Enemies are stronger than I. So may we complain, the
Enemies of our souls are stronger than we are. Well, but they are nothing in
the hands of Christ our Savior. They be nothing before his Almighty Power:
Luke 11.21, 22 The strong man keeps his Palace ^ill a stronger then he comes.
The strong man there spoken of is Satan; and the stronger then he is Christ:
who can overc^me Satan and dispossess him, and subdue him when he will. Hence
the Disciples came with great joy to Christ saying, Luke 10.17 Lord, even the
Devils are subject to us through thy Name; that is to say, through thy Power.
The Devils cannot stand before the Almighty Power of Christ. He then has
overcome that great Enemy, yea all the Powers of Darkness. Hence it is that
Christ is represented in Scripture, as a Mighty Wa^rior. Psalm. 45.3 Gird thy
Sword upon thy Thigh, O most Mighty. The words are spoken and to be understood
of Christ. He is compared to a Great General. Joshua saw a man appearing over
against him with a drawn Sword in his hand, and he went to him, Josh 5.13 and
said, Art thou for us, or for our Adversaries? Nay, (says he) but as Captain
of the Host of the Lord am I come. And Joshua fell on his Face to the Earth,
and worshipped him. For he then perceived that the person who appeared to him,
was Christ the Son of God, that was to come into the world as the Captain of
our Salvation. Heb. 2.10 The Glory of our Salvation is all owing to Him that is
our Captain General. If we had not had such a Captain, such a Lord-General, we
should never have been Saved, but our Enemies would have Ruined us for ever.
But Christ having overcome them all, is therefore represented as a Conqueror,
and as one that does Triumph after his Victory. The Prophet Isaiah represents
him as having on him the Glorious apparel of a Conqueror, returning from his
Victory with his Garments sprinkled with the Blood of his Enemies. Isa. 63.1
And the Apostle says, Col. 2.15 He has spoiled Principalities and Powers, he
made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it. He has spoiled them,
taken away the Prey from them, and Triumphed over them, made Captives of them
that had made Captives of his People: Ephesians. 4.8 He has led captivity captive.
Believers are said to be Conquerers But it is through Christ* that they
overcome, Romans 8.37* We are more then Conquerers through him that has Loved
us. It Is through him. So then we see that Jesus Christ is a Savior.

USE.
If Christ be the Savior, then what what is like to become of Christless
Sinners, yea what will become of their Souls forever? They cannot be said,
their is no hope for it. Ephesians. 2.12 Ye were without Christ and without Hope. As
for Christless sinners* their is no hope that they should be saved, if they Die
in a Christless state. Those that were out of the Ark, when the flood came all
perished, the Lord knows how many Millions of them; probably many Millions, and
they Perished every soul of them. There was not a man out of the Ark but Died.
Only those in the Ark, those few, Noah and his Family were saved. So the case
is here. Alas there are but few in the world that are in the Ark, that are in
Christ, and those few shall be saved. But the greatest part of men are out of
the Ark, out of Christ, and they are certain to Perish, so Living, and so Dying.

But, Who are they tha^ have no Interest in Christ? Alas there are many in the
world that are Ignorant of Christ. They know not any thing about Christ; though
he is the only Savior. The Gospel never came among them. Now says the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.3 I^ our Gospel be hid, it is hid from them that Perish. Oh!
they are Lost Perishing souls that know not Christ. It is Life Eternal to know
thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. But many in the
world know not the true God, nor Jesus Christ: How then should they have Life
Eternal? But there are others that will Perish more terribly th^n they that
never heard a Sermon Preached to them; Namely, all that live under the
Preaching of the Gospel, but Obey it not. It is said, Heb. 5.9 That Christ is
the Author of Salvation to all that Obey him. But he is not an Author of
salvation to them that continue in their Disobedience. What will become of
them, when the Great God our Savior shall Appear to Judge the world? We see
what will be their Portion then, 2 These. 1.8 He shall be Revealed from Heaven
in flaming Fire, with his Mighty Angels, to take Vengeance on them that know
not God, and on them that Obey not the Gospel. Yea on them especially. There
are Millions that know not God that will Perish in that day. But above others
such as Obey not the Gospel, they know God, and know Christ, as to External
knowledge, and Revelation of him, but they Obey not the Gospel. Oh! that there
were not one soul here this Day concerned in what I am now speaking. That there
were not one soul that did Disobey the Gospel, and the Voice of God and Christ
therein. But my Friends, does not the Gospel require you to Believe? Is not
this Gods Commandment, that we should Believe in the Name of his Son Jesus
Christ? The great Commandment of the Gospel is, that men should go to Christ,
give themselves unto him; look up to him, and depend on him for Pardon, Life,
Grace, yea for all that their souls stand in need of. Well, then they that
remain in a state of Unbelief cannot be saved. They are in a state of
Damnation, and not of Salvation. He that Believes not is Condemned already. He
is under a Sentance of Condemnation, and that sentance will most certainly be
Executed upon him, if he continues in his Unbelief. Does not the Gospel command
men to Repent, and Turn to God? When Christ Preached the Gospel, he Preached
Repentance. It is said, Mat. 4^17 He began to Preach the Gospel, saying, Repent
for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand. Then they that do not Repent o^ sin, Obey
not the Voice of Christ in the Gospel. They that never did mourn for sin, never
unto this day. Are there not some h^r^ of whom it may be truly said, that they
never went into secret corners, there to mourn before God because of the sin
they have been guilty of. Well then you never had Faith in Christ nor an
Interest in him^ Zach. 12 10 They shall Look upon me whom they have Pierced,
and they s^all Mourn. They then that never did mourn for sin, never did look to
Christ with an Eye of Faith. They are Strangers to him, and it is in vain for
them to think to be saved by him, if they Repent not. They that do not confess
their sin, that do not go alone and bewail their sins before God, do they think
their sins shall be Pardoned. The Blood of Christ indeed cleanses from all sin,
but it is the sins of those that do with a Penitent heart conf^ss their sins,
that the Soul-cleansing Blood of Christ is applied unto. Does not the Gospel
command men to Live Soberly? Is it not said, The Grace of God that brings
Salvation, teac^eth men to live soberly? They that are not sober and temperate
in their Lives and Conversa^tions, never went to Christ, never believed on him;
they cannot expect salvation by Christ. Drunkards, they have no interest in
Christ. Unclean persons, they have no interest in Christ; for the Gospel says,
Live Soberl^. And it says, Live Righteously. They then that are Unrighteous in
their dealings, have not Faith in Christ. The Gospel says, Live Godly. They
who are Prophaners of the Name of God, of the Sabbath of God, do not Live
Godly. They that Live in the neglect of Duties toward God, Prayerless ones do
not Live Godly. How then do they think that they have an interest in Christ? If
they had Faith, it would make them Live Godly. Oh, consider of it, and let
every soul be persuaded to go to Christ for salvation, and let that blessed
word of his encourage you, Joh. 6 37 All that the Father has given to me, shall
come to me, and him that comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.

SERMON V.
We proceed to the Second thing to be Enquired into.

2. Enqui. WHat manner of Savior is Jesus Christ?

An^w. 1. He is a Great Savior. The Great God, and our Savior. That Savior
who is the great God, and not a mere man, is a great Savior. He is called a
great One, a Savior, and a Great One. Isa. 19.20 It is there Prophesied
conc^rning the Egyptians, that God would send them a Savior, and a Great One.
We do not read neither in the Scripture, nor in other Writings, that the
Egyptians had a Temporal savior sent to them. No, but that Text is to be
interpreted of Christ, who is a Savior of Egyptians; that is to say, not only
of Jews, but of Gentiles. God has laid help an One that is Mighty. Psalm. 89.19
Christ is that Mighty one of Jacob. He is able to accomplish that work of
Salvation, which has been undertaken by him* Those Temporal Saviors which are
mentioned in Scripture, were only Types and Shadows of Him. Moses was so, he
was a Temporal Savior; yet but a shadow of the Lord Jesus Christ. Deuteronomy. 18 5
He said, the Lord shall raise up a Prophet like to me. So a Savior like to
him. A shadow has some resemblance of the body whose shadow it is. So Moses had
some resemblance of Christ. Moses did save the Children of Israel from Pharaoh,
and the Egyptians: But Christ has saved the Israel of God, from Satan* and from
all the powers of Darkness. Joshua was a savior, as his Name signifies; Joshua
and Jesus are the same Name; only Joshua is the Hebrew, and Jesus the Greek
Name; and it signifies a Savior: (as was formerly showed.) The children of
Israel were brought to the possession of the Land of Canaan, not by Moses but
by Joshua: To signify this Truth of the Gospel, that we possess Heaven, not by
the Law, but by Christ. Not by our works, or by the Deeds of the Law, but by
Faith in the Righteousness of Jesus Christ. The Judges in Israel of Old, were
Saviors, and some of them great ones: Neh. 9.27 Thou gave them Saviors,
according to the greatness of thy mercy. Saviors* Temporal Saviors. Now,
these were but Types and Shadows of the Lord Jesus Christ. And in a special
manner Sampson was so. Jacob in his Blessing of the Tribe of Dan, Genesis 49.18
says, I have waited for thy Salvation; that is to say, till a savior shall
come out of the Tribe of Dan. And who was that? It was Sampson: he was of that
Tribe, and he was an Eminent Type of the Lord Jesus Christ, who was indeed of
another Tribe* not of Dan, but of Judah. Sampson did save his people, by losing
his own Life that he might save theirs, it cost him his Life to save his
people. In that he was a Type of Christ, who by His Death, saved His People
from their Spiritual Enemies. Sampson was a little Sun. That is the
signification of the Name of Sampson. But Jesus Christ is a Great Sun, the Sun
of Righteousness. Therefore He said, Joh. 8.12 I am the L^ght of the world. He
is a great Light, able to give Light to the whole world. That the Lord Jesus
Christ is the Greatest and most Glorious Savior, that ever was in the world,
Appears;

1. In that He Saves from the Greatest Enemies. He saves out of the hand of the
Mighty. Satan is a Mighty and Powerful Enemy: Luke 10.19 Christ nevertheless,
has delivered and taken away the Prey out of his hands. A Sinner is no more
able to deliver himself out of the hands of Satan, than a Lamb can deliver
himself out of the Mouth of the Lion. But Jesus Christ has delivered us out of
Satan's hands, out of the hands of that Infernal Lion. We read concerning David,
1 Samuel 17.34 that when there was a Lamb fallen into the jaws of a Lion, David
smote the Lion, and de^ive^ed the poor Lamb. He was in that, a singular Type of
the Lord Jesus Christ: For Satan is that Lion, that the Souls of men are fallen
into his devouring Jaws; but Jesus Christ the true David* has so far smitten
that Lion, as to deliver those Lambs. Spiritual Evils they are the greatest
Evils, and most to be dreaded. A Blind Mind, and a Hard Heart are dreadful
Evils, but Christ delivers from those Evils* Men by Nature have Darkened souls
within them: 2 Cor. 4.4 The God ^f this world has Blinded the Eye^ of them that
believe not. But Jesus Christ he makes blind men to see: Isa. 42 7 He was sent
to open the Eyes of the blind. Those afflicted with Bodily blindness, Christ
caused them to see. But especially to as those that have blind Soul, he causes
them to see: And that shows him to be a Great Savior. A man that was healed of
that blindness he was Born with, Ioh. 9 32 said, Since the world began it was
not known, that a man should open the Eyes, of one that was born Blind. Aye,
but Jesus Christ has opened the Eyes of many an one that has been born Blind.
Many a Sinner that has been Born with a blind soul, Jesus Christ has opened the
Eyes of that soul, and caused it to discern Spiritual Objects* that others
cannot discern. And Death is an Enemy, and a Dreadful one. But Jesus Christ
saves from that Enemy: Joh^ 11.25 If any man believe on me, though he were dead
yet shall he live I am the Resurrection and the Life, says Christ. The Second
Death that is a terrible thing, a terrible Enemy indeed. The second* Death is
an Everlasting Death; but Christ delivers from that* All the men in the world
were Condemned to Dye, the Law of God has Sentenced them to Death, Temporal and
Eternal; but Jesus Christ saves from all these Deaths: Joh. 3.17 The Son of God
came not into the world to Condemn it, b^t that the world through him might be
Saved. God did not send His Son to Condemn the world, there was no need of
that; for all the world was Condemned to death before the Son of God came into
it. But therefore He came to save them from that Death, which they were
Condemned unto. Eternal Death, Everlasting Burnings is the most terrible thing
that possibly can be thought of, and this Jesus Christ saves from* Romans 5, 9 We
are saved from wrath by him. And all this has Christ done, by saveing His
People from their sins. Mat. 1.21 His Name shall be called Jesus, for he shall
Save his People from their Sins. He saves them from all that misery which is
the woeful fruit of sin. By saving them from their sin, He has saved them out of
the hand of Divine Justice. As the Princes of Israel said to the Reubenites.
Josh 22.31* You have delivered the Children of Israel out of the hand of the
Lord. So Jesus Christ has delivered the Israel of God out of the hand of Divine
Justice, by satisfying Justice on their behalf; and therefore has Delivered
them from Death, and Hell, and the Powers of Darkness; from all that Misery
that sin has brought upon them.

2. Jesus Christ is a Savior of Souls. 1 Pet 2.25 He is the Shepherd and
Bishop of our Souls. Never did Shepherd take such care of the safety of his
Flock, as Jesus Christ has done for all that belong to His Flock. The Jewish
Religion has Fundamental Errors in it. One is, That the Messiah is ^et to come;
and another is, That when the Messiah does come, He shall only be the Savior
of Bodies out of Bondage. They don't suppose that he will b^ a Savior of
Souls. But Christians know otherwise. They know that Christ saves the soul* And
therefore Christ said, Mat. 11.29 Come unto me all ye that are heavy laden, and
you shall find rest for your Souls. The soul that is heavy laden with the
burden of sin, can never find rest, but by coming unto the Lord Jesus Christ. A
soul disquieted with the guilt of sin, can never be at ease, but by coming to
the Lord Jesus Christ: therefore He is a Glorious Savior. For the Soul is of
unspeakable worth and value; one soul is of more worth than all the bodies in
the world. The soul is ^mmortal. There is (...) a soul but must be either in
Happiness or in Misery, either in Heaven or in Hell, throughout the Days of
Eternity. Therefore to save a Soul is a mighty thing. Well then, Christ is a
savior of souls, and therefore does Excel all other saviors, as much as the
Soul does Excel the Body.

3. In that Christ has saved an infinite Number of Souls. That procames him to
be a Great and Glorious Savior. He has saved more than a few. When the Lord
Jesus Christ did Institute that Ordinance of the Lords Supper, Mat. 26.28 He
said, This is my Blood which is shed for Many. Not for you only, that are a
few, not for you only, that are but ^leven of you; no, it was shed for many.
Christ saved many among the Jews: Acts 21.20^ There were of the Jews many
Thousand^ of them tha^ did believe; and therefore were saved by Jesus Christ.
But he has saved far more among the Gentiles: 1 John 2.2 He is a Propitiation
not for our sins only, but for the whole world. He not only saves us Jews, but
the world, the G^n^ile world; and all the Elect of God that belong to that
world, he has made a Propitiation for, and has wrought salvation on their
behalf. But some will say, How many has Jesus Christ obtained S^^^vation for? I
Answer, They are innumerable* Rev. 7.9, 10. They were a great multitude which
no man could Number, and they said Salvation to our God, and to the Lamb. And
it is said, their Robes were made white in the Blood of the Lamb. So then, the
Blood of the Lamb has purchased salvation for a great Multitude, so many that
they are Numberless. Then he must needs be a Great Savior.

2. Jesus Christ is an Everlasting Savior. Heb 13.8 Jesus Christ yesterday,
and to day, and forever the fame. He was a Savior Yesterd^y, He is a Savior
To Day, He will be a Savior For-Ever. As long as any of the Elect of God do
stand in need of salvation, He will be a savior unto them. He is a Savior
unto his People, not in one Age of the world, but in all Ages thereof. No man
was ever saved since the world began, nor ever shall there be, but Jesus Christ
must be his Savior. He has saved not only New Testament believers, but
Old Testament b^lievers, they also were saved by him. Heb. 11.40 They were not
made perfect without us. The Old Testament believers did not obtain the Pardon
of their sin, and the salvation of their souls in any other way, but what we
have done; both we and they have obtained salvation through Jesus Christ. Other
saviors are only for one Age, in the Age wherein they lived, only Temporal
Saviors; as was said concerning the Priests, Heb. 7.23 They were not suffered
to continue by reason of Death. But says the Apostle, He is a Priest for ever;
and he ever lives to make Intercession for those that come unto him. He is able
to save unto the uttermost. And the salvation that Christ is the Author of, it
is an Everlasting Salvation. Heb. 5.9 He is the Author of Eternal Salvation: He
saves from Everlasting Misery; He procures for those that are his, Everlasting
Blessedness, He then is an Everlasting Savior.

3. He is an Alone Savior. Therefore, Isa^ 59.16 He saw there was no man, then
did his A^m bring Salvation. None did join with him in that Glorious work of
making Atonement and Reconciliation for the sins of his People^ Heb. 9.7 The
Apostle observ^s, that the High Priest went alone into the holy place, not
without Blood. None did go with the high Pri^st, when he did carry Blood into
the holy place: He went alone, and thereby this Glorious Miystery of the Gospel
wa^ signified to us, that Jesus Christ alone by his Blood, did make Atonement
for sin. And as there was none that joined with him therein, so neither did any
man assist him in overcoming, and subdueing the Enemies of our salvation. Sin,
Satan and Death, no man did assist him in overcoming those Enemies. Isa. 63.3
He has trodden down his Enemies in the wine press of the wrath of God; has done
it Alone, of the people* there was None with him. ver. 5 He looked and there
was none to help, therefore his own Arm brought Salvation. There is none but
Christ to be the Savior, for there is no other Mediator besides him. 1 Timothy 2.5
There is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus.
No other Mediator but the Man Christ Jesus; that man who is God as well as man.
God has not Appointed any other: Acts 4.12. Neither is there Salvation in any
other Name given under Heaven whereby we must be saved. No Name but the Name of
Jesus Christ is given whereby we must be saved. Therefore Christ is said not
only to be a savior, but the Savior; that is the only one. Joh. 4.42 Christ
is the Savior of the world. There is no other savior of the world, but only
Jesus Christ: For there is none other can save, none other that is able to save
an ^mmortal Soul but only Christ. Thus we see what manner of Savior He is.

But then;

3. Enqui. Whose Savior is the Lord Jesus Christ? Or, to whom is He a Savior?

The Text before us says, He is Our Savior.

Answ. 1. He is a Savior to us Men^ In this respect, God has showed more love
and kindness to Fallen Man, than to Fallen Angels. Tit. 3.4 The Divine
Philanthropy, the Love and Kindness of God our Savior toward man appears, in
that Christ did not assume to himself the Nature of Angels. He did not
undertake to be their savior. Hence the Angel said to the Shepherd, Luke 2.11
I bring you Glad Tidings, that unto you is born a Savior, Christ the Lord*
Unto you Men, not unto us Angels. As for the Elect Angels, they never sinned,
and therefore did not stand in need o^ a savior; and as for the Fallen Angels,
God did not appoint a savior for them. When they sinned, they were not spared,
but were cast down to Hell, and Res^rved in Everlasting Chains of Darkness, to
the Judgment of the Great Day. When the Son of God did come into the world, it
was not for the salvation of Fallen Angels, but for their destruction and
confusion. 1 John 3.8 For this end was the Son of God manifested, that he might
destroy the works of the Devil. All that the Devil had been doing for Four
Thousand Years together, from the beginning of the world until the coming of
Christ into the world, Jesus Christ Destroyed it all in one Day. He has
destroyed the Devil and his works too: Heb. 2.14 He through Death has destroyed
the Devil. And this was but according to the Ancient Prophesy and Promise, the
first that was made to Fallen man, Gen, 3.15 That the Seed of the Woman should
bruise the Serpents head. Implying, that the Son of God should be born of a
Woman, and should bruise the Serpents head, by being Himself bruised on the
Cross, and that the Head of the Serpent, the Devil that is, should be broken to
pieces thereby. Christ indeed is the Lord over the Fallen Angels, but he is not
their Savior. He is their Lord whether they will or no. The Disciples came to
Christ, and said, the Devils are subject to us through thy Name; through thy
Power. And unto his Name every Knee shall bow, not only those in Heaven, and on
the Earth, but those under the Earth. All the Fiends in Hell shall bow to the
Lord Jesus Christ, he has a Dominion over them all, though he be not a savior
to them. He is only a savior to Men; and in some sense a savior to all men:
not only in respect of the infinite Meritoriousness of his Death. There is
Merit enough in the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ to save Ten Thousand Worlds,
had the pleasure of God been so: But in that, all men are put under the
Dispensation of Divine Patience by his means; they are saved for a while. There
had not been one man on the Face of the Earth, or out of Hell, had it not been
for Jesus Christ. As the Dresser of the Vineyard said, Luke 13 9, 10 the
Sentence was, Cut it down; says the Dresser of the Vineyard, Let it stand
these Three Years, and aft^r that cut it down. So has the Lord Jesus Christ
said to God, concerning the Tree of Manki^d, as the Dresser concerning the
^ig-Tree; Let it stand a few years longer, till all mine Elect are called home,
then shall thou Cut it down. There is a Salvation in respect of Temporal
Preservation: 1 Timothy 4.10 God is the Savior of all men, especially of them
that believe. In respect of temporal preservation, he is the savior of all
men. And so is Jesus Christ the Savior of all men.

2. As to Eternal Salvation, He is a Savior to the Elect of God. In respect of
the Efficacy of his Death, he is a Savior to all them. Therefore Christ said
to God, Ioh. 17.10 All thine are mine, and all mine are thine. All that do
belong to God in respect of Electing Grace, do belong unto Christ in respect of
his Redemption. He has Redeemed them all; they are all given to him, that he
might purchase Eternal Life for them. Ioh. 17.2 God has given him power over
all Flesh, that he should give Eternal Life to as many as God has given to him.
He came into the world to obtain their Salvation: Ioh. 10.11 He has laid down
his Life for his Sheep. The Elect of God are his Sheep, and he has laid down
his Life to obtain their salvation. Therefore when the Great God our Savior
Jesus Christ shall Appear, they shall all appear with him at his Right hand;
all the Elect of God shall stand at his Right Hand in that Day. He shall set
the Sheep on his Right hand, but the Goats on the Left: Mat. 25.33

3. Believers are they that have an actual interest in the Salvation of Christ.
They may plead their right unto Eternal Life* by virtue of a Purchase which has
been made for them: That Life has been merited for them by the Death of Christ.
Ioh. 3.16 God so loved the world, that he sent His Son into the world, that
whosoever believes ^n him should not Perish but have Everlasting Life. The
Gospel does not only Declare that there is a Savior, but also that who ever
Believes, Christ is become a savior to that man. If a man has Faith, then he
has an Interest in the Person of Christ: he is then Married to Christ, United
to Christ. Ephesians. 5.23 He is the Savi^ur of the Body. His Church consisting of
true Believers, is his Body, and this Body being united to him, as the Natural
body is to the head, he is the Savior thereof. And having an Interest in
Christ's Person, we have then an Interest in his Righteousness, and to all the
Saving Benefits obtained thereby. We are then Justified: Romans 5.1. Being
justified by Faith, we have peace with God. We have then a Glorious Inheritance
belonging to us. Ioh. 1.12 To as many as Believe, He has given power that they
be called the Children of God. Therefore the Inheritance that belongs unto the
Children of God; they have a right unto it: And that Inheritance is no less
than the Glory of Heaven, and all that blessedness which is there to be
enjoyed. This Believers have a right unto, and that by means of Jesus Christ
their Savior.

For APPLICATION.
USE I.
This should put us upon Examination, whether we have Christ to be our Sa^iour
or no. It is worth more than all this worlds Goods, to be able upon good
Grounds to say, as the Church did, Cant. 2.19 My ^eloved is mine, and I am his.
To be able to say with Paul, Christ Loved me, and gave Himself for me. Gal.
2.^0 Well, then Examine we whether Christ be our Savior? He is so in a General
sense, and in respect of the profession we make of his Name; we all of us say
Christ is our Savior. But alas! Many a man that says so, will in the last
Day, when the Great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ shall appear, find
himself utterly disappointed, and deceived, in his hopes of salvation. Christ
has said, Not every one that says to me Lord, Lord; that is, that call
themselves after my Name, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Many that
call themselves Christians, and say, I hope to be saved by Jesus Christ* he
will in that Day say unto them; I never knew you. It concerns us then to
Examine whether we have an Interest in Christ as a Savior? This is a Duty in
special incumbent on believers, when they approach unto the Table of the Lord:
1 Cor. 11.28 Let a man Examine himself, and so let him Eat of that Bread and
Drink of that Cup. The Church of Christ ought to Admit none into their
Communion, but such as can Examine themselves, and such as we may rationally
hope do and will Examine themselves; Namely, whether they have a real Interest
in Christ, yea, or no. Therefore we should Examine, what our Faith is, whether
we have true Faith? 2 Cor. 13.5 Examine your selves, try your selves. This is a
duty of great moment, Examine, Try whether you be in the Faith? Know you not
that Christ is in you, except you be Reprobate? Would you know whether Christ
be in you, whether you have a true and real Interest in Christ, Have you true
Faith? You may know by that. Have you given your self to Jesus Christ, not your
Names only, but your Hearts to Christ? Have you made with him an Everlasting
Covenant, a Perpetual Covenant, never to be forgotten? Have you given your self
to the Lord according to the Terms of the Covenant of Grace: Have you Accepted
of Christ on his own Terms as he is offered in the Gospel? And has Christ saved
you from the Dominion of sin? Then be it known unto you, that he has saved you,
from the Damnation of sin. Is sin Mortified in you? It Is said, Romans 6.5 The Old
man is Crucified, and the Body of sin is Destroyed. If sin be Crucified in
thee, it is certain that Christ has been Crucified for thee. They that are
Christ's, have crucified the Flesh with the affections and lusts, that they
never had done if Christ had not been crucified for them. Again, have we the
Spirit of the Lord Jesus? Romans 8.9. If any man have ^ot the Spirit of Christ,
he is none of His. Have we that Spirit? Has Christ by his Holy Spirit taken
possession of us? The Spirit of Christ is that which Glorifies Christ. Do we
above all things desire to Glorify him? His Spirit is a Spirit of Prayer: Gal.
4 6 God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, whereby we C^y,
Abba Father. Have we that Spirit in us? can we come to God as to a Father? Is
it Natural for us to pour out our complaints to God, as Children to a Father?
In a word, do we obey Jesus Christ? Heb. 5.9 He is the Author of Salvation to
all that Obey him. Have we received CHRIST the Lord? No man did ever receive
Christ aright as a Savior, but did at the same time receive him as Lord. He is
a Prince and a Savior. Well then, if he be our Savior, he is our Prince also.
Finally, Do we keep his commandments? Rev. 22.14 They that keep his
commandments have right to the Tree of Life. And do we conform to All his
commandments? Joh 15.14 Ye are my Friends, if ye do all things whatsoever I
Command you. Is there a willingness in us so to do, to comply with All the
commands of Christ? That is a sign that we have Faith, that we are among those
unto whom CHRIST is their Savior.

USE II.
How are Believers indebted to the Lord Jesus Christ, in that he is their
Savior. And what is it he has saved them from? From going down into an
horrible Pit: Job 23.10 He has delivered their Souls from going down intto the
Pit. Their Souls were going down into the Pit, but he delivered them from that
Pit. He has Delivered them from that, which all Men and Angels could never have
saved them from; Even from the wrath of God. 1 These. 1.10 Jesus has Delivered
us from wrath to come. Therefore he has saved us from the greatest Misery that
can be imagined, yea greater than can be imagined. For no heart is able to
conceive what a terrible thing the Wrath of God is. How great is that goodness
that Jesus Christ has purc^ased, and that Jesus Christ by Saving thee will
bring thee to the possession of? How great is that Good? Psalm. 31.19 How great
is thy Goodness that is laid up? How great? A Question is Propounded, but is
not Answered, nor can be; How great? It is laid up; where? In heaven. How great
is that Salvation, that Blessedness? None can ever say how great it is. It has
not entered into the Heart of man to conceive, how great that Glory is, which
Jesus Christ by being our Savior, has obtained for us. If a Minister should
spend his whole Life in Meditating on that Glory, he could not express a
Million part of it. Therefore what do we owe to the Lord Jesus Christ? And how
are we indebted to Him? It cost Christ dear to obtain this Salvation for us: He
has obtained it in no easy way. It has cost him his own Life and Blood: Ephesians.
1.7 We have Redemption, even the Forgiveness of sins through (...) Blood. Never
any of us had ever had the forgiveness of sins, if Christ had not shed his
Blood: Not any of those Million of sins that we (...) been guilty of, had been
forgiven to us, if Christ had not shed his Blood for us. Then what do we owe
him? We owe him all possible (...). The Angels Praise Christ, because of the
Salvation tha^ he has wrought out for us. Rev. 5.12 There is an innume^able
c^mpany of Angels saying, worthy is the Lamb that was Slain to receive Honor,
Glory and Blessing. Do Angels bless the Son of God because he has been slain on
our behalf? And shall not we then do it too? Shall not we say as David, Psalm.
103.1 Bless the Lord O my Soul, and all that is within me bless his Holy Name;
who does forgive all thine Iniquities, and ransoms thy Life from Destruction.
Our Life is Ransomed from Destruction, and Christ is he that Ransoms it from
Everlasting Destruction. Then we ought to Praise him, and Bless his Name for
ever. We owe to him all possible Service, we owe our selves to him, Body and
Soul, and that forever to be his. 1 Cor. 6.20 You are not your own, you are
bought with a Price, therefore Glorify God with your Bodies and Sp^rits which
are his. Our bodies and spirits are his, who is the great God and ou^ Sa^iour,
who has bought them with the Price of his own Blood. Then we are under the
greatest obligations that possibly can be, to Love him* Serve him, and Glorify
him, and that forever.

USE III.
Lastly, Let us depend upon Jesus Christ alone for Salvation. What ever
salvation we need or desire, we are to depend on Christ for it. Temporal
Salvations we are to depend on him for. There is a dark Cloud impending over
this Land, a Dark Cloud, if it break many Lives will be lost* Seed time and
Harvest will fail, and a terrible Famine come on us, and there will be no
withstanding it. What shall we do then? Let us go to our Savior Christ, and I
am persuaded He will save us, notwithstanding all this Darkness that Threatens
us. Mic 5.5 This Man shall be the Peace, when the Assyrian shall come in our
Land. This Man, that is God as well as man: This Man whose goings are from
Everlasting, shall be our Peace. We are safe enough no matter what Combinations
are among our Enemies; if he who is our great Shepherd speak the word those
Wolves shall not fall on his people. He is our great Shepherd, if he will but
say, as, Isa. 54.17 No weapon formed against thee shall prosper. All Designs
and Combinations shall be blasted, if he that is our Savior will but speak
such a word on our behalf. We are then concerned to get into Christ above all
things, and to take heed that we don't offend the Lord Jesus Christ; that we
don't provoke him who is our Shepherd, to give us into the hands of Wolves to
devour us. Would you know how these Churches may come to be saved? Let the
Churches become such as once they were, and I dare boldly declare it, Christ
will save them. And therefore we are concerned to hear what Christ says to the
Churches, Rev. 2.4, 5 I have something against thee. Alas for us! Christ has
something against the Churches in New England; Repent and do thy first works,
Remember whence thou art Fallen, or I will come quickly, and remove the
Candlesticks. The Lord Jesus Christ; is Threatening to remove Candlesticks out
of their places, to make his House Desolate in New England. The way to prevent
it, is to consider from whence we are fallen and repent, and do our first
works. Let (...) Churches be as once they were, and upon all the Glory, he will
Create a Defense. Isa. 4.4 The saddest sign of all is, the Glory is sinned
away. We have Despised the Glory, Young Men Despise that Glory, and Young
Preachers are risen up that Despise that Glory. And how then, can we but expect
that Christ will appear against us, when we have sinned against the Glory. What
is the Glory of Churches? But that they consist of Holy Members, of Regenerate
persons; and that great care be taken, that so far as men are able to judge,
none but Godly persons be admitted into their Communion. But is it come to
that, that we must not Enquire whether they are Godly, or put them upon
relating their Spiritual Experiences? If such Principles so contrary to ^he
First-Works prevail, how can we expect Temporal Salvations? How can we think
that the holy Lord Jesus Christ will not fulfill the Threatenings of his Word,
that such Churches shall be removed out of their places, and that quickly too.
But especially, as to Eternal Salvation, we are to depend on the Lord Jesus
Christ. We have no absolute promise of Temporal Salvation; but of Eternal
Salvation, believers have a promise. There was a Godly Minister Drowned on
these Coasts, when cast on a Rock; Lord, says he, I cannot challenge a Promise
of the preservation of my Life, but according to thy Covenant, I challenge
Heaven: immediately a Wave came and wafted him away to heaven. Therefore as to
Eternal Salvat^on, we may and should depend on the Lord Jesus Christ: for that
is that which God in his Covenant has assured to us, and it is Sealed to us in
the Ordinance of the Lords Supper. Christ when he did Institute that Ordinance
said, This is the New Testament in my Blood, shed for the Remission of Sins.
The Lord Jesus says to a true believer, when he partakes at his Table, as sure
as Jesus Christ has shed his Blood, thy Sins are forgiven thee, and thy Soul
shall be Eternally saved. Let us then repair to Christ with that Promise: that
Promise, that Covenant shall never fail. For the Blood of Christ, is the Blood
of the Everlasting Covenant. The Covenant is sure, because Ratified in the
Blood of Christ. And of this salvation, Christ will quickly make us possessors.
When he appears the Second time, he will complete this Salvation, we shall
enjoy that Blessed Hope, when the Great God our Savior shall Appear; and he
will appear quickly, for he says, behold I come quickly, and my Reward is with
me. AMEN, Lord Jesus, even so, come quickly.

SERMON VI.
We proceed now to the Third Doctrine.

3. Doct. THat there will be a Glorious Appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ,
when Believers shall enjoy their Hoped for Blessedness.

The Doctrine may be opened and confirmed, in several Propositions.

PROPOSITION I.
The Lord Jesus Christ will come again into this Visible world. Though He is
gone into another World, into that Heaven which is to us unseen, Heb. 7.26 He
is made higher then the Heavens. Higher than these aspectable heavens which our
mortal Eyes are able to behold; nevertheless he will return from thence. The
Heavens must contain him, till the time of the Restitution of all things, and
then will he come down from heaven. Therefore at the time when our Lord did
ascend up into heaven, the Angel said to the Disciples, Acts 1.11 This Jesus
who is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come as you have seen him go
into ^ea^en. And before that, the Lord Jesus Christ did assure his Disciples
that he would come again: Joh. 14.3 I will come unto you again. The Scripture
speaks of a Double Personal coming, or appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ in
this Lower world: Psalm. 96. ult. He comes, He comes. A Converted Jew observes
from those words, that in as much as they are doubled, He comes, He comes; that
it was to intimate, that there shall be a Double coming or appearing of the
Lord Jesus Christ: Heb. 9.28 He shall Appear the Second time. He has Appeared
Once in the world already, but he shall Appear a Second time. When Christ did
First Appear, it was to one Nation only, to the Jewish Nation only. Joh, 1.11
He came to his own, and his own received him not. But few of them that saw him
when he was in the world, knew who he was. They were little aware that he was
the Eternal Son of God whom their Eyes beheld. Hence in ver. 10. He was in the
world, and the world knew him not. But at his Second Coming, not only the
Jewish Nation, but all Nations shall see him, and they shall All know who he
is. Rev. 1.7 He comes in the Clouds o heaven, and every Eye shall see him, and
they also that Pierced him. Not only the Jews, but all others shall see him
then. When Christ came First into the world, the sins of his People were
imputed to him, and then he Dyed to make Atonement for sin. It will not be so
at his Second Coming. Heb. 9.28 He shall Appear the Second time without Sin:
without having any sin imputed to him. At his first coming, his work was to
Save his people by Dying for them. God sent his Son into the world, to be a
Propitiation for our sins. But his second coming shall be to Judge the world.
Thus both the First and Second Appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ, was by the
Spirit of God Revealed unto the Prophets. 1 Pet. 1.11 The Spirit which was in
them did testify before hand, conce^ning the Sufferings of Christ, and of the
Glory that should follow. That implies a Twofold coming of Christ* Although in
the Old Testament, both these Appearings are spoken of without any express
Di^tinction of a First and Secon^ coming; nevertheless that is asserted which
does necessarily imply it. For the Prophets speak of him as one that shall come
to Die for the sins of his People. Daniel says, that the Messiah shall be cut
off; and yet he speaks of him as one that shall come in the Clouds of heaven to
Judge the world; which implies two comings. So the Prophet Zechariah, speaks of
the Messiah's being Crucified; and also that he shall come with all his Saints.
These things Evidently imply a Two-^old coming of Christ. Yea, this Gospel was
Preached in the very First Ages of the world. It was then Revealed that the Son
of God should be made of a Woman, and that he should be bruised to Death, in
order to the Salvation of his people. And yet, in the Age before the Flood, it
was Revealed that he should come to judge the world. So did Enoch Prophesy
above Four Thousand Years ago, as the Apostle Jude observes, 14, 15 verses:
Enoch Prophesied, saying, that the Lord should come with Ten Thousand of his
Saints, to Execu^e judgment. So that this Twofold Appearing of the Lord Jesus
Christ, is held forth unto us in the Scriptures, both of the Old and
New Testament.

PROPOSITION II.
That this Coming of the Lord Jesus Christ will be a Glorious Appearing. The
Greek word (...) used in the Text, signifies an Illustr^ous Glorious Appearing.
Thus, Mat. 24.30 He shall come with Power, and Great Glory. And therefore the
day of his Appearing, is called a Great Day: Jude 6. and the Terrible Day of
the Lord. Acts 2.20 Christ's First Appearing was in Meanness: His Second
Appearing shall be with great Glory; with the Greatest and most Glorious
Majesty. His first Appearing was in the form of a Servant, as if he was but a
mean inconsiderable person. Phil. 2.6, 7^ He made himself of no Reputation, and
took upon him the form of a Servant. But at his Second Coming he will Appear
like Himself, in the form of the Son of God; yea in the form of the Great God.
As when the three Princes were cast into the Furnace; Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. 3
25) was astoni^hed; says he, there were Three men cast into the Furnace, and I
see Four men, and the form of the Fourth is like the Son of God. So when Jesus
Christ Appears again, the world shall be astonished, for he will Appear in the
form of the Son of God. His Humane Nature will then Appear with such Divine
Majesty, as will Declare him to be what he is. It will shine with a greater
Glory, than the Sun in the Firmament. And therefore Paul when traveling to
Damascus, and Christ Appeared to him in the way, Acts 26.13 At Midday saw a
Light above the Brightness of the Sun. The Humane Nature of Christ has a Glory
attending it, above the Brightness of the Sun at Noon. We read, Rev. 18.1 of an
Angel that came down from Heaven, and Lightened the Earth with his Glory. When
Jesus Christ shall come down from Heaven, he will Lighten the Earth with his
Glory. The Glorious Appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ discovers its self in
several things.

1. In respect of the Glorious Attendants that then he shall have. He shall
have great Attendants to wait upon him, when he comes down from Heaven into
this lower world again. There shall attend him an Herald who shall blow the
T^umpet, and Summon the whole World to come and stand before his Judgment Seat;
and this Herald shall be no less then an Archangel, and as it seems the chief
among the Archangels. 1 These. 4.16 The Lord shall descend from Heaven with a
Shout, and with the Voice of the Archangel, and the Trumpet of God. Not only
an Archangel, but an Innumerable company of Angels shall then come to wait
upon him, and to do what service he shall see meet to appoint them unto.
Therefore the Prophet Daniel did in a Vision see the Son of Man coming in the
Clouds of heaven: Dan. 7.10 And there were Ten Thousand times Ten Thousand that
Ministered unto him. Millions of Angels shall then wait upon him. Yea more, all
the Angels in heaven, not an Angel in heaven but shall in that Illustrious Da^
come to wait upon the Lord Jesus Christ, the Great God our Savior. Mat. 25.31
When he shall sit on His Throne of Glory, and all the holy Angels shall come
with him. Not some only, but all of them. And yet more, all the Saints in Glory
shall then come down from Heaven to wait upon him. Zach. 14.5 The Lord thy God
shall come, and all his Saints with him. The Apostle therefore prays for the
Thessalonians, 1 These. 3.15 that they may be found unblameable, at the coming
of the Lord Jesus with all his Saints. That then shows that his Second Coming
will be a Glorious Appearing.

2. It will be a Glorious Appearing in respect of the Illustrious and Terrible
things which he will cause to be done then. For he will cause all that are Dead
to come forth (...) of their Graves in that day, but every one (...) his own
order. He shall no sooner Appear, but Believers shall rise out of their Graves:
1 Cor. 15.23 The Dead shall rise every one in his own order; Christ the first
fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his coming. And before the
dispensation of judgment, which begins with the Glorious Appearing of the Lord
Jesus Christ shall be finished, all that are Dead shall Rise, as well the
Wicked as the Righteous. Joh. 5.28, 29 All that are in their Graves shall hear
the Voice of the Son of God, and come forth, they that have done Good unto the
Resurrection of Life, but they that have done Evil unto the Resurrection of
Damnation. That is a Glorious thing; Christ will then be known to be the Son of
God, when all the world shall see that he is able by speaking a word, to make
the De^d to Live. When those that have been in their Graves and turned to Dust,
above Five Thousand Years, shall then be made to Live by the quickening Voice of
the Son of God. And another thing that he will do (and it is a Terrible thing
indeed) is, He will set the world on Fire: set this Earth all on a light Fire
and Burn it up. There has been one Destruction brought upon this sinful Earth
already; which was by Water, in the days of Noah, when the whole World was
Drowned, all excepting one Family consisting of Eight persons. But there is a
more Terrible Destruction coming on this woeful Earth, and that will be by Fire,
at the Appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 3.7 The Heavens and the Earth
which now are, they are reserved unto Fire at the Day of Judgment. And ver. 10.
The Elements shall melt with fervent Heat, and the Earth and the works which
are therein shall be Burnt up. The Appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ will
begin with Flames of Fire, which sinners will be no more able to stand before
it, then they can resist Thunder and Lightning. 2 These. 1.7 The Lord Jesus
Christ shall be Revealed from Heaven in flaming Fire. He will bring a final
Destruction on all his Enemies in the day of his appearing. As it is said
particularly concerning Antichrist, who is a pretended Friend of Christ, yet
the greatest Enemy that has been in the world above this Thousand Years. It is
said, 2 Th^s. 2.8 The Lord shall destroy him with the brightness of his coming.
The Fire in which the Son of God shall be revealed from heaven, will cause it
to be a Bright Day, and a Light Day, and the Brightness of his coming shall
utterly Destroy that Enemy. Thus Daniel Prophesied, (Dan. 7.11) concerning
Antichrist, that his body shall be given to the Burning Flame. And not only
Antichrist, but other Enemies shall Perish at this Glorious appearing. Isaiah
has Prophesied of this Fire that Christ shall appear in. Isa. 66.11, 12 The
Lord shall come with Fire, and shall render his Rebukes with Flames of Fire,
with his Sword and with Fire i. e. with that Sword of Fire he will plead with
all Flesh, and the slain of the Lord shall be many. This Fire is that which
none of His Enemies shall escape: Mal. 4.1 The Day of the Lord shall burn like
an O^en, and the proud, yea, and all that do Wickedly shall be as stubble, and
the Day that comes shall burn them up. Is not this a Terrible and Glorious
Appearing?

3. When Christ Appears the Second time, he will be Known and Owned as the King
of the Universe. Psalm. 96.9 All the Earth will fear him. It is a blessed Truth,
that the Lord Jesus Christ shall have an Universal Kingdom, a Monarchy over all
the World. His Kingdom shall be the last that ever shall be in the world, and
the greatest. The Prophet, Dan. 7.14 saw the Son of Man coming in the Clouds of
Heaven; and a Kingdom was given to him, that all people should serve him. All
the men in the world shall serve him. Most true it is, that the Lord Jesus
Christ does now Reign: He has now a Kingdom, and he is now the Governor of the
world; which is employed in that Expression, of his sitting at the Right hand of
God. The Man Christ Jesus is Co-partner with God in the Government of the
World. He is installed in the very Throne of God: He is sat down with his
Father on his Throne, and all Power in Heaven and Earth is given to him. Aye,
but the World does not know this, nor see, nor b^lieve this. The whole Jewish
Nation don't believe one word of this; but they shall believe, they shall see
that it is so. Therefore when Christ was Arraigned and Condemned, Mar. 14.62)
He said to the High Priest and the rest of the Jews, You shall see the Son of
Man sitting at the Right hand of Power, and coming in the Clouds of Heaven. And
not only so, but all the World shall see it. There have been Millions in the
world, that never in all their Lives heard of Jesus Christ, never did hear that
Jesus Christ is the Great God, and that he is the King of all the World. But in
this Day, they shall all hear of it; the whole Race of Mankind shall hear it.
Every man that is, or has been in the world, or shall be, from Adam to the last
man that shall be Born, will then see that Christ is Lord of ALL, and will do
Homage to him accordingly. Romans 14.10, 11 We must all appear before the
Iudgment-seat of Christ; as it is Written, every knee shall bow, and every
tongue confess to God. There is not a Tongue in the World, nor ever was, nor
ever shall be, but in the Day of Christ's Appearing shall Confess that he is
the true God, and the Lord of all. Christ's Judging the World, is his Reigning
over the World. Psalm. 96.10, 13 Say among the Nations the Lord Reigns, He
shall Judge the World in Righteousness. The Father Judges no man immediately,
but he has Committed all Judgment to His Son. He will Judge the World, by the
Man whom he has Ordained; that is JESUS CHRIST, and this will be at His
Appearing. Then does He Reign, then does He come to the full Possession of the
Kingdom that belongs unto Him. 2 Timothy 4 1 He shall Judge the Quick and the
Dead. The Quick, those that he shall find alive at his Coming; and all that are
dead, He shall judge them at his Appearing and his Kingdom: So then, Christ
shall have an Universal Kingdom, at the Day of His Appearing to Judge the world.

PROPOSITION III.
Then Believers shall enjoy their Hoped for Blessedness. The Blessed Hope
looked for, that (says the Apostle) will be at the Appearing of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. He will then appear as a Savior to Believers. Heb. 9.28
He shall Appear the Second time to Salvation. And what is it Believers do Hope
for? It is Glory, Eternal Glory. They rejoice in Hope of the Glory of God. And
this Glory they shall have at the Appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ: Col. 3.4
When He shall Appear we shall appear with him in Glory. All and every one that
has a true Faith in his Name, shall then have this Glory given to them. 1 Pet.
1.7 That the Trial of your Faith may be unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory at
the Appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ. So then, Believers shall in that Day
enjoy what they hope for. All the Promises made unto the People of God, shall
in that Day receive their full accomplishment. The Scripture is full of
Promises, and those Promises shall all of them be performed to the utmost, in
the Day of Christ's Appearing. For what is it that the Lord has Promised to
Believers?

1. He has Promised that they shall have a Glorious Resurrection unto Eternal
Life. That their Dead bodies shall Rise again. Christ proved against the
Sadduces that there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead, because of the
Covenant of God. Mat. 22.31 As touching the Resurrection of the Dead, have you
not heard that God said, (He said it to Moses in the Bush) I am the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; he is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living. And
therefore because of the Covenant, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob must Rise out of
their Graves. Believers have given themselves to God, Body and Soul; they have
not only given their Souls but their Bodies also to Christ. So then, God is in
Covenant with them in respect of their bodies, as well as of their souls. As
for the Soul, that is immortal, and by virtue of the Covenant their Bodies that
are Dead, shall be Raised to Life again. And this is a great part of that
Blessedness which believers hope for. They have hope toward God that there
shall be a Resurrection from the Dead* Says Paul, for the hope of the
Resurrection of the Dead am I called in Question. At the Resurrection, their
bodies shall undergo a blessed glorious Change; they shall be made like to the
Glorious body of the Son of God. Their bodies shall then be freed from all such
Evils as at present they are subject unto. They shall never endure any Pain
more, they shall never be subject to any Disease in the least any more. Aye,
and they shall not be subject to Mortality any more. Luke 20 26 The Children of
the Resurrection are equal to the Angels of God, neither can they Dye any more.
Their bodies are then so Immortalized as that they cannot Die any more. And this
Blessedness they shall have at the Appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore Job says, Job 19.25 I know that my Redeemer shall stand on the Earth
at the latter Day. And says he, although worms shall after my skin destroy
this Body, yet in my Flesh I shall see God, at the latter day. Now that Latter
Day is the same with the Day of the Appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ. Then is
it that Job and all believers shall have a Glorious Resurrection vouchsafed to
them.

2. The Lord has Promised that all their Obedience shall be Rewarded. They have
not done any service for God and Christ, but it shall have a Glorious Reward;
though never so small a matter, it shall have a great re^ard. Matthew. 10.42.
Says Christ, whoever shall give, if but a Cup of cold Water to a Disciple in
the Name of a Disciple, he shall not lose his reward. Though never so small a
matter, he shall be rewarded for it, if he has done it in Obedience to Christ.
Much more then, they that have done great services for the Lord Jesus Christ
shall be Gloriously Rewarded in that Day. If he that gives but a Cup of cold
Water to a Disciple shall be rewarded, how will that man be rewarded that has
been an instrument of much good to many a Soul? In that Day he shall shine as
the Stars for ever and ever. So shall they that have Suffered for the Name of
Christ: That man that has been Reproached for his Faithfulness to the Interest
of Christ, that man that* has been Reviled, and Evil spoken of for standing up
in the cause of Christ, shall have a great Reward. Blessed are you says
Christ, when men Reproach you and speak all manner of Evil of you, Great shall
be your Reward. And when shall they have this reward? It shall be at the
Appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ. Rev. 22.12 Behold I come, (says Christ)
and my Reward is with me. When Christ comes He brings his blessed Reward along
with him. We must not look for Recompenses whilst in this world, for what
services we do for Christ in this world; but at the Day of His Appearing* then
shall we^e Rewarded. Luke 14.14 Thou shall be Recompensed at the Resurrection
of the Just. When Christ Appears, then will be the Resurrection. A Recompense
for services you must not expect in this world, but in the Resurrection world.

Therefore;

3. The Lord has P^omised a Kingdom to Believers. No less than that, Jam. 2.5
(...) in Faith, Heirs of a Kingdom* And he has Promised they shall sit on a
Throne, Rev. 3.21 To him that overcome, will I Grant to sit with me on my
Throne. He has Promised they shall have a Crown, in the Day of his Appearing: 1
Pet. 5.4 When the chief Shepherd shall A^pear, they shall receive a Crown of
Glory which (...) not away.

4. The Lord has Promised that Believers shall be with him. John 12.26 Where I
am my Servants shall be also. They shall be with him when he comes to Judge the
World: they shall come with him* and never be separated from him any more. 1
These. 4.17 So shall we be ever with the Lord. And they shall sit with him on
Thrones when he Judges the World, and after that go with him to his Fathers
House. Therefore Christ says, John 14.2, 3. In my Fathers House there are many
Mansions; and I will come to you again and take you to my self, and where I am
there you shall be also* Namely in my Fathers House. This is the Heaven of
Heavens thus to be with Christ, to behold his Glory throughout the Days of
Eternity. Mat. 25.34 Come you blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you, from the Foundation of the world. Believers shall be with
Christ in that Heavenly Kingdom forevermore.

We proceed to APPLY this Doctrine.

USE I.
Here then we may see, that the Saints in Heaven are not so Happy as one Day
(...) shall be. They shall have a greater Blessedness as to the Degrees of it,
then at present they are made partakers of. Most true it is, that the Saints
departed are in a Blessed state. The believer no sooner Dies, but he is
blessed: Rev. 14 13 Blessed are the Dead which dye in the Lord. They which Die
in the Lord, are no sooner Dead but they are Blessed. They are set at Liberty
from all that is Evil. They are freed from Sin the worst of Evils. Romans 6.7 He
that is Dead is freed from Sin. Aye and freed from all Affliction too. Saints
Departed enjoy a blessed Tranquillity, in that World of Souls where they are:
Isa. 57.2 The Righteous are taken away from the Evil to (...). They rest in
their Beds; they enter into Peace. When their bodies rest in the Grave, their
souls enter into Peace and Glorious Tranquillity, and they are filled with Joy.
They enter into the Joy of their Lord, into joy Unspeakable and full of Glory.
It was therefore said of Lazarus, that when he Died the Angels carried him into
Abraham's bosom: and it is said, Luke 16.25 Now he is comforted. There is
ineffable Joy and Consolation, which fills the Soals in Heaven. Nevertheless,
they shall have a greater addition to their Blessedness, at the Appearing of
the Lord Jesus Christ: For then shall they be brought to a full enjoyment of
the Glorious Inheritance that is promised to them. Romans 8.23 We wait for the
Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our Bodies. The Adoption* that is the
Inheritance which we are Adopted to; the Inheritance which by virtue of our
Adoption we have a right unto. This we shall have at the Redemption of our
Bodies, when our bodies shall be redeemed from the Power of the Grave. The
Saints in Glory, are at present blessed only in respect of their Souls, but at
the Appearing of Christ* they shall be Glorious not only in respect of their
Souls but of their Bodies too. Then shall they have a Kingdom which as yet they
are not in the Possession of. Then shall they Reign. Rev. 5.10 We shall Reign
on Earth, viz. at the Appearing of Jesus Christ, and during the Day of
Judgment. Psalm. 49.14 In the Morning the Upright shall have Dominion over them.
In the Morning, that is in the Morning of the Resurrection, they shall have a
Glorious Dominion, for they shall then Judge the world. 1 Cor. 6.2 Know you not
that the Saints shall Judge the World. At the Appearing and Kingdom of Christ,
they shall judge the world, and so have that Degree of Glory which at present
they have not. And then also they shall be Cleared of all Reproaches cast upon
them. They are many times charged with Crimes they are not guilty of, and their
Innocence is not known, but at Christ's Appearing it will be known. And in that
Day all the world shall know that they belong to God. So that they shall then
be made partakers of a higher Degree of Blessedness then at present they enjoy,
for all they are as to their Souls in Heaven.

USE II.
If Believers shall enjoy their Hoped for Blessedness at the Day of Christ's
Appearing, then they have great reason to Long for (...) Day o^ Judgment. To
long for that Day of the Glo^ious Appearing of the Great God our Savior Jesus
Christ. As the Saints of Old did long for the First Coming of Christ. Abraham
by Faith saw that Day, and was glad; and many Prophets and Righteous men
desired to see it. So Believers should long for the Second Coming of the Lord
Jesus Christ. 2 Pet. 3.12 Looking for and Hatning to the Coming of the Day of
God. You must no^ only Look for, not only Believe that such a Day will come,
but you must Hasten to it, that is by earnest desires, by longing wishes; we
should Pray for the coming of this Day. Thus Christ has taught us to Pray, Thy
Kingdom Come. We must therefore Pray for the Day of Judgment. For the Kingdom
of Christ will not come in all the Glory of it, before that Blessed Day. And
when we Pray, Thy Will be done on Earth as in Heaven, we Pray for the Day of
Judgment. For then and not till then will the Will of God be done on Earth as
it is in Heaven. Then will the Saints that shall come down from Heaven, the
Saints in the New-Ierusalem do the Will of God with as much Perfection on
Earth, as now it is done in Heaven. So then, we are to Pray for this Coming of
the Lord. And great reason Believers have so to do, because of that perfect
Salvation which they shall then be made partakers of. By Hope we are Saved. We
hope for a perfect Salvation in that Day, therefore should long for that Day. 1
Pet. 1 13. Hoping for the Grace that shall be brought to you at the Revelation
of Jesus Christ. Grace, that is Glory proceeding from the mere Grace of God,
without any Merit of ours, shall be brought to us at the Revelation of Jesus
Christ. When H^ shall be Revealed from Heaven, we shall be Immortal then.
Suppose w^ Die and go to the Grave before this Glorious Appearing of the Lord
Jesus Christ, yet He will R^ise us up in that Day to a blessed Immort^llity.
Or, suppose Christ shall come quickly, as he will; but suppose so quickly as to
be here while we are yet alive, when the Son of God comes down to judge the
Earth, we shall in one Moment be made Immortal. All Believers shall not Die that
shall be found alive at the appearing of Christ, but all shall be Changed in a
Moment, in the twinkling of an Eye. 1 Cor. 15.51, 52. A Glorious Change will
pass on them as to their Bodies, therefore they have cause to Long for this
Blessed Day.

USE III.
Will the Appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ be a Blessed Day to Believers,
what then will it be to Unbelievers? Unto all Christless Sinners, to those whom
Christ at His coming shall find without an Interest in him* it will be a
Terrible Day to them. A Dreadful day it was when the Lord came down on Mount
Sinai, it was a Day of Blackness, and Darkness and Tempest; the Mountain shook
and was all on a light Fire. Well, but when the Son of God comes down from
Heaven to judge those that have Transgressed that Law, what a Terrible Day will
it be? 2 Cor. 5.11 We knowing the Terror of the Lord persuade men. The Day of
judgment is called, the Terror of the Lord. No Tongue is able to Express, no
Heart is able to Conceive the Terror of that Day. For when the Lord Jesus
Christ the Great God and our Savior shall Appear, all men must come before His
Judgment Seat: And as for Christless Sinners, their sins shall be discovered in
the hearing of Heaven and Earth. All the world will hear what secret sins they
have been guilty of Eccles. 12.14. God will bring every work with every secret
thing into Judgment, whether it be Good, or whether it be Evil. All the evil
all the sins that wretched Creatures have committed in seeret, will then be
told of. Many a Guilty sinner would be ashamed to show his Head among men, if
what he has done in secret should be told and spoken of before the world. Well,
but at this Day of Christ's Appearing, all the World shall be told of thy secret
abominations, thy secret filthiness, and secret thefts will then be known. Now
Sinners think to hide them^^^^es by telling a Lie; Aye, but it will be in vain
in that Day to go about to hide any thing from the Infinite and Omniscient God.
And there will then be a Sentence passed upon all Christless Sinners, by the
Mouth of the Lord Himself. And what will that Sentence be? It may make the
Rocks to rend to hear what it shall be. They shall be Sentenced to be Burnt to
Death, and that they shall continue in those Everlasting Burnings World without
end. That is the Sentence Mat. 25.41. Then shall the King say, (the King
Messiah, the Son of God he is the King of the world, He will say) Depart ye
Cursed into Everlasting Fire. Will not this be a Dreadful day to Sinners? And
as sure as the Sentence is passed, Execution will follow. For there is no
Appeal from this Sentence to an higher Court. And the Judge by a words
speaking, can cause the Execution to be done; He has Thousands and Millions of
Angels to Execute His Commands, and to do His Pleasure; more Angels then there
are Men in the world, one of which is able to deal with Millions of men. Christ
will in that Day come with all his Angels, and the Mighty Angels shall bind
sinners up in Bundles, and throw them into the Fire.

USE IV.
Lastly, Oh! Let us make sure that we be Prepared for this Coming of Christ.
And therefore, let us often be thinking of it. Let this Glorious Day often come
into our minds. O Sinner often think with thy self, if Christ should come down
from Heaven this Night, what account have I to give to him? If He should call
me before His Judgment Seat this Night, what account can I give of what I have
done for God and Christ in the world? Think, if the Lord Jesus Christ should
come down from Heaven this day, what wo^ld He say to me? Would He say to me,
Come thou Blessed? Or, would he not say to me, Away thou Cursed? And remember
as Death leaves us, so will the Judgment which will be at the Appearing of our
Lord Jesus Christ find us. We have no time to prepare for it, but while we live
in this world. Heb. 9.27. It is appointed unto men once to Dye, but after this
the Judgment. There will be a General judgment, but first a Particular
judgment; So soon as ever the Immortal Soul of a sinner is parted from his
Body, then a Judgment is passed on him, and that Judgment will be proclaimed at
the Last Day, though now none knows what it is. And when the soul is separated
from the body, either Christ will command His Angels to conduct that Soul to
Glory in Heaven, or permit Devils to carry it to the place of Torment. Oh, then
Prepare for this Coming, since Judgment will find us as Death leaves us. God
calls aloud to us all to Prepare, yea, to Young People as well as others. Does
not God take away some of them, and that suddenly? In the week past, Three
Young Men as likely to live as any here this day, over Night were Well, and
Dead the next day. There is a Voice of the Lord in that awful stroke of his.
And what does the Lord say? The Voice of God unto you all is, Oh! Let every one
be always Prepared for the Appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ. Every one,
Young and Old, be always Prepared for Death and Judgment. Oh that Young
Persons would think of that and do accordingly. And remember, that as Judgment
leaves us, so must we be to all Eternity. Hebr. 6.^* We read of Eternal
Judgment; because at the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ, men shall be
Sentenced to an Eternal state of Happiness or of Misery. They must then be
Sentenced either to Eternal Weal or to Eternal Woe. If Death and Judgment find
us in Christ, then shall we inherit Eternal Life; but if they find us out of
Christ, then must we go away from His presence into Everlasting Punishment. Oh
then think of these things. And if we would be Prepared for the appearing of
Christ, we must make thorough work of it in Repentanc^ for Sin, in turning from
sin to God. Acts 17.31. Now God commands all men every where to Repent, because
He has Appointed a Day wherein He will Judge the World by the Man whom He has
Ordained. In that Day if men be found among the Impenitent ones it will be a
sad Day to them: better thou had never been Born. Therefore Sinner, Repent of
every sin that thou have been Guilty of. Live not another day in any sin: For
believe it from the Lord, if there be any one Sin that Death shall come on thee
before thou have Repented of that Sin, at the Day of Judgment thou will wish
thou never had been Born. And Oh, let us make sure that we be found in
Christ* That was the Apostles great care, that Death and Judgment might find
him in Christ. Nothing else will stand a Man in stead in the Day of His
appearing. It is not being found in the Church that will stand you in stead at
that Day. It is (...) being found among Civil Moral men: at that Day many will
be found among such, that will not be found in Christ at all. And if thou art
not found in Christ, that Day will be a Dismal Day to the^.

Finally, Let us endeavor to be like Jesus Christ. If we are like Him, when He
appears we shall be more like Him. If we are lik^ Him now in respect of Grace,
we shall be like Him then in respect of Glory. Christ did always the things
that please God: If there be such an Heart in us, then may we Think of the Day
of Judgment with Transports of Joy. 1. Ioh. 4.17. We may have Boldness in the
Day of Judgment; because as He is, so are we in this world.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 16. l. 16. for have read be, p. 17. l. 26. ^. all r. also. l. 28* d.
then. p. 30. l. 1. d. desiring. p. 81. l. 23. f. then r. that. p. 88. l. 11. d.
what. p. 96. l. 6. f. to as r. as to. p. 98. l. 30. r. proclames.


