GOSPEL Family-Order, BEING A SHORT DISCOURSE CONCERNING THE Ordering of
Families, BOTH OF WHITES, BLACKS and INDIANS.

Pour out thy Fury upon the Heathen that knew thee not, and upon the Families
that call not on thy Name; for they have eaten up Jacob, and devoured him, and
consumed him, and have made his Habitation desolate,

Jer. 10.25. Seeing that Abraham shall surely become a great and mighty Nation,
and all the Nation of the Earth shall be blessed in him: For I know him, that
he will command his Children, and his Household after him, and they shall keep
the Way of the Lord, to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon
Abraham that which he has spoken of him,

Genesis 18.18, 19. And if it seem Evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this
day whom you will serve, whether the Gods which your Fathers served, that were
on the other Side of the Flood, or the Gods of the Amorites in whose Land ye
dwell; but as for me and my House, we will serve the Lord,

Joshua 24.15. By G. F.

Reprinted in the Year 1701.

GOSPEL Family-Order.
The following Discourse is as it was taken from the Mouth of George Fox at a
Men's Meeting at Tho. Rous his House in Barbados in the Year 1671. touching the
Government of Families according to the Law of Jesus.
HEre all Friends may see how the holy Men of God by the Command of the Lord
were to order, their Families apart, and also by the same Law of God the People
in the General were to be ordered, as you may see in Genesis 17. where God
commanded Abraham to keep his Covenant between him and his Seed; Every
Man-child shall be circumcised in your Generations, Genesis 17.
and he that is born in the House, or bought with Money of any Stranger, which
is not of thy Seed, shall be circumcised; and Abraham obeyed the Command of God
in circumcising all his Family, and all that were born in his House and all
that were bought with Money of Strangers. Now you who are called Christians,
must not all your Families be circumcised with the Spirit, which the outward
Circumcision of the Flesh did type forth? yea, all Sons and Daughters, Masters
or Mistresses of Families must be circumcised with the Spirit, that puts off
the Body of Death, the Sins of the Flesh with the Circumcision of the Spirit,
that is not made with Hands; and also all that you have bought with Money, all
Strangers, and all that are born in your Houses (of Strangers) which are not of
your own Seed, must you not bring all these to the Circumcision of the Spirit?
else how are you the Friends of God, as Abraham was who obeyed God; and
therefore call upon all your Families, and your Servants whom you bought for
Money, and those that were born of them in your Families, and let them be
Circumcised, and endeavor to bring them to that which does circumcise them, to
wit, the Spirit, which is the Substance of the outward Circumcision; and every
one that was not circumcised, was he not to be cut off from among the People.
And so are not all now that are not circumcised by the Spirit to be cut off
from the spiritual Union, the spiritual Fellowship? And therefore if you who
are Masters of Families, if you (I say) do not see the Circumcision of all your
Families, of Servants and Strangers, and all such as are bought with Money,
will it not lie upon you, who ought to take Care for your Families, and order
your Families, as Joshua said he would order his Family* And if it seem Evil
unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this Day whom you will serve, whether
the Gods which your Fathers served, Joshua 25.29.
that were on the other Side of the Flood, etc. or the Gods of the Amorites, in
whose Land ye dwell; BUT AS FOR ME AND MY HOUSE, WE WILL SERVE THE LORD. And so
where not all his Servants that he bought with Money, and Strangers, and such
as were born in his House of his Family, were they not all to serve the Lord,
according to the Law in the outward Circumcision? And so are not all you
Christians now, and Masters and Mistresses of Families now to look to your
Families, to see that you and your Families do serve the Lord in the
Circumcision of the Spirit of God? by which Spirit you must worship God in
Spirit and in Truth, who is the Father of Spirits, and the God of the Spirits
of all Flesh: And therefore mind and consider this in your Families, and
gather them all together, and teach them the Way of the Lord, and the New
Covenant; yea, your Families and Children, and those you bought with Moneys,
and the Strangers, and such as are born of them in your House.

And in Exodus 12. there you may see how the Lord said, when a Stranger
sojourneth with thee, he shall keep the Passover of the Lord, Exodus 12.
and let all his Males be circumcised.

you may think it was a strange thing, that if a Man did but sojourn in the
House of a Jew, that the Male should be circumcised; for a Sojourner is a Comer
and Goer* but a Servant that is bought with Money, or one that is born of them
in the House, is more then a Sojourner; for no uncircumcised was to eat of the
Passover. And so now no uncircumcised Person is to eat of the Sacrifice or
Passover; ( Christ Jesus), but such only (I say) who are circumcised by the
Spirit, who ands the outward Passover and the outward Circumcision, which were
Tipes of Christ; and so one Law should be to him that is born at home, and to
the Strangers that sojourneth with you: And as all were then to keep this Law
of God, so all are to keep this Law of Jesus Christ among Chrstians now.

And Leviticus 14. there it is said, You shall have one Manner of Law, as well
for the Stranger, as for one of you own Country; Lev. 14.
I am the Lord your God, says the Lord.

So this Law was then and still is to be observed, which is, to love God above
all, and to love their Neighbors as themselves.

And Deuteronomy. 5. all were to keep the Law of God, Deuteronomy. 5.
and all were to keep the outward Sabbath, both Sons, Daughters, Menservants
and Maidservants, Oxen, Asses and the other Cattle, and the Strangers that
were within the Gates, these were all to keep the Rest, the Sabbath, and the
Law of God.

Now mark Christians, who are come to Christ, and who believe in him, and have
entered into your Rest by the Law of Christ; see that all your Families do keep
this Sabbath, this Rest, both you and your Sons and Daughters, Menservants and
Maidservants that are within your Gates; this concerns every one of you, that
are Masters of Families, to consider seriously of it; for Christ is the Sabbath
and Rest, who gives Rest to the whole Creation, He it is that takes off the
Oppression, who destroys the Devil's Works, who has been the Oppressor both
of Man and Beast; and so in Christ all have Rest, and Peace, and Love, that
does not kill, nor commit Adultery, nor steal, nor covet, any thing that
another man has, nor learn false witness, nor make Images of any thing in
Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, and so Love fulfils the Law: And
therefore see that this Law of Love be set up in all your Families, by which
they may be ordered and ruled.

Here you may see how Moses, a faithful Servant of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 9.29.9. to
11.
as the Lord had commanded him, puts the Jews in mind of their Duty required of
them by the Lord; Keep (says he) therefore the Words of this Covenant, and do
them, that you may prosper in all that ye do* ye stand this day all of you
before the Lord your God* your Captains of your Tribes, your Elders and your
Officers, with all the Men of Israel, your little Ones your Wives, and thy
Strangers that are within thy Camp, from the Hewer of Wood unto the Drawer of
thy Water, that thou should enter into Covenant with the Lord thy God, etc.

Now consider this, hear how that all these were to stand before the Lord, to
enter in to Covenant with the Lord, even the Elders, the Officers with the men
of Israel, their Wives and little Children, the Strangers, with the Hewers of
Wood and Drawers of Water; now Christ is the new Covenant, and therefore all
you called Christians, that profess him, who are Elders and Masters of
Families, are you not to see that your Wives, your Children and Strangers that
are within your Camps, yea, to the Hewers of your Wood and Drawers of your
Water, that they come all into the new Covenant, Christ Jesus? which in God is
established forever, an everlasting Covenant, who ends the first Covenant among
the Jews; and therefore shall not you outstrip the Jews in their Families, in
bringing all your Families, and Strangers, and Sojourners, Hewers of Wood and
Drawers of Water into the New Covenant of Life, Christ Jesus, through whom they
may stand before God, and have Peace with him; mark this, ye Elders, and
Rulers, and Fathers of Families, who have Strangers and Sojourners in your
Families, so as to see that you do perform your Duty, and bring them to do
their Duty in the Covenant of Life, Christ Jesus.

And now again in Deuteronomy. 31. When all Israel shall appear before the Lord thy
God, in the Place which he shall choose; thou shall read the Law (says he)
before all Israel, Deuteronomy. 31.
in their hearing, and shall gather the People together, Men, Women and
Children, and thy Strangers that are within thy Gates, that they may hear, and
that they may learn, and fear the Lord thy God, and observe to do all the Words
of the Law: Now mark and consider this all you Christians, that profess the New
Covenant, Christ Jesus, and the Law of Love, and the Law of Life, and the Law
of Faith, and the Law of the Spirit, must you not gather all your Families
together, Men, Women, Children and Strangers within your Gates, and such as you
bought with Money, and such as are born of them in your Families, that they may
all hear the New Covenant, and the Law of Life, and the Law of Love, and the
Law of Faith, and the Law of the Spirit of Life, that makes free from the Law
of Sin and Death, that they may all hear, that they may all learn this, and
that they may all fear God, and observe and do the Law and the New Covenant, as
the Jews were to do the old, which is a Figure of the new: And therefore be not
you negligent, nor-sloathful, nor careless in this, but do your Duty, and see
that all your Families may do their Duties; and so as it was among the Jews,
the Children that had not known me [hear and learn] and the Strangers; for if
you should be negligent in this then look what came upon the Jews, and how rude
their Families grew, and how God's Judgments came upon them, and it came partly
by the Heads of the Families, and Elders, and Overseers: And therefore be
diligent, and bring all your Families to serve God in the first Place, and be
faithful to him, through Jesus Christ, the New Covenant, then they will not be
negligent in outward Things, if they be faithful to God, and then God's
Blessings will be in your Families; and so therein men serve the Lord, in
bringing their Families to serve the Lord, in that they do God's Will, and
please him in the New Covenant, bringing them out of that which displeases
God, and so rule in Power and in Love.

And in Jeremiah 10.25. there you may see what the Lord says by the Prophets,
Pour out thy Fury upon the Heathen that know thee not, Jer. 10.25.
and upon all the Families that call not upon thy Name.

So now consider this seriously, how God would have all Families to call upon
his Name, and especially you that call your selves Christians, and profess the
New Covenant of God (to wit) Christ Jesus; and therefore see that all your
Families do call upon the Name of the Lord, it concerns you very much; if you
do not, ye may expect the Lord's Fury will be poured out upon you and yours.

There you may see the Lord speaking, how he will pour out his Spirit of Grace
and Supplication, and they shall look upon him whom they have pierced (meaning
Christ) and they shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only Son, as one
that is in Bitterness for his first born; the Land shall mourn, every Family
apart shall mourn, and their Wives apart.

And so consider this all you that profess Christ, who have seen him whom you
have pierced; if the Spirit of Grace and Supplication be poured out upon you,
why then, you see him, Christ Jesus, whom you have pierced, and then you will
mourn bitterly, as you should mourn for your first born.

So all Friends, they that witness the Spirit of Grace poured out upon them,
they know the Mourning for him whom they have pierced; and then there is a
Fountain opened by Christ Jesus, for their Sins and for their Uncleanness, to
wash away the Filth.

And you may see in Zachariah 14.17. Whoseever will not come up of all the
Families of the Earth to Jerusalem, Zach. 14.17
to worship the King, the Lord of Hosts, even upon them there shall be no Rain;
yea, if the Family of Egypt go not up, be shall have no Rain, and they shall be
plagued, etc.

And now consider this, how all the Families of the Earth, that come not to
worship the Lord of Hosts in Spirit and in Truth in this Heavenly Jerusalem,
and keep the Feast of Tabernacles, and eat of Christ, the Sacrifice, who is the
Bread of Life, that came down from above; such must be punished, such have no
Rain indeed, but are like to the parched Ground; and so mind every Family apart
this; for Egypt was of Ham's Stock, yet if they do not come up to worship God,
they must be plagued.

And in Amos 3.2. you may see there how the Lord was against the whole Family
of the Jews, because they had not kept his Law, Amos. 3.^.
and he punished them. And so consider ye Christians, ye whole Families of
Christians, and see how you have kept the Law of the New Covenant, and the Law
of Love, and the Law of Life, and the Law of the Spirit; if you have, not
plainly you must be punished* God will punish you with a Witness, even the
whole Family; if any Family, or Tribe, or Man, or Woman their Hearts shall turn
away from God, and serve other Gods, see what a Curse came upon them; and
therefore what does Christ say unto all the left Hand Goats, though they may
profess him in Words, whose Hearts are turned away from his Law of Love, Law of
Life, Law of Faith, and the New Covenant.

And therefore see that the Ark of the Lord be in every ones House (to with
your Hearts) in all your Families* and with the Law and Testimony of Jesus in
it, and then you will have the Blessing of the Lord with you, as Obed Edom had
the Blessing of the Lord upon his Family and House, while the outward Ark
remained with him, the Figure of which Christians must enjoy the Substance of,
as you may see, 1 Cor. 13, 14. and Genesis 39.5.

See how the Lord there blessed the Egyptian's House for Ioseph's sake, and the
Blessing of the Lord was upon all that the Egyptian had, both in House and
Field; so you may hence see how a Servant, being a faithful Man to God, brought
the Blessing of God upon the House and Field of a Heathen* and now much more a
faithful Master, or an Head, or an Elder of a Family, faithful to God, brings
a Blessing on his own Family, and upon all within his House, and out of his
House, and Field; for the Lord said, If that they keep his Law and his Word,
then they shall be blessed in the Field and in the Storehouse, and blessed in
the Basket, and blessed in his going forth and coming in (as Abraham was) who
are of the Faith of Abraham now, of the blessed Seed, that brings the Blessing
now to them, as it did to him; but they that crucify the Seed to themselves
afresh, and quench the Spirit of God in themselves, and entertain the evil Seed
and the evil Spirit* that brings the Curse upon them in the Basket and in the
Storehouse, and in the Field, in his going Forth and coming in.

And you may read in the Scriptures how many Families* Nations and Kingdoms the
Lord did cut off, because they did not obey nor keep his Law, as Core and his
Family, Achan and his, wicked Haman and his, and many others, for transgressing
the Law of God. Yea, and he destroyed Nations for his own People, and gives his
own People the Possession of them, because of the former Inhabitants Debauchery
and Wickedness, and tells his own People, that if they do go into the same
Debaucheries and Wickedness, they must look for the same Destruction: And
therefore Christians all should serve God in the new Life, out of the Life of
old Adam; for if they do profess Christ Jesus, the Heavenly Man* and yet live
in the Old Adam, and serve Sin and Evil, they must look for Destruction, both
Families and Nations, who profess God in Words, but deny him in their Works,
Lives and Conversations, according to that in Isa. 31.2.9. the Lord says
concerning the Children of Israel, that transgress his Law, Are ye not (says
he) as Children of Ethyopia unto me, O ye Children of Israel? Amos 9.7. Amos 9
7.


Now consider this, if the Children of Israel transgress the Law of God, were
they not accounted as Ethyopian Children: And so you Christians now, who
profess Christ in Words, and transgress his Law of Love, of Life, of Faith, and
the New Covenant, are you not to the Lord as Children of the Ethyopians: what
Difference is between you? It is not a Profession and talking that makes the
Difference, but the Possession of Chrst. Ier. 38. there you may see an
Ethyopian, a Black moor, how serviceable he was made unto Jeremiah (the Lord's
Prophet) in the Day of his Suffering in the Dungeon, how he went to the King,
and told him that the Prophet was like to perish there, and the King commanded
him to go and take thirty Men, and draw him out of the Dungeon before he dye;
so here this Black had more Sense then the great Professors of Jeremiah 's
Innocence; and he was in Favor with the King, being one of his Eunuchs.

And so now consider, do not slight them, to wit, the Ethyopians, the Blacks
now, neither any Man or Woman upon the Face of the Earth, in that Christ dyed
for all, both Turks Barbarians, Tartarians and Ethyopians; he dyed for the
Tawnes and for the Blacks, as well as for you that are called Whites; therefore
you may see in Acts 8.27. how the Lord commanded Philip to go toward the South,
and he arose and went, and behold a Man of Ethyopia, a Eunuch of great
Authority under Candace Queen of Ethyopia, who had the Charge of all her
Treasure, how this Man came up to Jerusalem to worship the Lord, and how this
Ethyopian, this Black, was converted to Christianity by Philip, who preached
Christ to him: And therefore now you should preach Christ to your Ethyopians
that are in your Families, that so they may be free Men indeed and be tender of
and to them, and walk in Love, that ye may answer that of God in their Hearts,
being (as the Scripture affirms) all of one Blood and of one Mold, to dwell
upon the Face of the Earth; for Christ (I say) shed his Blood for them, as well
as for you, and tasted Death for them, as well as for you* and has enlightened
them, as well as he has enlightened you, and his Grace has appeared unto them,
as well as it has appeared unto you, and he is a Propitiation for their Sins,
as well as for yours; for he is the Propitiation for the Sins of the whole
World: and so let every Master and Governor of a Family inform them, as well
as others in his Family, that so they may come to walk in the Grace and in the
Light of Jesus Christ, that so they may come to know Christ, the Savior, from
whence Grace and Light comes, and the Mediator (or Middle-man) between them and
God; and so in this so doing, you will serve God, and not your selves: Also in
Psalm. 68.31. there you may see* Princes should come out of Egypt, and Ethyopia
shall stretch forth her Hand unto God; sing unto God, ye Kingdoms of the Earth;
Oh! praise the Lord: Now consider this ye Christians, the Prophecy of David, in
that you may see the fulfilling of it ( viz.) that Ethyopia should soon stretch
out her Hand unto God for you; see by the Eunuch, when he was converted, his
Hand was soon stretched out to God; and does the Lord say in another Place,
Egypt my People.

And therefore Christians, you that have received it, do you preach the
everlasting Covenant, Christ Jesus, to the Ethyopians, the Blacks and Tawny
moors, as Philip did; I say, preach Christ Jesus to them in your Families, that
so each may come to know Christ and their Way to Salvation, as in Psalm. 87. the
Lord speaking of the Glory of his Church, says, he will make mention of Rahab,
and Babylon, and Ethiopia, that make mention of me, behold, etc. So that you
may see that there was a Church of God in Egypt, in Babylon and Ethiopia, who
were Christians, as well as among the white People, so called by the Blacks.

And if thy Brother, an Hebrew Man or an Hebrew Woman be sold unto thee, and
serve thee six Years, then in the seventh Year, thou shall let him go free from
thee; and when thou sendest him out free from thee, thou shall not let him go
away empty, thou shall furnish him liberally out of thy Flock, and out of thy
Floor, and out of thy Winepress, of that wherewith the Lord thy God has
blessed thee, thou shall give it him; and remember that thou wast a Bondman in
the Land of Egypt, and the Lord thy God redeemed thee; therefore I command thee
this Thing to Day.

See here this was to be done by the Jews to such as were of their own Nation
and People, and indeed this will very well become Christians* Masters,
Governors and Rulers of Families here in this Island or elsewere, who should
outstrip the Jews to deal so (as the Lord commanded) with their Servants and
Apprentices, that are of their own Nation or People: And to close up all, let
me tell you, it will doubtless be very acceptable to the Lord, if so be that
Masters of Families here would deal so with their Servants, the Negroes and
Blacks, whom they have bought with their Money, to let them go free after a
cosiderable Term of Years, if they have served them faithfully; and when they
go, and are made free, let them not go away empty-handed, this I say will be
very acceptable to the Lord, whose Servants we are, and who rewards us
plentifully for our Service done him, not suffering us to go away empty; for
who is there even among you* says the Lord, that will shut the Doors for
naught, neither do ye kindle Fire on my Altar for naught, Mal. 1.10. So now,
you I say that are Christians, that are redeemed out of the spiritual Egypt;
for as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7.22. He that is called in the Lord, being a
Servant, is the Lord's free Man* that is, set free from Sin and spiritual
Bondage: Be ye holy, as your heavenly Father is holy; and be ye merciful, as
your heavenly Father is merciful, as is commanded you in Luke 6.36. and this is
the Way to have the lost Image of God restored and renewed in us.

Therefore I say, you spiritual Jews, you must exceed the outward Jews in this,
who are now come to Christ, who is a merciful and faithful high Priest, who is
the Savior of all men, and who tasted Death for all men, Heb. 2.17. And let
not your Families of Whites and Blacks be like Sodom and Gomorrah like Zeboim
and Zephervaim, and the rest of the Cities of the Plain, or like the
Canaanites, lest sudden Destruction come upon you, and the Lord root you out,
as he did them. Let not, I say, your Servants under your Command, and such as
are born in your Houses, and bred up in your Families, and such as you have
bought with Money, suffer them not (I say) to take Husbands and Wives at their
Pleasure, and then leave them again when they please, and then take others
again as fast and suddenly as they will, and again leave them; this is not
well, this may bring the Judgments of God upon you; yea, this manifests your
Families to be unclean and adulterous Families; For he that puts away his Wife,
and takes another, he commits Adultery; and she that marries, and he that
marries her (after she is put away) commits Adultery; this is the Law of God,
and of Jesus Christ, the Son of God the great Reformer and Restorer of Paths
to dwell in, Mat. 19.9. Isa. 58.12. that came to reform all Things

And therefore let these Things be amended, as you expect the Blessing and
Favor of God, or otherwise must expect his Judgments and Curse upon you and
your Families and your Plantations (who should order these Things according to
the Reformation and Mind of Jesus and the Law) even Blastings, Mildews,
Caterpillars, which is the Portion from God upon debauched Families and People;
and therefore let the Law of Jesus be set up in every Family.

And if any of your Negroes desire to marry, let them take one another before
Witnesses, in the Presence of God, and the Masters of the Families, in the Name
of Jesus, the Restorer of all Things to the Beginning, when God made them Male
and Female, not one Man and many Women, but a Man and a Woman, and they were to
continue and consort together as long as they lived, and not to break the
Covenant and Law of Marriage (nor defile the Marriage Bed) as long as they
lived; but if the Man were dead or Woman were dead, they were free, and at
Liberty to marry in the Lord, and to be joined by him, that so he might have
the Glory and the Honor of it, and his People to be the Witnesses of it, and
so to record it in a Book, which was and is the Practice of the famous Fathers
of Truth, and Saints, and Worthies, and Valiants of the Lord, who were Friends
of God, and of his Law, and Righteousness, and such as denied Debauchery,
Whoredom, Fornication and Uncleanness.

And further, consider with your selves, if you were in the same Condition as
the Blacks are (and indeed you do not know what Condition you or your Children,
or your Childrens Children may be reduced and brought into, before you or they
shall dye) who came as Strangers to you, and were sold to you as Slaves; now I
say, if this should be the Condition of you or yours, you would think it hard
Measure; yea, and very great Bondage and Cruelty.

And therefore consider seriously of this, and do you for and to them, as you
would willingly have them or any other to do unto you, were you in the like
slavish Condition, and bring them to know the Lord Christ, and the Light and
Grace of Christ, by which they may come to know him that dyed for them, and
that shed his precious Blood for them, and was buried, and rose again for their
Justification.

And truly Friends, great Troubles I underwent about those Things; yea, sorely
was my Spirit troubled when I came into the Sense of these Things, which were
over my Life, and burdened my Life very much, to see, that Families were not
brought into Order; for the Blacks are of your Families, and the many Natives
of them born in your Houses: I had a fore Burden, and (I say) much Trouble, how
that Righteousness might be brought through in the Thing, and Justice and Mercy
set up in every Family and in every Heart, that so God might be honored in
every Family, who is the Creator of all, and has given his Law to all, that
Just, Righteous, Holy and Good: And so I leave these Things to your serious
consideration, and to the Witness of the Spirit of God in you all, and in all
your Hearts, and you to be obedient unto it, and see if it will not lead you
into the selfsame Thing; for indeed when any shall marry into your Family,
before the Master of the Family and Overseer of the Family, then you may
admonish them all of God and of Christ, and his Truth, Light and Grace in their
Hearts, by which they might all know God and Christ, and know the true
Marriage, which is honorable, in all Things to beat down the Evil and Vile;
for Marriage is of God, and so honored by him.

And from Maryland, the 4th Day of the 12th Month 1672. touching the
Government of Families, in Part of his Letter he writes as follows.
AND in all your Family Meetings be not negligent among your Whites and
Negroes, but do your Diligence and Duty to God and them, which you will not
neglect, if you keep in the Faith of Abraham, and of that blessed Seed which
inheriteth the Promise and Crown Immortal, and be at Peace among your selves,
that every one may show that you are in Christ, the Prince of Peace, and it
does show that you are the Disciples of Christ, and Learners and Followers of
him, so to possess him, and then Life Eternal, Amen.

And from London, the 14th day of the 7th Month 1673. he wrote as follows.
MY Dear Friends, all live in the Power and Spirit of God, in which you have
Peace and Life; now in the Spirit you have Unity and Fellowship, and this
Spirit is the Bond of Peace, in which you do keep the holy, just, righteous and
good Peace; and now see that you do keep the Peace in God's House, who are his
Servants and Children in the Spirit; for in it you have Unity, and in it you
have a heavenly Fellowship, in the Fellowship of the Spirit, the Bond of Peace,
by which Spirit you may answer that which may be known of God in all, both
Blacks and Whites and that they may make Confession with that of God in them,
which they do transgress, that God is in you of a Truth: And however, keep in
Love one with another, for that does edify one another, and the whole Body,
which Christ, the beloved Son of God, that came out of his Bosom, is the Head
and Prophet, Shepherd and Bishop, to open and feed and to oversee. Dear Frinds,
keep your Meetings, and your Men's and Women's, and your Fortnights Meetings
among your Blacks, and train them up in the Fear of the Lord, and spread the
Truth abroad, and instruct your Families, as Abraham did, that they may know
the New Covenant, and the Lord to write his Law in their Hearts, and put it in
their Minds: So no more, but my Love to all, as though I named them.

And from London, the 18th of the 12 Month, 1673.
ALL my dear Friends, keep in the Power of God and in his Life, which gives
you an Inheritance of that which has no End; and keep your Men and Women's
Meetings in the Power of God, and keep the Gospel Order in the Power of God,
and the Government of Christ, which bruiseth the Serpent's Head, who is the
Head of all Disorder and evil Government; and keep your Meetings Weekly and
Fortnightly, as they were established, instructing your Families, as Abraham
did, whether they were hired, or born in his Family, or bought with his Money;
and who are of Faith, are of Abraham: And let me see and hear that you are of
the Faith of Abraham, that you do instruct them in Christianity* and in the Law
of Jesus, and in the Circumcision of the Spirit as Abraham did outwardly. Send
me over a Black Body of your instructing* that I may see some of your Fruits,
and as I shall see, I shall make him a free Man, or send him to you again.

And at the last Quarterly Meeting at Thomas Rous's this Paper was read, as
follows.
FRiends, all that have Negroes to your Servants, let them have two or three
Hours of the Day once in the Week, that Day Friends Meeting is on, or an other
Day, to meet together, to wait upon the Lord; for this would be a good Savor
among all the rest; for therein you deny your selves, for the bringing them to
the Knowledge of the Lord God; and this would be a good Pattern to all the
Island, and an Example to all other Masters, to bring their Servants from under
Oppression to know the Lord.

G. Fox.

THE END

