Death The certain Wages of Sin to the Impenitent: Life The sure Reward of
Grace to the Penitent: Together with the only Way for YOUTH To avoid the
former, and attain the latter.

Delivered in three Lecture Sermons; Occasioned by the Imprisonment,
Condemnation and Execution, of a Young Woman, who was guilty of Murdering her
Infant begotten in Whoredom.

To which is added, An Account of her manner of Life and Death, in which the
Glory of free Grace is displayed.

By Mr. John Rogers, Pastor of the Church of Ipswich.

1 Timothy 1.16

Boston: Printed by B Green, and J. Allen, for Samuel Phillips at the Brick
Shop. 1701.

The Preface.
IT is above Sixty years since Courts of Judicature have been Erected in the
Town of Ipswich; yet was it never known in all that time any person Arraigned
there for any Capital Offense. Which might justly be supposed to be the reason
that so many Thousands were there gathered, as was scarcely ever heard of or
seen upon any occasion in any part of New England. Which could not but put all
serious and thoughtful Spirits in mind of the Great and General Assembly that
will appear at the Great Day to receive their final Sentence: Which Multitude
were gathered to behold the Tragical End of the person then Executed, which was
attended with so many signals of Divine Grace and Favor, as the following
pages will give a more perfect and distinct Account of, which not to have
published, would have been a concealing of the Displays of the Declarative
Praise and Glory of God; and a damp to the Encouragement of Paenitent Sinners
to hope for Mercy at the last hour. These following Subjects that were handled
on those Lecture Weeks when the Criminal was Tried, Condemned, and afterward
Executed, appearing to be very suitable to the Occasion. And the Discourses
which were raised from them being judged worthy of publication; not only to
revive the memory of those that were happy in hearing of them; but that all
others, who may providentially come to the view of them, may be stirred up to
praise the Lord for his wonderful goodness, in making such an heinous Sinner
such an Instance of Converting Grace and Mercy: Neither shall any need to
question the truth of the repentance of the person Condemned, and after
Executed, from the shortness of the time of her Experiences: The Thief that
Commenced Converted on the Cross (as was expressed by him that Preached on that
occasion) is a proof of the possibility hereof; for with God all things are
possible: Seeing we read not any thing of his Conversion before he was Nailed
thereon, but God (whose gifts of Grace and Mercy are free, and disposes of
them, to whom, and at what time he pleases, did bless the public and private
means that were used, so as to bring about this mavelous Change in this poor
Creature, for the Exalting of the Riches of his Grace to miserable Sinners. So
as that she may be counted worthy to be added to those several memorable
Instances of special Mercy recorded in Ancient History, viz. that of Sir
Jervace Ellowis, Jacobus Andreas, and others, which Mr. Clarks History recites
in the Life of the Reverend Mr. William Perkins. So as that upon consideration
of this late and former Examples of like nature all that hear thereof ^ay well
break forth in the words of the Apostle, Romans 11.33 O the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God how unsearchable are his Ways, and his Judgments
past finding out.

Further also, It is not unworthy to be inserted, That this poor Creature
lately Executed, when she took her last leave of her Christian Friend, (the
night before her Execution) as she sti^ed him blessed by whose Ministry she had
received most benefit and Comfort. So she did the place of her Confinement,
(Happy Prison.) Not unlike that h^ly Martyr, wh^ suffered Martyrdom in Lions in
France: Subscribing his Letter to a Friend -- From the D^lectable Paradise of
the Leonine Prison -- And if the Prison of Martyrs be look^ upon as a Paradise,
What will be the place of their Eternal Ma^si^ns in the Higher Heavens*

William H^bbard.

TO THE Christian READER.
THE Word of the Lord is in it self always precious, yet best esteemed where
and when there are few or no open Visions; therefore it is said when Samuel
began to Prophesy, the word of the Lord was precious in those days, 1 Samuel 3 1.
For when there is a Famine of hearing the Word, then will men wander from Sea
to Sea, and run to and fro, to seek the word of the Lord: and the fair Virgins
and Young men will faint for thirst, Amos 8.12, 13. It is the l^s wonderful,
but not the less Sinful, that good Books and good Sermons, are so little valued
in our Age: for the full Soul is wont to loath the honey comb. And Israel it
self despised the Corn of Heaven, when it ^ell about their Tents every day: yet
through the mercy of God things are not come to that woeful pass in New England,
but that good Sermons and good Books find many good Friends. And we have the
less reason to fear, the following Discourses will want Readers, nay we cannot
but hope for a general acceptance, considering the weightiness of the Subject,
the worthiness of the Author, and the awfulness of the Occasion of their
Preaching and Printing.

1. The weightiness of the Subject on which the Sermons treats. It is no less
then LIFE and DEATH is to be set before you: which when Moses set before
Israel, he called Heaven and Earth to Record, Deuteronomy. 30.19. Sirs, What is more
bitter then the Death that Sin deserves? except the Sin that deserves it: and
what is more sweet then the Life that God gives through Jesus Christ? except
God in Christ who gives it. Besides, both the Death and the Life treated on are
ETERNAL, and they whose minds run on Eternity, and the things that are Eternal,
will not account the time long or lost, that is requisite for the Reading a
little Book Surely they that choose Life, will do more then this to escape the
Wages of Sin, and to attain the Gift of God: and what more necessary and
proper, than to stir up Youth to cleanse their ways, that so they may escape
the threatened Death, and obtain the promised Life? and this the Reader will
find effectually done in the Third Sermon.

2. The Worthiness of the Author, will be no little motive to them that best
know him: viz. The Church and Town of Ipswich, where he Exercises his Pastoral
Charge and Care, and the Neighborhood round about; and were he as well known
in other parts, where this Book may come, we should not have mentioned this
argument; and his known modesty forbids us however, to say much of it; yet we
may not omit saying, that we esteem him to be a pious, painful, Minister of the
Gospel; and that God has Crowned his Ministerial Labors with good success,
and has owned and honored his Ministry, (as well as that of his Aged,
Reverend, and Worthy Colleague, Mr. William Hubbard) with the convincing,
humbling, comforting, and (a^ is generally believed) converting as lewd, and
rude, and wretched a Sinner, as most that are brought home to God, whose woeful
circumstances, gave the occasion of the Ensuing Sermons; in Preaching whereof
he commended himself to the Consciences of them that heard him; and especially
to hers, who for the sake of his frequent visiting her in Prison, and Praying
with and for her, and for his Counsils in private and in public, cried out in
Prison, O Blessed Rogers* O happy Prison! but we pass this, being got before we
are aware to the third particular, which was the awful occasion of the Sermons.
They being Preached at the Trial, Condemnation and Execution of one Esther
Rodgers, (who by the way, though she was of the same name with the Author, yet
was no ways related to him, unless as her Spiritual Father.) This poor woman
was the unnatural Mother, and cruel Murderer of two spurious babes, the fruit
of her own Body; a most dreadful instance of the Wrath of God against the Sin
of Fornication and Whoredom, which so sadly abounds in our Land, and a Warning
to such, as indulge themselves in the breach of the Seventh Commandment, least
thereby they lead themselves into temptation, and so God leave them to break
the Sixth; and to work folly and falsehood against their own lives, and the
lives of their Children, as well as against their own Chasti^y and Honor. One
reason why God ordained such dreadful punishment for Sinners in this world was,
That a^l Israel might hear and fear, and do no more so wickedly: and we judge
that the reading of these Sermons, and the Confessions and Penitential Papers,
and Dying Speeches and Prayers of the poor Condemned Woman, may be a means to
startle the Rising Generation, and to keep others from sinning in the same
kind, and to make them to beware of the works of Darkness, least God bring them
to light, and to punishment at the same time, publishing and punishing in the
place of Beholders, what was done in secret. And let it be remembered, that her
sin found her out, and that she endured unexpressible horror, before she
obtained Consolation; and when she did obtain i^, it must be ascribed to the
unaccountable Sovereign Free Grace of God, who to the Eternal Glory of his free
Grace, granted her Repentance unto life, when many others die without
instruction, and go astray in the greatness of their folly, being taken by
their own iniquity, and held with the cords of their own sin, as is threatened,
Prove. 25 22, 23. So true is that, Romans 9.18. The Lord has mercy on whom he
will have mercy, and whom he will he hard^^s; i. e Judicially leaves them to
the hardness of their own hearts. The Gracious Lord gives instances of both
kinds, that none may presume, and that none may despair, but that all may work
^ut their own Salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God who works in
us both to will and to do of his good pleasure; Phil. 2.12, 13. And it is not
of him that wills, nor of him that runs, but of God who shows mercy,
Romans 9.16.

We have nothing further to add, but to desire of the Reader, a just candor
toward the Reverend Author, and his holy endeavors; so as not to wring or
wrest any particular expression beyond his intention, who had no inclination,
much less design to appear in Print, but was averse even to a fault, and very
hardly persuaded to suffer it to be done, perhaps fearing, what was proper
enough to profit a well-minded popular Auditory, might not be fully guarded
against a cavelling adversary; for his province at that time was that of
predicant, and not of a disputant; and his design was, to convince men, that
sin was odious, and that God was gracious, and to urge both to the uttermost He
dealt with the Consciences and affections of Sinners, to move them to
repentance, that God might be Glorified, and Sinners might be Saved. As it had
a good effect in Preaching, so we hope and pray that it may in Printing. And if
any should think the worthy Author might have been more particular on this
occasion, in setting forth the danger and mischief of the Sin of Fornication,
for the warning of the Rising Generation. Let the Reader know, that the
Reverend Mr. Hubbard did purposely and effectually do it in the same Pulpit,
from those words, in 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Know ye not that the Unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God? be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor
Adulterers, etc. Which made him more general, which his Text also led him to,
for the wages of all and every Sin is death. Now that God may be Glorified, the
Reader benefited, and the pious Author further encouraged and succeeded in his
Ministerial Labors; is the hearty desire of your Friends and Servants for
Christ's Sake.

Salem 11 th d. 7 th. m. 1701. Nicholas Noyes. Joseph Gorrish.


DEATH The Certain Wages of Sin To the Impenitent.
Romans VI.23. For the wages of sin is death: but the gift of God is eternal
life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.


THESE words are the Sum both of Law and Gospel. The Law was given first, and
also broken first, before there was any mention or need of mentioning the
Gospel.

According to which order and method, we have here, first, the Sentence of the
Law, which is rigorous, then that of the Gospel, which is gracious. H^re is the
Debt which God owes to the Sinner, and the Gift which he bestows upon him: The
Debt according to Justice is Death: The Gift according to Grace is Life Eternal
The Wages of Sin is Death: But the Gift of God is, etc.

The former Clause is an entire Axiom, or Doctrine, and cannot be altered to
advantage.

DOCTRINE. The Wages of Sin is Death.
Death is the certain due punishment of Sin: The just Reward or Recompense of
Sin. Evil Suffering is the just consequent of Evil Doing. The Illustration and
Confirmation of this Doctrine may be had in Answer to these Questions.

1 What is Sin? 2 What is Death? 3. How Sin is punished with Death? 4 Why it
should be so? Under which may be shown the equity as well as certainty hereof.
Quest. 1. What is Sin?

Answ. In general, It Is the swerving or declining of the Nature or Act of the
Reasonable Creature from the Will and Law of the Creator: It is the Habitual or
Actual Exorbitancy, or Deviation of the Affections and Actions of man from the
Commands of God. God is the last End, the End of all things. As he is Alpha, so
Omega, the First and Last, Beginning and Ending. Of him and from him are all
things, and also to him; from him as their Original, to him as their End. His
Will therefore is the Creatures Rule. The Will that is In^eriour, is to be
regulated b^ the Will of the Superior: The will of the Father is the Rule of
the Child: The Command of the Leader is the Rule of his Soldiers: The Supreme
Will is the Rule of that which is Subordinate. Hence the Will of God Revealed
is the sole Rule and Law of our Inclinations, Dispositions and Actions. It is
the right straight line by which our whole course should be ordered. Now any
warping or turning from this line is Sin. The Statutes of the Lord are right,
the observing them is Righteousness. The Conformity of our Nature, Powers,
Faculties and Acts unto the Law of God; For Sin is a Transgression of the Law.
1 John 3.4. Whosoever commits sin Transgresses the Law. A Concordance of
our hearts and ways with the Law of God; This is Righteousness. The Disagreeing
of these is sin: If it be the Habitual Deviation of our Nature, it is called
Original Sin: The inordination of any Act, Actual Sin. Neither of these are
positive, but only the privation, defect, absence of Holiness and Righteousness
in the heart and ways of men.

Quest. 2. What is Death?

Ans. As Sin is the privation of Righteousness and Holiness in a Subject whose
it ought to be; so Death is the privation of Happiness in a Subject where it
might be, or is capable of it: Death is the privation of Life. Now Life being
the greatest Natural Good, its put for all Good; and so Death being the
privation of it, and most contrary to it, is the sum and comprehense of all
Evil; The loss of all that Happiness and Good both of Soul and Body which man
was possessed of here, and was to be communicated to him afterward: Likewise
the sense of all that Evil which he is the Subject of, both now and for ever.
This is Death.

Quest. 3. How this Death is inflicted as a punishment on the Sinner?

Answ. Corporally and Spiritually, in both Temporal and Eternal; that is,
Inchoatively here, and Consummatively hereafter.

1. Corporally, Man a Sinner suffers Bodily Death in the loss of a twofold
Good, and a sense of a twofold Evil, intra et extra.

(1.) There is the loss or privation of the Internal Good of the Body; as of
the Beauty, Strength, Vigor and Activity thereof; in all which Innocent man
Excelled: But since the Fall is punished with Deformity, Blindness, Lameness,
Weakness and Inbecility in all parts, powers and faculties, with an utter decay
of all at Death.

(2.) The loss of External Good relating to the Body or Outward man, is a fruit
and punishment of Sin: There had never been any want of these things, no
poverty or indigency, had Adam remained in Innocence. But Sin has deprived man,
not only of self perfections, but the excellency, suitableness and subjection
of the Creatures to him. These in their very natures are become full of
infection and deadly poison by the contagion of man's sin: The World is full of
vanity, disorder, and confusion; yea, in a word, Sin has sown that seed of
universal Dissolution, which will one day deface with horror and darkness the
Beauty of that glorious Frame of Nature, which we now so much admire.

Again, Sinful man suffe^s the inchoations of Bodily Death in the sense of
Evil, internal and external.

(1.) Within are all manner of pains, griefs, aches, sickness, sores,
wearisomness, etc.

(2.) The world without is a true Bochim, a place of Tears. There is scarce any
thing but ministers matter of sorrow and trouble, for all is not only vanity,
but vexation of Spirit, Eccles. 2 17. Our very Honey is mixed with Gall, our
Roses set with Thorns, our sweetest pleasures attended with much bitterness:
What then may we say of those inmixed simple sorrows which we meet withal? By
reason of sin, and the Rebellion of man against God, all the Creatures are up
in Arms against him; they do not only not yield the comfort which otherwise
they would, but they fight against him, work his sorrow and ruin. The very
Heavens, ^he Stars which seem to promise nothing but light and comfort, they
infect his person and good by their malevolent influences and aspects. The Air
proves contagious to him, and scatters its plagues throughout the world. The
Waters from above pour down upon him; the Waters beneath they swallow him up;
the Earth is continually gaping and opening its mouth, devours the Inhabitants
thereof. The Beasts of the Wood are ravenous and venomous; yea further, man
suffers from his own kind, for Homo homini Lupus; as if mankind had not evil
enough, enemies enough to conflict with, besides, he becomes an enemy to
himself, and with Cain falls out with his Brother and kills him. Sin has sown
the seeds of Enmity and Discord in the nature and mind of men one against
another, whence Murders and other mischiefs do proceed; and what the Ruins and
Calamities of Wars have been, all Ages may and do sufficiently witness to us;
neither has our own time wanted the experience of such Sufferings; though we
may have wanted the sense of those Sins which procured them, and for that cause
are likely to bring them on again. Yet these are but the beginning or
inchoation of Bodily Death. The perfection, consummation or accomplishment
hereof is in the other world: And it is the total Absence of all good, and
sense of all Evil in the Body, when cast into that place of Torment, where is
Weeping, and Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth; when every part and member that
has been an instrument of Unrighteousness here, shall be pained in the highest
degree of misery, and that for ever.

This is the birth of Sin, part of the wages which man works for, when he works
Rebellion against God. Bodily Death begun here, and finished hereafter. But
there is yet more in Death, and that which is worse too, viz.

(2.) The Death of the Soul. The Sinner dies Spiritually as well as Corporally:
Or, The Soul th^^ sins shall die. The principal Agent in sinning, shall be the
chief Patient in suffering* Now, This Death of the Soul is also* begun here; in
the loss of Spiritual Good, and sense of Spiritual Evil. The first is accounted
the greatest, and that is the loss of the Image of God in the Soul, or defacing
and oblitering that Divine Impression once stamped upon it. The Image of God,
was the life of the Soul, the privation hereof (...) the death of it. This was
the glory, (...) e^^ellency of man, his pre-eminence above ^e rest of the
Creation, that he alone bore the Image of his Creator; The Confo^mity of man
after his manner and measure to the Divine Pe^fecti^ns. Now the Deformation of
this Conformity is the ^nc^^ati^n of Spi^i^^al Dea^^ as the (...) of sin* Romans
3 23 For ^ll have (...), and come short of the glory of God. Then,

The sense of evil in the Soul is spiritual bondage, a subjection to the Powers
of darkness, and all deadly enemies of the Soul. Man by Apostasy brought
himself into bonds; whence his Anastacy is exemplified by a Redemption from
bondage, Col 1.13. This is the bondage of the Devil and his instruments: so
that man by sin is a Servant of Servants, and a slave to the Devils Servants,
the World and Sin. Man is subject to the Temptation of those evils and snares
which are in the World through lust, and unto sin as the fruit of that lust;
which subjection is not only a consequent but punishment of the first sin.

Then follows, the Terrors of a guilty Conscience, often conjoined with Despair:
These are the beginnings of a Spiritual Death.

We may next look to the Consummation of this Death of the Soul

1. In regard of its loss which is infinite; being the deprivation of an
infinite good; the presence and favor of an infinite God. The greatest
heavenly enjoyment is the ^ruition of God, his favor and fellowship. The chief
happiness of the Saints in heaven is this perfect beatifick vision, speculation
and contemplation of the glorious Trinity. Now as contraries serve to
illustrate each other, by this we see the infinite loss of that Soul which
looses God, Heaven and Happiness all at once: that is punished with everlasting
separation from the presence of the Lord. To whom God shall say, Depart, Oh
dread^ul word! enough to kill any Soul indeed: Depart from the living God.

2. This Spiritual Death is completed with the sense of all Evil: that is
Servit^tis Plenitudo. The fullness of bondage: They are held in Chains of
Darkness to the Judgment of the great Day. God this Judge shall give Commission
to the powers of Hell to Seize on their Souls as soon as out of the Body: Take
them Devils, Hale them to the place of their miserable ab^de for ever* Then and
there shall the sum of the Sinners punishment be inflicted fully and finally,
yet everlastingly, when Body and Soul being brought together shall be cast into
the depth of that Pit which is without bottom: This is the Second Death, Rev.
21.8.

This may suffice for Explanation of the Doctrine: How Death is said to be the
Wages of Sin; even all kinds and degrees of Death, Corporal and Spiritual,
Temporal and Eternal. For the proof and confirmation hereof, that thus it is,
and that thus it should be, or that it is both certain and just. I might lay
down some Positive Texts of Scripture, Examples and Reasons.

First, for Scripture proof.

We may look back to the first threatening, wherein God said to Adam, In the day
thou eatest thou shall surely die. Gen 2.17. This included his Posterity, even
all mankind, who sinned in him and f^ll with him in his first Transgression.
And as Original Guilt obliges, so every actual Sin leads unto Death, Jam.
1.15. Lust when it has conceived brings forth Sin, Sin when it is finished
brings forth Death. This is the Spawn, the fru^t and effect of Sin naturally.
Prove. 5. Solomon speaking of the strange Woman, says, Her feet go down to Death
her steps take hold of Hell; her way of Sin is deadly, and they are Children of
Death that go after her, though they know it not, yet it is for their life.
This also is given as a reason of that Expostulation, Romans 6.21. What fruit had
ye of those things whereof ye are now ashamed, for the end of those things is
Death. Hence, He that Converteth a sinner, saves a Soul from Death. Then the
Scripture is full of instances as well as Assertions to prove the deadly
effects of Sin. Sin once brought a destructive deluge on the whole World: drew
down Fire and Brimstone on Sodom and Gomorrah which consumed them; and many
other Examples of immediate Death inflicted on particular Persons, for the
punishment of their sins.

The next thing is to show it just as well as certain; or give the reasons, in
Answer to the fourth Question.

Quest. 4 Why it should be thus? Or, Why is Sin punished with Death?

Answ. 1. From the Will and Pleasure of God; who is the Sovereign Lord and
Lawgiver, and may set what penalty he will for the Transgression of his Law.
Now its the Will of God that Death should be the wages of Sin, or to reward Sin
with Death. Its Gods pleasure that man should thus suffer for his Sin; and this
is a reason above all other reasons: this were sufficient if there were no
other. The Supreme and highest Will, the Will of God it is the Creatures Law,
and that is the Rule of Righteousness. God is perfectly independent, has none
above him, to limit or give him Rule; but his own Will is the Rule, therefore
he cannot err, if he does but please himself: he break^ no rule except he
thwarts his own Will, which is impossible. Now this is Gods will to punish Sin
with Death, therefore it is just, for he can Will nothing but what is so. He
delights in equity, but hates iniquity. Righteousness and Justice in men, its a
beam that issues from this Sun of Righteousness, yea its but as it were a
shadow of his brightness; yet God takes delight therein because its a
resemblance of that infinite Goodness which is in himself. Justice is essential
to him, its his very Being, his Nature and Delight, therefore it must needs be
a righteous Sentence that ever proceeds out of his mouth.

Reason 2 Its just also by Gods Covenant and Engagement with man at first. It
was their bargain that Death should be the wages of Sin, Gen 2.16, 17. Now
consider Adam as able to keep this charge, had power to stand, and could not
but know the consequents of his Fall: God did not hide his danger from him, as
he justly might, but annexes the penalty to the Precept for his warning, [ Thou
shall surely Die.] Now if Adam would venture his life for a lust, it is no other
than just with God to punish the neglect of his Duty and Happiness with the
evil he had threatened: if he would choose Death rather than life, God might let
him have his choice: and if this was just with respect to Adam, so it is to all
his Posterity, who were then as parts of him, and in his loins were partakers
in the sin, and so justly sha^ers in the suffering: besides the same Law is
given us on like penalty, Ezekiel. 18 20. The soul that sins shall die.

Reason 3. From a proportion between the Reward of Obedience and Disobedience.
This will appear just: The Reward of Disobedience is not longer or larger in
point of Evil, than the Reward of Obedience should be in point of Good Man is
no more miserable by his Sin, than he should be happy by Righteousness: Life is
as great a good, as Death is Evil; Heaven is as large and long as Hell. Now if
God would have man to inherit life, Eternal Life as a Reward of his Obedience;
then its equal and just, that he should give Death, even Eternal Death as an
answerable Recompense of Sin and Disobedience.

Reason 4. This will appear just, if we consider the Nature of Sin. That is, A
Forsaking God. Isa. 1 4. Jer. 2* 13. Therefore its just with God to forsake
them. God is the Fountain of Life, and all Good, the fountain of living waters;
if men will run away from it, they must needs perish, Psalm. 73 27. It is also
just that God should restrain and with hold all the streams of life and
comfort, that they never come near them. They that are estranged from the
Author of Life by Nature, and yet by actual wilful Departure, set themselves
further off from God, how or why should they ever be let to know what belongs
to Life Eternal?

Again* Sin is Enmity, and Sinners are Enemies unto God. As, Romans 8.7. The
carnal mind is enmity unto God. It is high Treason and Rebellion, Treachery
against the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; what punishment but Death can be
just and suitable for Enemies to God, Rebels and Traitors against his Crown and
Dignity? Though the Lord has said and sworn by his own life, that he takes no
pleasure in the Death of Sinners; yet he cannot but delight to manifest
Righteousness in punishing Sin with Death: Glory is that which God designs in
every thing. He seeks to get the Glory of (...) the admirable perfections of
his Na^, and so desires his Justice might be conspicuous as we^l as his Mercy;
therefore a^ he is willing to make known the Riches of his Grace on the Vessels
of mercy, which he had fore prepared thereunto; so he is willing to show his
Wrath, and make known the power of his Justice, and the justice of power on the
Vessels of Wrath fitted for Destruction.

APPLICATION.
USE 1. This shows the miserable Estate of all the Sons and Daughters of Adam.
Born in Sin, and so Heirs of Death. They are subject unto Death as soon as they
have received life: yea, are born under a necessity of Dying; they may indeed
pass from Death to Life through Grace, 1 Job. 3 14 But are by Nature under the
power of Death: Consequently this sho^s the Happiness of those that are
Redeemed from sin; at least a P^ivative Happiness, that they are thereby
delivered from Death and Hell; and how deeply engaged are all such to Christ
their Redeemer, to admire, love and live to him, who by suffering Death has
taken their obligation thereunto. If Death be the Wages of Sin, there could be
no life for any man, without the Death and Suffering of Christ who is our
Surety. God could not withold this due, and remain just; for not only his
Promises, but his Threatenings must stand for ever; In the day thou eatest thou
shall die. This then must be either the Sinner or the Surety; if Christ will be
a Surety, he must be a Sufferer. Hence, he praying says, If it be possible,
let this Cup pass; but it was impossible that Cup of Death should pass from the
lips of our Savior, if he would be a Savior unto us: Justice would not be
satisfied without the Delinquent or the Surety suffer Death according to the
Threatening.

2. This sh^ws the blameable cause of all Evil of Suffering of what kind or
degree s^ever it be. All is comprehended under this word Death, and all is
procured by Sin: Even the Sufferings of the Saints are chargeable to their own
account, and a^e a fruit of sin, if not properly the punishment thereof; and
they may look upon Death it self with no other aspect then as the greatest
bodily Affliction which shall or can befall them. They as well as others must
sip of these bitter Waters not for satisfaction but submission to the Law.
Indeed Death was d^c^eed and determined of God to seize upon Fallen Sinners in
all its kinds; and we never yet find that doleful Sentence repeal^d as to a
temporal Dissolution in any Promise. It Is true, Christ is the Resurrection and
the Life, and says, Whosoever beliveth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he
live. But Die he must, that is a Statute which never will be reversed. Heb.
9.27. And we see it execu^ed in Divine Providence on every sort of men in the
world; yea, such of whom it is said, Ye are Gods, must die like men, Psalm. 82.6
Riches and Greatness prevail not for a Reprieval; neither will Grace and
Holiness exempt from this Sentence. Though the wicked fall twice under the dint
of this Goliah's Sword, yet it is appointed for all once to die* For as by one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, so Death passes upon all men,
for that all have sinned. Romans 5.12.

3. This shows how odi^us a thing Sin is unto God. The odiousness whereof
appears.

(1.) In that God inflicts any punishment, brings any Evil upon man. Man who
was his greatest Favorite, the Object of his peculiar^d light, the Subject on
whom he first heapt the treasures of love and goodness. God loved all his
Creatures, but man superlatively, whilst he remained in Innocence. Surely then,
it is not a small matter which turned the heart of God against man, and the
streams of his love into hatred. Great is the Evil of Sin that disingratiates
this Favorite, that stirs up the Wrath of God against his beloved Creature,
yea against his only Beloved Son, when he appears as man, and in his behalf.

(2.) In that he brings so great Evil, inflicts so high a degree of punishment
as Death; Corporal, Spiritual, Temporal, Eternal. It is not a small matter
would restrain the influences of Gods love; how offensive then must that be
which turns his love into infinite wrath, that nothing less will content him,
than the utter destruction of the Offender. We may make a light matter of sin,
and extenuate it in our own apprehensions; but God makes every br^ach of his
Law to be Capital; we have many Laws, but a few Capital; whereas God makes
every Law such. He that breaks any one of his Commandments forfeits his life:
God has set Death as a stated penalty of every sin: Sin therefore is exceeding
hateful to God, and we need not wonder at it, because i^ there were any
Deicidtum, it were by sin. A Sinner destroys much good, and if it were
possible, would annihilate God himself, the Fountain of all good. This strikes
at the Life and Being of God, therefore it is so odious, that he loves to
punish it with Death. But,

4. Though Sin be so odious to God, yet see and admire how gracious God is unto
Sinners.

1. In his patience, that he forbears, reprieves from present Execution, or
does not b^ing the full weight of his Wrath at once. It Is admirable long
suffering which suffers the Children of Death to live at all. Indeed the Curse
has taken part hold, and Death has beg^n to seize on man from the first s^^;
from the first touch of the Apple man began to die; his after breath was his
dying breath; and every breath the impenitent Sinner breaths, is the expiring
of his Soul; but it is Gods patience which allows him to breath at all

2. In his Beneficence He not only restrains Judgment by one hand, but bestows
blessings with the other. He makes the Sun to rise on the evil and the good,
and sends Rain on the just, and on the unjust. Mat. 5.45. There are none so
bad but partake of his Goodness in this life. Also he gives to many the
opportunity of escaping Death, and the offer of Life Eternal, affording means
of Grace to bring them thereunto.

5. This shows how odious and detestable Sin should be unto us; were it only
the deadly effects of it. The lovers of sin are haters of God and themselves
too: Every wicked man is a Felo de se; A Felon, a murderer of himself. Prove.
11.19. As Righteousness tends to life, so he that pursues Evil pursues it
to his own death. The lips of sin are lying lips, its favoring flatteries are
cruel deceits; it speaks men fair as Joab did to Abner and strikes Death at the
same time. Stolen waters are sweet, and bread eaten in secret is pleasant; but
the Guests of this Banquet are in the Depth^ of Hell. Therefore men should hate
Sin as Death and Hell it self, being the High way thereunto; and this hatred
should be universal: for there is the same reason to hate every sin as any sin,
for the least is d^adly.

Many may please and deceive themselves with a false distinction of sins into
Venial and Mortal. Whereas indeed, all are venial upon Repentance and Faith in
the Lord Jesus; but otherwise all are mortal and damnable; and though all are
not pu^ishable with Death by Humane Laws, but a few stripes or shillings is the
ordinary penalty, whence so many are imboldened to transgress (I fear) yet let
such presumptuous ones consider, that God and his Law will not be so easily
satisfi^d, nor the punishment thereof endured. Besides the hazard of being left
to run from lesser to greater sins, till they arrive at the Gallows, as many
others have done before: they are certainly reserved to a future Judgment,
wherein tricks of youth, wantonness and other sins, which are here made light
of shall be doomed with an heavy Condemnation. Eccl. 11.9

There are two general Arguments or Motives to hate Sin: Love and Fear.

1. Love to God should make us loath to offend him. We have highest reason to
love him who is the Sun of all our Light, the Fountain of our life, the God of
our mercies, and Father of all our Comforts. We have nothing, we can have
nothing that is good and desirable, but what is dispensed out of his Treasury,
and Benefits are Bonds, they oblige Lege Talionis: by the Law of Retaliation^
The Love of God should constrain us: and love to him should make us not only
love what he loves, but also hate what he hates: we should have the same common
friends and enemies. Now Sin only is an Enemy to God: How then shall we take
pleasure in sin against him, who takes no pleasure in our Death? But love of
God and our selves too should make us abhor that which is so displeasing unto
him, and destructive to our selves.

2. Fear of God should deter us from sinning against him. If we do not forsake
Sin for love of God as a gracious Father, yet the Fear of God as a terri^le
Judge should put a stop to the current of our Iniquity: If the Goodness of God
which has found out a way of Redemption from Sin will not allure and persuade,
let the Justice of God which will inflict Eternal Damnation as the punishment
for sin affrighten and enforce us: If the Light of his Countenance, which is
better than life, and the joys of Heaven persuade us not; let the dark shadows
of Death, and the sorrows of Hell constrain us to this abhorrence of Sin, which
can only keep us from the Happiness of the first, and bring us into the misery
of the latter.

And here Consider, That the least sin may do us this deadly mischief, (as was
before hinted.) The least grain of this Poison will kill both Body and Soul, if
it be not expelled by true and timely Repentance: Therefore if we hate the
nature of sin, we should hate the least sins, which are of the same poisonous
nature, and mortal effect.

Further to excite, maintain and increase our abhorrence of every sin, let us
think more on Death, which is the bitter fruit thereof. And we have a threefold
Object for medita^ion herein. viz. The Certainty, the Extremity, the Eternity
of this Death.

1. The Certainty of it. There is nothing more certain than this, that Death is
the consequent of sin. So sure as God lives, so sure every Sinner dies; The
Life of God is as questionable as the Sinners death; the Sinner as much as in
him lies would destroy God; God therefore will certainly destroy the Sinner*
All the Attr^butes of God are offended by sin, and will be avenged of the
Sinner. The love of God unto himself, as it sets his heart against sin, so it
will set his hand on work to destroy the Sinner. Is it possible that God should
not be true, or that Truth it self should ly^? If this be impossible, then it is
impossible that sin should escape without the reward of Death. If God be a God
of Truth, then every Sinner is a Son of Death. For this is that which God has
said, and will make go^d; The Soul that sins shall die: Whether the Sinner be
warned or no, he shall die, as Ezekiel 3.18, 19. If the Watchman gives not warning,
he haz^rds his own life* but that ^rees not the Sinner from Death.

Again. Is i^ p^ssible that God should forget his own Holiness? I^ God be a
Holy God, as ^e is, Exodus 15 11. then he cannot but hate all that is contrary
and sanctify himself by bearing testimony against sin. Is it possible there
should be any Unrighteousness in God? No, He is a God of Justice and without
Iniquity; but it would be injustice to withold a Debt from him to whom it is
due: If God be just then, he will pay the Sinner his wages; therefore Death
shall be certain, for this is the Reward by agreement: God will be a faithful
Play Master, though he does not always pay down, or presently. It is no
Unrighteousness to remain for a time in Debt, at least if the Debtor has not
bound himself to present payment. But Justice can never utterly forget to pay
the Debt it ows. God lets the Sinner have time and opportunity to finish his
work, and when sin is finished, it shall be fully rewarded. God has not only
given his word for it, (which is as good as a Bond) but sealed his Decree to
punish Sin with Death: yea, he has sealed it with the Blood of his own Son. If
it had not been the absolute determinate Counsel of God, the cup of death had
passed the lips of our Savior Christ; He had never dyed; he had never
descended into Hell, if Hell and Death were not the certain determined portion
of the Sinner in whose stead he dyed. God the Father would have granted the
life of the Elect Gratis, if his Decree had not made it impossible* God would
have spared his own Son, in whom he took infinite delight, if Justice had not
tied up his hands, (to speak with Reverence.) Our Savior himself cries unto
his Father, If it be possible, and Christ never made a prayer that was not
heard by his Father. This is Hypothetical or Conditional, If it ^e possible,
but it was utterly impossible* Infinite Justice will not be satsfied unless the
Delinquent or Surety suffer this Death for Sin. The Bowels of God, his heart
would never have b^rn that his only begotten Son should have endured such an
Agony in the Garden. Th^se drops of Blood would have commanded pity and
release if there had been any possibility of it. But Justice cannot permit that
the Surety should escape Death, and yet the Sinner live. Well then, if God
spared not his own Son, his only Son, but delivers him up to Death and Hell for
sin imp^t^d. How impossible will it be for any out of Christ to escape? Can any
look, or is there any hopes that we may find more Favor at Gods hands than his
only Son? and yet He if he will take upon him the sins of his Elect, must drink
of this cup of Death. There is a Second Death, and that is as certain as the
first: As sure as there is a Heaven, so sure there is a Hell, a Lake of Fire
and Brimstone, and all the wicked of the Earth shall have their portion in it;
there is none shall escape, not so much as one. It Is true, they that a^e gotten
into the Ark, Christ Jesus, they shall be saved; but whosoever is not found in
him shall perish. All the Elect have been in Hell already, and have suffered
the pains of it in their Surety; But they that have no interest in the Death
and Suffering of Christ, they must suffer these Eve^lasting Torments in their
own persons, and there is no possible Redemption for them It will be a vain
confidence or hope to rely on general mercy, or the comm^n Goodness of God to
his Creatures; The mercy of God will deceive such as rely on it without ground;
The streams of Gods mercy unto Sinners, they all run in this one Channel,
through Jesus Christ our Lord; there is no mercy in God for the Salvation of
Sinners but in Christ. Christ died not for Angels, they are lost irr^coverably
therefore; and unless he had undertaken and overcome Death for ^s, all we must
have been overcome by this Death; and though some Sinners may have made a
Covenant with Death, and are at an Agreement with Hell, yet this shall be
disannulled, it shall not stand, it is a refuge of lies they trust unto, and
the deceit will be but an addition to their Torment, Deuteronomy. 29.19, 20. For any
to think of peace when God proclaim^ War, to hope for life when God has
threatened death, is but to flatter themselves with a Dream, yea, it is a
comforting themselves with the sparks that will consume them. For Death is
certain.

And under this Head we may also consider its suddenness. It certainly will be
sudden; Death shall speedily overtake sin. The day of Patience and Forbearance,
it is but short; The Lord delays his Coming, but not long. The day of the Lord
is near at hand, whether of particular, or general Judgment: The day of the
world is but a short day, the day of ones life much shorter, it will soon be at
end; and the night of end less darkness will succeed. Yet a little while and he
that shall come will come, and not tarry. God comes on the Sinner suddenly and
terribly; The Chariot Horses of his Justice are swifter than Eagles to bring
Destruction upon Sinners; though they ly fast asleep in Sin, yet their
Damnation slumbereth not at all.

2. Meditate on the Extremity of Death, that it may work a greater abhorance
and dread of Sin, which procures it. Indeed, as the happiness of the Saints in
Glory is greatly surpassing our highest conceits; so proportionably the
wretchedness of the Damned in Hell must needs be the deepest misery. Their
Torments are invented by infinite Wisdom, and inflicted by Almighty Power. God
is terrible when he appears in Mercy (as Jacob says.) how much more when he
comes in Fury: If fearful in the giving of his Law, how dreadful in revenging
the breach of it? In the day of Gods patience and goodness here, awful are his
Judgments; what then will the Day of his Judgment be? If the Afflicting hand of
God be so heavy upon his own Children, whom he loves with infinite and
everlasting love; what will be the weight of the hand of his Wrath upon his
Enemies, whom he hates? If the love of God be so wrathful; how direful will his
wrath be? If they are such dismal d^ops that fall from the love of God, as all
the Afflictions of his Saints do; how scalding will the drops of the vial of
his wrath be? yea what will be the burning Sea of incensed Fury? If the Fire of
God to refine his People be so hot and almost insufferable; how dreadful is the
boiling Lake of Fire and Brimstone? If those Rods for his Children be so sharp
and stinging, what are those fiery Scorpions to torment his Enemies withal?
Heavy Judgment fall upon Sinners in this life, which is the day of Gods
patience, but how intolerable will his wrath be in the day of his Wrath and
Vengeance? If his little Finger be so heavy, a very touch of it, how
insupportable will the loins of his wrath be? This will surely press down to
the lowest Hell. The Extremity of the Sinners misery might be considered on
both parts, viz Their Extrusion or Banishment out of Heaven, and from the
Society of the Blessed for ever: And also their Intrusion and incarceration
among the Cursed in Hell for ever. Where or what this Hell is which the wicked
are cast into; The Scripture leaves us without the distinct knowledge of it. It
may be this Earth, or this Visible World. That which has been the stage
whereupon the Sinner has acted his Rebellion against God, shall also be the
Scaffold of his Execution: These Creatures which have groaned under the burden
of man, who has employed them against their Maker, may be restored unto their
liberty and serve their Creator, in being Executors of his Wrath on man. This
beautiful Fabric of the World being perfected to become a Palace for man, a
Subject unto God, may be dissolved and confounded to become a Prison, a Dungeon
for man a Reb^l.

But wheresoever and whatsoever Hell shall be, it is a dismal place: a place of
utter darkness; of horror and consumption: a Pit of Noise, where is nothing to
be heard, but Weeping and Wailing, Banning, Cursing, Blaspheming of God, and
the horrible out cries of Despair, raised from what is to be meditated on in the
third and last place, Viz.

3. The Eternity of this Death, which is the wages of Sin. This is common to
the Wicked with the Godly; that their reward is Eternal, Dan 12.2. The life of
the Saints it is Eternal Life and the Death of the wicked it is no less than
Eternal. It is an ever dying Death: As its said, Rev 9* 6. There men shall seek
Death, and shall not find it, they shall desire to die, and it shall flee from
them. This indeed is the misery of the Second Death, that it will not suffer a
man to Die* Death would be sweet in this Death, but this is the Sting of Death,
the immortality of it.

Were all the pleasures of this whole World contracted, and put to one drop of
the wrath of God, they could never swee^en it; but yet the Eternal duration of
this exceeds the bitternes^ of it in it self; that when whole Myriads of Ages
are past in those horrid Torments, yet the time is no whit shortened. Its
direful to conceive of the easelessness of the pains of Hell, that Dives shall
not have one drop of water to cool his Tongue: But the Endlessness of those
Tormets, its intolerable. What Is a Drop to the Ocean; a Sand, a Dust or a
little Atome, to the World? yet these hold a proportion: but now between the
longest time and Eternity, there is no proportion. We have never a line to
measure Eternity by. Our Thoughts that are most swift, and extensive, they are
not able to reach to the End of Eternity: It has no end. Our Souls cannot grasp
it. EVER and for EVER, it is a word will pose the strongest Head. How can we
comprehend that which has no limits, see to the End of that which has no End?

The least particle of Time detracts from the greatest Sum of Finite Sorrows,
let them be multiplied never so far, by parts, it will be worn out: But the
further ye go in these Eternal miseries, we are never the nearer to an End:
Hell is as lasting as Heaven, and never is wasted. Its the Hell of Hell that it
is Eternal. The never dying Worm is the Worm of Hell. This frets out all
comfort, all ease, all hope, that those Torments are perpetual.

This is the happiness of the Saints, the Heaven of Heaven, that those joys are
Eternal: and this is the greatest misery of Hell, that there is no End of
misery. This one circumstance has more weight in it, than all Hell besides. To
pass through the Fire is dreadful; what is it then to dwell with Everlasting
Burnings? Yet this must be the portion of all that live impenitently in their
sins.

Who then can, (after this has been told them as most certain,) take any
pleasure in sin? If there be any pleasure in it, it is but for a moment, than
vanishes away; but the pain that abides for ever.

One serious Reflection on each of these, would bring men to see and confess
the truth of that, Prove. 14 9. That they are fools who make a mock of sin. None
such, fools as those that laugh themselves into misery; and yet none more
certainly do so, than they who make a mock of Sin. They sport themselves into
their own Destruction, and pleasantly they go down to Hell, where those
Eternal Flames become their first Awakeners: and then men begin to be wise,
when it is too late. They that satisfy themselves with the momentany pleasures
of this World, and deride those Everlasting Miseries of the other, shall have
leisure enough to Repent their Folly, when their Repentance shall only increase
their Sorrow, without hopes of any Ease or End.

I might also show how Precious a CHRIST should be unto every Sinful man: how
welcome a Savior, and how reviving to hear of Life after Death:

But of this in the latter Clause of the Text.

The End of the First SERMON.
LIFE The Sure Reward of Grace To the Penitent.
Romans VI.23. -- But the Gift of God is Eternal Life, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.


MAN a Sinner, he has no greater Enemy than God, who has Revealed his Wrath
from Heaven against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of men: And yet it is as
true, the Sinner has no greater Friend than God. There is none that man has
more reason to flee from, nor any that he has more reason to fly unto: Adam
(and we need not wonder) having disobeyed the Command of God, he is afraid of
his Presence; be hears the voice of the Lord walking in the midst of the
Garden, he betakes himself to a Thicket for Defense, to shrowed himself from
the sight of God, whose voice he heard: Well might he dread to see the Face of
such a Terrible Majesty incensed against him by his Rebellion: He could not but
tremble to think of beholding a Consuming Fire, as he could not think to see
any thing in God but Fiery Indignation. The Voice of God to Adam, it was worse
than the roaring of a Lion; yea the dreadful Thunder of Mount Sinai, it was not
half so dreadful as this voice of God in Eden. Adam could not bear to see the
Lightning after it: therefore he seeks a skreen to hide himself, as not being
able to behold the Face of God and live: Adam could expect no less than the
full Execution of the Sentence of Death which he had subjected himself unto by
his Disobedience. He could expect no other sight of his Maker, than of one
armed with Fury and Vengeance to destroy him. God had said, In the day thou
eatest, thou shall surely d^; Man has Eaten If then God be a God of Truth, what
must his next word be, but a peremptory Sentence of Death against the Offender;
or rather the next word might be a blow, the inflicting of that Sentence of
Death which was before threatened. How could Adam think, but that God who was
his Lawgiver, and had given him Law, would also be his Judge in inflicting the
penalty due for the breach thereof, and that without mercy. No wonder then that
Adam flees from the presence of God. Yet consider also, whom might he better go
unto than that God, whom he had offended? whom might he more safely repair unto
than his Judge? who as he is infinite in his Justice, so he is no less infinite
in his Mercy: and thus indeed Adam found it after his Examination and Trial:
Notwithstanding he is found guilty, and could dream of no better sentence than
to be immediately seized upon of Death and Hell, and to be swallowed up by
them; Then God opens the rich Treasury of his Grace, he opens the Door, the
Gate of Life to him, he Reveals a Savior; even he that gave the threatening,
gives the Promise also. The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents Head.

When we read the former part of the Text, with Adam we may be ready to flee
away from God, from his Presence; we justly dread this voice of God, this word,
THE WAGES OF SIN IS DEATH. But if we stay a little, and hear further what God
the Lord will speak, he speaks Peace unto the Children of men, be turns that
Death into Life. THE GIFT OF GOD IS ETERNAL LIFE.

In this Verse the Apostle gives as the sum both of the Law and the Gospel.
He is a Son of Thunder, and begins with Terror; it is a dreadful Sentence he
praemises; The Wages of Sin is Death. He is also a Son of Consolation, and
follows with another word as Gracious* The Gift of God is Eternal Life. Having
had occasion and opportunity to insist much on the former part already for the
Awakening and Conviction of Sinners in general, and of one in particular, who
has Sinned a Sin unto Death, both by the Law of God and man.

I shall now speak chiefly of the latter for a Reviviction and Encouragement to
all that hear the Gospel, and particularly to such an one as has been slain by
the foregoing Sentence. And as the former words was a complete, entire Axiom or
Doctrine without any Alteration, so are these.

DOCTRINE. Eternal Life it is Gods Gift to Sinners, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.
Although Death may be the demerit of Sin; yet Life is the gift of God to the
Sinner. He owes Death to him, but bestows Life upon him. Life is a gift of God
through Christ. Here is a blessed Scream, that is Life; a most blessed Spring
or Fountain of it, that is, GOD. A most blessed Channel through which it is
conveyed to the Sinner to make him blessed, that is CHRIST. We may take the
Doctrine asunder, and shall find these three parts in it.

1 That there is Life to be had for Sinners. 2. That this Life is Gods Gift. 3.
The Gift is through Jesus Christ our Lord.
PROPOSITION I.
That there is Life for Sinners: viz. Life Eternal. Under which general term is
comprehended every good thing: All that is needful or desirable, whatsoever
makes to the well being or perfection of a man. Death is the sum and
comprehense of all Evil, Life is also the comprehense of all Good.
Particularly, the Life here spoken of is Eternal Life, and by it we may
understand the Life of Grace and of Glory. These are not distinct in kind,
there is only a gradual and circumstantial difference between them. The truth
of the Proposition may be seen both in general and particular. There is Life
for Sinners* this is the voice of the Gospel. The Law brings news of Death, the
Gospel brings the glad ^idings of life. The Law concludes all under Death, the
Gospel excludes none from Life; stretching forth its Arms to all that will
receive it. The Law brings Condemnation, the Gospel Salvation. The Law casts
all into Hell, and as Abraham said to Dives, between us and you there is a
great Gulf fixed, so that there is no passing from one to the other. Yet now
we may truly say, that this Gulf is passible, or here is a passage from Hell
to Heaven. The Gulf is exceeding great, Heaven and Hell are far asunder, Death
and Life, there is a vast distance between them; but yet there is a passage
from Death to Life, 1 John 3.14. A Sinner may be brought out of the belly of
Hell, as sometimes Jonah out of the Whales Belly. Indeed the Law leaves us
without hope or help, like Joseph's Brethren, it casts into the Pit, and does
not regard our crying: But the Gospel lets down those Cords by which we may be
drawn out thence. The Pit indeed is deep, but there is an Infinite Arm of Grace
that can fathom and reach to the bottom of it, and bring us out of it. A
Sinners Chains and Fetters may be broken, and made to fall from him; The Prison
doors are set open for man to come out; yea, the door of Heaven is now open,
the Gate of Life, wherein whosoever will, may enter, and Live for ever.

Further to illustrate this, Consider two things.

1. Life is tendered unto all. The Gospel is universal in its offers: Whosoever
believes* and is baptized shall be saved; according to our Saviors Commission
to the Preachers of it, Matt. 28.19. Mark 16.15. Ye^, both the Word and the
Spirit says, Whosoever will let him come and take of the waters of Life freely.
Rev. 22.17.

2 Life is actually bestowed and conferred upon many, even on all that embrace
the Gospel. There is Grace enough for all in the Gospel, but all will not
accept of it. There are those that will not come unto Christ that they might
have li^e; But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the
Sons of God; and Heirs of his Kingdom; Hei^s of Life and Glory. So Paul to the
Ephesians, You has he quickened who were dead in trespasses and sins. Though
Death has passed upon all because all have sinned; yet many are already passed
from Death to Life.

If any ask, What Life is?

They must tarry till they come to Heaven for a full Answer of ^his Question.
No man living can here tell what Life is. Angels know it, but cannot impart the
knowledge of it to us.

It is all that Glory, begun in this World and perfected in Heaven, which the
Saints shall enjoy to all Eternity. It Is the happiness and perfection of the
Reasonable Creature in the full enjoyment of God for ever. There is This Life
for Sinners.

Man though a Sinner may yet be united to God. It Is most true, that God is a
holy God, and of purer Eyes then to behold iniquity. He cannot approve Sin, yet
he can love the Sinner: He hates Sin with a perfect hatred, infinitely; and yet
he loves the Sinner with an infinite love. His heart loathes Sin; he is an Enemy
to all Sin, and that irreconcileably; yet he can be reconciled to the Sinner,
and become his Friend. They called our Savior Christ a friend to Publicans and
Sinners. God is a friend of Publicans and Sinners, and as it were Courts their
Friendship. He is so far from being implacable to his greatest Enemies, that he
is first in moving for Peace, and by his Ambassadors beseeches them to be
reconciled.

Thus in general, There is Life for the Children of Death. More particularly,
There is a removal of Death, and Life that is recovered.

1. There is a removal of Death here employed; or Death is taken away. That is,
All evil of Sin, and Suffering. As to the evil of Sin.

1. There is a freedom from the Guiltiness.

2. From the power of it.

1. There is a freedom from the Guiltiness of Sin. And Gospel Ministers are
directed by Christ, To give knowledge of Salvation to his People by the
Remission of their Sins, Luke 1.77. Not that the Fast or Action it self can be
remitted; because that which is done is done, and cannot be said not to be
done. Factum infectum reddi n^quit. Ye^ the Guilt of that evil Act, which is an
obligation to punishment may be remitted: and this is properly, Pardon of Sin.
Neither does Remission change the nature of Sin, that that which is Sin should
be counted no sin: or that Evil should be called Good, Isa. 5.20. Sin is as
really sin after pardon, as before: only Pardon frees from the Guilt of sin,
takes away, Meritum Paenae, the deserved Punishment, which is a taking away,
not from the sin, but from the Sinner only. Still, The wages of sin is Death;
that is, deserves it. Though this Death is not actually inflicted on him to
whom Sin is pardoned. Neither again, is the Rigor of the Law relaxed by the
pardon ^f sin: only it does not exert its conde^^ing Power over the persons of
B^lieve^s, because Christ has already suffer^d for their Si^s. But still the
Law remains, and ever will remain a Sin Condemning, and Sin Avenging Law. It
has as much power as ever to sl^y the Sinner; but it ca^ sl^y him but once, and
the stroke of the Law is so heavy in that case, (...) ^ed not smite him a
second tim^ (...) Christ indeed being God as well as man, recovered from that
deadly blow which the Law gave him for our si^s, and so Saved himself and us.
Yet here is no Relaxation of the Law, but a full Execution of it, full
satisfaction given to it. The whole Debt is paid to the utmost farthing, by
Christ our Surety; whence all the Life, Glory and Happiness that follows
hereupon comes in by Grace. But then,

2. There is the freedom from the Power and Dominion of sin; also from the
filth and pollution, as well as Guilt and Obligation to punishment. The former
is expressed in the Sinners Justification, by the imputed Righteousness of
Christ. The latter in his Sanctification by infused Holiness from the Spirit of
Christ. Man fallen from God is become a Captive to sin, and is forced to serve
diverse Lusts, of which is true, what Solinus says of the several kind of
Serpents in Africa; Quantus nominum, tantus mortium numerus But the Gospel
preaches Deliverance to these Cap^ives: there is a Release from the bondage of
Corruption, from the T^^^nny o^ Sin and* Satan in part begun here, an opening
the Prison Doors to them that are bound. Then, as to the Evil of Suffering, or
consequents of sin, there is a perfect freedom to be obtained. The cause being
removed, the effect cease. Sin is the cause of Death, it gives life unto
Death; therefore if Sin be killed, Death dies wi^h it; The same stroke destroys
them both; Sin and Death are contemporary they live and die together. So that if
once a man be gotten free from the guilt and power of Sin, he is also loosed
from the bonds of Death, and from the Pains of Hell for ever. For, though it be
appointed for all once to die, and experience confirms the truth hereof, that as
by one man Sin entered into the world, and Death by Sin, so Death passes on all
sorts of men, and will do upon all of every sort, because all have Sinned; and
excess of Sin, procures untimely Death to many an one; yet it is as true, where
sin is taken away, there the Second Death shall have no power, Rev. 20.6. And
even the former is swallowed up in Victory: That the Repenting Believing Sinner
may triumph with the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. O Death where is thy Sting!
the sting of Death is sin, the strength of Sin is the Law: But thanks be to God
who gives us the Victory, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Then further,

2. As there is a Removal of D^^^h, that is all Evil of Sin and Suffering; so
there is a Restoring unto (...) that is all manner of Good, of Grace (...), and
Glory hereafter. The vilest of Sinners may be made holy and righteous now,
happy and blessed for evermore. Indeed we should not too nicely distinguish
between these: Freedom from Death, and a right to Eternal Life; as if one could
be obtained without the other, which is impossible: For certainly not to die, is
to live; not to Die Eternally, is to Live Eternally. But though these be not
distinct in themselves, yet may we speak distinctly of them. As

1. The Sinner may become Holy and Righteous, not only guiltless (as we Saw
before) but righteous in the sight of God. A Believing Sinner is not only free
from sin, but full of Righteousness: In some sense as righteous as Christ
himself, for he is righteous in the Righteousness of Christ, which is every way
perfect and complete; that the Law or Justice it self can find no ^ault or fl^w
therein; and is relatively, im^^^atively theirs that by Faith are united to
Christ.

Again, There is also a real inherent Holiness and Righteousness by a
Restoration of the Image of God in the Soul Man that is born a Sinner may be
born again. He may be Regenerate, he may be a New Creature; as David prays for
himself, Psalm 51.11. Create in me a clean heart, etc. In Justification the
Sinner is esteemed as Righteous; but in Sanctification he is made Righteous.
Then,

2. The Sinner also may be Happy. This necessarily follows on the former. A man
cannot but be happy, if he become holy: Sin and Misery, Holiness and Happiness
are Twins, and will never admit of any separation. Those that are Justified are
Sanctified, and they that are Sanctifi^d are Glorifi^d Happiness is inchoate in
this life, and consummate in the next.

Thus* much for the Doctrinal handling of the first Proposition.

PROPOSITION II.
That this Life is Gods Gift*

Two things are employed herein.

1. That Life is from God originally. 2. That it is bestowed on the Sinner
freely.
1. That Life, whether of Justification, Sanctification or Glory, is from God
originally. Justification in the Acq^ittance from Sin, Guilt, and imputation of
Christ's Righteousness, is Gods gift: Hence he is said to be the Justifier of
him that believes in Jesus, Romans 3 26. And Blessed is the man to whom the Lord
imputes not sin, Psalm. 22.1, 2. This is Gods Name, to be a God forgiving
iniquity, transgression and Sin; and if it be God that Justifies, who shall
Condemn: Romans 8.30. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? It Is
God that justifies? It Is God that is offended; Against thee thee only have I
Sinned. It Is he that is wronged by sin, therefore he must give the discharge.
He is the great Creditor that alone can release his Debtor. He seals the
Sinners Pardon* and acquits him of his Guilt and Punishment.

2. This Justification is Free, and thus it is a Gift. Romans 5.15. It Is again and
again called, The Free-Gift of Righteousness to Justification of Life; and we
are said to be justified freely by his Grace through the Redemption. But you
will ask? Quest. How can this be free, since Jesus Christ has paid and
performed all? Has fulfilled all Righteousness; done and suffered all that the
Law requires for our Justification: Does not therefore the compleatness of
Christ's Satisfaction lessen the Freeness and Greatness of Gods Love in
pardoning Sinners? Ans. Not a whit, but these consist well together. Life is by
the Righteousness of Christ, and yet a free Gift; This is the admirableness of
it, that Justice and Grace meet thus; that Justice and Truth should be fully
satisfied, and yet Mercy and Grace highly exalted Neither is Grace in Scripture
ever opposed to Christ's merit, but to ours. If we our selves had made the
Satisfaction, Justice it self had absolved us; but the R^ches of Free Grace
will appear to them that shall consider these things.

1. That it is God himself finds out and accepts the way of our Reconci^iation.
Men or Angels could never have invented it. Besides, God might have refused to
accept of a Surety: This was free, and in this sense, the life of Believers are
s^id to be given unto Christ; he has bought them, purchased them with a great
price, redeemed them with his own Blood; as they are given him, Joh. 17. Thine
t^^^ were, that is, in the hands of Gods Justice, and he has given them to the
Lord Jesus to be redeemed. Hence, its truly said of the Apostle, Rom 3 24 We
are justified freely by his Grace, yet or though through the Redemption that is
in Jesus Christ.

2. Christ himself is Gods gift. Joh. 3.16. God so loved the world that he gave
his only begotten Son, etc. God has given his first born for our Transgressi^n:
He spared not his own Son, but freely gave him up for us all, Romans 8 32. To us
a Son is given, Isai. 9 6. I^s true, Christ ^ave himself, he was willing, Gal.
1.4 2.20. He came freely and readily, but God the Father sent him, he makes a
Present of his Son unto the wo^ld; Giving power also to as many as shall
receive him, to become the Sons of God, Joh. 1 12.

3. Saving Faith is the gift of God also Ephesians. 2^8. By Grace ye are saved
through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Is by virtue
of our Union to Christ, that we have any benefit by him, by Faith only we are
United, and this Faith is Gods gift. Our Righteousness is by Faith in Christ*
and it is God that gives us to believe on him. Thus we see our Justification is
of God originally, and freely, that it is his Gift; and so may be said of our
Sanctification and the principle of an Holy Life wrought in the Regenerate.
This new Life is given and breathed forth of God: It Is the inspiration of his
Spirit, a^ Job 3^ ^ says, The breath of the Almighty has given me life, that in
Spiritual as well as Natural.

Then, as the Spiritual Life of Righteousness and Holiness on the Earth, so
Eternal Life of Happiness and Bless^dness in ^he Kingdom o^ Heaven is the free
gift of God to Sinners; and (...) he has given Grace, he will give Glory also.

PROPOSITION III.
That this Life is through Jesus Ch^^^^ our Lord

1. It is by him as he has bought and purchased it. He paid down the full and
exact price of our Redemption: So, though it was free to the Sinner, yet it
cost our Savior dear: He laid down his own life a Ransom for ours. He suffered
Death, and went into Hell himself, to save us from Death and Hell; and by the
Red^ndancy of his merit and satisfaction procured Life and Salvation for us.

2. It Is by virtue of our Union to him, that we partake of the benefit of this
purchase, Freedom from Sin and Misery, and Participation of Holiness and
Happiness. Our life is derived to us, by being One with him. 1 John ^ 12. He
that has the Son has life, and he that has not the Son has not life.

3. It Is by his good Spirit, that we are quickened, strengthened, and directed
in the way of Righteousness and Holiness, and by his Grace are enabled to
persevere unto Eternal Life.

And then,

4. Its by him at last that we come to the Possession and Enjoyment of Life and
Happi^^^s ^verlasting. He as ou^ Head is already risen, and entered into the
Heaven^; in due time all the members follow after. Its he alone, who having
purchased this inheritance of life for us, that can give us a Title to it, and
put us in actual Possession of it.

The Doctrine which is contained in these Propositions require a much more
larger Application, than can be made within the limi^s of time ordinarily ^et
for these Exercises: Besides the Solemn Occasion before us, call for a
particular as well as general Application of these Truths.

In General

1. How may this be a Reviving word to the Dead World, to every dead Soul, that
by nature is dead in Sin; and dead by the Sentence of the Law; that by the
Grace of the Gospel there is life, even Eternal life to be had for Sinners:
what a joyful sound should this be in every ear that hears it. As it concerns
all, this should be a quickening Word to beget so much life at least in every
one, as to stir them up to seek after this life in the way that God is pleased
^o bestow it, thro^^h Jesus Christ our Lord. It Is also a comforting Word to all
men: though comforts are usually appropriated to the Saints: the Subjects of
com^orts are wont to be more special and particular. But yet this Truth like
the Sun conveys its comforts to all, to every Son and Daughter of Adam. The
voice, the sound of the Gospel is a joyful sound to all men, Luke 2 10. Behold
I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all People. Is there
life for Sinners, even such as are condemned to die? What more grateful news,
than to hear of a possible Reversion of the Sentence of Death; this may be a
cordial to support the Sinking dying heart of any Sinner, That there is pard^n
to be had, a possibility of escaping Death, and inheriting Life Eternal; that
though in Justice he might die, ye by Grace he may live, and that for ever.

2. This leads us to the contemplation of the Divine Philanthropy, or Admirable
Love of God to mankind. Job. 3 16* There are several Considerations which might
help to heighte^ our Esteem, and Admiration hereof; which I shall but just hi^
at.

As, The Special^y of the Subject. Not Angel, but men. The quality of men, as
Sinners. The Eminency of the Gift or Benefit, that is Life The principal mean
of obtaining it, Viz The Death of his own Son, 1 John 4 9 In this was
manifested the love of God toward us, because God sent his only begotten Son
into the World that we might live through him.

It also leads into the Dep^hs of Gods Wisdom, that has contrived the way of
life for Sinners, after a positive Sentence of Death was declared. This would
not only have set the Wisdom of man, but posed quite the Heavenly
Intelligences, Angels themselves, to have found out a Way; wherein the Truth of
God might be Established, his Justice satisfied, the Rights and Honor of
Holiness Vindicated, and maintained, and yet the Guilty, polluted and condemned
C^^^inal be pardoned, justified and saved Everlastingly. Many other things
might be added for the Ex^l^ation of Divine Power, as well as Wisdom and Grace,
in Saving man a Sinner; to quicken and raise the Dead is a work of Omnipotence
is (...). But,

3 Is there life for Sinners, then very great is the Privilege and Happiness
of those that have the way of Life made known to them: that enjoy the light of
the Gospel. Next unto life it self, to live under the means of life, is the
greatest blessing. We cannot be born under a more happy Star than that which
leads unto Christ a Savior, by whom this life and immortality is brought to
light.

Consequently,

This shows the extreem misery of those that perish under the Gospel. Death
will be more deadly to such than others. There are none so miserable as those
who either have, or might have been happy. The thoughts of former advantages
neglected, will add to their present and future sufferings. Time was when they
might have had pardon and Eternal Life ^or asking, or accepting; but now they
must perish without remedy, and that more dreadfully than other Sinners Gospel
Sinners have the worst Death; For Necessary Death would not be nigh so dreadful
as a Voluntary. Now Death to those that live under the Gospel is of choice;
they will Death rather than Life; wherefore their Condemnation is not only most
certain and just, but most fearful of all. Thus the danger is proportionable to
the Privilege. But, I hasten to an Use of Exhortation in two words,
principally.

1. To a firm and fixed Believing of this Truth, that Eternal Life is Gods Gift
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

2. To a speedy and earnest Addressing God in Christ, for the bestowing this
Gift, or obtaining the benefits therein included.

1. Is there Life for Sinners? Then its the Duty of Sinners to Believe there is
Life for them. I^s the Duty of every Sinner to Believe there is life for him.
Its the Duty of all in general, and the Duty of every one in particular to
Believe this for himself, that he may live, that he may be Saved, that he may
be free from Wrath to come, Escape Hell and Death, and be an Heir of Life and
Heaven for evermore. Its our Debt to give God Credit for this Word. All Sinners
believing may be Saved; th^fore, Let All Believe. The Gospel is propounded
limittedly in respect to the Condition, Believing, but Universally, in respect
of the Subject, Whosoever Believes, shall not perish, but have Everlasting
Life. I don't say, I^s every man's Duty to believe he shall be Saved; but to
believe that he may be Saved if he will: Whosoever will let him take of the
Water of life freely: If any go without and perish for want, it is his own
fault. Its true, Many are called, but Few are chosen All shall not obtain life,
that live under the means of life: All shall not receive life that have the
offer and tender of it. All shall not Will to have life. God who is to give the
Will and the Deed of his own good pleasure, Phil. 2.13 Does not give all to
Will life. But this is the Truth ass^rted, God gives life to all that Will: to
all that will receive and embrace it; that is, to all that will Believe and
Accept of his Grace in Christ. If any perish, it is not because there is no life
to be had, but because they will not have life, Job. 5.40. Nay, it is because
they Will Death Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. Let a man's Sins be what they ^ill, yet there
is life for him There is no mins so many, or great, a^ that they make him
incapable of entering into li^^. Its said, Strait is the gate, etc but they
make the Gate of Heaven streighter or na^rower than it is, that don't have it
wids enough for the greatest Sinner to pass through. Neither the Magnitude nor
Multitude of Sins can hinder. Nay further I say; Were there any one man guilty
of all the Sins in the World from the first of Adam to this Day, yet he might
be capable of Grace and Salvation. Its impossible that any Number or Degrees of
Sin should make the way to Heaven unpassable. Infinite is the Grace of the
Gospel. It Is impossible that ever sin should swell to an infinitum in i^ (...);
therefore impossible it should ever be too big for Grace. There is Forgivenes^
of All Sin through Jesus Christ, and the Chief of Sinners have obtained it
(...) Instances;

M^nassah, a Monster in Nature, a Murderer of man* a Consulter with Devils, a
Defier of God himself, and yet could we imagine the Sins of Manassah ten
thousand tim^s greater and more then they were, yet there is pardon for them;
and though he so often made himself a Child of Death, yet he became ^n Heir of
Life.

Seven Devils were cast out of Mary Magdalen; but if every one of those Devils
had been a Legion, yet they might have all been cast out as well as one. There
is Justification, Sanctification and Glorification for the most-Guilty, most
Unholy, most Miserable of the Sons or Daughters of men.

Are they not the worst of Sinners that the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor. 6.9. Hell
it self cannot afford a worse Rabble then we find there, and yet says the
Apostle, Such were some of you, but ye are washed, but ye are justified etc.
And now are Glorified.

Again, What more Execrable Wretches can be under Heaven, than those who were
guilty of the Blood of the Son of God, that Crucified the Lord Jesus Christ,
both the Lord and Savior of the World? yet even those whose hands were imbrued
in the Blood of God, may be cleansed from their blood guiltiness. They may be
as pure, s^^tle's and innocent as if they had had no sin. The Gospel proclaims
life to them; yea Ch^i^^ himself gives them life, that were instruments of his
own Death: He fetches them out of Hell that were instrumental to send him
thi^her. There is SALVATION for those that killed and destroyed the Savior of
the World, Act. 2 36. Who then shall Despair of life, if they may live that
have put to Death the Lord of Life? We may hence Conclude, there is no such
Sinner, but he may have life.

The Duty of believing this might be further pressed from the mischief and
misery of Despair, which is most injurious to God, Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, injurious to the Truth, Power, Goodness and Grace of God; also most
pernicious to our selves; which is not only adding Sin to Sin, but a sealing up
the Guilt of all other sins. Hereby we loose an Infinite Blessing, and incur an
infinite Curse in the room. Wherefore, It is both the Duty and Interest of
every one to get a f^^m and fixed Belief of this Truth.

And in particular,

I would commend it unto thee, O poor Condemned Malefactor, now standing before
the Lord, to hear and receive the words of this Life: Not only thou may, but
thou ought to believe this; viz that there is Life to be had for such an one
as thou art; yea even for thee there is Li^e. Though yo^^ sins ^e as scarlet,
they may be made white as snow, though they be red like crimson, the may become
as wool; they are indeed of a deep and double dye, yet may b^ thoroughly pu^g'd
and done away in that Blood of the Lamb of God which clea^seth from all sin.
Although Death is thy Desert in all is kinds and degrees, Corporal, Spiritual,
and Eternal: and though such is the Nature of thy particular Crimes, that Divine
Vengeance rarely suffers to go long undetected or unpunished; but Untimely
Death is ordinarily the portion of such as are found guilty thereof: therefore
must thou acknowledge the Righteousness of God and man too in ordering this
punishment unto thee; who stand here guilty of a repeated Murder, and that
attended with many heinous aggravations, in destroying the (...) of thine own
Body: Thou have no^ only been so unhappy as to bring forth Children for the
Murderer, but have been so ungodly, as to be the Mother and Murderer of them
thy self. O cruel monster in Nature! who shall deliver thee from such
Uncleanness and ^^ood guiltiness? Or, who will stay thee from going down to the
Pit? Certainly that in Job 36.4. will be verified up-thee; Thou shall die in
youth, and thy life will be reckoned among the Unclean and Cruel. The first Law
of God was a Law of Retaliation. Genesis 9 6. Whosoever ^^eddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood to shed. So that it is not in the power of man to save from the
First or Second Death: But yet I say, though by the Sentence of the Law, thou
must Die once, yet by the Grace of the Gospel, thou may Live again; yea, thou
may live for ever. Blessed be God; who has laid help on O^e that is mighty,
able and willing to save thee to the uttermost. This is a true and fai^hful
saying, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save Sinners: And our
observation may tell us, that God does often make the chiefest of ^inners,
Objects of his choicest Mercy, viz. Pardoning and Sa^i^g Mercy. Be^^des the
Examples instanced in before, The Stock whereof Christ came seems ^o intimate
this. God might have kept the Stock whence Christ descended according to the
Flesh, pure and free from being tainted with any notorious Crim^^ but we find
sins of a crimson die eve^ among them If we examine our S^viours Geneology as
reckoned in the Scripture, we shall find a company o^ loose and lewd women, as
Tamar, wh^ played the Harlot with Judah b^ Father in law, Rahab the Harlot ^
Jericho, Ruth a Moabitess, the root ^ whose Generation was Lots Son b^ Incest
with his own Daughters; Bat^sheba, David's Adulteress, etc. God chos^ these
Repenting Sinners out of who^ loins Christ was to come, that the greatest of
Sinners might not be afra^^ to come unto him: and David himself (whose Son our
Savior is calle^ was notorious for the Acts of Mu^der and A^ul^ery. Now in the
O^nion of the Wise and Learned, Christ own Stock being thus tainted seen an
evidence, that Penitents, ho^gh^ the greatest Pollutions might be we come to
him, and that as he pi^ out such out of whose loins to pr^ceed, so he would
pick out such (...) in whose hearts to reside. This we certainly find, that
great Sins are often made preparations to Conversion; not in their own nature,
that is impossible; but by the wise and gracious Disposal of God; and some
Reasons of this Dispensation might be guessed at. To show the insufficiency of
Nature to sach a work (as Conversion is) so the more to Glorify himself, his
Patience, Power and Mercy; 1 Timothy 1.16 For this cause (says Paul) I obtained
mercy, that in me Jesus Christ might show forth all-long-suffering. Herein also
is the exceeding Greatness of Gods Power Exerted: the same as in Raising up our
Lord Jesus from the Dead; and the Riches of his Grace to such Sinners is
glorified in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe. Particularly,
the fullness, freeness, tenderness, and compassionateness of his mercy to such
as are most deeply involved in sin and misery, are made gloriously c^n^picuous.

That every Age is furnished with some remarkable instances hereof, may be ^o
keep up the credit of Christ's Death in the world; or to show that the value
and efficacy of his Sacrifice remains for ever.

The Conversion of some of extraordinary Guilt now and then, proclaims to the
World that this Fountain of his Blood is inexhaustible; that the virtue of it
is not spent or drained, though so much has been drawn out of it for above Five
thousand years already.

And doubtless, the greater Fruits of this Grace is expected from such Converts
in ways of Thankfulness, Love and Obedience.

Persons ordinarily admire more when they are pulled out of Danger, than when
they are prevent^d from running into it. Hence, we find that no Apostle gives
such Epi^hets to the Grace of God as Paul; ^or any ^o Seraphi^al in admiring
Ex^r^ssions of it. Again,

The Re^urns of L^ve and Affection will be propo^tiona^le, Luk 7.47 To whom
little is forgiven, the same loves little. B^t Mary Magdal^n having her many
sins forgiven, therefore she loved much. And so for other Service and
Obedience: Paul l^b^ured more abundan^ly than they all; because he was one born
out of due time, having been so and so before. I might add, for others sake,
Ephesians. 2.5, 6, 7. That the Ages to come might show forth the transcendant Riches
of his Grace. Very great Judgment on a grand Sinner (as one says) is like the
Hanging a m^^ up in Chains to deter others from the like practice; and this is
the improvement which the Holy Spirit of God in his Word does direct should be
made of such Examples; viz. That all Israel should hear and fear and do no more
presumptuously, Deuteronomy. 17.13. So every such Conversion (as we have been speaking
of) is not only an Act of Gods mercy to the Convert, but an invitation to all
Spectator^ or Hearers of it to return to him. It Is natural to men not to
believe, till they see miracles,, Joh* 4 48. Except ye see signs and wonders,
ye will not believe. Now of all the standing miracles which God has left in the
World, these are none of the least, Viz. The Extraordinary Conversions of the
vilest of Sinners. And I hope by this time, there has been enough spoken to
beget in such an one a firm and fixed Belief of this great Truth: that there is
Life to be had for Sinners, even the Chief of them.

The Second Br^^ch of the EXHORTATION is to a Serious and Speedy Addressing of
God in Christ for this Benefit. Is it a Divine Gift; then (for ought we know)
Thou stand as fair for it as any Sinner on this side the Pit. Is it Gods
Gift? Then ask it, Beg it of him. It Is not an Angel or any Creature can confer
or continue Life. Is it a Gift? Then expect not to merit it by thy Prayers,
Tears, Humiliations, or Repentings; but from free Grace alone.

Again, Is this Gift of God through Jesus Christ? Then come for it in this way,
Joh. 14.1. If ye believe in God, believe also in Me, says our Savior Christ.
For I am the Way, the Truth and the Life: the only way unto the Father. Out of
Christ, He is a consuming Fire to the workers of iniquity. There is no
Approaching to him wi^h Safety, but through JESUS the Mediator and Advocate.
God never had a thought from all E^ernity of Pardoning or Saving one Sinner,
but only in and through Christ. In whom we have Redemption through his Blood,
even the forgiveness of our Sins, and assurance of Life Eternal. Well then,
Embolden thy self to Draw near to God in Christ Jesus, and humbly Beg mercy on
his Account, and for his sake. Have thou obtained any grounded Hope hereof
already? Then Glorify God all that thou can. Labor to possess thy heart with
great Admirations of Divine Grace. Admiration is all the Glory you can give to
God for his Grace: seeing you can add nothing to his Essential Glory. O Admire
his Distinguishing mercy to thee above Multitudes that never Sinned at such a
ra^e! who has made thee thus to differ from the many Pillars of Salt of whom
thou have heard and read? was it not God alone? O let him have the Glory, and
t^y Soul shall have the Comfort thereof for ever. I conclude with a Word of
Caution and Counsil to the whole Assembly.

Here are some perhaps in this great Auditory that have never heard me before,
or ever may again. God Forbid, that any should abuse his Grace either in the
Doctrine, or Example thereof now before them. Despair is exceeding dangerous;
but Presumption is more natural and no less Fatal. Yea, (as Divines account)
where That has slain its Thousands, This has slain its Ten Thousands.

1. Think not your Sins are pardoned therefore, because they are ^ot so great
as those which God has pa^oned in others: but remember, God cast off Saul for
less Sins than David committed.

2. Nor that you may safely go on in Sin without Fear of Death, or Sin the more
that Grace may abound, Romans 6.1. Thus to do were most disingenuous, Foolish and
Dangerous. God never intended mercy as a Sanctuary to perfect Sin, much less to
promote it. Besides, if you loose the present time* you are in greatest Danger
to loose Eternity also. There are many in Hell already, who never Sinned at
such a presumptuous rate. God is now merciful to the Penitent; yet will be
faithful to his threatenings as well as Promises: and all Despisers of his
Goodness and Forbearance will be found to have treasured up wrath against the
day of wrath, and the Revelation of his righteous Judgment.

The Counsil also is twofold.

1. To a Thankful Acknowledgment of (...)

2. To a Faithful Improvement of it.

Be Thankful for the Possibility of Life^s and careful to improve the
Opportunity of it. If there be Life and Salvation to be had, then All men are
called upon to make sure of it. Life is generally tendered to all, therefore it
behooves all to make sure of it to themselves.

It were better there were no Offer of Grace, if there be no Acceptance of it.
I^ avails not that there is a general Exhibition, if there be not a special and
particular Appplication of it. What though the Wells of Salvation are set open,
if we draw not Water out of those Wells, we perish notwithstanding. Here is
Water of Life running by us, but if we refuse to drink, we may die of our
thirst. Manna falls in all quarters of Isreal's Camp, the people may gather it,
yea are commanded so to do: But they may pine to Death if they look not after
it, and gather it in the season: Naaman is Leporous, the Prophet tells him of a
Cure, of a Bath that will restore his Flesh; but if he will not vouchsafe to
take the pains, he may remain a Leper still. The Prodigal whiles he remains in
a far Country is never the better that there is bread enough in his Fathers
house: He must come and submit himself to his Father, take the Dole from his
hand, or else it were all one to him, as if there were nothing to be had: There
is Wine and Milk enough to be had without money and without price; but what
benefit can this be, if we come not where it is to be had, and buy it on the
Terms? Who is the Richer for the Pearl, that has not made it his own by the
purchase of it? Though Life and Salvation is graciously offered in the Gospel to
every man; y^^ there is no man will be the better for it, that does not hearken
to this gracious tender, and apply himself to the way of obtaining benefit by
it. It is not the opportunity, but the improvement of it that will make us
happy.

Many Arguments might be used as Motives to quicken and strengthen our Desires
and Endeavors after Life. I shall hint at these two only. The N^cessity and
Excellency of this Life.

1. Life is necessary, and a necessity is laid in our endeavors after it.
There is no way, but one of these two; either Life or Death; if we Live not, we
must dye: There is no middle between Life and Death; nothing between Heaven and
Hell. It Is true, now there is a kind of medium between these: But the time is
coming when there will be no other places but these two; the only Receptacles
of all mankind. If therefore we cannot bear to think of Eternal Death, of an
Everlasting Separation and Seclusion from the Face and Favor of God, unless we
are willing to be shut out of Heaven, deprived of all the joys and pleasures
of it, to be for ever excommunicated from the blessed Company of God, Angels
and Saints: And unless we can endure to be shut up in Hell, to be unto all
Eternity, incarcerated in the Dungeon of Darkness, Cohabiting with Devils and
Damned Spirits, to be subject unto all those miseries, which the Infinite
Wisdom of God can invent, and the Hand of his Infinite Power can inf^ict: O let
us be earnest, instant and constant in our Endeavors for Life; for there is no
other Choice. One of these must, and will be the portion of every Son and
Daughter of Adam, either to be happy in life, or miserable in Death, and that
for ever. Now God sets Life and Death before us, and we have our choice: If we
do not choose the one, we shall never be able to refuse the other. We must
needs get life then, because the mischiefs of the want of it are insufferable.
If there could be an Annihilation, if we might be reduced to our first
principle of nothing again, if we might again not be, and so not be miserable,
the matter were less, though we were not the Subjects of this Life and
Blessedness: Better never to have been born, than being so, to fall short of
Eternal Glory: for then endless misery will be our portion.

2. The Excellency of this Life well thought upon, may invigorate all our
desires and endeavors after it. Natural Life of all natural good, is the most
excellent; nothing bears so high a price as Life, nothing is to be valued with
it; its called the precious Life, and life puts a price on all other things;
they are therefore good and precious as they are means of the being,
continuance and comfort of it, and they are valued according to their
conducement hereunto: Such is the rate, the degree of their Excellency; but the
means are ever inferior to the end; so that Life Temporal is incomparably
above all other things; but Life Eternal is more worth than a thousand Lives:
It is infinitely better both in the nature or kind, and in the duration of it.
In respect of the nature, it includes all other kinds, and all possible
perfection of the reasonable Creature. It consists in the removal of all Evil,
Sin and Misery: and the position of all Good, H^liness and Happiness in Soul
and Body for ever. It were as easy to open Heaven it sel^, and show you that,
as to open this Life, or tell the Contents of it. Eye has not seen (...) Ear
heard, neither can it enter into the heart of man to conceive, much less fully
comprehend what this Life (...) In respect of duration* (...). This is Life
indeed, and ^i^e without an end. We have frequent experience of the
momentanious of th^se natural lives of ^urs: yea, the longest li^e on Earth is
not a moment to that Eternity which it sets into either of Woal or Woe. Death
is appointed for all Living, and we find even such as are called Gods, to die
like men: Nor do the Prophets live for ever? may therefore say with the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.19. If in this life only there were hope, we were indeed
miserable: But blessed be God who gives to all this good hope through Grace,
of an Eternal Life by Jesus Christ our Lord.

The End of the Second SERMON.
HOLINESS The Way to Blessedness.
Psalm CXIX.9. Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way: by taking heed
thereto according to thy Word.


A Serious Case, and a Sound Resolution.
THE Terms plain, or easy of Explication. Way in Scripture, signifies the
course of Life. The Actions of man are the steps hereof; which according to the
quality of them, do difference their Way and give it the Character of Good or
Evil. Cleanse, or purify: As a man walks in a clean or foul Way. So by the
Goodness or Evil of his Actions, is said to be Pure or Polluted in his Way. A
Young Man, A Child or Youth; which though some take for a Child of God, or, the
New man according to the phrase of the Gospel: yet the most take it literally,
for a man in his Youth or Childhood. So then, here is the young man's Practical
Catechism, set down by Question and Answer.

Q. Wherewithal shall a Young man cleanse his way?

A. By taking heed thereto according to thy word.

The Psalmist here applies the power of Gods word to this special Age of man,
Happily, Because himself was now young, and because young Persons ought
especially to look to their way and practice; and to intimate that the word is
able to cleanse their Way, which is most subject to Error, Obliquity, and
Impurity. Yet, not excluding all other Ages and Sexes, for it behooves every
Man, Woman and Child, particularly in their Youth to mind this. As Austin
says, It denies not, that any of riper years, or decrepid Age (if they have
neglected so long) should make have and cleanse their ways: But, it requires
and shows, that it is to be begun in Youth and continued even to old Age. That
none are ever exempted from this Care; but must even from their Childhood or
younger years look to this point, To cleanse their ways from Sin, and have
respect to the Word of God for this end, to Direct and Assist in a pure Way.

In the Answer is set forth the Excellency of Gods Word, in the use and
singular effect thereof; as it is both a Rule and Instrument of our cleansing,
together with the manner how it is to be applied and made use of.

By taking heed thereto according to the Word of God. Or studying and
endeavoring an holy Conformity to Gods will revealed in his Word. And it is not
a slighty and careless but diligent and circumspect walking by this Rule, which
is here required. If God had not given Direction about this, we should have
been at an utter loss, and without a close Application hereof, all will be in
vain still.

But, I begin with the Question. In which some things are supposed, and
something enquired.

1. It Is here taken for granted that all men naturally have a desire after
Happiness: and in Youth this inc^ination is strongest. Some kind and degree
hereof is common to all that partake of the reasonable nature. There must
therefore be an universal Good, or the inclinations of nature would be in vain,
Psalm. 4 6. Who will show us any good: Good is the Cry of the World. It is
intended in the very Nature of desire, as well as desire of Nature: for every
thing which is desired, is desired as Good* ( sub ratione Boni.) As God
implanted in us Affections of Aversation, to avoid what is Evil: so Affections
o^ Choice and pursuit to follow after what is good Well then, out of a
Principle of self Love, All would be happy and not miserable, they would love
good, and have it always. Notwithstanding the Diversity of men, they all agree
in this one thing. Though it is as true also, that the generality of men pursue
a false happiness; or seek it where it is not to be had. Yea, all without Grace
are mistaken in it.

1. Some mistake as to the End or Obj^ct. Calling and Choosing Evil for Good;
or at best embrace the shadow instead of the substance: placing their
Affections upon, and expecting satisfaction from things unworthy of the former,
or incapable of the la^ter. Or else,

2. They fail in the means or way to obtain. Either because they know them not,
like them not, or else faint in the prosecuti^n of the End by them. It Is true
indeed, that as all men desire to be happy; so they apply themselves to those
means, which to them appear convenient for the obtaining it. And by the methods
or courses which men take in their life, we may judge or gu^ss at the end or
final Happiness which they choose or pursue. And in our Obs^rvations we may
make this further Remark: That every Natural man is framing a Happiness
according to his temper. The Apprehensions hereof are answerable to the
dispositions of the person; For Faelicity is desc^ibed to be the pleasures
which arises from the harmonious agreement between the Object and the Appetite.
Now man by his original and contracted Corruption is altogether carnal; he
cleaves to debasing and defising Objects, and is only qualified for sensual
satisfactions. Thus of the first thing supposed, viz. That all men naturally
desire Happiness, and are framing one to themselves according to the various
Temper or Distemper of their Natures, and likewise shape their course
accordingly.

2. It is here supposed to be a matter of great Concernment to all, especially
in youth, to be studious and inquisitive concerning the right way to true and
eternal Blessedness Our mistakes about it will co^t us dear. God is very
^ealous of what we m^^e our Happiness; and therefore blasteth ^be carnal
choice. Those that will try experiments, smart for it in the issue; will surely
come home by weeping cross, if ever at all. It Is good therefore, it is best to
be early in this Enqui^y. Our Savior Christ at the Age of Twelve years was
found answering and asking questions in the Temple: and he was a young man who
came unto him with that question, Good Master, Tell me what I shall do to
Inherit Eternal Life! But how few concern themselves about religious matters
now a days! Young men are all forward enough, but little in Reflection, much
in activity, but little in study: hot and confident in their own way, but
little inquisition, deliberation or advising: Youth are apt to try, rather than
trust. They cannot but eat of the Tree of knowledge of Good and Evil. Solomon^
Counsel must be proved before received. Though young persons are aptest to learn,
yet of small experience, simple and easy to be deceived, as the Wisest of me^^
men afterward declares in the example of his own experience, Prove. 7 7. At the
Window of my h^use I l^^ked th^^^gh my ^a^ement, and behold among t^^ ^imple
ones, I disc^^ned among the Yout^s, a young man void of understanding, passing
such (...) way* The point of true (...) should be studied well in youth, and
such should beware of taking up with a f^lse Happiness, or of being prejudiced
against the True. Many think it a Happiness to live without the yoke of
Religion, to speak, and think, and do what they please, without restraint; but
to be always in Bonds, and held under the Awe of the Word, that they count
u^reasonable and grievous, Psalm. 2 3. Let us break their ^ands asunder and cast
away their cords from us. Wherefore in studying of this point, O Young man or
young woman, take these Directions.

1. Lean not to thine own understanding, Prove. 23. Vain man would be wise though
he is born as the wild Asses Colt, Job 11.12 Cease from thine own wisdom; but
seek direction from God by his Word and Spirit. For he only can determine who
is the Blessed man, in whose hand alone it is to make us Blessed.

2. Labor for the Light of Faith. Sense and carnal reason will deceive you.
Blessedness is a Riddle which can only be ^ound out by Faith, that is the
Evidence of things not seen

3 Wait for the light and power of the Spirit of God, to incline and draw thine
heart to himself the chief Good, and Fountain of a^l Blessing, and Blessedness.
Many times we are Doctrinally right in point of Blessedness, but not
Practically. We content our selves with the mere notion, but are not brought
under the power of these Truths. This is the work of the Holy Ghost himself.

3. It Is also further supposed in this Question, that Holiness is the way to
Happiness, Sanctification unto Salvation.

In the beginning of this Psalm, there is Blessedness propounded as the End,
and Holiness is all along pointed out for the way. And that this is the will of
God, even our Sanctification, is elsewhere revealed in his Word, 1 These. 4.3.
The Doctrines, Precepts, Promises and Threatenings of the Word do all hold for
this. Tit. 2.11, 12. The Doctrine of Grace which brings Salvation, ^eacheth
us that Denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live sobe^ly,
righteously and godly in this present world; and 2 Cor 7 1 We are exhorted and
encouraged To cleanse our selves from all Filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit,
perfecting H^liness in the Fear of God. With out this n^ne shall ever see God,
Heb. 12.14. That is without this Twofold Holiness, habi^ual and actual, viz the
principle of it in their hearts, and Holiness in the practice or exercise of it
in their lives. These are both inserted in the Character of the person that
shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord, and stand in his holy place. Psalm.
24.4. He that has clean hands, and a pure heart.

4. It Is herein employed, that we are from the Birth polluted with sin, and need
changing. Also,

5. That we should be very early and timously sensible of this Evil. For the
Question is propounded concerning the Young man. And

6 That we should earnestly seek for a Remedy, how to dry up the issue of sin
that runs upon us, defiling our persons and our ways. All this is supposed,
or taken for granted in the Question before us.

That which is Quaeried or Enquired after, is, what Remedy there is against it:
or what course is to be taken in this Case? So that the ^umm of the Question
is, How shall a man or woman that is impure, unclean, naturally and actually
defiled with sin, be made able as soon as he comes to the use of Reason, to
purge out that natural Corruption, and practically lead a holy and pure life to
God?

The Answer given, is, By taking heed thereto according to the Word of God. In
which Counsel or Advice are three things very hard to Youth.

1. To be confined to a Rule. Children and Youth love to keep no path. 2. To be
Ruled by the Word of God, which is strict, pure and spiritual. 3. But the
hardest of all is to take heed, or be circumspect in walking by this Rule.
The general Doctrine from the whole Verse may be this, viz.

DOCTRINE. That the heedful Observing of our way from our Youth up, according
to the Word of God, is an effectual means to cleanse and keep them clean from
all sinful Defilement.
There are three Propositions contained in the Doctrine.

PROPOSITION I.
That every man's ways even from his Youth upwards, naturally are Unclean. Or,
The Natural ways of every one are Filthy and Unclean. A Foundation for this was
laid in our First Parents Fall. The Representations of the Forbidden Fruit were
under the Notion of Pleasure: The Woman saw the Fruit was good for Food; that
is, pleasurable to the Palate, and pleasant to the Eyes. These Allections draw
her into the snare, and Adam with complacency received the Temptation, and by
the inticement of the soul Fiend of Hell, committed Adultery with the Creature;
from whence the cursed Race of Sin and Miseries do proceed. Hereupon they lost
the Original Purity and Perfection of their Natures, and contracted a soul
Deformity and Pollution to themselves, became defiled with the Filthiness of
Flesh and Spirit. Now this first sin was of universal efficacy, and derived
both a guilt and stain to mankind in all Ages of the World; even an Hereditary
Corruption is transmitted to all that naturally descend from old Adam according
to an universal and unchangeable Law of Nature, that every thing should preduce
its like both in kind and quality. Thus our Savior tells us, Mat 7 18. That
the Fruit partakes of the Rottenness of the Tree, Joh. 3 6. Whatsoever is born
of the Flesh is Flesh The Title of Flesh there does not signify the material
part of the Humanity; but the Corruption of Sin wi^h which the whole Nature is
infected; and as it is natural, so universal Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean
thing out of an unclean? The Answer is peremptory, Not one. The Fountain was
poisoned in Adam; and all the streams partake of the Infection We must every
one acknowledge with David, Psalm 51 5. I was shapen in Iniquity, and in sin did
my Mother conceive me. Likewise the pollution of sin is universal in each
particular subject or person. Every Child of Adam is born a Leper, all over
defiled, from the Crown of the Head to the sole of the Foot; he is as i^ were
one engrained spot, a lump of Uncleanness: The mind impure, Conscience defiled,
the Heart as the Chambers of Imagery, and Cage of unclean Birds. The Corrupt
Nature is also pregnant with the seeds of all sin, though all do not shoot
forth together, or in every individual: The restraint is from some higher
principle.

But this is the Truth ass^rted in this Proposition; That all those Actions
which proceed from corrupted Nature, even from first to last are sinful, and
have need of cleaning. Or, every way of the Natural man is filthy and
abominable, both internal, or intentional, as thoughts and actions; external,
and transient, as words and actions. The ways of the Heart, ways of the Tongue,
of the Hands, Feet and whole man, inward and outward. There was a time since
the Fall, when the whole world was corrupt, Gen 6.5 6 God saw the wickedness of
man was great in the earth, and that every imagination of the thoughts of his
heart was only evil continually; and that all Flesh had corrupted his way.

Nor was all the Water o^ the Deluge sufficient to wash ^way this Fil^^^. The
same Corrupt^^n is acting and ^eigning in the heart of every natural man and
woman ^^ll Now the uncleanness of sin arises thus: partly from inward
Filthiness defiling our ways, as Original Sin pollutes all natural and moral
actions. Partly ^^om the ^^^fulness of our ways themselves, or outward actions
defiling us; as in Actual Transgressions. Both we defile our ways, and our ways
us; or we by that which is in us defile our Actions, and then these reflect a
spot of Guilt and Filth upon us again; even as the Sow wallowing in the mire,
then tumbleth in the Grass, and being washed returns to wallowing again: So the
Scripture sets it forth; therefore man must needs be unclean; yea, the ways of
some are so brutish, that you may track them in their filthy paths, out of one
company and place into another, in their words and deeds, at home and abroad.
The Natural man defiles every step he takes, and the filth thereof redounds to
himself: Such is the way of young ones especially; if you trace them from their
Childhood, what stubbornness, falseness, and multitude of Indecencies: In Youth
what Pride, Wantonness, Dalliance, Drunkenness, Self pollution, and
Fornication; even such as is not so much as named among the Gentiles, and some
into Blood^guiltiness: But I speak here of the common paths wherein you may
track our Youth up and down, in Lying, Swearing, Cursing, Railing, Filching,
Sabbath breaking, Night-walking, Works of Darkness which bring both shame and
sorrow when discovered and brought to light. Thus, though there is one Sin
which by peculiar use bears the Name of Uncleanness, yet all Sin is so: both in
the nature and effect. There is a Turpitude in it self, and staineth the person
guilty of it. Can a man touch Pitch, and not be defiled therewith? Every Sin is
a Transgression of the Law of God: Now the Law is holy and pure; therefore Sin
is filth and uncleanness. Hence so many legal Institutions for purification,
washing, ^insing, cleansing, etc. There are L^^ers of Cleansing set at the door
of the Tabernacle, and a Fountain opened for all Judah and Jerusalem to wash
in, to pu^ge from Sin and from Uncleanness. Circumcision appointed in the Old
Testament, and Baptism in the New. All which do signify a Native Filthiness in
every one which needs to be purged and taken away.

PROPOSITION II.
That it is the Duty and Interest of all, especially in Youth, or as soon as
they come to the full use of Reason, to enquire how they may cleanse their
hearts and ways from sin: Or, Cleansing our heart and ways is a meet and
necessary Object for every man's meditation, study and enquiry; though more
especially for younger ones. Because such are commonly void of wisdom and
experience, heady, wilful, and impatient of Admonition, full of violent
passions, stronger lusts, and exposed to more and greater Temptations, with
other reasons to be given hereafter. Indeed this is the one thing needful for
all, whether man or woman, young or old to look about them, to get themselves
purified from their sin; and so to order their course aright here, as that they
may see Gods Salvation.

The General Reasons for all.

1. Because, As is the Way, so will be the end. Sinful and fil^hy ways are the
Devils paths that lead down to Hell, and the Chambers of Destruction.
Righteousness and Holiness are the wa^es of God, that lead to Heaven and
Salvation. According to every man's walking, such will he find to be the place
of his Rest. The ways of Sin iss^e in Death: The way of Grace tends to Life.
Though God is no Respecter of persons, yet he has a great respect to all the
actions of man; and will render to every one according to his deeds. Romans 2 6
Job 34.11. The work of a man stall he render unto him, and cause every one to
find according to his ways.

2. It Is certain God hates the man that walks in a filthy course; He is of
pure Eyes, and cannot endure iniquity. This is the thing which his Soul hates
where ever he sees or finds it. He who is Glorious in Holiness abominates all
ways of Filthiness: and no unclean person shall dwell with him, they shall be
shut out of his Presence for ever.

3. It Is a token of a heart cleansed, that is thus affected, and Contra. Both
for the prose it, that God has begun his good work, and for the future, that
they shall obtain a through cleansing from all their sins; as the Leper found
upon his coming and crying to our Savior, Matthew. 3.2. Lord, if thou will thou
can make me clean; Jesus put forth his hand, and touching him, said, I will
be thou clean, and immediately his Leprosy was cleansed.

But as the careless world now carries the matter, it seems very impertinent
and ridiculous to propose such things to Youth: what have they to do with so
serious a wo^k? these are too grave matters for that licentious Age; when Old
Age has snowed upon their heads, and the smart experience of more years in the
world has ripened them for so severe a Discipline, then 'twill be time to think
of cleansing their way: or entering on a new course of Repentance and Submission
to God. For the present, Dandum est aliquid hun^ aetati; Youth must be a little
indulged, they will grow wiser as they grow older: This we hope, but the former
must not be granted. God demands his right as soon as we are capable to
understand it, and it concerns every one as soon as he comes to the use of
reason, to mind his way and work, both in regard of God and himself, Eccles.
12.1.

The special Arguments or Reasons to put Young people on the Duty and Practice
hereof.

1. Because even Youths and Childrens way is of great concern and consequence.
No part of our Age is to be left free for sin. It Is all owing to our Creator,
and what more fit than that he should have our first and best, who made us
wholly for himself. When therefore we cannot guide our selves, others should be
our Monitors, Prove. 22 6 Train up a Child in the way he should go: and Children
should be ready to hearken, Psalm ^4 11. Come ye Children, hearken unto me, etc.
But Young men will not obey the voice of their Teachers. To Hearken is a
property as far off from Youth as any other virtue whatsoever: Yea, if this
were in them, nothing would be wanting.

2. Youth is most likely to be out of the way. Yea, none so Young, but are out.
All are born with their backs toward God, and as soon as they can go, are
going further astray from him. The Question, Wherewithal shall a Young man
cleanse his way? p^esupposeth a Defilement (as has been showed) No Infant is
like a Vessel that newly comes out of the Potters Shop, indifferent for any
good or bad in^usions No, the Vessel is already tainted: Therefore it should be
cleansed as soon as may be fit for the masters use betimes.

3. A man begins his way betimes, even in Childhood he begins to take his bent.
We look to what hand our Children take, whether right or left; and if Solomon's
observation be true, a man's infancy and younger time is a notable praesage,
what he will prove afterward, Prove. 20.11. Even a Child is known by his
Doings, whether his work be pure, or whether it be right. Much may be known by
our young inclinations: But when the young man comes on the Stage for Action,
he stands a while, like Hercules in Bivio; the way of worldly Delights and
Sinful Pleasures on one hand, the way of painful virtue and practice of
Godliness on the other: Now choose your course. Children should be put into a
good way by others, but when grown up, they will choose for themselves*
Therefore need to make the Enquir^ in our Text.

4 Thi^ Age is more i^^e^uo^s^y carried to Evil, in a ^ead strong course.
Partly, through hea^ of Nature, strong and active Spirits, and force of
Passions: Partly, through Ignorance and Simplicity, having little wit to ch^^se
their own way. Young men think old men Fools but old men know them to be so,
for they themselves have been young. Yet few of these but think they can guide
themselves best, care not to be controuled. Youth is in it self most inclined
and disposed to err, through weakness of Judgment, conceitedness of Wisdom,
headiness in choice, vehemence of Affections, inordinate and excessive love of
Liberty, and to all these I might add, a variety of more and stronger
Temptations: none so tempted as Youth. Little Children cannot be so serviceable
to the Devil; and old men are spent, however they have chosen their way
already. The Prodigal Son had four special Provocations to evil (as Ambrose
notes) His Portion in hand; his Father indulgent; ill Company, and the greatest
of all was Youth^ul Age. That which is said of old Age naturally, is true of
Youth spiritually. Morbus est. It is a Disease.

5. Its hard leaving any accustomed way of Evil No easy thing to be broken off
an old Haunt. Habits of Sin grown inveterate are most difficultly plucked up or
rooted out. Sins of Youth will get into the Bones, and then are rarely gotten
out of the Flesh afterward. Sin grows stronger by Custom, and more rooted;
it gathers strength by every new act: yea every act lesseneth the fear of
Sinning, and strengthens the inclination to Sin.

6. Early Converts or such as take in a good way betimes are fittest to Serve
God. The Exercise of Religion depends much on the vigor of Affections,
therefore, we should get them sanctified betimes: None more zealous than a
young Saint, 1 John 2 14 I write unto you young men, because ye are strong and
have overcome the wicked one. These will bring a great deal of honor to God,
as well as prevent dishonor. When the Fervency and Strength o^ Youth is
employed not in sati^fying of Lusts, but in the Service of God, and fighting
against Satan.

7. God will punish the Sins of Youth as well as Elder years. You whip your
Children for defiling themselves, and p^dling in the dirt; so God gives no
leave for T^icks of Youth, nor will he always let them escape without some
severe mark of Judgment upon them, in this life. However, Justice is provoked
the longer, and that will be a grief to you first or last: If ever you are
brought home to God it will cost you many a bitter Tear; not only at first
Conversion, but afterward, Job 13.26. Thou writest bitter things against me,
and make me to possess the iniquities of my youth. Old Bruises may trouble us
long after upon every change of Weather; and new Afflictions revive the sense
of old Sins, they may stick by us as long as we have a day to live.

8. Young Men and Maidens, may be as near their End as Elder Persons. As soon
comes a Lambs skin to the Market as a Sheeps; and more dye in Youth than live
to Age: more Childrens Skulls in Golgotha than of grown Folk. Youth is a tender
Age and brittle, therefore soonest broken, Dum splendet frangitur: the grass
while in its strongest verdure is cut down by the Sithe at noon day, and the
fairest Flower is first gathered. Thus in ordinary Providence, therefore no
safety in de^er^ing of Repentance or turning to God. But this is often executed
in a judiciary disp^nsation, as the fulfilling of some Divine threatening, Psalm
68 21 God shall wound the hairy Scalp of such an one as goes on forward in his
trespesses. And, Psalm. 101.8. He early will destroy the wicked of the Land, and
cut off the workers of iniquity. Yea, we find that fatally verifyed which is
said in Job 36.14 They die in youth whose life was among the Unclean. Some turn
those words thus, The Unclean are even Dead whilst they live: As is said of
the wanton Woman living in pleasure, 1 Timothy 5.6. But besides, Excess of
Wickedness procures an untimely Death to such: either by some soul Disease, or
the Sword of Justice some other way. Eccl 7 17.

9. Young Folks must come to Judgment as well as others Solomon gives this
Solemn Memento for a Co^ler to their mirth, and a che^k to their madness, Eccl.
11.9. Rejoice O young man, etc. but know that for all these things God will
bring^ thee into Judgment. Not for open profaness only, but secret Filthiness;
for his Eyes are upon all the ways of the Children of men, and the darkness
and light are alike unto him. A serious meditation on this Truth might prevent
the Commission of much wic^edness; If Sinners would consider that all their
Actions are Coram Judice, in presence of such a Judge who will not want Witness
to convict them, but can Summons a thousand within their own Breasts, if there
were no other without: and if their heart condemn them, God is greater, and
knows all things.

Well, If these things be so, the main Enquiry for every one is this in our
Text, Whereby shall I come to change my Heart and Ways? or all my ways,
internal and external, secret and open: Not who will show me any good, a good
Match, a good Bargain, a good Trade, or place to set up in: But how may I
become pure, and be kept clean from the filthiness of Sin? How shall I get Sins
past pardoned and purged, and be kept unspotted for the Future, being my self
so full of Corruption, and living in such a filthy Age? But O the stupid
Blockishness of the World! Why do we hear no more either Younger or Old, thus
Crying out of themselves, Unclean, Unclean! I see my self in an Odious State
and have followed a wicked course, how shall I get freed and cleansed
therefrom! Is it because we are all so pure! Perhaps in conceit, Prove. 30 12.
There is a Generation pure in their own Eyes, yet is not washed from their
Filthiness. May we not say, This is a Generation, or Age generally of that
mind! Or, because the most are settled on the Lees of their Sins, delight in
their self polluting Courses, resolve to continue in them: Like the Collim,
make account they shall foul themselves again, therefore will not wash.

Oh, But if God should show you your Ways and Faces in a glass, you would Abhor
your selves in Dust and Ashes. Many of you that think your selves wondrous
pure, would (as Job says) Think your own clothes defile you, or you your
clothes. What Filthy Souls have many of you, Men and Women, Young and Old,
Never yet washed in the Blood of Jesus Christ, in Tears of true Repentance, and
Laver of Regeneration, but continue to besmear your selves with your daily sins.

It may be thus pronounced to you all, that if you have not as yet come to make
this Question, and that Sincerely, heartily, affectionately and with deep
desire, as David here did, you are not of his Spirit, nor yet in the way to
Heaven; and if so you abide, shall be shut out with Dogs, or unclean Persons.

As for you Old Sinners that have been wallowing and soaking in your miry Filth
for so many years, until this Day, and yet take no care to be washed. Did you
but see your Filthy Souls in the Glass of Gods Law, and would reflect on the
dreadful Stain of your life past, what shame and confusion of Face would cover
you? Think how you will look God in the Face another day, when All the hidden
things of Darkness shall be made manifest before the World of Angels and Men.
How will you hold up your Heads in that Day? Do you look to come where David
is? The Devil will as soon, except you be transformed, Changed and Sanctified
throughout. Well then, should Young men cleanse their Way, Is it not high time
for you? I will only Item such with what the Spirit says, Rev. 22.11. The time
is at hand, he that is unjust, let him be unjust still, and he which is filthy
let him be filthy still.

I hasten therefore to an Exhortation, wherein I earnestly address this Great
Assembly and Concourse of People, beseeching every one, Old and Young, Male and
Female.

1. To Consider your ways now in time. See what they are, or have been, and
what their End will be. Remember our life is for an End, I mean an endless End.
It Is not only our Business therefore to escape Death and Eternal Damnation, but
to Enjoy Life, and Everlasting Communion with God; or to have an entire
Fruition of the best Good for ever. The End (you see) is of greatest
Consequence, for that determines the Final Happiness or Unhappiness of any
person or course. It Is not the way rough or plain, but the End whereto it
tends: The difficulty of the way is no wise comparable either with the Woe, or
Happiness of the End. It Is not what way or Weather thou travellest through, but
where thou must lodge at night. O that we may be every one wise therefore to
consider our latter End.

2. That the End depends on the way. According to the course we steer in this
life, we shall certainly arrive at Death: either in the fair Havens of Rest and
Glory, with the pure and undefiled, or else in the Dead Sea of Wrath and
Misery, where all the Sodomites and Unclean persons are immerst Eternally.

Know then, Here is Life and Death set before us all, and our steps are every
day carrying us to Heaven or Hell. Hinc illud melior est Claudus in via quam
Cursor praeter viam. Better to be limping in the way, than running besides it.
A word for Backsliders, or such as having once escaped the pollution of the
world, and again entangled and overcome, we have in 2 Pet. 2.21. The latter end
of such is worse than their beginning.

As for the Directions needful in this Case, they might most properly come
under the third and last Proposition in the Doctrine, viz

PROPOSITION III.
That the heedful observing of our Ways from our Youth up, according to the
Word of God* is an effectual means to cleanse and keep them clean from all
sinful Defilements.

But I shall wholly pass this, Referring you to the late Learned Composures of
some who have handled this point with greater accuracy and skill than I may
pretend unto. That which I principally aimed at in this Enterprise was further
to excite the Generation of young people (great Numbers whereof were expected,
and accordingly are here gathered together on the solemn Occasion before us.)
To search and cleanse their ways, To show them the necessity hereof, and urge
them to the practice of the Duty, rather than give Directions about it, which
is better done to their hand already.

I shall therefore conclude with a word of Motive further, not from precept,
but example; not of one coming from the Dead, (as Dives desired might be sent
for the warning of his Brethren) but of one going to the Dead, whose counsel
and caution may be as effectual, and will to all considerate persons.

Then, Besides what has been hinted already; that Unholiness cuts off from the
Blessing of God in this life: often procures untimely Death; and at length
shuts out of Heaven, because nothing that defiles or makes abomination shall
ever enter in there, Rev. 21.27.

Let me add, or rather present unto you this Solemn Example of one before us at
this time, who has been notoriously defiled in her way, and is now hasting to a
shameful End of a wicked Life; One that is immediately to Dye for her Sins,
though we hope not in her Sins. Such an Example as has never been heretofore in
this place; God of his infinite mercy grant (if it be his will) that there may
never be occasion for another: But make all that see and hear thereof to stand
in aw, and do not any such abominable things as she has done: To whom I had
thought never to have spoken a word in this world more, (I mean in Public) and
now the time is so near expired, it can be but a word.

And what shall I say unto thee, Esther, from such a Text as this? Thy ways
have been all filthy, thy whole Walk, a walk after the Flesh; thy course a
course of filthy Communication and Conversation. O Unclean, Unclean! As if
possessed with an unclean Devil, or with as many as Mary Magdalen, yea rather
with a Legion; thou have served the Devil an entire Prenticeship of one and
twenty years in filthy ways of one sort or other. But, is thy time of Bondage
now expired? O Rejoice thou in the Jubilee, and magnify the Lord who has
Redeemed thee, and that at so dear a rate, as with the price of his own Blood:
Did he vouchsafe to look upon thee, when thou wast in thy blood, even when thou
wast in thy Blood-guiltiness and Filthiness, and to say unto thee Live! instead
of letting thee sink and be drowned in thy Gore and Guilt, has raised thee to
the Hope of Pardon and Life Eternal? O Admire, Admire the Riches of Divine
Mercy and Free Grace! Admiration is all the Glory thou can give to God for
his Grace. Jesus Christ will come at the last Day to be Glo^ified in his
Saints, and admired in all them that believe I pray send thine Admirations
before hand to attend him at his Coming.

But what preparations has thy Soul made to appear at Gods Tribunal before this
Day be ended? Art thou like to be found choathed in the Righteousnesses of the
Saints, both imputed and inherent Righteousness, not only justified by Grace,
but sanctified by the Holy Spirit also. The former is to give thee right to the
latter, to make thee fitter for Heaven and Happiness: Heaven is the most Holy
place, there is the most holy Company and society of God, Angels, and Spirits
of Just ones that are made perfect in Holiness. Have thou desired and labored
for Holiness to Sanctify thee, as well as Righteousness to justify thee? what
means have thou used to get thy Soul purged as well as sin pardoned: Have thou
been at the Fountain which God has opened for Judah, and for the House of
David? Have thou waited and prayed with David, Psalm 51. Wash me thoroughly from
my sins, purge me with Hyssop, referring to the Blood of Sprinkling, that Bl^od
of the Lamb of God, which alone cleanses from all sin; or have thou thought a
few Tears sufficient for this? Verily, if thy Head were a Fountain, thine Eyes
rivers of waters, and if thence thou could pour out such a Flood as would
even Deluge the world again, it would not wash out the stain of one of thy
least sins: A drop of the Blood of Christ is infinitely better, though all of
that be necessary.

Once more then Esther, Look unto that Jesus who came by Blood and Water both;
by the one to purchase Pardon and Heaven for thee, if thou Believe. By the
other to purify and prepare thee for it. And God of his Infinite Grace give
unto thee an Open and Abundant Entrance thereinto: For the sake of him who is
Priest for ever, and Lives still to make Intercession for Sinners.

The End of the Third SERMON.
Reader;
THis Serves only to draw the Curtain, that thou may behold a Tragic Scene,
strangly changed into a Theater of Mercy, a Pillar of Salt Transformed into a
Monument of Free Grace; a poor Wretch, entering into Prison a Bloody Malefactor,
her Conscience laden with Sins of a Scarlet Die, but there by the Gracious and
Powerful, but various workings: first of the Spirit of Bondage, then of
Adoption; the space of Eight Months she came forth, Sprinkled, Cleansed,
Comforted, a Candidate of Heaven.

Whilst she was under Confinement, after she had conceived in her self good
Hope of finding Mercy with God, through Christ, she was ready to give a reason
of her hope, to such as were Serious and Pious, with Meekness, and much
affection. And truly the Reasons and Grounds she went upon were Scriptural, and
so able to bear the weight she put upon them; (which Hope the result of her
Faith) kept her Company to the last, and failed her not, when she had most need
of it. When she walked the dolorous way to the place of her Execution and
approaching near to it, after a little Reluctance of the Flesh, as soon as she
ascended to behold the fatal Tree, her Faith, and courage revived, and she lift
up her Feet, and Marched on with a^ Erected, and Radian^ Countenance, as
unconcerned with the business of Death, at once out doing all the old Rom^n
Masculine bravery, and showing what Grace can do, in, and for the Weaker Sex;
and this in Presence of a Multitude of Spectators, of whom this Relator was
One, and an Admiring Observer: All which is to be Ascribed, Firstly, To the
Infinitely Rich, and Free Grace of God; but Ministerially, and Instrumentally
to the Labors, Prayers and Endeavors of the Reverend Elders of the Church of
Ipswich, and many other good Christians there; after her Apprehension in
Newbury where the Fact was Committed.

She was Conveyed, (and it was happy for her) that she was Conveyed to the
Prison in Ipswich; where are to be found, [A Nation] Pardon the Expression, Of
Sound, Serious and Praying Christians, who made Incessant Prayers to Heaven in
her behalf, Praying not only for her, but with her, in their own Houses,
joining and turning their Private Meetings into whole days of Fasting and
Prayer; and continuing till the Stars appearing: Yea, by Turns in the Prison
also. So turning a Den of Theives, (to use Dr. Wilds words) into a House of
Prayer; and had there been some Thief there, (for I know not who was there) he
might Perhaps, with her, been sharer of the benefit. Their Worthy Pastor also,
took constant and unwearied pains, Plying the Oar, To waft over her Soul to
Heaven; and saw the fruit of all his Labors, and Travels with her, through the
Blessing of God, Namely a great and gracious change wrought in her, which she
Humbly, Affectionately, and Thankfully acknowledged.

And now, Let the Great God of Heaven, have all the Praise and Glory of this
Action: And let that unhappy Tree; indeed happy in this, that the first that
Suffered on it, was (we trust) Fruit Consecrated: But if it be the Will of God,
that there may never be Occasion again to make use of it to such Fatal
purposes, but only stand as a Bu^y, or Seamark, to point out the Rocks and
Shelves, where she Shipwrackt her honor; and that all others may HEAR and
FEAR, etc. Which is the Desire and Prayer of,

Your Servant in the Lord, SAMUEL BELCHER.

THE Declaration and Confession OF Esther Rodgers, Of Kittery in the Province
of Main, in New England, Single woman.
I was born at Kittery sometime in May, 1680. At the Age of Thirteen came to
live as an Apprentice to Mr. Joseph Woodbridge of Newbury. Had little or no
thoughts of God or Religion, though Living in a Religious Family; was taught to
Read, Learned Mr. Cottons Catechism, and had frequent opportunities of going to
Public Meetings; but was a careless Observer of Sabbaths, and Hearer of
Sermons; no Word that ever I heard or read making any Impression upon my Heart,
(as I Remember) Neither did I at all give my self to Secret Prayer, or any
other Duty that concerned the Salvation of my Soul. And because I thus
neglected God, refused his Counsil, and would not walk in his Ways, therefore
he justly gave me up to my own hearts Lusts, and ways of Wickedness.

About the Age of Seventeen, I was left to fall into that foul Sin of
Uncleanness, suffering my self to be defiled by a Negro Lad living in the same
House. After I perceived that I was wi^h Child, I meditated how to prevent
coming to Public Shame; Satan presently setting in with his Temptation, I soon
complied and resolved to Murder the Child, if ever I should have one born
alive: and continued in my wicked purpose all along, till I had the fatal
Opportunity of putting it into Execution. Being delivered of a Living Child, I
used means presently to stop the breath of it, and kept it hid in an upper
Room, till the Darkness of the Night following, gave advantage for a Private
Burial in the Garden.

All this was done in Secret, no ^erson living whatsoever, no not so much as
the Father of the Child himself was privy to my disposal of it, or knew that I
ever had such a Child.

Afterward reflecting on what I had done, was followed with some Awakening,
Frights and Convictions during my abode at Mr. Woodbridges, which was about
half a year. Yet, never making any serious Address to God for pardon of these
my great and heinous Sins. But thence I went to Piscatequa, where I lived in a
public House, and soon got over and rid of all my Fears, and even all thoughts
thereof, giving my self up to other wicked Company and ways of Evil.

About a year after, I returned to Newbury to Mr. Joseph Woodbridges again,
where my former Sins came fresh to Remembrance, and troubled me a while; which
together with other reasons, occasioned my Removal to another place in the
Town. But there also I took all Opportunities to follow my old Trade of running
out a Nights, or entertaining my Sinful Companions in a back part of the House.
And there I fell into the like horrible Pit (as before) viz. of Carnal
Pollution with the Negro man belonging to that House. And being with Child
again, I was in as great concern to know how to hide this as the former. Yet
did not so soon resolve the Murdering of it, but was continually hurried in my
thoughts, and undetermined till the last hour. I went forth to be delivered in
the Field, and dropping my Child by the side of a little Pond, (whether alive,
or still Born I cannot tell) I covered it over with Dirt and Snow, and speedily
returned home again. B^t being Suspected and Examined, about having had a Child
since my going out, made little or no answer (that I remember) till the next
Morning The Child being found by some Neighbors was brought in, and laid
before my Face, to my horrible Shame and Terror; under which Confusion I
remained during my Confinement at Newbury, being about one Month, Thinking only
of the punishment I was like to suffer, without any true concernedness as to my
Sins against God, or the State of my Immortal Soul; till some time after I came
into Ipswich Prison; when and where it pleased the Great and Gracious God to
work upon my heart, as in the following Relation I have given account of.

A Relation of her Experience, both of some Conviction and Comfort received in
the Prison: Communicated to a certain Gentlewoman of the Town, with whom she
was very free, before and afterward.
Taken word for word from her own Mouth.
THE first time Mr. Rogers came to see me; after much other Discourse, he told
me of the odiousness of Sin; and that if ever I came to be sensible of it, I
should loath it, and not because of my own punishment procured thereby, but
because of the Dishonor done to God. Then after he was gone, I began to think
that I never loathed Sin so as yet, and was in a dreadful Case indeed; to think
what a wretched Condition I had brought my self into, and had dishonored God:
insomuch that I could not Rest, I was so dreadfully hurried; and Satan made me
believe that it was impossible such a Sinner, should be Saved. And I could not
Read, nor Sleep, nor have any Rest night nor day. After a while God made me to
think that it was Satan's Temptation to keep me from Repentance: But if I could
Repent and Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, I might find mercy, although I was
such a Sinner. And although I am such a vile Sinner, I hope God has made me
sensible of my sins, he has made me to loath my self, and truly to Repent for
Sin. God has made me to see that there is nothing that I can do can save me,
but that there is a sufficiency in the Lord Jesus Christ. And I do throw my
self at his Feet for mercy, and have hope from his promises. Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him Return to
the Lord, for he will have mercy on him: and to our God, for he will abundantly
pardon. And I do so far as I know my self, Repent of my so great sins against
so good a God; for that which has been the delight of my Soul, I do now
abominably hate^* And again it is said, He that confesses and forsakes his
sin, shall find mercy. I can truly say, I have confessed my Sins before God and
man, and do desire truly to Repent for them. Isa. 1.18. Come now let us reason
together says the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be white as
snow, though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool. I hope I have
hated the evil of my ways; and do hope to have my Soul washed and cleansed in
the Blood of Jesus Christ.

During her Imprisonment (which was more than eight months) she was frequently
visited by Ministers, and other Christians of the Town and Neighborhood, to
whom she gave little Encouragement for a considerable time, being very much
reserved, partly through natural temper, partly by power of Temptation as was
judged; that she could not open her mind or condition at all; nor make any
other answer to Questions propounded, than yea or no: till after a while she
obtained more freedom of spirit, and liberty of speech. Then would she speak of
her sins with aggravation, and express sorrow for them with great affection:
related the distressing, and almost despairing thoughts of her mind in the time
that she kept silence; as that God who had left her to fall so dreadfully into
sin, would now leave her to an hard and impenitent heart, that she should be
damned; found a great averseness at first, against going to the Public
Assembly on Sabbath and Lecture-Dayes, (for which she had liberty twice every
week) lest her heart should be more hardened, and her Condemnation more
heightened thereby. But it was not long before she found a better fruit and
effect of her attendance thereupon: She felt the power of the Word preached,
inlightning, convincing, humbling and softning of her heart. Also that the
words spoken to her in private made deep and lasting impressions on her Soul:
that she began to delight in hearing the Word public or private; and set her
self to search the Scriptures diligently, out of which she collected many
Texts, that encouraged her to hope for mercy and pardon, as particularly these,
Prove. 28.13. Isa. 55.1.7. Mat. 11.28. and Isa. 1.18. on these was her
Meditation day and night; and though she professed not to rest on these
promises, yet was by them encouraged and drawn to come unto God through Jesus
Christ, and to hope in him according to his Word. And having once laid hold on
that Hope set before her in the Gospel; she did not, would not, ever after let
it go; and though she could not so well express the reasons and grounds of her
hope, as was desired, yet would not by any means be beaten off from it: and
though sometim^s she felt a ^king fear come upon her, yet that did not ^ong
abide. But still said she, my slopes prevail against my fears; at length all
fear was in a manner cast out, and she was even filled with hope, comfort, and
joy in believing: Spoke very sensibly of the Nature of Faith, which said she, I
never understood before, bu^ (...) I ^eel the power of it; it is quite (...)
than most people take it (...) my self did conceive of (...) time before have
(...) ^est thou to be Saved by Christ? whereas now I know, that I neither did
believe, nor knew I what it was to believe. O Believing is a great and
difficult work, it is the mighty work of God himself, that any do believe, This
was after she had heard a public Discourse on the Apostles words to the
Jailer, Acts 16.31. Having before heard those words of our Savior, Mat. 18.3.
spoken to; and being afterward asked what she thought or experienced about
Conversion, said, I am sure there is a great Change, I think a through Change
wrought in my whole nature: I now see all things otherwise then I did before;
Sin is become very odious, and Christ very precious to me; I s^e the folly and
filthiness of the ways of sin, and in some measure am made to discern the
Excellency of Gods ways, and do find more delight and pleasure therein, then
ever I did in my former courses. Oh! I can truly say, I loath my self for my
sins, I abhor my self; and if I were to live a thousand years in this world, it
should be in the hatred of all Evil. Again she said, I would not for all the
world be among my sinful Companions, and in the state I then was: I find a
thousand times more comfort and delight in this Prison alone, than ever I did
with them. When News was carried to her, that her Life was likely to be
prolonged near two months by the Courts Adjournment, it raised no sudden joy in
her, as was expected: and though she could not but wonder at it her self, yet
gave this reason for it: I find (said she) a willingness in me to accept the
punishment of my sins, and a readiness to glorify the Justice of God by
suffering that Death I have deserved, in hope of receiving his mercy to Eternal
Life; but I submit to his pleasure. In the time of this Reprieval, she had many
opportunities of going to the private Meetings of Christians in the Town, who
spent whole days in Prayer with Fasting on her account; and though she joined
not in any Conference with them, yet professed her delight in hearing them, that
she found much sweetness in their society, and desired to be gathered with such
at Death.

When the time of her Trial came, though she would have acknowledg^d plain matter
of Fact, yet could not plead Guilty according to the Form of her Indictment;
but being brought in Guilty according to Law and Evidence, of Wilful Murder
committed by her, and thereupon being Condemned to Die, was not at all
surprised; but as she before expected, so afterward approved the Verdict and
Sentence, that they were just and right. After Condemnation she was much more
free and enlarged in discourse than before: and being often asked, how her
Faith and Hope in God and Christ held out; she would answer, without Doubting
and Wavering; being asked whether she was never assaulted with Temptations to
Unbelief or Fear since her beginning to hope: Answers, yes at the first, but
not lately; neither have I been troubled with terrifying Dreams or Fancies, as
formerly I was: nor can I possess my self with fearfulness when I endeavor it
by thinking on the most awful circumstances of my Condition and manner of Death
which I am to suffer; but in the midst of those thoughts, Gods comforts delight
my Soul, and I think, that at such times I ^eel the g^eatest incomes of joy and
swee^ness.

On the last Sabbath of her Life on Earth, she presented this Bill to be Read
in the Congregation, which was wholly Dictated by her own Mouth, though Written
by another hand.
ESTher Rodgers having received a Sentence of Death, which ere long is to be
Executed on her Body, being sensible of the just Hand of God for her Great and
Crying Sins and Crimes, that she is found guilty of before God; Humbly begs the
Prayers of all Gods People in this Congregation for her: being made in some
measure sensible of her sad and deplorable Condition, she earnestly begs, that
the Lord would still look down in Mercy upon her, to give her Assurance of the
Pardon of all her Sins, and to Wash and Cleanse her from, That Sin of
Blood-guiltiness, in the Blood of the Lord JESUS CHRIST; that her Faith and
Hope may be only upon the Mercy of God in Christ, for SALVATION: and that the
Lord would Strengthen and Uphold her, and carry her through that hard and
difficult Work when called thereunto, that she may not be dismayed at the Sight
and Fear of DEATH: but that her Mouth may be Opened, and her heart enlarged to
declare to Others, what the Lord has done for her Soul, and also to Warn them
that are Beholders to take heed by her Example, least they fall into the like
Condemnation.

The Lord was pleased to make this a good Day unto her, and she was much
strengthened and refreshed by what she heard from those words, Act. 16.31.
Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be Saved. In which discourse,
the Subject, Object, and Principal Act of true Justifying and Saving Faith,
were touched upon: And in the close of all, the extent of the Promise being
considered, it was particularly applied unto her upon Believing. The Apostle
there did not speak to the Jaylour only, but the Charge and Promise both are
Universal. Let every one believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and Whosoever
believes shall be Saved. This was often repeated by our Savior, particularly
unto Martha, Joh. 11.26. Whosoever lives and believes in me shall never Die.
Nay further to manifest the Riches of Grace and Power of Faith: He says, I am
the Resurrection and the Life, He that believes in me, though he were Dead,
^et shall he live.

Here is One in the Congregation at this time, of whom it may be thus spoken,
That she is a Dead Woman; not only that she was dead in Trespasses and Sins,
but is Dead in Law, and by a Sentence of Condemnation must be put to Death
before another Sabbath come about: And yet there is more than a possibility
through Grace, that she may Live again; though not in this World, yet for ever
in a better, where she shall neither sin nor sorrow more. Who has begotten
thee to such a lively hope, or hope of Eternal life, O thou Dying Malefactor?
Has the Spirit of the Lord Jesus wrought this in thee by his Word or no? O
Examine (whilst there is Opportunity) thy Hope by thy Faith, and see if that be
well grounded on Christ Himself, according to the Word. Not on thine own
Prayers, Tears, Humiliations, Sorrows or Repentance, but on the Free Mercy of
God, and Merits of Christ alone. If so, It can never rise too high, or will
make ashamed by its fall. Yet most thou continue instant and constant in thy
Looking unto this JESUS, who is not only the Object, but Author and Finisher of
thy Faith, to establish, strengthen and enaable thee to persevere in Faith and
Hope to the End; that thou may not be found to be one of those who draw back
to perdition, but of those that hold out to the Saving of their Souls. Be
sensible, that the same Almighty Power which at first enabled thee to believe,
is necessary to keep and carry thee through Faith to Salvation. Beg of God to
strengthen thee against new Fears, or any Temptations to Unbelief: Say with
him. A (...) time I am afraid, I will trust in (...) God of his Infinite Grace
grant (...) Evidence of true Part (...) Christ both to thee and (...) we may
hold the beginning of (...) ^^^fidence steadfast unto the End. (...) Heb. 3.14.

The Night before her Execution (...) said to many coming in at once to (...)
her: Oh! I have had the joyfulless (...) to day that ever I had in my whole
life. I bless God that ever I came into this Prison. When one of the Company
asked her, what she thought of the poor murdered Infants, whom she was
instrumental to bring into the world, and then perhaps of sending them to Hell.
She answers, I have greatly mourned for my cruelty and wrong to them, as well
as Sin against God in all that I have done. Question again; But how do you
think to answer the Cry of their Blood? Answ. I trust I have an Advocate, and
many like things.

The next Day (which was appointed for her Execution) being Lecture Day, July
31 1701 This other Bill was presented by one that took it from her own mouth.
ESTher Rodgers a poor Prisoner of Hope, under Sentence of Death, which is in a
few hours to take place upon her, being through Gods Grace made sensible of the
just hand of God upon her, for her great and crying sins she was found guilty
of before God and man: Considering she is upon the Brink of Eternity, which she
hopes will be a Blessed Eternity to her; and having a comfortable assurance
thereof, through Gods infinite mercy in Christ vouchsafed to her so great a
Sinner, she humbly begs the Prayers of all Gods People for her, as being the
last time she shall enjoy such a benefit here in this world; that the Lord will
be pleased to stand by her, and strengthen her, that her Faith and Hope in
Christ may hold out to the end; and that her heart may be opened and enlarged
to declare to others what God has done for her Soul; and to give warning to
those that are Standers by, to take heed of falling into any such ways and
courses, as she has been left unto.

Some time before the Public Lecture began, the Reverend Mr. Wise went in to
visit the Prisoner, and began to quaery with her, about her Spiritual
Condition, viz In what preparation she was for Death, that was now approaching?

Her answer was in expression of much comfort and assurance of her future well
being.

In the inte^im of time came in a Gentlewoman that was her peculiar Visitant,
and asked her how she found her self this morning? She answered, her hopes and
comfort continued*

Quest. Whether, when her Coffin was brought in, it did not daunt her?

Answ. No, but it rather ministered matter of comfort to me. Then Mr. Wise
replied to what he heard from her, that if this were real, the effect of a
Saving Change upon her heart, she of a poor miserable Malefactor was become one
of the greatest Favorites to the King of Heaven. Why Esther can you entertain
Death, and such terrible Forerunners of it in such Triumph? Then you are very
happy: But are you not mistaken? Will you give me leave to make a more exact
scrutiny into the State of your Soul? Then pray, be free and plain hearted,
that I may have a particular account of your Spiritual State For this she
desired Privacy: whereupon the whole Company withdrew. And Mr. Wise proceeded
in discourse with her after this manner.

Esther, The Godly after Grace is implanted, God is want to order that they
pass variety of trials for the proof of the soundness of their State, that
Divine Grace in them may grow into greater assurance: So that to put you upon
an Examination of this nature, will be no disadvantage to you. Therefore let me
have liberty more c^itically to enquire into the ground of your fore mentioned
hopes: I would not at such a time molest your Spiritual quiet, yet you are now
within a few hours to appear before a Jealous and Omniscient Judge; you cannot
be too curious in se^ling all things right between Him and your Soul, under the
benefit of means. There is no room to err twice in this Adventure. If there be
any essential error in your State, and it continues, you are undone for ever.
Therefore take my freedom in good part.

Quest. Where are your hopes placed?

Answ. In the Mercy of God, and Merits of Christ.

Quest. You have been a very great Criminal, What sense have you had of Sin?
have you seen it exceeding sinful?

Answ. Yes, It has been a greater grief to me that I have offended God, than
for what I have, or shall yet endure for my Sin. The time hastens, give me a
distinct account of the work of Gods Spirit upon your heart.

This Relation she makes agreeable to the former.
Says she, When I came first into Prison, I was altogether careless, unaffected
and unconcerned about my condition. Mr. Rogers came to visit me, and in
discourse with me, did so open and lay out my condition before me, in the
terrible circumstances and aggrevations of it, that I was smitten in my heart,
and filled with terrible thoughts about it. He told me als^ I must seek to God
to do all for me that I needed to have done. That I could not mend my heart no
more than make it, etc. The trouble of my mind continued upon me, and All the
Si^s of my Life came to my Remembrance: I fell into great horrors, and was in
great distress and perplexity about my condition: I saw my self in a very
miserable State by reason of Sin, and the J^stice of God. I had very great and
sore Conflicts in my Spirit, and many great Temptations. But it pleased God
after some time to come in with much Comfort into my Soul, by many precious
Promises, as that in Ezekiel. 18.32. I have no pleasure in the Death of him that
Dies, says the Lord God, wherefore Turn your selves and live ye; and others
that have been already mentioned. The Peace and Comfort of my mind, ( said she)
is great and continued: When I think of my Sins they disappear, and fly from
me, I many times have endeavored to terri^y my self with the thoughts of
Death, and my Execution, it seems rather a matter of comfort than terror to me.
At times my spirit has been somewhat damped, but my comfort and peace return.
Mr. Wise further quae^ied with her about the sense she had of Indwelling sin:
And by her answers she did discover a considerable knowledge of the Mystery in
Christianity; that though she was well confirmed (by the ^eams of Divine
Favor) of the c^mpleatness of her Justification, yet did discern that her
Sanctification was incomplete from the sense of heart Evils, Darkness,
Wanderings, under sacred means, and vain imaginations, etc.

To make some Trial of the Firmness and manner of her Faith, 'Twas queried,

Whether she found it hard to believe?

Answ. Yes, But yet she desired to roll her self upon the Mercy of God, for He
had said, Come unto me all ye that are w^ary and heavy l^d^n, and I will give
you Rest.

Hereupon, the Minister gives her his charitable Opini^n of her good Estate, of
which he had a peculiar esteem from the Account she had given him, that the
special instrumental cause of her Awakening and Comfort, was an Ambassador of
Jesus Christ. So having Recommended her condition to the God of all Grace and
Consolation by Prayer, repaired to the Public Lecture.

After Lecture, the High Sheriff prepares a Cart to carry her from the G^al, to
the place of Execution: But she earnestly desiring of him the liberty to walk
on Foot; it was granted to her, and two or three of the Neighboring M^nisters
did her the Favor to Walk with her, who did by turns endeavor to fill up the
time with such Divine Passages of discourse as might best suit her condition;
mixing with words of Consolation, something of Terror and Caution. Her
Behavior was very grave and Christian from first to last. She retained an
invincible Courage, and yet manifested nothing that had the least Tincture of a
vain glorious Confidence. One of the Ministers thus glossed on her present
circumstances for Terrification.

O Esther, How can your heart abide! Don't you here behold terrible displayes of
Justice: you are surrounded with Armed men, which signifies that God and man
has determined to rid the World of you; and you are thus beset, that you may no
ways escape The terrible place and Engines of Destruction, are but a little
before us, where you must in a few Minutes Expire; and there lies your Coffin*
that must receive your perishing Body: How can you bear the sight of all these
things? She turns about, and looking him in the face with a very smiling
countenance, says, I know I am going to the Lord Jesus Christ. The manner, the
Christian Bravery, the Cheerfulness, and suddenness, with the profound matter
of her Reply was suprizing and astonishing; Yet not to clip or over load the
Wings of her Soaring Faith; they told her, that God did put much honor upon,
and signalize his Grace to her, in that she had been the Subject of Prayers
generally through the Neighborhood. And now in that Christian and Civil
Attendance that was given her in her last Journey; and from the intere^^ she
had obtained in the hearts of (...) Sacred Order of men, entrusted with the
Keys of the Kingdom. So that they might in a humble confidence and hope,
pronounce an Absolution, though not from the Temporal Punishment, yet from the
Condemning Guilt of all her great Abominations; (upon a presumption of her
gracious state) founded on those words, Mat 16.19 Whatsoever thou shall loose
on Earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. The Discourse seemed very delightful to
her, making suitable, though short Replies to all.

Having walked above a mile, she ^^em'd a little to flag and faulter in her
pace; which together with a sudden p^^^ness of countenance occasioned, one of
the Ministers observing it, to ask her, How she did now? whether she felt any
alteration? To which she replied, t^^s; some sudden qualm of faintness and fear
came upon me, but it is over, and I am very well; so presses forward again with
her usual vigor. Being come in sight of the Gallows, was asked, whether her
heart did not now fail (...) She answers, No, but the nearer ^ approach, the
more I feel my strength and joy to increase. When come to the Foot of the
Ladder, she seemed no ways altered by any distress invading from the terrible
Spectacles then in view. Mr. Sheriff having settled his Guard, and Read the
Death Warrant, asked, what she did desire further before Execution? She turning
to the Ministers, desires one of them to (...) with her. Prayer being ended.
Mr. Sheriff bids her go up the Ladder, she readily obeys; But first with very
affecting Gestures, takes her leave of the Ministers, giving them many thanks
for all their kindness to her; and this she does with a mixture of Tears, and a
show of moderated sorrow, and so without sto^ or trembling went up the Ladder;
and turning her self about, made the following Discourse to the People, and
Prayer to God.

The last Dying Words and Prayer of Esther Rodgers, upon the Ladder, just
before her Execution, taken in Shorthand by some there present, July 31. 1701.
HEre I am come to Die a Shame^ed Death, and I justly deserve it is Young, People
take Warning, O (...) all take Warning by me; I beg of al^ ^o have a Care. Be
Obedient to your Parents and Masters; Run not out a Nights, especially on
Sabbath Nights, Re^rain bad Company for the Lords Sake. Here me poor Souls,
Keep Gods Sabbaths, mind the Word of God, and let good People be your Company,
Mind it for the Lords Sake: Do it if you love your Lives: for Gods Sake mind
your own Souls. O Run not abroad with wicked Company, or on Sabbath day Nights,
and so forget what you have heard. Improve time, you do ^^t know what Comfort
is to be had and found in Gods Ways; If you do not love God, he will not love
you; If you go on in Sin, you will provoke God. O let me beg of you all to hear
me! for the Lords Sake Remember me! O let every one Remember me! Let me beg of
all Young Ones, be not Disobedient, go not with bad Company, O my dear Friends.
-- Take Warning by me. Here I come to Die, and if God be not Merciful to my
Soul, I shall be undone to all Eternity. -- If I do not turn by Repentance. I
Bless God, I have found more Comfort in Prison, than ever before. O Turn to God
now. O how hard it is to Repent^* If you go on in Sin, God may give you up to a
hard Heart* Oh! Turn whilst the Day of Grace lasts.

Her Prayer.
O LORD JESUS, I humbly beg of thee, Look upon me in Mercy, -- God for Christ
Jesus Sake h^^^ ^ercy upon me. It is nothing that I can do for a Pardon -- All
my Prayers and Tears cannot Save me, -- But it is through the free Grace, and
Mercy of God in the Blood of Jesus Christ. O Lord, Sprinkle that Blood upon my
Soul, that will wash away all my bloody Sins. I beg pardon through him of all
those sins I am guilty of. O Lord Jesus have Compassion upon me, and say to me,
as thou did to the Penitent Thief; This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. Oh Lord, I come, Receive my Soul. Thou have said, Come unto me all
you that are weary and heavy l^den. And they that are a thirst, thou w^lt give
the Water of Life to. Lord, I thirst, have mercy upon me, for the Lord Jesus
Christ's sake. O Receive my Soul, Dear Lord Jesus, I beg of thee: Have.
Compassion upon me, have mercy upon me, O Lord, for Christ's sake. O pity me,
and have Compassion upon me Lord Jesus be with me, and carry me through. --
Thou have said, Whosoever comes unto thee, thou will in no wise cast them out.
O Lord I come to thee, O Lord cast me not out. Though I have deserved Death and
Damnation -- my sins have deserved Hell -- a thousand Hells, yet Lord pity me,
and pardon all my (...), and give me an interest in Jesus Christ. Lord Jesus,
thou have said, Whosoever believes on thee, shall never dye. O Lord I believe,
help thou mine unbelief. O Blessed Jesus, Receive my Soul, Blessed Lord Jesus,
I come to thee, fit and prepare me for thy self. If my heart be not ^^mbled,
humble me to the Dust. O Lord Je^^s, I have been guilty of Blood enough (...)
Damn me to all Eternity. O Lord have mercy on me, hear me, pity and pardon me.
Lord I bless thee, that thou give me any hope; thou deliverest from the
Grave, and out of Hell: I might have been before this time in the Grave with
the Dead, and in Hell with the Damned* Lord Jesus, thou can give me a heart
to Repent, I do Repent that ever I have sinned against so good and so gracious
a God. O Lord, pity me, and send thy H^ly Angels to guard my Soul into the
Heavenly Kingdom, as thou did for Lazarus. O pity me, for Jesus Christ's
Sake: To whom with thee, O Father, and the Holy Spirit, be ascribed all Honor
and Glory for ever Amen.

Then Mr. Pa^son said to her, The Lord is the Hearer of Prayers, and will hear
thee --

Mr. Belcher said, He that has helped thee to make this Prayer will also hear
thee. --

She then said, O Lord Jesus Look down upon me, and Save my Soul; I trust thou will Receive my Soul. O Lord I commit my Soul into Thy H^nds. O Father of
Mercies have Mercy on me. O now Lord Jesus is the Time: -- I am upon the Brink
of Eternity, O Lord have Mercy upon me. O Thou Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
into thy Hands I commit my Spirit. O Receive thou it. Have Mercy upon me, and
Pity me for Jesus Christ's Sake.

Then the Officer binds an Handkerchief upon her Face, -- which she cheerfully
receives, with Eyes and Hands lift up to Heaven.

Mr. Wise said, Now is the great Crisis of Time. Does your Faith hold in God
and Christ still. --

She answers, God be thanked it does, God be thanked. --

Then being bid to lean her Head back upon the Ladder, to receive the Halter,
She readily does it; and Cries, O Lord Jesus, Now Lord Jesus, I am a Coming: O
Come Lord Jesus by Thy Pardoning Mercy, to Save me Now, or I Perish for ever.
My Blessed Jesus, -- O Lord Jesus, have Pity upon me, O Good Lord. -- And thus
she remains lifting up her Hands to Heaven, till Mr. Wise said again; We have
Recomm^^ded you to God, and done all we can for you, and must now leave you. --

If your Hopes can lay hold upon the irresistible Grace and Mercy of God in
Christ, and you can cast your self into His Arms, you are Happy for Ever. --
And so we must bid you Fare Well.

THE manner of her Entertaining DEATH, was even astonishing to a Multitude of
Spectators, (being as was judged Four or Five Thousand People at least) with
that Composure of Spirit, Cheerfulness of Countenance, pleasantness of Speech,
and a sort of Complaisantness in Carriage toward the Ministers who were
assistant to her, with their Prayers and Counsils, that even melted the hearts
of all that were within seeing or hearing, into Tears of affection, with
greatest wonder and admiration. Her undaunted Courage and unshaken Confidence
she modestly enough expressed, yet steadfastly held unto the end. So that he
must needs want Faith for himself, that wants Charity for such an one.

FINIS.
Advertisement.
THERE is in the Press, and will speedily be Published, A Book, Entitled,
Christianus per Ignem: Or, a Disciple Warming of himself, and Owning of his
Lord: With Devout and Useful Meditations, fetched out of the Fire, by a
Christian in a Cold-Season, Sitting before it. A Work though never out of
Season, yet more particularly, designed for the Seasonable and Profitable
Entertainment of them that would well Employ their Leisure by the Fire Side.

Sold by Samuel Phillips at the Brick Shop, and Benjamin Eliot, under the West
End of the Town House in Boston.


