A Remedy against Despair.

OR Brief Discourse wherein Great Sinners are Encouraged, and Directed how to
improve the consideration of the Greatness of their SINS in Praying to GOD for
PARDON.

BEING ^he Substance of Two SERMONS ^^eached at the Lecture in Boston, 1699.

(...) Samuel Willard, Teacher of a Church there.

(...). 43 25. I, even I am he that blotteth out thy Transgressions for mine
own sake.

Magnam injuriam Deo facit, qui diffidit de ejus misericordia.

Aug. Boston, Printed by B Green, and J. Allen. Sold by S. Phillips at the
Brick Shop. 1700.

A Remedy against Despair.
PSALM. XXV.11. For thy Name sake, O Lord, pardon mine Iniquity: for it is great.


AT what time, or on what occasion this Psalm was penned by David, we are not
told; however the Contents of it give us to understand, that it was a time of
complicated trouble with him; his Enemies were grown insolent, and gave him
great molestation; and his Sins mean while pained his Conscience, and
disquieted his mind; it may therefore be well supposed to refer to the
disturbances which were occasioned by Absaloms unnatural Rebellion, which was
consequent upon, and a threatened correction for his great sin in the matter of
Uriah. The Psalm therefore is a prayer of Faith with which he addresseth God in
this condition; and is made up of petitions, and pleas wherewith those
petitions are enforced; introduced with a profession of his recumbency on God
in the midst of his distress, verse 1, 2. The Petitions, though interwoven in
the Psalm, may be reduced to two heads, viz. for deliverance from his Enemies,
and a discharge from the Guilt of his Sins; in each whereof he fortifies his
Faith, and strengthens his importunity with suitable arguments. Our Text is a
Petition of the latter sort. In the words we may observe;

1. The Object to whom he directs it, the Lord; the word is, Jehovah, which is
a proper and incommunicable name of God, and is no where ascribed to any second
being whatsoever, but to the true God alone.

2. The benefit which he petitioneth for, viz. pardon or forgiveness; the word
properly signifies to pardon, or to spare of free grace or mercy, without any
the least deserving in the Subject to whom it is applied: and Critics observe
that it is most commonly used in the Law of Moses, for such a forgiveness as is
afforded, upon an oblation that has been offered to God for the expiation of
the Guilt contracted by the person; so that we may here suppose the Psalmist to
have an eye of Faith upon the Sacrifice of Christ, which was to satisfy the
Justice of God, in order to the obtaining of a Pardon for Sinners. Pardon
presumes Guilt, and supposes it to be removed by it.

3. The special Subject about which he petitioneth this benefit to be conferred
upon him; mine iniquity: and here two things are to be considered.

1. It is Iniquity, in the singular number. I confess the word is sometimes
used in the singular number, as a name of multitude, comprehending in it all
the Sins which the person has ever been guilty of: but it seems here to refer
(...) some one, which his Conscience was peculiarly wounded with the
remembrance of, and may probably refer to that complicated sin of his that he
had been guilty of, which has already been mentioned; and the word here
rendered, Iniquity, signifies pravity, or perverseness, and is used for the more
bold and high-handed transgressions, that men do sometimes run themselves into;
the word is also often intended for Original Sin, which is the pravity or
perverseness of our nature, and unto which we ought to have a respect in all
our Confessions of sin unto God.

2. It is his own sin, mine iniquity; he does not lay it upon any other, but
assumeth it wholly and entirely to himself, and acknowledges that he has
rendered himself Guilty by it; under which there is necessarily implied a
confession, both of the sin it self as chargeable upon him, and also of the
deserved Guilt that he has contracted to himself by it.

4. The arguments by which he strengthens his Faith in making of this petition:
indeed, every word does tacitly carry an argument or plea in it, as might be
made evident, but there are two which are expressed in the Text; viz.

1. He pleads Gods Name for it: By the Name of God we are to understand God
himself, as he has revealed himself unto us in his Glorious Perfections, in
which alone we can see any good ground to hope or pray for pardon; and hence it
either points us to the Attributes themselves, which shine forth in the
procuring and applying of this forgiveness; or to the Glory which will redound
to those ^^^ributes by it; or to Christ who is the purchaser of this mercy for
us, and may be equivalent to that in, Dan. 9.17. Hear the prayer, etc. for the
Lords sake; and God himself has said concerning Christ, Exodus 23.21. My name
is in him.

2. He looks upon the greatn^^^ of his sin, for it is great. To what ^ead we
are to refer this argument, is matter of dispute, and accordingly there is a
different reading given to it by Interpreters* The particle translated for, is
variously used in the Scriptures; and more frequently in two senses: it is
sometimes used Illatively, to bring in the reason of that which went before,
and then it is read for, and thus our Translation understand it: and so it is
used by David as an argument to enforce his pleading for pardon from God, in
regard of the greatness of his sin; sometimes it is used discretively, upon the
grant of a thing which might seem to look to the contrary, and then it is read
although; and so have some rendered it in our Text: and then it is put to
encourage faith to seek a pardon notwithstanding the greatness of his sin; that
he fortifieth against the discouragement which that might afford him. The word
great, is used in the Scriptures both for magnitude and multitude, and is to be
translated according as the sense will carry it, and both of them are often
comprehended. If we take sin here aggregatively, to comprehend all his sins,
both original and actual; it then intends that they are very many, and
grievously aggravated; but if we understand it only for some one particular and
special sin; it then intends that it is a very great one, and that it has a
great many wrapped in it; and the pronoun particle, which is rendered it, is
Emphatical: it intimates as much, as if he did point with his finger to the
particular iniquity, and say of it, this, this is a very great sin*

There are a great many precious practical Truths contained or implied in these
words, which I cannot willingly overpass without some brief glance at them,
before I come to the Case specially intended from them, viz.

DOCT. I. The Children of God may sometimes fall into very Great Sins. David
was such an one at this time: he was a true Believer, a man after Gods own
heart; and yet he acknowledges his Sin, and puts that note upon it. Every Sin
is great, as it is against God, and is a Violation of his Law; for the least
affront offered to that glorious being cannot be small: but there are some
which are aggravated Sins; either as they are the more direct breaches of some
of the greater and more leading Commands of God, or as they are awfully
circumstanced, by which they are rendered the more presumptuous; and such was
that of David in both respects, as we shall find it amplified on in, 2 Samuel 12.
begin. That Godly men may fall into such Sins, there needs no more to make it
evident, than the instances of such in the word of God, which are there
purposely recorded for our learning and warning. Besides, Original Sin, which
remains in all Gods people as long as they live, has every lust comprised in
it, it being a whole Body of Death, and if God leaves them to themselves, it
will drag them into Captivity. So Paul complains of it, Romans 7.23. And God does
sometimes so leave them, as is said of him, 2 Chronicles. 32.31. God left him, to
try him. Gods people are under the Command, as it is a Rule of Obedience, and
every transgression or coming short in it is a Sin; nor does their being his
Children make it no Sin, or a little one: but it is a notorious aggravation of
it that such as are so related to him, and are thus obliged by him, do so. God
has holy ends in his thus leaving them; and will hereby humble them out of
their carnal confidence, and magnify his Grace in Saving of them.

USE. Let this then caution such as pretend to be the Children of God, and that
in two respects.

1. Beware of thinking your neglects or violations of the Command to be no
Sins. How many have ruined their own Souls, by misunderstanding of that Text?
Romans 6.14. Ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. As if Lying, Stealing,
Swearing Whordom, etc. were no Sins if done by a Believer, but had lost the
nature of Sin, because such do them. Such pretenders are strangers to the Grace
of God, and shall know their delusion to their cost sooner or later.

2. Take heed of carnal confidence and negligence. That is a duty incumbent on
all the people of God, Ephesians. 5.15. See that ye walk circumspectly: And we here
see what great reason there is for the constant practicing of it. There is
scarce one Sin, though never so foul and filthy, but you may be drawn into it,
if God shall withdraw his preventing Grace from you; and you will grievously
provoke him so to do, if you thus neglect your selves* and there are continual
Solicitations that will be offered to draw you into them: let therefore the
thought of this be a monitour to you not to be high minded, but to fear*

DOCT. II. When God brings outward troubles on his People, these Sins of theirs
may peculiarly trouble them. Thus it was with the Psalmist at this time; and
this gave the Occasion for his putting up the petition in our Text. God
sometimes brings personal afflictions on his own, for their trial, as he did
upon Job; and yet then it is good for them to make a diligent search after Sin
in themselves. But very often they are the corrections which he lays on them
for some bold transgressions of theirs: and, because he intends to use them for
their Correction and amendment, he therefore gives them some notice or other
about those Sins, either by his Word and Ordinances, directing his Servants to
meet with them, or in the very Language of the Providence themselves; with
which he touches their Consciences, and makes them reflect, and charge such
Sins upon themselves. Thus he did unto David, by Nathan in, 2 Samuel 12. begin*
and by Gad, when he had numbered the People, Chap. 24.10. And when it is so,
they are more distressed with the consideration of their sin, than with the
affliction that is procured by it. Yea this is it which puts the greatest
bitterness into the affliction it self, and well it may, because hereby they
discern anger in the rod, which is more terrible to them than all the rage of
Death and Hell: yea they could be contented to be corrected, so they might but
be assured that it were not in wrath, but in love and compassion; hence that
request of the Prophet, Jer 10.24. Oh Lord, correct me, but with judgment; not
in thine anger, lest thou bring me to nothing

USE. Let such as fear God take this for a daily watch word, to make them
afraid of every Temptation to sin.

It may be for the present, you may swallow the bait, and not feel the hook to
prick you, but you know not how soon God may in his Providence visit you with
some remarkable affliction, and then bring this sin to your remembrance, and if
he do, you will find the bitterness of it; little do you think at present, how
much gall and wormwood this will put into the Cup: now the lashes of Conscience
within, will be more terrible than all the outward strokes of Providence,
though never so severe. Now it will be a comfortable Cordial, to be able at
such a time to say as the Church, Psalm* 44.17, 18. All this is come upon us;
yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in thy Covenant.
Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way And
to appeal with him, Job 16.17. Not for any injustice in mine hand; also my
prayer is pure.

DOCT. III. There is sometimes one sin* that lies more heavily on the
Conscience of Gods Children, in a time of trouble. The design of Affliction
indeed, is to put us upon the making of a thorough search for all sin; but
oftentimes there is some one that gives special occasion for the affliction,
God being peculiarly provoked by it, and thereupon the Spirit of God bears it
more heavily on the Conscience at such a time than any other, though thereby he
leads us up to the fountain of all, as he did David, Psalm. 53.3. with 5. I know
my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me; behold I was shapen in
iniquity; and it is evident that God is more especially dishonored by some one
sin, than by others, and the sin it self is more prodigious and presumptuous,
and leaves deeper wounds in the Soul, which when the sense thereof is revived,
draw our thoughts that way, and God will leave proportionable impressions on
our hearts thereby.

USE. And let this be a constant caution to us to (...) how we give way to the
temptations of sin that are urged upon us.

Does God at any time make one sin so bitter to us, that we cannot endure the
terrors of it, but are ready to sink under them; the burden of them has such
a load that we are oppressed with it, and roar under it? Surely he does hereby
caution us to look to our ways, and beware of multiplying transgressions
against him; if one be so terrible, what will many be? this should put force in
that argument, and make it powerful in our resistance, Gen 39 9. How can I do
this great wickedness and sin against God?

DOCT. IV. The Sins of Gods own people stand in need of forgiveness. Not only
those sins which they committed before they were Converted; and their persons
were Justified, but those they fall into afterward do need a pardon. Though
they are as to their state, delivered from Condemnation, and shall no more be
in danger of the Eternal Wrath of God; which is a great encouragement to them
to hope for, and to seek remission upon their falls: yet when at any time they
are overtaken with sin, they provoke God thereby, and lay themselves open to
his holy Displeasure, and can have no peace in themselves, or security from his
Judgments, till a pardon be gotten. There is a sort of Guilt that cleaves to
them, which they must seek the removal of in order to the restoring of their
comfort; he prays for this, Psalm. 51.12. Restore unto me the joy of thy
salvation; for this reason our Savior made it a petition to be daily put up by
all his Disciples, Mat. 6.12. Forgive us our Debts.

USE. Let this then Excite us, if at any time we are overtaken with any sin, to
be restless till we have obtained the pardon of it.

To this end let us maintain in our selves the exercise of Repentance. God has
put these two together, Acts 5.31. Him has he Exulted by his Right Hand, to
give repentance to Israel, and remission of sins. Take heed of nourishing
carnal security, with the presumption of your justified Estate, and thinking
that you are thereby safe, so as that God will not charge any transgression
upon you; assure we our selves, that sin which we have not repented of, and
gotten a sealed pardon for, will look terribly upon us, when Conscience shall
charge it home, and we have nothing to show for the forgiveness of it.

DOCT. V. The Children of God must ask for a pardon, if they would obtain it.
God has appointed a medium for the conveyance of those saving benefits to his
people, which have been purchased by Christ for them: and he has made prayer
to be necessary in this order, Ezekiel 36.37. I will for this be enquired of by
the house of Israel, to do it for them; hence that in Jer. 29.12, 13. Then
shall ye go and pray to me, and I will hearken unto you; and ye shall seek me,
and find me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart; and as he has
required it, so he has encouraged it, Psalm 50.15. Call upon me in the day of
trouble, and I will deliver thee. God has a pardon ready, only he waits to be
asked for it, that we may, by so doing, testify the sense that we have of our
need of it, and acknowledge to him his great kindness to us, when we obtain it.
Nor indeed are we in a fit posture to receive a pardon at his hand, till we are
brought upon our knees, that we may take it of him in that humble and prostrate
posture; and in this prayer there must be a cordial sense of the sin, and of
the great vileness of it, accompanied with a sincere Confession of it; and
therefore till we come to this, we may expect to be in sore distress; but in
this way there is relief to be had. We have an account of David's experience in
both these respects, Psalm. 32.3, 4, 5. When I kept silence, my bones waxed old,
etc. I acknowledged my sin to thee, etc. and thou forgavest the iniquity of my
sin.

USE. Let this then direct us what to do, when we are under Conviction and
Remorse, by reason of any sin that we have made our selves Guilty by. Let it
direct us to prayer; and let us encourage our Faith in prayer. Is this the way
to obtain forgiveness? let us not be so unwise as to go without it, for want of
so doing: how justly will God continue us under our distress, if we neglect to
seek a deliverance from it? and to establish our says in praying for this
benefit, let us consider that God never rejected any that duly sought to him
for it; how many, how great, how aggavated soever their sins have been; he
waits to be called on, and he takes notice who it is that does so. Even a
persecuting and malicious Saul, when he is made to fall upon his knees, has
that remark made upon him, Acts 9.11. behold he prays.

DOCT. VI. God alone is to be addressed for pardon We must not only ask it, but
of him, if we would obtain it. Men may be wronged by us, and if we have offered
them any injury, it is our duty to seek reconciliation with them, and attend
proper means for that end; but it is God who is sinned against, Psalm. 51.4.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned; and therefore he must be sought to for a
pardon. Forgiveness of sin is a Divine prerogative; none can apply it
authentically to the Sinner but God: if it comes not under his hand and seal,
it signifies nothing. It is true, we must go to him for it in Christ's name, or
else we shall certainly miss of it; for it is one of the benefits which he has
purchased for us, at the price of his own blood; but we must not seek it any
where else. The Jews were in the right of it, in Thesi, when they said, Mark
2.7. None can forgive sins but God. David therefore gives this praise to him
alone, in Psalm. 103.3. Who forgiveth all thine iniquities.

USE. Let this encourage us to hope for forgiveness, and accordingly to seek
it; because God is the object at whose hand it is to be sought. And indeed
there is great motive contained in this consideration; inasmuch as he has a
stock of it with him; this the Psalmist pleads; Psalm. 130.4. There is
forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared; he has laid in a sufficiency
for it, in the Redemption wrought out by Christ, of whom we are told, Heb.
7.25. That he is able to save to the uttermost all that come to God by him; and
he has an heart disposed to pardon such as do come to him aright for it; and
hence it is one of his Titles in which he has commended himself to us, Psalm.
86.5. Thou, Lord, art good, and ready to forgive; let us then be sure to apply
our selves to him for it, and seek it at no other door; and in this way we are
likely to speed. How ready was the Father to meet, and how kindly did he
entertain his returning Prodigal, Luke 15.20. He arose and came to his father:
but when he was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion,
and ran, and fell upon his neck, and kissed him.

DOCT. VII. The sense of Guilt should not discourage Gods People from seeking
of him deliverance in times of trouble. It is indeed then an hour of
Temptation; Satan, and a misgiving heart, at such a time, offer to drive us to
despondency, when sin and sorrow meet together. However the people of God ought
not to be overwhelmed in their minds, when it is so, and think it in vain to
hope and seek for deliverance of God, because he is justly provoked at them.
David resolves against giving way to sinking fears in such a condition, Psalm.
49.5. Wherefore should I fear in the day of evil, when the iniquity of my heels
shall compass me about? and that was the encouragement which that good man
offered to the Jews at such a time, in Ezra 10.2. We have trespassed against
our God, etc. yet now there is hope in Israel concerning this thing; and truly,
both these are Gods works, and he is to be waited on to do them, both to put
away the sin which has provoked him to bring trouble upon us, and to remove
the sorrow that has been procured by our sin: the one therefore ought not to
discourage us in regard of the other, but rather to excite us to make haste the
faster to him.

USE. Let this then rebuke such as nourish despondencies and despair in them,
by such reflections as these are. God indeed afflicts you, that he may thereby
make your Sin bitter to you, and humble you to his feet, under the sense of it;
but this is not to drive you from him, or to make you think that he will not
hear and help you in your trouble, but to excite you the more earnestly to seek
it of him. And truly, there is nothing that should make us more earnest in
going to God for deliverance, when we are under his afflicting hand, then to
consider that our Sins have procured this for us, and therefore there is none
that can give us deliverance but he, inasmuch as he alone can take away the
cause of our trouble, which is our Sin.

DOCT. VIII. The proper course to obtain deliverance from trouble, is to seek
first the forgiveness of Sin. This is it which is the Moral procuring cause of
that; and as long as sin remains unpardoned, Gods controversy abides; and then
it is not to be wondered at, if our cries and howlings for deliverance are not
heard. God therefore directs to such a course as this is in a time of distress;
Joel 2.12. Therefore now turn to me with all your heart, and with fasting, and
weeping, and mourning, etc. And tells them what success it should have, Verse
18. Then will the Lord be jealous for his land, and pity his people, etc. Till
then, the sin be repented of, and taken out of the way, God threatens that he
will go on in his anger, Josh 7.12, 13. Neither will I be with you any more,
except ye destroy the accursed thing from among you: Thou can not stand
before thine enemies, until ye take away the accursed thing from among you. And
indeed, if we have not obtained a pardon of God, the outward deliverance which
he affords us, is but a respite, and the controversy still abides.

USE. Learn hence the miserable folly of those who, in times of trouble, seek
no farther than to have their outward Calamity removed. This is the ready way
to lose all our attempts, or put case they should succeed, this very success
would be in a way of anger and not of love; and we have a great deal of reason
to be afraid of such a deliverance. Would we have a gracious and an abiding
deliverance at any time? Let us make that our great care, to see that God and
we are atoned; this therefore was the Churches triumph after all her sorrows,
Isa. 12. begin. I will praise thee: though thou was angry with me, thine anger
is turned away, and thou comfortedst me.

DOCT. IX. Confession is to be made of particular Sins, in order to the
obtaining a Pardon of them. David indeed mentions all his Sins, Verse 18. Look
upon mine affliction, and my pain, and forgive all my Sins. But he also
specifies them, as in Verse 7. Remember not the Sins of my Youth. And he comes
to individuals, Text, Pardon mine Iniquity. He brings one sin, and spreads it
open before God, and prays, Lord, pardon this Sin: And thus we have him again
at it, Psalm. 51.14. Deliver me from blood guiltiness, O God, thou God of my
Salvation. And the truth is, there can be no kindly Repentance of sin, unless
we descend to particulars: For, though we must be acquainted with, and bewail
the fountain of sin which is in us, yet we are led up unto this by the streams
that issue from it; nor can we have a kindly apprehension of it, but by feeling
the woeful effects of it in those fruits that grow upon it, and which are
discovered in our hearts and lives. And indeed, all conviction of sin begins
here, though it terminates not in one, but leads us farther, even into those
Chambers of Imagery, where all Abominations are to be seen.

USE. Hence see the folly and deceitfulness of general Confessions and
Repentances. For, though we can never reach, to every individual sin that we
are chargable withal; for Who can understand his Errors! Psalm 19.12. And so it
is impossible for us to spread every one particularly before God in our
acknowledgments; yet it is a great truth, that he who has not seen and
bewailed his own vileness in some particular sins, has never done so at all in
truth. These general Confessions; I and all men are Sinners; the Lord forgive
me, I am not perfect, etc. are miserable senceless things, and he that cannot
tell wherein he is so, and lay his finger upon the sore, has never Confessed
his Sin to God aright.

DOCT. X. Our plea for forgiveness is to be built on Gods Name. If we would
pray for it successfully, we must pray believingly, Jam. 1.6. But let him ask
in faith, nothing wavering. And faith must have something to bear its weight
upon: And it is of Infinite concernment that it be something that will hold it
up, else it will fail us, and leave us to sink in despondency. Our prayers must
be argumentative, but we must see that the arguments that we make use of are
good, otherwise they will not avail us. There are many that pray, and plead
with much vehemence, but they speed not; and why? but because they ground their
pleadings wrong, build them on a false bottom. Some plead their own
righteousness and goodness; So did that Pharisee, Luke 18.11. God, I thank
thee, I am not as other men, etc. but he was not Justified in that way: whereas
the poor (...) had but one plea, and that succeeded, Verse 13. And we then ask
in Gods Name, when we renounce all our reliance else where, and acknowledge our
entire dependence to be on his free Grace, of which he has the Sovereign
disposal in his own hands. When we acknowledge our deserving of the contrary,
and resolve all into his undeserved mercy: So he applied himself to God, Dan.
9.8, 9. O Lord, to us belongs confusion of face: to the Lord our God belong
mercies and forgivenesses, though we have rebelled against him. And reason
good, for all our hope of finding acceptance with God, is in the New Covenant,
which was opened on purpose for the display of the riches of his Grace, which
is through the Lord Jesus Christ: this then is the Name of God by which he
commends himself to fallen man.

USE. Learn hence, that the more humble we are, the more fit are we to ask, and
the more likely to obtain pardon from God. The humble Soul sees nothing in
himself, no worthiness at all of his own; is put by all pleas from any thing
that he either is or has; he sees that there is no hope for him but in the
free Grace of God, and it is vain for him to look any where else: and therefore
he resolves to improve no other arguments in his petitioning of God for pardon,
but such as refer to his Great Name. For this reason we are told what pleasure
God takes in the humble, Isa. 57.15. I dwell with him who is of a contrite and
humble Spirit. Job 22.29* He shall save the humble person. Psalm. 138 6. Though
the Lord be high, he has a respect unto the lowly.

DOCT. XI. Gods Children ought to aggravate their sin, in the confession of it,
in order to their asking of a pardon; thus does the Psalmist here: and this
has been the constant course which the people of God upon Scripture Record,
have been wont to take* and accordingly they have put to their confessions,
those circumstances whereby they might give to their sin, the most odious face
that they could; thus Moses sets out the sin of his people, Exodus 32.31. Oh!
this people have sinned a great sin; thus those Godly ones, in Ezra 9. Neh. 9.
and Dan. 9. Do amplify on this subject, when they set themselves to seek mercy
of God; and as these did so in respect of their people, with whom they involved
themselves, so we shall find that they have done on a particular and personal
account, thus did David, 2 Samuel 24.10. I have sinned greatly in that I have
done, and now I beseech thee, Oh Lord, take away the iniquity of thy servant,
for I have done very foolishly; so does Paul, 1 Timothy 1.13, 15. Who was before a
blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious, and a chief Sinner; and this is
that which God expects of them, in order to his free forgiving of them, Lev.
26.40. etc. If they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their
fathers, and their trespass, etc. then I will remember my Covenant, etc. and
there is great reason for it, because this makes way for the greater glory to
be ascribed to him by them, when they shall experience his free pardon bestowed
upon them, notwithstanding the manifold provocation there was given him by
those sins of theirs: and this is the very thing that God aims at in the
Dispensations of his grace to his people that have sinned against him.

USE. Learn we hence the great folly of those who seek to encourage their hope
of pardon, by mincing, extenuating and excusing their sins. How many are there
who seek to quiet their Consciences, and strengthen their faith by this? I
confess I have not done well, I cannot deny but that I have failed, and ought
to have been more watchful to my self; but I hope that God will not charge it
upon me; I was tempted, it was too hard for me, I allowed not my self in it,
and it is no such great matter, another in my circumstances would have done as
bad or worse, etc. This is to undermine the great aim of the New Covenant, and
is a certain evidence that such an one is not brought to a kindly repentance.
True, we ought not so to aggravate our sin as to drive us to despair, as Cain
did, who said, Genesis 4.13. Mine Iniquity is greater than can be forgiven; for
this will hinder us from going to God: but we ought to put every other
aggravation to it, which the nature and circumstance of it call for.

DOCT. XII. The greatness of our sins ought not to discourage us from seeking
forgiveness of God, but drive us the faster to him. Thus it was with the
Psalmist, Text. If there were any sin that could outdo the power and efficacy
of the Grace of God, and be too big for the merit of Christ, to obtain a pardon
for, there would be reason enough for such a sin to drive us to despair,
because there is no other hope but this set before us: but because there is no
such thing, for we are told, 1 John 1.7. The blood of Christ cleanses from
(...): there is therefore no reason (...) be disheartened. Nay, because (...)
will make sin to be a foil for his grace to be illustrated; hence the more
multiplied and magnified our sins have been, the greater occasion there is for
the shining out of that grace the more illustriously, in his so pardoning of
us; according to, Romans 5.20. Where Sin abounded, there Grace did much more
abound; it offers us powerful motive to come to him for pardon, because his
Grace has a special subject before it, for this glory to be advanced, and the
Grace appearing in it to be admired: God therefore thus encourages great
sinners, Isa. 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his
thoughts, and return to the Lord, for he will have mercy, and to our God, for
he will abundantly pardon.

USE: Let this then reprove those that nourish despondency in them on this
account. How many are there that do so, refuse to receive advice; yea, thrust
away all encouragement that is at any time offered to them, as if it could
(...) their condition? their sins (...), and so great, and there have (...) so
many aggravations attending on them, that they dare not to adventure to seek a
pardon for them; nor dare they believe that any gracious word expressed in the
Scriptures belongs or may be applied to them; how preposterous is this? it
carries the very language of hell in it: and how does this contradict the
Cou^^^l of God, in contriving the Salvation of Sinners? are you loath that
Christ should try his skill upon you, and prove the infinite value and virtue
of his great Redemption on such as you are? why should you be afraid of being
rejected by reason of this, when God himself has put in a precious antidote
against such a demur as this? Isa 1 28. Though your sins be as scarlet, they
shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as
wool.

DOCT. XIII. A right consideration of the greatness of our sin, is very helpful
to our profitable seeking a pardon from God. David makes use of it to this very
purpose in our Text: And here comes in that great Case to be enquired into,
viz.

Quest. Of what use the consideration of the greatness of our sin is, in our
pleading with God for forgiveness?

A. This Case being practical; and because the Children of God have daily
occasion to make use of it in their addresses to him in prayer, I shall
endeavor to give a distinct account of it; and to make way to the thing it
self, let me offer the following Conclusions.

1. That pardon of sin is an act of Gods free grace. As a pardon supposes a
sin whereby the person has made himself Guilty, else there would be no
occasion for it; so it is a special way whereby the Guilt comes to be removed.
It finds the person insolvent, utterly unable to repair the wrong he has done
to the Declarative Glory of God* and so make satisfaction for his Guilt, and
thereupon it delivers him from it frankly; thus our Savior Christ expresses
it in that Parable, Luke 7 42. When they had nothing to pay, he frankly forgave
them both. Nor could sin have ever been remitted to the Sinner in any other way
but this; for, neither could he for himself, nor yet could the whole Creation
for him, make a due compensation to injured Justice on his account: So dear is
their Redemption, and it must have ceased for ever, Psalm. 49 8. and that God
would thus forgive him, is an act of mere grace, to which he was not at all
obliged by any natural necessity, but was altogether free in it; and the Sinner
had given him sufficient provocation righteously to have destroyed him for ever.

2. That hence God uses his absolute Sovereignty in choosing the Subjects of
the application of it. That this pardon is not a privilege bestowed upon all
Guilty Sinners, is a truth plentifully born witness to in the Word of God.
Though all have sinned, Romans 5.12. Yet all Sinners are not forgiven, but there
are multitudes left to die in their sins, and there is by this a great
discrimination made between men. Now, if a reason of this difference be sought,
it must be resolved negatively, that it is not because one is in himself* or
his natural state better than another, for we read, Rom 3.9. Are we better than
they? no, in no wise; and verse 22. There is no difference; and Ephesians. 2.3. We
are children of wrath by nature, even as others. Nor is it because one
addressed God for it. and the other neglected so to do; for God says, Isa.
65.1. I am found of them that sought me not, and we are told, Luk 19.10. The
Son of man is come to seek and save that which is lost. Nor is it because that
God foresaw that these would accept of Christ upon the offers of him made to
them, and believe in him, and that the others would refuse him, and harden
their hearts in unbelief, and thereby judge themselves unworthy of eternal
life; for with regard to multitudes of those who are not pardoned, they never
had any revelation of Christ, and of forgiveness to be obtained by him, made
unto them; or any terms of reconciliation and peace proposed to them, and
consequently never did refuse their compliance with them: and as to those to
whom this discovery is made, he could foresee nothing in them, but what he
(...) to bestow upon them, (...) because he loved us first, (...) that all must
finally result (...) of his will, according to (...) 18. He has mercy on whom
he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens.

3. That hence nothing in the Subject can be properly a motive to put him upon
bestowing this favor upon it. The will of God, being the Supreme cause of all
his works of Efficiency, cannot be moved by any thing out of himself, to do any
of them: for then it were not absolutely free and independent, as it is. The
very notion of a Motive, refers to an impulsive cause, moving upon the
affections, and that either by Instinct, as in sensitive creatures, or by moral
swasions, as in Rational beings; and therefore when it is attributed to God, we
are to conceive of it after the manner of men: and what can there be in the
Subject that should move God to this Compassion? Not the misery which it is
under by reason of the Curse and Condemnation that is upon it; for, as it
justly deserves it, and (...) the righteous sentence (...), in the execution
(...) can and will Glorify his (...) Attribute is precious to him, and (...)
delights in the manifestation of it; So the same misery lies upon all such to
whom this pardon is not given; for there is no other way to remove it but only
one: and yet these are equally his Creatures with the other, and every whit as
capable of being made the monuments of mercy, in whom the glory of it would
equally shine forth. Nor is it the disposition in any making of them more ready
to accept of a pardon and to close in with the Gospel terms on which it is
offered, for our Savior says, Math. 11.21. If the mighty works that are done
in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have repented long ago in
sackcloth and ashes: And the Apostle confesses, Tit. 3.3. We our selves were
sometimes disobedient. Nor the greatness of their Sin; for, as the greater the
Sin is, the more of provocation is thereby offered to God, and his holy and
just indignation is incensed proportionably; So there are as great Sinners
passed by and not pardoned, as any that are made to share in this benefit. We
must therefore, after all our enquiries, finally resolve all into a What if God
willing, Romans 9.22.

4. That yet there is something in the Subject from which God takes the
advantage to advance his Glory in pardoning of them We conceive of God as an
Intelligent Agent, or a cause by Counsel, and accordingly that he must
necessarily have some worthy design, and such as becomes himself, in all his
works. Hence, as he has a last end in them, which he resolves to advance by
them, so he does wisely accommodate all the Media most advantageously to serve
to this end: and though the contrivance be of such an unfathomable depth, as
infinitely transcends our short comprehension, yet we must under write with
him, Psalm. 104.24. O Lord, how manifold are thy works! in wisdom have thou made
them all. God seeks his own Glory in the pardoning of a Sinner, for the
exaltation whereof, he takes an occasion from something in the Sinner, by the
which he may carry on this purpose of his, and from thence get to himself a
great Name: So that though he is not moved by it, but acts his pleasure, yet he
makes use of it in subserviency thereto; we are told in 2 These. 1.10* That he
will be admired in those that Believe.

5. That there is a way in the New Covenant, which God has laid out for the
Communication of this benefit to us. Not only did he lay in for the procuring
of such a favor to be conferred upon Sinners; which was done in the Covenant
of Suretiship, in which he indented with his own Son to lay down the purchase
of it; but for which it could never have been conferred on any of Adams
Children, consistent with the Righteousness of the first Covenant; but he has
also made known how they may come to obtain a Title to this benefit, and this
is held forth in the Covenant of Grace. For this reason the Gospel Promises are
exhibited on terms; and th^se (...) proposed, do not only tell us what it is
that God requires of Sinners in the treaty of Peace which he opens and manageth
with them in the external and ministerial dispensation of the Covenant, but
they do also give us to understand after what manner God will by his Grace
convey a pardon to Sinners, by a powerful working of the terms in all those
whom he has a design to make partakers therein; So that if ever he forgive
them, he will bring them, to it in this way; and therefore there is an
inseparable connection made between them in the Gospel; Mark 16 16. He that
believes and is baptized, shall be saved, and he that believes not, shall be
damned; and Joh. 3.36. He that believes in the Son of God, has everlasting
life; and he that believes not the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of
God abides on him.

6 That to this way belongs their coming to him for, and their asking it of
him. When God had mentioned the many and great privileges of the New Covenant,
which he promised to bestow upon his people, at such time as he should return
to them in a way of Grace, he enters that clause, Ezekiel. 36 37. I will yet for
this be enquired of by the house of Israel, to do this for them. It is true,
there must be the intervention of his preventing Grace, by which they must be
enabled and excited thus to do, or else they will never put up one sincere
petition to him; however this is the order in which he brings them to a
participation in it; they shall seek to him for a pardon, and upon their so
doing, they shall find it. When David had told how he obtained one, Psalm. 32.5.
he adds that observation, verse 6. For this shall every one that is Godly pray
unto thee, in a time wherein thou may be found; and there is the greatest
reason that Sinners should thus come unto him, and after this manner wait upon
him for it if they would enjoy it; and they are worthy to go for ever without
it, who will not stoop to petition for it. Nay, it is a wonderful
condescendency in the Great God, and an admirable expression of his rich grace,
that he has given encouragement to such to come unto him for it, by promising
that if they so come, they shall speed, Mat. 11.28. Come unto me, ye that are
weary and heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Whereas he might have utterly
refused them, and never opened this door of mercy to them: they might have
called and had no answer, sought him early, and yet not found him.

7. That there is a right seeking of him in order to the obtaining of this
benefit. It is not every sort of seeking that will do here. Our Savior has
told us, in Luke 13.24. I say unto you, many shall seek to enter, and shall not
be able; and when the Prophet in Gods name, gives this encouragement to that
People, he yet thus limit^ it, Jer. 29.13. Ye shall seek me, and find me, when
ye seek for me with all your heart; there are prayers, which in Gods account,
are no better than howlings, and these he will not hear* and there are
effectual prayers which are prevalent with him, we are told on this account,
Jam. 5. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much. Now
there are these ingredients requisite in that prayer that shall find mercy at
the hand of God.

1. We must seek to God for this favor. He must be the alone object to whom we
direct our petition; we must go to him, and no whither else, acknowledging that
it is with him alone; we must say, with him, Jer. 3.23. Truly in vain is
salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of mountains; truly
in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel We must acknowledge that it is
his prerogative to forgive us, that forgiveness is with him, Psalm. 13^.4. And
accordingly in our coming to him we must utterly renounce all affiance in any
other but him, and say, Ashur shall not save us, etc. Hosea 14.7

2. We must make a free and humble Confession of our Guilt and Demerit. God
puts in that clause, when he invites Backsliding Israel to Return, and makes
the offer of mercy to them if they so do, Jer. 3.13. Only acknowledge thine
iniquity, that thou have transgressed against the Lord thy God, etc. And there
can be no right prayer to God for pardon, without this confession either
expressed or implied; for as a pardon supposes Guilt, so the asking a pardon
presumes a Confession of that Guilt, and the righteousness of the Sentence
contained in it: And to such a Confession is the encouraging promise made,
Prove. 28.13. Whosoever confesses and forsakes shall have mercy: and of the good
success of so doing, David sets the Seal of his experience, Psalm. 32.5. I said
I will confess my transgressions to the Lord; and thou forgavest the iniquity
of my Sin.

3. We must renounce all that is in our selves, as to any dependence on it to
obtain a pardon withal We must not only reject other objects, but all
arguments, but what are fetched from God himself. We must have no confidence in
the flesh; bring nothing of our own to make a plea withal, but lay our selves
in the dust pleading nothing but the mere mercy of God: we must come in the
form and quality of beggars; Isa. 55.1. Come without money, and without price;
that so we may receive it of him as an alms. And in special we are to reject
our own Righteousness, and refer our selves to the compassion of God, as, Dan.
9.18, 19. We do not present our Supplications before thee for our
Righteousness, but for thy great mercies: O Lord hear, O Lord forgive.

4. Hence we must ask with a resignation of our selves to his Mercy. We must
acknowledge that it is free with him to receive ^s or reject us, and that if he
does receive us it is beyond our deserving: if, when we ly never so low at his
footstool, he spurn us from thence, it is no injustice, and that if he take us
up into his arms, it is astonishing kindness. We are therefore to refer it to
his free will, believing that it is in his power to do so for us, and say as
the Leper did, Math. 8.2. Lord, if thou will, thou can make me clean.

5. We must come in Christ's Name. There is no other way in which God
communicates the saving benefits of the New Covenant, but through Christ, who
has purchased them for us: and therefore to come in any other Name is
altogether vain, and will prove altogether fruitless. God out of Christ, is a
consuming fire, Heb. 12. ult. But in and through him he is propitious; Christ
himself therefore both directs and encourages us thus to do, Joh. 14.14. If ye
shall ask any thing in my name, I will do it.

6. We must ask in Faith. This is a qualification belonging to every
Evangelical Duty, in order to its finding acceptance with God, for we are told,
Heb. 11.6. That without faith it is impossible to please God; for, as the bond
of union on our part; between Christ and us, is faith, so we are to maintain
Communion with him in all his privileges by the continued exercises of it;
Heb. 10.38. And the Just shall live by his faith; and to hope to be heard in
any other prayer, but such as mounts to heaven on the wings of faith, is vain;
that is a caution always to be carried with us, Jam. 1.6. But let him ask in
faith.

8. Hence, whatsoever serves to the furtherance of our right seeking of God, is
profitable in this case. That which is a proper and an approved help to our
obtaining of pardon, and finding the good and comfort of it, and being helped
suitably to acknowledge God in it, will be of great use in our prayers: for,
God has appointed us to make use of those helps which he has told us of in
his Word, and has accommodated to be serviceable to our doing our duty; and
indeed we cannot do well without them. We must go to the Word of God for our
direction about these, nor may we suppose that it is left to our own foolish
arbitrament, to use things which our own fancies are moved by; but we are to
acquiess in what God has commanded, who only is able to bless them unto good
success.

9. There are many respects in which the consideration of the greatness of our
sins will be helpful in this affair; and these are now to be considered of, for
the more direct resolution of the Case before us, which are more especially
such as follow.

1. This consideration rightly entertained, will put us upon seeking a pardon.
Though all the lost, progeny of Adam stand in need of forgiveness, yet how few
are there of those, among whom this benefit is proclaimed, and who are with all
earnestness invited to embrace it, who regard it, or enquire how they may come
at it? The Prophets complaint is still of force, Isa. 53.1. Who has believed
our report? The most of men that sit under the Gospel, do practically bid
Christ to depart, and carry his pardon where it is wanted, if he would put it
off, as for them they need it not, they desire it not; why else do men live
content without one, or why do we hear no more crying out, What shall we do to
be saved? And surely this is either because they do not believe themselves to
be Sinners, and under Guilt, or else because they do not know what it is to be
so. Whereas a looking upon Sin in its true colors, and its greatness, will
serve to promove this enquiry, and make us serious in it; and that,

1. By showing us the greatness of our Guilt. Guilt derives from the Sanction
of the Law, and is the binding of the Sentence of the threatening of it upon the
person, who has by sin brought himself under it. Hereupon the greater the sin
is, the more severe is the threatening, and consequently the more aggravated is
the Guilt, and great Guilt that is felt must needs make persons proportionably
concerned to get it removed. He who looks upon sin to be but a small thing,
reckons the Guilt of it easy to bear, and that makes him regardless of getting
it taken away. Prove. 14.9. Fools make a mock of sin. Whereas he that apprehends
his sin to be great, feels his Guilt heavy, and would fain be eased of it,
Psalm. 38 1. with 4. Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath; for mine iniquities are
gone over mine head; as an heavy burden, they are too heavy for me.

2. By convincing us of what reason there is that we cannot expect to escape
the threatened misery, unless we get a pardon. The reason why the generality of
sinful men are no more concerned to get the Sentence that is upon them removed,
is because they think it is no such great matter, whether it be or no; and that
which makes them so easy in this regard, is a presumption that they nourish in
themselves, that God will not exact so severely upon them, as his Ministers do
give them warning of, and that there is more fright than hurt in these
threatenings. We have men of such a spirit as this characterized, in Deuteronomy.
29.19. When he hears the Words of this Curse, he blesses himself in his heart,
saying, I shall have peace, though I walk in the imagination of mine heart; and
there are a great many such as these who live in places of light. Whereas, did
men believe that they shall not escape, except a pardon be seasonably obtained,
they could not be so quiet: and the reason why they do not believe it, is
because they have such diminitive thoughts of their sin. When therefore God
comes to convince Sinners of the woeful danger they ly open to, he displays
their sin to them in its vileness and abominableness, and when he has so done,
he challenges them to be judges whether there be any ground to expect that he
should not execute the Sentence of his wrath upon them: Jer. 5.7, 9. How shall
I pardon thee for this? Shall I not visit for these things? And this puts us
upon deliberating with greatest intensness on that demand, Heb. 2.3. How shall
we escape, if we neglect this so great Salvation?

3. By persuading us of the fearful misery that awaits us, if we get not a
pardon. Guilt binds Sinners over to punishment, and this penalty holds a
proportion with that Guilt: and there are greater miseries for those that have
been Guilty of greater Sins. Hence, by the suitable apprehension of the
greatness of our Sin, we shall be filled with a suitable terror at the
expectation of the greater wrath that awaits us: and he that has (...) right
conception of the misery which is deserved by the least Sin, (...) himself to
get it removed: How concerned then must the Soul needs be, which has in its
view the prospect of those peculiar effects of Divine revenge, which he has
exposed himself unto, and is every moment liable to the execution of, if he
gets not into the City of Refuge? See how it was with David, Psalm. 32.4. Day
and night thine hand was heavy upon me, my moisture is turned into the drought
of Summer. And doubtless it was this apprehension that brought him into such a
condition.

2. This Consideration will make us to go to God, and him alone for pardon. We
are too ready to seek our help in other objects, but this will keep us from
going to, or knocking at any other door: it will make us to say to our selves,
as he, Psalm. 62.5, 6. My Soul wait thou only upon God; he only is my rock, and
my salvation:

And that;

1. By showing us that such Sins cannot have their Guilt removed, but by a free
pardon. That if it be not given to us, we can never have it. This affords an
undeniable demonstration that it must be utterly beyond our ability to make
satisfaction to the offended Law, and at one the Justice of God to us; that
Thousands of Rams, and ten Thousand of Rivers of Oil will not do it; and that
if it be not provided for and given to us on free cost, we must despair of our
getting it. The want of having such a view of Sin, makes men to think that a
confession, and overly repentance, a good work, etc. will make amends, make up
the breach between God and them, and turn away his wrath from them: whereas
this drives them out of their refuges of lies, and shows them that the demerit
of Sin out-bids all they can do for the expiation of it, and that therefore
they must seek some where else for it.

2. By discovering that none else can pardon them but he. The greatness of Sin
truly discovered carries evidence in it, that it cannot be less than a Divine
work to forgive it. Men that have low thoughts of Sin, reckon a pardon to be
nothing; but they that see how great it is, believe that it is a work of
Omnipotency. When Moses petitioned God to pardon his peoples sin, he requests
that he will manifest his power in it, Numb. 14.17. And now I beseech thee, let
the power of my Lord be great: and the extensiveness of his mercy, Verse 19.
Pardon, I beseech thee, the iniquity of this people, according to the greatness
of thy mercy. And in this Article God is acknowledged to be incomparable, Mic.
7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons iniquity, and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of thine heritage? Nor indeed is there any thing
in which he more appears to be God, than in this: and the conviction of it is
because great Sins require a great God to forgive them; and thereupon it must
be sought of him alone.

3. By assuring us that if we obtain it not of him, we must needs perish. When
Sin comes to be felt in its weight, it not only says in our Consciences that
we must either get it removed from us, or else it will sink us into the
nethermost hell, but also that we must go to God for it, or we are undone. That
Destruction is upon us, and that he only can Ransom us from it, by forgiving
us. It says, that if an holy God finds us under the Guilt of these Sins, and
that if we have not received a pardon under his hand, We cannot escape the
vengeance of Hell.

3. This Consideration helps to humble us into a right frame in our coming to
God for pardon. There is a right frame, and only the humble Soul has it, and
this is promoved by such thoughts diverse ways.

1. It beats us off from our own Righteousness. When we go to God for
remission, we would fain carry something of our own with us, to satisfy our
pleadings withal, and encourage our hope for acceptance by, and this proceeds
from pride, and is the principal reason why awakened Sinners stand off, and are
not willing to apply themselves to God for it. But when our sin appears to be
exceeding sinful, our hands are now knocked off, we lay aside all such
pretensions; and now we are made to come as poor, miserable, blind, and naked
Creatures. This makes true beggars of us, and puts us into the posture of the
Publican, of whom, Luke 18.13. The Publican standing afar off, would not lift
so much as his eyes unto heaven* but smote upon his breast, saying, God be
merciful to me a sinner. We now see that there is no other hope but what
resolves entirely unto Gods mercy.

2 It helps us to justify God; and there is no hope for us to speed in asking
forgiveness of him, without this. God will have the glory of his free grace,
ascribed to him by every one whom he forgiveth; and this will never be, till we
plumply confess that the greatest severity of his Law is very righteous; that
we are justly condemned, and that there is no injustice at all to be imputed to
him: hence that in, Dan. 9.8, 9. To us belongs confusion of face, to the Lord
our God belong mercies and forgivenesses; and we can never come up fully to
this, till we see a world of vileness in our sin, and the more we see of this,
the more will our hearts be persuaded of Gods righteousness, which is one thing
that the Spirit comes to convince us of, Joh. 16 8. and till it be so, Sinners
will be ever finding fault with the Law, and charging cruelty and injustice
upon it.

3. It helps us in our confessions. There is a thorough confession which we
observed that God expects of us in order to our obtaining forgiveness from him:
he would not have us to mince and curtail it, but the more ample and aggravated
it is, the more is God honored by it; because it carries in it a discovery of
the deeper sense that we have of it on our hearts. He that has a right
conception of the evil there is in Sin, will then see that he cannot exceed in
expatiating on it, and laying of himself low by it. They are but lank
Confessions which that man will make, who does not Know the plague of his own
heart, and how evil and bitter his Sin is: God therefore invites his people to
this, Jer. 2.19. Know and see that it is an evil and bitter thing, that thou
have forsaken the Lord thy God.

4. It serves to further our importunity. Our Cries for pardon ought to be very
urgent and earnest, as of those that apprehend the forlorn condition that Sin
has put us in; and nothing will make them to be so, but the resentment which
we have on our hearts of that sin which gives us the Occasion to pray for
pardon. It is felt trouble that draws forth our request to have it removed from
us; and therefore these requests will be more or less earnest in proportion to
that sense: light thoughts of sin, will produce but flat and complemental
petitions about it; but terrible apprehensions of it, will put us upon loud
cries to have it taken away. Such doubtless was David's sense, when he prayed
in, Psalm. 41.4. Lord, be merciful to me, heal my Soul, for I have sinned
against thee.

5. It Commends to us the Merits and Obedience of Christ. We are directed by
the Gospel, to seek for pardon on Christ's account; and we are told that our
reliance for the obtaining it, must be upon his Satisfaction. Now this shows us
how infinitely we are beholden to him, for that he has thus laid in for us,
and so it comes to make his Obedience very precious to us. There are none that
prize a Savior so as they do, who have found sin to be beyond measure evil,
and the guilt of it to be beyond any other power of taking it away, but the
virtue of his Sacrifice: it will make us to say with Paul, 1 Timothy 1.14. The
Grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant.

6. It makes us restless till we get an answer of peace from God to our
petitions. They that have slighty conceptions of sin, neglect their prayers,
and regard not what becomes of them: but this will put us upon repeated
requests, and agreeable fervency in them, whiles God seems to delay us, and
make us to resolve that we will never let him alone, or take a denial of him.
He that knows what his sin will righteously cost him, when he comes to receive
his recompense, if it be not now forgiven, will follow God unweariedly, until
he has given him a sealed pardon; this was it which drew forth those repeated
requests which David puts up to him, in Psalm. 51.

4. This consideration will also serve to help our faith. Satan indeed, and a
misgiving heart will make use of it to discourage us: and put us upon despair
by looking on our sins in their magnitude and multitude; but the Spirit of God,
in those who are his, fortifies their faith with it, and that in two respects.

1. It tells us there is a work for God to do. God acquaints us in his word,
which is the Rule of our faith, that he delights to do like himself in all his
works; and then to discover his glory to us, when all other help and hope fails
us; and what is this but to draw up our Eyes to him, when we cannot tell what
do do? Faith therefore will now argue, what though it out-bids all the power of
the Creation to take away the Guilt of these grievous Sins of mine, yet God can
do it, and in doing of it he will give a signal demonstration of his power.
Faith says, I know and am fully persuaded that God can forgive it if he
please, let it be never so great, and there is an occasion now for him to make
it appear how sufficient an object of trust he is, when all other refuge fails;
and herein make me a pattern to them that shall hereafter believe on him to
life everlasting. 1 Timothy 1.16.

2. It also tells us that he will herein Glorify his Grace abundantly. An eye
of faith also looks upon the great design of the New Covenant, to be the making
of the Grace of God to appear in its most orient colors: and therefore the
believing soul under the deep sense of sin, thus argues; here is an
opportunity for the Grace of God to be the most resplendent: how will the
pardoning mercy of God be herein magnified? how will the inexhaustible virtue
of Christ's Obedience be hereby demonstrated? God will in this get to himself a
name, which shall be celebrated with the most joyful acclamations of praise to
eternal ages. It therefore helps us believingly to put up that petition, Psalm.
79.9: Deliver us, and purge away our sins for thy name sake; and to back it
with that stimulation, verse ult. So we thy people, and sheep of thy pasture,
will give thee thanks for ever; we will show forth thy praise to all
generations.

5. This consideration will also help to prepare us for a right improving of
this pardon, when we have obtained it. When Gods people have gotten any thing
of him in a way of prayer, they ought to return to him the acknowledgment
thereof in praises, and therein to use it for his Glory, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon
me, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me; and in respect to
pardon, this consideration will abundantly contribute hereto; for,

1. It will make us the more to admire the riches of Grace appearing in it:
Gods great aim is at the glory of this, in all the special favors which he
confers upon his own, Ephesians. 1.6. To the praise of the glory of the riches of his
grace; and the more our hearts are touched with the apprehension of this, the
more will they be filled with admiration at, and acclamations to it. Now, the
greater our sins have been, and found so to be by our right consideration of
them, the more does the grace appear, that was exerted in the procuring for,
and applying to us, a free pardon of them. Such therefore will be always
harping upon this string, and think that they can never enough expatiate on it.
This made Paul so to commorate on the displaying of the Grace of God that had
been manifested in him, 1 Timothy 1, 12. to 17.

2. It will inflame our hearts the more with love to God. There are none in the
world, whose love burns so bright toward Christ, as of those whose sins have
been exceedingly great, and born home upon their Souls with the apprehension of
the greatness of them, to consider that this notwithstanding, God has forgiven
them all freely. So our Savior argues, Luke 7.47. Her sins which are many are
forgiven, for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the same loves
little.

3. It will make us to walk the more humbly ^fterwards. There is nothing which
more helps the Grace of Humility, to its perfect working in a Child of God,
than the remembrance of what horrible and deep died sins he has been guilty
of, and that yet God should forgive them. He is ever reflecting on these two
together; what his Sins have been, and what a pardon is bestowed upon him: he
will be on all occasions turning his eye this way; and indeed the greatness of
Sin will never work to a kindly Humiliation, till it be joined with the
apprehension of a pardon.

4. It will help us the more cheerfully and steadfastly to Serve God for the
future. Such an experience as this, when it works kindly on the Soul, will
mightily strengthen Obedience; and this is a fruit of that love which it does
produce and excite in the heart: it will, as often as he turns his eye that
way, make him to say as he, Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render to the Lord for
all his benefits to me? and now he thinks that he can never do or suffer too
much for the honor of that God who has so appeared to him.

USE. Let it serve to direct us in the right improvement of such a
consideration as this is; and that may be in two respects.

1. Beware of taking Satan's glosses. He will endeavor all he can to make us
count Sin to be nothing, so long as he can keep us in carnal security by such
an esteem, and for that end supplies us with arguments of the flesh,
accommodated thereto: and when the Spirit of God convinces the man of his sin,
and so he can hold this device no longer, he then would make our Sin appear
great beyond the extent of a pardon, so to precipitate us into despair: take
heed of this, it will drive you from the use of means, and so undo you.

2. Oppose to the consideration of the greatness of your sin, and balance it
with these three things, and establish your faith on them.

1. The great sufficiency there is in the Redemption of Christ. It is through
this that you come to have any hope of a pardon. Hence the Apostle refers it
hither, Col. 1.14. In whom we have Redemption through his blood, even the
forgiveness of Sins. Out of doubt then there is hope for pardon for all those
sins, which do not exceed the virtue of that Redemption: and this is declared
to be very extensive, Hebr. 7.25. He is able to save to the uttermost all that
come to him; think then what a price he paid for this purchase: we are put upon
such a consideration, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Ye are redeemed, not with corruptible
things, as silver and gold, but with the precious blood of the Son of God.

2. The design of the New Covenant. In that it is that your hope is revealed to
you; the Old Covenant had none in it: Now consider that the opening of that
Covenant were to set forth the riches of Grace in the salvation of Sinful man
by Christ; so long therefore as you have a prospect how Grace may be exalted in
your being pardoned, let (...) ^^courage you to wait to see his great salvation.

3. The contrivance of infinite Wisdom to make Justice and Grace to agree in
this design. This is usually a great discouragement in Satan's temptation, when
Sin is made to appear great; how can God be (...), and forgive such horrible
Sins as (...) are: but here is a sufficient answer (...) that demur; these two
glorious Attributes are combined in this affair, Psalm. 85.10. Mercy and Truth
are met together, Justice and Peace have kissed each other. God displayed such
a Righteousness, as takes away all that seems to obstruct the communication of
a pardon righteously, and that he may be both just, and the justifier of them
that believe in his Son Jesus Christ, Romans 3.26. Let then the greatness of our
sins drive us the faster to Christ, resolving that if he will he can pardon
them, and if he do, Everlasting Hallelujahs shall be Sung to him on that
account.

FINIS.

