News of a Strumpet Co-habiting in the WILDERNESS OR, A brief Abstract of the
Spiritual and Carnal Whoredoms and Adulteries OF THE QUAKERS IN AMERICA.

Delinated in a Cage of Twenty Unclean Birds.

Purposely Published in pity to the Quakers, to let them see themselves as
well as others see them, because in page 47. of their Book, called, Satan's
Harbinger, (lately printed at Philadelphia by the Authority of their Meeting of
Ministers) they pretend they know no such Persons amongst them.

Otherwise, it is more Work for the Quakers to use their Arts and ^mploy their
Press to prop up their two main Pillars INFALLIBILITY and PERFECTION.

For nothing can be written but something may be objected against it.

Printed in the Year 1701.

PREFACE
MAny Readers no sooner take a Book in hand, but they look for the Authors
Name, and according as they believe or have received Reports of the Author, so
they Judge of the matter in the Book, even before they read it. Therefore as
the Quakers often use to do, I have only put the two first Letters of my name,
that if thereby you know me not, you may read before you Judg^.

This small piece had not come forth now had not the Quakers called for it in
their last Book printed in Philadelphia, they want, it seems, to have unclean
Persons among them made public; for they (...). They have none such; therefore
I have in the following (...) made a troop of them as public; I think as they
can desire, and I here let them know that I could have named (...) more of
their Ministers guilty of Whoring and (...), only they have acted i more
privately that these; for which reason I omit them; yet if they call for these,
they shall have their names and their facts too at large it is but ask and have.

Yet th^^ I say nevertheless, if the Quaker Humility would suffer them to come
down to the common Rank, of other Mortals, if they would acknowledge themselves
to be failable and deceiveable, like other men, and that they may put Darkness
for Light and Light for Darkness as well as others, and are no surer of their
Inspirations than we are of ours; if they would freely own t^is, then shall
they be admitted to the common Privileges of Mankind; and in such case, it
would be highly Uncharitable and a great sin to expose the private ^anings of
any.

But if they will stand upon the Pinnacle above the level of all the rest of
Mankind, or of all who call themselves Christians, then must they expect to
have their sailings exposed, and not to be spared; for there is no other way to
humble them; And if they understood themselves, they would desire, and not
complain to be brought to th^^ ^^st; our Savior provoked the Jews to (...).
Which of you [said he convin^eth me of sin? and if the Quakers had an ^ne^^ing
portion of the same Spirit, as they pretend and were free from sin, they would
be further Justified by the stricte^t search that could be made into their
Lives and Actions; but for them to complain of this, as hard usage and claim
all that Charitable covering of faults, which is necessary for frail sinners,
is a bewraying of their false pretense to Innocence and Perfection.

And yet they will keep up their pretense, tho every one of them should fall
after one another; for they hold for th^n their London Yearly Meeting ^^^stle
for 1^9^. This th^^r principles are the same as ever they were; and for
confirmation hereof, I find that in their answer to those h^^ps of C^^fusion
that Mr. Leeds quotes out of their Books, they do not own one error no, not one
^ailing in their ^rien^s Books. (...) must not in the least give way. But
observe, if any of them fall, the rest say, it was because he kept not to his
Light within, so of a second, a third, a fourth, etc. How then are they kept
more secure from falling then others? how was their friend (...) kept more
secure who hanged himself, and several others of them about Delaware, that have
been distracted, and attempted to put an end to their own Lives? How are these
distinguished or kept more secure than others? And though this (...) lived as ^
and removed from Long (...) near to Philadelphia that he might have in the
heavenly M^^^azeen of their Preachers and Meetings, as many others has done,
yet all this keeps them more secure from the snares of the Devil than other
Christians, whom the Quakers have damned as worse than Infidels.

Note, I have account that the Quakers Justices of the Burlington at there first
Court after they had re-ga^^^d the saddle of Government, preferred two (...) to
the grand Jury against Mr. Leeds for something he had printed against them; but
it happened that the Sheriff had been so (...), than he had put some on the
Jury that were not of that Tribe, who would not suffer the (...) to be found
against him, but ^eturned them (...) (...) so that the (...) hopes of Revenge,
(...) the^ at the (...) I note (...), because I perceive Mr. Leeds knowing how
easy it is for them, it God give them leave to exercise their power, against
him, to the (...) of himself and family, is willing to be (...) till the wheel
has its proper motion.

But will the Quakers seek revenge? No, They will not do that for a world for
they say in their Catachism by W. S. p. 79 It Is the disposition of our nature
not to (...) Revenge, though we do suffer wrong; for the Revenging Nature is on
the (...), but it is not so with us whom God (...) redeemed etc. But this
passage so gr^^ly gives the lie to their Natures that it needs no other Remark.
Therefore I now come to the matter.

Babylon is fallen is fallen, and is become the Habitation of Devils, and the
Hold of every foul Spirit, and a CAGE of every Unclean and Hurtful Bird. For
her Sins have reached unto Heaven, and God has remembered her Iniquities,
Rev.18.
Samuel Jenings, John Moon, Tho. Musgrove, Thomas Fitzwater, Christoph.
Holder, Iho. Williams, John Wood, Robert Ewer, Arthur Cook, William Biles,
Henry Jenings, Peter (...), Jud Allen, William G., Jacob S -- k, Thomas Lloyd,
Thomas Thurston, John Gilbert, William Yardly, John Humphry



H^ ^are the Man, behold and view them well,
You know their Names, and where they use to dwell;
You know their Parts, you know their Fruits also,
If these be Saints, Lord! whither shall we go!
Behold again, and mark the Prophets well,
They did confess (^he Scripture does us tell)
The^^ (...) to God, and ^eg'd his Pardon t^o,
If these were humble, they would do so too.
Pretenses ^reat, they to Religion make,
Though Cros^ to (...) some think for Crossness sake:
In Practice Cross, (...), in their Fruits also
In Manners Cross in Faith and Doctrine too.
Cross to the saints that lived in every age,
As Cross as they sit coupled in the Cage
Where in each Pair you certainly may (...)
A Bird Unclean in Body and in Mind.
I shall now open the Cage and take out the Birds one by one, and open their
wings and spread their Feathers, to the (...) thou (...) view them, and note
their Features and observe their Natures. But first, take notice that G. Fox
[as in (...) pistle to (...) in Churches] uses to call the Professors and
church of England A CA^E of unclean Birds, and the more he made them sing was
No perfection Here, No Perfection Here. Therefore the note the Quakers sing is,
Perfection as Here, Perfection Here; and my present business is to show how far
the Quakers have attained Perfection here beyond others, that they themselves
may, if possible, see the danger of their self-righteous, self-confident state
And first,

1. Samuel Jennings is the most aspiring bird in the CAGE, in that his
intolerable Pride has led him to assume a far higher station then Lord Bishop
of Delaware, he talking as if himself were the Almighty, saying to some
se^erate ^uakers, If I draw forth my hand against you. I WILL Not pull it in
again till I have (...) you (...) compare this speech with Deuteronomy. 32 40. Again
(...) said he need not the help of Gods Spirit, to do our business as (...).
These Arrogant speeches [as I remember] he owns in print.

But one crim^ of this lofty Bird is that he has led the way to set the Ind^ans
to mischief the Inhabitants, in that he d^d about 12 years since take up and
survey some of the Indians L^nd, and by his example, others have since done the
like, of which 50 or 60 Indians have lately drawn up a complaint in writing by
two Interpreters, wherein they threaten to call other Indians to their Aid, to
make war on the Inhabitants, unless they have Justice done. Whereupon Jennings
had no way to save his Quaker Principle of a sinless Perfection, but to pretend
Thy virtue of a cheat put upon the Indians by A R one of his Qu^^dom Brother
preachers too^ that the said Land was purchased of the Indians. And yet in
contradiction to himself, he and his followers do acknowledge the said ^hea^^
for they condition with those that settle they Land, privately to buy (...) of
the said Indians; But this not (...); the (...) because some keep the^^ land
unsettled, and so (...) therefore they have [since M. Hamliton has re-install'd
them in the Government] bountifully treated all the Indians of the Province,
and gave the^ great Gifts; but place it as a debt ^or (...) to pay, [Asses
being made to bear Burthens] but no matter who pays it hereafter, the Indians
have got it, and (...) hoped are qu^ted at present.

Nay, this B^d must be the ^apital tradiction singer in West-Jarsey, for he
lately wrote a Book herein he shows [from an English law made chiefly against
(...)] that the people are disloyal to the King, if they submit to any
Governor that has not the Royal approbation, and yet no sooner was his said
Book made public, but he himself ^eads the first example of disloyalty, and
submits to Mr. Ha^^^ton a Scotch m^n as Governor, who has not the said
approbation; doubtless he was guided by his Light within in both there.

2. Thomas Thurston a great favorite of G. Fox. he betrayed an (...) persons
Wife, in Maryland to the sin of A^u^tery, by pretending he had a motion from
the Spirit to get her with Child [her Husband being then, and long after, in
Old England] And this (...) being excellently gifted in the Ministry, had by
that powerful affecting way of preaching (...) by the Quakers, overcome the
common People in Maryland in general, and kindled in ^em a fiery Zeal for
Quakerism; But so soon as 'twas known that he had a Child by the aforesaid
Woman, they all ^ell away and deserted Quakerism, as smoke vanishes out of
sight.

3. The Lord though so eminent a Preacher and Deputy Governor of Pennsilvania,
yet he stood in so great need of honesty that the Assembly of New York spent
both time and skill after his death, to make him an honest man, for having laid
out 600 Pounds on a piece of land at New York, he settled the ^ame by need on
two of his Children, and to make i^ the more (...) ^state to his said Children,
he got the said (...) recorded in the Secretary's Office there; and when he had
so done he (...) the said Land out (...) and told it to several Persons or
great advantage, who built (...) and made Improvements thereon. But so soon as
this Lloyd was deceased, the Purchasers came to see how they were cheated, and
must loose their Estates unless the said Children, when they come at Age will
give away their Portions to make them (...); wherefore in the mean time the
persons concerned have (...) an Act of Assembly to confirm the E^tates to the
Pur^^^sers. (...) as an Assembly can do in the case, Thus these Saints that
dream of judging the World, are judged by the world: yet to give the (...) his
due, this men was the greatest benefactor that ever Ruled at Delaware, in being
a means to stock those par^s with Silver and Gold (...) encouraging and
entertaining Pirates. Ay and no doubt but he got well by it too, a large (...)
to spare as it is said.

4. John Moon, he was an ^^rator exceeding S. Jinings, a (...) ^^^lling
P^eacher, and a very (...) the Women he conferred honor on his Maid Servant at
(...) (...) sporting with her, till becaused her Belly to (...), and she
perceiving her self with Child, grew sorrowful to think what would follow, but
he endeavored to cheer (...) up, by telling her she ought to esteem it an
honor to be with Child by such a man as John Moon an eminent (...) of the
Ministry, and a Justice too: Some say he dyed (...) the (...) D^ease.

5. (...) for John Humphry and Thom^s Fitz^^ter, The^r g^^ss and (...) us
Assertions are in Print in the Quakers Books of Controversy, to which Prefer.

6. Robert Ewer, a Preaches and Justice (...). at whose House in Philadelphia
the Ministering Friends about Delaware (...) to meet, and hold their Council: he
was known to be (...) of packing meal or other course stuff into his Flower
cask, and flower only at each end, also of blowing in Money (...) to make his
light Money pass for weight, and other such (...) Ch^ats as even a profane man
would scorn; yet being it be (...) his house to the Brethren, and a tree
Entertainer of the Preachers, he was undiscerned by them. And though this Ewer,
was taken on bed with his Neighbors Wife, with her Coats up, etc, as was
evidenced before two Justices, yet the Ministering Friends being privately
satisfied by a Paper from their liberal Brother Ewer, that he did (...) just
with the woman, they were so far from confessing any thing amiss in him, that
their cry was, R. Ewer was bel^^d, all he forced them to confess, when his own
Wife brought a Child too soon after Marriage, together with a Cheat he put on
his Wife, by making two Wills; for by his last will, unknown to his wife, he
gave large Legacies to Sam Jenings, and others of his chief Brethren, not
doubting but they would be true to their Religion, to hide his deeds from the
light, by telling their hearers that R. Ewer was belyed, in order to which he
held fast his Quaker Confidence to the very last breath, declaring at his
death, that he had no guilt on his Conscience for any thing he had done; but
since his death his baseness appearing so broad, they cannot cloak it, they cry
out, he was naught, and refuse to take his gifts, least all (...) people should
hi^s at them.

7. Jacob S in the time of his wife lying in childbed, must needs be tampering
with his Neighbors wife in the woods, as he was conducting her home from
visiting his wife; and this Woman^ Husband being a Cock of that game too, she
had no^ an opportunity to fit her Husband, which it seems she let him know,
upon which he was the more bold with other Women, till being complained of, he
made his defense to this purpose, why may not I, etc as well as Jacob S. one of
our Teachers, do the (...) to my Wife? This being told to the said Jacob, he
freely con^e^^, (...) and gave in a paper of his condemnation to the Meeting,
and thus having satisfied the Church, he kept to his preaching still.

Note, I have heard this story related after another manner, though to the same
effect, as indeed scarce any two persons will relate one and the ^ame story
alike: Therefore let not the Quakers say, these are fa^^e stories, because some
perhaps will relate them after a different manner from others for the Quakers
themselves do that unavoidably as frequent as other people.

8. Thomas ^^sgrove, being angry with the Publisher, of the (...) etc, because
he was therein changed [after (...) substantially proved, and contest by
himself] for preaching (...) the Manhood of Christ, as not good, he tell to
pouring Judgments and Curses against the Hue-and Cry^^an as his (...) was
saving at a Meting at Burlington, (...) at God (...) him an example in a short
time, and that you shall see Friends. But alas! though this Musgrove said hard
about him to compass Land and Plantations to get himself an estate all at once,
yet in se^ching his family from England o^ possess i^ a Judgment of Mortality
tell among the passengers of that st^p in which he, with diverse of his Brethren
were cut off, so that he was so far short of living to see his He and Cry Man
made an example by Gods Judgments, that he could neither escape nor see the
Judgment whereby God had appetite (...) cut him off. Had it so happened to the
(...)-and Cry Man now would they have boasted of th^^ prophet, and himself been
pus^ up thereby! then sure much more if he or any of their opposite should have
been struck dead by Thunder, as was their friend F. L. o^ by a said of a tree,
as their friend W. B. or any other (...) death should befall any of them; for if
persons dye soon after they have affronted any of them, they count it a
Judgment and Example from God for that cause; for proof of which, I Will in short
give you two out of many Examples from their ^ook entit. A word of Reproof,
etc. by E. B. printed 1 59 page 75 where it is said, Here follo^s some Signs,
Examples and Judgments for the accursed generation, who desire a sign, but they
are Miracles to them that believe; viz. Edward H^nt, Norwich (...), who after
G. Whi^ehead was discharged, (...) his act^^ against him for 4 pence a night,
was soon after cut off by death Robert ^^llen of Ba^h, who abused Tho. Mursord
in the street, had a boy scalded to death. Thus in short. But to return.

8. Christopher Holder, and effeminate loving preacher to the Women in Rhode
Island and was at (...) one of the chief men in the Island taken lying with
another man, wife in a field of Corn, for which the Friends there being about
to deal with him, he suddenly ships himself for England and gets to G. Fox, and
obtains a Letter from him, in the nature of an absolution, and so all was whole
again.

9. But Fed Allen was not so loving to a young woman that his son had gotten
with Child, intending to marry her, but that this man his Father would not
suff^^ him, but gave him Many to run away, and then affrighted the poor woman
by threatening her with punishment here, and laying before her, in a Terrifying
manner, the punishment deserved for Whores in the world to come; insomuch that
she took grief and dyed, and is gone before him in order to meet him, and face
him ^t the great day of Judgment. As to earthly Mammon his actions were so
gross in the sight of his Neighbors, that it has cost some of his own Brethren
several years pains to make him honest, especially in the case of a poor
widows Land; the story whereof is soul, but too large to repeat here. But what
of all this? he is a thundering Preacher, and can Preach as many words in one
hour, as most other Preachers can in two, and that heals up all.

10. William G -- was sometime since deeply affected with a Mil^ers Wife, who
since, on her dying bed, made confe^^ion and complaint of this Preachers
actions, declaring with great earnestness to those about her, how wickedly this
man had dealt with her, crying out in Lamentation, O that wicked (...) -- (...)
The story is large, and I design brevity, the core I omit the Relation,
believing the man will be better, when his hearers grow better by his preaching.

11. Aurther Cook, a Preacher many years, yet never was head to pray in a
Meeting, though he has out done all in cursing; for it happened that this Cook
and S Jennings were at variance, whereupon Burlington Meeting undertook to deal
with Cook about it, often sending to him, but to no purpose, Cook being too stout
to bend to Jenings; so that at last being tired with persuing him. Jenings
expressed himself to the Meeting th^s, Friends, you may soul your fingers in
meddling with A. Cook but you can never make him clean Also, he compared Cook to
the (...) a hundred years old, that should dye, accursed etc. This being told
to Cook by one present at that Meeting, Cook replied, D^d he S. Jenings] say
so, LET HIS SOUL GO DOWN QUICK INTO HELL. This profound and dreadful Curse;
with other words of Indignation against Jenings were uttered by coo^, which I
the rather mention, because in their paper of Judgment against G. K. they
advise Friends to have their words seasoned with the ^alt of the covenant; see
other crimes of Cook in the Books of controversy with G. K.

12. Wm. Yardley was an old Preacher too, and by reason of age he was go on ill
favored and (...) to the Women, so that when he offered to lie with his maid
Servant, she was so sort out to deny him, though a Preacher, which he took hard,
and thereupon renewed his assaults on her, but she, it seems, constantly
repulsed hi^, till she was forced to complain to this Yardleys wife, and to a
neighbor, whereby I suppose he mist of king David's pleasure of a young Damsel
in his old age.

12. (...) ^ile, Justice and Preacher too, in Pennsilvania whom the Women had
like to have pulled by the crown for endeavoring to get a law made [to curtail
the Law of England] that men's widows should have but five shillings instead of
thirds of heir Husbands (...); because himself had married a poor widow with
children; he sits in the ^^age for arbitrary rule in prosecuting [I mean]
persecuting J. Rovland a separate Quaker, and condemning him, before himself or
(...) Justices at Court had heard him, threatening, That it should so be, As
sure [said Biles] as his name is R^wla^d; and accordingly they sent and to
(...) Cow from the said Rovland because he conscientiously refused to take on
him an office and power to take goods (...) Quakers, who refused to pay that
three hundred Pound Tax they gathered and sent to be employed in the War at
Albany. I refer you to some Long Island men who bought land of this Bile
unseen, to give account of the honesty of his dealing: They made a sad
complaint, and it is a sad story to relate, but have no Remedy but to learn more
wit than to trust traveling Preachers for time to come.

13. As for John Gilbert, i^ the Meeting that was kept at his house have not
the spirit of discerning, as they pre^en^, he may be wrongfully put in the Cage
for ought I know; for (...) he was charged with l^^ing both with a white woman
and a N^gr^^ woman, the Friends did thereupon remove their Meeting from his
house, thereby condemning him as guilty of the said charge; so that I say, if
the Meeting had not a true, discerning but condemned him wrongfully, then they
deserve to be put in the Cage in his stead, for I would have the saddle laid on
the right Horse.

14. John Wood, Sheriff and Preacher, whose Office is to hang the Body and save
the Soul, the singular President for future Ages; he took away the poor Woman's
warming Pan, to the hastening her sick husbands Death; see the story at large
(...) Mr Leeds his News of a Trumpet, p.94. This, Wood is no Scrivener, yet he
often makes Indentures in Philadelphia streets, but it is when strong drink breeds
the staggers in his head, of Which Mr. Test and a widow that sells drink there
can give a more particular account. But I put none in the Cage for this sort of
Drunkenness, believing the Stocks a more fit place; Though the Quaker Preachers,
who have the rule, think it more fit to punish those who will needs be prating
when they see a Preacher drunk, as did John Simcock and Sam. Jenings.

15. Henery Jenings, had several Bastards before he was discovered, he not
being suspected, by reason of his being so demure a Quaker, and his carriage so
Saint-like. But I Will say no more of him, because the President and ruling part
of the Court at Salem, where he dwelt, were not Quakers, and so they made him
pay for his pleasure.

16. Thomas Williams and Peter Fretwell fit in the Cage in the nature of sworn
Brothers [as the term is for when Wil^^^ms had gotten his wifes Daughter with
Child and put her off in marriage to a young man, he made a contract with the
said young man, drawn in writing to this purpose, That his Wifes first born
should have the one half of his Plantation,, so diligent was he with his Quaker
Conscience to provide a portion for his Bastard, out of this young man's Estate:
And this Peter Fretwell [who was a Justice too] was jointly concerned in the
said writing, to cause his notable piece of Justice to be done.

But hark you Quakers of the Men's and Women's Meeting at Burlington! think you
it was not a pretty sight to see you exercise your devotion on this big bellied
Damsel, in conducting her into your Meetings, as your manner is, and yet have
no discerning of her Pregnancy, nor of her Father-in-Laws wickedness, after so
many years pretense to the spirit of discerning? is this all your sufficient
evidence of spiritual discerning, which (...). W. and others declare in print,
that the Quakers have? can you ever expect a plainer instance than this,
^^convince you that the Devil holds you captive in dark de^usion, under a
presence of Light? for she (...) the form of the Men's and women's Meetings, and
the Marriage began, carried on and finished in the Unity of (...), and hat
(...) for her said Father-in-Laws take. And the (...) Certificate was by the
said P. Fretwell closed with those words, Done According to order, and Approved
by us the PECULIAR People of God. Pray read it twice over because this Fretwell
pretended he had a discerning of the aforesaid R. (...) before yea, long before
his baseness broke out. But the D -- was (...) he did not discern the state of
this his dear Brother William: tho he is to exact a Quaker, that any stranger,
that has ever seen Quakers, will by the bare eyesight, Judgment to be a
Quaker; for he wears the perfect Livery of a Quaker, in hi^ Speech (...) is
Countenance, in his Gesture in his Apparel, but especially in this he has been
heard to say since his baseness was public, That God had new revealed his
(...) him. This is the true Livery of a Quaker, never to be cautious of him
till they can hide there (...) no longer from the World; of which though I could
give many instances, yet I will now give but one more to confirm this truth.

There (...) one (...) who going with his boat between Philadelphia and
New Castle with other people. Both men, women and good, in the year 169^ who
were (...), no man knows now, the boat being found empty of People and Goods,
but about two years after, it accidentally cannot be discovered that some
Quakers about (...) (...) got some or most of the goods, and had all that time
concealed them who when they saw themselves discovered to the world [not
before, mark that] they then published papers under their hands of their own
condemnation, to clear the Body of the Friends [as they call it] from their
guilt, expressing in the said papers what grief and trouble they were under for
concealing the said goods; I would for the Readers satisfaction print copies of
the said Papers but for largeness omit them here. And this was never discerned
by their fellow Quakers ti^l discovered by others.

But, I remember G. Fox in his Great mystry, p 89. makes the Quakers most (...)
for (...) there says, They can d^scern who are Saints, and who are Devils and
who (...). But that (...) has here deluded his implicit followers, even as much
as (...) did his, when he told them that the dove that (...) pea^e out of his
ear was the holy ghost sent to teach him, may further appear in that Fox (...)
no such (...); for (...) did not discern Ezekiel Wolley a Quaker of note in
London at whose house this Fox and many other traveling Preachers use to
quarter, till '^was openly known he had a child by his neighbor, the watch
makers wife; then George could discern him, and would Quaker there no more though
long before that, it was common for this Wolley to be brought home in evening
in a Coach so drunk that he could not get out, to go to bed, without being
carried by his servants.

Certainly God in Judgment has deprived the Quakers of that D^^^^rning common
to the rest of (...), and that because of their self-Righteousness and spirtul
^ridea; for though several persons that were not Quakers perceived that the
aforesaid Williams had been naught with his said daughter, and talk'^ of it one
to another, yet the Meeting of Quakers, or any of (...) Members, were so far
from mistrusting any thing (...) in the case, that several of the chief
upholders (...) Meeting went afterward, to their zealous Friend Williams his
(...) to (...) the Marriage, where Fretwell closed the Certificate as abovesaid.

But on the contrary, when M. Shin married about the same time, who was one of
their women's Meeting, and a good woman, as themselves say, yet they could not
for religion ^ake, be at that Marriage; no, not so much as her Father John Shin
a grave ancient Quaker durst appear at this his Daughters Wedding, though
forsooth! he could be at his Friend Williams his house, at this big bell^ed
Damsels, We^ding, and the reason was, The man whom this M. S. married could not
agree to G. Fox his Tradition of their M^n and Women's Meetings in the case of
Marriage, which the said big bellied Damsel punctually observed. So short are
these Quakers of true Religion that they prefer the Tradition of their great
Fox before Honesty and Piety, of which take one more Example to establish the
truth hereof.

Daniel Wills one of the most eminent elders of Burlington Meeting, his
daughter married the aforesaid R. Ewer, who at the time of his marriage was
known to be guilty as aforesaid, also this Daughter of D. ^. the bride, was
then with Child, and has since owned condemnation for the same, and got into
the Church again by a Paper-Key but they proceeding in their Marriage in all
the formalities of G. Fox this Wedding was (...) with the attendance of their
Father D. W. and the rest of the Friends, Preachers and others.

But a little before, when a Son of this D. W. married, though they (...) lay no
evil to the charge of him or the Woman he married, being both Quakers, yet the
Religion of this D. W. the^r Father, and his (...) of the Fox^^ an Tribe, would
not suffer them to be at this marriage, and the reason is, this Son of D. W
also rejects the Authority of their Men and Women's Meetings in the case of
marriage, believing it rather belongs to the Civil Magistrates. Thus you see
how these blind Idolitors worship their Image of Men and Women's Meetings [which
Fox carved cut and set up instead of Baptism and the Lord Supper] without
regard to honesty.

I remember D. W. has more then once related a story of Wm. Green and The West
two of their Northampton Preachers, of their naughtiness with Women, Green
being twice found guilty before they quite silenced his preaching; But T. (...)
preaching at a Meeting soon after he had lain with another (...) wife, D. W.
opposed his preaching from a spiritual discerning that he said he had of this
preachers state, without any outward knowledge of it. But pray what is become of
his discerning in the case of Robert Ewer? there he has either left it, or
never had it; for he did not discern R. E. he never opposed his preaching.

But (...) give one instance more, to show that these Quakers are all under the
like Judgment of Darkness, and want of Discerning. They did in the year 1696
build a great Cathedral Meeting place at Philadelphia, and in order to lay such
a Foundation Practice as they were like to continue, the very first Marriage
[as am credibly informed] they passed there, the woman ( Magdalen (...) by
name) brought a Child in her belly, when she came thither to publish her
Intentions of Marriage, and not one of the infallible Friends could discern it;
but on the contrary, congratulated her present happy condition, her former
husband being a separate Quaker!

But on the account of such, and (...) abominated actions of the Quakers, I
must be careful to keep from Pennsilvania shore, left I write a volumn, etc
besides, the Quakers and reflect on me far this little, and say, it is a taking
up dirt: But let me tell them, that West-Jarsey Quakers, found it needful of
late to rake up such dirt in order to make heir Teacher S. J. clean; that is,
the sent Certificates to the said Jenings for him to print when last in
England, to clear him of the charges proved against him in the trial of P. B.
which being printed in England some of the Books came back to Delaware, in
which Certificates, the way they take to clear [(...) is to rake up dirt
Rediculous stuff] against the witnesses to make their evidence seem false. One
when he was a servant boy, they accuse for stealing of his masters Powder,
shot, Oits, and nobody knows what. Another, eat up (...) M^s^risses Eggs. Other
two of the witnesses, they say, that discredit stands on their Court book for
getting young women with Child. This they slanderously put down, for they
should only have blamed them for their wives seeming in less then nine months
after marriage, but this is the art they use to make people think their
evidence against S J. was false.

But mark how God confounds them in the Devices they have used to Just (...)
themselves and defame others; for no sooner was the said Certificate Book
arrived at Delaware, but it fell to (...) lot of John W^lsford, one of the
signers of those Certificates, to be taken in the same snare, and all the
Country round taking such notice of his wife bringing a Child to soon after
Marriage, he, for grief or shame, or both, because it could not be kept hid [as
was Judged] he fell sick and died thereupon.

Lastly, As to the Birds in the Cage, least Peter Fretwell should grudge that
his crimes are not so great as some of his fellows, I here let him know, that
he stands presented by the grand Jury at Burlington for his disobedience to
Government, and if ever you beheld a Swine led by the Bars, or a Beast by the
(...), and saw how they stubbornly set their feet as shores against the ground,
because they will not come forward, but as forced by great strength, just so
for all the world did this Fretwell [when the Sheriff and his assistants (...)
him before Authority] and that in such a brutish manner as all the sober
beholders were a shamed to see. Nor could he any other ways be prevailed with
to come to give account what he had done with the County (...) that the former
grand Jury had raised and put into his hands as Treasurer; for that was all
that the Magistrates wanted to know of him, being appointed by the grand Jury
to examine him; and where he was thus brought, he would neither give any
account to them, nor give bayl to answer next Court, but a Prison he would
rather endure, and to prison he went, to the shame of his Profession be it
spoken.

Also in the year 1697. When D. Bacon a separate Quaker refused to serve on a
Jury, pleading the English Law for his defense, this Fretwell being Justice,
told him in open Court, That ^f be pleaded matter of conscience, he should be
excused, but if he pleaded the English Law, they would (...) him; which
accordingly they did. Where note, there were two gentlemen of the Governou^s
Council sitting in that Court with the Quakers, who dissented from them in this
Arbitrary procedure, and being over voted by the Quaker Justices, they desired
their dissent in that case might be ^^^^red by the Clerk.

POSTSCRIPT
THE last instance of P. F. has occasioned a few more such instances of the
Quakers actions in their Government. But because I would nor hinder the
publication of a large black account of the Quakers Arbitrary, Unjust and
Partial Government at Delaware, which I have seen in the hands of a Gentleman
there, digested in manner of a Chronicle, Therefore I shall only take a few of
his Burlington instanc;es, as the place by them most anciently settled, that
you may as by one glass of Liquor know the relish of the whole Cark.

The first then is, of one John Ne^bold, who was no Quaker, he had by the
appointment of the Quakers in Authority taken up, possessed and occupied a
p^ice of Land near Delaware hills, by the right of his Father then in England:
and this Land lying very desirable and commodious for his Neighbor John
Lambert, who knowing the said Newbold had not Power to dispose thereof,
resolves to take it from him by force, and takes this course to do it viz. At
seed time he takes witness with him, and scatters some Corn on the ground: and
the said Newbold plowing and sowing as he used to do, at harvest when he and
his Reapers were reaping their Corn. Lambert comes with his Brother Th. Lambert
and Mahlon Stacy, two Justices, with their Servants, and takes the said Newbold
and his Reapers, and carries them away Prisone^s, and Newbold not having
Friends nor Power to oppose, was forced to yield up the said Land, and Lambert
got it in spite of Justice, which never could since be regained. Mr. Revell,
who was then their Clerk, can relate the circumstances of this un^^st action at
large. Note, this was the beginning when the Q^^akers had newly embraced their
beloved Government, when they were so extreme covetous of Land, that they could
not afford a piece of ground at Burlington to bury their dead, but buried in
the public street or high way, where usually Malefactors are buried; which
irreligious practice, an eminent person observing, together with some other
Ignoble Passages in the foundation of Burlington, made this Achrostick poem
thereon

BAse in thy Birth, and Burial like a Thief.
UNdone, when first conceived beyond, Relief.
RUined before one stone of her was laid,
LEd since b'lmpostures, and by folly swayed.
I Have read the Fates, and in their Books can spy,
NOthing but shame to be thy Destiny.
GIve up thy old N^^e the^ reverse thy Doom;
THy Heathenish Birth disclaim for time to come;
ON Christ's found Doctrine mould thy self anew,
NO more to him per^ideous live, but true.
2 dly. But as they began, so they proceeded on; for though they that inhabited
there had Land in every street in Burlington, yet none of them could afford a
piece where on to build their Meeting house, but they built on (...). Rudyards
Land, who then dwelt i^ London; and this they did without his leave or
knowledge; Though indeed at the said R^dyards arrival there they proposed to buy
it of him, and (...) them a price of fifteen Pounds, which was moderate, but
they thought it too much, and would not give it. But now since Rudyards death,
in order to cheat the Heir, The. Rudyards Son, of his Land, they caused Sarah
Far, a rich (...) Widow of their Church to give them this Land whe^eon their
said Meeting House stands, and she has done it by Deed under her hand and Seal,
and they have got the said Deed recorded, and to secured their Meeting ^ouse,
as they think. Thus you may perceive the Quakers have need to strive hard to
keep the Government, for it they loose the Government, they loose their Meeting
House, if Law and Justice take peace.

3 dly, Walther Reve^ a poor man finding it hard living at his first ^e^tling,
he got sum pine Trees off from unsurveyed Land, and cut them into Boards to
sell to sustain his necessity, but he being no Quaker, the Quakers to^k the
said Boards from him, (...) allowing him any thing for his labor, which was
Partial and Unjust, nay, wicked, to wrong the poor man of his labor; I say,
partial because several Quakers about Burlington have done the like, and
suffered nothing; also John (...) and his Brother, and others about (...), have
well advanced their Estates by Board and Shingles so gotten, and never had a
pennyworth taken from them.

4 th, They have a law in West Jarsey to punish breakers of the Sabbath by a
forfeiture of six shillings to be taken of the offenders goods, if they refuse
to pay; and J^hn O^borne, who was no Quaker having brought home his Horse or
Mare on a Sabbath day morning, that had st^ayed from him fettered, for which
they demanded the (...) forfeiture for breach of Sabbath, but Ogborne refused
to pay, alleging he had not broke the Sabbath, having done no more then as
helping an Ox or an Ass out of (...), whereupon they without regard to their
Law, imprisoned Ogborne, and prosecute him next Court. This, I say, was
Arbitrary, and also (...) partial, because most of their Quaker Justices of
that Court had been really guilty of breaking the said Law, as could be proved,
and yet suffered nothing and especially Fra D^venport, who about the same time
had a^sisted with his Team on a Sabbath day, to draw a Boat on the Road from
Burlington toward West-Jarsey, who was President or Judge in that Court, and
yet had the confidence to Prosecute Ogborne contrary to their own Law too.

5 thly, Samuel O^dal^ was accused by his daughter in Law (...) for carnal
knowledge of her Body, or that she was with Child by him, upon which this
Oldale was prosecuted and punished with two punishments; for though Oldale
stoutly denied it, and there was no proof but the girls affirmation, they
released the girl out of his service [which some thought to be the end for
which she so accused him] and whipped the (...) Oldale for his first punishment,
and, made him pay a twenty pound Fine for his second, no less then two
punishments for one offense; and that but a supposed offense neither, because
never any thing after appeared to prove it. But on the other hand, when the
aforesaid Williams had got his daughter-in-law with Child, which was a real
crime, obvious and evident, yet they could easily let him escape without any
punishment at all for why? Williams was a zealous Quaker, but Oldale was no
Quaker, but one of the worlds People.

6th, The Quaker Juryes are very zealous [forsooth] to present men for
fornication, whose wives bring Children in less then 9 months after Marriage,
and then the Justices of the Court fine (...) for it; but by what Law they do
this, would fain be known, seeing our English Law makes such Children lawfully
begotten. But on the other hand, this real of theirs has not appeared against
their own Brethren in the (...) case, for I can name them two at once, viz. W L
and W D. who published their Marriage at their Meeting at Burlington whose
wives brought Children in two months after Marriage, yet th^se were never
presented; nor was (...). presented who had a Child before Marriage, the Woman
he Married being the daughter of a Preacher and Justice in Burlington.

The like Justice have the Quakers observed in the prosecution of their Law
that forbids selling or giving strong liquor to the Indians; they have made
many poor man [or any but their own people] pay a fine of five Pounds and Court
charges for selling strong drink to the Indians; But themselves having the
power in their own hands, have sold and given them whole casks (...) at a time,
in buying their Land, and making them treats, and the like, but never suffered
any thing for it. And thus runs the current of the Quaker Justice, these are
some of the effects of the privileges they boa^^ of and cry out for, and are
afraid of losing viz. The ch^sing one another for Justices, and crowding
Offices upon one another. And if they have a design to bring to pals '^is But
to get a Quaker Jury, and their business is done. But on the other hand, if
they have any drudgery to do, as trying (...), or the like, then they will take a
Jury of the worlds people to do it, that they may throw the blame on them, and
off of themselves, if any thing be done (...) in the case, and this has been
their practice at Burlington.

And at the day of Election, when they have before hand enjoined their
followers who they shall choose for Assembly men, they cry out to the People,
Stand up for your Privileges, That is, to choose us for Assembly men, for if
you choose the worlds people, you will soon have a Militia to maintain, (...),
and you may have Priests to maintain too, who^^^^ hurt our cause and draw the
People from Truth that is, from us and our cause. And these are same of the
Art^ that those who would be thought Loyal Subjects to the King, use to freight
and force the poor ignorant people to gratify their ambition to rule, and for
the ^eeding and maintaining this ambition of theirs, they pay them back again
by enslaving them with prodigious Taxes, but this [I am told] begins now so to
open the eyes of the poor people, as to make them shut their purses, for they
now perceive that the Privileges of West-Jarsey that the Quakers have so long
stood up for and boasted of, is for them to lord it over their neighbors, and
command their Purses. But in this road I must travel no further.

J. B. a Protestant

FINIS.

