The Right Christian Temper In every Condition, Endeavored (As the Lord
Vouchsafed to Assist) To be Set forth and Recommended: AND The due Debt of a
suitable CONTENTMENT With our outward Lot, Humbly Demanded, on the behalf of
the Divine Providence; In a Lecture upon; Heb 13. 5. Be Content with such
Things as you have.

By John Danforth, Pastor of the Church of CHRIST, at Dorchester in N. E.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for Samuel Sewall junior. 1702.

READER,
I Have perused this SERMON with great Content, and judge it seasonable, and
that the Reverend Author has given the Sense and Improvement of that
Scripture; and handled the Subject judiciously and profitably, for the benefit
of pious Christians; in this day of Affliction felt and threatened. I cannot but
give my judgment as I feet.

James Allen.
June 8 th. 1702.
THE Right Christian Temper, IN Every Condition.
Hebrews XIII.5. Be Content with such things as ye have.
THE Holy Spirit who derives no Authority to the Writings given by inspiration
from Himself, from the names of the holy men that He employed as His
Amanuenses, with held the Writer of this Epistle from Prefixing His Name
thereto. Yet is not His Person concealed from the Conjectures of Learned men,
who have found many Arguments to persuade them that 'twas the Apostle Paul.
Such things are treated of, in this Epistle, As Eye has not seen, nor Ear
heard, nor have entered into the Heart of man as the Deity, Offices, Sacrifice,
Mediation and Grace of Jesus Christ, the most Glorious Messiah, and Union to
Him by Faith; as also the Expiration of the Time allotted by God unto the
Churches Obediance to Him in their Observance of Old Testament Rites and
Ceremonies; with the Doctrine of and Precept for the Introduction of a great
alteration thereby in the outward worship of the Church: for Non Submission
whereunto the Jews exposed themselves to Unchurching and Destroying
Dispensations: And that which the Philosophers of Old attempted in vain is here
Accomplished: The Doctrine of Christ being by Divine Precepts, and Directions
so handled in this Epistle as to Lead Christians in the way of Spiritual
Blessedness, unto Eternal Life,

OUR Text Presents us with one of those Divine Precepts [ Be content with such
things as ye have.] Wherein the Duty and Virtue Enjoined on Christians, is
Contentment and its particular Object is specified, viz their outward
Condition, and Enjoyments, [ Such things as they have.] Whence the Doctrine to
be spoken unto, as the Lord shall Help, is this,

DOCT. IT is our Great and Indispensable Duty to be Content with such things as
we have.

AS to this Doctrine, I shall offer something by way of Explication, something
by way of Demonstration, and something by way of Application,

AND,

1. BY way of Explication. Let me show,

1. THAT the Contentment here commanded by the Holy Ghost is a virtue and
course of virtue belonging to our Sanctification, whereby the Minds and Hearts
of Christians, have and Exercise a suitable Acquiescence and Rest in the
outward Lot, that by the Lords Wise and Holy Providence is assigned unto them

2. TO set forth the nature of this Contentment, we use the words Acquiescence
and Rest, for contentfull things give Rest, and Delight also, Prove. 2913. Which
are some what more than bare Patience in our condition, and cannot be without a
Judicious Approbation of it; nor yet without some Degrees of Love and Joy. God
has given us Temporals to Enjoy, to some more and some less; now our Duty is
to be satisfied with them, accounting them enough for us, and best for us, for
the Present time: We should therefore suck the sweet of them, and so slack our
Thirst with them, as not to be Insatiably craving after more: and not be so
uneasy, that we have so little, as not to be able to take the Comfort of what
we have. We should Labor to Attain and Preserve such an even, quiet,
unperplexed frame and disposition of Spirit, as wherein we may with felicity
serve, and enjoy our God, our selves, and our Neighbors, in our Enjoyment and
improvement of that Portion of His Blessings, that God Gives us in Hand,
keeping our selves in an equal Poise, in our whole course, in every Condition:
This it is to be Contented. Thus Contented Jacob judged what he had to be
enough for him for time present, Gen 33. 11. And thus Contented Paul says, I
have enough, or I am full, without any covetous uneasiness because he had no
more, Act 20. 33. Phil 4 11, 18.

3. THE Primary and most proper Seat and subject of this Concentment is the
Sanctified Soul, 1 Cor. 16. 18. Prove. 29.17. Yet is the whole man and whole
course of Life to be Subjected to, and managed by the Imperate Acts of it. Eccl
5 18, 19, 20.and 9 8. Thus it is when we Enjoy life. As in Eccl. 9.9. Marg.

4 THE special Object of this Contentment is the Christians Temporal Condition
and the Accidents thereof, [ Such things as he has:] which is to be the more
Critically Remarked, because he has and exercises also a Superior Contentment
of a nobler, order respecting the most Divine, and Bearisical Object: Viz God
in Christ, Psalm 36 7,. 9 and 63 5 and 73. 25, 26. Now as to the special Object
of his inferior Contentment, we must carefully distinguish between a
Christians Temporal Condition and Circumstances, as considered Naturally and
Absolutely, and the same as considered Relatively and Conjunctly with the Will,
Wisdom, Holiness, Goodness, Power, and Providence of God and Christ, Ordering,
Dispensing, and Disposing them. for, and unto those Blessed Ends, His own
Glory, and His Childrens Good, 2 Samuel 16 10, 12 Under the latter Consideration
the most Afflictive outward Condition is an object of contentment to a
Christian, Jam. 1. 2, 3. It Is all Joy. When it is not so, under the former, Heb
12. 11. And in the former Consideration, separate from the latter, the most
flourishing Temporal Condition is so full of Emptiness and Wretchedness, as to
be too diminitive an object for the satisfying and contentful regards of an
Heaven born Soul, Prove. 27.20. Eccl. 6. 11. and 5 10. Thus while under the
latter Consideration we ought to be contented, though oppressed with most direful
obloquy. penury, thraldom, and misery, which the Hand of Heaven lays upon us,
for our Good, Phil. 1. 13, -- 19. Yet at the same time with regard to the
former consideration we are to Employ our Patience upon our ill Circumstances,
and our Prayers and Pains to make way for an Alteration of them, for the time
to come, Matthew 6. 13. And that without any inconsistency at all; for thus
without without any; kind of Inconsistency: does a Prince engaged in War, levy
mercenary Troops, they being necessary to him, though very burdensome, while at
the same time, he takes all possible care to put himself into a capacity
speedily to disband them, because so burdensome.

5 ALL rest in our Temporal Enjoyments is not Virtuous and Commendable, but
only that Acquiessence and Rest that is suitable. The City and Inner Temple of
our Contentment are the Lords, and must be kept Sacred, and Inviolate for Him
accordingly; yet the Benefits of common Providence may and must be entertained
in the Suburbs. Outward things are not to have the respect of the End, but of
the Means; they are not the Fountain, but Cisterns; not the living Spring, but
the Conduitpipes. Compared with God, the most substantial and immense Being and
Good, they are Nothings; yet is there something valuable in those nothings, not
Unworthy of a Thankful Regard and Secondary satisfaction, so far as they are
made capable of Inserviency to our Enjoying and Glorifying of God. But it a man
possessed of Wit, Health, Wealth, Fame and Friends, should superlatively Rest
and be Satisfied in them, as in things Supreamly or absolutely good, he were
not a contented Christian but a contented Idolater; like the Contented Epicure
in Luke 12. 19. Thou have much Goods, Soul! take thine ease, etc.

6. THERE is a Negative Contentment as well as a Positive. And so not to be
Discontent, not to repine, fret, murmur, vex, storm, sink in discouragement or
distraction, not to rise in rebellion any ways against God, and not to be
immoderate, unjust, uncharitable, inordinate in our Desires to gain from our
Neighbors, and to get up with them, or above them, is Contentment, Yet
Contentment takes in more than all this, even a direct proper positive
quietness and composure, rest and satisfaction and complacence of Spirit, yea
even a frame, habit, disposition, and course of such satisfaction, and
complacence, wherein each power and faculty of the Soul has some share; whence,
it a man is satisfied in his Judgment that his present outward condition is
best for him, yet cannot for his Life, rule his Thoughts, his Will, his
Affections, but that they are turbulent, though some what of the Soul has some
Contentment, yet the man must pass for a Discontented man for though he be
convinced of, yet is he not Converted from his Discontent:

7. THERE is in all true Repentance a virtuous Coffeehouse: and a man's
vicious contrariety unto God, is the Proper and Primary Object of it, and the
Things which the Apostle Metonimically calls Lust, 1 Job.2. 16 as being through
the Curse, the fuel and incentives of it; the Secondary; Ezekiel 36 31. Eccl.7.
26. And more bitter than Death. Yet our want of Grace, sense of inward
Corruption, continual conflicts with Satan, and frequent foils by him; though
they ought to Disquiet our Hearts from taking any rest in our Sins, and carnal
selves, and should make us Humble, and vile in our own eyes; yet ought not to
disquiet our Hearts so far as to provoke us to impatiency and murmuring at our
present condition, or to any Repining against God, (who has permitted the same
for a greater good than the Suffering of Sin to be in us is in evil:) Nor may
we long for such a Change of our Present Condition, as is for the Time, Means,
Manner and Circumstances of it, not warranted in the Word of God, but should
rather chide our Souls for it Psalm. 49 5. and42. 1. 5. Lam. ^. 27. 29

8. THE Contentment Demanded in our Text, is a frame and course of virtue
belonging to Sanctification; and is a sign to him that has it, that he is in a
State of spiritual Salvation; and Christ by His holy Spirit dwelling in His
Saints strengthens them hereunto Phil 4 11, 12, 13. And contrary covetings
belong not to Saints, Ephesians. 5. 3. Indeed there are some sorts of Contentment,
that are not from Sanctification: As,

1. THAT which is only from the natural Rellicks of some Umbrages of the Image
of God in a man's Soul, which he is born with. True Content is from the New
Birth.

2. THAT that results only from the good Temperament of the Body, and from a
Sanguine or an evenly mixed complexion, helping to allay or rein in the furious
Extravagancies of the Soul: This rises not in zeal though God be dishonored,
but has equal Tranquillity in natural and moral good and evil.

3. THAT which is from want of occasions of Discontent, and from the efficacy
of a contented Education. And Oh! how good and sweet are some while they are
pleased! but little see what an ill ferment is in their Hearts. 2 King 8 13.

4. THAT which is from the gifts of the Spirit, and from common Grace, which
some have in an Extraordinary degree, above others, for the common good: and
that which is from Restraining Influences only giving check to Discontents, and
inordinacies. Gen.20. 6 Exodus34. 24.

5 THAT which is from Hypocrisy. The Contented Hypocrite, he feigns, or forces
a Contentment, not for Gods sake, but for the sake of other things: for the
sake of ease of Conscience; or that so he may pass for an extraordinary Saint
among men, or that he may oblige God, (as he thinks he may) to be more
favorable to him, This is but feigned Obedience Psalm 66 3 Marg. and a
Counterfeit,

6 THAT such is from strong Reasonings only, as the Stoick's: And that famed
General's who repined not at the Slaughter of his Son, because he begat him
Mortal

7. THAT which is from a Deifying of things Temporal; when men say to the works
of their Hands, ^e are our Gods. and rest in them. None of there sorts of
Contentment with things Temporal, belong to Sanctification, or can assure a man
of Salvation: for there is one fundamental Deficiency in them all; Degenerate
Nature is not Regenerate. The Contentment therefore in our Text is a thing
specifically differing from them all. It Is from the Second Adam, It Is of a New
Creation; Its Principle is Supernatural; Its Impulsive cause syeth beyond Self
and all Creatures, Yet is it not forced but free; not flitting and by fits and
starts, and in some good moods only, but of a constant and uniform Tenor, which
it generally keeps though Wind and Tide and Tempest make against it, I mean the
Tide and Wind of ill temper, natural melancholy, violent temptations from
Satan, and Provocations from men, and cross Providence of God Phil 4.11, 13.
9ly and Lastly (and so I have finished all that I shall at present hint by way
of Explication) The contraries to this Contentment, are Uneasiness in our
Condition and Enjoyments, Anxious Solicitude and carefulness, eager thirsting
and coveteousness, envy at those that have more, immoderate Grief,
Disquietment, Sourness, and self Vexings and Impatience, whence we cannot take
the full and Lawful and Proper Sweet and Comfort of what we do enjoy; nor can
improve the same to Gods Glory, and Service, and our own (...) others Good.
These and all other Branches, Acts and Fruits of Coffeehouse are as contrary
to Contentment as Darkness to Light, and Death to Life. See for this, the
immediately preceding Context, and Compare Discontented Ahabs and Isreal's
frame with Paul's 1 King.21 4. Numb.4. Exodus Chap.15 and 17. But I proceed to
the Demonstrations.

1. AND in the first place, let me say, That whatsoever is charged by a
Command, must be discharged as a Duty, God has called us to Contentment The
same God which has bid us to Believe, has bidden us to be Content, as in the
Text. Our Passions may not keep in uproar, after that He has said, Peace, be
still, you will not please Me, if you be not pleased with My Providence. 'Till
God dispenses with his own Command, our Coffeehouse will be Disobedience:
And to be Contented, will be our most indisputable, and indispensable Duty.

2. IT IS doubtless our Duty to Imitate the Perfections of the Deity, as near as
we can. We were made in the Divine Image and Likeness and by the Grace of God
in Christ, we are yet allowed to try to mend ourhand by this Fair and Glorious
Copy, Gods blessed Life is a Life of Contentment: And the more Contented our
Life is, it is the mere like His. We should aim to be and do just as God would
be and do, were He in our nature, in our Persons; and how that is, we have
Learned from the Life of our Lord Jesus Christ, who was God in our Nature; and
God requires that we take Him for our great Example, Job.13. 15. 1 Pet. 2. 21.
1 Cor. 11. 1. Ephesians.5 1. Now you never find Him in a pining, repining condition;
but Enjoying Himself, and giving thanks to His Father. You never find Him
discomposed with discontent, though He had not a house to lay His Head in, nor a
Penny before hand to pay His Tax with.

3. THE Providence of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ deserves this Deference
and respect from us. The Dispenser and Disposer of our Temporal Condition is
infinitely above us: Had it been an Equal, we might with some color of mason
take Discontent, in case things went not to our means; but there is no
contending with, or taking offense at Him, Luk.7. 23. Shall mortal man contend
with God? Job 40. 2. The Disposer of our Temporal Condition, He is one who has
an absolute Right to, and Dominion over us. We must be still, and know that He
is God. We have not that right to kill a Worm that He has to take away our
Lives, The Omnipotent Former and Sustainer of all things is worthy of an
Absolute Authority over them, and that none of His Creatures should take
Distaste or Discontent at any of His Providence, Moreover, He is One against
whom it is in vain to strive. His Counsels shall stand, and He will Have and
dot all His Pleasure, all the opposing Force, Policy and Discontent of Men and
Devils not withstanding, He is one, into the Hands of whose destroying Justice
we are all forfeited by the First Sin: Can He then wrong us if He would? but
such is His Infinite Righteousness, that He would as soon Cease to be God, as
once begin to injure the meanest of His Creatures. He is one that does all
things infinitely well, and there is no mending of His work. Shall the Actions
of a man in reputation for Wisdom, and Goodness be contentfull unto us, though we
understand them not, only on account of our Confidence in him, that he himself
understands what he does? And shall Infinite Goodness be treated with Distrust
and Discontent? Knows He not how to order all things in the Best way that can
be? and is He not infinitely above the influence of all possible Temptations to
do otherwise? Besides, O Christians! He is a Friend of Yours, and a Great one,
that has unspeakably obliged you with His innumerable kindnesses and
inexpressible: Now if a Great Friend should Palpably wrong you, and harm you,
would you not say, this Man has deserved that we put up all injuries patiently,
on account of his former benefits? Suppose then your Great Friend in Heaven
should be Unjust to you (which yet he cannot be) His infinite Kindnesses have
sufficiently obliged you to forbear all Harsh Resentments: and to treat His
Providence with Content. Yet again, He who is a most Jealous God, and Savior,
gives His Presence in and with all His Providence toward us, Scholars are
sure to be corrected if they continue their Confusions before their Masters
face; and he no sooner comes in sight, but they are an Hushed into a good
decorum: O! then, how should the Lords Jealous Eye Hush and Compose all His
Disciples, and allay, and quash all unruly Storms in their Distempered Hearts!
This Deference we surely owe to Providence, though Discontent denies the debt;
striving to disparage, and blaspheme the Creditor; as when a man thinks and
says, I am in such straits, as I shall never get out of; I shall certainly be
undone; and now his Head and Heart are so disturbed, that he is not fit to
Pray, to Read, to Hear, to Meditate; his thoughts tumultuating, like an Army in
Disorder; his Affections murmuring, and making a Mutiny, at the condition that
Providence has Placed him in; he then instead of Vouching for, and proclaiming
of the Divine Faithfulness and Goodness, and Doing all that he does unto the
Glory of God, the Highest and Last end of all things, he practically and
treasonably calls God an hard and intolerable Master, and is so far from
drawing men to a love and relish of Religion, as by him Professed, as the very
sight of his carriage is enough to turn any ordinary Stomach, even from
Godliness it self. But Providence deserves better: and so ill to treat it is
unworthy and base ingratitude.

4. THOUGH our goodness extends not unto God (to add unto his Essential
blessedness) yet it may and ought to extend unto our Neighbors, toward whom
if we would be good, it is necessary that we be Contented in our selves,
forasmuch as the Discontented Person either is slack, and dull, or sottish, or
sullen, and oftentimes as it were dead to himself, and lifeless and useless
unto others; or otherwise he is like a distracted man, not good to others while
he is not himself; or else being uneasy under his temporal circumstances is
tempted to take irregular courses to mend them, and so he proves a pernicious
Instrument, wronging his Neighbor very much by Exaction, and much more by the
infectiousness of his Example.

BUT the Language and Carriage of a Contented Christian, is so humble, and
patient, and thankful, and cheerful, and just, and useful, and refreshing, as
to render him a very active, exemplary, and universal Blessing,

5. DOES not even nature it self, as well as Scripture Teach a man to Love, and
do good unto himself. He whose Charity begins not at home, is worse than an
Infidel. A Christian's regular selflove is the Rule and measure to direct his
Love and Beneficence to his Neighbor, Matthew.19. 19. Now the Christian that
loves himself, will find that his great Concern next unto his contenting of his
God, is to satisfy and content himself: for it is in and by Patience, and
Contentment that a man Possesses his own Soul, and comfortably Enjoyes himself,
as well as his God, and fellow Creatures. Luk.21. 19. Discontent is a monstrous
Unnaturalness toward a man's self, as well as Impiety toward his God. Nor is
it more impious and unnatural than absurd, and unreasonable: the Discontented
Christian is continually running counter to himself, his real End, and his
present way being quite contrary, while he pursues his Satisfaction by
Dissatisfaction, and his blessedness by discontent the great contradictory
thereof. Those that have had any considerable Experiences of this Evil, can
tell you how Discontent distracts the Heart in duty and worship, weakens the
hands, so that men of might cannot find their hands, Runs a man into a world of
Evil. Is the spring of hard Thoughts, sullen Silence, wretched disputings,
unthankfulness to God, envy at others, contention, and unconscionable dealing
with our Neighbors, and hardness to forgive injuryes, it is an inlet to fury,
evil wishes, execrations against ones self, and the persons, and things of
others. No Passion produces stronger and more fatal inconveniences, than this
does, by causing obstructions of the Spirits, pressure of Heart, wasting of
Strength, and dryness of Bones, and Exhausting of nature; clouding the
Countenance, stopping the Voice, troubling the Bowels, and disordering the
whole frame, as well as taking off the Chariot Wheels of man, and causing him
to drive on very Heavily.

MOREOVER, it provokes and drives away the Holy Spirit of God: Two great men
Saul and Ahab found it so: And sets open the Gates and Doors to the Devil.
Judas found it so. And is a notorious inlet to the most execrable Self Murder,
yea (...) also unto the most damnable Blasphemy, and most impardonable Sin
against the Holy Ghost. Had many of the Pharisees been (as John the Baptist
was) Contented that Christ should increase and themselves should decrease, They
had never Committed that Great Transgression Most certain it is, no external
hardships and calamities can (...) a Christian so much harm, as his internal
discontent. Now when God wishes him all beatifical and Saving good, why should
he so wickedly Harm himself? He that is Content with what he has, though he meets
with many Crosses, is like a man that when it is cold, dark, and stormy abroad,
has Fire and Light within doors, He may be a beggar without, but has a Kingdom
within. A Poor, and a Sick and a Bereaved man, is like one who is stung only
through the skin, but he that is Discontent is like one stung through the
Heart. Stop we the leak of Discontent in our Souls, and no Ocean-waters of
trouble can mortally hurt us. Prove.18. 14. Phil.4 9 -- 12.

6. WHAT shall I say more? If it be attainable we ought to Labor to obtain it.
Indeed Perfection in Degrees of Grace and Holiness is not attainable by us in
this Life, yet who dare say that God has lost His Right to enjoin, what man has
lost his Power to perform, or that it is not our indisputable and indispensible
Duty to Labor after and strive for even perfection of Obedience? Mat.5 48. 2
Cor.7 1. Yet when a commanded Duty and Virtue is in a great Degree attainable,
our neglect thereof is signally criminal and atrocious, as (...) without all
color of Excuse; and thus it is in regard of the Contentment now set before
us, for most certain it is, that some Christians have Attained, even in this
Life, (and in the midist of very changeable and very terrible dispensations of
Providence as to their outward condition,) very great measures, and most
eminent degrees of Contentment. Phil4. 11. Psalm16 5, 6.

MOREOVER, Our blessed and dearest Lord Redeemer having dearly purchased it for
Believers, even by His own Blood, Offered and Engaged it in His glorious
Gospel, and His Eternal Spirit being Officially concerned, and daily Waiting
and Ready to Work it in Us; whence it becomes Attainable union us; Therefore
that we may not Incur the horrid Guilt of vilely Trampling upon the Mediator of
the Covenant, the Grace of the Covenant, the Blood of the Covenant, and the
Holy Spirit of the Covenant, in is, and cannot but be our Indispensable Duty to
Be and Labor to be Content with such Things as we have.

BUT I proceed to the APPLICATION:

AND,

1. THIS Doctrine may be improved for Conviction of the Sinfulness of the Sin
of Coffeehouse, which is so directly contrary to Gods Command.

2. FOR the Reproof of such Christians, as give way to it, who have reason to
be deeply humbled for it before the Lord: foresmuch as they could never wallow
in the mire of this iniquity, but for some of these criminal Causes; as namely,

1. THAT they want due Consideration: they consider nor, as they ought to do,
the weight of the Command to be Content; the worth of the Grace of Contentment,
nor the woe of those that want it; they consider not how much their Discontent
disables them from Heavenly Devotion to God, Exemplary Usefulness to men, and
from the Exercise and Increase of Holiness and Comfort in themselves; they
consider not the High dishonor they do to God, the terrible Stabs they give
to their own Consciencer, and the perniciousness of their Examples unto their
Neighbors; they consider not that God Hears all their murmurings, nor how
causeless and unreasonable they are, nor what a bitter Repentance they will
cost them, er'e they have their Pardon Sealed for the same.

2. PRIDE runs too high. Where Affliction sits too Heavy, there Sin sits too
light. The Language of this disdainful Sin is, Where am I a Dog, to be put off
with such Crumbs? But the Humble man will be contented with a Little;
accounting himself less than the least Mercy. Genesis 32, 10 And he that is in his
own sense the Chief of Sinners, will be far from fretting, when punished far
less then his Iniquities have deserved. 1 Timothy.1. 15 Phil.4. 11. Ezra 9.

3. HOPES are too carnal; Anchoring on the Sandy Ground of Temporals; where
meeting with nothing but disappointments, they are Horsed down into the
Tempestuous Sea of Discontent. Even hope deferred does make the Heart Sick.
Prove.13. 12. Much more hope destroyed. Act.16. 19.

4. FAITH runs Low, both Faith of Dependence and Faith of Assurance; and Divine
Hope fails also. No man can Quiet himself duly without Faith and Hope
Psalm.131. 2, 3. Perpetual Doubtfulness and Uncertainry about a man's main
concernments is very Discontentful: No perfect Peace, till our minds are stayed
on the Lord. Isa. 26 3, 4.

5. MEN are too Covetous, Now Covetousness Eats out all Contentment. He that
could say, I have coveted no man's Silver, was the man that had Learned, in
every Estate to be content. Act 20 33. Phil 4. 11. He that has not his
Conversation without coveteousness, can never be contented with such things as
he has. But Poor men say, They are not covetous, for alas! they have nothing to
be covetous office but yet they desire and cover when they have nothing, Prove
13. 3 and oftentimes more than the Rich. Rich (...) also, They are not
covetous, for every body knows, they have no need to be coveteous; they have
enough, Gen.23. 6 Yet oil and fuel will put out fire, as soon as Riches will
Extinguish covetousness. The Covetous Man is Grieved and Discontented, when he
gives or Parts with Temporal things; which is forbidden in Deuteronomy. 15 9, 10.

6. CHRISTIANS are full of Mistakes: And hence,

1. NECESSITIES are mistakenly multiplied; Good Rachel grievously mistook, when
she cried to Jacob, Give me Children or else I die, Gen 30 1. And Jonah when his
Heart murmured, Let me have my Gourd, or let me die, Jonah 4 3 -- 9 God can make
His Children Spiritually happy on Earth, and Eternally happy in Heaven, with a
very small allowance of temporal things Luk.12. 15. Poor in the world, Rich in
Faith, Jam. 2. 5.

2 TEMPORALS are mistakenly magnified; The Flesh, too much Unmortified, ever
consults for Ease and Plenty, and like an Horseleech, cries Give, Give; and men
fancy if they could get such and such Things, that they see others have, they
should then be happy, and thence grow discontented it they have them not. The
Creature looks big; Riches and Honors, and Gay Clothes, and Delicious Daintys
are huge things in their Eyes; They repose that trust in them and expect that
good from them, that they ought not; forgetting that they nourish and benefit
men not by bulk, but by blessing. Mistaken discontent says, had we more Breed,
we should live better: But the four Princes, Dan.1. 12. -- 16. found it
otherwise: Man lives not so much by Bread, as by the Word of God. The Creature
can convey no more to us, than God puts into it and inables it to give: Yet if
the Vehicle be but a Spoonful of Cold Water, God can put in so many Drops of
the Precious, and Spirituous Elixir of His Divine Blessing, as may render that
little greatly profitable, comfortable and valuable to us. Psalm.37. 16. A
little that a Righteous man has is better than the Revenues of many Wicked.

3. MEN'S Conditions are mistakenly Considered. Afflictions are numbered by
Thousands, and Millions, but Mercies by Unites, and Tens; Though the former be
Inconsiderable, and the later Innumerable. A paltry Gourd weighs better with
Jonah, than Life it self. Discontentments would Disband, and Flee away before
the formidable Armies of the Divine Mercies, had not men (by poring only upon
their petty Crosses,) put them from their fight. Moreover men's Temporal
Conditions are mistakenly Compared: As namely,

1. WITH their Stations in this World: God has placed me in an high Station
(says one) but I have not Means according to my Rank, and this discontents me:
But is not a Christians Station here the Station of a Soldier in the Field? 2 Timothy 2. 3, 4. and his Life a Warfare? What though he does hunger, and thirst,
and has no dwelling Place? Has he not all at home? And is not his Station also
that of a Stranger and Traveller? Psalm.39 12. If he have enough to bear his
Charges to his own Country, and Inheritance, he is well enough: Yea it is that
of a Beggar, and such may be glad of Crumbs and Scraps.

2. WITH their Labors which are more than others. But what is Labor without
Merit? The least Bit of Bread is more than God owes you. Such as have born the
burden and heat of the day, have no reason to murmur, when they have more than
they deserve, though others that have done less, should receive of free Gift as
much as they.

3. WITH their Rich Neighbors, who live at Ease and Swim in Abundance, while
they themselves work hard, and fare hard, and pine in misery: not considering
the Thorns that grow under their Roses; and that such as have less, have less
to answer for; and that the best Saints have been glad of Deserts for their
Lodging, and Goat Skins for their Clothing, and Water for their Drink, and
Locusts for their food in this World: and that the most in the World are far
worse of it than the Complainers.

4. WITH Themselves. I was Naomi, said One, but am now Marah; I was full of
Wealth and Health, and Friends, but now Empty, I live just from hand to mouth,
by my day-labour; now I am Strong, but when Aged and Infirm, I shall Starve,
says Another: I do well to be discontent, and angry even unto Death: But they
should rather say, We were Naked once, and brought nothing into this World with
us; and it is certain we can carry nothing out: having therefore Food and
Raiment we ought to be Content. Thus the Holy Ghost teaches them to Argue, and
Reason with themselves, 1 Timothy 6 6, 7, 8. And thus Job Contents himself, Job 1.
21. Sirs! The God who has fed you all your lives long, is not Dead yet, nor
likely to die, or to grow Poor, or to grow Coveteous, or Unkind, or Careless,
that you should Distrust His Providence for the future. [ Mal.3. 6. I am the
Lord, I Change not:] He that has Delivered, will Deliver you still, 2 Timothy.4.
17, 18. Whenever He shall discern that the things which you now have will not
be enough for you; He will moreover add such and such things, as He knows you
will further have need of, 2 Samuel, 12. 8. Matt. 6. 32. Psalm.84. 11.

THUS we have showed that the Mistakes of Christians do not seldom cause their
Discontent. But what does this Arguing reprove? Why, it Reproves Discontent, as
an Inconsiderate, Proud, Carnal, Unbelieving, Coveteous, and Mistaking Humor
and Distemper; Yea did not the time fail us, we might easily demonstrate that
it is a filthy Phlegrean Lake, into which all Corruptions have a Current, and in
which their Streams do Pond and Stagnate, sending forth most loathsome and
deadly Vapors, Steams and Fumes, and Vomiting out whole Rivers of Nauseous,
and Noxious matter that is set on Fire of Hell, greatly to the Nuisance of
Heaven, and as Portentous to all Countries, that are under it is malign
Influences, as the most Draconick Comet that ever shone in the Ether, and gave
the greatest horror unto Mankind.

THE Third and Last USE is of EXHORTATION to all, to Labor and Learn to be
Contented with such things as they have.

IF you were Regenerate before you were born, (as some do suppose the Prophet
Jeremy and John the Baptist to have been,) yet you might have occasion for such
an Exhortation as this, as having some Corruption remaining, notwithstanding
your Regeneration. And let me tell you, that such as are of Serene, Calm, and
Placid natural Tempers, and live among Kind and Peaceable Neighbors, and have
Health of Body, and Vigor of Mind, and are aforehand in the World, are so far
from being out of the Gun shot of Coffeehouse, as that they are fatally in
danger thereby, for want of timous Discovery of their Danger. Let such
therefore and all others be awakened.

AND by way of DIRECTION!

I beseech you, in the Name of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, to Observe these few
Rules.

1. LABOR to Impress your Souls with a Solemn sense of its Necessity: for so
long as it bears the Aspect of a matter of Indifferency unto you, whether you
be Contented or no, you will pine away in the Iniquity of Discontent, without
due use of Means, for your Deliverance: But if you see you Must be Content,
then it is to be hoped you will; For necessity is the Parent of Industry. And
know, It is of Necessity to Please, Obey, and Glorify God, and to Obtain His
favor through the Lord Jesus Christ. Yea it is of necessity to be Content, for
it is His Commandment, (as in the Text:) And if it be not Obeyed, He will be
greatly Provoked; and the Divine Providence will first or last carry it to you,
just as you carry it toward Providence. O! then let that Dreadful Text sink
down into your Hearts, in Psalm. 18. 26. With the Froward thou will show thy
self Froward. Remember the First and Rebellious Eating of the forbidden Fruit
sprang from Cursed Discontent, and Millions of Millions of Sins and Woes ever
since; nor is it yet blessed with a Miscarrying Womb, and Dry Breasts.

2. JUDGE your selves severely for all your Habitual and Actual Discontents of
the Time past: and for all your Moral Impotency to Recover and Deliver your
selves therefrom for the Time to come; seeking Pardon for the same, from the
LORD JESUS CHRIST For if you Judge not your selves, the Lord will Judge you, 1
Cor.11 30, 31. And what is Sinfully committed by you, may be Penally confirmed
upon you. He that is not deeply Humbled for his past Discontents, will fall
into them again: And 'till a man be sensible that he can by no Means help
himself, (he is so Proud) he will not go cut for Help to another.

3. SEEK Contentment from Heaven by the Prayer of Faith. Those that utterly
want this Grace of Contentment, (I am Confident) do forget to ask it, every
Day, at the Hands of the Lord, who gives most liberally and upbraideth not.
But in vain is it sought for from the Creature; while the World is so full of
Discontentful Objects, as to render a genuine Contentment with them, naturally
(though not Supernaturally) Impossible; for an abundance of the World is an
increase of Vanity, Eccl 5. 10, 11. Contentment with Temporals is therefore not
to be sought for from Temporals, but from GOD. And as to a due SIGHT and SENSE
of the Infinite Wisdom. Goodness and Faithfulness of GOD through CHRIST,
disposing and dispensing all Temporals unto us; The Holy Ghost Himself gives
the same to His Saints, and Contentment together there with, as their great
Comforter.

4. GIVE all Diligence to make sure of the Love of God and of Christ unto your
Souls. For as a Condemned Capital Malefactor can take little Content in any
thing, so long as he is in Danger of his Life; so Peril of Eternal Ruin, by
the Wrath of Almighty God, will Eat our the Comfort of Temporal Enjoyments; But
the Love of God will sweeten every thing, to an Hundred sold advantage, Matt.19
29. And if the Lord be YOUR Portion in the Land of the Living, (who will never
fail you, nor forsake you, though Friends, Lands, and Life it self do leave you)
you will Subsist well enough, and so will have Reason enough to be satisfied,
in every Condition. Psalm.73. 26.

5. LOVE the Lord your God, and Christ your Savior, with all your Hears; for
Supreme Love to and Contentment in God will Sanctify and Sublimate your Content
with the Creature, and it you Love Him, you will take all things well at His
Hands; for Love thinks, and suspecteth no Evil, 1 Cor.13. 5. And you will not
then be hard to believe that He is Better and Wiser than you, as in contriving
His Worship and Ordinances, so in Dispensing His Providence, and that it is
better that He have His will, than that you have your Humor; and better that
you deny your selves, than that God deny Himself; and accordingly far better
that your Minds be levelled and squared to your outward Condition, then that God
should Crook your Condition to your weak and wanton Minds.

MOREOVER, if you Love Him, 'twill be your Aim, your Care, your daily Work to
give Contentment to the Heart of God in Christ; to be Godpleasers and not men
pleasers, and flesh pleasers, Gal 1. 10. and then' will be the Lords Design and
Delight in all His Dispensations to give Contentment to your Hearts Psalm 37 4.
And if He will give it you, it is not in the Power of the whole Creation to take
in from you.

6. GET and KEEP a good Conscience Sprinkled with the Blood, and Sanctified and
kept by the Spirit of Christ. A Ship-wreck of a good Conscience is a Ship-wreck
of Contentment; for as the best food relisheth ill, to a Feverish Palate, so
the best Temporal Condition, to the man whose Conscience is full of Guilt, and
Guile, and inward Anguish. An unpurified, and unpacified, Conscience must needs
make an unsatisfyed and a discontented Creature.

7. LOVE your Neighbors as your selves; and be not selfish and private
Spirited; so neither will their Prosperity discontent you; nor yet the Injuries
that they do unto you; while you do as much take to Heart, and Lament the
Provocation, they have therein given to Almighty God, and the Guilt and
Pollution they have brought upon their own Consciences, (whereby they have
greatly hurt themselves,) as you do Resent and Lament the mischief done to your
selves

MOREOVER, If you dearly Love them, you will not easily offend, or be offended,
nor be hard to be reconciled, which will redound to your Contentment; forasmuch
as such Spirit and Practice is highly passing to Christ, and is wont to be
rewarded with much of the Grace of Contentment; even as the contrary is wont to
be Punished by Judicially giving men over to Discontent: so woeful is is to
offend any of Christ's little ones; Matthew.18. 6. And as woeful not to forgive
them, for Christ's sake, when we cant find cause to forgive them for their own;
For if we forgive not men their Trespasses, neither will our Heavenly Father
forgive us our Trespasses, Matt. 6. 15. But will commit us to the Tormentors,
Matt.18. 34. And Unforgiven, Fearing, Disturbed, Unsatisfyed, Discontented
Consciences, are no despicable Self-Tormenters.

8 VISIT, and Associate with the most Contented Christians, and Observe and
Imitate their Example as much as you can; for, as he that walks with the Wise
shall be Wise, Prove.13. 20. So he that walks with the Contented, shall be
Contented; so great is the Efficacy of Sanctified Examples.

9. KEEP a Low Sail; Don't live above your Means; Aim not at Things too High
for you, Psalm 131.1, 2, Endeavor to Cut your Coat, according to your Cloth.
The Pride that Prompts you, to the contrary hereunto, if it shall prevail, will
inevitably run you into Undoing Discontentments.

10. FORBEAR Harping and Grating continually upon your Crosses and Afflictions.
If you rub and fret sore Places, they will be very Painful. Let not your
everlasting thoughts be, Ah! what must I always be Crossed in my Designs and
Hopes! always blasted in my Labors, and Enterprises! always depressed with
Penury, and want! always Scorned and Reproached! always kept under by Pain, and
Sickness, and Scarce ever have a Well Day for many years together! and yet must
I be Contented? Ah, this is impossible and intolerable! Nay, rather make Room
for such Thoughts as These: I have deserved infinitely worse, than I have
Endured; and far better men than I am, have Endured much more.

"MOREOVER, God has never laid more upon me, than He has graciously enabled me
to bear; I am Visited with Merciful Succors, and Mitigations; I suffer nothing
but what I need, and what is Best for me; and I know my most Grasious Father
Knows all this; and what I Suffer for a very Short Time, is in order unto an
Everlasting and Transcendent Reward; so ineffably Great toward me, is the
Infinite Grace of Heaven! Yea also the Present Temporal, and Spiritual,
Privative, and Posative, Personal and Relative Mercies! Enjoy, are far more in
Number, and Value, than all my Afflictions are, or are ever like to be in this
World; I were therefore the most Ungrateful Wretch under Heaven, If I should
Indulge my self in this Unjust and Accursed Coffeehouse.

THUS Entertain the Loving Kindnesses of GOD and CHRIST JESUS in your Thoughts,
and you will find them, by the Divine Benediction, very Fruitful of Heavenly,
and Beatifical CONTENTMENT to your Souls. AMEN.

FINIS.
A few Lines to fill up a Vacant PAGE.
Woe worth the Days! The Days I spent
IN the Regions of Discontent;
Where I naught rightly understood,
But thought Good, Evil; Evil, Good;
Friends I deemed Foes; Wrong I conceived was done me;
I Swelled and Rege'd; whole Heaven could not Atone me:
My Soul (it is known) was not my Own, so far it had undone me;
Health, Fame, and Wealth were full of Stings;
Children, and Friends were no such Things;
My wholesome food was Poisoned all,
And Honey did but Swell my Gall;
God was no God, Christ was no Christ to me,
While thus I Drove in Discontentments Sea:
Thank this first Vice, that Adam e're lost Paradise, and me,
Thus being Lost, wrong Course I Steerd,
While neither Sun, nor Stars appeared;
Instead of Heaven's Land, I made Hell,
I knew't by its Sulphurous Smell:
Coming on Waters, strait my LORD spied I;
Avaunt, Fonl Fiend! Avoid, fell Foe! Cried I;
So vilely I mistook, and therefore spoke foul Blasphemy;
It Is I, quoth He, Be not Afraid.
Which Words He had no sooner said,
But all my Discontents resil'd;
The R'uffling Winds, and Waves were stilled;
By what Time, Faith and Hope my Sails could hoise,
I got safe and firm Anch'rage in a trice,
Within the very inmost Bays of blissfull Paradise.

