The Governor's Speech to the Assembly, at Philadelphia the 15 September 1701.
FRIENDS.
YOU cannot be more concerned than I am at the frequency of your service in
Assembly, since I am very sensible of the Trouble and Charge it Contracts upon
the Country: But the Motives being considered, and that You must have met of
Course in the next Month, I hope you will not think it a Hardship now. The
reasons that has^^n your Sessions, is the Necessity I am under, through the
Endeavors of the Enemies of the PROSPERITY of this Country, to go for ENGLAND;
where taking Advantage of my Absence, some have attempted, by false or
unreasonable Charges, to undermine our Government, and thereby the true value
of our Labors and Property, Government having been our first Encouragement. I
Confess I cannot think of such a Voyage without great Reluctance of mind,
having promised my self the quietness of a Wilderness, and that I might stay so
long at least with you, as to render every Body entirely easy and safe: For my
Heart is among you as well as my body, what ever some people may please to
think: and no unkindness, or disappointment shall (with submission to God's
Providence) ever be able to alter my Love to the Country, and Resolution to
return and settle my Family and Posterity in it; but having reason to believe I
can at this time best serve you and myself on that side of the Water, neither
the rudeness of the season nor Tender Circumstances of my Family can overruled
my Inclinations to undertake it.

Think therefore, (since all men are Mortal) of some suitable Expedient and
Provision for your Safety, as well in your Privileges as Property, and you
will find me ready to Comply with whatsoever may render us happy by a nearer
Union of our Interests.

Review again your Laws, propose New ones that may better your Circumstances;
and what you do, do it quickly, remembering that the Parliament sits the end of
the next Month, and that the sooner I am there, the safer I hope we shall be
here.

I must recommend to your Serious Thoughts and Care the Kings Letter to me, for
the Assistance of New York, with Three-hundred and Fifty pounds Sterling, as a
Frontier Government, and therefore Exposed to a much greater expense in
proportion to other Colonies; which I called the last Assembly to take into
their Consideration, and they were pleased for the reasons then given, to refer
to this

I am also to tell you the good News of the Governor of New York, his happy
Issue of his Conferences with the five Nations of Indians, that he has not
only made Peace with them, for the Kings Subjects of that Colony, but (as I had
by some Letters before (...) ^^m) for those of all other Governments under the
(...) of England o^ the (...) of America, as also the Nations of Indians within
those Respective Colonies, which certainly Merits our Acknowledgements.

I have done, when I have told you, that Unanimity and Dispatch are the Life of
Business, and that I desire and expect from you, for your own sakes, since it
may so much Contribute to the Disappointment of those, that too long have
sought the Ruin of our Young Country.

The ASSEMBLY's Address to the GOVERNOR
May it please the PROPRIETARY and GOVERNOR.
When have this day in our Assembly, read thy speech delivered (Yesterday) in
Council, and having duly considered the same cannot but be under a deep sense
of sorrow for thy purpose of so speedily leaving us, and at the same time
taking Notice of thy Paternal regard to us and our Posterity, the Freeholders
of this Province and Territories annexed, in thy Loving and Kind Expressions of
being ready to Comply with what soever Expedient and Provisions we shall offer
for our Safety as well in Privileges as Property and what else may render us
happy in a nearer Union of our Interests; Not doubting the performance of what
thou have been Pleased so Lovingly to promise, do in much Humility and as a
token of our Gratitude, return unto them the unfeigned Thanks of this House.

Subscribed by order of the House. JOSEPH CROWDON Speaker.

Printed at Philadelphia by Reynier Jansen 1701.


