A LETTER FROM A CLERGYMAN IN THE COUNTRY, TO A CLERGYMAN In The CITY,
CONTAINING Free Thoughts about the Controversy, BETWEEN Some Ministers of the
Church of England, AND THE QVAKERS: With Seasonable Advise to his Brethren, To
Study Peace and Moderation.

PHILADELPHIA Reprinted by REYNIER JANSEN 1702.

A LETTER from a Clergyman in the Country, To a Clergyman in the City, etc.
Reverend Brother,
THE long Knowledge I have had of your Wisdom, Temper and Moderation (for which
I can truly say, without the least Umbrage of Flattery, you deserve to be
highly valued) has given me Encouragement to Communicate to you, my free and
impartial Thoughts, concerning the Controversy, between some of our Brethren
on the one hand, and the Quakers on the other. Though I am a great Admirer of
Solitude and Retirement, being seldom seen in the Crowds of the Talkative and
Unthinking Multitude, but sequestring my self, as much as I can possibly, from
public Noise, that I might have the more Opportunity to Introvert my Mind, and
Wait upon, and adore my Creator; for when my Mind is Silent and Retired, and my
own Imaginations and Reasonings are shut out; then I can hear his Still and
Small Voice, and have an inward sensible Perception of his Divine Presence with
my Soul: Yet I am not such an absolute Recluse, as to Cloister my self wholly
up from the Things of this World; for I admit of Visits from particular
Friends, read Books at seasonable Intervals, and hold Epistolary Correspondence
with Your self, and a few more Select Persons, who know the worth of Privacy,
by the Benefit they Enjoy in it. So that though I am no Actor in the public
Theater of the Times, yet I never have been, nor am an ignorant and unconcerned
Spectator of those Transactions, that have happened in our Day.

And of all Occurences; the Dissentions about Religion, and those often
attended with violent He^ts and Reflections, by Men of serious and intemperate
Spirits, have most affected me. All profess themselves to be Christians, to be
Disciples and Followers of Christ, and yet, how few ^mitate him whom they
pretend to be their Master? And it is a sad, but a true Observation, that they
who have the worst Cause, and weakest Arguments, are very apt to give Hard
Names, and to Revile and Slander their Opponents; that since they cannot Co^^^^
them by Dint of fair Ratiocination, they might, if possible, Pollute them with
the Dirt of filthy Reflection. You know whose Practice this has been in their
former Quarrels, with other Dissenters; and now, in a more particular manner,
with the Quakers, especially since Mr. Bugg and Mr. Keith came amongst us;
Persons who were not so much Deserters, as Cashired Men, for their
Immoralities; for they did not Come, but were Thrust out from amongst the
Quakers; at which taking deep Resentment, and cherishing that bad Humor in
themselves, which caused their Expulsion, their whole Mass seems to be so
corrupted, that their Enmity is become Implacable against that People.

And as it is natural for Malignant Humors to spread, especially over those
Parts which were before Infected; so these Men, coming full amongst us, of
Envy, Hatred and Malice, have infused their Wenom, into some of our Brethren,
who had formerly been Tainted, and those, having received the Infection
themselves, how Industriously do they endeavor to spread it among others.

I am heartily sorry to see it; but what Pains do they take? Yea what Artifices
do they use, to possess not only private Persons with Prejudice, but also to
stir up Persecution in the Government against the Quakers, as though they were
not fit to live amongst us? The Pulp^ts Ring with Invectives, and the Presses
Groan with Abusive Books and Pamphlets against them. The common Charge is, That
they are Guilty of Blasphemy against God, Christ, and the Holy Scriptures; thus
our Norfolk-Brethren: Yea, of Blasphemy and Heresy; so Mr. Keith. But the
Quakers have Answered those Charges again and again, and Cleared themselves in
the Face of God and the World, as appears by their Printed Books and Papers. To
be plain; Let any indifferent Man compare their Books with ours, and he will
soon see, to whom the Blasphemy and Heresy belong.

You may remember, Sir, what you gave me in your last, as your Opinion about
the Cause of our Brethrens Out cry against the Quakers, rather than other
Dissenters, viz. Their Opposition to Tithes, which the other generally pay? and
your sense was, That if the Quakers would comply in that One Thing, the N^i^e
of Blasphemy and Heresy would be no more heard against them: And I am inclined
to believe it, because you know, that Tithes are the very Pil^ars of out
Church; take away them, and the Sumptuous Fabric quickly falls into a Heap of
Rubbish: We cannot Su^^i^t without them, we can not Furn^^h our Libraries, not
Maintain our Families, without them. It Is granted, they are not due to Us by
Virtue of the Divine Law, as they were to the Levites; but they are settled
upon us by the Law of the Land; and so we Claim them, and so we Receive them,
and upon no other Foot of Account.

The Quakers have said so much against our old Plea, of Divine Right, and made
it out so fully, and plainly by Scripture, that none but some Zealous Novices,
or Super annuated bigots, will now offer to use it; and therefore the Wise
among us have quitted that Pretense, and do insist only upon a Right issuing
from mere Humane Constitution.

I have diligently looked into the Controversy, that is between our Brethren
and the Quakers, not with a Partial or Captious, but with a Single and
Indifferent Eye; and I do not find, that the Quakers are either Guilty of those
Real Errors that are laid to their Charge; or, that those which our Brethren
suppose to be Errors, in them, are Errors at all; but are rather Glorious
Gospel Truths. I will give some Instances in both.

First, The Quakers are charged, with Denying the Man Christ Jesus; which were
a great Error indeed, were they Guilty of it: but they sufficiently Acquit
themselves of this, by confessing expressly to his Manhood; That he was
Conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of the Virgin Mary, Suffered under Pontius
Pilate, was Crucified, Dead and Baried, Rose again the third Day, and Ascended
into Heaven: So that this Charge is very untruly brought against them. G. Fox's
Journal, p. 358.

2 dly, They are charged, with Denying the Resurrection of the Body: But this
also is another false Imputation; for they believe the Resurrection according
to Scripture, the one, from Sin; the other, from Death and the Grave, W. Penn's
Key, etc. Perversion 15. Yea, That the Dead shall be Raised with the SAME
BODIES, as far as a Natural, and Incorruptible, Terrestrial, and Celestial, can
be the SAME, Truths Principles by J. Crook, printed Anno 1663.

3 dly, They are charged, with Denying the Trinity: But the contrary is
manifest by their Writings; for they believe in the Holy Three, or Trinity of
Father, Word and Spirit, 1 John 5.7. And that these Three are truly and
properly One, of One Nature, as well as Will. W. Penn's Key, etc. Perversion 9.
In the Unity of the God head, says G. Wh^tehead, there is the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost; and that those Three are One, of One, Substance, Power and
Eternity. Truth and Innocence Vindicated, etc. p. 52. See also Anguis
Flageleatus, by Joseph Wyeth. p. 184.

4 thly, Another Charge against them is, that, They Deny the Scriptures; than
which, nothing can be Falser: For they have always Testified, as J. Wyeth
declares, to the 2 Timothy 3.16 That all Scripture is given by Inspiration of God,
and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in
Righteousness, Ibid. p. 150. See also, The Defense of the People called
Quakers, etc. p. 15. The like may be said of several other Things, which are
real Errors, where ever they are met with, as well as those before mentioned;
but they are untruly charged upon the Quakers (...) it evidently appears by
their Writings.

Again, there are some other Things, which our Brethren supposing to be Errors
in the Quakers, have charged upon them, as such, which yet are found to be
Glorious Gospel Truths.

First, Our Brethren suppose that the Quakers are in an Error about the LIGHT
WITHIN; and thereupon have bestowed upon it many Opprobrious, not to say,
Blasphemous Names; as, Ignis hotuus, A Diabolical Light, etc. So some: And
others, A Spark from the Devil's Forge; So our Norfolk Brethren (to wit) Doctor
Beckham, Mr. Meriton, and Mr. Topcliffe, in their Principles of the Quakers,
etc. p. 6. A Whimsical Witness fetched from Terra Incognita, p. 57. A
Counterfeit Phantasm, p. 74. The Phantasm of a Christ within, p. 86. ibid.
Another calls it, A Monstrous Notion; and Affirms it to be the Ground and
Foundation of all their other Errors and Blasphemies: So the Author of The
Snake in the Grass, 3d Edition, p. 8. But I have faithfully Examined the
Quakers Notion about the LIGHT WITHIN, and compared it with the Scriptures, and
do find, that they speak of it as the Scriptures do ( v^z.) That Christ is the
LIGHT of the World; and that he does Enlighten every Man that comes into it,
with DIVINE SAVING LIGHT. I am sorry our Brethren should be so Dark, as to
oppose it.

2 dly, Our Brethren Charge Immediate Revelation upon them, as another great
Error; which is not an Error, but a Glorious Gospel Truth: for, if Immediate
Revelation were Ceased, as our Brethren say, there could be no such Thing, as
the Christian Religion in the World; for there is no Saving Knowledge of the
Father and the Son Attainable without it. I have the Testimony of Christ
himself, for what I say, and therefore am bold to Assert it. No Man knows the
Son, but the Father; Neither knows any Man the Father save the Son, and he to
whomsoever the Son will Reveal him, Mat. 11.27. Take away Immediate Revelation,
and farewell to the Christian Religion; a Name and Notion of Christianity may
be kept up, but the Life and Power cannot subsist without it. The Quakers do
not plead for any New Gospel, Faith, or Doctrine, different from that which
Christ and his Holy Apostles and Prophets Taught, and is recorded in the
Scriptures of Truth: but for the Revelation of that, which they Taught, and is
there in Recorded. Defense of the People called Quakers, p. 6.

3 dly, Our Brethren Charge it as an (...) upon the Quakers, for Asserting the
Sufficiency of the LIGHT WITHIN to Salvation, without the Scriptures: But this
is no Error in the Quakers Sense; for I perceive by their Writings, that they
do not oppose the LIGHT WITHIN to the Scriptures, nor do they exclude the
Scriptures, where they are afforded unto Men: but by the LIGHT WITHIN, they
understanding Christ, who said, I am the LIGHT of the World, John 9.5. And is
God Blessed for ever. Romans 9.5. and therefore able to Save to the uttermost, do
Testify to the Sufficiency thereof, to Save all those who believe in and obey
it; though the Scriptures are withheld from them by the Providence of God. For,
as those that have the Literal Knowledge of the Work of the Scriptures, are not
Saved merely by that, without the Experimental Knowledge of the Work of the
Spirit in, and upon their Hearts; so those that have the Experimental
Knowledge, may be Saved without the Literal: And as many are Injured by the
Fall of the First Adam, who know nothing of him, or his Eating of the forbidden
Fruit; so, many are made Partakers of the great Salvation, that comes by Jesus
Christ, the Second Adam, though Ignorant of the History of his Sufferings and
Death. Therefore, unless our Brethren will deny the All Sufficiency of Christ,
or exclude all those the Pale of divine Mercy, who know not the Scriptures
(which is both contrary to Scripture, and to the repeated Testimony of God's
Goodness Recorded therein) I cannot see what Pretense they can make for
Oppugning this Assertion of the Quakers.

4 thly, Another Truth held by this People, and mis-called Error by our
Brethren is, Sinless Perfection on this Side the Grave: But if such a State is
not attainable in this Life, to what end are there so many Precepts about it,
so many Exhortations to it, so many Prayers for it, and so many Examples of it
recorded in the Scripture? Why do we pray in the Te Deum, Vouchsafe, O Lord, to
keep us this day without Sin? In the 3d Collect, at Morning Prayer; Grant that
this day we fall into No Sin, neither run into Any kind of Danger; but that All
our doings may be ordered by thy Governance, to do Always that which is
Righteous in thy Sight. In the Litany; From All Evil and Mischief, from Sin,
from the Crafts and Assaults of the Devil, from thy Wrath, and from Everlasting
Damnation: Good Lord deliver us!

From Fornication, and All other deadly Sin, and from All the Deceits of the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil, Good Lord deliver us! In the Collect for
Innocents Day; Mortify and Kill All Vices in us. For the Circumcision of
Christ; Grant us the true Circumcision of the Spirit, that our Hearts, and All
our Members, being mortified from All Worldly and Carnal Lusts; we may in All
Things Obey thy blessed Will. For the 6th Sunday after Epiphany; Grant us, we
beseech thee, that having this Hope, we may Purify our selves even as he is
Pure. For the first Sunday in Lent; Give us Grace to use such Abstinence, that
our Flesh being subdued to the Spirit, we may Ever Obey thy Godly Motions in
Righteousness and true Holiness. For the first Sunday after Easter; Grant us so
to put away the Leaven of Malice and Wickedness, that we may Always Serve thee
in Pureness of Living and Truth. For the 7th Sunday after Trinity; Nourish us
with All Goodness, and of thy great Mercy keep us in the same. For the 15th
Sunday after Trinity; Keep us Ever by thy Help, from All Things Hurtf^ll, and
lead us to All Things Profitable to our Salvation. For the 17th Sunday after
Trinity; Make us Continually to be given to All good Works. For the 18th, ibid;
Lord, we beseech thee, grant thy People Grace to withstand the Temptations of
the World, the Flesh and the Devil; and with pure Hearts and Minds to follow
thee the Only God: Here we make the Spirit our Rule and Guide, and yet Quarrel
with the Quakers for doing the same
So the 19th, Grant that thy Holy Spirit may in All Things Direct and R^l^ our
Hearts: So the 21th, Grant, we beseech thee, merciful Lord, to thy faithful
People, Pardon and Peace, that they may be cleansed from All their Sins. See
more of the like kind, in the order for the Administration of the Lord's
Supper, and the Ministration of Public Baptism of Infants. Why, (...), do we
Pray thus And why do we Teach our Children in the Church ^at^^hism, to Pray to
be kept from All Sin and Wickedness, if it be impossible to be obtained?

You know, Sir, That SINLESS PERFECTION in this L^fe, is the Doctrine both of
the Law and the Gospel, the Doctrine of Moses, and the Prophets, of Christ and
his Apostles: Or Justin Martyr, in quaest and respon^ ad Orthodox. Of Origin,
Hem. 11. super Genesis Of Cyprian, Sermon. de Baptism. Christi. Of Chrysostom. Hom. 3.
in 2 Cor. 11. Of Hieron. l. 3. ad^. Pelag. Of Augustine de vera and falsa
Paenitentia. Of Greg. Mag. l. 2. Mor. c. 8. Of Prosper, and many others: Yea,
you know, that the most Learned Bishops of our Church, as Bp. Andrews, Bp.
Overal, Bp White, and Bp. Tailor, were of this Opinion; That King James I.
says, upon the Lord's Prayer, That' it is Blasphemy to say, that any of Christ's
Precepts are Impossible; for that were to give him the Lie, who told us out of
his own Mouth, That his Yoke is Easy, and his Burden is Light; and Christ's
intimate Disciple says, 1 John 5.3. that his Commandments are not Grievous.
See also what Dr. Thomas Drayton has written upon this Subject, in his
Proviso^ or Condition of the Promises, and Mr. William Parker. in his Re
vindi^at^on of the said Doctor, wherein he clearly proves these two Assertions,
to be the Orthodox Protestant Doctrine.

First, That there is a Possibility, through the Grace and Help of Christ, of a
Total Mortification of Sin in this Life.

2dly, Then there is a Possibility of perfect Obedience, through the Grace and
help of Christ, to the Law of God in this Life.

Yea, Mr. Keith himself, though denying SINLESS PERFECTION, as held by the
Quakers, yet Asserts it in his own Terms, as fully as can be; see the Account
of an Occasional Conference between him and Thomas Upshare, p. 15. where he
Affirms, That Persons, by the Help of God's Grace and Spirit continually
assisting them, may, before Death, come to Perfection in the true sense of
Scripture, so as with Sincerity of Heart to Love God, and walk in All his
Commandments; and to be free from the condemning and commanding Power of Sin;
and from All, not only Scandalous, but deliberate and wilful Sin, though liable
to Sinful Imperfections. For, do not the Quakers grant, that there remains
always in some part a possibility of Sinning, when the Mind does not most
Diligently and Wachfully Attend unto the Lord? See R. Barclay's Apology, Prop.
8 So that Mr. Keith both Denies and Affirms, SINLESS PERFECTION, in the same
Paragraph: For a Liableness to Sin, does no more exclude SINLESS PERFECTION
now, than it did to Adam before his Fell; who, though he was liable to Fall, yet
was Perfect before he Fell:

I could add many more Testimonies in Confirmation of this Doctrine, but I fear
I should exceed the bounds of an Epistle, and therefore shall draw toward a
Conclusion; Humbly advising my Brethren, that are to Hot and Violent against
the Quakers, to Cool a little, and to ^^ate of their Impetuousness.

We profess to be Ministers of Jesus Christ; let us Imitate him in his
Meckness, Lowliness, Gentleness, and in his loving and peaceable Disposition;
and not Demonstrate to the World, by our contrary Practice, that he never Sent
us. Moderation, is a Virtue that will Commend us, not only to our own People,
but to those that Dissent from us; but Fierceness and Animosity, Strife and
Contention, render us Contemptible unto all. If it be possible, as much as in
us lies, let us live Peaceably with all Men

My advice is, to put an End to these Paper Skirmishes, with these Sober
Peaceable People, and make War against our Lusts and Sins, of all sorts; this
will be the Noblest Cause we can Engage in, and the most Comfortable and
Glorious of Victories to obtain it. For how does Iniquity abound among us? Are
not All Orders and Degrees of Men and Women Infected? May we not All truly
say, We are miserable Offenders, both Priests and People, being full of Wounds,
and Bruises putrefying Sores? What Atheism and Profaneness, what Pride and
Luxury, what Lewdness and Intemperance, what Lying and Swearing, what
Chambering and Wantonness, what Gaming, and Sporting what Condeming and
Cheating, what Injustice and O^^^^^^ion, overspread the Nation! We cry, The
Church, The Church, as some of old did, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of
the Lord, are we, while Satan has his Seat amongst us, and we have little left
of Pure and Primitive Christianity in our Communion. We are so degenerated from
that Life and Power, that appeared in our first Reformers, that we are become a
Reproach to the Reformation: And now we make a great Ostentation of Essentials
and Fundamentals in words, when we are departed from the Foundation in our
Practices. It was the Saying of the Primitive Christians, N^n mag^^ eloqui^ur,
sed vivimas, We do not speak great things, but we live But behold, how
notoriously the Apostasy of this Generation contradicts it! So that we may take
up our Lamentation, and say, Magna eloquimur sed non-vivimus; Our Impute
Conversations, are a Shame to our splendid Professions. The Quakers, whom some
call, Heretics and Blasphemers, but still want proof for those Odious
Epithets, are Sound and Orthodox Livers; you, they not only Out strip us in
Real Piety and Virtue, but in Faith and Principle too, and for my part. I do
believe, they are the People, whom God has ^a^^ed up in this Dreggy Age of the
World, to Refine it, and Restore talien Christianity to its Primitive State of
Perfection and Innocence.

Bold and Angry Mr. Keith, write not only at Random, but with extreme Vi^ulency
against them; his C^oler overflows in all his late Pamphlets, and almost every
Stroke of his Pen discovers either Gall of Blood. I had been astonished, when I
read in his Reasons for leaving Quaker sin, p. 32. That he was able to prove,
that they do not believe one Article of the Apostles Creed: But that I
consider, that when he has a mind, he may say the same of Us, or any other
Christians in the World; yea, that he himself does not believe them, and yet
wipe, his Mouth, and say, He is always Sound in Fundamentals: for he is the
greatest Instance of Confidence and Contradiction that this Age has produced.
But whom are we to believe, Mutable and Invidious Mr. Keith, or the Sober and
Peaceable Quakers? A Furious and Implacable Adversary, or an Honest and
Conscientions People? You will easily agree with me, that the Testimony of the
lat^^^ is of most Validity. Now these People have often declared, That they do
sincerely Believe every Article of the Apostles Creed, as their Books do
Testify.

Benjamin Cool speaks exceeding plain and full in this Matter: To obviate all
Objections, as well to man fest the Intolerable Baseness of George Keith; I
will add, says he, that it is not only All what we suppose Truths in the
Apostles Creed, that we bel^ive, but even all that is contained in what is
called the Apostles Creed, allowing us but a just and reasonable Explanation in
three Particulars, that seem to us not safel^ (...)

First, He Descended into H^ll; Now, if by Hell be understood, (...) Dr. Wallis
says, no more, than that he was in the State of the (...) Subscribe to it.

Secondly, And from thence he shall come to Judge both Quick and Dead; from
thence he shall come, implies, he shall leave that (...), with which he is
Glorified with the Father; Now if it be intended only, That there is a Day
appointed, wherein he shall come in Power and great Glory, to Judge both Quick
and Dead, according to their Works, we Subscribe to that also; it being more
Consonant to the Holy Scriptures Testimony, so to Believe, and say*

Thirdly, The Resurrection of the Body; If by Body is meant a Spiritual Body,
then we Subscribe to that also; as well as to All the rest; is being as much
our Faith and Persuasion as any Man's. See his Honesty the Truest-Pal^ey, etc.
p. 106. printed 1700.

It Is manifest, that M. Keith has done this People a great deal of Wrong; for
he has first drawn them in what ugly Colors his Invidious Fancy pleased, and
then endeavored to make us believe, his Monstrous Draught is their Real
Picture: whereby he has done much H^^t also to many of our own People,
instilling into the Minds of the Unwary and Inconsiderate, such strange Notions
of the Quakers, as though they were the Vilest of Heretics, who are the Purest
Part of the Reformation. For their Principle is Pure and Holy, and their
Conversation generally such, as becomes the Gospel of Christ, notwithstanding
the Filth cast upon there by M. Keith in his Occasional Conscience with Thomas
Upshare, p. 15. The Sins there charged, as Drunkenness, Whoredom and
Defrauding, and many more, being Notoriously known to be frequently committed
by many, both of our Teachers and People.

I have met with a Passage, which for the suteableness of it to Mr. Keith's
Character, and Project against the Quakers, I shall here Subjoyn, and Conclude.

Socrates, a Man of the greatest Reputation in his time, for Religion and
Virtue, one that did not take Money for Instructing the People but freely
Taught them Piety, Justice and Sobriety: The Priests of Athens, with some other
of their Confederacy, being weery of him, and enraged against him, for his
Honesty and Uprightness, and continual pressing the People thereto, amongst
them contrived his Ruin; and to perfect their Design, they procured, and some
say, Hired, one Aristophanes, a very poor Man, but of Parts sufficient to be
their Tool in this wicked Work* who being willing to do any thing for Money,
undertakes the Business, and writes his Comedy, called, The Clouds; wherein he
brings in, and Personates Socrates, speaking as Heretically and Contemptibly,
as Mr. Keith Represents the Quakers. The People having a great Love for
Socrates, were surprised at first to see him so miserably Traduced; I do not
compare M. Keith's learning to Aristophanes's, but his Mercenary Conscience and
^^en to his.
but after a while, they began to Credit the false Representation of him, and
his Philosophy, it had so much of Show and Appearance, though nothing of Truth
and Reality in it; and Aristophanes was as much Applauded by the Priests, and
ignorant Vulgar in those days, as Mr. Keith is now* Socrates his Enemies having
thus Prepared the Peoples M^nds, began openly to Draw up a Charge against him,
and their Principal Accusation was, That he was a Heretic, and denied
Fundamentals; or, as their Phrase was, He denied those to be God's, which the
Priests of the City deemed to be so. By which Means, and through which
Disadvantages, his Enemies never ceased Persecuting him, till they had
destroyed him. But his Judges quickly repented themselves of what they had
done, and slew many of his Accusers; and some others of them laid Violent Hands
upon themselves. And it is observed by some Historians, That the City of Athens,
not long after his Death, was punished with such a Terrible Plague, that never
was amongst them before.

I would have Mr. Keith, and those of our Brethren, that are so Hot and
Furious, consider of this, and be Wise in time: O Let not our Church become a
Slaughter House, nor her Priests Instruments to Stir up Cruelty and
Persecution, against a Quiet and truly Religious People! But let us all Study
to promote Love, Peace, Truth and Righteousness, both by Preaching and Living;
That God may Look down upon us in Mercy, and Stay his Hand, which is Stretched
out against us, for the Sins and Transgre^^^^^^ of our Priests and People.

FINIS.

