Walking with GOD, THE Great Duty and Privilege Of true Christians. In Two
SERMONS, Preached on the Lecture, in the year 1700.

By Samuel Willard, Teacher of a CHURCH in Boston.

Micah 6.8. He has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what does the Lord
require of thee, but to do justly and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with
thy God

Boston: Printed by B. Green, and J Allen. Sold by Benjamin Eliot. 1701

Walking with God.
Genesis V. 24. And Enoch walked with God.


THIS Chapter contains the Chronology of the Lives of the Antidiluvian
Patriarchs, from Adam to Noah: of whom little else is mentioned, but their
names, succession, long lives and death: only concerning Enoch, we have his
short life, eminent piety, and wonderful Translation here recorded, verse 21,
etc. And yet it is to be supposed that these, being Christ's Predecessors,
through whom his Humanity was derived, and those heads of Families by whom the
true Religion was preserved in the world, were all of them holy men. There must
therefore be something singular in Enoch, on account whereof God gave him this
record, by which he testified how well be was pleased with him, as we are
informed, Heb. 11.5. Before his translation he had this testimony, that he
pleased God; which must needs refer to the words of our Text. That which is now
to be insisted on, is the eminency of his piety, to which a witness is here
born, to his perpetual honor; and doubtless, whatsoever is written in the Word
of God is for our admonition. Scripture Example are our Monitors, either to
warn us against sin, or to animate us unto Holiness. The thing that is here
asserted concerning Enoch; is, that he walked with God: in which few words we
have a most excellent character given of him; and they contain in them a large
History of his Life, by which we are given to understand, not only that he was
a Godly man, and separated from the corruptions of the times; but he was
singular, and had out stripped other holy ones that had gone before him, or that
were contemporary with him It is observable, that his Walk with God is twice
asserted in the Context; and the Spirit of God does not use vain repetitions:
it is therefore to stir up our attention to it, as to a thing of special remark
In he former it is mentioned to set forth his constancy in it, that he held on
this course perseveringly for three hundred years: and in what capacity, viz in
an Oeconomical, or in a Family relation, and did not turn Anchorite for it: in
the latter it is repeated to introduce the great recompense that God gave him,
by a glorious. Translation. The purport of the expression here used, will be
enquired after in the sequel: The words themselves will offer us this,

DOCTRINE. Walking with God is the Christians both Duty and Glory in this Life,
and the way to Eternal Felicity.

This Doctrine takes it for granted, that there is such a Walk to be enjoyed
here, as well as Sitting down with him in his Kingdom hereafter; and is
exemplified in many others besides Enoch. That it is every Christians Duty to
imitate him in this is evident, because this is recorded of him for our
encouragement to do likewise; and that it is our Glory here, appears in that
this was it which procured for him his renown above others, because he excelled
in this; and the singular Providence of God in translating him to Heaven, not
to see death, shows how serviceable it is to our Eternal well Being. Nor does
his short abode here any whit contradict the truth of this, inasmuch as life is
but a Journey to Eternity and when the work of our Generation is done, it is
our happiness to go home. That to which I shall confine the following discourse
shall be an enquiry into, and resolution of this great Case, viz.

Quest. How may a Child of God so order his life, as to maintain a continued
Walk with God to the end of it?

Answ This Case being of greatest importance, and for the regulation of our
daily practice, it will require the more distinct consideration: but that it
may be the more portable, I shall endeavor to contract it so far as the nature
of the subject will permit. And here, to prepare the way for the Rules of
direction about it, it is requisite that we make some brief enquiry into the
nature of the Duty, or What it is to Walk with God? And we may observe that
there are three expressions made use of in the Scriptures on this account, viz.
to walk with God, to walk before him, and to walk after him. Which Commentators
do suppose to aim at one and the same thing: and doubtless each of them does
comprehend the other two under it, though there may be something specially
pointed to in each of them. Walking after God may intend a following of his
Command, which is the Rule of Life: Walking before him may intimate a setting
our selves as in his presence always, to awe our hearts into a careful
endeavor to obey him: and, Walking with him may signify our maintaining
Communion with him in our whole Life; and hence it includes in it, a living in
the practice of all those things by which that Communion may be upheld, and
avoiding of whatsoever may interrupt it. The word is Metaphorical, and serves
to give light to the thing aimed at Walking is properly the progressive motion
of a living creature, by which, from an inward principle or power, it carries
it (...) from one place to another; and is opposed to sitting down, or standing
still: and is therefore used for that course of life which men do lead, which
is called the way they walk in; for walking ever supposes a way. It also
supposes the motion to be spontaneous, in opposition to that which is violent
or compulsive; and so in voluntary agents, it points to that course of life
which they follow upon choice; and it tells us, that a Christian is not to
stand still, but to pursue his way with freedom of spirit, if ever he hopes to
obtain his great end. To walk with another is used for our conversing with him,
and using of his familiarity, so Prove. 13 20. He that walks with the wise,
shall be wise. It therefore supposes friendship and intimacy, and a likeness
of manners in the persons so associating; and on this account, Walking with God
intends, a so ordering of our Conversation, as is according to his will; or, a
so living as to have fellowship with him in all that we do; on this account it
is said, 1 Job. 1.3. Truly our fellowship is with God the Father, and his Son
Jesus Christ. Or, an endeavoring so to live that we may please him, and enjoy
his favorable presence with us: for, it is not his Essential presence which is
here designed, but the presence of his love, and his acceptance of us. The
Apostle therefore in the fore cited Heb 11.5. interprets his walking with God,
by his pleasing of God. Now, we then please God, when we always do the things
that please him; and he walks with us, when he signifies to and in us, that he
takes delight in us; hence that of Christ, Job. 8.29. The Father has not left
me alone, for I do always those things that please him. Hence this is set forth
in other terms in Scripture, all of which are but Commentaries on this.
Sometimes to walk in the ways of God. Isa 3.2. i. e. in those ways which he
has commanded us, and wherein we conform to his will: to walk in his law,
Psalm. 119 1. i. e. to follow that law which he has revealed to us for the
ordering of our Conversation by; to walk in good works, Ephesians. 2.10 i e. to
exercise our selves in such works as God approves of; to walk in our integrity,
Psalm. 26.1. i. e. in the practice of sincere Obedience to God; and many
expressions of like import. So that in sum, we are then properly said to walk
with God, when we constantly nourish true piety in our hearts, and pursue it in
our whole lives. This then is the matter about which we are now enquiring; and
for our help and direction in which, the following Rules are to be observed.

I. That we may walk with God, we must take care that he and we are reconciled.
Walking together signifies, and presupposes friendship and agreement; hence
that, Amos 3.3. Can two walk together except they be agreed? If therefore there
has been a discord between them before, it presumes that there has been a
making up of the breach, and bringing of them together again: and so it is in
the case before us. Here then let us observe.

1. That the state of nature is a state of alienation from God. Not that man's
primitive state was such, for God made man upright, Eccl. 7.29. There was a
Covenant of amity between God and man at first; but man's Apostasy has violated
that Covenant, and so has procured a great distance between them, Isa. 59 2.
Your sins have separated between you and your God. And at this distance is
every natural man born, as he comes out of the loins of the first Adam, hence
that is universally a truth, Ephesians. 2.3. Were Children of wrath by nature. On
this account Unregenerate men are said to be far off from God, Psalm. 73.27.
Ephesians. 2.13. In this regard also ungodly men have the style of Enemies put upon
them, Romans 5.10. Whiles we were yet enemies, etc. And good reason, for man is
by his sin revolted from God, has broken his Allegiance, which has both
filled him with enmity against him, for such is the frame of them that are
carnally minded, Romans 8 7. and incensed the just indignation of God against
them, for we are told in, Psalm. 7.11. God is angry with the wicked every day.

2. That so long as this alienation abides, there can be no Communion between
God and Sinners. Communion between person ever supposes an union going before,
which is the foundation of it: and where there has been an ancecedent
separation, it requires an atonement, in order to which that which made the
difference must be removed. God and Sinners go two ways, they walk contrary one
to another, and God requires that they do acknowledge that it has been so,
Levit. 26.40. How then should they go together? Whiles then things remain in
this posture, the distance must needs abide; yea it must increase, for sinful
man is not only naturally afar off, but he is continually going further: hence
the way that they are in is called a departing from the Living God, Heb. 3.12.
and a forsaking of the fountain of living waters. Jer. 2.13.

3. That this Reconciliation must be mutual. And the reason is, because the
alienation was so; Zech 11.8. My Soul loathed them, and their Soul also
abhorred me. Gods anger is kindled against the Sinner, and how should he come
at him, whiles this abide? as long as that fire burns against him, there is
no approaching to it, Heb. 12 ult. Our God is a consuming fire. The Psalmist
intimates how dangerous a thing it is, Psalm 76.7. Who may stand in thy sight
when once thou art angry? The Sinner also is full of prejudices at God, has
taken up false opinions of him, and so long as these abide, he will not come
unto him, but hide out of his sight, as our first Parents did as soon as they
had violated his Command. God therefore must be at peace with the Sinner, and
the Sinner at peace with him, if ever the breach be made up between them.

4 Christ having reconciled the Justice of God by his Obedience, invites
Sinners by the Gospel, to be reconciled to God Man's sin had armed the revenging
Justice of God against him, which was engaged to destroy him; till this was
satisfied, there was no hope of agreement: this therefore was first done by
Christ as our Surety, who standing in our room, answered all the demands of the
Law for us, and now God is ready to receive Sinners into favor upon terms;
Col. 1.21, 22. You that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in your minds by
wicked works, yet now has he reconciled, in the body of his flesh, through
death. 2 Cor. 5.19 God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself. Now
Justice and Mercy can meet together and agree: But this did not complete the
affair, but upon the former, Christ, in pursuit of his Mediatorship, opens a
treaty of peace and by the Gospel he proclaims it to Sinners and Rebels,
offering the atonement, and soliciting them to embrace it; for which he has
delegated his Ambassadors, whom he has Commissioned thereto, and we are told
what is the design of their Embassy, 2 Cor 5.20. We are Ambassadors for
Christ, as though God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be
ye reconciled to God

5. The terms on which this Reconciliation is to be made, are offered in the
New Covenant. God does not only offer Sinners to be at peace with them, but
makes proposals of agreement, on which he is ready to lay aside all
differences, and receive them into favor, and intimate fellowship. He treats
with men in a Covenant way, in which the peace is to be ratified between them;
and there are the Articles of it, which must be complied withal it ever they
unite. The Gospel promises are therefore proposed Hypothetically, and a
threatening in case of failure, Mark 16.16. He that believes shall be saved, and
he that believes not shall be damned; and Rom 8.13 If ye live after the flesh
ye shall die, but if ye through the Spirit mortify the deeds of the flesh, ye
shall live.

6. Hence by our cordial closing with these terms, we are again made nigh unto
God. It is the blood of Christ which is the procuring cause of this, Ephesians. 2 13
Ye who were sometimes afar off, are made nigh by the Blood of Christ; but the
actual accomplishment of it is brought about by our entertaining of the offered
Grace, according to the tenor of the Gospel Covenant. We therefore no sooner
repent and believe, but we are at peace with God, his anger is turned away, and
he receives us into favor. We are by this faith united to Christ, and so
become the Children of God, Gal. 3.26. For ye are all the Children of God by
faith in Jesus Christ: And now he carries it as a father to us and we may with
a Child-like boldness approach near unto him, and maintain fellowship with him,
Ephesians. 3.12. In whom we have boldness, and access with confidence, through the
faith of him.

7. That we may thus embrace these terms, we must wait upon God for his Grace
and Spirit, to work this Faith and Repentance in us. As we could do nothing for
the reconciling of God to us, and if Christ had not done it for us, it had
never been; so neither can we reconcile our selves to him, or comply with the
proposals of the New Covenant, of our selves: We have neither ability nor
inclination hereunto; hence that in, Ephesians. 2.8 By Grace are ye saved through
faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God Acts 5.31. Him has
God exalted with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, to give
repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of sins It is therefore the Spirits work
to make application of that Grace to us, by which we may be wrought up to a
compliance with the calls of the Gospel; and it is our duty to renounce trust
in our selves, and seek for his help, waiting on him in all the ways of his
appointment, for his coming and doing of this great thing for us: and when once
this is effectually wrought in us, we are then fitted for communion with him.

II If we would walk with God, we must carefully avoid all those things that
tend to make a distance between him and us. It is true, that when once we are
reconciled to God by the Blood of Christ, and the powerful virtue of the Spirit
in us, bringing us over to a cordial compliance with the terms of the New
Covenant, there shall never be a total breach made between him and us, his
Omnipotency will keep us from it, 1 Pet. 1 5. Ye are kept by the power of God
through says unto salvation. However, there may be distances procured, and
uncomfortable breaches made, the Communion be interrupted, and we thereupon
lose our sight of him; and though there be the Sovereign withdrawings of his
light and comfort from his own, when they are watchful over themselves; yet
there are the things which provoke him to hide away, and carry himself to them
as an Enemy: and if we would prevent this, we must be watchful against all
those carriages which will procure it. And to this end,

1. Let us carefully avoid every sin; and more peculiarly every bold
transgression. As it was sin that at first made the breach between God and man,
so it has always a tendency in it to produce this effect, because it is a
thing so contrary to his Holiness, according as is declared, Hab. 1 13. Thou
art of parer eyes than to beheld evil, and can not look on iniquity. And
although God has a fathers pity to extend to all those his Children which
serve him, and accordingly has a regard to their frames, as Psalm 103.13, 14.
And therefore will accept of their integrity, and bear witness to it,
notwithstanding the deficiency which attends upon their best, yet if at any
time they allow themselves in any presumptuous sin, it will incense his
righteous displeasure at them, and procure for them some remarkable desertion:
we read in 2 Samuel 11. ult. The thing which David did displeased the Lord. And
what awful Dispensations in his Providence followed upon it, is recorded in the
History: what care then ought we to use on this account, lest we be drawn into
any iniquity?

2. Let us pursue the mortification of every fleshly lust. Though the Dominion
of sin is subverted in every Regenerate one, yet there are the remains of it in
the best in this life; and it is very active, and has too much of the nature
of a Law in them, as he confesses of himself, Romans 7.21. I find a law, that
when I would do good, evil is present with me. The best way for a Christian to
avoid the Commission of sin, is to endeavor the mortification of those lusts
which are the branches of Original Concupiscence in him, by the motions and
force whereof he is hurried into actual sins. That is on this account made the
Duty of all the People of God in, Col. 3.5. Mortify your members which are upon
the earth, fornication, etc. And for this we should make use of the Cross of
Christ, where we should Crucify them, thus did Paul, Gal 6.14. God forbid that
I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is
crucified unto me, and I unto the world.

3. Let us maintain a special warfare against our bosom sin. Although there is
every lust remaining in every believer, against which the spiritual warfare is
to be upheld and pursued: yet there is usually one more remarkable lust, which
either our natural constitution, or the occasions offered in the Providence of
God, or the affairs that we are employed in, do stimulate us to; and we are
more easily won to hold correspondence with it, and find it hardest to
withstand the motions of it, when it calls for being attended and gratified.
Now one sin if it be allowed by us, and we can hold familiar correspondence
with it, though it be never so secretly, is enough to procure a distance
between God and us, and make us to experience his displeasure. How carefully
then ought we to observe the stirrings of it in us, and resist it with greatest
resolution? David therefore tells us on this account, Psalm. 18.23. I was
upright before him, and I kept my self from mine iniquity.

4. Let us Crucify our over eager affections to the world. There is a love to
the Creature which it is lawful for Gods people to exercise: but then there is
a love of these things which is very dangerous, against which we are warned, 1
Job. 2.15. Love not the world neither the things which are in the world. If any
man love the world, the love of the father is not in him. If we let our hearts
out over eagerly after these things, they will draw them off from God: and our
Savior has cautioned us in, Mat 6.24. No man can serve two masters, etc. And
there is nothing that more obstructs our walking with God, than the prevalency
of Ambition, Covetousness, and Voluptuousness in us: And because these things
are so adapted to our senses, and gratify the cravings of the outward man, we
have the more need to be daily crucifying of them, and praying as he, Psalm
119.37. Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity; we are therefore earnestly
advised in, 1 Pet. 2 11. Dearly beloved, I beseech you as strangers and
pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts, which war against the Soul.

5. Let us carefully abstain from evil company. Ungodly men are Gods enemies,
and we should in that regard look upon them as ours, Psalm 139.21. Do I not hate
them, Oh Lord, that hate thee? And God is therefore angry, when we make choice
of such to be our intimates, and enter into alliances with them. How was
Jehoshaphat rebuked and threatened for this? 2 Chronicles. 19.2. Should thou help
the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee
from the Lord. And if we will associate our selves with such persons, we shall
learn of their ways, and walk with them; and then we shall not walk with God,
because his ways and theirs are contrary; and doubtless the little regard that
men have to the choice of their Companions, is none of the least reasons why
Professors at this day make so little progress in their Christian Walk, and
that there is so great an Apostasy among them.

6. Let us manfully resist all the Temptations of Satan and his instruments. If
we resolve to walk with God, we must expect to be withstood in our way: they
that are his enemies will be ours too; and if all their policy and industry can
draw us off, they will not be wanting. We are told of Satan, 1 Pet. 5.8. Your
adversary the Devil, as a roaring lion, walks about seeking whom he may devour;
and of his agents in, Mat. 24.24. If it were possible they would deceive the
very Elect. And there is no way for us to escape them, but by withstanding of
them, 1 Pet. 5.9. Whom withstand steadfastly in the faith. There is need
therefore of courage and constancy, in all those that would hold on their way,
and not be turned out of it.

7. Let us beware of Hypocrisy. And indeed there is nothing more dangerous. The
Hypocrite pretends to walk with God, but does not; he seems to look one way,
but indeed goes another: he has a way of his own which he closely prosecutes,
whiles he holds the world in hand that he is running in the way of Gods
precepts; and in nothing is God more provoked than by such an Atheistical
carriage as this is; as if he could as easily blind the all seeing eye, as
impose upon the credulity of short sighted men. We are therefore given to
understand the doom of such, Jeb. 8 13. The Hypocrites hope shall perish, and
13 16. An Hypocrite shall not come before him. Take heed then, for it is only
the upright in heart, whose way pleases God.

III. If we would walk with God, we must live the exercise of the Graces of his
holy Spirit. As one that is without Grace cannot so do, so he who has it
habitually, does no further keep close with God, then he is in the exercise of
it. And here observe,

1. That the graces of Sanctification are bestowed on us, to furnish us for new
Obedience. It is by new and Evangelical Obedience that we keep in Gods way, and
so walk with him, which we are altogether unable to do, whiles we abide in our
natural state, Romans 8.8. They that are in the flesh cannot please God The
Apostasy had rendered us altogether unprofitable, and without strength to do any
acceptable Service to God. Man, by the loss of Gods Image, in which he was at
first created, lost his own power which he before was furnished withal. It is
therefore by restoring and renewing of this Image, that he is recovered to it
again; hence that, Ephesians. 4 23, 24 Be renewed in the spirit of your mind; and
that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and
true holiness. So that it consists in the sanctifying Graces, which are infused
into the Soul, by the Spirit of God, that we are renovated; and that is by
being put into Christ by Regeneration, according to, 2 Cor. 5.17. If any man be
in Christ, he is a new Creature; old things are past away, behold all things
are become new And what is this for, but that we may obey God, and do the
things that please him? for we are told, Ephesians. 2 10. That we are created in
Christ Jesus unto good works.

2 Hence no actions of ours, but what are influenced by these Graces, are to be
accounted steps in this walk. It is not enough that we are renewed, for us
hence to conclude that all that we do will be right, and that now we cannot
decline from the way which we are put into, as if now we might confide in the
promise, without taking heed to our selves. We have corruption as well as grace
in us; there is the Flesh as well as the Spirit, and these are ever drawing us
contrary ways, Gal 5.17. The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit
lusts against the flesh; and these two are contrary; and that which is the
product of either of these two principles will be attributed to it, as, Joh.
3.6. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh, and that which is born of the
spirit is spirit. God does not only look at the actions which we do, but also
at the spirit with which we do them; hence that, 2 Chro. 12.2. He did that
which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not with a perfect heart.

3. Hence we ought very carefully to take heed by what principle we act. Many
professors think themselves no farther concerned in the duties they do, then to
see to the things so done, that in the matter of them they be things warranted
or commanded in the Word of God; and if therein they are conformable, they
think all is well: but so may an ungodly man do, without any root of grace or
piety in him, merely by the instigation of a natural Conscience in him, and the
force of moral principles, and yet such duties are far from finding acceptance
with God. Nay we have that character put upon them, Prove. 21.4. The plowing of
the wicked is sin. 28.9. His prayer shall be an abomination. God indeed
requires the outward act, but he calls for the heart too, Prove. 23.26. My Son,
give me thine heart; and that is done only by the exerting of the Graces of
Sanctification in the duties that we do.

4. And that we may thus exercise our Grace, we must wait upon the Spirit of
God for his help in exciting and actuating of it. It is true, we must have
Grace before we can use it, Gal. 5.25. If you live in the spirit, walk in the
spirit. But it is equally certain that the exercise hereof depends upon his
influence, nor can we put it forth in any thing farther than he affords us his
assistance. The Apostle refers not the will only but also the deed hither Phil.
2.13. It is God which works in you both to will and to do. And they were
Regenerate ones to whom our Savior said, Joh. 15.5. Without me ye can do
nothing. It is therefore the believers encouragement, that he may have this aid
afforded him upon his right asking for it, Luke 11.13. Your heavenly Father
shall give the holy spirit to them that ask him. It then concerns us to seek
this of him, how else shall we walk with him?

IV. If we would walk with God, we must maintain the life of faith. We are told
in, Heb. 10.38. The Just shall live by his faith. Where, by living is not only
intended, the enjoyment of the title to Everlasting Blessedness, which is
secured by promise to faith in Christ, Joh. 3.16. Whosoever believes in him
shall not perish, but have everlasting Life; but also the maintaining of a life
of Holiness, in which alone it is that we can be said to walk with God, and
because this is an essential point, let us consider it in the following
observations.

1. There is no walking with God, but in the way of new Obedience. There was an
Obedience which God required of man in the Covenant of Works, in the
performance of which, if he had kept his integrity, he should have upheld
entire Communion with God; and that was in an exact conformity to the Law of
that Covenant. But fallen man cannot maintain this; he is fallen short of the
Glory of God, and can no more conform to the Law: We are therefore told. Gal
3.10. As many as are of the works of the Law, are under the Curse. There is
therefore a new Covenant opened, in which, as there is Obedience to God
required of us, so it is upon another tenor, in which sincerity is accepted at
our hands by God, and all our short comings are over looked: and it is for that
reason called new, because there was nothing of it in the Old Covenant which
pronounced a Curse upon the least defect. Of this is that blessing pronounced,
Psalm 119. 1, 2, 3. Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the way of
the Lord, etc. and for this he prays in, Psalm. 25.22. Let integrity and
uprightness preserve me.

2. There is no performing of sincere Obedience but by the help of Christ. He
must work our works in us, if ever we do them as we ought. As all the operation
of second Beings depends on the Co operation of the first, even in things
natural; so the Gracious Actions of the Children of God must have their supply
from Christ, through whom all saving benefits derive to his people: he is the
Vine and they are the branches, Joh 15. begin. And all the Sap which they have
that must render them fruitful comes from him, Hos. 14.8. From me is thy fruit
found. Paul therefore dares not to presume any further for his doing of any
duty, Phil. 4.13. I can do all things through Christ strengthening of me.

3. It is by Faith that we must derive all this virtue and help from him. As
all our help is fountained in him, so there is a way in which we are to fetch
it in from him, and that is by the exercise of faith on him: and for this
reason, Paul, when he speaks of his life of Holiness in which he walked with
God, refers it hither, Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me,
and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of
God. The Obedience of Gods people is on this account called the work of faith,
2 These. 1.11. And all the glorious exploits which are mentioned to have been
done by the Worthies of old, are ascribed to their faith in, Heb. 11. For it is
by faith that we go to Christ, and embracing the promise, in which all the help
that we need is laid up, we fetch in that assistance from him, by which we are
enabled to walk with him.

4. The best of our Obedience labors of sinful infirmities, and imperfections.
It is by the law that we have the knowledge of sin; accordingly we are to
reckon that whatsoever comes short, in any respect, of what that requires,
whether in matter or manner, or end, is so far sinful. Now the people of God,
when they have exercised their Grace with the most sincere endeavor, come
behind in this respect, and so dare not to put themselves upon a law trial, but
confess as, Psalm 130.3. If thou, Lord, should mark iniquities; Oh Lord, who
shall stand? And therefore deprecate it as, Psalm. 143.2. Enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living be justified.
Sinless perfection is that which none can with any truth pretend unto, for we
are told, 1 John 1.8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
the truth is not in us.

5. This imperfect Obedience, when sincere, is rendered acceptable to God
through Christ. God, out of Christ, is a severe Judge, and condemns men for the
least defect in what they do: whereas believers have hope of acceptance,
notwithstanding they find so much of a body of death mixing with their duties:
and whence is this? not because God likes sin in his own, when he cannot endure
it in others; his Holiness forbids that: But it is, because he looks upon them
in Christ, and having covered them under the robe of his Righteousness, he will
not see, so as to judge them for their frailties, according to, Numb. 23.21. He
has seen no iniquity in Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel; but we have all our
acceptance in the beloved, Ephesians. 1.6.

6 It is only by faith that we apply this perfect Righteousness of Christ by
which we are thus accepted Hence that title is put upon it, Phil 3.9. The
Righteousness which is of God by faith. If we confide in our own works, and
expect to be accepted for the worthiness of them, God will despise us, and
wholly reject our services as things which he can take no delight in: but when
we utterly renounce our affiance in them, and resolve our whole hope, after
all, into Christ, and him alone, we then please God. We thus comply with the
New Covenant way, in which the Grace of God is every way exalted, and our whole
acknowledgment is paid to it: and when we thus do, we Walk by faith, and so
Walk with God.

V. If we would Walk with God, we must endeavor to conform our whole
Conversation to his revealed will. We before observed, that walking intends the
course of life which we follow, every action whereof incompared to one step
that we take. Walking with God then, is a living according to his will, so it
is expressed in, 1 Pet. 4.2. That he no longer should live the rest of his time
in the flesh, to the lusts of men, but to the will of God. Now there is a
double-consideration of the Will of God, viz as it is secret, or as it is
revealed; by the former of which God disposes of all the affairs of his
Creatures, according to his infinite wisdom, and good pleasure, Ephesians. 1.11. Who
works all things after the counsel of his will. And by the latter he
prescribes to us our Duty, and how we ought to carry toward him in all things.
And here we may observe,

1. That God has given us a Rule to direct us in the way wherein we may walk
with him. He has not only enjoined it upon us as a duty so to walk, but has
also shown us the way in which we may so do; else we had been left at an utter
loss. Nor did he only do so to man when he first created him, by the Covenant
of Works, for compliance wherewithal fallen man is left altogether without
strength: but he has also thus prescribed under the New Covenant, which is
therefore called the law of Christ, Gal. 6 2. For the Gospel does not discharge
man from obedience to God, and so open to him a door of licentiousness; and
they are grievously mistaken who reckon this for the Grace of the Gospel: but
it prescribes unto them a new way, in which they may live and please God: which
is called the way of Righteousness, 2 Pet. 2.2. and the way of peace, Luk 1.69
Romans 3.17. and the way of Salvation, Acts 17.16. Nor has he left it a thing
indifferent, whether we go in this way or no; but has added Sanctions to the
Command.

2. That this Rule extends to the whole man. For this reason, the
Sanctification, which is to furnish us with ability to conform to this Rule,
extends to the whole, 1 These 5.23 The very God of peace sanctify you wholly,
and I pray God that your whole spirit, soul and body be kept blameless. Man
consists of a soul and a body; and both of these are to be regulated by it: It
therefore gives precepts concerning the inward as well as the outward man; and
we are obliged to glorify God with both, 1 Cor 6.20. Glorify God in your body,
and in your spirit, which are Gods. There is a way of the heart as well as of
the hand and foot, which we must take heed to, if we would walk with God; and
indeed God firstly and mainly regards the heart in all; and our outward
actions, let them be otherwise never so regular, are no further accepted with
him, than our heart is right in them. God therefore requires this in the first
place, Prove. 23.26. My son, give me thine heart And this is a remark that is
made on the specious reformation attempted by Israel, Psalm 78.37. Their heart
was not right with him; and if our feet move one way, and our heart goes
another, God is not honored, but despised by us; so he upbraids them Isa 29.13
This people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me,
but have removed their heart far from me.

3 Hence it gives laws to all sorts of actions. As the whole man is under the
command of it, so all the motions of it, in all respects, are to be regulated
by it; and we no farther walk with God than we sincerely conform to it. Actions
are distinguished from the next subject by which they are exerted, into
thoughts, words and deeds. Thoughts are the next and immediate acts of the
heart, or inward man, and are performed in us, by the Soul it self: others are
strangers to them, but this Rule extends to them, and is a Judge of them, Romans
2.16. God shall judge the secrets of men; and that is one prerogative
attributed to the Word of God, Heb 4.12. Is a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the heart. The words are the acts of the tongue; and men are
deceived if they think their tongues are their own, and have no lord over them,
as they vainly boasted, Psalm. 12.4. for of these also there is a reckoning ere
long to be made, Mat. 12.36. I say unto you, that every idle word that men
shall speak, they shall give an account thereof in the day of Judgment. And
deeds comprehend under them, all else that is performed by the outward man, as
it is the organ of the Rational Soul in the exerting of its imperate acts;
every whereof he is also accountable for, Eccl. 12 14 God will bring every work
into judgment. The right ordering of these therefore belongs to our walking
with God: to every of which the Scripture precepts are adapted.

4 And it prescribes to all the Relations that we are set in. There are a great
many relations which God has placed between men, whiles they are in this
world; in every of which they owe an obedience to God, and for their direction
whereunto, he has annexed the duties which he requires of them in each, in the
discharge whereof they are to serve him; and they can no farther walk with him
in them, then as they comply therewithal. These Relations are enumerated in the
Holy Scriptures, where also the precepts which God has given concerning each
of them are recorded: and they are Natural, Oeconomical, Civil, and
Ecclesiastical. There is the Relation of Husband and Wife, Parents and
Children, Masters and Servants, Magistrates and Subjects, Ministers and
Churches, Teachers and Scholars, aged, and younger persons, etc. In our
discharge of all of these we ought to yield obedience to the command of God
relating to them, and when we do so, we therein walk with him: and thus did
Enoch, verse 22.

5. It also directs to all the callings which God providentially places men
in. The most of these Callings might have been reduced to the former head of
Relations; being founded in, or resuking from them. But let me here add, that
there is a General Calling, which all persons of what relation soever, are
obliged to the pursuit and practice of, viz the Religious Worship of God in all
the ways of his appointment; and that both in the Natural and Instituted: and
the more constant and faithful Christians are in their attendance upon those
duties, the more closely do they walk with God. There are also the Particular
Callings which God has distributed among men, which nextly refer to the
concerns of this life, and the public, as well as private and personal benefit
of mankind, which are also subordinated to Religion: and in these also God
expects that we should maintain fellowship with him; and we do in vain pretend
to walk with him in acts of Worship, if we regard him not in these. I should be
endless in going about to prescribe particular Rules of walking with God in all
the fore cited cases, for which the Word of God plentifully furnishes us with
advice. Let then two or three general hints suffice.

1. We must use all endeavors to get a distinct acquaintance with the Rules of
holy walking. Though knowledge alone be not sufficient for us, for we may know
our duty, and yet live in the neglect of it, which will but aggravate our
guilt, yet without knowledge the mind of man cannot be good; nor his actions
regular; those therefore are put together, Joh. 13 17. If ye know these things,
happy are ye if ye do them. And for this end,

1. We must be diligent in reading the Word of God. That is the complete Rule
of our walking with him, and without our getting acquaintance with it, we must
needs err; for, if God had not there shown us what is good, we must have
wandered in a labyrinth of mistakes: David resolves upon this, Psalm. 119 16 I
will delight my self in thy statutes; I will not forget thy word. And he tells
us what use he makes of it, v 105. Thy Word is a lamp to my feet, and a light
unto my path.

2. We must be frequent in meditation on the Word of God. It is not enough for
us cursorily to read it, and set our selves a stint of so doing, but we must do
it with understanding and consideration; how else should it be our guide in the
paths of peace? David resolves on this. Psalm 119 15. I will meditate in thy
precepts, and have respect unto thy ways; and he tells us for what end he did
it, v. 11. Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against
thee; and to what a degree of acquaintance with it he arrived by this course,
he tells us, verse 99. I have more understanding than all my teachers, for thy
testimonies are my meditation.

3. We must be careful in attending on the preaching of the Word. God has
appointed the Gospel Ministry for this end, that they may be helpful in
acquainting us with his mind; and when he bestows such upon us, it is a great
blessing; he therefore promised that in better times, Jer. 3.15. I will give
you Pastors according to mine heart, which shall feed you with knowledge and
understanding; and he has accordingly made it our duty to afford all diligent
and ponderous attention upon the Preaching of his Word, that we may thereby get
acquaintance with his mind; and he has declared all such to be blessed ones
who do faithfully comply therewithal, Prove. 8.34. Blessed is the man that
hears me, watching daily at my gates, waiting at the posts of my doors.

4. We must join to all prayer for the Spirit of Illumination to be afforded
us. We do not only stand in need of the Word and Ordinances to inform us about
the will of God, though the matter of the knowledge of it is therein contained
Doctrinally; but of the Spirit too, to give us a right discerning: for we are
naturally blind in spiritual things, and so need not only light to be set
before us, but our eyes to be restored that we may perceive it. And though
there is a remainder of the light of nature in us, which can apprehend the
reason of many moral Duties, yet we are altogether strangers to the way of
Evangelical Obedience, by which alone we can walk with God: this therefore Paul
prays for on their behalf, Ephesians. 1 17, 18. That the Father may give to them the
spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him; the eyes of your
understandings being enlightened, etc. And good reason; for he tells us in, 1
Cor. 2 14 The natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God;
neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned. Surely then
we should pray for it in respect of our selves, in the words of the Psalmist,
Psalm. 119 18 Open thou mine eyes that I may behold wondrous things out of thy
law.

2 We must corroborate our love to the Rule. It is not enough to have a
Theoretical knowledge of it, for it is certain that we shall conform unto it no
farther than we love it: The natural man is offended at the Rule of Obedience
given us by God; his heart rises up against it, he has entertained prejudices
at it, yea is a mere lump of ermity, as he is described, Romans 8.7. The carnal
mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of God, neither
indeed can be. And so much as there is of the law of sin remaining in the best;
so far is their love defective and stands in need of fortifying. And here
observe

1. That all sincere Obedience is the exercise of love. Faith indeed regulates
our Obedience, but it is love that acts it, according to Gal 5.6. Faith that
works by love. We walk with God in no duty any farther than we do it in love,
for we are told in, Romans 13 10. Love is the fulfilling of the law And for this
reason all Obedience is called by the name of love, and put distributively with
faith, 2 Timothy 1 13. Faith and love which is in Christ Jesus; and the Apostle
John so argues, 1 John 4.7, 8. Love is of God, and every one that loves is born
of God, and knows God; he that loves not, knows not God.

2. Hence we no farther please God, than we are acted by this love in our
Duties. We may be very circumspect in the matter of them, and critical to the
very tithing of mint, annise and cummin, and take a great deal of pains in the
performance of it; but still, if this principle does not influence them, God
will not take the least content therein; and good reason, for love is the very
life of the precept, and obedience thereto is denominated by it, Mat. 22.37, 38
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy mind; this is the first and great Commandment.

3. That we may so do, we must get persuaded of the excellency of the Rule, and
the felicity of them that delight themselves in it. It is the loveliness of the
object that attracts our love to it; and we must discern that in it which
renders it so, in order to our union with it. We have David professing of his
inexpressible love to this Rule, Psalm. 119.97. Oh, how I love thy law! And no
wonder that he was thus raised in his mind, for he could give that incomparable
encomium of it, Psalm. 19.7, etc. The law of God is perfect, etc. More to be
desired than gold, yea than much fine gold, sweeter also than the honey, and
the honey comb. And that we may keep up this value, we must look upon it as the
great medium of Communion with God in this life; and if we love that above all
things, we shall prize this for that reason proportionably.

3 We must be very accurate in all our actions, to see that they comport with
the precept. The Word of God is a Rule of life, and no farther profits us
than as we order our Conversation according to it: and for this we ought to
take great heed to its counsels, and accordingly lay out all our actions by it:
to do nothing but by the direction of it, and to bring all that we have done to
the trial of it; and this is that accurate walking which is commended to us,
Ephesians. 5.15. See that you walk circumspectly; for if we depart from this Rule, we
therein depart from God. And there are two things especially that we are to be
curious about in this affair.

1 About the matter of them. God has told us what we should do, and what we
are to avoid, if we would please him in our Conversation; and there is much of
curiosity to be used by us in this, if we would not miss in our endeavors. For
though we may do the matter of duty very plausibly and without blame from men,
or our own Consciences in that regard, and yet sin, for want of all other
requisites to render it conformable to the precept; yet if we neglect or
transgress that, we sin unavoidably. We are forbidden to add or diminish, Deuteronomy.
12 32. What thing soever I command you, observe to do it; thou shall not add
thereto, nor diminish from it. And we are limited hither, Isa. 8 20 To the law,
and to the testimony; if they speak not according to this word, it is because
there is no light in them

2. In the sincere aim of them. We then only keep with God in our actions, when
we pursue the same end in them for which he prescribes them: And though no
pretense of a good end, and aiming at the glory of God in it, or the benefit of
others, will gain the Divine approbation for any thing which is in it self a
Transgression; yet a sinister end in the doing of it, will spoil that which is
otherwise a Duty. God always observes, not only what we do, but what we do it
for; and if we fail in that point, he will make his remark upon it, Zech 7.5
When ye fasted and mourned, etc. did ye at all fast unto me, even to me? It
spoileth prayers and alms when they are done to be seen of men, Mat 6. beg.
That then is to be fixed in our hearts in all our actions of all sorts, if we
would keep with God in them, 1 Cor. 10 31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink,
or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God.

VI. If we would walk with God, we must be much in these duties wherein close
communion with him is to be upheld. Although we are to follow him in all
duties, yet there are some in which we separate our selves for special intimacy
with him, in which he is wont more peculiarly to manifest himself to his
people, when they carefully seek him in them. And the more special of these are;

1. Secret Prayer. Prayer is in the Scriptures called a drawing nigh to God,
because in it we present our selves before him, and put up our petitions to
him. Praying is an act of Divine Worship, and that in all the kinds of it; and
God has made it to be a medium of participation in his favor; and therefore
when he had made large promises of blessings to his people, he tells them how
they may come by them, Ezekiel 36 37. I will yet for this be enquired of by the
house of Israel, to do it for them. And of all prayers there are none in which
a Child of God has more of freedom and intimacy with him, than in those that
are performed in secret. We are therefore directed to and about this sort of
prayer, Mat. 6 6. Here we may pour out our hearts before him; here we may open
all our cases with the greatest freedom, whiles there is none that stands by to
upbraid or discourage us; and the more we are sincerely engaged in this Duty,
the oftener shall we be in the Mount where God is, and have intimate converse
with him; and if we have not a great deal of such private business with God
every day, it is an ill sign that we do not walk with him.

2. Diligent attendance on the Ordinances of his house. If we would walk with
God, we must repair thither where his goings are: and we are told, Psalm. 68 24.
They have seen thy goings Oh God, in the Sanctuary. And 77.13. Thy way, O God
is in the Sanctuary. Here it is that he makes peculiar manifestations of his
grace and love to his people; here he has commanded the blessing, and has
therefore promised his presence to be with such for this end, Exo. 20.24. In
all places where I record my name, I will come unto thee, and I will bless thee
This was the reason why the Psalmist desired it as a peculiar privilege to
dwell all his days in the house of God, Psalm. 27 4. To behold the beauty of the
Lord; and in his exile he envies Swallows and Sparrows their liberty of
building near the Altar, Psalm. 84 3. And why? but because he counted them to be
happy men who were so privileged, verse 4 Blessed are they that dwell in thine
house. It was therefore that he might have a refreshing sight of God that his
Soul so longed and thirsted, Psalm. 63.2. To see thy power and thy glory, so as
I have seen thee in thy Sanctuary. Only if we would enjoy this benefit when we
come there, we must be sure that we make this our business; that it be our very
errand to his house, to get into his company and fellowship.

3. Spiritual Communion with such as walk with him. We before observed, that if
we make ungodly men our companions, it will be the readiest way to lose Gods
company: and we may here further take notice, that to be much with those that
fear him, is the way to be near him. If we take heed that our frequent and
intimate fellowship be with them whose fellowship is with God, we are then of
that society in which he delights; for we are told, Psalm. 25.14. The secret of
the Lord is with them that fear him; and this is the argument used by the
Apostle to invite those whom he writes to, into the fellowship of the Saints, 1 John 1.3. Truly our fellowship is with God the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. Only observe, that it is not enough to associate our selves with their
persons; mere civil friendship will not advance this, but it must be spiritual;
for by that only it is that they do mutually edify one another. When we choose
such as are gracious for our society, and make it our endeavor to stir up each
others graces, and confer together about the Matters of the Kingdom, seeking to
warm each others hearts with holy and heavenly discourses, we shall then have
Christ to come and make one in the Company, as he did to those two Disciples,
who walked together, and talked of the affairs that concerned Christ; Luke 24
14, 15. And were this Duty revived, which so much languisheth, and is so little
pursued, there would be a great deal more of close walking with God among
Christians, than there is.

4. Self examination, accompanied with renewed Repentance. And indeed it is
requisite that these two be in conjunction; for there will be no kindly
Repentance, but upon self reflections; and serious calling of our selves to an
account daily, will promove the exercise of Repentance in us There is a great
deal of folly breaking forth in our Conversation, when we take never so much
heed to our selves, and much more when we are remiss in our watch, which we are
too often guilty of; in all of which we get so far out of the way wherein God
and we should go together and till by Repentance we turn into it again, we keep
at a distance from him: whiles then we take no heed to reckon with our selves,
this separation will abide, whereas they that are often calling of themselves
to a strict account, enquiring where they are, what they have been doing, and
bring themselves to the Rules of Trial upon that account, are most likely to go
the least away from God, and to make the speediest returns to him. This was a
practice which the Psalmist accustomed himself to, Psalm. 119.59. I thought on
my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies. No wonder then, if those that
are negligent in acquainting themselves very often with themselves, do so
frequently straggle away, and many times are a great while before they can
recover their former communion with God.

VII. If we would walk with God, we must endeavor to subordinate all our
outward concerns to his guidance and government. We have observed, that this
Duty extends to all that we have to do withal in this life. Enoch walked with
God in his Oeconomical capacity; and it is certain, that a Christian would be a
great sufferer by being obliged to the duties of his particular calling, which
take up the bigger part of his time in this life, if his attendance thereupon
would necessarily interrupt his Communion with God, but it is quite otherwise:
and though it so fails out too often, that through the prevalency of our
concupiscence, and our over eager letting out our selves upon these things, we
are drawn away, and lose our selves here, for which reason we have duties of
Worship enjoined us by God, to be frequently engaging our selves in as helps to
recover and establish us; yet it is incumbent on us, and God expects it of us,
that we order these affairs, and our selves in them, with that care and
caution, that they may not hinder, but promove our Communion with him. And to
that end;

1. We must seek God, and not our selves, ultimately in these things. The
things of this life are given to us for our support in the world, and the
comfortable supply of our outward man; these being, by the Divine appointment,
the things, on which we have our dependence for our bodily life and livelihood
whiles we continue here, in the ordinary course of Gods Providence; and hence
it follows, that the next and immediate design of our contriving and laboring
for these things, in the several vocations that God places us in, is for the
body, and the suitable support of it. But we must not center here, and look no
further; much less are we to seek to gratify our fleshly lusts with them, which
is the farthest reach of unregenerate men, and is born witness against, Jam.
4.3. Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon
your lusts. But as we are to devote our whole lives to the Service and glory of
God; so we ought to desire, endeavor and pray for the supplies and comforts of
it, with this great purpose, that therewith we may the better honor him and be
encouraged therewithal in our faithful obedience: that therefore is a precept
enjoined us, Prove. 3 9. Honor the Lord with thy substance; and we are told
that God gave Israel all those things for this end, Psalm. 105 44, 45. And gave
them the lands of the heathen; and they inherited the labor of the people;
that they might observe his statutes, and keep his laws; and the neglect of
this is secretly threatened, in Deu 28.47, 48. Because thou servedst not the
Lord with joyfulness and gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things,
etc.

2. Take heed that we be not put by our Spiritual Duties for worldly affairs.
These are our principal business Mat 6 33. Seek first the kingdom of God God
has not made the duties which he requires of us to interfere, but they may
very suitably join and go hand in hand, if it be not our own fault; and we may
and ought to allot to each their season: we ought to be diligent in our
callings, but we are to worship God too Our being good husbands must not hinder
our being good Christians, but pay a due deference to it, else we shall be
guilty of the worst husbandry that can be: we must not follow the world so
eagerly as either to thrust out Religious duties, or tire our selves to an
unfitness to attend them; all our success depends on the blessing of God, Prove
10 22. The blessing of the Lord, it makes rich; and all our endeavors, all
our prudence and industry without it is of no value. If we think the time lost
from the world, that we spend in daily religious exercises, we run away from
God, and practically deny his superintendency over all humane affairs, nor can
we have ground to expect to enjoy him with us in our employments.

3. Let us submit the issue of these things to the Providence of God. Diligence
and discretion is our Duty, and we must ask that of God too, for it is his
gift; but after all our care and wisdom, he governs the event as he will; and
the wise man observes in, Eccles 9 11. The race is not to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong, nor yet bread to the wise nor yet riches to men of
understanding, nor favor to men of skill; and he tells us that we ought to do
our Duty under the ignorance of what shall be the success, in, Chap. 11.6. In
the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening withold not thine hand; for thou
know not whether shall prosper, etc. that therefore is the advice given us,
Jam. 4.15 Ye ought to say, if the Lord will, we shall live, and do this or
that; and for this end we are to commit every thing that we are concerned in,
to him by faith and prayer, Psalm. 37.5. Commit thy way unto the Lord. And when
we have so done, it behooves us to be quiet, and not to perplex our selves with
anxious cares about it, but to wait patiently till we see the end of it,
believing that God is infinitely wise, and as he has all things at his
dispose, so he will certainly bring them about in such a way, as shall be most
for his glory, and our best good; and in this we should with greatest
satisfaction wait upon his Providence in well doing.

4. Let us carry it suitably toward God in every condition of this life. There
are many changes that we are liable to in regard of the affairs of this world,
and there is an answerable deportment required of us, if we would serve God
aright in them; we are therefore advised in, Eccl. 7.14 In the day of
prosperity rejoice, in the day of adversity consider. If God smiles upon our
secular concerns, and we prosper in our way, it becomes us to give him the
praise of it, and not to sacrifice to our own net, and burn incense to our own
drag; as they, Hab 1 16 And to study how we may serve him in and with it; and
take heed to our selves, that it do not become a snare to hinder us in our
faithful obedience to him: and if he defeat our most likely undertakings, and
bring us low in the world, we ought to adore his Sovereignty, and study what is
the language of it, so as to improve it to lower our esteem of mutable things,
and fix us the more in our earnest pursuit after a mere enduring substance.

VIII. If we would maintain our walking with God, we must use all means to
establish our Perseverance. A Christians walk is not only for a turn or two,
but it is to continue all his life. It is mentioned as the reproach of those
Disciples, who sometimes had followed Christ in Joh. 6.66. From that time many
of his Disciples went back, and walked no more with him. And Christ declares
how ill he resents such a thing, Luk 9.62. No man having put his hand to the
plough, and looking back is fit for the Kingdom of God. Now the Children of God
meet with a great many temptations, which offer to draw them off, to prejudice
them at the good ways of God, to allure them after the vanities of this world,
and make them to be weary and faint in their Christian progress; whereas the
promise runs to such as endure to the end, Mat ^ 4.13. Which that we may do.

1. Let us prize Communion with God above all things. Labor to get a firm and
experi^^^^al persuasion of the happiness of the Children of God in this world,
and that it consists in this, that they live with God, and have the advantage
of conversing with him. This is the reason why David declares them to be
blessed who hear the joyful sound, Psalm. 89.15. They shall walk, O Lord, in the
light of thy Countenance. Reckon every distance from him to be so far an
unhappiness but his company to be sufficient to carry you above all fear in the
darkest condition that you can be in; as he, Psalm. 23.4 Though I walk through
the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil, for thou art with me.

2. Let us keep our eye firmly fixed upon the unseen and eternal things. There
are the things of time that the people of God do here encounter withal, which
have such an aspect on them, as if they look no farther, will discourage them,
and make them to faint under the difficulty of them. We read of the stony
ground professors, Mat. 13. When tribulation, or persecution arises because of
the word, by and by he is offended. Now such trials as these are to be
expected; it is an Evangelical Doctrine, Acts 14.22. That we must through much
tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God; and if we do look no farther, we
shall doubtless tire and give in; for we are told, 1 Cor. 15.19. If in this
life only we have hope in Christ we are of all men most miserable; but if (...)
look forward by an eye of faith, we shall have a prospect which will swallow up
all this, take off the discouragement of the way we are walking in, and give us
fresh vigor in our pursuit of it, 2 Cor. 4.16, 18 For which cause we faint
not; whiles we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which
are not seen.

3. Let us get an heart more and more weaned from all the objects of sense.
There is Concupiscence remaining in the best of Gods people here; and sensible
objects have anattractiveness in them, to draw away our fleshly appetite after
them; and that will certainly disturb our Perseverance, and thereby impede our
Communion with God, and make us to drive heavily in our course of Christianity.
We must therefore be very careful to get our hearts loosned more and more every
day from these things, if we would hold on unmoveably in our way. Let us take
that advice, and be quickened by the argument with which it is strengthened, 1 John 2.15. Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world: if any
man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. And to that end let
us get more practical experience of the emptiness and vanity of these things,
and the very great hindrance that an over eager affection to them gives to the
great concerns of our Souls; which he that has any intimate acquaintance with
himself cannot but subscribe unto.

4. Let us contemn all the flatteries and frowns of the world. The great
endeavor of the world is to draw us off from our Walking with God, which it
prosecutes with utmost intenseness; and there are these two ways in which it
attempts it, viz. either by fawning insinuations wherewith it endeavors to
steal our hearts away after, and by false representations of things, as if
accommodated to give us the best satisfaction, to draw away our love to it, and
if it prevails, we shall go off from God; or else by threatenings and affronts
to terrify us, and make us afraid of following our way, by representing these
things with a discouraging aspect: but we must entertain both of these with an
holy scorn, and when they are pressed never so hard upon us, to say to the one,
as Peter once to Magus, Acts 8.20. Thy money perish with thee; and to resolve
of the other, as Paul does with respect to those bonds and afflictions that did
abide him, Acts 20.24. None of these things move me.

5. Let us be content to go alone. It is true, we cannot be alone, if we have
God with us; however, as to men it may be so. It is observable that this is the
encomium that God gave to Noah, Genesis 7 1. Thee have I seen righteous before me
in this generation: And it is certain, that there are but a few who go in this
Walk. Gods Company, that have fellowship with him, is but a little company: the
multitude go in the other way, which leads from him. There is an holy
singularity which all they must be contented withal, that would hold communion
with God in this life; nor must it prejudice them if they see, not only the
greatest number, but also the wisest men in the worlds account, going in
another road.

6. We must be content to follow God in the dark. It is true, God is sometimes
pleased to lead his Children in the light of his Countenance, and that is a
very comfortable thing, and they can rejoice all the day in his name; according
to, Psalm. 39.15, 16. But he very often calls them into a dark vale; there are
clouds that encompass them, and they cannot clearly see their way before them;
and if it be so with us, we must not baulk that, but resolve still to go on,
that we may keep with him, Psalm 23.4. Nay, if he hide his face from us, and we
are environed with darkness, trouble and fear, yet we must after him, and not
desert him, and say as he, Job 13.15. Though he slay me, I will trust in him.

7. We must ever interpret dark Providence by the Promise. Sometimes there are
very hard chapters in the Providence of God, which we are at a loss about the
meaning of, and now Temptations offer to draw us to despond, and sit still; but
for us so to do will dishonor God, whose Service we have engaged our selves
in, and bring us more into the dark; and though we cannot see the particular
meaning of such Dispensations at present, yet we have a clue, which if we
follow, it will never deceive us, and that is the promise, unto which all
Providence are accommodated, and shall issue in the accomplishment of; and if
there were no more, that one would be sufficient, Romans 8.28 We know that all
things work together, for good, to them that love God, to them who are the
called according to his purpose.

8. Maintain a believing resolve, that all they are happy that walk with God.
Could we always firmly build on his conclusion without wavering, how steadily
would it help us to walk? Here then,

1. Believe that your nearness to God now is your present safety and security.
Satan, and the corrupt part in us, would persuade us to count it our danger,
and thereby fright us from it, and could the adversaries of our Souls have
their will, they would make it so; but God has assured us that it is
otherwise: David gives this reason why he desired to dwell so near to God,
Psalm. 27 5. For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion. And
this is the argument of encouragement which God uses to fortify the hearts of
his people against fear, Isa 41.10. Fear thou not, for I am with thee, be not
dismayed, for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee, yea,
I will uphold thee by the right hand of my righteousness.

2. Believe that all that walk with him here, shall rest with him for ever. The
way in which all such as these go, is the way of peace; it is the way to
eternal life; and all that follow it to the end of it, shall without fail
arrive at last in the Everlasting Kingdom. They that walk with God, have him
for their Guide; and David could presume upon this, Psalm 73.24. Thou shall
guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to Glory. And let the way
be in it self never so difficult, and discouraging, yet this is your
consolation, that under the conduct of such a Guide there is no fear of
miscarrying.

9. Look to the Lord Jesus Christ as your Undertaker, and rely on him to do all
that (...) you, by which you may be preserved in your (...) till you come to
the end of it. If you would walk and not faint, nor miscarry in your way, you
must lean on him as your beloved. Neither lean to your own understandings; nor
confide in your own strength, but by the continued exercise of faith, fetch all
grace from him, to enable you to hold on to the end: so shall you abide in him,
and hold on your way; yea, grow stronger in it, till you arrive at the end of
your faith, the Salvation of your Souls: for we are assured in, Isa. 40 31.
They that wait on the Lord shall renew their strength: they shall mount up with
wings as eagles; they shall run and not be weary, and they shall walk and not
faint.

FINIS.

