Prognostics OF Impending Calamities. Delivered in a SERMON Preached on the
Lecture at Boston, July 17. 1701. Occasioned by the DEATH of the Truly
Honorable, William Stoughton Esquire. Lieutenant GOVERNOR, etc. of the Province
of the Massachusetts Bay, in New England.

By SAMUEL WILLARD, Teacher of a Church in Boston.

Eccl. 7.2. The living will lay it to his heart.

Boston: Printed by B. Green and J. Allen, for Nicholas Boon, at his Shop over
against the old-meeting house. 1701

Prognostics OF Impending Calamities.
2 Kings XXII. 20. Behold therefore I will gather thee unto thy Fathers, and
thou shall be gathered to thy Grave in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all
the evil which I will bring upon this place.


IN this Chapter, and that which follows, we have an account given of the most
remarkable passages of the Life and Reign of Josiah, an Excellent Prince, and
in some respects, unparalled by any of the Kings that had gone before him. I
shall not now insist on his early piety, and speedily exerting it in an
industrious restoring of the Worship of God, which had been so depraved under
some of his Progenitors. That which I shall observe, to make way to the Text
under consideration, is that whiles he is engaged about purging of the Temple,
God ordered the finding, and presenting him with the Book of the Law, which was
of manifold use to him at this time, verse 8 etc. When Gods Servants are
sincerely engaged in Reformation he is wont to reveal himself more unto them,
for their direction and quickening. One eminent and observable passage is, that
upon the reading of this book to him, Josiah is convinced that his people lay
exposed to the fierce anger of God, in that by their Apostasy they had laid
themselves open to the threatenings therein denounced; which deeply affects him,
Verse 11. He rent his clothes. Whereupon he presently sends messengers to
enquire of God what was to be done to divert the Judgment denounced, Verse 12,
13, 14. From thence to the end of the Chapter, we have an account of the return
given him upon this message. It is the surest way, for Gods people to ask
counsel of him, when they are in any perplexity. In this return there are two
parts observable,

1. A confirmation of the threatenings against the body of that People, which
should certainly issue in their ruin, Verse 15, 16, 17.

2. A consolation directed to Josiah, Verse 18. to the end of the Chapter. Many
worthy remarks might be made on every passage of it, but I may not tarry here:
I shall only glance on the last Article of it, recorded in our Text, which
contains in it a gracious promise made to him with regard to those times which
were coming. The Promise in Sum is, that God would keep off this Calamity,
during his life, and would deliver him from the sight and sorrow of it, by
removing him out of this World. In particular, there are three passages by
which it is expressed.

1. I will gather thee to thy fathers.] Which manner of speech is used in the
Scriptures to set forth the state of the Dead, in which one Generation succeeds
another; and it is indifferently applied both to Godly and wicked men: and
diverse suppose it to refer not only to the state of the Body, but of the Soul
too, after Death; but I dispute it not: only observe, That God says he will do
it, I will gather thee; which tells us, That God disposes of the Life and
Death of all men at his pleasure. And because God promises this to him as a
favor or privilege, it farther teaches, That it is sometimes a peculiar
Privilege for Godly men to Die.

2 And thou shall be gathered to thy Grave in Peace.] To be gathered to his
Grave, intends, that he should have a funeral bestowed on him; and he had a
very honorable one, as is recorded in, 2 Chronicles. 35.24, 25. But it maybe here
demurred, how this promise was fulfilled, that he should be gathered in Peace,
whereas he was slain in battle? Some interpret it, that he dyed in Peace with
God, and so entered into everlasting Peace, which is true and not hence to be
excluded, yet it is not the whole truth of it. Others therefore generally
understand it of the public Peace of the Nation, which was not at that time
embroiled in War; and both of these may be taken in conjunction: and we may
learn from it, That let a man die a natural or violent Death, yet if he be
reconciled to God, he dies in Peace. As also, That it is a favor to live and
die in times of public Tranquillity. Hezekiah thought it to be so, 2 King 20.19
Is it not good, if peace and truth be in my days?

3. And thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon this
place.] These words are supposed to be explicatory of the former, and added to
signify in what respect he should be gathered in Peace, viz. That he should not
be disturbed with the fight of the Calamities of that dismal time; but that by
Death he should be out of the noise of it, or any acquaintance with it:
teaching us, That Dead Saints, when gone to their rest, know nothing of the
affairs of this World. And consequently, That it is a kindness for them to be
called off first, when doleful Calamities are coming upon their People. But we
may farther look upon these words as they stand distributive with the foregoing
threatening against the People; and it is, q d. I will without fail bring all
these evils upon the sinful Land; however I will defer it as long as thou
live, and stand in the gap: I will therefore first see thee well housed,
and then I will open the floodgates and let in Cataracts of desolation upon
them; whence observe this,

DOCTRINE. Sometimes God takes away good men in order to the letting in of more
fearful and amazing Judgments upon a People.

There are seasons when the removal of such as these is a prognostic of great
Evils at the door, and ready to break in upon the Land where they have lived.
It is not indeed always so, but sometimes it is otherwise: and there are the
Rules for discerning of this, which it becames all wise men to observe, that
they may practice accordingly; for we are told, Prove. 27.12. The prudent
foreseeth the evil, and hides himself. It may then be suitable and seasonable
in such a day as this is, to make some enquiry into that Case, viz.

Quest. When the removal of good men is a foreboding symptom of great miseries
ready to break in upon a people.

A That this Case may be rightly stated and resolved, let these Conclusions be
observed.

1. That Death is the common lot of all, both good and bad. There is an old
Statute for it, which has been of force ever since man's fall, Heb. 9.27. It is
appointed for men once to die. It was sin that brought it into the world, and
subjected all sinful men to it, Rom 5, 12. Death passed on all men, for that
all have sinned. It therefore belongs to the Curse, and though God has taken
out the sting of the Curse from it in respect of his own Children, and rendered
it beneficial to them, yet he has seen good to continue it in this world, and
make it to be the passage of men from time to eternity; and hence it is not, of
it self, a note of distinction between the Godly and the wicked, for both die,
and those pass over to heaven, as well as these are detruded into hell, through
this common road: It is the Psalmists observation, Psalm. 49.10. He sees that
wise men die, likewise the foolish and brutish person; and this Job lotted
upon, Chap 30 23. I know that thou will bring me to death, and to the house
appointed for all living.

2. That Death, whenever it comes, is to good men, a pasport from their labor
to their reward. The time of life is working time, and though Godly men can merit
nothing by their best works, nay they utterly renounce all thoughts of so
doing, yet God has, in the New Covenant, promised a reward of Grace, to the
faithful Service that is done him by his Children in this life, for we are told
in, Psalm 58.11. Verily there is a reward for the righteous. And as they are to
follow their work as long, as they continue here, being faithful in it unto
death, so there is a recompense which they shall receive in the end of it,
after they have persevered in it, Gal 6.9. Let us not be weary in well doing,
for in due season we shall reap if we faint not. And the Scriptures abound with
promises of this nature. Now though there is reserved a more glorious
compleatment of this reward for the great day; in which their faithful Service
shall be declared openly before the whole world, and they shall receive it both
in Soul and Body after the most stately manner, yet their Souls do enter upon
it immediately at their dissolution. We are therefore told, Isa. 57.2. They
shall enter into peace, they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his
uprightness; they are on this account declared blessed from that very instant,
Rev. 14.13. Blessed are the dead, which die in the Lord, from henceforth: And
this is contained in the reason which Paul gives of his desire; Phil. 1.23.
Having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which is far better.

3. That God has allotted to each one of his Servants, the work of their
Generation, and when it is done he calls them to rest. Every Godly man is
cordially engaged in the Service of God, and it is his Duty diligently to
pursue it as long as he abides in the Body, for he will have work to do all the
while he lives: but God has in his holy counsel laid out what work he will
have from every one, which he will give them the opportunity for, and when they
have done that, he calls them off and gives them a quietus sit. He knows what
business he has laid out for this and for that man to do, and as he will
continue him in life until that be over, so he will call him home to himself
when it is done; thus we read of David, Acts 13 36. David after he had served
his own generation by the will of God, fell on sleep, and was laid unto his
fathers, and saw corruption. They may possibly see a great deal more of
desirable work before them, which they would have been glad if they might be
serviceable in; but God accepts of their fidelity in that little which they
have done faithfully, and thereupon gives them an honorable discharge, in
calling them home to rest in his Glory.

4. That when God has more favor to bestow on his people, he adapts other
instruments to be made use of in the continuing of it. He does not always take
away good men in anger against a people, but he does it to declare his
sovereignty and his power, and absolute independency, and to take the occasion
to distribute his honors among his Servants. As he uses none to do his work,
for any need that he has of them, for he could as easily have done it without
them; so he has the residue of the Spirit, and can communicate to others a
double portion of it as he pleases, when he sees meet to call them to any
eminent service; and he makes way for their serviceableness by calling of
others from their post, when they have kept it as long as he saw good: and when
he purposes the continuance of his benignity to a people, he is wont thus to
do Thus when Moses was to die, God provided and spirited Joshua to conduct his
people Israel into, and give them the possession of Canaan, whom the other had
so happily conducted to the borders of it. Moses therefore when he was
acquainted that he must not do that service himself, so addresseth God about
it, Numb. 27.16. Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man
over the Congregation, etc. Which the Lord accordingly did, and commands Moses
to set apart Joshua for it, verse 18, etc. And by this way God mercifully
continues his presence with and among a people. Thus when David had
accomplished his work in making ready for the Building the Temple, Solomon
succeeds him, who carries on the work that his father had begun, with very
great success.

5. That God sometimes takes away useful instruments in the midst of their
work, in Testimony of his displeasure at them personally. The most pious and
eminently serviceable men have their frailties and sinful infirmities; and
though in the tenor of their lives they do faithfully serve their generation
to Gods glory, in obedience to his command, yet he is sometimes pleased so far
to leave them to themselves, as once he did Hezekiah, as that in some overt
action or other, they discover this imperfection, by doing something that is to
Gods dishonor, and by which he is righteously provoked at them: and though he
loves their persons, yet he dislikes the things that are so done by them, as, 2 Samuel 11 ult. The thing that David did, displeased the Lord. And though he
accepts of their faithful Service, and will reward it graciously; nor shall
these obliquities put them out of his favor; yet he will bear some notable
Testimony against the thing which they did, and that in this world; and he has
many ways in which he does this, instances whereof we shall find in the Word of
God: and among others this is one, that he call them off in the midst of a
work, which their hearts were engaged in, and will not suffer them to
accomplish it: which, though it does not hinder their eternal blessedness, yet
is a fatherly rebuke given them, and is to them a matter of humbling, and to
others a matter of warning. Thus Moses conducts Israel through the Wilderness
to the very borders of the promised Land, and they were now just ready to enter
in and possess it, but he must die, though apt enough for that Service, for we
read, Deuteronomy. 34 7. His eye was not dim, nor his natural force abated; but the
reason why it must be so is rendered in, Numb. 27.14 Thou shall be gathered to
thy people, as Aaron thy brother was gathered; for ye rebelled against my
Commandment (in the desert of Zin, in the strife of the Congregation) to
sanctify me at the water, before their eyes. Nor could he obtain a repeal of
this sentence, though he earnestly requested it, Deuteronomy 3 23. etc. I besought the
Lord at that time, saying, etc. I pray thee let me go over, etc. but the Lord
was wroth and said, let it suffice thee, speak no more to me of this matter.
Thus also it was with Josiah, who had wrought a great reformation in the
Kingdom of Judah, and now hoped to live to confirm it, and enjoy many happy
days in the comfort of it, but he must die, and that business cease: and we are
told how this came to pass, 2 Chronicles. 35.22 He hearkened not to the words of
Necho from the mouth of God

6. Nevertheless there are times wherein God takes away such men in a way of
Judgment against their people. Nay, this may be so, and often is so, when they
themselves do suffer the chastisement of their own failings: for God many times
leaves them to such mistakes, in anger against a people; thus we read, 2 Samuel 24
1 The anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel and he moved David against
them, to say, go number Israel and Judah. And such to be sure was the removal
of Josiah at this time, for, in regard of himself, it was an accomplishment of
the gracious promise made to him in our Text; and God often calls off such of
his precious Servants when there is no such thing; and such a Providence is
recorded in the Scriptures as an introduction to other and greater calamities
for which it is to make way, and which are to ensue upon it: read for this,
Isa. 3 beg. The Lord of Hosts does take away from Judah and from Jerusalem, the
mighty men, the Man of War, the Judge, the Prophet, the Prudent, the Ancient,
the Counselor, etc. So that it is not only a Judgment it self, but an
harbinger to more and more awful Judgments. And that we be not mistaken in our
observation on such a dispensation, let us consider:

1. That every Godly man is a blessing in the place where be lives, and his
Death is a loss. It is the wise man's observation, Prove. 12 26. The righteous is
more excellent than his neighbor. And the more worth there is in any thing,
the greater damage is sustained in the losing of it. The Saints are called the
excellent that are on the earth, Psalm. 16.3. Whenas ungodly men are said to be
vile, and are compared to dross, and to chaff, which are contemptible. Of what
esteem such men are with God, and how profitable they are to a people among
whom they dwell, may be remarked, in that ten such would have kept off
vengeance from destroying Sodom it self: Genesis 18.32. I will not destroy it for
tens sake. These are they unto whom God has respect, and not only do they pray
heartily and importunately for their people, but they have an interest in
Heaven, and God neareth their prayers, Isa. 66 2. To this man will I look, even
to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my word. And
therefore, let these be never so obscure, carry never so mean a part among men,
be little noticed, but rather despised by their Neighbors, yet when they die,
the places they lived in are sufferers by it; on which account we find the
Psalmist so expostulating; Psalm. 12.1. Help, Lord, for the Godly man cease,
for the faithful fail from among the Children of men.

2. The more eminent any have been for Holiness, and zeal in the cause of God,
the greater is the loss of such. Every good man is a public blessing, but
there are some who are more so than others; and these are such as do most
express the life and power of Godliness in their conversation. The more
exemplary that any are for their piety, the more careful they are to order
their whole course aright, and the more practically they bear witness against
sin, and live contrary to the corruptions of the times and places they are cast
into, the more is God glorified by them, and the greater is the public benefit
that is enjoyed in them. It is the commendation that God gives to Phineas,
Numb. 25.11. Phineas, the son of Eliazar, the son of Aaron the Priest, has
turned away my wrath from the Children of Israel, whiles he was zealous for my
sake among them. When therefore such men are taken away, there is more of God
goes with them. Such as these were stakes in the hedge to keep off Judgments,
and now they are plucked out of it.

3. The more public Station these stand in, the loss is still more
influential. When goodness and greatness meet together in a man, such an one is
of eminent use and service for a people; these have a great advantage put into
their hands above others, to promote the interest of Gods Glory, to suppress
the prevalency of provoking sins, and to encourage the ways of righteousness
and piety: yea their very Example is of greater force to command men; and when
God bestows such upon a people, he does it in great mercy. The Queen of Sheba
made that observation on Solomon, when she had seen, and was surprised with his
great wisdom, 1 Kin. 10.9. Because the Lord loved Israel for ever, therefore
made he thee King. And truly, the more happy a people have been in the
enjoyment of such, the more sorrowful must the loss of them be. These are main
pillars in the building, and do mightily strengthen it as long as they stand in
it; it must needs therefore be much weakened by the plucking them down and
taking them away; and the more rarely that greatness and goodness meet in one
person, the more awful must the death of these be.

4. The more capable they were of Service, the more afflictive is the loss of
them. The best and ablest of men are subject to the infirmities of nature, and
to lose the vigor and activity both of mind and body by sickness, and the
decays of age, so that sometimes their work is next to done before they die; and
now they would very gladly go to rest, if God will give them leave, when they
can no longer be serviceable to him as formerly: and yet even such, although
they die seasonably for themselves, may die in a bad hour for their people, and
Judgments might but wait for their departure. But when they are in the verdure
of their age, and in the midst of their work, engaged strenuously in the
Service of God and his people now to be cut down and called off, is no small
rebuke in Providence, and gives occasion for deep searchings of heart; such was
the death of Josiah in our Context; he was now in his prime, and what a
blessing might he have been to Judah? and what Service might he have yet done
for the house of God, if he had pleased to have lengthened his days, and
continued him still in his Station.

5. These considerations alone will not amount to an evidence that their death
is to make way for the inundation of sore Judgments. These things indeed may be
witnesses of Gods displeasure, and inflicted in way of chastisement upon a
people, and so they ought to be deeply resented, and duly improved; and to
neglect them will render a people guilty; but of themselves they are the
ordinary dispensations of Gods Providence to his people in the best of times.
Would we therefore make a true judgment of those things we ought carefully to
observe the circumstances of their death, and these as they come under Moral
consideration; else we may labor of a mistake on either hand; and there are
those Rules to be gathered from the Word of God which will be serviceable to
conduct us right in this search, and by which we may be led to draw safe
conclusions about these unhappy Symptoms; for which let us here observe.

1. That sin is the moral procuring cause of Gods Judgments upon a people Sin
brought all the evil into the world which mankind are exposed unto; for they
are nothing else but practical Commentaries on the Text of Death, which is
expressed in the threatening; and though God acts much of his Sovereignty in the
dispensing of his Judgments among sinful men, sometimes exemplifying of his
patience in bearing long with them, at other times declaring his holy severity
in letting out of his fury upon them, yet hither are they referred as to the
rise of them; hence that, Isa 59.2. Your iniquities have separated between you
and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you; and Jer. 2.17. Have
thou not procured this to thy self, in that thou have forsaken the Lord thy
God? and the People of God have been wont, when they were truly awakened, to
acknowledge this in their confessions to him, in which they have justified him,
and taken the whole blame to themselves declaring that in all that has come
upon them, he has visited them less than their iniquities deserved, Ezra 9 13

2. That God, in the dispensation of the Covenant to a professing people, has
limited the threatening to an Hypothesis There are both promises and threatenings
which belong to it as it is exhibited in the Gospel; but they are not absolute
but connex in the exhibition of them: and therefore we are every where told on
what account the threatenings are, or what it is for, and in what way a person
or a people may expose themselves to be made the unhappy subjects of the
execution of them; whereby they are instructed that if they avoid such things
and practice the contrary cordially, they shall so escape the threatened evil;
yea he has made a promise of doing them good, and continuing of his blessings
to them, Isa. 1 19. If ye be willing and obedient ye shall eat the good of the
land. Nay he has so restreined the threatening, that he has secured to them a
stop of begun Judgments, and deliverance from the oint and full accomplishment
of them, upon their Repentance, Jer. 18.7. And at what instant I shall speak
concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up and pull down, and
destroy it: if that nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their
evil, I will repent of the evil which I thought to do unto them.

3. That yet God is sometimes so provoked at a people, that he resolves to
bring them to feel the severity of the threatening. Though the promise of the
Covenant do stand according to the tenor of it, and it must be so, for it is
inviolable, yet sometimes God is resolute that such a people shall smart
severely for their provocations, and shall not escape; and this he will bring
to pass consistent with the veracity of his promise, by leaving them to
themselves, and their own lusts. There are therefore some threatenings denounced
by God, which are in this sense absolute and determinate, such was that against
Saul, for the taking away the Kingdom from his Family, of which the Prophet
has that observation, 1 Samuel 15 29. The strength of Israel will not ly nor
repent, for he is not a man that he should repent. And how resolved God was
against the Kingdom of Judah, we may see in, Eze. 14.14 Though these three men,
Noah, Daniel and Job were in it, they should deliver but their own souls: And
yet about the same time Jeremiah could make that offer unto them, Jer. 26 13.
Now amend your ways and your doings, and obey the voice of the Lord your God,
and the Lord will repent him of the evil that he has pronounced against you.
And this notwithstanding God himself had before said to him, Chap. 7.16. Pray
not for this people, neither lift up cry nor prayer for them, neither make
intercession to me, for I will not hear thee.

4. That, this notwithstanding, he sometimes raises holy and zealous
reformers, who hold back his hand from executing the threatening. These are of
Gods own providing and by such as these there is a respiting of the execution,
and we may, in a sound sense, truly say, that if these had not interposed, and
held back his hand, the case of such a people had been dismal, and his wrath
had broken in, and born down all before it. On this account we shall read such
expressions in, Psalm. 106 23. He said that he would destroy them, had not Moses
his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest he
should destroy them; and in Verse. 29, 30. Thus they provoked him with their
inventions; and the plague brake in upon them: Then stood up Phineas and
executed Judgment; and so the plague was stayed. And we shall find more than
once that in Judah, when things were brought to a fearful pass; when their sins
cried to Heaven for Vengeance, and Judgments brake in upon them with fury, some
holy man or other has stepped in, and prevented the final stroke. Thus did
Hezekiah, and thus did Josiah, and thus also did Jehojada in the days of Joash.

5. That such a people may be Hypocritical in their Reformation. Yea, it too
often falls out, that when holy and zealous Magistrates and Ministers appear
for the interest of Religion, there will be much of an out side show, as if the
body of such a people were cordially engaged, and were resolved in setting
forward so good a work; when indeed it is nothing but flattery and
dissimulation. It is charged upon them in the wilderness, Psalm. 78.34. to 38.
When he slew them, then they sought him, and returned, etc. nevertheless they
did flatter him with their mouth, and lied unto him with their tongues, for
their heart was not right with him, neither were they steadfast in his Covenant.
And it is notorious by the consequence, that the Reformation made by Jehojada,
in the days of Joash, was such, if we read, 2 Chronicles. 24. And of that eminent
one wrought by Josiah, we have Gods own animadversion upon it, Jer. 3.10. Her
treacherous Sister Judah has not turned unto me with her whole heart, but
feignedly, says the Lord.

6. Hence, by taking off these men from such a people, God makes way for his
wrath to break in upon them. God is not to be imposed on, or put off with men's
dissimulation, for, God is not mocked; he knows their hearts and designs. He
is not therefore atoned to such a people, though for a while he with holds his
wrath, in testimony of his especial respect to such of his Servants: but still
the provocation abides, and he will find an occasion to let it be seen to their
cost. In order to this, he puts these men out of the way. Whiles they enjoyed
them, he not only gave them a space to repent, but, under them, gave them all
encouragments and helps unto it; but they repented not: he will therefore
remove these pillars, and call home his Ambassadors, and now, what but fury is
to be expected? And from the premises, we may gather these five Symptoms of
their being removed in order to his venting of his anger upon such a people.

1. When these have lived despised and reproached Whatever out side pretenses
men have made of their respect for them, yet they have indeed been weary of
such: their piety, their zeal, their holy Conversation, and the Testimonies
which they have born against sin, have been burdensome to the most, and they
have sat uneasy under them. Hereupon they have on all occasions, and without
just occasion, murmured, and complained, and found fault with them: in stead of
giving God thanks for such men, they have wished them gone, thought they lived
too long, counted them the troublers of Israel, been ready to charge all
adverse Providence which have fallen out among them, to their evil conduct;
and have sought all under hand ways to under-mine their names, and blast their
credit among men. So Israel dealt with Moses and Aaron in the wilderness, Psalm
106.16. They envied Moses also in the Camp, and Aaron the Saint of the Lord.
And thus the Jews traduced Jeremiah, Chap. 38.4. The Princes said unto the
King, we beseech thee let this man be put to death, etc for this man seeks
not the welfare of this people, but the hurt. And thus it was in Isaiahs time,
Isa 59.25 Truth fails, and he that departs from evil, makes himself a prey.

2. When they die unlamented. Possibly a people may make a great outward show of
mourning over them, and give some plausible signals of it; they may build them
tombs, as they of old did for their Prophets, whom they had persecuted in their
lives; but it is nothing but mere dissimulation, when indeed they are inwardly
glad that such are gone, and discover their gladness in it by too broad tokens.
This was evident in the Death of that holy Reformer, Jehojadah. We indeed read
of great outward respect shown him in his funeral, 2 Chronicles. 24.16. They buried
him in the City of David, among the Kings, because he had done good in Israel,
both toward God, and toward his house. But we shall discover their Hypocrisy
in what they did presently upon it, Verse 17. After the death of Jehojadah,
came the Princes of Judah, and made obeisance to the King, and he hearkened to
them. No doubt they accosted him after such a manner as this, That great zealot
is now Dead, who held us under such an intolerable restraint, and abridged us
of our liberty, and would not suffer us to follow our own inclinations, but
punished every transgression, etc. but now he is gone, and will trouble us no
more, etc. It is therefore given as an Omen of evil hastening, when such men
die, and their Death is not duly resented, Isa 57.1. The righteous perishes,
and no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away, none considering
that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come. And truly this makes it
evident that they were a burden to their people whiles they lived, and that
they bless them selves in their being eased of them.

3. When the gap which was made by their removal, is not filled up again. The
great blessing that any people enjoy by such men, is that they stand in the
gap, to keep off the wrath of God from flowing in upon them: and of what
influence their standing there is for this end, we may gather from that, Jer.
5.1. Run to and fro through the streets of Jerusalem, see if ye can find a man,
if there be any that executes judgment, that seeks the truth, and I will
pardon it. Their Death therefore leaves the breach open, unless there be some
other to step into it in their room, who may fill it up again, and this is done
only by such as are men of a like spirit, and are acted with the same zeal for
God which was in their predecessors. Hezekiah had a successor, but who was it?
a Manasseh, who did not follow his fathers steps, but turned all things upside
down, and destroyed what his father had built. Josiah had Successors in the
Kingdom, but they proved such as provoked God, widened the breach put an end
to, and utterly ruined the Reformation which he had so gloriously begun; and
that hastened Gods wrath, and brought a speedy desolation upon the Land. Hence
we have that exprobration on Jehojakim, Jer. 22, 15. etc. Shall thou reign,
because thou closest thy self in cedar? did not thy father eat and drink; and
do judgment and justice, and then it was well with him etc. And how fearfully
is he threatened? Verse 18, 19. This therefore God renders as a reason why he
would bring ruin and desolation on the Kingdom of Judah, because there were
none to make up the breach, Ezekiel. 22.30, 31. I sought for a man among them that
should make up the hedge, and stand in the gap before me for the land, that I
should not destroy it, but I found none; therefore have I poured out mine
indignation upon them, etc.

4. When upon their Death iniquity gets head again among a people. So long as
they lived, they suppressed it, and though men were wicked, and would practice it
secretly, yet they dare not to make an open show of it, and declare their sin
as Sodom, but curbed themselves in, and made an outward show of Sobriety and
Religion; but now it breaks forth with the greatest impetuosity, as waters do
that have been long pent up, when the dam that kept them in is broken down.
Thus it was upon the Death of Jehojadah, 2 Chronicles 24 18. They left the house of
the Lord God of their fathers, and served Groves and Idols: and wrath came upon
Judah, etc. And it we observe the current of the Scripture history, we shall
find that the misery and calamity of a professing people was introduced in this
order: Godly and zealous Rulers in State and Church were taken from them, and
they presently fell into their Apostasies, and hereby God was stirred up to
anger against them, and all manner of evils thereupon over took them, and
wasted them. We have such a remark made with respect to the times of the
Judges, Judge. 2.19, 20. When the Judge was dead, they returned, and corrupted
themselves more than their fathers, etc. and the anger of the Lord was hot
against Israel, etc.

5 When those good men who are left behind can do nothing to prevent the
inundation of Apostasy. God does not use to take away all Godly men at once
from a people; There were, in the most degenerate times of Judah, holy men, and
God took notice of them, and sat a mark upon them, Ezekiel. 9.4. Go through the
midst of the City, and set a mark upon them that sigh, and that cry for all the
abominations that are done in the midst of it. And God raised up Prophets, who
bare witness against their degeneracies, and abominations, but they were
despised, and abused, and murdered; 2 Chronicles. 24.19 etc. And there were good men
in places of authority, but they were over born, they had no influence, they
could mend nothing, prevent nothing, but all went backward; and all they could
do was but to Save their own Souls. In a word, they could not stand in the gap;
though they mourned in secret places for their pride, etc. as the Prophet
expresses himself, Jer. 13 17. And when such things as these attend the Death
of good men, the Prognosticit is amazing.

USE.
The only improvement I shall offer, is to invite us all to make a serious
application of these truths to our selves, and to make through enquiry how far
we are concerned in them. There are a great many awful tokens of Divine
Displeasure against this sinful Land, appearing in the face of Providence,
which call for our deep Meditation, and speedy Reformation; and not to be
sensibly affected with these things, is an argument of sottish stupidity, and
the most ill boding Symptom of hastening calamity. Among others, and because in
conjunction with so many others of a black and sad aspect, the Death of
Righteous men, and peculiarly of such as have born a public figure and been in
that regard, eminently serviceable to this people, deserves an Asterism to be
set upon it. What breaches God has lately made upon both Orders of the
Magistracy, and of the Ministry is obvious, and not to regard his operations is
severely threatened, Psalm. 28.5 Because they regard not the works of the Lord,
nor the operation of his hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up. I
shall at present only reflect upon the death of that Worthy Patriot, whole
Funeral we have this week solemnizd, whose Piety, Prudence, Learning,
Integrity, love of Religion, love to his people, serviceableness to the public
for so many years, faithfulness to that Service in several capacities, and that
in either England, zeal for the Truth both in Doctrine and Worship, and noble
Munificence do praise him in our Gates; and will command the commendation even
of envy it self. These have erected him a more stately and lasting monument in
the hearts of wise and good men, then pillars of brass or marble; and will
embalm his name, and make it precious to after generations. Certainly, when
such Cedars fall, the whole Wood must Echo the resentment of it: and I could do
no less than drop this groan over his Tomb. How far this Providence is
accommodable to the fore mentioned sad Prognostics I leave it to every prudent
and ponderous man's consideration. All I shall add is, the fall of this great
man in our Israel, is attended with many awful circumstances, not easily
enumerated; every of which bespeak Gods displeasure, and all of them put
together, a great beat of Divine anger We are greatly Apostatized from our
primitive profession and zeal; great heart divisions and open contentions are
found among us; many immoralities have gotten head in the midst of us; God has
many ways testified against us, and waited for our Reformation, but we have
rather grown worse, and remain stupid; and his hand is stretched out still; and
what shall we conjecture is like to be the end of these things? let me only
here insinuate, the consideration of the juncture of time, which must needs put
a great Emphasis on the Providence it self, How much our affairs at home are
involved, is best known to such as sit at our Helm: but this all are privy to,
that it is a time threatening to involve all Christendom in War; a time wherein
God has but lately removed from us a Governor, under whose mild conduct we
enjoyed many desirable things; and our hopes under God, upon his departure,
were on him whose loss we now bewail: and by this there is a wide gap made in
our hedge; and who shall thrust into, and make it up? It then deeply concerns
us all to lay these things to heart, and tremble before this holy and angry God
Our only hope is, that when all created help fails us, and there is none shut
up or left, God knows how to appear for our help and succor; only let it rouz
us up to a due sense of his anger, and let that drive us to a speedy and
cordial returning, to him: and let it encourage us thus to do, because God is
gracious, and if we repent of our sins, he will repent of the evil which he
threatens us withal. And let us not slight or despise these solemn warnings
given us by our God, lest he be provoked to anger, and cause the Funerals of
our wise and good Leaders, to be but the harbingers to the Funeral of all, that
is preoious and pleasant among us.

FINIS.

