Some Remarks On a late SERMON, Preached at Boston in New England, BY George
Keith M. A. SHOWING That his pretended Good Rules in Divinity, are not built on
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets.

By Increase Mather.

Phil. 1.17. Knowing that I am set for the defense of the Gospel.

Consuetudo sine Veritate vetustas erroris est.

Cyprian. BOSTON: Printed for Nicholas Boon near the Old Meeting House. 1702.

Some REMARKS On a late Sermon Preached at Boston in New England.
By George Keith. M. A.
Sect. 1. THere is of late com^ forth a Sermon Preached by George Keith, M.A.
Which I am importuned by some who are scandalized by that Discourse to
Animadver^ upon. The Author instead of keeping to his Text, or to the Doctrine
of the Apostles and Prophets, has obtruded upon us notions of his own, which he
calls Good Rules in Divinity: but every one of them, if not taken with grains
of Salt, are unsavory Divinity. This Writer has not long since been famous for
corrupting many in the Fundamentals of Religion, in which he has seen and
renounced his errors, and is on that account worthy of commendation*
Nevertheless, it seems by the Publication of his present pretended Sentiments,
he aims a^ gaining a Reputation by Endeavors to seduc^ m^n from the Truth in
matters relating to that Order of the Gospel, which is of Divine Insti^u^ion. I
think there is no great fear that such weak reasonings as he has offered, will
gain many Prose^^es among those who are so well inst^^cted and en^ightned in
the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles, as the People in New England
(through Grace) generally are. Nor has he sa^d any t^ing but what is ^rambebis
(...), said by others, and has been Answered more than twenty times. Yet
inasmuch as many amongst us have not those Books in which his Good Rules in
Divinity are abundantly con^u^ed, and discovered to be false ones, and since if
nothing should be replied to him, some of his p^^^y will be apt to say that his
Allegations are unanswerable. We shall therefore make some few Remarks upon
them.

Sect. 2 His first Rule is in these words: Whatever is Enjoined by our
Superiors, if it contradict (...) Gods Command in Holy Scripture ought for
Conscience sake to be obeyed, according to 1 Pet. 1 13, 14. ^^m 12.5. Heb. 1^
7, 17 And if what they Enjoin is not made a Command of God, or an Article of
Faith, or a means of Grace. Such a Rule as this would do very well among
Papists: For their Clergy men readily swear Obedience to their Superiors as
some others do Canonical Obedience. But this does not very well agree with the
Apostles Rule, who has taught Christians not to use their lawful liberty when
the use thereof cannot be without scandal, Romans 14. ^ Mr. K's. Rule implies
that the determination of a Superior will take away the sin of scandal, and
make it a duty for a men to offend his Brother. Thus have Dr. Ames, and Mr.
Jeanes long si^ce a^gued to show the invalidity of their reas^ning who p^^^end
Obedience to Superiors though acting contrary to edification and charity to be
a duty. As for the Texts by him a l^^^ged they only speak of Subjection. I
suppose he is not altogether ignorant that our Divines when the Scriptures
quoted have been urged against them, are wont to Answer that there is a
difference between Subjection and Obedience. Subjectio potest esse ubi ^on est
obedientia, says the Casuill: They are subject who choose rather to suffer then
Obey an O^dinance which their Consciences will not permit them to comply with.
A Learned Countrym^n of his own (namely Mr. George (...) in his Part ^. Chap. ^.
Judicious Disputations ag^ansi English Popish Ceremonies) will instruct him,
that whatsoever Superiors Command in such matters as any way appertain to the
External Worship of God, must be both lawful in the nature of it, and expedient
in the use of it, which Conditions if they be wanting, their injunctions do not
bind to Obedience. The Divine Law bind^ men to do nothing which is not for
edification, 1 Cor. 6.12. and 14.26. which whether the thing required be so,
every man has liberty to examine v. Davenant de Judice controvers. cap 14
by the judgment of discretion. The Laws of men are only Regulae regulatae, and
Mensurae mensuratae. If Mr. K intends an Intimation that humane Laws do
directly bind the Conscience, his Divinity is not good. They bind not ( propter
se sed propter aliud) of themselves, but because of some other Law of a
Superior bond. So Calvin, Beza, and among the Pontificians, Gerson and many
other Casuists v. Ames Gas. Cons^ lib. 5 cap 25.
have determined. In Civil Matters the Laws of men are to be complied with when
they are not repugnant to any Law of God. But in Religious or Ecclesiastical
matters, we are not to consider so much what men say, as what the Lord says.
Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our
King. Jam. 4.12. There is one Law giver. In matters relating to the Worship of
God, the Negative argumen^ is sufficient. What is not commanded ought not be
practiced. Ier. 7.31. Heb. 7.14. All sound Protestants agree, that Christ is
the only Head of the Church. It does therefore belong to him alone to appoint
Laws for the Government of his Church. If men, let them be never so Superior,
suppose Pope or Emperor shall take upon them to make Ecclesiastical Laws which
the Lord Christ has never made, no man is bound in Conscienc^ to submit to
them, but may with a good conscience refuse to Conform thereunto, and will be a
Martyr in case he suffers for that his Non Conformity. Some of ^a^e have
taught, that a man's private Conscience must be ruled by the public Conscience,
viz. The will of Superiors, which (as one says) is a Solecism in Divinity.
^ouner used to object Rom: 13.5. against the Martyrs. All the time of Popery
Protestants were reproached as disobedient to Authority. Celsus reflects on
Christians after the same manner. Conformi^ts in their disputes with
Nonconformists, wonderfully extol the Authority of the Church. But when they
have to do with Papists, that argument is of no validity. This proved a^ great
temptation to a Great man to change his Religion. Mr. K. designing to exalt the
Churches Authority, alleges, Heb. 1: 17. Doubtless his meaning is, that in
things ^ot forbidden by the Divine Law, the Commandments of Bishops must be
obeyed. There was a man (Dr. Richard Smith) that Preached such Doct^^ne in the
days of King Edward VI But he was said to make a public Recantation of his
Error at Paul's Cross in London, May 15, 1547. In which he says, that whereas he
had taught, that it is more convenient that the people obey their Bishops
Commandments and Decrees, although it be but ^^ thing indifferent of it self,
and not commanded by God, then that Servants should obey their Masters, or
Children their Fathers. Which sayings (says he) I revoke, disanu^ and condemn
as erroneous and false. And then he adds, That the Authority of Bishops and
other Ministers of the Church consists in the Disp^nsation and Ministration of
the Word, and not in making Laws and Decrees besides Gods Word. The Reader may
see Dr. Smiths Recantation more largely recited in Mr. Nath Tailors Defense of
the Diss^n^^s against Dr. Sherlock. p. 21.22.23* Mr. K would do wel^ if he
would follow Dr. Smiths example in some further Retractations of his errors.

Sect. 3. The Second Canon which Mr. K. would impose upon us, says that,
Whatever Church holds the Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, and has the
Word of God duly Preached, and the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper
duly administered, such a Church is a true Church of Christ and to separate from
such a Church in External Communion, and in External Acts of Worship, is a Sin,
the which Sin is the Sin of Schism. It is evident by these words that he has
not attained unto the true notion of Schism. According to him, Schism consists
in a Separation from a true Church in external acts of Worship; but according
to Scripture, men may be guilty of Schism, and yet hold External Communion with
that Church where they have made a Schism. Corab made a Schism in the Church of
Israel, for which the Earth made a Schism to swallow up him and his Company,
yet he did not separate from the Church in external acts of Worship. The
Schismatics in the Church at Corinth did not withdraw from the Communion of
the Church. They did not make separate Meetings, but all came together, meeting
at the same place, and partaking of the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.17* 20. There
were those among them that caused Contentions and Divisions, and they were the
Schismatics. When after the Apostles death, that Church was influenced by two
or three chief men among them, so as that the major part of the brethren
deposed their Elders without any just cause, they were again guil^y of Schism,
which occ^sioned Clemens Romanus to Write an Admirable Epistle to them, yet
they did not then neither (so far as do^ appear) separate from Communion in
external acts of Worship* If Mr. K. will consult Dr. Owen, and Mr. Philip
Henry, they will let him understand that his notion of Schism is not Scriptural
nor good Divinity. Nor is it a true Assertion, that to separate from a true
Church in some external acts of Worship is always a Sin, or that they who do so
are guilty of Schism. For,

1. There may be just and allowable causes of such a Separation. The late
Bishop of Worcester has mentioned several Cases wherein the Scripture allows of
Separation. One of which he says, is, if false Doctrine is imposed instead of
true. Is not Lutheranism as opposed to Calvinism false doctrine? Let the
doctrinal Articles of the Church of England be judge. Are there not some true
Churches in the world, in which Lutheranism is imposed? Another of his cases,
is, If men make things indiffer^^t necssary to Salvation. A Learned man infers
upon it, why is not the imposing of things indifferent, so as to make the
observation of them necessary unto Temporal Salvation, a just cause of
Separation? Dr. Owen Original of Churches, first part p. 334 ibid p. 181. etc.
has mentioned four other just causes of withdrawing Communion from some
Churches. That incomparable Author dos also Assert and has proved, that where
the Fundamentals of Church order, practice and discipline are destroyed, it is
not Lawful for any man to join in Church Communion.

2. It is possible that a true Church may walk-disorderly, and not hearken to
the Admonitions of those that would reclaim them from the Error of their way:
They may tolerate Scandalous evils, and very Scandalous persons in their
Communion. Dos not the Church do so throughout most if not all the Parishes in
England? And yet Mr. K will now (though a while ago he would not) own them to
be true Churches. In this case with drawing is no Sin, but a duty rather. 2
These. 3.6. We Command you brethren in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
you withdraw your selves from ^very brother that walks disorderly. The Apostl^^
in those words seems to have respect to the Jews Nidui, which signifies
Separation, and was the lowest of Ecclesiastical censures among them. If then
every Brother in a Church shall walk disorderly and scandalously, (which is not
impossible) neighbor Churches may and ought to withdraw from them.

3. Church of England Divines do many of them own the Church of Rome, to be a
true Church, because they pretend to a belief of that which is commonly called
the Apostles Creed, and they have the Sacrament of Baptism administered among
them in the Name of the Trinity. Yet the Church of England is not guilty of
Schism in separating from the Church of Rome!

4. It is possible that a true Church may impose on its Members unlawful terms
of Communion, and then if a Schism happen the guilt will lie not on them that
dare not Sin, but on them that make such Terms of Communion as God in his Word
does not approve of. And this I take to be the case between the Church of
England and the Dissenters. The Law requires all Ministers to declare their
assent and consent to all and every thing contained and prescribed in the Book
of Common Prayer. This they dare not for their lives do, because they should
then dissemble with God and men. One of the first things in the Liturgy is
Mathamatically false; for it gives a Rule for the finding of Easter Day for
ever, as fallible as Mr. K his Rules of Divinity. It requires Apocrypha Stories
to be read in Divine Service, which are contrary to the Word of God, such as
the Magical Superstitions related in Tobit, to be read the last day of
September, and first of October; And on November 23. the Legend of Bell and the
Dragon. And some things out of Judith and Ecclesiasticus, which are contrary to
the Scripture. The Common Prayer Book will not allow the Minister to Baptize
without the Sign of the Cross, nor unless God fathers and God mothers be
procured. Nor to administer the Lords Supper to such as do not receive it
Kneeling, which is a clogging the Ordinances of Christ with new Terms of
Communion, not appointed by him, but devised by men. All and every one of these
things, and many more mu^^ ^h^s^ Ministers that will be of the Church of
England Communion d^clare their Assent unto, although in their Consciences they
a^e otherwise persuaded, which if they dare not violate, there are that will
brand them with the name of Schismatics. But it has often been known, that
they who have themselves been most guilty of that crime, have been very liberal
in bestowing the censure of Schismatics on those who never deserved it. When
the Arians of old were uppermost, they called the Orthodox who withdrew from
their Communion, Schismatics. Papists at this day say all Protestants, and in
particular, Church of England Protestants are Schismatics, and the^ of the
Church of England Communion (many of them) do the like of all Nonconformists.
Nevertheless, Mr K has put a weapon into our hands which slays himself. For
th^^, I argue, They that Separate from Churches ^^ich hold the Fundamentals of
Christian Religion, in which the Word of God is duly Preached, and the
Sacraments duly Administered, and set up other Churches in opposi^ion to them,
are guilty of Schism; and consequently of great Sin. This Proposition is what
himself asserts as a Maxim. I assume^ But George Keith and his Brethren in
sepa^ating from the Churches of New England, and setting up other Churches in
opposition to them, separate from Churches that hold the Fundamentals of the
Christian Religion, and in which the word of God is duly Preached, and the
Sacraments duly Administered: This no man can deny.

Ergo George Keith and his brethren are guilty of Schism, and of great Sin* If
his second Rule is good Di^inity and infallible, he is out of his own mou^h
infallibly proved to be a great Schismatic.

Quis tulerit Gracchos de Seditione querentas? I am loath to put him in mind
that the famous Author of Puritanismus Anglicanus, was wont to say, that the
C^nformists were Schismatics, by their Nonconformity to the Catholic
Protestant Church, throughout all Europe. And d^s he not know that Protestants
look on the Church of Rome as the most Schismatical in the W^^ld, for breaking
Communion with all the Gresi^^ Churches in Europe, and with the Russian and ^^m
all under the Patriarchs of Jerusalem Antioch, and Alexandria, and in all
places in Asia or Africa, and with all Protestants if they will not receive
their Errors, and subject their Consciences to her dictates? Let them be
Schismatics who impose their unscriptural opinions on all others, like the
Donatists of old, and thereby transgress the Rule of Charity and break
Communion. The Reverend Baxter has these smart Expressions, We (says he)
English Nonconformity. p. 219.
Appeal to the common reason of mankind, whether they that make a Multitude of
sinful Canons to Persecute Christ's Church and Servants, and add to his Laws an
hundred and forty one of their own with inhumane penalties, casting out th^se
that obey them not, be not rather Schismatics, than they that say, we
withold Concord in all that Christ Commands or his Apostles practiced, but
we dare not Obey you against God.

Sect. 4. His third Rule would have been l^ss liable to Exception, if he had
said, that the Errors of particular persons are not to be charged on the whole
Church, in case the Church dos bear a due Testimony against them: but Mr. K. it
seems would have the Church innocent, unless they justify those persons in
those things. In which phrase there is an ambiguity. For if by Justifying he
means an ^vowed defending of Scandalous Criminals, like that of the Benjamites
toward the Sinners in Gibeah, then his Rule is not Good Divinity. For the
Scripture gives us to understand that if Scandalous persons are Winked at, or
not duly brought under the Holy Discipline of Christ, the whole Church is
guilty though but a few, perhaps one in their Communion has been an Enormous
transgressor. Heb. 12.15, 16. The Corinthians did not say, that the Incestuous
person did well in violating the Seventh Commandment; nevertheless, the whole
Church was Levened and became like a Sower Lump, because of the Sin of one man
in their Communion, which was not duly witnessed against. 1 Cor. 5.6. When the
Church in Pergamus did not exercise discipline toward the Nicholaitans among
them, the Community was guilty, and exposed to the Holy displeasure of the Lord
Jesus Christ: who was also offended with the Church in Thyatira, not for their
Commending and Justifying, but for their Suffering a Jezabel to be in their
Communion. Rev. 2.15, 20. And this has been the fault of that Church whose
Communion Mr. K. chooses above all others. This neglect of discipline has
caused many Thousands of Godly men to separate from her Corruptions, lost they
should partake in her Sins. Nor can she be excused in this matter, since in her
Liturgy, she confesses that in the Primitive Church there was a Godly
discipline, and that it is much to be wished that Discipline might be restored:
But although this Confession was made One hundred and fifty years ago, no ca^e
has been taken for the Restoration of that Discipline to this very day: nor
will it be as long as the Discipline of Christ is become a Picuniary business,
as it is in the Church of England, as well as in the Church of Rome.

Sect. 5. The design of Mr. Ks. fourth Rule in Divinity is to Intimate, that
the Dissenters ought to join, in Acts of Public worship with the Church,
notwithstanding the great mixture of unsound Members in that Church, because
the Prophets and Apostles did not separate from the Public Worship of God in
the Jewish Church, when the matter of it was found. This Argument though often
urged is not Cogent. It is Controverted among Learned men, whether there were
any Ecclesiastical Discipline in the Jewish Church, except in cases wherein the
Ceremonial Law was Transg^^ssed, and that Moral Offenses were Punishable only
by the Civil Magistrate. Whereas it is otherwise under the Gospel, as all
except Erastians, do willingly Confess. But suppose it be granted that Moral
Transgressions in the Jewish Church fell under Ecclesiastical Judicature, as
the Jewish Writers v. Buxtorf. Lexic Talmud p. 1304
tell us of above twenty crimes which they say were Censurable Evils, and it is
certain that Heresies were so, Mr. K's reasoning is nevertheless invalid. For
he cannot but know that the Dissenters from the Church of England find fault
with some particulars in the matter of the Worship required by the Liturgy.
They verily believe that such things are herein Commanded as God has forbidden.
Whether they are mistaken in their Judgment the day will shortly declare. The
Conformists say that the Ceremonies enjoined by the Common Prayer Book, are not
commanded by Christ nor forbidden by him, but that they are of an indifferent
nature. The Nonconformists believe that they are forbidden in the Second
Commandment. I shall not here dispute that point, which has been so Elaborately
handled by many others. Particularly by Mr. Bradshaw, and by Dr. Ames in his
fresh Suit against Ceremonies. And by my Brother Samuel Math^r, late Pastor of
a Church in Dublin, and sometimes Senior Fellow of the College there.
Particularly, Nonconformists complain of the Sign of the Cross in Baptism, as a
corrupting addition to an Ordinance of Divine Worship. Dr. Tailor
notwithstanding his Pleas for the Liturgy, confesses that in respect of the
Cross in Baptism, a Non instituted Ceremony is made a part of External Worship.
There are also many Nonconformists who suppose that if they should Kneel before
Bread and Wine, they should be guilty of Idolatry. Nor was that enjoined or
practiced in the Church until the Idolatrous Doctrine of Transubstantiation was
established. Some Popish Authors have said, that if the substance of the Bread
remains after the Consecration, then they must acknowledge themselves guilty of
Idolatry in kneeling at the Sacrament. The Jesuit Costerus pro^esse^h that he
would rather be torn in pi^ces by wild Horses, then Kneel at the Sacrament, if
he did not believe the Bod^l^ presence of Christ, and that the Bread was real
Christ. I is true, the English Liturgy declares otherwise: for which cause many
that Kneel do not violate their Consciences. Nevertheless, they whose
Consciences are persuaded that the inj^nction of Kneeling is a corrupting the
Worship of God, ought not themselves to join in an act of External Worship so
circumstanced. It would f^^ a Volumn to enlarge on this Subject Mr. Baxter in
his English Nonconformity, has enumerated no less th^n forty things imposed on
Ministers, which they cannot Conform unto. Also twelve particulars which hinder
Laymen (as they call them) from Conforming to what is by the Common Prayer Book
required.

Sect. 6. That which Mr. ^ calls his fifth Rule needs Explication. It is not a
found assertion, That what things soever were allowed under the Old Testament
that were neither any part of the Ceremonial Law, ^^r of the Jewish Polity
peculiar to that Nation, are allowed and practiced lawfully under the New
Testament. Diverse things were allowed to the Jews that Christians cannot
lawfully practice. Polygamy and Divorcements were customary with them, but the
New Testament does not permit such things, Mat. 19 8, 9. Some Rites which were
used by them as they were Asiati^^^^ and not merely as Jews, do not oblige
European Christians to an Imitation. It was usual with them when they entered
into their Synagogues, to put off their Shoes, Eccles. 5.1. And to pray with
their Hats on. None can think that Christian Nations whose Civil Customs are
differing, should in that follow the Jewish mode. 1 Cor. 11 4. Dr. Lightfoot
has observed that some Christians would pray with their faces covered, in which
he says, they were guilty of a Jewish Superstition. Two things we may affirm in
opposition to Mr. Keiths Rule.

1. That the Apostasy of the Christian Church has consisted partly in its
Judaizing. Some indeed have made the Antichristian Apostasy to be solely in the
Idolatry and Paganizing of ^h^ Christian World. But there has been a strange
aptn^^^ in Christians to imitate je^ish Customs which the Gospel does neither
require nor allow of. The Agapae or Love feasts among Christians seem to be of
this original, 1 Cor 11.20, 21. D^ Lightfoot, vol. 2. p. 1044, 1045.
The h^t now mentioned Learned Author has further observed, that the Jewish
part of the Church retained something of the old Leaven, and could not fo^bear
Judaizing in the Ordinance of the Lords Supper, and therefore it mu^t be
attended with a Feast as the Passover was. The Jews in Swearing would say, By
the Law I Swear this, whence also in taking an Oath, they laid Drus^^s de 3
Sect ^ 2, ^ 16 L^us^^n P^u^ol H^^^ mixed. p. 452
their ban^ on the penta^^uch; but are Christians bound to imitate them
therein? In the Council of Ni^^ it was decreed that Christians should not keep
the Feast of Easter at the ^ime the Jews did, that so they m^gh^ not ^^^m to
symbolize with them. The Jews had many s^^^ed Festivals besides the Sabbath
day. In Conformity to them, Christians would have so too. In such Iudaizing
they offended against the Gospel. Gal. 4.10, 11. C^l. 2 16. The Jews had Music
in their Temple-worship. In imitation of whom Papists and some Protestant
Christians worship with Cathedral Music. Priests in the Jewish Church had holy
Garments whereby they were distinguished from other men. Accordingly
Ecclesiastics among some Christians have been known by their Miters, Albes,
Surplices, Copes, etc. The retaining of things of this nature in the imperfect
Reformation of the Church of England has not only been offensive to other
Reformed Churches, (as is to be see^ in Zanchies Letter to Queen Elizabeth) but
has given occasion to Popish Adversaries to ^e^ide them. West^^ ^ Popish Bigot
having said that the Religion of Protestants is without all Religion, because
they have no Sacrifice, Priesth^^d n^r sacred Ceremonies: He further adds, some
Protestants indeed, that they may not appear absolutely in ^i us and
irreligious, use our Miss^^ and Br^viary, selecting what they please ^^ereof
for the Rubric of their ^^sturgy, and to make the form of their Worship appear
the more goodly, they have their Canonical person, ^orsooth, after the Mo^es
and Customs of the Church of R^me, their Caps and Hoods and Holidays, and such
like stuff, wh^^h they say they found in the Synagogue of Antichrist; by which
very thing it i^ apparent that the Religion of those Protestants stands guilty
of Stealth and Robbery, by which it ^^^^t came into the world; or if they will
not be taken for Thieves, let them go for our Apes. These with their whole
Service are derided; not only by ours, but also by the^^ own. The English seem
to have driven the Pope out of England in such haste that they forced him to
leave his Clothes behind him, which they as fools in play put on with a kind of
pompous Ceremony of triumph, and so lead the Quire: A goodly Reformation it is,
that they dare not carry it through! Thus has a Scoffing Pontifician reflected
on our Hierarchal men for symbolizing with Papists and Jews.

2. Whereas Mr. K. has asserted that proofs out of the Old Testament are in all
cases as good as proofs out of the New. No man doubts of that, provided they be
proofs indeed, and not Scriptures misinterpreted or misapplied, but we affi^m
that the Order of the Gospel respecting the Constitution of particular
Evangelical Churches is to be found not in the Old Testament, but in the New.
It is only the New Testament that informs us what Officers, what Sacraments,
what Censures are to be allowed of in Churches of Christians to the end of the
world. When some would have had Mr. Fox (the famous Martyrologist) to have
subscribed to certain Canons of their devising, (such as Mr. K's Rules in
Divinity) He declined it, but producing his Greek New Testament, he said, I Will
Subscribe to all that is written here, but to nothing more.

Sect. 7. Our Authors last Rule is very Exceptionable. He therein tells us,
That Set Forms of Prayer and Thanksgiving where the people pray vocally with
the Minister, are a duty as well under the New Testament as the Old. We suppose
that he intends Prose and not Psalm Prayers, otherwise he fights with his own
shadow. None excep. Non singers, or his Qu^ndam Friends, the Quakers will
^ainsay him, ^^rce Praying in Meeter cannot be without a Form. We then say.

1. That it is not our opinion that all Forms are unlawful. A late virulent
Anonymous Author has slanderously reported that to be the opinion of him ^h^t
wrote a brief Discourse concerning the unlawfulness of Common Prayer Worship;
but as he has in many other particulars dealt very falsely and disingeniously,
so in that report of the Discoursers judgment, the pretended Answerer has
wronged him. Indeed we look upon the Imposition of Forms as sinful, but not all
use of them. It were much better for men that have not the gift of Prayer, to
use a Form in their Families then not to pray at all. This I have often
declared, both in Sermons and in Printed Books.

2. We maintain that there was no such Common Prayer Book of Divine Institution
as our Author, and some others have imagined. This notion of his is not built
on the Foundation of the Prophets. They did not make a Liturgy for the use of
the Jewish Church. The Jews themselves (as great Formalists as they now are)
confess this to be true. They say Saubert ^s precious Hebraer^m. p. 123.
that from the time of Moses to the great Sanedrin, there was no ordinary form
of Prayer amongst the Israelites; but every man made a Prayer for himself,
according to what knowledge and gift of utterance he was end^^^d with. As for
the Texts alleged by Mr. K. they will not serve his purpose; because the
Prophet Isaiah complains of the Jews, that they did draw nigh to the Lord with
their mouth, and honor him with their lips, when their hearts were far from
him, Isai 29 13. He concludes that there^ors they had a ^inted Liturgy. But is
this any proof? Are not men whose Religion is Formality and Hypocrisy, or who
draw nigh to God with the outward, but not with the inward man, guilty of what
the Prophet charge the Jews with. Can none honor God with their lips, and
yet not with their hearts, but such as use a Common Prayer Book? Mr. K will not
say so. And what though the Prophet Hosea and Joel, say, Take with you words
and say, receive us graciously, and the Ministers of the Lord should say, Spare
thy People. The meaning is that they should humbly confess their sins, and
deprecate the Judgments of God, and not that they must needs use those very
words and no other. Whoever among them did with a penitent heart pray for
mercy, observed what was enjoined, whether they made use of those very words or
not. I suppose Mr. Keith took these quotations from Dr. Comber, or Dr. King, or
from both of them, for they both abuse those Scriptures as he does, pretending
that they command the use of a ^^inted form of words in prayer. I affirm that
there is not one instance in a^l the Bible, of men's reading their Prayers;
(still remember that we distinguish between Psalms and Prayers) but there are
very many examples of free Prayer, or of that Extempory Praying which some have
not been a^raid to ridicule. Mr. Boyse, Answer to to the Bishop of Derry. p. 36.
has well showed, that God was so far from confining the Jews to any ^^inted
Liturgy, that most of the Prayers, both private and public recorded in the Old
Testament, are conceived or free Prayers, without any set or prescribed form.
Such was Solomon's prayer at the Dedication of the Temple. 1 King 8. and Asas, 2 Chronicles. 14. And Iebosaphats. 2 Chronicles. 20. And Hezekiahs. Isai. 37. And Ezras.
Chap 9. And the Confession in Neh. 9. was a free conceived prayer, according as
God was pleased to afford the assistance of his Holy Spirit. It is pretended
that our Savior taught his Disciples a Form of Prayer. I have in another
Discourse proved that the Lords Prayer was given as a Platform and Directory,
and not commanded to be used as a Form, as is evident in that the words of that
prayer in the two Evangelists Matthew and Luke, are not altogether the same.
Our Saviors design in delivering that Prayer, was not to teach his Disciples
what words they should use in Prayers, but what things they should pray for, as
very many Divines both Ancient and Modern have truly asserted. And therefore we
do not find that ever the Apostles concluded their Prayers with the repetition
of those words. Nor that it was usual to do so among Christians in the next Age
to the Apostles. In the third Century it was practiced in some Churches. From
that Expression in de Orat. p. 122 Edit. Franeker, An. 1597.
Tertullian, Praemissa Legitim^ et Ordinari^ Oratione: It Is conjectured that in
those days they did not conclude but begin their public Prayers with the Lords
Prayer. It was a long time before they would use it in mixed Assemblies, only
at the Lords Supper when the Church was by themselves. They would not permit
the Catechumeni to be present when that Prayer was used in the days of Austin
and Chrysostom. To finish this Argument. If there had been any need of a Common
Prayer Book for the Edification of the Churches, doubtless the Apostles would
have composed one, which they never did. We therefore conclude, that to use a
public Liturgy or Set Forms of Prayer is not a duty commanded in the Scripture.

3. Supposing it be a duty to make use of Forms which were of Divine
Inspiration, it does not at all follow that it is then a duty to use Forms
which are of Humane Composure. If Christians are under obligation to read the
Scripture, it does not follow that they are then bound to read the Apocrypha.
So could it be proved that the Jews used Forms of Prayer with Ezra by Divine
Inspiration directed them unto, we cannot rationally thence infer, that
Liturgies of men's devising ought to be used in the Public Worship of God.

Sect. 8. As for his Testimonies out of the Writings of the Ancients, they are
vainly produced. For,

1. Suppose in the next Age to the Apostles, Forms of Prayer had been used in
Christian Assemblies, that does not prove the use of them to be a duty. Isai
8.20. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this
word, it is because there is no light in them. Innovations and Corruptions did
gradually and insensibly, and very early creep into the Church, when the
Apostles were all dead. Ireneus and Socrates both of them confess that the
Observation of Easter was never appointed by Christ or by his Apostles, yet was
it kept as an Holy Time by those that had seen the Apostles. Soon after
Polycarp (who knew the Apostle John) every year Christians observed a day in
Commemoration of the Birthdays (so did they call the Death days) of Martyrs.
This was a Superstition which made way for greater Corruptions. The mixing of
Water with Wine in the Lords Supper, and sending the Elements to such as were
absent, were practices that had no warrant in the Scripture. Nevertheless, thus
it was within Fifty years after some of the Apostles were living. Exorcisms,
Chrysm, and other additions to the Sacrament of Baptism were ancient
Superstitions. In Tertullians and Origens T^m^, the Custom of praying toward
the East was advanced among Christians.

2. It is certain ^h^t there were no stinted Liturgies or Forms of Prayer
prescribed to the Churches for some Hundreds of years after the Apostles. Mr.
K. has notoriously abused his ignorant Reader by rela^ing a pi^ce of a Sentence
out of Cyprian. All that that Father (so called) says, is, Cyprian p. 55. 102
Edit. parisys. An. 1541.
That Christians are not to pray for themselves only, but for the whole People;
for all the Brethren with a common and concording Prayer. Now because Cyprian
calls the Prayers of Christians Public and Common in the sense mentioned, to
conclude that therefore they had in his Time a Common prayer Book, is a weak
Inference. I have that charity for Mr K. as to believe that he did not himself
consult Cyprian, but made use of that Sentence as he found it quoted and
perverted by Dr Comber. Mr. Clarkson, (a Judicious and Learned Divine, has
Elaborately proved, that for the three first Centuries, there were no Common
Prayer Books used among Christians in the Public Worship. Dr. Comber has
endeavored, but in vain to persuade us, that Mr. Clarkson has falsified in his
Quotations: And that Dr. has obtruded on his Reader, many Sentences out of the
Fathers, strangely perverting them to a sense never in the least by the Authors
themselves intended. A worthy Con^ormist Minister, (Mr. Samuel Bold) has taken
the pains to examine the Quotations both in Mr. Clarkson, and in Dr. Comber.
And notwithstanding his being a Conformist, and using the Liturgy of the Church
of England in his officia^ing as fully as the Law requires, he does ingenuously
acknowledge that Mr. Clarkson in his Citation of Authors has used great
Fidelity, and not imposed a sense on their words contrary to their meaning; but
that h^ finds it otherwise in Dr. Comber. Were all Conformists as moderate and
candid as Mr. Bold, Nonconformists and they might live and love like Brethren.

Sect. 9. Mr. K's. Commendation of Vocal Praying with the Minister deserves a
further Remark. He does on this account extol the Church of England above all
other Churches. But he cannot be ignorant, that in Antiphones and Responses in
Public Worship, the Church of Rome ou^does the Church of England. He says
true, that the Reformed Churches in Holland, France, etc. have no such Custom
among them; only he is a little mistaken about the Protestant Churches in
Germany Chvtraei O^as de statu Ecclesia^.
for some of them do, though most of them do not Conform to that way of
Worship. That it was not thus practiced in the Apostles days, is indisputable.
The highest Original pretended for it from Ignatius. Socrates l. 6 cap. 8.
(though otherwise one of the best among Ecclesiastical Historians, however
condemned by Bellarmin, Baronius, Possevinus, and other Popish Authors) reports
that Ignatius had a Vision of Angels Singing after that manner, which caused
him to introduce Ant^phones into the Church in Antioch; but Judicious men
esteem that Relation of Ignatius his Angelical Vision as fabulous. The^doret
says, that Flavianus and Diodorus taught this way of Antiphonical Praying.
Basil (who flourished Anno ^70) found a difficulty in persuading his
Neocaesarienses to Conform to responsory praying by reason of the then Novelty
of it. The Arians at Constantinople used that mode of Singing, which lest
simple people should be taken therewith, and be seduced from the Truth thereby.
Chrysostom appointed the like to he done by some of his people with Nocturnal
Hymns, Ambrose (about the year 383) is reckoned to be the first that brou^^t
this way of pra^ing in to the Latin Church. Durand Rational. l. 5. c. ^.
Cresp^tius (a Popish Author) being willing to prove that this mode of praying
was used by Christians in the Primitive Times: He endeavors (as Mr. K. does)
to confirm his notion by Plynys, Carmen dicere sibi invicem; unto whom the most
Learned de Eccles. polit. part. 1. chapter 2. p. 538.
Voetius replies, that the words of Pliny do not imply any such Antiphonical
Singing as is used among the Papists, only an Alternation in diverse Psalms. If
Pliny had lived in our Times, and heard the Reformed Churches who use not
Antiphones and Responses Singing the Praises of the Lord, he might have
reported of them as he does of the Primitive Christians. To add no more on this
head, very Learned men have disliked the impleaded mode of Praying, as judging
it not to agree with the Apostles words, 1 Gor. 14.15. Ubi supra p 483.
So Voetius, and Altore Damasc. p. 491.
Didaclavius. The words of the Ingenious Mr. Boyse in his Answer to the Bishop
of Derry, are, I must Confess I am not very fond of it, because it seems less
suitable to the gravity and solemnity of Christian Worship, and brings in a
confused noise in a Christian Assembly, too like that of a Dover Court, where
it is said, all speak and none hear. Mr. Makemie says: We dare not allow in
Public Worship, which should be for the Edification of all, that inarticulate
and unintelligible way and noise of all people, where all or most confusedly
speak together, one man's voice drowning the accent of another, which seems to
be far from order, that it appears confusion, a Service in an unknown tongue.
Mr. Hikeringill notwithstanding his being a Conformist,) tells us, that he
suffers not such babbling in his Church in Colchester, as is made by Alternate
Responses.

Sect. 10. There are other passages in Mr. K's Sermon that are Crude
Assertions, and which it is not worth the while to spend time in any large
Remarks upon them. He would make his Reader believe, that Vocal Prayer with the
Minister is a duty, because the Apostle says that we should with one mouth
glorify God. Romans 15.6. I suppose he had this gloss from the Bishop of Derry.
Can any man seriously think that those (...) of the Apostle are a precept ^^r
^he Congregation repeating a wh^le pr^yer with the Minister, or for their so
dividing the words between them as that the people, rather than the Minister
make the Prayer, as in most petitions in the Litany they do? When Christians
are Unanimous in Serving God, and agree in the profession of his Truth, they
glorify him with one mouth: But (says Mr. K) Confession with the mouth is
required in the New Testament in order to Salvation. Ergo Vocal Prayer with the
Minister, one after another in Responses is a duty. And can he now think that
this mode of Praying is a thing wherein Salvation is concerned? He tells us
further, That the whole Church is a Kingdom of Priests, therefore they may
offer their Prayers each one with his own mouth, as well as by the mouth of the
Minister, which cannot be done without some Set Forms. Is there any weight in
such reasoning? All Believers are Priests, therefore they must all pray vocally
after the Minister, and therefore we must have Set Forms of Prayer. The
Recitation of such weak arguing is Confutation sufficient. One notion more he
has ( p. 15.) which I passed over. A King (says he) would not put on a new pair
of Shoes every day, Ergo, a Christian should not make a new Prayer every day.

^ Risum te^^atis Amici. But he is though an Old man, nevertheless a Novice
(...), re^ens Ecclesiae infitus, one newly come to the Faith, on which account
his mistakes are the more pardonable. I have taken no notice of what he speaks
of Spiritual Overflowings, and the gift of Prayer. Some (I perceive) look on
his Expressions on that Subject as scandalous. Is not what he says contrary to,
2 Cor. 1.4, 5, 6.

Sect. 11. George Keith wrote a very wicked Book in the year 1689 full fraught
with Haeresies and Blasphemies, and with Revilings and Slanderings of the
Ministers and Churches of Christ. Had he made a penitent acknowledgment of his
great sin therein, and published to the world his detestation of that Book of
Blasphemies, that would have been a better evidence of the sincerity of his
Conversien, then this Sermon which strikes at the most Reformed Churches on
Earth. He has reason to walk ^o^^ly all his days, from the consideration of the
hu^t he has done to the Souls of men, not a few having been either perverted or
confirmed by him in the damnable Heresies of Quakerism There have been many
Conformists, whom for their eminent Piety and Learning we shall always love and
honor. Would Mr. K. make it his business without concerning himself in those
Circumstantials in Religion about which Godly and Learned men differ in their
Judgments, to undeceive that miserable sort of people by him formerly deluded,
he might do a Service, for Christ; but it is to be feared that this S^^mon of
his, besides the offense it has given to many Judicious and Orthodo^ Professors
of the Truth, may have scandalized his old friends, so as to make his
Endeavors of reducing them to a sound mind the less successful, since it is now
plain to all men that his design is to advance notions which have no Scripture
foundation, as well as to make the world believe that the Churches of Christ in
New England and all other that Conform not, consist of Schismatick^ and
Sinners, as formerly he declared them to be no true Churches at all, pretending
the Doctrine of the Apostles for his Errors then as well as now. For him who
has himself been as great a Schismatic as ever was any Donatist in the worl^,
now to insinuate that all the holy Churches of Non Conformists are
Schismatics, and yet at the same time to scatter his Sermon up and down, with
a Schismatical Design to make Divisions (if he could) in the Churches of New
England, by seducing and corrupting them from the simplicity that is in Christ,
to another mode of Worship never taught nor practiced by the Apostles, deserves
severe reproof. But we spare him, not do^bting but that our people will be
mindful of that Apostolical Advice, Rom 16 17. Mark them which cause divisions
and off^nees contrary to the Doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them.

Sect. 12. It has been often and truly said, that New England differs from all
other the Outgoings of the English Nation, in that it was purely on the account
of Religion that the first Planters came into this Corner of the Earth. They
were men Eminent for Godliness in the power of it. The Ministers of the Lord
Jesus Christ who first Preached ^he Gospel in this part of the World, were men
fa^ous for their Learning as well as Exemplary Holiness. When they arrived
here, they found this Land a mere Wilderness, full of wild men and wild beasts.
With incredible difficulty and vast expenses they subdued it, so as that
through the Blessing of Heaven on their Endeavors, it has been made a fruitful
Land. But THE GLORY of it has been, that therein our Fathers have Built
Sanctuaries for the Name of the Lord, (as 2 Chronicles. 20 8) And it has been not
the least wonder of the last Age, that in a Land where Satan had been
Worshipped for Generations, no man can say how many, he is disposessed, and
Christ Reigns there. The sincere Endeavor of those that went after the Lord
into a Wilde^ness, into a Land not Sown, (as Ier. 2 2) there to worship him,
was to have no^^ing in matters of Religion, or of Church Order, but what agreed
with the Foundation laid by the Apostles and Prophets: And therefore they had
not among them so much as a Ceremony or Holiday besides what the Lord Christ
Himself has Instituted. Nor were the Churches of New England ever tainted with
those early Superstitions which crept into the Church in the next Ages to the
Apostles. So careful were those M^n of God who laid the Foundation here, to
keep exactly to Scripture Pattern. Conformists (who have and we desire they may
have equal liberty of Conscience wi^h our selves; only we like not their
calling us Schismatics, especially considering that some of their late
Bigoted Writers say, that Schismatics are as bad or worse then Murderers or
Adulterers) are in New England, Dissenters, there being but one or two
Conformist Congregations in all New England, and those not the greatest; but
more than an hundred Congregations of Nonconformists. Since our Churches
notwithstanding his making them Schismatics and Sinners are built on the true
Foundation, it is to be h^ped that if an hundred George Keiths should come to
seduce them, and to pervert the right ways of the Lord among them, they will
not forsake that pure Religion which their Fathers have left them in the
possession of. The little Fo^^^ who have ^ought to spo^l these vines, have not
hitherto prospered. The Lord Jesus Christ who walks in the midst of the Golden
Candlesticks, has taken a singular ca^e of these his Churches. The Rebukes of
Heaven on those that have set themselves to undermine them have been signal;
some Instances whereof are to be seen in the Church History of New England,
newly Published at London. If Mr. Keith and those that abett him, would follow
my (or rather Gamaliels) advice, they should refrain and let these Churches
alone, left ha^ly they be found even to fight against God.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 11. line 27 ^. querentes. p. 12. l. 2^. for with r. will.


