Advertisement.
THe Reader is desired to take Notice, that the Printer in Boston is so much
under the aw of the Reverend Author, whom we answer, and his Friends, that
(...) could not obtain of the Printer there to print the following Sheets,
which is the only true Reason why we have sent the Copy so far for its
Impression and (...) it printed with some Difficulty.

GOSPEL ORDER Revived, Being an Answer to a Book lately set forth by the
Reverend Mr. Increase Mather, President of Harvard College, etc.

ENTITLED, The Order of the Gospel, etc.

Dedicated to the Churches of Christ in New England.

By sundry Ministers of the Gospel in New England.

Prove. 18.17. He that is first in his own Cause seems just, but his Neighbor
comes and searches him.

(...). 8.20 To the (...) and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to
(...) because there is no Light in them.

Printed in the Year 1700.

The Epistle Dedicatory, To the Churches of Christ in N. England.
IT can incur no just Censure that we address our selves to the Churches of
Christ here in the following Sheets, inasmuch as they are but a Reply to a Book
lately dedicated unto them. Nor does our zeal, (we hope) for Truth, the Honor
of God, and the Safety, Peace and Flourishing of these Churches come short of
what our Reverend Author may be inspired with in his performance We make the
same glorious Pretense with him to maintain and defend the Order of the Gospel,
although we cannot allow what is suggested in the Title page. That every
Principle so strenuously contended for in that Treatise, is either professed or
practiced by the Churches of Christ in New England. One part, at least,
therefore of his Book the Reverend Author ought to have published in his own
Name, and not have obtruded it on the Churches here, whose Practice never gave
grounds to suspect them leavened with so gross thoughts, as particularly his
Doctrine of the Ordination of Ministers is.

We will not guess at the Authors secret aim, or whom in particular he raises
his Batteries against We'd charitably hope he has no private Interest to bribe
him in this Affair; and we hope for a like favorable and candid Construction
of this Reply. Indeed the Name prefix't to that faulty Treatise, may be
presumed, with a multitude of prejudiced People, to weigh down all the Reasons
and Arguments which can possibly be brought for their Conviction. And we have
no such advantage to boast of; yet are happy in this, that we are not overawed
by any Name, and the Truth we know is greater, and more venerable than all
things.

Its well known how liberal some men are of the odious brand of Apostates, for
every one who cannot digest the late published Orders: but, without arrogance,
we assume, as more due, the Title of Proficients, and doubt not to make it out,
that our dissent from many of them is so far from a going back from any Gospel
Truth or O^der, that it is rather a making progress, and advancing in the
Evangelical Discipline.

It is a groundless Calumny which is suggested, That a latitude beyond what our
Author contends for, is b^t a betraying the liberties and privileges which our
Lord Jesus Christ has given to his Church, or the Brethren of the Church. These
we profess to prize and stand for, and would by no means lose. But wherein do
they consist? not in the Brethrens challenging any part of the M^nisterial
Work! Not in imposing upon others any thing which Christ has not imposed! which
is but a debarring Christians of the Privileges they have a right to. But they
consist (as we conceive) in such things as these. That our Consciences be not
imposed on by Men or their Traditions, Christ being the alone Lord of the
Conscience, 1 Cor. 7.23. That Believers are through Christ, freed from the
guilt and dominion of Sin, from the curse of the Law, and from the sting and
terror of Death. That we have the liberties of Gods House and Ordinances, and
therein communion with God. That we may have the benefi^ of the gifts of his
Ministers for edification, and such like, according to the Apostles Doctrine, 1
Cor. 3.22.

Nor is that Objection less frivolous, when if we appear less Rigid than others
of the Reverend Authors severity, we (...) reflected on as casting dishonor on
our Parents, and their pious design in the first settlement of this Land No, we
reverence our Ancestors, and the Memory of their divine Zeal and Constancy, and
would derive it as a Truth sacred to our Posteri^y, that it was a religious
Interest which carried them through all the amazing Difficult^es and
Discouragements in that Undertaking But yet, the particular design or end has
been somewhat differently conveyed unto us.

Some have carried it as if the great end were the Conversion of the Heathen;
and there have been great Complaints by some of late, how this has been
neglected and contradicted, and another course taken up, whereby instead of
bringing the Heathen into the Church of God, many whose Fathers and themselves
were once of the visible Church, are now strangely left out, scarce any face of
Religion remaining among them.

As for this, we bewail it, and look upon it as a Reproach to the Land, and
would therefore countenance no such Principles or Practices as have any
tendency to such Apostasy.

Again, some have made this the great Design, to be freed from the Impositions
of Men in the Worship of God, wherewith they were sometimes burdened; and as
they fought freedom for themselves, we cannot suppose they designed to impose
upon others In this we are risen up to make good their grounds.

The Reverend Mr. Willard in his Sermon of the sinfulness of Wo^shipping God
with Men's Institutions, p. 27. gives this as the errand of our Forefathers
into this Wilderness, namely, to sequester themselves into a quiet corner of
the World, where they might enjoy Christ's unmixt Institutions, and leave them
uncorrupted to Posterity; and the gainsaying or counter working this, is, as
he intimates, to cast dishonor upon them, or call them fools.

This Charge falls heavy on those who are for imposing their will on others We
crave no more but to enjoy the Institutions of Christ unmix't And it appears
very st^ange that those who fled from an Act of Uniformity, should presently
impose on themselves, on their Neighbors, and entail the M^schief on their
Posterity.

Some indeed would make the design of our first Planters to consist in some
little Rites, Modes or Circumstances of church Discipline, and those such as
the Word of God no where requires These are the men who dishonor their
Country, and their Fathers Memory, by making their great design to lie in so
small matters. And it is notorious there has been no agreement in these points
from the beginning. Its known there was Anti-Synoda^ia printed, and who had a
hand in it, and how modest his Dissent was, and in what terms they contradicted
what the Synod had established, though the like is criminal and insufferable in
any other.

These Principles in Church Discipline are also wrote against in English by the
Assembly of D^vines, by Mr. Ca^dry, Mr. Rutherford, Mr. Ba^ly, etc. In a word,
if it be the Truth, according to Gods Word, we stand for, it would not be
grievous to any of our pious Ancestors, were they now on Earth; neither will it
be grievous to them now in Heaven: nor should it be grievous to any good Man to
receive Conviction. We refer all therefore to the Word of God, to the Law and
to the Testimony.

In the Preface or Epistle to said Book, we find several things that might be
justly excepted against, but designing neither to be contentious nor
volumnious, we shall speak but to one or two.

In page 8. the Reverend Author is pleased to number up seven or eight
erroneous Doctrines, as he apprehends them to be; and the consequence from all
is this, that if we espouse these Principles, we give away the whole
Congregational Cause at once. Whence we perceive now the professed cause which
the Author engages in; though we hope it is not the Name or the Party, but the
Truths they defend. We shall have occasion to examine these Principles
hereafter; it may suffice here to say, they are craftily and unfairly worded,
and in the Dress they are here clad, we do not espouse them; yet according to
their most fair and genuine construction there is a great deal of Truth in most
of them. And this is but a block the Author politickly casts in the way, which
at last we fear may but discourage some from embracing the Congregational way,
seeing it must need^ fight for its life against some Truths. Its hard kicking
against the pricks, Acts 9.5.

Another thing Remarkable in the Preface is the Authors heat and warmth, page
9. Shall we then by Silence betray the Truth? shall we retort, therefore we are
bold to speak too. Who is on the Lords side? Who? shall we answer, we are* we
trust (through Gods Grace) together with you; and all other siding we would
have in contempt. Is there no one that will stand up for the Churches of
Christ? God forbid but we should, had others declined it! The good People in
them then man well think their Watchmen are all either dead or a sleep: or if
they talk light and ^eady, they may conclude them in a trance, or not quite
awaked. For which cause it is that I dedicate this ensuing Dissertation. And
for the same cause we address you in the following answer. It is not my cause,
but yours. Nor is it ours, but the Churches* and every good Christians in
common. Did I say yours? nay, it is Christ cause. We list under the same
Banners, and would to God we were all as really, as we would seem to be
divested wholly of carnal self -- for truly our present De^ence is become the
peculiar concern of these Churches.

But why all this heat? we would not interpret too hard: but these Expressions
seem plainly to carry this sense, That every one (...) the (...) published
Orders, is an opposer of Truth, not on the Lords side, Enemies to the cause of
Christ, and the Churches of New-E^g^and. Whereupon the Reverend Author ro^^es
himself, and sounds an Alarm to the Churches, To put d^wn all such If this be
not involved in it, we would beg his Pardon, and be informed better. But truly,
Sir, i^ is a mistaken Zeal, ^dly lavished away, and not kindled from above; for
we know no such conspiracy against the Truth^ of our Lord Jesus Christ, or
against the good of the Churches in New England, although we are not proselyted
to some of your particular Opinions. It appears to us, that the Reverend
Authors infirmity in this matter, is the same with the Apostle John's, Mark 9
38. Master, we saw one casting out Devils in thy Name, and he follows not us;
and we forbad him, because he followed not us. Which too forward zeal our Lord
cheeks, and reconciles the matter, Verse. 39, 40. And jesus answered for^^d him
not; he that is not against (...) is on our part. But in this case, as in many
others we could instance in, if need were, the Reverend Author, though very
zealous for a time, yet is not very steady and constan^; for before he ends his
book, he comes about again, in page, 139. where he proposes his Brothers Essay
for Union wherein he shows ^ow inconsiderable the Differences are between those
of the Presbyt^rian and Congregational judgment, that they need no^ se^ T^u^h
to purcha^e Peace. And yet by the cry just now, you wou^d have though all the
Truths of Christ ^^a^peled under foot, the Cause of Religion deserted* and
(...) ^^^mid^ble War, commenced by the Presbyterians against the order of the
Gospel.

It is observable, that the Reverend Author in the D^ssertation of the
following Questions, makes use of abundanc^ of Quotations from several famous
Persons in their Generations; but in some the sense is perverted to a wrong
end, beside the obvious intention of the Writers; in some he brings them in
contradicting at one time what they said at another, and sets some in
opposition to others. And where he endeavors to confirm his Tenets by the
Testimony of some, he might, if he had pleased, have brought many others to
contradict the same thing. But this is a good-way to amuse the Reader, and to
cloud his mind, and to terrify him, by mustering a legion of inartifical
Arguments. We shall be sparing in Quotations, and pass by many cited by the
Author, though we approve them not. Only we ^ra^e leave to present one Quotation,
which may be of use to us all along, being we are unwilling to be imposed on to
believe what God never spoke, or to do what God never required. It is that of
the Reverend Mr. Willard, in his fore-quoted Sermon, page 23.24. Hence it
follows, that there is nothing to be received by us on this account, but what
has G^ds Seal affixed to it. Its therefore enough to s^t us down resolved
against any such thing, if we can say there is a silence about it in the
Scripture, that God has no where commanded it in his Word, either expressly, or
by just and necessary conseq^ence, its no Order of his devising. Scripture
(...) ab^ut any Tradition gives a full condemnation, wh^t ever Pleas men may
bring for it, as, That it is profitable, many have been edified by it, it is a
prudent way to secure the Interest of Religion; many wise, holy learned Men
have pleaded for it and practiced it; that there is much of decency in it, and
the thing it self is (...) ways harmful. All this is fully answer (...) that
one word, God has spoke nothing about it, Heb. ^.4. It never entered into his
heart to enjoin it, Jer. 7.31. Thus he.

This being publicly practiced and printed so long a go by so eminent a
Minister, and never since contradicted, we take it for granted, that none have
any thing to say against it. And we are thankful to him for furnishing us with
a Doctrine so fully laid down, to bear off the Institutions, Traditions and
Impositions that men would lay upon us.

But it is high time now to consider the Questions which the Reverend Author
propounds, and the Answer he gives to each of them. In which attempt we shall
offer no other Apology for our brevity, save that our Author himself might have
been as brief, and yet full as clear and ^^^victive.

Gospel Order Revived, etc.
THe two first Questions might have been wholly spared, yet may serve as a good
introduction to others of (...) aspect.

(...). 1. Whether particular Churches ought to consist of Saints and true
Believers in Christ?

It is granted that the matter of a particular Church (for the Question is not
stated with reference to the Catholic) is visible Saints. And though the Answer
is not given in the words, yet we would charitably hope his sense is the same,
with the united Ministers in London. That none shall be admitted as members in
order to Communion, in all the special Ordinances of the Gospel, but such as
are knowing and found in the fundamental Doctrines of the Christian Religion,
without scandal in their Lives, and to a judgment regulated by the word of God,
are Persons of visible Godliness and honesty, credibly professing cordial
subjection to Jesus Christ. Had our Reverend Author only said t^^s much (and
indeed more is needless) he had saved us the labor of any Reflections on this
part of his Essay. But there is one passage in p. 15 which we cannot but except
against. A Scripture, says ^e, which has respect to the times of the Gospel,
severely rebukes those Ministers, which shall bring men that are uncircumcised
in heart ^ unregenerate persons) into the sa^ctuary, into the Church of God, to
eat the Bread and drink the Blood, which they that are there, partake o^, Ezekiel
44.7, 9. A hard saying, and who can ^ear it. The Text is here mangled, and the
princi^^l things left out. Wh^t God has joined, our Reverend Author has
separated, to drive on his de^^gn The Text says Uncircumcised in heart, and
un^ircumcised in flesh: but h^re we have it only uncircumcised in heart,
interpreted unregenerate persons. What a rebuke is this to the b^st of
Ministers because (forsooth) they are not heart searchers, and dare not invade
the prerogative of God Did the Revere^^ Author or the Church with him, never
admit any unregenerate Person to communion with them? He will not dare to
pretend to it, and therefore the r^b^ke is to himself. We know our Lord Jesus
Christ admitted Judas uncircumcised in heart, an unregenerate Person to holy
things; and in the purest Ages of the Church there were Hypocrites crept in,
many of whom turned Apostates. Nay, our Author is so sensible of this, that p.
19. he quotes the opinion of the Reverend M. Co^ton, That its better to admit
diverse Hypocr^tes than to keep out one sincere Child of God. It i^ obvious
th^n that Hypocrites may be admitted, and yet the Minister (...) neith^^ the
^ebukes of Conscience, or of this Scripture: nay, he may be approved of God, as
doing his Du^y, though Hypo^risie may (...) well consist with sufficient
Knowledge, ^ound belief, a ^l^meless Life, a credible Profession, etc. To
conclude, Its very observea^le, the Reverend Author closes this first Enquiry,
by saying, That the Churches here are free to admit those into their communion,
who are thus qualified. We marvel then his Zeal is not stirred to rebuke them
afresh.

But what will the Reader think if we should make an Apology after all for the
Reverend Author, and assure him he means no more, than that Ministers ought not
to admit known Infidels or Profane; for, for his part, he pretends not to know
men's hearts. We only can entreat the Reader not to rebuke the Author too
severely for his inconsistency, for he may mean well, and all parties are
agreed. Unless he should imagine himself attacqued by the Reverend Author of
the Doctrine of instituted Churches.

Q. 2. Whether there ought not to be a Trial of Persons concerning their
qualifications and fitness for Church communion, before they are admitted
thereunto?

We shall not here examine the force of the Authors arguments, whether they
unresistably conclude, or not; and whether the consequence is good from the
trial of the Apostles, the Porters at the Temple, or the 12 Angels at the Gates
of the Mystical Jerusalem, to the trial of Church Members. It suffices that the
Reverend Author has modestly stated this Truth, and cited us to a merciful Bar,
the judgment seat of a rational Charity, where the Judge avoids severity, and
the trial is managed with abundant tenderness: the bruised Reed is not ^^oken,
nor the smoking flax quenched: the tender (...) find the kind Shepherds Arms
to fold them, and a gentle carri^ge in his bosom. This is indeed the part of
the good shepherd, and we could now gladly commit our selves to the Reverend
Authors Pastoral care. So many good words remove (...) of a rigid Trial. But
alas! the Clouds return upon us, and a black ^ou^t is sta^t^d, as follows.

Q 3 Whether a^e not the Brethren, and not the Elders of the Church only, to
judge concerning the qualifications and fitness of those who are admi^ted into
their Communion?

The Reverend Author allows there may be a difference of apprehension, as to
this point, and yet no breach of Union. We think so too, and therefore as we
continue to honor the Person, though we expos^ his opinion; so we ho^e the
negative will not deserve the popular cry, Oh Apostasy! Apostasy! The
difference, as the Reverend Author tells us, is betwee^ the Brethren of the
Presbyterian and the Congregational way, the former givi^g this power only to
the Eldership, the latter joining the fraternity with them. He takes up for the
latter; but whether he proves it, the world may see when we have considered his
Arguments.

In the foregoing Chapter, when he would prove there ought to be a trial of
Persons, he tells us of the Porters that were set at the^ gates of the Temple,
2 Chronicles. 23.19. but those Porters were Officers 1 Chronicles. 6.1. so he Instances
in the Twelve Angels at the Gates of the Mystic^l Jerusalem, which though it may
imply that the Gates were kept, ye^ not that the fraternity were the keepers.
He instances also in Phillip and John the Baptist, which if it argues any
thing, is applicable only to the Officers, and not to the Brotherhood.

But to examine his strength in this Chapter what he calls argument, may more
truly be styled dogmatical ^ffirming, or a more mean begging the Question. ^ill
page 24, 25. he quote a Scripture or two in proof of his assertions, scil. 1 Corinthians. 5.12. 2 Cor. 2.6. in both which places the Apostle is writing to the
Church a^ Corinth, about excommunicating the Incestuous Person for his sin, and
the restoring him again upon his Repentance. And we remit the Reverend Author
to the same holy Apostle for an answer. It is that known place, 1 Corinthians. 12.
chap. where he compares the Church to a man's Body, and shows the distinct
offices and operations of the respective Members, as the Eye and Ear, the Hand
and Foot. And to render the allusion the more intelligible, he names the
Officers God had set over his Church, as more immediately referred to v. 28.
God has set some in his Church, first, Apostles, secondarily, Prophets,
thirdly, Teachers -- and in the close of the 14. chap. he adds, Let all things
be done decently and in order. The result of all is this.

The Apostle would have every one to keep his proper place and sphere, and do
his own work, scil. in the Censure of the faulty Person, the Eldership were to
do theirs, the Brotherhood not to usurp or arrogate any thing above their
Province. For as the Apostle queries, v. 19. are all Apostles? are all
Prophets? are all Teachers? i. e. in a governed Body we cannot expect all
should be Governors, vid. Pool'^ Annot.

There is another Text also produced to prove the power of the Brethren, scil.
Mat. 18.17. and if he shall neglect to hear them, tell is to the Church. This
Text has been often brought on this account, and sometimes on other accounts
and as often answered, yet here brought again, but it will not answer the end.

The Context supposes an Offender, and the wronged party proceeding against
him; and here are three steps the dissatisfied Person is directed to take, in
order to heal the wound given, 1.) To tell the Offender his fault in private.
2) To tell him before 2 or 3 witnesses, and if the end be not obtained; 3.) To
tell it to the Church. Suppose now a Person acting according to this Rule (as
we could give instances if need were) when the first step did not gain his
Brother, nor the second answer the end, at last the dissatisfied Person carried
the case to the Pastor, and now he reckoned he had told it to the Church. The
Pastor sending for the Offender presently ^onvinced him, brought him to
Repentance, and to give satisfaction, and the thing was issued. Here the Rule
was attended, the Church told, the offender healed, the wronged Person
satisfied, and the matter issued, when the Brotherhood all this while knew
nothing of it. It is evident from the next verse, that by the Church must be
meant those who had Power to bind and loose, which Power Christ had given to
the Apostles. Moreover let the sense be that the Offense is to be ^old to the
Rulers first, and then by them to the multitude; not for the multitude to (...)
it, but (...) their wa^ning and example, for their prayers for the offender,
and their approbation of the Elders Censure, and that they might take care to
avoid the fami^iarity of such an infectious sinner, vid. Pools Annot.

But if Scripture will not prove the Power of the Brethren, possibly some
venerable Maxim may do the feat. Quod tangit omnes deb^t ab omnibus approbari.
But alas! this Maxim gives so much to the Sisters, as to the Brethren. Surely
it is no divine Oracle, it neither came from Heaven, nor is it according to the
manners of men upon Earth. If a master of a family take in a sojou^nor or a
servant; all are concerned, but their vote is not asked. If a Captain list a
Soldier, all the Company is concerned, but it is done by his Authority,
without asking their leave. And pray carry this m^x^m to the College, and see
if the President and Fellows will stand by it in their admissions. If it be
objected, that even in all these cases if there be any sufficient reasons
presented by those concerned, a prudent Ruler will yield to it; we easily grant
it, and therefore its not unfit that men be proposed to the Congregation, if
there be any thing to object against their lives, etc.

Another argument for the Brethrens Power in admission, is, lest the whole
Power should sometimes reside in the hands of a single Minister, and that this
is unreasonable we have a Speech quoted from the Presbiterian Ministers in
London. But it is strangely perverted from their true meanning, as appears not
only from the whole series and scope of the Book, but also from what is
expressed in the page quoted ( p. 71.) where they say, That the Power cannot be
placed in the whole Church collectively taken. The Scripture makes an exact
distinction between Rulers and ruled. They only plead that there should be more
Rulers in a Church then one; or that, when there are more, then the Power
belongs to the whole meaning, the ruli^g Elders as well as the Teaching. And
what is that to the Power of the Brethren? One officer has Power in plain cases
to act in the Kings name.

Indeed our Savior did frequently send forth his Disciples two and two. But
yet Phillip was sent alone to baptize the Ethiopian E^nuch. It will not excuse
a Minister in the neglect of Christ's work, because he has no fellow laborers
with him.

But the strongest argument comes last. The way to keep Popery out of ^^e
World, sait^ our Author, is ^or the fraternity to (...) and maintain* (...)
Power, which do^s o^ right belong to them. (...) to which, we re^d only blot
out the word fraternity, and (...) ^oom write the word (...) An excellent
argum^^t that wi^^ equally prove either (...); and by the change of a (...) to
answer (...) long Speech, which ends that Chapter.

(...), all Power is fi^stly in (...), and our Reverend Aut^^r produces to
commiss^on (...) Christ, for the Breth^en (...) the affairs of his (...) in his
(...); for he has app^^^te^ Officers of his own to that and.

Q. 4. Whether is it necess^^y that (...) at their admission into the Church
should make a public relation (...) the time and manner of their Conve^sion?

The Reverend Author answers in the Negative, and adds, that the Churches of N.
E do not impose it, ^or ought it to be req^ired or desired. He gives f^ur
su^stantial reasons why it ought not And had he stopped here, he had done well,
or had he added more reasons to those four, as he could have done, it had been
an acceptable performance.

But about he wheels again, and seems to plead hard for it, or something like
it, which he calls the Practice of the Churches of New England.

This he would recommend from a story received from the Reverend Mr. Eliot, but
we have heard another story from the same Reverend Person, how when one of the
Brethren was highly commending his neighbors Relation, and preferring i^ to
others, the said Mr. Eliot turned upon him, and said, An Brother! don't be so
much taken with fine words, but look to the man's conversation. The Author
relates another story from the Reverend Mr. How, of o^e who through importunity
was brought to make a relation, and made the Congregation weep, when he did it;
but whether for joy or grief, we are left in the dark.

The Author gives us his arguments, but they do not reach his end. He pleads
for them in that they are ed^fying; but we have known some that have been no
ways so; or granting they were always so, can that justify the instituting and
imposing them? would it not be edifying if every Sabbath day evening, some well
disposed (talkativ^) Brethren should stand up and relate the experiences of the
week past? yet shall we make it a ^aw or custom? will not some people assure
you, they have been wonderfully edifi^d by a woman's preaching in Public? and
yet will out Reverend Author be induced to prostitute his Pulpit to them, or
part with a Sallary to cherish their zeal.

Again, the Relation of Experiences is pl^^d^d for, in that God may be Honored
by them. But we have known some to Gods dishonor, being in^^pid, sensl^ss
things, to use ou^ Authors own words, mere fo^m^lities, too scandalous and
superstitious. He says, they are a means to gain love with the Ch^ldren of
God. But we have known some that have lost love and credit by them.

But the Question is, Whether they are an instituted means for any of (...)
ends? Whether appointed by God, to promote his glory, edify the Congregation,
or gain love? If not, they are but the Institutions of m^n, and therefore to be
rej^cted, as the before quoted Mr. Willa^d instructs us.

God has appointed the preaching the Gospel, the Sacraments, etc. for
edi^^cation, and the promoting Christian love among his people; but we read
nothing of these impos^d relations, neither when Christ himself, nor when his
Apostles after him, adm^nistred this holy Sacrament. Nor is there any
appearance of such a Cu^tom in the primitive Church.

Indeed, there are some occasions, as our Author observes, on which a Person
who has had a rema^kable Conversion, may declare it: but there is neither
p^ecept nor rule in the Word of God, that it should be done at this set time,
and in public. And with what face can we impose it, when o^r Fathers fled from
^he impositions of men? whether (...) Impositions are insufferable in
themselves, or not; yet c^^tainly they are bold and i^solent in New England,
where the greatest outcry is made against them in others.

But it wou^d m^ke a man smile, were he never so serious or displeased, to read
the Texts that are brought for this Custom; as that Psalm. ^0 10. I have not
concealed thy Truth from the great Congregation. And indeed the Ro^al Prophet
had been inexcusable if he had as a Minister would now, that should not declare
to his stock the whole counsel of God.

Again, Psalm. 66 16. he says, Come and hear all you that fear God, and I will
declare what ^e ha^ done for my ^oul We imagine ^he Reverend Author supposes
the Psal^^s^ thus (...) some va^^ religious Concourse, and that in order to his
partaking of the privileges of the Jewish Church. Bu^ (...) a suppo^^ ^o
ridiculous and extravagant, yet this makes nothing (...) Rel^tions, for then it
should ^ave been spoken and (...) by the People. Do you come, and stand forth,
Sir, and tell us what God has do^e for you^ soul, and (...) we admit you to all
the privil^dg^^ of the Temple. Another Text strang^ly perverted to scare some
good people is, that, Mat. 10 33. Whosoever denies me before men, him will I
also deny b^^ore my ^ather which is in Heaven. As if there were no confessing
Christ, without making formal speeches in the Church.

And as if a credible profession of our faith in Christ, the taking his Name
upon us in Baptism, and the renewal of our Baptismal Vow, and a devout
attendance on the O^dinances of the Gospel, were not the true confession our
Lord expects! Woe be to the world, if all were to be rated, denyers of Christ;
who whether from inability, modesty or a just indignation, refuse to make a
q^aint Speech in the Church. The last Scripture we shall name, which has been
equ^lly abused with the rest, is that in 1 Pet. 3^15. That Christians should be
ready to give a reason of the hope that is in them, to every one that a^keth
it, to wit, in a proper place and time, for a (...), and on sufficient Reasons,
where there is Authority to command, or it i^ de^^red with modesty. The sense
indeed is, that we sho^^d be ready to defend our Faith against the scoffs and
cavil^ of Infid^l and Persecutors: and that it is a shame to Christians not to
be a (...) to argue for their Religion, and confu^e gainsayers. So that if you
would infer hence any public Speech in the Church, it m^st be rather a^
Apology for the Ch^istian Religion, or a Sermon to prove its reasonableness and
evidence; but neither is it in the least intimated that this should be m^de a
stated term of Communion; and we are sure the Church has no more power to debar
the (...) from any Christian privilege then to require Oaths, Subscriptions,
and Conformity to a Thou^and more Ceremonies.

We have but one Remark more to make here, and that is, the Apostle requires
this reason of our hope to be given with meekness (...). The true sense whereof
is, th^s which we are contending even with ^nfi^els, yet we m^st not argue wi^h
an intemperate Passion or (...) we construe it, as in opposition to Pride and
Presump^^on of (...) abilities; It is a severe Rebuke to many of our bold and
forward Zealots, who have been ^amed for their promptness to (...) in the
Church, and the first that have fallen under its deservee (...). We should
indeed be better reconciled to this ^^^tom of Relatio^^* we^e this prescribed
meeknes^ and fear more visible in them. Bu^ this is the misery, the m^re me^k
and fearful are hereby kept out of (...) House, while the more conceited and
presumptuous never boggle at this, o^ any thing else.

But it seems the^e is a (...) Corruption of this laudable practice which the
Author do^^well to censure; and that is, when some, who (...) no good intention
(...) their own, get others to devise a Relation for them. The Author may be
satisfied there is something of truth in such reports; neither Charity nor
Interest should make us too incredulous. But then he passes a severe sentence
on such Liars to the holy Ghost. Which they truly deserve, if in their
relations they pretended to tell the time and manner of their Conversion, or if
they so much as suggested it to be their own devising; but if it be only a
profession of their Faith and R^penta^ce, it is not material who composes it,
if they can conscientiously sub^cribe to it. And indeed a general^ form might
be best of all in the case, if they must needs be made us. To sum up all, we
not only believe (with our Author) that such as delude the Church, by ^^inging
relations not of their own devising, do exceedingly provoke the Lord; but also
that the imposers of them as a term of Communion, do so too.

Q^ 5. (...) Church Cover^n^, as commonly practiced in the Churches of
New England, a^y Scripture foundation?

In reference to this Question, the Reverend Author and others of his opinion,
in their discours^s about it, love much to keep in the dark. We confess our
selves at a loss about those words ^ as commonly practiced) and Solomon has
long ago told us, that he that answers a matter before he understands it, it is
a folly and shame to ^im.

The Reverend Author knows we suppose, or if he don't, we do, that in some
Churches of N. E. they have no Church Covenant at all, and that in other
Chu^ches it is different^y (...). Some understand by it only a Cove^anting with
(...) perfo^m by his Grace the Duties we owe to him, and ou^ Christian
Brethren, and accordingly so propose it; others (...) by it a Covenant with a
particular Church, where^^, they are bound to walk in Commu^ion therewith, till
by their consent di^missed. Others will have it to be a nec^s^ary Qualification
i^ ord^r to a persons part^king of the (...) Supper, either there or (...)
where; And others have Noti^ns of it quite different from all these.

The Reverend Au^hor first bears us down with a formidable Authorit^, te^^ing
us ^his Qu^stion was conside^ed at a G^neral Convention of the Minist^rs, May,
1^98 and that an the Ministers then present save one, did concur in the
A^firmative, but we have heard quite otherwise, and that it was th^n proposed
and urged to have the Church Covenant more distinctly ope^ed, though it was not
hearkened to. It is a go^d policy to hu^ry on a vo^e their cause depends on,
and like a first Principle, It must not be deliberated or debated; and such, as
we hear, was the mannagement of that vote. And it is observeable the Reverend
Author avoids (whethe^ industriousty or no, we shall not guess*) to state the
nature of t^is Covenant, bu^ c^nfusedly says, as it is practiced by the
Chu^ches ^ N. E

In the Preface we have the Au^hors own description of this Covenant, where he
calls it expl^^^ Covenanting with God and (...) Church, and sometimes with God
and his People. But we renew our Complaint, that we are yet most miserably in
the dark. It might be enquired here, whether it be two distinct Coven^nts, one
with God and the other with his People? if so, which of them is the proper
Church Covenant? If but one, whether it binds the person that enters into it,
to perform the same Duties to God, and to the Church? and in case a person be
dismissed, whether it is from his whole duty or from a part of it? and whether
God and his Church Promise the same thing to the party covenanting? These
Queries are offered only to provoke a clear state of the thing debated, which
should be cleared to the understandings of people, before its imposed on their
Consciences, as a term of Communi^n.

But before our Author ends this Chapter, he puts another disguise, and a more
taking face on this matter. He would insinuate that the Church Covenant, as
practiced in New England, is nothing more than the public Profession of Faith,
and promise of a holy Lif^; for which he quotes both Synods and several p^ivate
Reverend men's Names. But this unfair de^l^^g may be (...) of its disguise, by
showing in what sense we al^ow a Church Covenant, and in what sense we allow it
not.

1 st. We own and plead for a Covenant with God, whereby a Person or People
become his, and bind themselves to w^lk in all his w^ys. This was the Covenant
that con^^ituted Israel of old to be a Church and People of Go^, and which God
made with Abraham and his Seed after him, by which ^e became, in a special
manner, their God, and they his People This is the Covenant that Israel renewed
with God in the Wilderness, ^^ut. 26.17, 18. To this God annexed his So^ls,
Circumcision (...) the days of old, and Baptism under the Gospel. Its by this
Covenant that a Person or People are united to Christ the head, and do become
Members of his body. By this the Catholic Church is constituted, and we have
an interest in all those Privileges that belong to ^elievers, as such. This is
the Covenant we own, and which we renew every time we attend the public
Worship of God, Psalm. 50.5. and this Covenant ought to be explicit, op^nly
professed an^ published to the World. It is a false and abusive in n^^tion (but
frequently made in an awful Desk) that People are against all explicit
Covenanting, or the open renewal of it; for there is no pr^tence for such a
Calumn^, that we can hear of: It must therefore arise either from idle Fears,
or some mischievous Policy.

2 dly. We also highly a^prove of a Covenant of Reformation. A great Duty in
times of Apostasy, and gross corruption of Manners; to cov^nant to put away
th^se and those reigning sins, to return to the Lord, and perform such
particular Duties as have been visibly neglected. Of this we have frequent
instances in Scripture, Ezra 10.3 5.

3 dly We may also allow a Covenant between Minister and People, whe^eby they
bind themselves to those respective Duties, that the Wo^d of God has made
incumbent on them, on account of that Relation.

But we altogether deny a Church Covenant in the following sense, and say, Our
Lord Jesus Christ has no where appointed in his Word, that there should be a
Covenant entered into by some Persons of a Christian Society, exclusive of the
rest, whereby they being in Covenant one with another, should thereby call
themselves a Church of Christ, making the Ordinances of Christ, or any of them
to depend on this Covenant, so that those who scruple it, or refuse to join i^
it, shall on that account, not enjoy them. And that those who are thus
covenanted, or the major part of them, have power to make or unmake Officers,
to admit or reject Church Members, to manage Discipline, to order the affairs
of Christ's House in his Name, as if they had warrant and commission from him so
to do. Of such a Church Covenant neither Moses, nor Christ himself, the
Prophets nor the Apostles have spoke any thing. None of the Scriptures,
Arguments or Quotations of our Reverend Author prove any thing of it. We will
take leave therefore to call it Man's Covenant, and not Gods, for it has not
Gods Seal affixed to it; and though good, wise or learned men may endeavor to
obtrude it, and pl^ad, its harmless, edifying, or for the Interest of Religion,
yet according to the afore-quoted Rule of the reverend Mr. Willard, we are to
reject it, and shall do so, till it comes with a divine Stamp.

But possibly this may be called a M^srepresentation. You will say, Who owns
it, or will plead for it in this Dress? We Answer, by querying, Whether there
be not several that own and plead for the things contained in it? We wish there
were a less Number. But to evince it, let us take it into the several parts.
Are there none that plead for a separate Covenant, which some (and generally
the lesser part) must enter into? and if it be good, and for good ends, why
must so many be excluded? If it be to reform Manners, if to maintain the
Ministry and Worship of God, if to lay stricter Bonds of Duty, if to bring men
more effectually to submit to Discipline, why then are not the whole brought
in? for the whole Congregation are obliged to these Duties, and why must the
Covenant be separate?

Again, do not some plead, it is requisite, in order to a Persons partaking of
the Lords Supper? But did our Lord Jesus Christ require any such thing when he
first instituted that holy Sacrament? Did the Apostles when they administered
it? Was it the term of Communion in the primitive Church? or where is the
Scripture that comma^^s it? and why should Gods holy Ordinances be annexed to
Man's Covenant? Again, do not some plead, that those who thus covenant, have the
Power to make and unmake Officers? The Reverend Author will not escape here,
whose Opinion in this matter we shall see herea^ter. And, finally, do not some
pretend, That these are the Persons commissioned by Christ, for the admitting
and rejecting of Church Members? This the Reverend Author defends with all his
Might, under the third Question, though, as we showed, he could find no Proof.
And so much for the Church Covenant, which is a stranger to the Scripture, and
has no foundation in the Word of God.

Q. 6. Is public Reading of the Scriptures, without explication or exhortation
therewith, part of the Work incumbent on a Minister of the Gospel?

The Author does not mean, (as we suppose,) if there be no explication or
exhortation throughout the whole time of exercise. If he does, he fights with
the air, for we know no Sect of Men but have some explication, though many among
us neglect reading. We therefore take his sense to be this, If no explication
follow immediately without the interposition of Prayer, or any other part of
divine Worship. For we conceive that the ordinary preaching the Word may very
properly be called exposition, explication and exhortation, and that in every
Sermon there is a competent portion of Scripture for one time explicated and
applied. Nor can we imagine, the Reverend Author means that every clause a
Minister reads in public should be in a formal manner explicated: Methinks it
should satisfy, if after one or more Chapters read, some select clause, verse
o^ paragraph be insisted on and expounded, i. e. chosen as a Text, and preached
on.

We are obliged to the Author, if but for quoting the Text in Timothy, where it
is given him in charge, as his Ministerial Work* To give attendance to Reading,
as well as to Doctrine and Exhortation. That the Jews were wont to read the
Scriptures in their Synagogue, says the Reverend Author, we all know; and that
it was their Duty to read the Scripture at some set and solemn Times, we also
know; for so it was appointed, Deuteronomy. 31.11. Again, he grants that in Justin
Martyrs time the Scriptures were read, and thereupon followed a Sermon.

We should have been th^nkful if he had added more Proofs, by way of
Encouragement (as he could easily have done) and thereby confirmed some that
are apt to stagger. He could have told how the Assembly of Divines at
Westminster, do order and advise to it: He could have quoted the many famous
Churches that do practice it at this day: He could have named several famous
Ministers in England, and some i^ New England, that plead for it, and practice
it. He could have told of more than the bishop of De^^y that complain of the
neglect of it, and that to use the wo^ds of a most emine^^ Divine not fa^ from
us^ as the most just Reproach that the Churches of New England labor under. He
could have told, for encouragement, that it is a clause in our public
Confession of Faith in New England, chap. 22. which treats of Religious
Worship, and the Sabbath day, Sect. 5. The reading the Scriptures, Preaching
and hearing the Word of God, singing of Psalms, as also the Administration of
Baptism and the Lords Supper, are all parts of the Religious Worship of God, to
be perform^d in Obedience to God with Understanding, Faith, Reverence and godly
fear. Finally, He could have told us (had he searched all our New England
Antiquities on this head) now in the Preface to our Version of the Psalms, the
reading of David's Psalms as other Scriptures) in Churches, is taught to be one
end of them, as well as si^ging of them, which is another end. It is ridi^ulous
to say, that reading, with exposition is here meant; for then why was it not so
said?

However, it looks very oddly, that they who neither read nor expound, should
talk so much, and quote so many Names, as our Author has done, for a Practice
which they never intended to come up unto.

We have heard what our Author has said, and much more that he could h^ve said
to encourage this good Practice: His Discouragements follow.

And first, he brands it with a hard uncouth Name, and twice tells us, that
some call it Dumb Reading. We wish he had named those that so term it. There is
so much Venom in the Epithet, and so complicated a Malignity in the Phrase,
that we fear its infections, and may propagate a Spirit of Pride, and contempt
of his Neighbors, and irreverence to his Maker The Author well thought, so
odious a Mark on the Front, would give all honest People a disgust to so
villainous and stigmatized a Practice. But his Policy has failed him, for it
raises a just indignation in an sensible and ingenuous Christians. We will for
once inform the Reverend Author, that the Scriptures are read in Churches
audibly and intelligibly. Nor can we guess what Dumb reading should m^^n,
unless when men sleep over their Books; and in charity to the Author, we wish
he had been a sleep when this unlucky word dro^t from hi^ Pen.

We are further beholden to the Author for his judgment, that the reading of
one Chapter^ with a bri^f explication* (...) edify the Congregation more than
the bare readi^g ^f twenty Chapters. But this is only his (...) Opinion, and as
it will not weigh against the daily experien^e of thousands of People, who mu^t
judge for themselves; so neither does it favor of modesty, to think any one of
his Sermons* o^ short Comments, can edify more th^n the reading of twenty
Chapters We would not charge on the Reverend Author all the hard consequences
^f his own words, or we should say, that it is audacious so vilely ^o disparage
the Inspirations of God. Alas! Si^, the Scripture wants nothing of ours to make
it Perfect. We have the Confessions of many who have come to hear the Word read
with p^ejudice, that God gives it autho^ity from the lips of the Minist^r And
we know, that as all Scripture is given by Inspiration of God, so it is (...)
it self profitable (without any help or advantage from us) for Doctrine, ^or
Reproo^, for Co^r^ction, for Instruction in Rig^teousn^^^ -- ^ perfect the Man
o^ God, the M^nister as we ^as (...) People; and if it were not ^o in it self,
it could not (...) so by being explained. He (...) Confessi^n o^ Faith speak
for u^, chap. 1 S^ct. ^. A^ things in Scripture are not ^lik^ plain in
themselves, nor alike clear unto (...) things which are necessary to be known,
beli^ved and observed for Salvation, are so clearly propounded and opened in
some plac^ o^ Scripture or other, that not only the learned, but the unlearned,
in a due use of the ordinary m^a^s, may attain unto a sufficient understanding
of them.

There ^s one Argument in page 47, 48 brou^ht (...) the Reverend Author against
this Dumb Reading, b^t so (...) a stumble, so m^serab^e ^n inconsequence* that
we are loath to name i^.

To (...) He^d, we are more and more c^nfirm^d, that the reading Gods Word in
the great Cong^^gation, is so far from being offen^^ve to God, that it is the
greatest Reverence and honor we can do (...) ^^^^owledgment we can (...) to
him, who in mercy has given us his Word, and will judge the World by it at the
great Day.

Qu. 7. Is Baptism to be administered to all Children, whom any professing
Christians shall engage to see educated in the Christian Religion?

The Reverend Author, according to his wonted Bounty, at first dash concedes to
us, that he will not oppose the adoptive right. We then d^clare our selves
satisfied, and crave no more; for we do not conceive that any man can engage or
undertake for the Education of a Child in the Christian Religion, unless he has
the Authority of a Parent devolved on him, for the government of the Child. Nor
would any conscientious Minister accept the engagement of one who has no power
or ability to perform his Vows. So that this engagement necessarily implies the
care and authority of a Father, and consequently there is an adoptive Right to
Baptism.

But the Author stumbles at the phrase, prof^ssed Christians, and seems to
think that the Question, if carried in the Affirmative, would conclude for
Papists, Secinia^^ and the grossest Heretics, as also for the most notorious
Profl^g^tes, and profane Persons; as if it ever entered into the heart of a
Protestant Divine to accept the Engagement of some lewd Debauchee or professed
Papist to institute his Child for the Devil or Popery Our complaint here is the
same that the Reverend Mr. How once made of his Adversaries, That ^e gravely
falls a combating with his own Man of Straw, and so we are to be tortured in
Effigy. But to pacify him, we wou^d info^m him what a charitable Man would
understand by a pro^^ss^d C^ristian, viz the same that our Catechism does, when
it instructs us, That Baptism is not to be administered to any till they profess
their Faith in Christ, and obedience to him. We leave our Author therefore to
fight it out with that Reverend Assembly, for truly his Argument is formidable
against them, in as much as Papists, Socinians, Heretick^, the Profane, etc.
do all profess their Faith in Christ, and Obedience to him. Such is the Power
of Interest, Faction, Passion and personal Opposition, that it blinds a Man on
a sudden to fight with those Truths which he has learned and reverenced from
his Infancy.

Qu. 8. Is Bap^ism in a private House, where there is no Church Ass^mbly, (...)?

The Question seems to grant, there may be a Church Assembly in a private Hou^e
((...) we (...). 10.5. (...). 2) so there ^ay be a public place, and (...)

We agree (...) Reverend Au^hor, that B^ptism is a part of the public
Mi^istry, (...) by one who is not called to the (...) Ministry; (...) should it
usually and o^^inarily be admin^st^ed but in (...) Co^g^egati^n, and in the
most public manner, no^ ^oul^ we drop a lord to dis^omage so pious a Practice.

Yet, let the Congregation be never so great, if the Ad^inistrator be not a
public (...), commissioned (...) our Lord Jesus Chr^^^, it may be called
private Baptism, and a^toge^her unallowable, and if the number of people be
sma^l, and the place otherwise privat^, yet if the Administrator be a public
Officer and Minister of (...), the Baptism may in a sense be called Pu^lick,
and in some cases ^as that of dangerous sickness) no^ only allowable but
necessary, and a duty. When a Justice of the Peace acts in his Office, though
out few are present, yet ^hey are acts of public Authority, as truly as those
done in higher Courts, and with greater solemnity. Although among us, where
Churches are orderly settled, there is little occasion either for private
p^eaching or Baptism, it being certain the more pub^^ck both are, the mo^e God
and his Ordinances are honored, and the gener^l profit of his people consulted.

But yet (as was (...) before) there are some cases of necess^^y, wh^rein its
o^es duty to seek a more private (...), the pr^vidence of God not permitting a
more public attendance, and no Minister ought to refuse their (...).

As for instance, in apparent danger of death* it would be ^^^tity to deny such
a request, i^ pri^acy be the only O^jection* (...) need not suggest, that all
what we call private (...) be a competent numbe^ of people p^esent; the
neighborhood ^eing called in, and notice given to some of the Brethren of the
Church. We observe a good (...) betwee^ the two dangerous extremes. We avoid
(...) and (...) Baptizing (...), for which our Brethren in England are so very
faulty, and we would correct our own defects here at home, in refusing to
Baptist in private, be the extremity (...) so great, or life never so
hazardous. Not that we are at all ti^ged (...) the error of St. Austin, namely,
a persuasion of the absolute necessity of Baptism to Salvation: but we esteem
it the most public owning of God which the ^^ate of the person admits of* or
the providence of God at present allows* and it is good to be found in the way
of blessing, and we may expect that God will bles^ his ^wn Institution^.

But the lawfulne^s of private Baptism, in cases of necessity, abundantly
appears from that One instance of the Jailer, Acts 10.33. To which our ^u^hor
answers, St. Paul was an extraordinary Officer. But by his leave, that is
nothing to the purpose; for the ordinary Mi^isters of the Gospel succeed the
Apostles in those things that are of an ordinary and standing nature in the
Church, as Baptism is, indeed, his other reason is good, that it was difficu^t,
if no impossible to g^t a Congregation of Christians; and therefore necessity
was put upon the Apostle to Baptize the Jailer and family in private; which
plainly holds forth thus much, tha^ in like cases of necessity, as in times of
persecution, danger o^ Death etc. the same practice is allowable and a duty;
wherein we have the promise of Christ's gracious Presence with us, as w^^l a^
when it i^ administered in ^ large^ Cong^egation Mat. 18.20. For where two or
three are gathe^ed together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them.

Q 9 O^ght all that contribute toward the maintenance to have the priviledge^
o^ voting in the Elect^on of a Pastor?

The Reverand Author in the v^ry first line of his answer to this question,
(...) in a most ^^kind insinuation, and not alt^gether (...) Calumny, as if the
Affirmative could not be maintained, but (...) of (...) m^st ^e i^curred.

We therefore one so (...) prof^ss, that we abhor as much as he (...) to do,
the thought that Money (...) purchase us Church (...); but this i^ so wide a
(...) that it is not worth while to (...) mo^e to it.

A^l the Authors arguments under this head infer only that it is the Churches
priviled^e (...). And under his 4th argument no tells us, that nothing i^ more
evident, then that in the (...) Ages of the Church, Pastors were chosen by all
and only their (...). Which we verily believe, no^ could he have expressed the
truth in more apt words. For long since he has taught us, That adult (...)
Persons are of the Church, and unde^iably proved it in his Treatise annixed to
the first Principles of New England, under which denomina^ion they claim the
privilege of voting in the ele^tion of a Minister.

Indeed there is one argument at first blush seems pretty plausible, p. 68.
(...) them who have no right to be Lord Supper t^emselves, (...) who (...) be
the Dispen^^^ o^ that Ordinance to others, is (...).

We An^wer; The administration of the Lords Supper is but one part of a
Ministers work, and but a little part, compared with all the rest. Let us turn
the argument then, and say, For some few to ^ppoint who shall be the Preacher
to the whole Congregation, is as (...) irrational.

Suppose we (what is frequent in this Country) thirty or forty Communicants,
and it may be two hundred to be admitted in convenient time; is it not every
whit as absurd, that not one of these who are to be examined, prepared and
admitted to this holy Ordi^^^ce, shall have liberty to choose the Person who
shall do this Work (...) them; but the Person must be altogether chose by
others, whom ^e has not this Work to do for. A hopeful argument that will help
both sides!

The Reverend Au^hor calls it A privilege p^rchased for the Com^unicant^ Only
by the Blood of Christ; but he gives no proof a^ all of any such App^^priation,
and leaves us yet in the firm belief, (...) the Privil^dge is purchased for the
whole Flock, who had (...) for their own.

We might here borrow of the Author the Maxim he gave (...) ^^^ther ca^e, Quod
tangit (...) omnib^^ app^obar^ (...) ^^ploded in the other case, but if ^e will
give u^ leave to (...) qualiter (Quod tangit omne^ aqualiter, etc.) then it
would ^uit (...) ca^^, and afford him some conviction.

The Reverend Author also gives us another Maxim in page 87 with ^^is Elog^^m,
That it ha^ its foundation in Nature and Reason, (...) ^e are sure it makes
strongly against him here, namely. That (...) to all is not valid, of some of
all sorts have not a consent (...) some places have no Communicants, and there
all grant this Right and Privilege belongs to the whole: if afterward they
come to have some Communicants, by what Rule or Reason do they take away that
Privilege which belonged to others before? In short, let our Author find one
Text that limits or confines it to the Communicants alone, and then deprive the
Majority.

But since Scripture fails him, he has another Refuge, viz. the Authority of
the Synod, and the Law of the Land. The last of these we think excepts Boston,
and of both we need only say, that as they were done by men, so they may be
altered and undone by the same men, when they please.

It is also ^inted, That this may prove fatal to the Churches. But there is no
danger, Truth does no harm; and we rather think it may be retorted on the
Author and his Practice. There was lately a grievous Complaint made by a
principal Man of Swanzy, before some Ministers and others, That the Law which
gives the Power to the Communicants only to call a Minister, is like to ruin
them and their Posterity forever, by excluding them from an able and orthodox
Ministry, and the Ordinances; for the Baptists taking advantage thereby, have
set up a gifted Brother, and spoil the place of the public Ministry.

Qu. 10. Is it expedient that Churches should enter into a Consociation or
Agreement that matters of more than ordinary Importance, such as the gathering
a new Church, the Ordination, Deposition, or Translation of a Pastor, be done
with common consent?

The Reverend Author answers, That it is both expedient and necessary; though
he had answered as well, had he said, It is altog^ther needless. but lest we be
mis-understood in this matter, let the Reader carefully observe, We do not mean
that the Communion, or Fellowship, or Prayers, or Assistance, or Duties that
the Church or People of God owe to one another, are needless. But for
particular Churches, that are parts, and result from the Catholic, and are
^^lted to the Head, and in Co^enant with him, and bound to perform all Duties
both to the Head and to all the Members respectively; for such to talk of
ente^ing into an agreement on this account, seems very idle and needless. To
^^ustrate the matter; If a Servant has bound himself to a Master, he need not
go to make new Covenants to carry it dutifully to the Mistress, lovingly to the
Children, faithfully to the fellow Servants, this being all contained in the
Masters Covenant. So, if a Person marry a Husband, she has no need to make a
new Covenant with his Father, that he shall be her ^ather, or that his
Brothers, Sisters or other Relations shall become hers, this being all ^mplyed
in the Marriage Covenant: The respective Duties must be perform^d, but there ^s
no need of new agreements or covenants to be ent^red into Mr. B^rro^g^s, as
quoted by the Reverend Auth^r, express^s this well. They are bound in
Consci^nce to give an account of the ways to Churches about them, or to any
other who shall req^ir^ ^t; and this not in an A^bitrary way, but as a Duty
they owe to God and Man. The united Brethren in London speak yet more fully in
the Chapter of Communion of Churches, ^. 1. We agree that particular Churches
ought not to walk so dist^^ct and separate from each other, as ^ot to have care
and tenderness to one ano^^er. But their Pastors ought to have frequent
Meetings together, that by mutual advice, support, encouragement and brot^erly
intercourse, they may stre^gt^en the ^earts and ^ands of each other in the ways
of the Lord. We may add here the who^e Chapter of occasional Meetings of
Ministers, and so dismiss this Question.

Qu. 11. May the Brethren in Churches, and not the Pastors only, be sent unto,
and have their Voice in Ecclesiastical Councils?

It is to be obs^rved, that by this means the Brethren in a Synod will surpass
the E^der^ in Numb^r, and by a Cabal may easily out vote them Wherefore we can
never believe that our Lord Jesus Christ has lest every private Brother an
equal Vote with any of his Officers, in ruling o^ m^nnaging his Church. It will
be granted that the advantage is of the Elder^ side, as to Learning, Prudence,
Parts, Piety, Zeal and Devotion, at least, taking the whole Synod together; yet
that men of mean Parts, no Edu^ation, nor under the awe of an Office that
obliges to ^he care of Souls pecu^iarly, should be equa^led to the former in
^ll Dec^^io^s, though not Debates, whereof they (...) uncapabl^, is very
unacc^untable. Indeed, had our Lord in his Word p^sitively required this, we
might expect that his Spi^i^ of Counsel would more abundantly reside on the
weaker Vessels; but otherwise, to fill a Co^^c^l from the Plough, and the
Stall, is a tempting Christ, and betraying the Church. Neither are we ignorant
what Tool they are in the hands of any one designing Man of a Reverend and
August N^me, let his Opinions be what they will; these are Bigg^^s, and the Man
is himself a Synod. We confess such a Man would be tempted to stand up for the
Brethrens Authority, which is his own support, and the mean while the Church is
like to be well governed.

But what is a further Outrage to the sacred Office, the Author will not let
Ministers fit as Officers of Christ, or as Persons aut^orized by him; for thus
he expresses himself, page 86. Its not their Office, but the Churches
Delegation, that gives Power to the Members of Synods, the specificating Act
in which Synod all Power, and so the right of a decisive Vote is founded, is
the Churches Delegation. And to prove thi^, he instance^^ in the first Synod
that ever sat, as he ter^s that Acts 15. a ^opy and Samplar left to all
succeeding Generations. But how Comical is this? as if that was so constituted,
or its Members delegated by particular Churches Or, how long had this inspired
Synod sat before that case was brought before them? or were they summoned upon
this single occasion? Truly the Author begs the whole, and proves nothing of it.

Indeed, the Reverend Author tells us in the same page, That of these Delegates
from the Churches, the Elders ought to be the principal, or principally
concerned. A mighty grace ineed! yet even this cannot be allowed, and he
consi^tent with himself; for in the next page he tells us, There are ^ome
Brethren in the Churches, whose Gifts and Abilities are beyond their Pastors,
and some again are more Noble and Honorable. Now if they are alike delegated,
and those can act no more in the Name of Christ than the other, pray why should
they be the principal? Why may not a Brother of equal Authority assume and
arrogate the first place to himself, which if he chance to do, we leave the
Author to be catechized by him, and to do Penance patiently by his own
Principles.

Qu. 12. Does the Ess^nce of a Ministers Call consist in his being Ordained
with the imposition of hands by other Ministers?

(...). 13. May a Man be ordained a Pastor, except to a particular (...), and
in the presen^^ of (...)?

(...) join these two together, partly because they are of near (...) and
partly because some things the Reverend Author asserts (...) one of them, may
indifferently be referred to the other. Our (...) exceptions may be reduced to
these five.

(...) he asserts, The essence of a Ministers Call consists (...) e^ection
between him and his People, page 91. If we (...) and the Author, he mean, that
a person cannot be a Minister (...) his mutual Election, and that with it he
may, and is. He (...) before noted, that some think the essence of the Ministry
to (...); others, in its being done by a Bishop; Which last (...) (says he)
most of the Ministers in France, Switzerland, (...), Scotland, etc. But, to
retort your words, Sir, (...) your assertion cuts off more both for Number and
for (...). It cuts off the Prophets, the Apostles and Evangelists! (...) all
the Bishops that are and have been. And though these (...), may sig^ifie little
with our Reverend Author, yet some (...) he mentions as great and e^inent
Lig^ts. He cuts off (...) of Presbyters, famous Ministers, who apprehending the
(...) of their Ministerial Call to lie in their being ordained and (...) God,
do who^^y wave this mutual Election, as a little thing.

(...) s^eaks very highly and honorably of the Ministerial (...). They are
ca^^ed Ministers of God, of Christ, of the New (...), of the Gospel: Ministers
in the Lord, Ambassadors for (...); Angels, L^g^^s, Stewards of the Mysteries
of God, etc. (...) ^^ews, that not only the Essence, but the Excellency of the
(...) consists in their Relation to God and our Lord Jesus Christ, (...) to
that separate and sacred Work that the holy Ghost has called (...) unto, Acts
13 2. But what Scripture in^imates to us, That (...) Essence or eminency lies
in their R^lation to this or that (...) People? The Prophets of old never
pleaded their Election (...), but that they were called, sent, ordained and
commissioned (...) God.

(...) ^uthors chief Argument here is a Supposition of Shipwreck upon some
desolate (...): and (...) easily grant, that one of the Company being elected,
may become a (...) of God unto them, bu^ it is more from the Providence and
(...) of G^d, than their Election. Its God (...) God must incline him to (...):
Its God that (...) to receive and entertain him as a Minister: God gives (...)
his (...), etc. But besides (...), it is to be considered, that God does not
tie himself to (...) ^eans which he has tied u^ unto in ordinary cases;
according to tha^ usual saying, Jas (...) jar^ divino Naturali. The case is
wholly extraordinary, and G^d that makes the Necessity wi^^ also dispense with
our unavoidable Compl^ance.

Were our Author in the right, the sinful Will of Man, whereon the Election
does depend, might f^ustrate the whole Mi^istry that Christ has instituted.
Bu^, alas! whether men will (...), o^ whether they will forbear, our Lord will
send his Ministers; and whether Men will call them or no, they shall be forced
to confess, Ve^ily, we had Prophets among us, Ezekiel. 33.33.

We wonder also, that they who insist upon it, That it is Christ's peculiar
Prerogative to state his own Worship, should ^ oil him of another part of it,
to make his own Officers. If the People may do one, why not the other? And it
increases our Wonder, that the Reverend Author should revive this Assertion at
this time of day, Forty six years after it has been so learnedly and so fully
refuted in Jus Divinum Ministerij Eva^g^l^^i, publi^hed by the Provincial
Assembly of London, chap. 9. without taking Notice of their Answers and
Arguments.

2 dly. We shall pass by several things in these Chapters, which in a severe
Disquisition, we might justly except against. Our second Charge is, That he
makes imposition of hands a little unnecessary Ceremony. Though we can
distinguish between Ordination and Imposition of Hands, and approve what the
aforementioned Assembly says, page 157. We must distinguish between the
Substance, Essence and formal Act of Ordination, and the Rite used therein. The
Essential Act of Ordination is the constituting or appointing a man to be a
Minister, or the sending him with Power and Authority to preach the Gospel; The
(...) of hands. Yet we can see no reason why this Rite, (...) divine
Institution, 1 Timothy 5.22. used by the Apostles* (...) Church, and generally
since the Reformation, should now (...) down (...) so triffling a Cerem^ny We
know the Reverend (...) could have quoted a whole (...) of fam^us Authors,
(...) highly for it. If the (...) at London displease (...), the New-E^gland
(...) him, That (...) are not only to be chosen (...) ordained by (...) of
^ands, and Prayer; o^ the (...) to the (...) expressly, Ordination is (...)
indeed disquieted (...)? It is but look^ng (...) magni^ies and contends for as
mere a (...), to (...) right hand of fellowship.

The Reverend Author not only speaks meanly of the laying on (...) of the
Presbyter^, ^ut he too much countenances the (...) of hands by Brethren, or
Persons out of Office. His (...) of Scripture, Numb. 8, 9, 10 respecting the
Children o^ (...) putting their hands on the Levites, is so (...), and
punctually (...) by the Provincial Assembly of London, page 188 (...) the Reader
thither, for we love not to transcri^e. (...) Testament ^e owns there is no
instance of Persons out of (...) ^ands. And notwithstandi^g all his instances,
the Apos^^e^ (...) good, Heb 7 7. and without all contradiction (...) of the
greater.

The Authors next Essay is, to remove the weighty (...) what (...) has no^ And
(...). To touch upon one, (...) self in Marriage* (...) the power (...) has
^ormally the power (...)

A poor (...) Woman has power (...) her Action (...) partic^^^^ (...) ^each
govern the (...) ^^in Di^pa^^^! Moreov^^ it (...) the Wife gives the Power to
the Husband. Indeed, she gives her self, but it is the Institution and Command
of God, that gives the Power* and could we suppose that to be laid aside, they
would be equal. To be sure, if Women once get this Notion by the end, that th^^
give the Power to their Husbands, we should soon have them (...), limiting and
r^serving in part to themselves, by a Mar^i^ge Contract, as well their Power
and Authority, as their (...).

4 ly. The Au^hor asserts, That no man ought to be ordained a (...), page 101.
Which kind of (...), because it manifests the Reve^end (...) his Judgment. It
is credibly reported, (...) Convention of Ministers at Boston, May 26. School.
(and t^e^e are eno^gh yet livi^g, who kn^w the truth of it, to w^^m we app^al)
this ^uestion was discussed, Whether a Minister (...) ordained, though he ^ad,
as yet, no particular Church, in order to the A^ministration of Bap^ism, and
the gathering and settling a Church? Thi^, as we are told, had a more pecu^iar
reference to Mr. Clap's station at Rhode Island, and it was voted and carried
in the Affirmative; and what is yet stranger, was lead on and put to the Vote
by (...) Author himself, he being the Moderator of the Assembly. Upon this
conclu^ion Mr. Wi^liams was ordained in the College Hall, in order to his
Voyage to B^^bad^es. Now it is wonderful to us, how the contrary to that which
was a truth two years ago, should obtain now. Possibly the Reverend Author'^
modesty will not suffer him to think the Balance equal, or we would put the late
Vote of May, 98. in the Scale against the Council of Calcedon, p* 105.

5 ly, We crave the Re^ders patience, and will offer but one Rema^k upon th^se
two Chapters. In page 102. its said, Pastor and Flo^k are Relates, and therefore
one cannot be without the other. It is contrary to the Rul^s of Reason (as
(...) know) that the Relate should be without its Correl^te. To say, (...)
Levite, who has no Flock, is a Pasto^, i^ is g^od (...) as to say, (...) who
has no Children is a Father, and (...) H^sband

This is wo^^ th^^d-^a^e, and answered long ago by the Assembly at London, and
others, and sometimes by the Author himself ^ Mini^ter may be (...) under a
double Notion, as a Minister of (...), or of this or that particular Church. In
this latter sense they are Relate and Correlate, and no otherwise. Hence, if h^
leaves them, (...) ceases to be their Minister* and they cease to (...); but
(...) he may be a Minister of Christ, and they a Church of Christ. And thus in
that (...) that is entitled, The judgment o^ several Divines o^ the
Congregational way, concerning a Pastors Power occasionally to exert
Ministerial acts in another Church, be^^des that which is his particular Flock;
the Reverend Autho^ expresses himself after this manner, page ^. The
Minist^rial Power which a Pastor has received from the Lord Jesus Christ, (...)
not so confined to his particular Flock, as that he shall cease to be a
Minister when he shall act in the Name of the Lord elsewhere. And a little
after, I am, as to this particular, fully of the same judgment with the learned
Dr. J. Owen in it judi^ious Treatise concerning a Gospel Church, P^g. 1^0, 101.
where he has these words, Although we have no concernm^nt in the fig^en^ of an
indelible Character accompanying sacred O^ders, yet we do not think the
Pasto^al Office is such a thing as a man m^st leave behind him every time he
goes from home; for my own part, i^ I did not think my self bo^nd to preach as
a Minister authorized, (...) all places, and on all occasions when I am called
thereunto, I think I should never preach more in this Wo^ld Thus Dr. Owen.

We see then, that our Reverend Author and the famous Dr. O^en plainly hold,
that though there be a Relation to a particular flo^k, yet a Minister is so
au^hroize^ by Jesus Christ, that he is cap^ble in his Name to perform
M^nisterial Acts in other places, and upon all occasions. And were not our
Author si^cerely of this Opinion, we cannot but think he would highly condemn
^n Mini^^er that should be absent from his Flock four years together, upon any
servi^e whatsoever. Sure, if he be no way capable to act as a Minister of Jesus
Christ, he is all that while but as a stray Bird, idly wandering from its Nest.

Yet at this time, our Author would bear the World in hand, that a M^nister has
no power to act a^ such, but to his particula^ Flock; and therefore quotes the
words of the Plat^^o^m, chap. 9. sect. 7. He that is clearly loosed from his
Office Relation to that Church whereof he (...) a Minister, cannot be looked on
as an Officer, nor perform any act of Office in any other Church, unless he be
again called unto Office. But a more eminent Assembly of Divines at London,
have quoted this very Paragraph, page 1^5 and severely, but justly answered it
as a great absurdity, and contrary to sound Doctrine.

The ^nswer to the other part of the Question, Whether a Minister should be
orda^ned only in the presence of that Church where he is to ^e^^e? Will ^e^uit
from what has been already laid down.

The presence of Christ must be supposed, when ever a person is (...) to his
Ministry; but seeing our Lord Commissions none im^^diately, such must be
present as have Power to authorize, Commission and give ^he charge in his Name.
When ever a Call is given, received and accepted, whether it be by Words,
Message or letter, both Minister and People are conceived, a^ present face to
face. But the Circumstances of Times, Places, Persons, Distance, etc. must
determine this matter; which as they may fall on^, may sometimes render it both
prudent, regular and necessar^, (and then its the Voice of Providence) for a
Minister to be ordained in one Land, and to serve in another.

Q. 14. Is the Practice of the Churches of New England in granting Letters of
Dismission or Recommendation from one Church to another, according to
Scripture, and the Example of other Churches?

The Reverend Author refers to many Scriptures to prove the Affirmative, but
not one of them reac^es the Question, or prove a dismission for this end, scil
to take a person off from being a Member of one Church, to be made a Member of
another. The Epistles or Letters he refers to, are all Apostatical or
Ministerial, not the Letters of one Church to another, some only excepted,
which is mentioned as (...) by the Brethren; but Apollo, on whose behalf they
wrote, was not a M^mber of their Church; nor do they write to those in Achaia
to receive him as a Member, but rath^r as a Minister, or as a Christian of
eminence and singular goodness.

Indeed the^e may be a good use of Letters of Recommendation, and especially
among stra^g^rs. And where a Member removes from one Church to another, a
mutual satisfaction may be labored after. But we cannot but think such Letters
frivilous, when in the same Town, and at two streets distance, a Person known
over all the Town for an exemplary Conversation, prefers ano^hers Ministry.
Civility will const^ain such persons to acquaint their Ministers of their
purposes, and the same Ch^istian Civility obliges such a Minister to acq^aint
the other Pastor (if need be) to whose Ministry they repair, that they have
carried themselves well in his Communion, and that he hopes they may prove
blessings in all other.

But as for the Brethren, We need not go to them, to make a second Speech, now
to ask leave to withdraw, and to render an account to every impertinent Talker
who thinks the man Married to him, and that his bed is broke into, or that
there is no just reason for a divorce.

Moreover, some people are forever dissatisfied; neither conveniences of
Habitation, liking the others Ministry, profiting under it, or dislike of some
Customs and Practices which he would willingly be rid of the light of, can
satisfy. And what must the grieved person do further in this case? Why, truly
he has done his duty, and may hear and communicate, where God and his own sober
Conscience directs him. No^ ought any Minister of Christ, to reject his claim
to the Lords T^ble with him.

To say no more, our Reverend Author having in a former Treatise proved that
persons baptized are thereby subjects of Discipline, We think they all ought to
be accountable to the Society where they are; there persons b^ing dismissed by
the Providence of God, whether they have letters of dismission or not. Else by
their principles, an ordained Minister in London, formerly of Communion with a
Church in Boston, being called to Office in a particular Church, and having
accepted the Pastoral Care thereof, must first send over a Packet to
New England for a Letter of dismission. And don't you think he would be well
employed?

Qu. 15. Is not the asserting that a Pastor may administer the Sacrament to
another Church besides his own particular Church, at the desire of that other
Church, a declension from the first principles of New England, and of the
Congregational way?

The Reverend Author Answers, No, not at all. Had the (...) been, whether this
be a d^clension from the (...), we (...) joined with (...) the Answer. (...)
Doctrine, that a Minister upon (...), may as well M^^ister to another Church,
as to h^s own (...) and he ^ Minister of Christ, there (...)

But (...) which he pleads for in this (...)* we must have answe^ed, that (...)
great Apostasy and Decleni^ion. And when the Reverend (...) out th^s in the
year 1^93 some of the old men and women did express th^mselves after this Rate
That it was not thus from (...), and that he had pulled such a (...) the good
old way (...) a little while brin^ the whole ^abrick to the ground No (...)
without reason, for if particular Chu^ches are (...), if Pastor and Flock are
Relat^ and Correlate, (...) to one another* as Hu^band and Wife, if the offense
of a Mi^ist^rs (...) in a mutual Election b^tween the ^hu^ch and him; th^n we
can by no mean^ allow the Authors assertion, That a Pastor may administer, etc
It Is in vain to plead, I ^ere may be as well communion (...) Offi^ers, as of
Members; for these Principles will not allow so much (...) a Mem^^r of one
Church to communicate in another. Hence the (...) Mr. Hooker (as the Author
(...) him) could never get over that diffi^ulty, but look upon it as
unwarrantable ^or private Members to communicate in another ^hru^h Neither can
Dr. Owen or Dr Go^^wi^ (whom he (...) pi^l^rs among the Congregational) though
the^ tw^st and squeze and strain hand, maintain this Truth on these Principles,
no^ satisfy a rati^nal mind about it. Though they plead (...) Members for that
time, yet this no more excuses it, tha^ if an (...) to hide her shame and
fo^ly, should excuse it by saying She made the Man her Husband o^ that turn and
act. For if we (...) it to the narrow, the Administrator and deliver the
Sacrament as an Officer, or not* ther^ is no (...): if as an Officer, the^ he
h^s Power from Christ, as (...), to administer the Sacrament where he is
occasionally c^lled. And ^hen down go the Authors P^inc^ples at once, of the
Churches being specifically distinct, of the Essence of the Ministerial Ca^
lying in the mutual Election of M^^ister and People, of Pastor and Flock b^i^g
Relate and Correlate, so as to give being to each other, as such; or else on
the other hand, it must be said, That a Minister, when he administers to
another Flock, acts not as an Officer, but as a private Man; and this lays all
in common, and destroys the Ministerial Power at once And to attempt to
reconcile it with our New England Platform, will be but (as Mr. Hooker has the
expression) to make the Platform to speak Daggers and Contrad^ctions. Neither
can it be pretended, that the g^nerality of the Ministers in New England were
of that mind in the beginning. In the Answer of the Elders of several Churches
in N. England, unto the Nine Positions, it is sai^, Position 8. If you mean by
a Ministerial Act, such an act of Autho^ity and Power in dispensi^g Gods
O^dinances, as a Minister does (...) to the Church whereunto he is called to be
a Minister, then we deny that ^e can p^r^orm any Ministerial Act to any other
Church but his own, beca^se his Offic^ ^xtends no ^arther t^an his Call. And
now we appeal to the Reader, if the Reverend Author must not either Renounce
these hi^ ^^rling Principles, or own himself guilty of that Declension from the
first Principles of New England, which in another he would call ^po^^acy.

And indeed, we know well enough, that a few years ago, no young man could have
escaped that odious Brand, that durst have printed such a Principle. But all is
well that we do our selves, and every other Congregational Tenet had been
laudably rejected, had some men the doing of it. Let another presume, he is a
Backslider, an Apostate, Proud, Rash, Contemptuous, and Despiser of his
Fa^hers. The same thing, (to a^^ude to the Authors words, page 71.) in one man,
is a modest inoffensiv^ Dissent in another, a daring Contradiction to Synods.

Qu. 16. Is it a Duty for Christians in their Prayers, to make use of the words
of that which is commonly called the Lords Prayer?

Though the Authors answer hereto be very large, yet we shall say very little
to it, or against it. He yields and allows, it may be lawfully used, as well as
other Prayers and Passages in Scripture, in our Addresses to Heaven: That it
has been used in ancient Times, he does not deny; and we know that it is most
f^equently used by the most famous Divines in these days. And he gives us an
instance of Mr. Jer. Buroughs, which we thank him for, having never heard it
before. That it has been abused to Superstition, and the Trial of Witchcraft,
we also know; but the abuse of a thing does not take away the proper lawful Use
of it; nor is it fit so far to gratify those that made it a Charm, as for that
reason to refrain to use it

But verily the Author would have us more superstiti^us than we are willing to
be; for h^ quarrels at the varying but of one word or clause in this excellent
form of Prayer: If instead of Debts or Sins we say Trespasses, it is a fearful
Crime. For why? says the Author, It smells rank of the Liturgy, its learned out
of the Common Prayer Book. He might have said rather, That we learn first to
read it so in our Horn-Books, and are mis-taught from our Infancy. But truly,
we account this diff^rence of Translation a petty thing. And if instead of
Hallowed, the Author would say Sanctifi^^; and instead of daily Bread, he would
choose to say convenient Food, we should not ^^ll foul on him.

No, says the Author, page 123. why then you give up the Cause In truth, then
the Author has no adversary in the wo^ld, where the Lords Prayer is used in any
Language beside the Greek; for who binds himself to a Translation, as to an
Original? but the Author's meaning is apparent, he would insinuate into the
heedless Reader, That whoever uses the Lords Prayer, ought not to vary one
word from the words Christ gave it in; and truly, then they must, like
Barbarians to the People, tone it in the Original Greek.

We would offer here one Query more. Does the Author mean, in stating this
Question, to enquire whether it be an indispensible Duty to use the words of
the Lords Prayer in all our Addresses to God, so that as often as we ^ow our
Knees in Prayer, we should think it necessary to repeat this Form? Here again
he would have no Adversary under Heaven Yet the Question may be strained to all
this, and he has taken no care to bound it.

But to detain the Reader no longer, it is enough and enough that the Reverend
Author justifies it as lawful; for then doubtless it may be sometimes proper:
for that would be a strange thing indeed, that is always lawful, and never (in
no Circumstances* not in that of Mr. Buroughs himself) can be proper. But
since it is lawful, I Will for once give my sense when it is proper, scil. When
People have been long taught and made to believe, that the Use of it is
Superstitious, To place a great p^^t ^f their Religion in the dislike of it; To
think this a principal ground of Nonconformity, and a di^^inguishi^g Badge of
a Dissenter; or, that it is too vain a Formality to compo^^ wi^h the Spirit of
Devo^ion. Then, if ever, it is high tim^ to correct such a Prejudice, and to
show the People it may be used without Superstiti^n, and that neither the
Spirit of Religion, nor yet the Arguments for Episcopacy, Pr^sbyterianism nor
Independency are any ways concerned in this affair.

Here we would crave the R^^ders patience for one Quotation, and the rather
inasmuch as the N^me of Mr. Phil^ip Henry may be of more Aut^o^ity with the
Reverend Author, than many arguments, when bar^ly offered by us. It is s^id in
the 97th page of Mr H^nry's Life, That he lo^k^d upon the Lords Prayer to be
not only a Directory or Pattern for Prayer, but (according to the advice of the
Assembly of Divine^) proper to b^ used as a Form. He thought it was an Error on
the o^e ^and to lay so much str^ss upon it, as some do, who think no solemn
P^ayer accepted, nor no solemn administration of Worship complete without it;
and he thought it an Error on the other hand not to use it at all, since it is
a Prayer, a compendious comprehensive Prayer, and may be of Use to us, at
least, as other Scripture Prayers; but he thought it a much greater Error to be
^ng^y at those who do use i^, to judge and censure them, and for no other
reason to conceive Prejudices against them and their Ministry. A great strait
(says he^ poo^ Ministers are in, when some will not near them, if they do not
use the Lords Prayer, and others will no^ hear them if they do! What is to be
done in this case? ^e must walk according to the light we have, and approve our
selves to God, either in using (...) it, and wait for the day when God will
mend the matter, which I hope he will do in his own due time. -- Thus spoke the
holy and heavenly Mr Henry, and with in the late Reverend Dr. Bates, who writes
the D^dication of his Life, and as he has fully expressed ou^ sense in this
mat^er* so we would wait and pray with him, for the Happy Day*

Well, but if the case be so circumstanced, says the Author, page 135. that it
cannot be done without Offense, it is rather a Duty, and will be (...) pleasing
to Christ, not to use it as a Poru^. But then such Offense m^^t be manifested,
and appear to be conscientious. This confirms what I before suggested, That
there is a riveted Pr^judice people are e^ucated in against this Practice, that
they start at it as a thing in it self sinful and scandalous.

But to show we are in Charity with the Author, and all those who omit the Use
of this excellent Form of Prayer, we shall close this Chapter in the wo^ds of
St. Pa^l, Rom 14.3 Let not him that eats d^spi^e him that eats not; and let
not him that eats not, judge him that eats.

Qu. 17. May the Churches under the Presbyterian and Congregational Discipline
ma^^tain Communion with one another, notwithstanding their different
Sentiments, as to Church Government?

The Author answers, That they may and ought to do so. And truly, had this Book
contained only this one Question and Answer, it might have turned to more
Edification than the whole. He tells us, There was greater Differences than
these in the Apostolic Churches. ^e thinks then we of latter Days may the
better bear with one another, the effusions of the Spirit of Peace and Truth
being since much restrained

The Reverend Author observes further, That both Persuasions have been
Confessors and fellow Sufferers, and ^e thinks this should endear them. We
think so too, but to our sorrow, some of us have heard how it has been in
England, and now, alas! we see it verified in our ^uthor, that when their own
Persecution ceases, they carry on the Tragedy on others. We do not wonder at
what the Author says Mr. Baxter told him, That if all Independants were like
N. England Independants, he would soon be one. For we can easily guess what
deceived that excellent Person (whose Moderation suited his Piety and Devotion)
into so endearing an Expression. He formed his Idea of New England Independency
by the Authors plausible carriage when in London, which th^ugh for that time
might be very sincere, yet either the difference of the Climate, or that his
Dominion here is more rightful, quite alters him. We are assured, the Author is
esteemed more a Presbyterian than a Congregational Man, by scores of hi^
Friends in London. (...)* is loved and reverenced for a moderate Spirit, a
peaceable Disposition, and a Temper so widely different from his late Brothers
in London He was most conversant at the Presbyterian Board, and oftenest in
their Pulpits, and professed the greatest Reverence for their Persons. And no
wonder Mr. Baxter should be so enamoured of such Independents! Did our Reverend
Author appear the same here, we should be his easy Proselites too. But we are
loath to say how he forfeits that venerable Character, which might have
consecrated his Name to Posterity, more than his Learning, or other honorary
Titles can. To confirm what we have here said, the Author declares how
Instrumental he was to promote the Union betwixt the United Brethren in London.
We only wish he would be as cordial and active to keep it, as he was to make
it; or else the World will think his Zeal for it was, because far enough from
home, where Inte^est was not touched.

As for the thr^e Articles of Union, which the Author transcribes, we would
endeavor to maintain them, and all the rest. But there are some Cases and
Times, when Ministers of some particular Opinions will not bear to be consulted
wi^h. Or if there is a necessity of di^^b^ying their Opinions for once, it is
best not to consult them, mee^ly to do their Counsels the more Despite. We
think this modest and ingenuous Nor can it be reas^nably ex^ected that a
Congregational Classi^ (if such there be) should be consu^ted in those things
which are properly P^esbyterian, their Prejudice, in favor of their own
Opinions, rendering them unfit to advise with in that matter; and the more
serious the appl^cation to such is, the more severely would they think
themselves bantered.

As to his Query, Whether the embodying into a Church state be not a mighty
matter? We must needs profess, we want some better account what that is, before
we can so esteem it. We read nothing in Scripture of gathering a Church, or
embodying it into a Church state, unless it refers to the converting and
baptizing of Heathen, and then administering the Ordinances of the Gospel in a
stated way to competent Numbers, whose convenience will permit them to meet
constantly at one and the same place of Worship. All further Solemnity in this
matter is ex abundanti, and therefore the matter seems not so very weighty.

WE now humbly take leave of the Author and his Book, wishi^g there had been no
occasion for there Reflections, and accounting it a sufficient Apo^ogy, that we
have been c^ntending for what we apprehend to be the Truth; and it became the
more necessary to vindicate it, lest it should suffer more by the Reverend
Author's Name and Authori^y, than by (...) a^gum^nts So far is the Presidency
of the College from being a Pro^^ction, that it is the loudest argument in ou^
(...) for a zealous (...).

Nor can the Reverend Author much resen^ ^his our search after Truth, if he
remembers the liberty that the humble and holy Mr. Baxter once Prayed him to
take, in examining and refuting any Errors he should find in his Books, or
should the ^uthor g^ow angry, it would but cause us to su^^^ct (what abundance
of people have long obstinately be^ieved) that the contest for his part is more
for Lordship and Dominion than for Truth.

It Is possible some good people may blame us, for carrying on the Contention,
whe^^in, as one says, though (...) be but little Truth gained yet a great deal
of Cha^ity may ^e l^st. We hope the b^st, as to both these, but however it
happens, we are willing ^o promise the Reader, that scarce any thing shall
provoke us further to concern our selves in these disputes: no, not so much as
to make any Return, should a Thousand pretended Answers be publi^hed; for we
love not to be contentious, but ^as the Reverend Author is wont to say in like
cases it suffices that we have born our Testimony.

And here we must do justice also to those who have first openly asserted and
practiced those Truths among us. They deserve well of the Churches of Christ,
and though at present decryed as Apostates and backslider^* the generations to
come will bless them. So a score of years or more past, the En^argement of
Baptism was cried out upon, as a woeful declension* but the present generation
feels the happy effects of it, and rising up at the Reformers names* do call
them blessed

To concluds all, i^ is the Answerers sincere desire and design, if it be
posible, and a far as in them i^, to live peaceab^y with al^ men It Is the^
prayer, that God would grant peace and Truth i^ our days, rebuke the evil
Spirit of pride, uncharitableness, come (...) contempt of others, and pour
for^^ on us all his Spirit of Grace and Love.

And now the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus
Christ, the great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make us perf^ct in every good Work to do his Will, working in us that
which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
forever. Amen.

Postscript.
IT is strange that our Review should be assaulted before i^ can be Pri^ted.
Yet so it h^ppens in a late Pamphlet, entitul^d, A ^oft Answer to the Doctrine
o^ instituted Churc^es. Let them ca^ it (...) who have lost their feel^ng! For
th^' it is confess^d there are no very hand A^guments, yet Jealo^sie, Censures,
Contempts there are, which gr^te hand enough.

In page 12. the Reverend Authors seem jealous of some Injurious Treatment in
this our Review; whe^eas their ^o^t Treatise is injur^^us not to us only, but
t^ whole Synods and Nations o^ Presby^erians. They dare to say, that their
Go^pel O^der, which is here an^w^red, is ^indicated in every (...) Concessions
^f the Re^orming Presbyterians beyond Sea; and that no^ only from (...) of
great ^ame among (...), b^t Wh^le Synod^, W^ols Nations of them. O injury to
Truth and Modesty! Te^ us ( Sirs) we (...) you, what Synods, what Nations of
Presbyterians do or po^^ reading Gods Word in public Worship, o^ the using the
Lords Pra^er, that ex^ellent, perfect and most comprehensive Fo^m? That (...)
the Ri^ht of choosing a Minister to a particular Church Covenant? That say, the
Essence of the Ministerial (...) co^sists not in the (...) of the hands of the
Pre^bytery, or that the Breth^en may lay on hands, o^ that there should be no
O^dination but to a pa^tic^lar Church. You rea^onably ^dd, Optimus ille qui
(...) --, Though the first men in the wo^ld (...) bea^ all his Could our
Authors persuade us to believe, this we would obey (...) ou^ selve no more
Presbyterians. We appeal (in our Authors words, page 16.) To all the
Presbyterians in the World, say, O ye Men of God, and of Order! What Reparation
can our Authors make you for this Wrong, in making your Name the Vm^rage of
these their Errors.

We are, moreover obliged to the Reverend Authors for their Civilities, page 7.
It Is a gadding, unstudyed, unstable Generation, full of Levity, bleating and
lowing An^imal^, Raw ^outh, page 15. They merit (forsooth!) this con^empt for
calling themselves Presbyterians, but even let the Calf be known by its
bleating. Too late that Rule came to mind, page 50. Being reviled, we bless,
be^ing de^amed, we ent^eat.

In page 14. the Authors complain, That we pay not due Deference to the C^^ssis
of the Pastors in the Vicinity, and yet they assume not any Power of a Classis,
any further than to forbid us to be Presbyterians.

We highly approve of many particulars in page 17. That the Proponant for the
Lords Table be ex^mined of his Baptismal Vow, his sense of spiritual Wants,
Sinfulness and Wretchedness, his Hope, Faith, Experiences, Resolutions through
the Grace of God But then come two words, Covenant and Brethren, in Capital
Letters, as a Lion R^mpant, insulting a couching Classi^, a bleeding
Presbytery. But if we look over the Answer to the last Question in The young
Man's claim to the Sacrament (whereto these words in our Author do refer) we
shall find, that the Proponant p^omises nothing more than to be su^j^ct to the
censures administered unto him b^ the Po^tor of the Church and its Officers. So,
Sirs, the Brethren are dropped, wittingly, no doubt, by the quick sighted Author.
And ind^ed, for the Brethren to be named in the Question, and neglecte^ in the
Answer, is a fai^ Negative on them. The Proponant promises no subj^ction to
them, and the Reverend Authors sagacity is wonde^ful in that Answer, for the
Question takes the Congregational Brother, the Answer satisfies a Presbyterian.

It seems also that the Adversaries of this Gospel Order multiply a pace; for
in page 22. They are m^erly a few ^^ntl^men at Boston and New York. But by that
time you come to page 30. our Brethren of Conne^^icut exceed all the ro^^ of
New England in proclaiming their (...) to it. And by the fo^^owing Exclamation,
O Times and (...): it seems that Cicero mu^^ be called from the Grave to (...)
against these Raw Youths, these licentious Catalines.

(...) cannot pass over p^g. 61. (...) a Remark: The Apostasy of (...) Men say
our Authors.) is great before the Lord* The Apostasy (it seem) respects the
Examination and Qual^fications of Communicants at the Lords Table, which is
suggested to be in decrying the N^cessity of men's coming to the holy Table with
Repentance, Fate and (...). God forbid we should so accuse, or not vindicate
our Brethren. This is to alledg^ a Crime abhorred by the Generation of period.
-- Well, but they zealously dispersed unhappy Pamphlets. If the Doctrine of
Instituted Churches b^ referred t^, that is b^t one; and what ^ther the
Reverend Authors mean, we cannot guess; and that (...) i^ most parts is a Mine
of Gold, and a rich Treasury of right Thoughts.

(...) Surmize is a mere Defamation, That Go^ge, Roberts, ^^^utles Books must
be h^^s'd back to Europe again. A pretty device to praise the Gentlem^n beyond
Sea, and at the sam^ time condemn these here that conform to their constant
Practice.

Had the Attestation in page 63. been only to recommend the following Treatise
of the excellent Mr. Quick's to our perusal and Practice, no Minister in New
England, that calls himself a Presbyterian, but would cheerfully subscribe it;
but we believe few would confederate in its Reflections on the Reverend Mr.
S^^ddard, or favor that worse Report, That under the Vmbrage of the Name of
Presbyteria^s (...) would bring in Innovations, ruinous to our Churches, and
contrary to the Doctrine and Spirit of Mr. Quick'^ ^ook.

And to add one Guess h^re, Its twenty to one if an^ one of the Attestators
knew what a soft Answer was to be prefixed to th^i^ Attestation. For this would
not be the first time that men have ^^^scribed a Paper, which had they known
would have been placed to such advantage, as to the less discer^ing Reader to
seem an Attestation to the whole Book, they would have refused their Names
(...) indignation.

What remains is to Recommend that Treatise, The Young Man's (...) to the
Sacrament* to the serious and diligent perusal of our Youth. A Performance, for
its kind, very perfect, and highly profitable. But the Reverend Author and his
Treatise are both abused in this Impression. M^^ Quick is here b^trayed in a
sp^cious show of Reverence and ^riendship; while his Name is use to Combat^
those very men and their Principles, which he most (...) and honors* And were
Mr. Quick here among us, and should continue what is his stated Practice in the
Worship of God, he would be decryed among the Presbyterian, Formalists, in page
9. as much as he is now magnified for a Reformer. For our (...), we do
sincerely believe him to be our E^emplary Reformer, and (...), Reverend Authors
would credit their Character of him, and follow his Ex^mple; for he is
conscientious to have the Sc^iptures read every Sabbath in the public Worship
of God, together with the Ten Co^mandments, and he as often uses the Lords
Prayer. Nay, a few years since this Reverend, and holy Person took leave of a
reverend Minister, returning to us, in words to this effect, Sir, (...) our
Reverend Brethren in New England that they must come over to the Presbyterian
Government, if they would perserve their Churches.

And would it not now provoke a just Indignation to see People so (...), and a
Gentleman's Name (so dear and venerable as it is with us, advanced against i^
own Principles* And will it not turn unto us for a Testimony to use the Authors
words, (...)) not only that we have endeavored to vindicate the Truth, but
also to do Mr. Quick justice?

FINIS.

