THE PRINTERS Advertisement.
WHEREAS there is Prefixed unto a late Pamphlet, Entitled, Gospel Order
Revived* Printed at New York, An Advertisement, which runs in these words, viz
The Reader is desired to take Notice, that the Press in Boston is so much under
the ^aw of the Reverend Author, whom we answer, and his Friends, that we could
not obtain of the Printer there to Print the following Sheets, which is the
only true Reason why we have sent the Copy so far for its Impression, and where
it is printed with some Difficulty. I count my self bound in Justice unto all
Persons aspersed by that Advertisement, to Declare and Publish to the World the
Truth of the matter, which briefly is this: Certain Persons bringing to the
Press, the Pamphlet above mentioned; after some Discourse concerning the number
of Copies and Price, I Consented to its being Published: But when they insi^^^d
upon doing it with Secresy. I considered t^a^ ^or o^ght I knew, Good men in the
C^un^^y might be Offended at (...): The^e^ore I only proposed this Rea^^na^l^
thing, That before I pr^ceeded, I might mention ^o His Honor the Lieutenant
G^ve^nour, what was offered to the Pre^^; T^is they d^ni^d me: But when they
angrily wen^ away, some of my last w^rds to them were, That I did not re^use to
^rint it. And neither the R^ve^end Praes^de^^ of ^^e C^lledge, nor a^y of ^is
Frie^d^, ever spoke one word unto me to Discourag^ my Printing of it.

Boston, December 21st. 1700 Barth^l^mew (...)
THE PRINTER having by this Advertisement Vindicated those that we^^ unworthily
re^lected on in the Advertisement P^efixed to the above m^n^i^n^d Li^^il^us
Pamphlet, (which no man is as (...) so Ha^dy as to own himself to be the Author
o^) the world may Judge of o^h^r things c^ntained the^ein b^ thi^. It will in
due Time appear, that ^e^ide^ the Profane Scoffs and Scu^riliti^s, (not onl^ on
par^icular persons, who never deserved such Treatments; but also on the Holy
Churches of the Lord, and on the most Sacred Actions performed in them, which
is the Spirit of their whole Pamphlet; as if they had designed to have that
^c^ip^ure ^ulfilled upon them* 2 Timothy 3.9. They shall proce^d no further, for
their folly sha^^ be man^fest to all men. Be^sides all this, (^t will app^ar)
that there are other more Impuden^ Falsehoods than that in their Advertisement,
which the Printer in Boston, has (as become an Honest and Just man) made a
discovery of.

Dated in Boston, December 24th. 1700.


THE Depositions OF THOMAS BRATTLE, Gent. AND ZECHARIAH TUTHILL, Merchant.
THESE Deponents say, That on Saturday, the 13 th. of Iul^ last, they went to
Bartholomew Gre^n's to Treat with him about Prin^ing an Answer to Old Mr
Mathers Book, called, The Order of the Gospel: Who, after he had taken said
Answer in^o his hands, and seen b^^h wha^ it was, and how much there was of it,
told them he reckoned Th^ee Sheets of Paper m^gh^ contain it, and seven Ream of
Paper Print about a T^^^^and of them; for which they agreed with him for Twenty
S^il^^ngs the Sheet* He made not any O^^^cti^n to them (...) sa^d Answer; only
said, he could not go about it, till ^e had Pri^^ed off the Laws, which would
not be till the Tue^day ^ollo^in^. They further sa^, There was never a^y other
per^^n tha^ ^rough^ said Answer to the P^ess, but the D^ponents; and ^hey never
b^^ught it* bu^ at this time But neither did ^he s^id Gre^^ propo^e to them ^he
m^ntioning to his Honor the Lieutenant Governor, what ^as of^er^d to the
Press, nor did the^ d^ny it him; no^ did the^ go away in an^ Anger from him;
nor did they hear him (...) any such words: ( That ^e did not refus^ to Print
it,) all which (...) Green in his late Advertisemen^ of the 21 th Instant most
unfairly D^cla^es, That cert^in persons bringing to the Press the Answer above
mentioned, did.

Boston, December 27. 1700. Tho. Braettle.
Zech. Tuthill*
The Subscribers offering to m^^^ O^th to what is above written, the same being
several times distinctly read over in the ^earing of Bartholomew Green, he
owned the same to be what passed between him and them.

Coram Justices of the Peace.
Isaac Addington, Nathaniel Byfield.




THE Depositions OF John Mico, and Zechariah Tuthill, Merchants.
THESE Deponents say, That on or about the 16 th of July last, they went to
Bartholomew Green's to see if he were ready to Print the Answer to Old Mr
Mather's Gospel Order, but he was then unwilling to Print it, because (as he
said) it would displease some of his F^iends; and to ^he best of their
remembrance, he mentioned particularly the Mathers. They told him it was
strange he would Print any thing for the said Mathers, and particularly the
said Gospel Order* and nothing in Answer to it or them* by which means the
World might think those Principles to be approved by all, which were abhorred
by sundry Worthy Ministers in the Land. The unfairness of which practice they
labored to convince him of, yet he still declined to Print it* but at length
said, if they would admit the Lieutenant Governor to be (...), to give his
Approbation to it, he would Print it; which they (...) unwilling to for this
reason: Because they conceived it a new Method, not practiced here^ofore, and
which the said Green would not h^^e required of them now, but to put off the
Printing of this Book which answered the Mathers, whom he seemed loath to
displease. These* Deponents hereupon asked said Printer, whether he had his
Honours-leave to P^int the Gospel Order? he said, he had not. They then asked
him if he would P^int this, if Young Mr. Mather would be Imprima^ur to it? he
readily said, he would. Then they told him, it was a shame so Worthy a Minister
as Mr. Stoddard must send so far as England to have his Book printed, when
young Mr. Mather had the Press at his pleasure? To which he replied, he hoped
Mr. Mather was another guess man than Mr. Stoddard. At length they told him, if
he would not Print it, they would have it Printed elsewhere; but did not hear
him say those words in his Advertis^ment of the 21 st Instant, namely, That
(...) did not refuse to print it.

Boston, December 27. 1700. John Mico
Zech. Tuthill.
Sworn by the two persons Subscribing, Bartholomew Green being present, and
excepting against those words in the Evidence; particularly the Mathers, and
that he would Print it, if Young Mr. Mather would be Imprimatur to it: Also
affirming he said those words, He did not refuse to Print it, and nothing
^urther.

Coram Justices of the Peace.
Isaac Addington. Nathaniel Byfield.





MR. Green the Printer, being by these Depositions Convicted of sundry Mistakes
in his late Advertisement, so that his Folly and theirs who set him on work is
manifest unto all m^n; there is just reason to suspect the truth of what he
says in the Fag and of his Advertisement, that neither the Reverend
Prae^ident, nor any of his Friends ^ver spoke a word to him to discourage his
Printing the Answer to the Order of the Gospel* Bu^ wheth^r that b^ tru^ or
fals^, concerns not the Advertisement pr^fix'd to said Answer, which says
nothing of any ones speaking to (...) P^inter, to discourage him; but only
(...) his Press was so much (...) of the Reverend Author and his Friends, that
we ^ould not obtain of (...) Print it; Than which nothing can be more evident
from these Depositio^s, which sa^, The said Print^r after he had positively
agreed for the Printing said Answer, fell off from his Bargain, and ^eclin'd to
Print it, because it w^u^d displease some of ^is Friends, and particularly the
M^thers, who are known by all to have been his particular Friends and
^^ploy^rs. So tha^ ^he Reverend Au^hor of that Libellous Scribble, at the tai^
of said Green's Advertisement ( to which the Reverend Author was not yet so
Hardy as to set his Name) had no reason to Refle^t as he did on the
Adve^^isement p^efix'd to said Answer, or to Boast of the Printer's
Vindication, but might be ashamed of both. As for the profane Sco^f* and
Scurrilities not only on par^icular persons, but on the Holy Churches of the
Lord, and ^he m^st Sacred Actions therein pe^formed ( by which are (...) O
HORRIBLE* his two dear and precious Creatures, RELATIONS and the CHURCH
COVENAN^,) which that in^amous Scribbl^ says, is the Spirit of the whole
Answer, and those other Falsehoods it is threatened shall appear therein; they
are but Brut^ Fulmi^^ to fright and sca^e the poor deluded, bigoted people
withal, which is the very spirit and Quintes^ence of the Reverend Scribler. But
all these little Ar^ifices and Cavils we^^ plainly ^orese^n, and so fully
provided against by the ^^genious-Authors of said Answer, that there is no need
of taking any further no^ice of them here.

I shall therefor at present say no more, but that the World may Judge what
^ase and inj^rious treatment that Answer mus^ expect ^^om its En^aged
Adve^sa^ies* by what is contained in that one little* Canting, Scandalous
Libel, wherein there are far more profane Sc^^^s, Scurrilities* and Impudent
Fal^hoods, than are in all that GREAT and NOBLE and EXCELLENT ANSWE^.

Boston, December 27. 1700. Tho. Brattle.

FINIS.
Boston, Printed by John Allen. 1700.

The Deposition of Bartholomew Green, PRINTER.
WHO Testifies and Says, That on Saturday, some time last Summer, Mr. Thomas
Brattle, and Mr. Zech. Tuthill came to my Work House in Boston, and brought
with them a Manuscript of small Writing for me to Print; and calling me aside
to one end of the Room, desired me to be private in it, and to keep it from the
Mathers; informing me that it was an Answer to Old Mr. Mathers Book, of the
Order of the Gospel. And after I had taken it into my hand, Mr. Brattle told
me, it was not yet ready, he would Transcribe it. They asked me how much I
thought it would make: I answered, Three Sheets, or something more, in Octavo;
and told them I could not do it before the Laws were Printed, which would be
next Monday or Tuesday. They asked me how much Paper Three Sheets would take to
Print a Thousand: I answered about Seven Ream. They asked me how much I would
have a Sheet; I answered, Two and Twenty Shillings. They said, I could do it
cheaper. I replied, Mr. B^a^tle was very curious in Correcting. They told me,
That would be for my Credit, or to that purpose. After some other words, I
consented to do it for Twenty Shillings* Per Sheet: Whereupon they told me,
they would have the Paper of Mr. George; and so went away, taking the Copy with
them. After they were gone, it came into my mind what great distu^bance the
Manifesto had made (which I Printed very privately at said Tuthill^s desire)
which made me the more th^ugh^ful, lest this might give more Offense. Yet for
all, I went not to the Reverend Praesident; n^i^her did I receive any
Di^couragement from him, or any of his Friends, as to my Printing of it.

The Monday or Tuesday following, Mr. Zechariah Tuthill came ^^one to my
Printing Hou^e, where I was, and guessing at his Business, I desired him to
walk out with me. Then I told him, I was much concerned about the Bo^k* and
prayed him to tell me who was the Author of it. Wha^? said h^, Now you have
been with Mr. Mather. To which I replied, I have not. Whereupon he said, There
are three or four that are the Authors of it. Then I desired only that I might
men^tion it to the Lieuten^^t Governor, or ask his Approbation; which said I,
I ought to do in Books of Controversy. Mr. Tuthill, seemed to be willing I
should; which grea^ly sa^isfied m^. And understanding His Honor was ^o be in
Town that day, I was to wait on him for that end. This is the substance of what
passed between Mr. Tuthill and me.

A little while after, in the same day, Mr. John Mico, and the sai^ Mr.
Zechariah Tu^hill came to me to my Printing Room, and charged me by no means to
go to the Lieutenant Governor; ^or they would not have him know of it. After
this, there passed some discourse concerning Mr. Increase Mather's Book, the
Order of the Gospel, and of Mr. Stoddard's Book, of Institu^ed Churches, as I
understood. Mr. Mico a^ked me if it were not pity, or a shame, that such a man
as Mr. Stoddard should send so far as England to have his Book Prin^ed. The
Answer to which I do not justly remember, nor for what reason he spoke it to
me: for Mr. Sto^dard's Book was never offered me to Print* b^ himself, or any
other person. Afterward Mr. Mico said to me, Well* you do refuse to Print it,
meaning the Manuscript that was an Answer to Mr. Increase Mather's Order of the
Gospel. I answered No, I do not refuse to Print it: but am not willing to do it
without the Lieutenant Governors Leave* or to that purpose. Whereupon they
said, they would have it Printed elsewhere; and went away in some Anger.

Boston, January 4 th. 1700. 1701. Bartholomew Green.
Boston, January, 4 th. 1700, 1. Sworn by Barthol. Green, Print^r; Mr. Thomas
Brattle, Mr John Mico, and Mr. Ze^hariah Tuthill being Notified, and Present.

Coram Nobis. Samuel Sewall Peter Sergeant Penn Townsend.
Justices of the P^^ce.



The Deposition of John Allen and Timothy Gre^n, Printers.
THese Deponents can and do Testify, That being at Bartholom^w Green's Printing
house ^t or about the 13 th. of July 1700. Where M^. Thomas Brattle and Mr.
Zechariah Tuthill cam^, and called the said Green aside to another part of the
Room, where they had some Private Discourse; which said Green afterward
in^ormed us, that it was to Print an Answer to Mr. Mathe^^ Ord^r of the Gospel.
Some few days af^^r, the afor^said Zechariah Tuthill came alone to the
aforesaid Prin^ing-House, where we also then were. And the said Green and
Tuthill went out together and had some discourse together. After the said
Tuthill was gone the said Green told us that he had proposed to the said
Tuthill the acquainting the Lieutenant Governor with it before he proceeded in
doing it; which the said Green said, that the said Tuthi^l was willing to:
Whereat the said Gr^en seemed mightily well pleased. But some time after in the
same day, came the aforesaid Tuthill with Mr. John Mico to the aforesaid
Prin^ing house: and we do Testify that we he^rd the said Mico forbid the said
Green acquainting the Lieutenant Governor with it; but that he should say
nothing of it. Other discourse happened, which we took not much notice o^. But
this we can, and do Testify to, That we heard the said Mr. John Mico, or
Tuthill, one of them say, Well! or What, then you Re^use to Print it. Unto
which the said Green Replied, No, I do not Refuse to Print it: but am unwilling
without the Lieutenant Governor's Leave, or Approbation. Hereupon they went
away seemingly Angry, saying, We will have it Printed els^-where.

Boston January, 4 th. 1700. 1701. John Allen. Timothy Green.

Boston, January, 4 th. 1700-1.
Sworn by the Subscribers, John Allen, and Timothy Green* Mr. Thomas Brattle,
Mr. John Mico, and Mr. Zechariah Tuthill being Notified and Present.

Coram Nobis Samuel Sew^ll Peter Serg^ant Penn Townsend.
Justices of the Peace.



To the Candid READER.
THE shortness of my Advertisement of the 21 st. of December 1700. having
rendered it less intelligible, and given Occasion for some Exceptions that have
been since taken against it: for this reason I have explained it in the
foregoing Depositions. As also because there being no mention made in the
D^position of Mr. Thomas Brattle and Mr. Zechariah Tuthill of the 27 th of
December* o^ their speaking to me to Prin^ their Copy privately; some might
happily think, I Owned that they did not speak to me to do it privat^ly: Whenas
I declared to the contrary. And some might think and boast, that I had Owned
that I had most ^ntruly, or at l^a^t most un^airly d^clar^d in my said
Advertisement: Which I never did Own; neither does the Attestation of the
Honorable Justices import I did.

And because what passed between Mr. Zechariah Tuthill and me singly, is wholly
Omitted in both the Depositions said Tuthill was concernd in.

The Sum is, Whenas no Name appeared in the Title Page; nor so much as the Name
of any Author was told me, when I requested it; and I had no opportunity to
read it over my self; the Piece being also Controversal: I concluded it would
be altogether inconvenient for me to Print it upon my own head without asking
advice; for which I referred my self to the Honorable William Stoughton Esquire
our Lieutenant Governor, who became Commander in Chief of the Province before
the Week was out. For His Excellency the Lo^d BELLOMONT, our Governor, began
his Voyage to N^w York, upon Wednesday, the 17 th of July, 1700. the very next
day after Mr. Mico and Mr. Tuthill were with me. Nor was it a new thing to show
Copies to the Lieutenant Governor in order to their being Printed Mr. Sewall's
Phenomenon Apocalyptica was taken off the Press, and carried to the Lieutenant
Governor for his Allowance. By the same Token, one Half Sheet being wrought
off too soon: the Author was at the Charge to Print it over again, to gratify
His Honor in some Alterations that could not otherwise be made. Besides other
Instances tha^ might be given. And considering the Lieut. Governors Eminent
Qualification to judge of Books; the Station God has given him in the
N^w-English Church; and the good Offices he has done for Mr. Benjamin Colman
and his Church in particular: Every one that is not a Stranger in Boston may
wonder at it, that a Book Dedicated to the Churches of Christ in N England, a
motion to have it first viewed by his Honor, should be rejected with so much
Disdain. For my own part, The obstinate Refusal of so fair an Arbiter, made me
fear some foul Play: which is the p^incipal Aw that I remember my self to have
been under.

In fine, the Maintenance of my self and Family of small Children, depending
under God, upon the good will of them that please to set me on Work* I have no
intent to provoke or affront any person or Order of men; but to oblige them so
far as is consistent with clea^ing of my Reputation; which (as little and low
as I am) ought to be more eligible to me than much gainful business. And now
having truly and uprightly given an Account of my doing in this matter, I
humbly submit it to the Cha^itable Censure of every judicious and Impartial
Reader.

Boston, Ian. 10. 1700, 1. B. Green.

BOSTON, Printed by Barth^lomew Green. 1701.


