AN ACCOUNT OF THE Illegal Prosecution AND TRIAL OF Coll. Nicholas Bayard, In
the Province of New York, For Supposed High Treason, In the Year 1701/2.

Collected from several Memorials taken by diverse Persons privately, the
Commissioners having strictly prohibited the taking of the Trial in open COURT.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford, at the Sign of the Bible in New York,
MDCCII.

TO THE READER
THe great Noise the Imprisonment, Prosecution and Condemnation of Coll. Bayard
has made in there parts, and the unusual care taken by the Actors to stifle the
Truth, is the occasion of these ensuing Sheets. The Copies of the Public
Papers, and the Report of the Matters of Fact (...) exact; and the Recital of
what has been said by the several P^^ions concerned, comes as near the words,
and comprehends the substance of what posted as well as many of the Auditors
could (...) away in th^^^ Memory, compared and assisted with such Notes as
privately (unknown to the Court) were taken. The greatest Omission is in the
long elaborate Discourses of Mr W^^ver, Solicitor General, previous to the
Trial, and of Mr (...) in his Charges to the Grand and Petty Juryes. The
Publisher hereof his not that Interest with these Gentlemen to procure Copies
of them; but the particulars of those Discourses mentioned in this Treati^e can
be proved by many Witness, and ^all much short of the V^rulency of their
Expressions: These Gentlemen, if they please, may supply those Defects.

The Common Interest the Subjects in the Plantations have to Petition the
Government in England in all their Emergencies, is of that Consequence, and the
sinister means taken to obstruct it. so in^ur^^^, that were there no other,
those may serve for a sufficient Apology for making this Public.

STrangers who read this Trial (without doubt) will be desirous to see the
Addresses, about which there has been such great Disturbance and Persecution;
wherefore that to the Lord Cornbury (being one of the Three, and having been
delivered to his Lordship on board the Ship at Sandy Poi^^) is permitted to be
here ^rinted. As for the other two, the Publisher hopes the Reader will arouse
it, until the Originals be delivered in England, (...) That intended for his
late Majesty King William, (of blessed Memory) to Her most Sacred Majesty Queen
ANNE, and the other to the Right Honorable The House of Commons.

To the Right Honorable Edward Lord Cornbury, His Majesty's Governor of
New York.
WHereas many of us live Remote, and the time of Your Lodships Arrival being
Uncertain, We have presumed to take this Method of expressing the Sincerity and
Fervor of Our Affection, Humbly Addressing Your Lordship by this Paper,
Congratulating Your Lordships safe Arrival, and that of Your Noble Lady and
Family.

WE do Assure Your Lordship, That We have and will always conserve a zealous
and steady Resolution to Support and Promote, to the Utmost of Our Power, the
Honor and Interest of Our most Gracious Sovereign Lord King WILLIAM, (whom God
long preserve to Reign over Us) in this part of His Dominions; and if it shall
please God His Majesty shall see it for the Honor and Interest of the ENGLISH
Nation to Engage in a New War. We shall cheerfully undertake the Duty and
Charge thereof, in this Frontier Province, as We have done in all the last War,
and will not be wanting to your Excellency in the hearty Expressions o^ Our
Duty. Supporting and Supplying those Your Lordship shall judge necessary to a
just and Impartial Administration of Government, to all his Majesty's Subjects
inhabiting this Plantation.

WE have this Entire Confidence in Your Lordships great Prudence, Justice,
Courage and Conduct, That with the Blessing of God upon Your Lordship's
Endeavor, We doubt not to Enjoy Safety and Protection from Our Enemies Abroad,
Liberty of Conscience, Peace and Tranquillity at Home, and that the Name of
PARTY and FACTION may hence forth Evanish, with every Thing Contradictory to
the True English Interest.

That Your Lordship be Successful in Attaining all the Ends of good Government,
Grow in Your Princes Favor, and have the due Reverence, as well as the Cordial
Affections of the People here under Your Direction, Live Long and Happily
amongst Us, to the Praise and Glory of Almighty GOD and Your Lorships
Satisfaction and Content, are the Cordial Wishes and Constant Prayers of,

Your LORDSHIPS Most Obedient, Dutiful, And Humble Servants

An Account of the Illegal Prosecution and Trial of Coll. Nicholas Bayard in
the Province of New York, for supposed High Treason, Anno 1701/2.
ON the 16th of January, 1701. Capt. John Nanfan, Lieut. Governor, and the
Council made the following Order, viz.

At a Council held at Fort William Henry this 16th of January, 1701. Present
the Honorable John Nanfan, Esquire etc.
IT is hereby ordered, that Alderman John Hatchins do appear before this Board
to morrow morning, and then and there produce to the board the Address to his
Majesty, the Address to the Parliament, and the Address to the Lord Cornbury,
which was signed by several of the Inhabitants of this City, and Soldiers of
the Garrison in his house about three weeks since, on the Penalty that shall
ensue thereon.

By Order of Conncil, B. Cosens.

Whereupon Mr. Hatchins appeared, and for neglecting or refusing to deliver up
the said Addresses, on the 19th of January was committed to the common Goal of
the City of New York, for signing of Libells, said to be against the
administration of the Government.

On the 20th ^oll. Bayard, Mr. Rip van Dam, Mr. Phillip French and Mr. Thomas
Wenham addressed the Lieut. Governor and Council in writing, as follows, viz.

To the Honorable John Nanfan, Esquire Lieut. Governor, and the honorable
Council of the Province of New York.
The humble Address of Nicholas Bayard, Rip van Dam, Phillip French and Thomas
Wenham, on behalf of themselves and some of the rest of the ^ree holders and
Inhabitants of the Province of New York.
Humbly Shows,
THat whereas by a Mittimus bearing date the 19th of January, 1701. Alderiman
Hutchins stands committed for signing of Libels said to be against the
Administration of the Government, which pretended Libels we understand to be an
Address to his Majesty, another to the Parliament, and another to my Lord
Cornbury, whom we understand by certain advice we have received from England,
to be nominated by his Majesty to succeed the late Earl of Bellomont, as our
Govenour; Copies of which (by said Mittimus) we find are expected from said
Hutchins and is part of his Charge in the Commitment, the Copies of which
Originals (being in our hands or custodies) he cannot deliver them: If there be
no further Crime to be alleged against him, we hope to make good the Legality
of the said Addresses, and pray that the said Hutchins may be released from his
Imprisonment, or be admitted to Bail, and your Petitioners shall ever pray.


Coll. Bayard and the other three Gentlemen having Personally delivered this
Writing, and refusing to surrender the Copies of the said Addresses, had time
given them, on their Parol, to appear next day. And afterward, the same day,
the Lieut Governor did deliver the above Address to his Majesti^^ Attorney
General of this Province, for his Opinion in Law therein, which the said
Attorney General did conceive in writing. And on the 21st day came into the
Council Chamber, and there delivered it to the Lieut. Governor, which was
read, and ordered to be entered in the Council Book, in h^^ Verba,

May it please Your Honor;
I Have well considered the humble ^ddress of Nicholas Bayard, Rip vas Dam
Phillip French and Thomas Wenham, for the Release of Alderman Hatchins from his
Imprisonment, sent me by your Honor yesterday, and have also weighed the
several Matters worn, and otherwise taken in Council before your Honor, which
do in any respect relate thereto, and upon the whole, in Obedience to your
Honors Commands, I humbly present you with my Judgment and Opinion in Law, as
follows,

1st. That neither the Addressor Petition it self, or any matter therein
contained, is Criminal or Illegal.

2dly. That the Refusal of the Petitioners at the Council Board to produce the
Copies (of certain Original Addresses mentioned in their Petition) owned by
them to be in their custody, by their Petition also, is not such a Contempt to
the Council, or other Offense against the Law, for which the Petitioners may
legally be committed.

Sa. Sh Broughton.
January 21. 1701.

And afterward the said Persons appeared, and continuing their Refusal to
surrender the said Copies, notwithstanding the Opinion of the Attorney General,
the said Lieut. Governor and Council issued the following Warrant.

By the Honorable John Nanfan, Esquire his Majesty's Governor and Commander in
Chief of the Province of New York and Territories depending thereon in America.
etc. and his majesty's Honorable Council for this Province.
To Isaac D'Reimer, Esquire High Sheriff of the City and County of New York,
Greeting.
WHereas by an Act of General Assembly of this Province, made in the Year 169^.
entitled, An Act for the quieting and settling the Disorders that have lately
happened within this Province, and for establishing and securing their
Majesty's present Government against the like Disorder^ for the future, It is
amongst other things Enacted, That whatsoever Person or Persons shall by any
manner of way, or upon any pretense whatsoever, endeavor by Fore of Arms or
otherways, to disturb the Peace, Good and Quiet of this their Majesty's
Government, as it is now established, shall be deemed and esteemed as Rebels
and Traitors unto their Majesty's, and incur the Pains. Pena^^^es and
Forfeitures, as the Laws of England have, for such Offenses, ma^e and provided.
Notwithstanding which Coll. Nicholas Bayard, as has appeared by the Oaths of
several Persons examined before Us in Council, by Conspiracy and Combination,
with John Hatchins, Esquire lately committed by us, together with several other
Persons disaffected to this his Majesty's Government, to the manifest
Disturbance of the Peace of the same, by diverse indirect Practices, has drawn
in Soldiers, and others, to sign scandalous Libells, whereby they have
endeavored to render the past and present Administration vile and cheap in the
Eyes of the People; and the said Coll. Nicholas Bayard has incited the People
to disown the present Authority, and cast off his Majesty's Government, as it
is now established, The Council has unanimously thought fit, and do Resolve,
That the said N. Bayard be committed for High Treason. These are therefore in
his Majesty's Name to Require and Command you immediately on your Receipt
hereof, to take into your Custody the Body of the said Coll. Nicholas Bayard,
and him in the common Goal of this City in close Custody to keep and secure
until he shall be from thence delivered by due course of Law; and for your so
doing this shall be your sufficient Warrant. Given under our Hands and Seals at
Fort William Henry in New York, in Council this 21th of January, Anno Domini
1701. and in the 13th Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord William the 3d,
by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, De^endor
of the Faith.

John Nanfan, A. D. Peyster, S. Staats, R. Walters, T. Weaver, W^^^twood,

True Copy, Examined by me, ^. D. Reimer, Sheriff.

Which Act of Assembly mentioned in the Warrant of Commitment, follows in
these Words, viz.

An Act for the quieting and settling the Disorders that have lately happened
within this Province, and for the establishing and securing their Majesty's
present Government against the Disorder for the future.
For as much as the good and quiet, ease, profit, benefit and advantage of the
Inhabitants within this Province does chiefly consist in, and altogether rely
and depend upon their bearing true Faith and Allegiance unto their Majesty's
Crown of England, which is, and can only be the support and Defense of this
Province. And whereas the late hasty and inconsiderate Violation of the same,
by the setting up a Power over their Majesty's Subjects, without Authority from
the Crown of England, has vitiated and debauched the Minds of many People,
etc. And has also brought great Waste, Trouble and Destruction upon the good
People of this Province, their Majesty's Loyal Subjects. For the Prevention
whereof, in time to come, Be it therefore Enacted and Ordained by the Governor
and Council, and Representatives met in General Assembly, And it is hereby
Published, Declared, Enacted and Ordained, by the Authority of the same, That
there can be no Power and Authority held and exercised over their Majesty's
Subjects in this their Province and Dominion, but what must be derived from
their Majesty's, their Heirs and Successors. And we do hereby Recognize and
Acknowledge, that Their Majesty's William and Mary, are, and as of Right they
ought to be by the Laws of the Realm of England, our Liege Lord and Lady, KING
and QUEEN of England, France and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto
belonging, etc. That thereby their Princely Persons are only invested with the
Right to Rule this their Dominions and Province, and that none ought or can
have Power, upon any Pretense whatsoever, to use or exercise any Power over
Their ^ubjects in this Province, but by their Immediate Authority under Their
Broad Seal of Their Realm of England, as now established.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That whatsoever Person
or Persons shall by any manner of way, or upon any pretense whatsoever,
endeavor by Force of Arms or otherways to disturb the Peace, Good and Quiet of
this Their Majesty's Government, as it is now established, shall be deemed and
e^eemed as Rebels and Traitors unto Their Majesty's, and incur the (...),
Penalties and Forfeitures, as the Laws of England have, for such Offenses, made
and provided.

Upon Coll. Bayards Commitment, the City Militia were by beat of Drum called to
Arms, and a whole Company daily appointed to guard the Prison for about a week
following, and Defaulters strictly punished, which was ^^r^ensom to the People,
and occasioned great Clamor; whereupon it was taken off.

The Prisoners being informed that a special Commission was ordered for their
speedy Trial, petitioned the Lieut. Governor and Council on the sixth of
February, in these words,

To the honorable John Nanfan, Esquire Lieut. Governor, etc. and the honorable
Council, etc. The humble Petition of Nich. Bayard and John Hutchins,
Shows,
THat your Petitioners are very sensible of the favor intended them by your
Honors, in appointing a special Court for their Trial, that in consideration
of their Age, they might not be confined in a Prison till the ordinary time for
meeting of the Supreme Court. But the Papers being at present out of their
Hands, which they shall have occasion for, in order to make their Innocence
appear, and not being likely to get them in so short a time as is prefixed for
the said Trial. Your Petitioners humbly pray, That they may not be obliged to
come to Trial before the usual sitting of the Supreme Court. And your
Petitioners shall ever pray, etc.

To which a verbal answer was given to Coll. Bayard's Son, That out of mere
Grace the Court should be deferred for five days.

On the 19th of February the Commissioners sat, and published their Commission
in these words, viZ.

WILLIAM The Third, by the Grace of God, of England, etc. To our loving
Subjects William Atwood, Esquire Abrah. D' Peyster, Esquire and Robert Walters Esquire
sends Greeting, Know ye, That we have assigned you, or any two or more of
you, whereof you the said William Atwood we will to be one, our Justices, to
enquire by the Oaths of good and lawful Men of the City of New York, and by
such other means, ways and methods, which to you shall be the better known, by
whom the Truth of the matter may be the better known, on the 19th Day of this
Instant February, of whatsoever Treasons, Mispri^^ons of Treasons,
Insurrections, Rebellions, Murders, Fellonies, Man sl^ughters, Homicides,
Rapes, Burglarie, Misprisions, Contederacies, False Reports. Trespasses, Riots,
Routs, Unlawful Assemblies, Contempts, Faults, Negligencies, Concealments,
Oppressions, Champarties, Deceits, Misdemeanors, and other Mis-deeds Offenses
and Injuries whatsoever, committed by Nicholas Bayard and John Hutchins, and
also the Accessaries of them in the Province of New York aforesaid, and by who
and by whom, to who or to whom, how, when and in what manner, and of other
Articles and Circumstances in the Pr^mises, either or any of them concerning,
and the same Treasons. Offenses, and other the Premises for this time to hear
and determine, according to the Laws and Customs of England, and of this our
Province of New York in America. And We Command, That on the said Day at the
City-Hall of the said City, you or any two or more of you, as is aforesaid,
diligently make enquiry upon the Premises, and all and singular the Premises
hear and determine, and do and accomplish these things in form aforesaid, which
unto Justices appertains to be done thereupon, according to the Laws and
Customs of our Kingdom of England, and of our said Province, saving unto us our
Amercements, and other things thereof unto Us belonging. Also, We Command our
Sheriff of our said City, that on the said Day, on the said Place, he cause to
come before you, or any such two of you as aforesaid, or more, such and so many
good and lawful Men of his Bailwick, by whom the Truth of the matter may be the
better enquired into. In Testimony whereof We have caused the great Seal of our
Province to be hereunto affixed, Witness John Nanfan, Esquire Lieut. Governor and
Commander in chief of the Province of New York etc. in Council, at Port William
Henry the 12th day of February, in the 13th Year of our Reign, Anno 1701.

And Proclamation being made in the usual manner, the Panel of the Grand Jury
was called over; those who appeared and were Sworn, were Johannis D' Peyster,
Foreman, David Provoost, Martin Clock, Leendert Huygen, Barent Reynd^rs,
Johannis vander Spiegell, Johannis Outman, Hendrick Gillissen, Peter van
Tillburgh, Johannis van Giesen, Abraham Keteltas, Aryen Hogelant, William
Jackson, John Corbitt, Johannis van Cortland^, Caleb Cooper, John van Hoorn,
Burger Mynders, Gerret van Hoorn, Jacobus D' Key, Abraham Kipp. Johannes van
Santa.


Jacob Boelen and Johannes Hardenbrook did not then appear.

Before the Jurors were Sworn, the Council for the Prisoner objected against
some of them for declaring before several Witnesses, then ready to be produced
in Court, That if Bayard 's Neck was made of Gold, he should be Hanged at the
same time boasting that they were of the Jury; and prayed, That since that Jury
was summoned upon that special Matter, such might not be Sworn. Which the Court
Over ruled.

Mr. Atwood, the first Commissioner give a long Charge to the Jury, aggravating
the Facts supposed against the Prisoner, and positively asserting, That those
Facts not only were Person within the words of this Act of Assembly, but also
by the Common Law before the Statute of the 25 E. ^.

The Jurors having received the Charge, the Court adjourned till next Day.

The Court being met the 20th, the Indictment against Coll. Bayard was
delivered by the Court to the Grand Jury, and Mr. Weaver, appointed Solicitor
General for this Servicee, attended them with the Proofs, and insisted to be
present with the Grand Jury, and that no Person should be sent for but whom he
should Name, and that no Question should be asked them but such as he should
approve of. On the other hand, John Corbitt, Caleb Co^per, John Cortland and
Jacoh d' Key insisted that the Kings Council ought not to be pre^ent with them
at their private Debates, and that they had a Right to send for what Persons,
and ask what Questions for their Information, as they should think needful.
Whereupon Mr. Weaver did threaten them, and (to use his own Expression) would
cause them to be Trounced, taking down their Names. And the Grand Jury broke up
without acting.

The Court in the afternoon met according to Adjournment, and the Grand Jury
being sent for, Mr. Weaver made complaint, That he was obstructed by some of
the Grand Jury, who would not acquiese to his being present at the Examination
of the Kings Evidence, and would have other Evidences sent for, than what were
by him produced. And thereupon Mr. Atwood did discharge the above said our
Persons from their further Service; and caused Jacob ^^elen, who was absent
when the others were (...), to be sent ^or from his House, Sworn and added to
the Grand Jury; and the Court adjourned till seven a Clock that Evening, but
did (...) till about Midnight, when lending to know if the Jury had found the
(...), and being informed, that they were separated, he adjourned the Court
till next Morning at eight of the Clock, and in the way from the Court, in
Passion said [If the Grand Jury will not find the Bill against Coll. Bayard, I
will bring an information against him of High Treason, and Try him upon (...)]

February 21. The Court met, and the Grand Jury appearing in Court, (...)
Indictment was brought in by the Foreman endorsed Bill^ Vera, and signed with
his Name. Upon which Mr. Atwood immediately di^c^^^ged the Jury.

Whereupon the Council for the Prisoner informed the Court that the Bill was
not found by Twelve Jurors And upon Examination it appeared to the
Commissioners that of such of the Jurors who remained in Court, Eight of the
Nineteen were against finding the Bill, as appears by the Minutes of the Court,
entered by order, viz.

Jacob Bo^len, Abraham K^^p, John Van Hoorn, Gerr^t Van Hoorn, Johannis van
Santen, William Jackson, Barger Mynderts, Johannis Vanderspiegel.
Which Eight importuned the Court that the Foreman might be brought upon his
Oa^h, and the res^ sent for to witness the Truth, That they only ^ound the
signing the Addresses, and not the Treason. To which Mr. Atwood made answer.
They were no longer Jurors, they had presented the Bill, and the Court was
posse^ of it, it was now a Record, and there is no averment against a Record.

Ordered, The Prisoner come to Trial on Monday next come seven Night, to which
day the Court adjourned accordingly.

On Monday, the 2d of March, the Commissioners met according to adjournment.

Mr. Nicoll, (Council assigned for Coll. Bayard) moved that the Indictment
might be quashed, not being found by Twelve Men: and to prove the ma^ter of
Law, offered to produce Authorities; and to prove the matter of Fact, offered
to produce Evidences in Court, if either were insisted on, the Grand Jury being
then by (...) in Court.

Mr. Solicitor General, What is moved in behalf of the Prisoner is most
improper, for as much as the Indictment is found, and signed by the Foreman
Billa Ve^a; there can be no Averment allowed against a Record brought in by the
Body of a Grand Jury, and therefore I desire the Prisoner may be sent for and
arraigned.

Nicoll, This is a matter of great Weight and Moment, and concerns not only the
Life and fortune of the Prisoner and his Posterity, but the Right of every
English Man in the Province: It is not only lawful, but highly reasonable that
an Indictment for High Treason should be found by Twelve Men at least. By the
Statute 13 E 1 W. 2 cap. 13. Sheriff^ feigning Persons to be indicted of
Fellonies and other Trespasses, take Men not culpable nor lawfully indicted.

Whereas they were not lawfully indicted by Twelve Jurors, ordained, That
Sheriffs, where they have power to enquire of Trespasses by the Kings Precept,
or by Office, shall cause Inquests, etc to be taken by lawful Men, and by
Twelve at least, which shall put their Seals to such Inquisitions. [Here it is
observable, That there is twice legi^^mo modo in few Lines.

Coo. Inst. ^. part 387. says he, Things are provided, or rather declared by
this Act,

^. Per legales homines ad minus D^od^^im faciant Inquisitiones.

C^. Inst. 1. fol 126 Indictment is defined, an Accusation found by an Inquest
of Twelve, or more, upon their Oath.

Poulton de pace, etc. An Indictment of Treason, Felony, Trespass, or other
Offense, is an Inquisition taken and made by Twelve Men at least.

West Symbo, part 2 86. An Indictment is a Declaration made in form of Law, for
the benefit of the Common Wealth, of an Accusation for some Offense either
Criminal or Paenal, exhibited unto Jurors, and by their Verdict found and
presented to be true.

Coo. 3. to. 30. No Peer of the Realm, or other Subject, shall be convicted by
Verdict, but the said Offense must be found by above four and Twenty, that is,
by Twelve, or above, at his Indictment. etc.

11 H. 4 9. Inquests had been taken of Persons named to the Justices, without
due Return of the Sheriff of which some Out lawed before the said Justices of
Record; some fled to Sanctuary, etc for Treason, some for Felony Granted that
henceforth no Indictment be made by such Persons, but by Inquests of the Kings
lawful Liege People, in such manner as was used in the time of his Noble
Progenitors.

Without any Denomination to the ^heriffs, etc except by Officers of said
Sheriffs and Bailiffs of ^^anchize, sworn and known, etc. and if any Indictment
be made hereafter in any point to the contrary, that the same Indictment be
also void, revoked, and forever holden for none.

Cok. 3 page 33. In ^corlet's case, adjudged accordingly.

Crook Eliz. 654 Clynca^rd was indicted on the 8 H. 6. the Record was, Ad (...)
Pa^is, etc. per Sacramentum A. B. C. D. ^t a^iorum legalium homi^um in Comitatu
pradi^^^ presentat^ exissi^, etc. and it appears not that it was per
Sacramentum Duodeci^, for if it were presented by a lesser Number it was
clearly ill, therefore it was revoked.

13 Eliz. B. R. Robert Co^nt d' Leyster against Sir Christopher Ke^do^. Plo^d^n
385 Predictus Robertus Com^s Leyster per nomen Roberti Dud^ey ^^per de Land.
militis ^ly Johannis nuper Duns Northumbrie nuper de, Land. per Veredictum
Duode^^m liberalium and legalium homin^^ di^i Comitatus Norfolkie indicta^^s
f^^t, etc. By all which it clearly and undoubtedly appears that as Indictment
is not good unless it be found by Twelve Jurors as least.

Mr. Atwood, There can be no averment against a Record, if you (...) produce
any Authority that it was ever all^^ed to make an averment against a Record,
and speak to that head, you shall be heard, but to go on upon this Head,
whether or no the Grand Jurors are or can be brought to reveal the Counsel
which they are sworn to keep secret, cannot be allowed


Nicoll. The Grand Jury Consisted of Nineteen Persons, whereof Eight have
openly in ^ourt protested that they found no Treason.


Atwood. I have by me the Oaths of two men, that the Bills were found by
fourteen Bill^ Vera, they are so endorsed, have been publicly read in Court,
and are of Record, for which reason I, nor no body else can enquire further of
it.


Nicoll. This concerns the Subjects Life, and your Honor ought to be Council
for the Prisoner, and if a Misunderstanding happens by the ignorance of the
Jurors, so that the Bill is returned contrary to their intendment, the Prisoner
ought to be assisted.


Solicitor General Pray show us any Authority where an Averment has been
offered against a Record.


E^ot. May it please your Honor, I am joined with Mr. Nicoll as Counsel for
the Prisoner: The Question that now seems to lie before your Honor is, whether
there can be any Averment offered against a Record; there is an Act of
Parliament of the (...) of H 4. wherein it is ^^acted, That a grand Jury shall
consist De (...) and legal^^us h^^ n^bu^, and so likewise runs the tenor of the
Writ of Ven^^; for want of such Persons the same Statute does declare the
Indictment void; so that it is a good Exception to an Indictment to aver, That
any one of the Grand Jury was an (...), which is matter of fact how, shall this
Averment be made, it so be the (...) be no Averment against a Record? and what
benefit has the Prisoner of this Act, unless an Averment be allowed against the
Record of this Indictment, if it should so happen that some of the Grand Jury
are not so qualified as the Act requires, which seem to me sufficient proof
that an Averment in the case at the Bar, is good against a Record.


Atwood The Statute gives the Part (...) that may be averred, and no other can
be allowed.


Emot. Its very hard upon the Subject, the Court appoints the Foreman of the
Grand Jury, and he may chance to be a Person prejudiced against the Prisoner,
who may sign and return the Bill B^ll^ V^ra, without the consent of his
Fellows, or a sufficient Number, and because its Matter of Record, shall no
Argument be allowed against the Bill?


Atwood. A Grand Jury, in a certain Case, on an Indictment for words spoken,
found B^lla Vera, but as to the M^l^tiose, Ignoramu^, which made the Bill void;
so in this Case, if the Jury, as to the Fact in the Indictment, had found Billa
Vera, and as to Treason, Ignoramu^, the Bill had been void, and the Court must
have taken Notice of it; but to this Bill there is no Endorsement but Billa
Vera, the Court has received and published the Verdict, and therefore will
proceed.


Emot. But the Matter of Fact only appeared to the Jury, and when they
understood the Bill to be laid Treasonable, they immediately objected against
it.


Atwood. The Bill is sound, and appears to the Court matter of Record, so that
you need not insist any further upon that Head, a Grand Jury is an Inquest of
Office, and an Inquest of Office may be found by a less Number than Twelve. Mr.
Sheriff, bring your Prisoner to the Bar.


Nicoll. I have something else to offer.


Atwood Sheriff, stay a little.


Nicoll I have a second Objection in behalf of the Prisoner, and it is that the
Jurys should have been returned by Precepts under the Hands and Sea^s of the
Commissioners, which we understand was not.

This appears in H^^^ Pleas of the Crown, page 134. Sr. Edw. Cool 4 part of the
Institutes, Title Oyer and ^^^miner, says the same, there is a special Clause
in the Writ of (...) and (...), which says. We have commanded our Sheriff to
summons as such days and places, as you shall appoint, such good and lawful
(...), by whom the Truth may be the better (...). How shall the Sheriff know
those days and places but by the Commissioners Precept? and how shall the Truth
be known, if the Grand Jury are permitted to have no other Evidence but what
are brought ex part Regis?


Solicitor. The Grand Jury are only to enquire for the King, and to receive or
send for no other Evidence than what are brought for the King?


Nicoll. You may tell that some body else, no^ to me; that is contrary to their
Oath, which is, That they shall diligently enquire and true Presentment make.


Atwood. All the Books speak of the Kings Evidence only, and agree that the
Grand Jury may and ought to find upon probable Evidence, as appeals in
Babbington.


Emot. Sir E. Cooksays a part of the Institutes, Title Oyer and Terminer, that
the Jurys ought to be returned by Precepts under the Hands and Seals of the
Commissioners: There is no Distinction made between the Grand Jury and the
Petty Jury, so that the Ven^^es as well for one as the other, ought to have
been under the Hands and Seals of the Commissioners.


Solicitor. Dr. (...), when you had the Government) had a Bill found against
him by eight Men of a Jury of fifteen.


^B. A private Person opposed the assertion, but was commanded Silence.


Nicoll. I never heard of it, nor believe it to be true; but that is not to be
taken for a President, were it true.


Atwood. Gentlemen. You seem to mistake the Lord Chief Justice Cook, Where he
says, There shall be Twenty four Peers upon the Arraignment of a Pe^^, etc. for
if there be but thirteen Peers, and the Majority agree to it, it is understood
to be found by Twelve of them.

There is something in that which you offer of the Precept being under the
Hands and Seals of the Commissioners, in the Return of the Pety Jury, but this
does not at all affect the Grand Jury; for which reason, if you see cause to
move it, time may be granted to mend that Mistake. Is there nothing else you
have to offer?


Nicoll. Nothing at present.


Atwood. Mr. Sheriff, bring the Prisoner to the Bar.


Which was done accordingly.

Clerk of the Cro^^. Nichol^^ Bayard, hold up thy hand. You stand Indi^ed, etc.


City and County of New York in the Province of New York in America. Anno Re^nt
Regis Gulielm^ Tertij, nune Angli^, etc. D^cimo Quarto.
THe Jurors Sworn, and charged to enquire for our Sovereign Lord the King, upon
their O^thes, Do present Nicholas Bayard of the City of New York, in the
Province of New York in America, E^q for that he the (...) Nicholas Bayard the
fear of God in his heart not having, nor the Duty of his Allegiance weighing,
but being moved and seduced by the Instigation of the Devil, as a Rebel and
Traitor against the most Serene, most Illustrous, most Clement and most
Excellent Prince, Our Soveraig^ Lord William the Third, by the Grace of God of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland and of this Province of New York, King
Defender of the (...) etc (...), the said Nicholas Bayards Supreme true lawful
and undoubted Sovereign Lord, the cordial Love and true and due Obedience,
Fidelity and Allegiance, which every Subject of our Lord the King that now is,
toward him our said Lord the King should bear, and of ^ight ought to bear,
with drawing, and utterly to extinguish, intending and contriving and with all
his strength purposing designing conspiring and endeavoring, with diverse other
Rebels and ^^^tors, to the Jurors unknown, the Government of this Province of
New York under him our said Sovereign Lord the King that now is, of right
happily and duly established, to defame, subvert, change and alter, and to
disturb the Peace, Good and Quiet of this his said Majesty's Government of this
his said Province of New York, as it is now, and has been for several years
last past established, on the tenth Day of December last past, and in the 13th
Year of the Reign of our Sovereign Lord that now is, in the ^ock W^rd of the
said City and County of New York, and diverse other times and days as well
before as after, at he said Ward, and elsewhere in the (...) and County of
New York aforesaid, falsely, ma^^^iosly, devilishly, rebelliously and
traitorously did compass, imagine, contrive purpose, design intend and
endeavor to defame, subvert, change and alter, and to disturb the ^eace, Good
and Quiet of this his Majesty's Government of New York as it now is, and has
for several Years last past been established. And the same most abominable,
wicked and devilish rebellion^ Treasonous and Traitorous Contrivances,
intentions, purposes and endeaveours aforesaid, to fulfill, perfect and bring
to effect, he the said Nicholas Bayard, by Conspiracy, as aforesaid,
afterward, to wit, the said tenth Day of December last past, in the Year
aforesaid, in the said City and County of New York, aforesaid, and diverse
other days and times, as well before as after, als^^^, maliciously, advisedly,
clandestenly, rebelliously and (...), with Force of Arms etc. did use diverse
indirect Practices and ^ndeavours to procure M^tuny and Sedition, amongst the
Soldiers in pay, belonging to his Majesty's Fort and Garrison of Port William
Henry in or near the said City and County of New York, aforesaid, and did draw
in Numbers of them the said Soldiers, and others, to sign false and scandalous
Libells against his Majesty's said Government, as it is new, and has for
several Years last past been established in this Province. Which said Libells,
by the procurement of the said Nicholas Bayard, as aforesaid, were signed by
the said Soldiers, and others, and were likewise signed b^ him the said
Nicholas Bayard; in one or more of which said Libells, amongst other things
highly reflecting on the past and present Admini^ration of the Government under
his Majesty, in this Province, it is insinuated and declared That his Majesty's
Subjects within this Province, a^e, and have been for some Years last past, by
Persons entrusted with the Administration of the said Government under his
Majesty, Oppressed; and that the said Government has been and is rendered
Cheap and Vile in the Eyes of the People, as also that the present General
Assembly of this Province is not a lawful Assembly. By which, and diverse other
malicious Scandals in the said Libels contained, he the said Nicholas Bayard
has incited his Majesty's Subjects of this Province to disown the present
Authority, and Government thereof, and to cast off their Obedience to his
Majesty's said Government, as it now is, and has for several Years last past
been established, against the Duty of his the said Nicholas Bayards Allegiance,
against the Peace of our Sovereign Lord the King that now is, his Crown and
Dignity, as also against the form and effect of one Statute or Act of General
Assembly of this Province, enacted in the Year of our Lord God 16^1. entitled,
An Act for quiet (...) and settling the Disorders that have lately happened
within this Province and for establishing and securing their Majesty present
Government against the like Disorders for the future.

Clerk. What say you, are you Guilty or not guilty of the Indictment?


Prisoner. Not Guilty. And puts himself upon God and the Country, etc.


Prisoner. I desire I may be allowed two Clerks to take the Minutes of the
Trial.


Atwood. No: You have a Solicitor allowed, he may take Notes; any other will
not be suffered to do it.


Prisoner I find it was allowed my Lord Russel and others, to employ Clerks to
take their Trials: I pray the same liberty.


Atwood. It was allowed my Lord Russel, but you would not be willing to meet
with the hardships of his Trial.


Solicitor Genesis Perhaps the Council will not insist upon the Mistake of the
Venire.


Nicoll. We shall not insist on that.


Atwood. But we will have it amended


And thereupon ordered a Precept to be directed to the Sheriff, under the Hands
and Seals of the Commissioners, to return a Pety Jury the 6th Instant. To which
Day the Court adjourned.

March the 6th. The Commissioners met. The Prisoner was brought to the Bar. And
the Petty Jary being called, consisting of Eighty, some of them did not appear.
Whereupon it was ordered, That the Defaulters of the Petty Jury be amerced Ten
Pounds each, if they did not appear in the afternoon, or show a reasonable
Cause. And the Court adjourned till three in the afternoon, when they met
again.

Solicitor General moved, That the Court might be adjourned till to morrow
morning, the Kings Evidences being disguised with Drink. Which was granted.

Nicoll moved, That it would be a favor to the Prisoner to put off the Trial
till Monday.

Atwood. No, I will take care to do my Duty, whatever other People do. We shall
not give Mr. Ve^sy the opportunity of another Sermon against us.


Atwood. I observe Mr. Jamison to have Pen and Ink. Mr Jamison, you are not
permitted to write.


Jamison. I only take Minutes for my private Satisfaction.


Atwood. I^ is true, an A^torney or Practitioner of the Court may take Notes
for his private use, but you are no longer an Attorney of this Court, nor shall
your be permitted to practice until you purge your self. Put up your Pen and
Ink.


March 7. The Commissioners met, and the Attorney General was called, but did
not appear.

Atwood. Mr. Secretary, let a Minute be made, That it appears to this Court
that the Attorney General has neglected his Majesty's Service. It is no wonder
the People here contemn his Majesty's Authority, since the Attorney General,
though commanded to prosecute by the Government, has neglected to do the same,
and has given a Judgment and Opinion directly contrary to the Lieut. Governor
and Council.


Atwood. Sheriff, (...) the Prisoner.


Which was done.

Mr. Secretary, before we proceed, read the Petition which was given me this
this Morning by Coll. Bayards Son.


Which was read in h^^ Verba,

To the Honorable William Atwood, Esquire Abra. d' Peyster, Esquire and Robert
Walters, Esquire Judges of this Special Cour^. The humble Petition of Nicholas
Bayard,
Shows.
THat your Petitioners Council have informed him, That on yesterday they
prayed, in the Petitioners behalf, the favor of this Court to prove before
your Honors, by the Oaths of the major part of the Grand Jury, there also
subpoena'd in Court, That the Indictment brought in for High Treason against
your Petitioner by Capt. Johannes D' Peyster ((...) being Pure man of the said
Grand Jury) was not found nor agreed to by any Twelve of that Jury, No, not by
Two or Three of the Nineteen of them, though the most ^ar^ of ^m (as is
evidently known) are your Petitioners mortal Enemies, for no other cause but on
account of the unhappy Divisions within this Province. Which said (...) of your
Petitioner's Council (as he is also informed) your Honors have been pleased
(...) Overruled, as (...) being practicable by the common form of Courts
Proceedings. But, May is please your Honors. This being a matter of that
Moment, whereof hardly a President is to be found, as that a Foreman Shall to
far impose upon a whole Grand Jury, as to bring in an Indictment Bill^ Vera,
which the said Inquest did not find nor agree unto, neither in matter nor form.
Your Petitioner therefore most humbly prays, That your Honors will be pleased
to take the Premises into your Honors serious Consideration, and to grant your
Petitioner that favor as to have all the said Nineteen of that Grand Inquest
sworn before your Honors, to discover the Truth and to afford your Petitioner
such Relief therein, as to your Honors shall be thought most just and
expedient. But if (...) should so happen (as your Petitioner does not hope)
that your Honors do not think fit to grant this your Petitioners most humble
Request; your Petitioner further prays leave to acquaint your Honors, the
excessive and a most unparalleled Hardships your Petitioner, in this very
(...) In the first place for that the Grand Jury, although your Petitioner
(...) prayed Mr Sheriff that he might have the ^avour and Justice of being
Tried by English Men and of English Extraction, of the lest Character for
Knowledge, Integrity, Justice, Conscience and Estates, yet notwithstanding your
Petitioner had not one allowed him of English, but all of them of Dutch
Extraction and Education, and several of (...), to that (...) that they can
neither write nor read, nor so much as understand the English Language; th^^^
sufficient Numbers of English Men, o^ very good (...) for Understanding,
Integrity, Conscience and Estate were to be ^ad in the B^wick.

And for a second Instance of your Petitioner^ Hardships, he finds now also a
Petty Jury imp^an^ch'd to serve upon his (...), except five or six, in like
manner of Dutch Extraction and Education, most (...) c^alt and laboring Men,
very (...) whatsoever, and most all extreme Ignorant in the English Language.

Your Petitioner therefore most humbly Prays. That (...) Honors will be
pleased to take the P^^m^ses your (...) and (...) Consideration, and to afford
your Petitioner such (...) therein as to your Honors, in Justice and (...),
shall (...), etc.

N. Bayard.

Atwood. Let a M^nute to entered that the Petition was read^ and that it does
appear to the Court that the Bill was (...) by more than twelve of the Grand
Jury.

Coll Bayard, The Laws do indulge you with Council, did you advise with them
concerning this Petition?


Bayard. No, I did not.


Atwood. 'Twere better you had, for you have acted very indiscreetly in this
matter to arraign the Justice of the Grand Jury.


The Jury being called, appeared.

Timon van Bursent. Prisoner, Accepts.

Solicitor Genesis I challenge him for the King.


^mot. You are not to Challenge, Mr. Solicitor, without cause, by the Statute
33 (...).


Solicitor. By the common Law the King could Challenge without cause, but by
the Statute that was taken away, and in the late (...) of (...) it is laid by
Lord Chief Justice Tr^^y, That the King should show (...) if not enough on the
Panel to serve, but not else.


Atwood. It is a thing so plain, I wonder you will insist on it.


(...). We say the King should show cause, but do not say when.


Gysber van Inbrough. Prisoner Accepts.

Solicitor Challenges for the King.


Gerryt Uncle. Prisoner Accepts.

Solicitor. Challenges, etc.


William Janeway. Prisoner Accepts.

Solicitor. Challenges, etc


(...) Stou^enburgh (...) Prisoner Accepts

Solicitor. I don't Challenge him, but desire he may be sworn on a V^^^ dire
whether any person has been with him on behalf of the Prison (...) desire him
to be favorable to the Prisoner on this Trial. [who was sworn upon a Voir
dire, and afterward for the Trial.


Richard Sacket.

Prisoner. I make no Challenge.


Solicitor. I desire to know whether I may not first have him sworn upon a Voir
dire, and afterward Challenge him?


Atwood. No, you must challenge perem^torily first.


Prisoner. I pray the Solicitor may first make all his Challenges, and only
have not a Pan^el of forty eight Jurors.


Atwood No, that must not be.


[ Memorandum. The rest or the Eight Jurors in the Panel were in like manner
challenged by the Prisoner (...), till the Number of Twelve were (...) viz one
of the (...), two no (...), and all the test (...), (...) of Dutch extraction
born (...) ignoran of the English Language, and of (...) Capacities to an
extreme degree.]

The Names of the Petty Jurors were as follows viz.

(...) S^ont^nburgh, Jacobu^ Vander^pe^gel, And^es Mars^alk, Gerret V^lt,
Thomas Saunders, Jacob Cornelisse, Barent Ko^l, Goert Olpherts, Samuel
Beekman, Cornelis ^lopper, Con^art T^n^ck Jacobus Gotler.
Mr. Solicitor made an Introductory Discourse and Harrangue of about an hour
long, and had some Sheets of Paper in his hand out of which he read several
scurrilous and (...) Reflections on the English Inhibitants of this Colony,
with the French and principal Dutch; having Re^ro^pection or many years past,
only designed to Incense and Inflame the Jury, charging the Prisoner to be the
Head of a Faction, a Malignant Party, who had endeavored to introduce P^pery
and Slavery Disturbers of our Israel, as they had been that of Capt L^^s^^rs
Government, which ^he said was now justified at home to be (...) That the said
Party was a Nest of Pirates, Betrayers of our Prince and his Laws, a parcel of
Banditt^'s, who had offered the late Earl of Bellomont a Reward of Ten Thousand
Pounds to connive at Pyracy's, and One Thousand Pounds to himself to solicit
it. That some mean and broken Merchants in London had made Complaints in their
behalf to the Lords of Trade and Plantations, and to the Parliament against the
said Earl, but that the said Earl's Proceedings were approved of And used
scandalous Reflections on Mr. Veasy the Minister of Trinity Church, and against
Coll. Smith, the first Member of Council, though nothing relating to this Trial;
and owned himself of the Leys^erian Party, and that he would stand and fall by
it, etc.

Then called his Witnesses, who gave their Evidences in the following words, as
they were taken in open Court, and since agreed unto by all of them
respectively, as follows.

Samuel Clows Sworn, says,

Gentlemen, When I come to speak of the Addresses, I must pray you to take
Notice, that I can speak positively to but very few things that is (...) them,
what I say is to the best of my Remembrance and Understanding, for I may be
mistaken in both. 'T was about a fortnight or three Weeks before Coll. Bayards
Commitment that I happened to come to his House about some business not at all
relating to this matter, concerning which as we were talking, Coll Bayard ask'^
me if I had seen the Addresses? I answered, No. He then showed me three
Addresses the first was to my Lord Cornbury, the Persons addressing in it,
called themselves Inhabitants of New York, and others distant from it, and
being some of them could not perhaps be present at his Lordships arrival here,
did by way of Address Congratulate his Lordship into this Government, wishing
him all Health and Prosperity here, and that the Name of Party might be
banished from among us. After I had read it, Coll. Bayard ask't me (...) any
thing to say against it? I answered, No, and then signed it. The other two
Addresses were one to the King, and the other to the House of Commons (...) to
the Parliament, (I am not positive which) as I had read them. I remember I made
this Observation in my self, that they contained nearly both the same things,
and in them, or one of them, to the best of my remembrance, were contained
these things. The Persons addressing called themselves English Men, and others
who though Foreigners, yet enti^uled to the Privileges of English Men here: It
speaks concerning the late Revolution here, of which I have but a confused
Idea, and can remember nothing particular; afterward it speaks concerning my
Lord Be^^mont's Administration, in several Articles of which I can remember but
one, which is, That the Hottest and Ignorantest of the People were put into
places of Trust. Then it speaks concerning the late Assembly here and tells
you, that after this Assembly had chose their Speaker, some of the
Representatives were informed that he was an Alien, upon which they made a
Motion to the House, that that matter might be enquired into, but that Motion
being refused, one halt of the Representatives, or Ten of them left the House,
notwithstanding which the remaining part of the Representatives, with some
others they took in, did proceed to make Acts, in one of which Acts they gave a
Sum of Money to the Lieut. Governor to tempt him to pass these Acts, and
likewise a Sum to the chief Justice of this Province to find Law and Form for
their Proceedings; and that these things tended to the rendering the Government
Vile and Cheap in the eyes of the People.

Solicitor. What Names do you remember you saw to the Addresses?


Clows. I saw several Names there, but whether to all there or to two of them
or only to that of my Lord Cornbury, I (...) o^ ^ay, but I did, to the best of
my remembrance, see the Names of R^p^^^ Them, Matthew Ling, ^ha^les Wooly Robert
Livingstone and Mr. (...) but I am not certain whether I saw Mr. Jam^son's Name
there, or (...) When I had read them I told C E. Bayard they contained things
done before my Time, and I did not (...) h^k it proper for me to sign them,
upon which he replied, Then don't sign them.


Solicitor I shall ^^ad what you said before the Council.


Clows. D^^^ if you please


Solicitor. Don'^ you remember that it was said, That my Lord B^llemont had put
the most I^genious and Honestest Men of the Province out of all Places of Trust?


Clows. No, I cannot remember that.


Solicitor. I think you said so before the Council.


Clows. Perhaps I might say something like to when I was before the Council,
though I don'^ believe there is any essential difference between what I now
say, and what I said to the Council; ^et if there (...). I hope what I then
said will not be taken to my Prejudice; I was then sent for by the Governors,
Letters which seemed to import that (...) with me of a (...) different Nature
than to examine me about this matter, so that I was then (...) a Surprise


Solicitor But you believe what you then sp^ke was true.


Clows. Without doubt, and I hope Mr Cos^ns took (...) truly to write down what
I then delivered; but whether he did express my meaning right or no, I know
not; for I did not look over his Notes till the Day I saw them at your Chamber


Solicitor. Was not the assembly called an Illegal Assembly? and that they had
made Acts prejudicial to the Country.


Clows. No, I no not remember that?


Solicitor. Was it not said that the ^cum of the People were put into all
places of Trust?


Clows. Perhaps I might before the Council uses, word Scum, but I now think it
was, That the Hottest and Ignorance^ were put (...) of Trust.


Solicitor. Mr. Clows, pray tell us what was the reason you did not ^ign the
other two Addresses?


Clows. I think I am not at this time obliged to tel^ that, being it does not
at all affect the matter.


Atwood. Yes, but it does, you must tell us.


Clows. On of the chief Reasons was because I then thought that the saying the
Assembly had given a Gift to the Lieut. Governor to tempt him to pass their
Acts. was a Reflection upon the Lieu^. Governor, but it is my judgment now
that it was ^n Reflection at all upon him.


Solicitor. How! and don't you think so now?


Atwood. He only speaks it as his Judgment


Solicitor. Don't you remember that the Assembly was called he pretended
Assembly?


Clows. No.


Solicitor. Don't you remember 'twas said, their Illegal Proceedings! Don't you
remember the word Illegal?


Clows. No, I cannot remember that; and I did desire you at your Chamber to put
that word out of the Clerks Notes.


Coll Bayard. Did I ever ask you to sign them?


Clows. No, you did not, you was so far from doing that, that you rather
persuaded me not to sign them, and so did Madam Bayard who was then in the Room.


Nicoll. Do you remember any thing of the word Oppression in the Address?
Clows. No. I do not remember that word.


Solicitor. That the Kings Subjects were oppressed here?


Nicoll. Was the Assembly called an Unlawful Assembly?


Clows. No. Gentlemen, I can speak positively to but few of these things; what
I say, is to the best on my Remembrance and Understanding.


Peter Odyr^, a French Man, Sworn, and for that he could speak no English, Mr.
Br^sack Chaplain to the Garrison, was sworn to be his Interpeter.

Solicitor. What do you know of the Papers that were at Coll. Bayards, (...)
did you sign them, or who desired you in to do?


Odyre, Going by Coll. Bayards House, (...) Mr. (...) told me I must step into
Coll. Bayards and sign an Address to the King; and (...) I was going in I met
Coll. Bayard coming forth of his House, and going in I saw the Addresses lying
on the Table.


Solicitor. D^d Coll. Bayard then persuade you to sign them, or did he tell you
it was for your good to sign them?


Oydre. Coll. Bayard then told me, I might sign if I would, or that I might
not; and the Coll. also told me it was for the good of the Country, and that if
I was willing I might sign them, it not, I might let them alone, and then went
away.


Solicitor. I will now prove the Addresses signed at the Coffee-House, and that
Coll. Bayard attended there for that purpose.


W. Richardson, Inhabitant and House keeper in the City, Sworn.

Solicitor. What do you know Mr. Richardson concerning the signing the Papers
at the Coffee-House?


Richardson. One day drinking at one Spe^cers, I was desired to go to the
Coffee House, which I did, and when there (...) saw a great many People. I
believe near a hundred, and coming above stairs, I saw Papers on the Table,
which were called Addresses, which I signed with others; and I saw among others
(...). Bayard there, but he learned to (...) more acting or concerned th^^ any
other


(...) Justice. You are very forgetful of what you Sworn before the (...) and
Council, but to put you in mind some what of it, Did as both tell you what
Papers were to be signed?


Richardson No Body at all


Solicitor. How many Papers did you sign?


Richardson. I (...) three, but did not know wha^^^ were, but was told, they
were Addres^es to the King, and my Lord Cornbury and the Parliament, but did
not read any of them; (...) I think one of them complained that the people lay
under some Hardships here


Solicitor. You declared much more before the Council.


Richardson. I was then (...) sudd^^^ly before the Council, and was surprised.


John Bashford Sworn

Solicitor. Mr. Bashford, tell the Court and Jury what you know concerning the
papers at the Coffee House.


Bashford. I was at the Coffee-House where I saw the Papers or Addresses, but
don't know what they were or contained; and I signed four or five papers there,
but did not stay half a quarter of an hour. When I was there I saw Coll. Bayard
amongst many others in the Room, but did not see his Name, as I remember, to
any the Papers.


[ N^ These fi^e Papers were the three Addresses, and he two Duplicates.]

Chief Justice. These Witnesses are very unwilling or very forgetful, having
given a much different account of things upon their Oaths before the Governor
and Council.


Bashford. I have now had time to Recollect my self, but was then under a
Surprise, not knowing what I was sent for.


Mr. Michael Christian Sworn.

Chapter Justice. Mr. Christian What do you know concerning the Papers o^ Addresses
signed at the Coffee-House?


Christian. I remember, some time since, about Christmas I believe, I was at
the Coffee-House, where I saw the Addresses, with many other people, but cant
tell how many.


Chief Justice. Do you believe there were more than Twenty?


Christian. No, I believe there were not. I found three Addresses there, and
signed them all, but the substance thereof I cannot now remember, it is a good
while since, and therefore cannot speak positively to it. I remember a Question
was asked me at the council, Whether there was any Complaints in the Addresses
that the Soldiers wanted their pay? I believe I might then answer something
about it but I do not know any such thing in the Addresses, either of the
Soldiers or their pay. I remember that Coll. Bayard was then at the Coffee
House when I signed the Addresses, but don't remember that any Body desired me
to sign.


Chief Justice. How many Hands, Mr Christian, did you see to the Addresses?


Christian. I cannot tell how many, but remember Coll. Bayard amongst others
was there, but he never asked me to sign either of the Addresses, nor can I
remember that there was any thing concerning either the Soldiers or their pay
in the Addresses.


Chief Justice. Certainly these Gentlemen are very unwilling Evidences; Mr.
Christian is a Gentleman of good Learning, and its strange that he should be so
forgetful that be cannot remember what was given in on his Oath before the
Governor and Council; he has either a weak or treacherous Memory.


Mr Hugh Gray Sworn.

Solicitor. Mr. Gray. What do you know concerning the signing of those Papers
at the Coffee-House?


Gray. About December last being at the Coffee-House, I met there one Mr Scot,
who a ^ed me to go up into the upper Room, which I accordingly did; an when
there I saw on the Table some Papers, which afterward I understood were
Addresses to the King, Parliament and Lord Cornbury; some body asked me to sign
them, which I did accordingly, but don't know who it was, I remember Coll.
Bayard was there amongst others, sm^king a Pipe of Tobacco; I believe there
might then be about Ten Hands to the Papers, and about five Men in the Room,
that I read all the Addresses, but cannot now remember the Contents of them.


Ch Justice. Mr. Gray, do you remember there was any Complaints against the
Government in those Addresses?


Gray. No.


Mrs Hannah Hutchins Svvorn.

Solicitor. Now, may it please your Honors, I will prove the Papers signed at
another place.


Chapter Justice. Mrs Hutchins, What do you know concerning these Papers brought to
your House?


Mrs Hutchins. About Christmas last Coll Bayard brought some Papers to my
House, and left them with me, but did not stay at all, but (...) me show them
to my Husband, who was then at Church; These Papers remained at my House about
three days, and then I delivered them to a Negro, who was sent (...), but do
not remember whose Negro it was; Coll. Bayard was not at our House while the
Papers lay there.


Solicitor. Now I shall proceed to prove what sort of People were drawn in to
sign these Papers.


John R^ad Sworn.

Ch Justice What do you remember concerning any Addresses or Papers at the
House of Alder-man Hutchins?


Read B^rg on the 26th of December at Mr. Hutchin's house. I there saw some
Papers which one Mr. Buroughs, then (...), telling me they were Addresses to
the King, Parliament and Lord Cornbury, ma^e for the good of the Country, and
which were lying on the ^ed there; and thereupon I signed them, but did not
read them; I did not see Coll. Bayard there, but believe I saw his Name to the
Papers; I saw a great Number of Names subcribed to the Papers, as near as I can
judge about Two Hundred.


Solicitor. Of what Age are you?


Read. About seventeen years of Age.


Edward Marshall Svvorn.

Chapter Justice. Where did you see these Papers, and what do you know of them?


Marshall. Going one day about Christmas to the House of Mr. Hutchins, to get a
Witness to a Letter of Attorney. I savv there five Addresses, which I signed,
one was to the King, another to the Parliament, and another to the Lord
Cornbury, Congratulating his Arrival. I read some of them, but found nothing in
any of them that reflected upon the Governor; There was some Complaint of the
Speaker of the Assembly being an Alien. Looking on the Names of the
Subscribers, I saw the Name of Edw. Marshall before I had signed, but I don't
know but there may be more Edw. Marshalls than one in the Province. I did not
see Coll. Bayard at the House, not his Name to the Papers.


John Beckly Sworn.

Chapter Justice. What do you know concerning any Papers at the House of Mr.
Hutchins?


Buckly. Coming home from the Fort, and passing by M. Hutchins's House, I was
asked to walk in by Mr. Hutchins, which I did, and being some into the upper
Room, I saw some Papers there, which were called Addresses, but I did not read
any of them but that to my Lord Cornbury, which as I understood was a
Complement and Congratulation to him a his arrival here. Mr. Hutchins has asked
me to sign it, but I refused it, because being a Lieut. in the Garrison, I was
unwilling to do any such thing before any of my elder Officers had done it. But
I did not see Coll. Bayard nor his Name there.


Francis Cherm^^ Sworn.

Chapter Justice. Give an account what you know concerning any Papers or Addresses
at the house of Alderman Hutchins.


Cherman. Coming a while ago to Mr. Hutchins's House, and going up Stairs. I
saw certain Papers there, and some People: Mr. Hutchins asked me to sign those
Papers, telling me, they were Addresses to the King and my Lord Cornbury, that
they were for the good of the Country and the English, and I expected by it to
be made tree of the City, and signed therefore; but did not see Coll. Bayard
there, nor don't remember the Contents of the Papers.


One B^tton Sworn.

Ch Justice. What do you know concerning these Papers, etc?


B^tton. Hearing by some of my Fellow Soldiers that there were some Papers or
Addresses at Capt. Hutchins's, I was willing to go and see what they were, and
coming to the House, i. e. The Three Addresses and (...) Duplicates.
there I found five Papers, and signed them all five, but do not remember to
whom they were directed: Capt. Hutchins was there, but said nothing at all to
me about the Papers, or signing them; nor can I remember whether they were
Paper or Parchment: I believe there were then about thirty Names subscribed,
but saw neither Coll. Bayard not his Name there.


Robert Cr^^^ell Sworn.

Ch Justice. What do you know, etc.


Cr^^^ell. Some time since I came to Mr. Hutchins's, and there found five
Addresses; I read that to my Lord Cornbury, and some of the two others to the
King and Parliament: In one of them, to the best of my remembrance, was
contained a Complaint that the People of this Province lay under more Hardships
than formerly, and that the Speaker of the Assembly of this Province was an
Al^en. I saw Coll. Bayards Name to that to my Lord Cornbury, but am not
acquainted with his hand writing at all. After I had read some part, and been
told what the rest o^ the Papers were, I signed them all five, but no body
desired or persuaded me to do it.


Atwood Your Evidence is not so full as when you gave in your Information on
Oath before the Council.


Cr^^^ell But it is, and I know nothing more.


One Griggs Sworn.

Chapter Justice. What do you know, etc?


Griggs. I was desired by one Bovell, a Soldier in the Garrison, to go to Mr.
Hutchins's House and sign some Papers; I was told and believed it was to make
me free of the City; thereupon I went to Mr. Hutchins's and there signed them,
but did not see Coll. Bayard there.


One Garnet Sworn.

Chapter Justice. Tell ^he Court what you know, etc.


Garnet. A great many of the Soldiers of the Garrison signed, and they
expected thereby to be made free of the City, many of them being Trades^men.


One Fleming Svvorn.

Chapter Justice. What do you know, etc?


Fleming Coming some time since to the House of Mr. Hutchins, I here saw some
Ro^ls opened with a great many Names thereto, After the Addresses were full,
they signed on the back side.
but did not see any other writing, to this I put my Name, and also then put
down two or three Names for others, at their Request, they having first put
their Marks: I and the others expected by this to be made (...) of the City: I
believe out of 160 Men now belonging to the Fort, or there abouts, there may
be about thirty that signed.


One Bovell Svvorn.

Chapter Justice. What do you know, etc?


Bovell. Coming to Capt. Hutchins's, was shovvn some Papers which I was told
were Addresses to which I put my Mark, without being desired by any body: I
cannot write nor read: When I had set for my Mark, Mr. Hutchins told me, That
if any of my fellovv Soldiers would come and sign al^o, they might; if not,
they might let it alone. By this signing I expected to be made free of the
City, but not from beings a Soldier; but never heard Capt. Hutchins say so.


Solicitor. I have now no more Witnesses against the Prisoner. Here is a Paper
signed by him, I desire the Clerk of the Council may be svvorn to prove the
same.


Mr. Cosens, the Clerk of the Council Svvorn.

Coll. Bayard. I own that Paper, it is a Petition to the Lieut. Governor and
Council on behalf of Alderman Hutchins then in prison, ^vvning with Mr. French,
Mr. We^ham, and Mr. Van Dam, That the Copies of the three Addresses to the
King, the Parliament and the Lord Cornbury, were in our hands.


Then the Petition was read, and was the same as is entered in page 1.

After this the Act of Assembly on which the Mittimus is grounded, (vid. page
3.) was read. And after that the Commission to the Lord Bellomont at large,
and the Lieut. Governors Commission.

Solicitor. I desire Mr. Emot may be Sworn, whether he did not give advice to a
certain Person about that clause in the Address to the Lieut. Governors; in
favor of Alderman Hutchins, viz. That the Lord Cornbury succeeded the Earl of
Bellomont as Governor in New York?


Emot was commanded by Mr. Atwood to be sworn; and being sworn, said, I told
Mr. French, These words in said Address did not run ^ur current, and might give
ground of exception to some who would be apt to strain every word to the
Prisoner's Disadvantage. To which Mr. French replied, They had drawn the
Address themselves, and believed it was well enough.

Solicitor. I have now proved by the Witnesses these false and scandalous
Libells set forth to the Indictment, whereby the good, peace and quiet of the
Government has been disturbed, which by this Act of Assembly is High Treason.
I have likewise proved that the soldiers were drawn in to sign those
scandalous Libells, and that some did sign blank R^lls, which was listing of
(...), and is Treason. By the^e words in Petition to the Lieut. Governor and
council, viz. [Who we understand by certain Advice we have received from
England, to be nominated by his Majesty to succeed the late Earl of Bell^mont
as our Governor] is a disovvning and casting off the present Authority and his
Majesty's Government.


Nicoll. Your Honor and the Jury will please to take Notice, that the
Indictment consists of diverse ^eads as, That the prisoner did compass, imagine,
contrive, purpose and design to Defame, subvert, etc. the Peace, Good and Quiet
of this his Majesty's Government.

That he u^^d diverse indirect Practices and Endeavors to procure Mutiny and
Sedition amongst the soldiers.

That he drevv in numbers of them the said Soldiers, and others, to sign false
and scandalous Libells, and that he had sign^d them himself.

That in these (...) ^eclared. That the Subjects in this Province are and have
been, for many Years last past, by those entrusted in the administration of the
Government, Oppressed, and that the Government has been and is rendered Cheap
and Vile in the eyes of the People; as also, That the General Assembly of this
^rovince is not a Lavvful Assembly by which means, etc. he has incited his
Majesty's Subjects to cast off their Obedience to his Majesty's said Government

The Prisoner is not directly charged here with any Fact except his own signing
the said Libels, but for (...) or Endeavors; the rest are for^'d Conclusions
and strained In^erences drawn from thence. It is not alleged that the Peace of
the Government Has been disturbed, or that any Mutiny or Sedition has been
amongst the Soldiers, or that any one of his Majesty's Subjects has cast off
his Obedience to his Majest^'s said Government. By the Court of the Evidence it
appears there was an Address to the King, an Address to the House of Commons
and an Address to my Lord Cornbury, and a Petition or Address to the Lieut.
Governor and Council, but all the Evidence is very Lame and weak as to the
three first: I we should admit the making or signing of them to be any fault or
crime, more especially if the same should amount to ^reason; for by none of the
Evidence it does appear that those Addresses signed at the Coffee-House were
the same Addresses which were at Coll. Bayards, or that the Addresses an
Alder-man Hutchins's were the same which were at the Coffee-House, or the same
which were at Coll. Bayards: There is no Proof that the Prisoner signed those
Addresses; here is not so much as the likeness, or comparison of Hands
produced, alleged or proved, though if it were, that would not do; in the great
Trial of the Bishops, Mr. Pollexphen there Affirms, page 60. That Comparison of
Hands is not good in a Criminal Case, and offers the Lady Cars case in and
dersi^s Reports, page 418, 419. where it is so adjudged.

But I shall not dwell upon the Evidence; it is certainly the Right of the
Subject to Petition the King whenever he conceives himself agrieved: In the
Bishops Trials, page 160. Mr Pollexphen says, I never thought it, nor has
since been thought by any body else to be a Crime to Petition the King. Page
121. Serjent Levens affirms. The Subjects have a right of Petitioning the King
in all their Grievances: So lay all our Books of Law; so says the Statute of
the 13th of Charles th^^d. They may Petition. Page 126 Sit Thomas Powes, then
Attorney General, acknowledges access to the King by Petition is open to every
Body; The most Inferior Person is allowed to Petition the King. Page 135. Mr.
Justice H^ll^way says, It^ the Birthright of the Subject to Petition the King.
It its the Birthrights of the Subject to Petition the King, to procure or draw
in men to do what its their Birthright to do, can never amount to a Crime.


Atwood. I do not say Petitioning the King is a Crime, but it may be to
Petition the House of Commons in the Plantations, where the King governs by his
Prerogative.


Nicoll. I cannot think it a Crime for the Subjects of the Plantations to
Petition the House of Commons, it is every days Practice; consult the Votes in
ever Sessons, you will find many Addresses, Petitions and Complaints from the
Subjects of the Plantations: I^ seems to be the Right of the Subjects to
Petition the House of Commons, the Statute of the 13th or Charles the 2d chap.
5. restrains the common Law, by that in plainly appears to be the Right of the
Subject to Petition the House of Commons or the King. The Provis^ in that Act
says. That neither that Act nor any thing therein contained shall be con^trued
to extend or hinder any Person or Persons, not exceeding the Number of Ten, to
present any public or private Grievance or Complaint to any Member of the
House of Commons, after his Election, or to the Kings Majesty. The Act of
Rcognition of Prime W. and Mary, declaring the Rights and Liberties of the
Subjects, and settling the Succession of the Crown, thereby it is enacted,
amongst other things, That it is the Right of the Subject to Petition the King,
and all Commitments and Prosecutions for such Petitioning are Illegal. And they
do claim command and insist upon all and singular the ^re^ses as their
undoubled Rights and Liberties; and that no Declaration, Judgment Doings or
Proceedings to the prejudice of the People, in any the said Premises, ought in
any wise hereafter to be drawn into Consequence or Example. More is no grant of
any new Privilege, but a claim and acknowledgement of an ancient Right: and
Petitions to the Parliament are as ancient as Parliaments themselves; If the
Subjects of the Plantations may not Petition and Compalin to their Prince, they
are in a worse Condition than Slaves. The Cries of the Oppressions in the
Plantations have gone up to Heaven, and are again come down upon the Earth, and
have inspired and moved the King and parliament of England to make a Law to
check the exorbitant Actions of Governors in the Plantations, and make them
accountable in England for their Miscarriages abroad; which can never be
discovered to the King but by Petition. The Statute is in these words,

An Act to punish Governors of Plantations in this Kingdom, for Crimes by them
committed in the Plantations.
WHereas a due punishment is not provided for several Crimes and Offenses
committed out of this his Majesty's Realm of England, whereof diverse
Governors, Lieut. Governors, Deputy Governors or Commanders in Chief of
Plantations and Collonies within his Majesty's Dominions beyond the Seas, have
taken advantage, and have not been deterred from Oppressing his Majesty's
Subjects within their respective Governments and Commands, nor from committing
several other great Crimes and Ofences, net deeming themselves punishable for
the same here, nor accountable for such their Crimes and Offenses to any Person
within their Respective Governments and Commands. For Remedy whereof, Be it
Enacted by the Kings most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent
of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons in Parliament assembled and by
the Authority of the same. That if any Governor or Commander in Chief or any
Plantation or Collony within his Majesty's Dominions beyond the Seas, shall
after the first day of August, 1700. be guilty of Oppressing any of his
Majesty's Subjects beyond he seas, within their respective Governments or
Commands, or shall be guity of any other Crime of Offense, contrary to the Laws
of this Realm, or (...) force within their respective Governments and Commands,
shall be enquired of, heard and determined in his Majesty's Court of
King's Bench here in England, or before such Commissioners, and in such County
of this Realm as shall be assigned by his Majesty's Commission, and by good and
Lawful Men of the same County; and that such Punishment shall be ^^^cted on
such Offenders, as are usually inflicted for Offenses of like Nature committed
here in England.

This Prosecution seems to be made to frustrate and evade this Act of
Parliament. The Subject is oppre^t, or conceives himself to be so he complains
of this Oppression; this Complaining is made TREASON! Here is a strange and
fatal Dilemma on the Subjects of the Plantations; They must either suffer their
Oppressions or be hanged for Traitors if they Complain!

What relates to the Act of Assembly of this Country, it can by no Natural or
Legal Construction be extended to make the Prisoner cu^pable: It is plain by
the whole purport of the Act, that it has made no New Treason, it only
Recognizes the King and Queen, and Enacts, That those who shall do any thing
distructive to that establishment, by Fore of Arms, or otherwise, shall be
Rebels and Traitors, which they would be without this Act. If th^s Address and
Petition had been to the French King, the thing had been of another Nature. By
the same Construction every petty Battery or other little Trespass may be a
Treason.

The Petition of Coll. Bayard and the other three, is so far from disowning the
Government, that it is a direct acknowledging of the same: The Direction of the
Petition is, To the Lieut. Governor and the Council. The Expression. ( That
they have Advice that the Lord Cornbury is to succeed the Earl of Bellomont)
can with no Jusitice or common Sense be construed to be a disowning and casting
off o^ the Government. I think it will hardly be affirmed that the Council
succeeded the Earl of Belloment, and Capt. Nanfan the Council: If so after the
Earl of Bellomont who was Cap. General Some time after the Earl of Bellamont's
Death Capt. Nanfan the Lieut. Governor was at Barbados.
? We had seven Capt. Generals; which is an A^^^rdity I suppose none will
allege. A familiar Example will demonstrate the weakness and falsity of this
Construction: If a Capt. of a Company be killed or absent, the Lieutenant or
next Office has the full Command of the Company, as the Capt. had, or could
have; but I think no man will say he succeeds the Capt. or that when another
Capt. is appointed, be succeeds that Lieut. or other Officer. So that I cannot
think there is any Fact or Crime alleged or proved against the Prisoner, to
charge him with this high Crime of Treason, or indeed with any other Crime
whatsoever.


Emot. By your Honor's permission I am of Council for Coll. Bayard the
Prisoner at the Bar, but by reason I am unwilling to spend too much of your
time, this Trial already having been very long, and Mr. Nicoll, who is also of
Council of the same side, having amongst other things made it very evident,
that for the Subject to Petition his Majesty, is their ancient and undoubitable
Right.

I shall therefore make it may business only, as near as I can, to demonstrate
to this Court and Jury, That had the King's Council made ^mple proof of all the
Matters of Fact alleged in the Indictment, as the signing the Addresses, and
other things therein contained, to have been true; yet in point of Law they
cannot amount to that grand Crime of High ^reason

In order to this, shall with as much brevity as I can, examine into, and put
your Honors in mind, and withal inform the Gentlemen of the Jury what the Law
of England by which we are or ought to be governed here) has been, for near
the space of four hundred years last past, relating to this grand Crime of
High Treason: whereby it will manifestly appear how cautious the Parliaments of
England have been, in making and increasing the Laws to take away men's lives,
and particularly for High Treason. And shall begin with the Statute of 25 Edw.
3. a Statute to which the greatest Regard has been paid, of any Act of
Parliament whatsoever, unless Magne Charta, as hereafter I shall briefly show

I must also observe to your Honors, that before the making of this Act of
Parliament of the 25 E. 3. which was in Anno 1350 and which was the very first
Act relating to Treasons, so many things were charged as High Treason by the
common Law, and there were so many Ambiguities and Diversities of Opinions,
that both History and our Books of the Law sufficiently inform us, that
scarcely any man knew how to behave himself. But now by this Statute the
particulars and Species of this grand Crime are reckoned up, and all others
excluded, till declared by Parliament. For though nothing can concern the King,
his Crown and Dignity more immediately than High Treason, which our Law calls
Crimen (...)Majes^atis, a Crime wronging Majesty; yet this good King Edward the
3d. at the request of the Lords and Commons of England, in a Parliamentary way,
and to make all after Ages happy, makes a plain Declaration of such Offenses as
should for the future be deemed for High Treason, and none other, unless
declared by Parliament.

This Act of Parliament is branch't out by Sir Edw. Cook in the 3d part of his
Institutes, into fix Classes or Heads, which I shall the rather take Notice of,
for that Trials of this Nature are very rare in the Plantations; and they are
these, 1. The Compassing or Imagining the Death of the King, Queen or Prince,
and declaring the same by some ^^vert^^ct. The Killing or Murdering of the
Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices, etc. in their Place doing their Office, etc.
2. To violate, or carnally to know the Kings Consort or Queen, the Kings Elde^^
Daughter unmarried, or Princes Wife. 3. Levying of War against the King. 4.
Adhearing to the Kings Enemies, and declaring the same by some Overt Act; and
this must not be luimieus sed Hosi^^s. 5. Counterfeiting of the Great Seal,
Privy Seal, or Kings Coin, etc. 6. And Lastly, Bringing into the Realm
Counterfeit Money, to the likeness of the Kings Coin, etc.


Now if there is any other Offense, which was not comprehended within one of
these Classes, the same was thereby declared to be no Treason.

In the Clause of which Act of Parliament, we find these words, which I shall
the rather read, because I apprehend it will very much concern this ensuing
Trial

And because that many other like Cases may happen (...) to come, which a Man
cannot think of ^^^are at this present time. It is O^dained, That if any other
case, supposed Treason, which is not above (...), do happen, before an
Justices, the Justices shall carry, without any going to Judgment of the
Treason, till the cause be showed and declared (...) the King and his
Parliament, whether it be judged Treason, or other Felony.

By this we may easily perceive, and its very obvious, that this cause was made
to prevent the Judges from taking upon them (...) declare any thing to be
High Treason, but such as are particularly expressed by this Statute of 25 Ed 3.
or by some other subsequent Act.

Again, in the Reign of Richard 2d. we find sundry other things were decla^d by
Parliament to be High Treason, which were not comprehenced within the S^. 25 Ed
3. But yet upon the coming in of Hen 4. It was again enacted and declared, That
nothing should for the future be adjudged High Treason But what were so
ordained by the aforesaid (...). 25 (...) The words are these,

1 ^. 4. cap 10. That whereas in Parliament, in the ^^th year of the (...) King
Richard, diverse pains of Treason were ordained by Statute; inasmuch as there
was no man which knew how he ought to behave himself, to do, speak or say, for
doubt of such Pains. Its accorded and assented by the King, Lords and Commons,
That in no time to come any Treason be adjudged otherwise, than it was ordained
by the Statute in the time of his Noble Grandfather King Edw. 3.

Now this Statute, I am humbly of Opinion, is directly in the Negative, which
says. That for the future nothing shall be adjudged Treason, otherwise than it
was ordained by the aforesaid Statute 25 Edw. 3

Yet nevertheless this indictment is grounded up (...) an Act of Assembly of
this Province, which is, I am humbly of Opinion, not only contrary to, but
directly repugnant to the aforesaid Statute (which appears to me to limit all
new Species of Treason to be declared in Parliament, and (...) else where)
Which if it should admit of such a Construction, as is now intended, I think I
may modestly say, it will introduce five hundred several new species of
Treason, ^o that his Majesty's good Subjects of this Province would fall under
much greater Hardships than whatever the People of England were sensible of
before the making of this Act, which I cannot to^ often mention, the 25 Edw. 3.

If we look further downward upon the coming in of Edw 6 which was in the Year
1546. sundry new species of Treason having been again introduced by Act of
Parliament, it was in the very first Year of his Reign Enacted, That no Offense
made Treason by any Statute, should be ^o deemed and adjudged for the future,
but such as were made Treason by the aforesaid S^at. 25 Edw. 3. other than such
as were by that present Statute ordained and declared.

But yet in Queen Mary's Time, in the first year of her Reign, this grand Crime
was brought to its an^ient Standard, and it was then declared in Parliament.
That no Act (...) whatsoever should be (...) Treason or Mispr^sion of Treason
but such as were decla^^^ by the Statute 25 Edw. 3. and the most (...) of the
Preamble is this, That the state and safety of the King stands more assuredly
by the Love of his Subjects than (...) of his Laws

So that upon Examination, we find how careful and cautious the People and
Parliament of England have been in introducing and increasing of Sangui^ary
Laws, and that through the Revolution of many Ages. And hereby (...) very
remarkable what a great Regard has been in all Ages paid to this ve^e^able
Statute 25 Edw. 3. which with great c^re has been consisted down to us to this
very time, and is now in its full force. Sir Edw. Cook treating thereof tells
us, That the Parliament in which this Act was made (...) many years afterward
was called, (...) Parliamentum, The Blessed Parliament

If we look but into the Bill of Attainder of Thomas Earl of Strafford, in the
year 1640, and 41. even in those times, what Regard was paid to this Statute,
which I have so often mentioned, wherein it was provided, That the Judgment
against said Earl should never be drawn into Presi^ent. And the words are
those, Provided, That no Judge or Judges, Justice or Justices whatsoever shall
adjudge or interpret any Act of Thing to be Treason, nor hear or determine any
Treason in any other manner than he or they should or ought to have done before
the making of this Act.

Now, if we do but Reflect upon the great Concern and Care that has been taken
through all Ages, by the wise People of England, in preve^^^g, the Judges from
in^erpre^ing any A^t or Thing whatsoever to be Treason, but such only as are
enumerated in the Statute 25 Edw 3.

And at the sometime give ourselves leave to think how industrousl^ we labor
to introduce an Act of Assembly of this Province, to make, as I said before,
even five ^undred New and Never-heard-of Species of Treason, (...), if we do
bu^ consider this, it is matter of great Amazement, and more especially in such
an Age as this, and in so happy a Reign, where no man over qu^stioned or at the
least doubted of the true enjoyment of our Laws and Liberties, though never so
remove from the Fountain b^^d.

I am afraid I have already Trespassed upon your Honor's Patience, shall
therefore conclude with some Observations upon the A^ of Assembly, upon which
this Indictment is laid.

Now both the T^^le, Preamble and Words of this Act of Assembly, and the cause
of making thereof, is very obvious (however the same may be now interpreted)
which were these two.

1st. For the future to prevent the setting up a Power over his Majesty's
Subjects in this Province, without Authority from the Crown England, which was
found to be of fatal consequence in the late unhappy Disorders in this Province.

2dly. To express the Love, Loyalty and hearty Affection of the People to their
Majesty's. King William and Queen Mary, and as (...) as in them lay to
Recognize them their Sovereign L^ge Lord and Lady. I doubt not but your Honor
will see cause to recommend the same to the Jury in delivering the Charge. And
that no strained Construction of this (...) of Assembly (...) ever affect the
P^isoner, Coll. Bayard or at the least blessed his long experienced Loyalty to
the Crown or England, and in a special manner to his present Majesty King
William.

I had almost (...) to beg leave of the Court to apply my self to the Gentlemen
(...) the Jury, to obviate some Objections or rather a vulgar Error that
usually has ^^^ept in amongst them, upon Trials, and particularly upon
Indictments, which is, (...) do be^^ve,

That it the matters of Fact alleged in the Indictment, be but proved, they
are to have no regard to (...) of Law. Which I take to be a very great and
dangerous (...) ^or in them.

For though it be true and mu^t be granted, that Matters of Fact are the most
common and p^oper Object (...) Jury's Determination, and Matters of Law that of
the Judges; (...) arises cut of, and is inter wo^^n and complicated with Fact,
it cannot but fall under the Jury's Consideration. For should it be otherwise,
if a Person should be indicted for doing any common (...) Act, if it be but
clothed and disguised in the Indictment with the Name of Treason, or some
other high Crime, and proved by Witnesses to be done, then the Jury would lie
under a Necessity of finding the ^^^one^ guilty. No.

Do we not find in most general Issues, upon Not Guilty pleaded, as upon
Indictments of Trespasses, Breach of the Peace, Felony, and even (...) Cases
of High Treason, yet the Jury do not find the Fact of the Case by it self,
leaving the Law to the Court, but finds the party Guilty or Not Guilty.

And this will more evidently appear upon Indictments of Murder, that the Jury
are Judges as well of Matter of Law as of Fact. For is it not every Days
Practice, where Persons are indicted of Murder, the Jury does not only find
them Guilty or Not Guilty. But many (...) upon hearing and weighing of
Circumstances, the Jury brings in the Prisoner not only Guilty or Not Guilty in
general, but brings them in either Guilty of Murder or Manslaughter by (...)
adventure, or se Defendendo, etc.

So the Jury being well apprize^ of the true Matter of Fact, of which they are
sole Judges, can better apply the Matter of Law; for, says my Lord Cook, Its by
^^tly applying Matters of Fact and Law together that the Jury brings forth
their Vera^^, which I hope you Gentlemen of the Jury will carefully do.


Prisoner. I desire some of my Evidences may be called to give an account of my
Life and Conversation.


Which was granted.

Mr. Ve^^. Minister of Trimity Church being ^orn* said. I have been for six
Years personally acquainted with Coll. Bayard during which time his Life and
Conversation recommended him to the World (...) Exemplary Christian. And the
frequent expressions of his Zeal and Affection to his Majesty's Person and
Government convinced me that he was a good Subject.

Prisoner. Call Capt. John Kipp.


Who being called, was absent.

Call Capt. T^dor.


T^dor Sworn, said, I have known Coll. Bayard twenty six Years, a moderate
civil good Man, has been employed in almost all Offices of ^he greatest Trust
in the Government, never disaffected, but stood up for the Protestant Religion
and King William.

Prisoner. To prove that I have upon sundry Energencyes, during the late War,
advanced of my private Fortune, upon loan, without Interest, several
considerable Sums of Money, for the Preservation of his Majesty's Interest and
Government in New York of which upwards of 200 l. Money in specie l^^^, is
st^ll unpaid. I desire Mr. Jam^son, who was them Clerk of the Council, may be
Sworn.


Jamison being called, appeared --

Atwood Mr. Jamison has refused to purge himself of signing those Addresses and
is Particeps Crim^^^, for which reason (...) cannot be allowed to be an
Evidence.


The Evidence being Sworn and examined, the Solicitor General, without
answering the Authorities offered by the Prisoner's Council, relating to the
Treason, summoned up the Evidence, as to matter of Fact

Mr. Atwood gave the Charge to the Jury, in a long Discourse; and among (...)
things insisted, that the Indictment was not laid upon the Act of 25 E. 3 nor
any Act of Parliament, but upon an Act of Assembly of this Province, confirmed
by his Majesty, which had Power to make Acts for High Treason, as well as the
Parliament of England; and that the said Statute was confined to England,
because by the said Statute, it is enacted that if any Doubt should arise, the
same be adjourned unto Parliament, which must be understood of the Parliament
of England.

That it is High Treason by the Act of Assembly, by any manner of ways, or upon
any pretense whatsoever by force of (...), or otherwise, to disturb the Peace.
Good and Quiet of the Government, as it is now established, which he said was
proved by Overt Acts laid in the Indictment, which were by signing (...)
L^bells against the Government, and thereby enticing the People to cast off and
disown the same, and chiefly by the Soldiers signing Complaints against their
chief O^^^ers, which tended to Mutiny, and was Treason by the Common Law.

That by bringing the Papers to Hutchins's House the Prisoner had made himself
guilty of all that was done (...), by the Soldiers and others signing those
Papers.

That the right of Petitioning the King was not in dispute, but the manner of
doing it made it Criminal.

That it was plain the Address of the Prisoner and (...) three Fellows, was a
Disowning of the present Authority, and casting off his Majesty's Government as
it was then established; (...) Capt. Nanfan succeeded the Lord Bellomont (as by
the Commission appeared) and not my Lord Cornbury, which was a plain Overt Act
of Treason, by the meaning and words of the Act of Assembly.

That it appeared undeniable, that the Prisoner and his Son were always by the
Papers, and that it was done with a great Number of People to affront the
Government.

That the drawing in Soldiers to sign Petitions, is Mutiny and Sedition by the
Law, and drawing of them in on false pretenses, in hopes of Freedom in the
City, and subscribing their Names on blank Lists, is listing of Soldiers, and
may be applied to invite in any Foreign Power. And thereupon stro^uously
insisted on the Validity of the Evidence, That the Facts la^d in the Indictment
were undenyably proved, and that those facts did amount to High Treason, within
the words and meaning of this Act of Assembly, and that therefore the Jury
could not do otherwise than bring in the Prisoner Guilty.

The ^onstable being Sworn to keep the Jury, the Court adjourned till nine a
Clock at night. And the Jury (...) not ^eing agreed, the Court did adjourn till
M^nday (...), the 9^h of March.

On Monday the 9^h, ^he Prisoner was brought to the Bar, and the Jury sent for.
They were ask'^ if they were agreed in their Verdict? They answered, They were
not agreed, but desired some Direction of the Court. Jacob Goel^t appeared a^
Foreman of the Jury, and read some Notes of what he said the Witnesses and
^worn. Which we^e denied to have been Sworn by the Council (...), who prayed
Mr. Atwood to satisfy the Jury or the Truth of the Evidence.

To this he answered. That he could not do it after the Charge given; but
affirmed, it was no new thing (as some pretended) after Charge given to
satisfy the Jury in some Ma^^ers of Law; and told, That he had received
Letters from the Jury, and answered them, which Answers were only his private
Opinion That if they were under any Difficulty whether the Matters of Fact
alleged in the Indictment, and which were proved to them, were Treason (...)
no, they might find the Prisoner Guilty, who had his advantage in moving in
Arrest of Judgment, and might be relieved ^s to Matter of Law.

Emot. This is not fair to give the Jury a^ ^and^e to find the Prisoner guilty,
in expectation of Relief in arrest of Judgment; for they are Judges both of Law
and Fact, as the case is now circumstanced: If they will ^nslave themselves and
their Posterity, and debar themselves of all Access to their Prince, they will
be worse than Negroes.


Atwood This is not to be suffered to offer these things to the Jury after they
have received their Charge, therefore be silent. Then proceeding, renewed his
Charge to the Jury, aggravating the supposed Crimes for the space of about haft
an hour.


Emot. I pray your Honor to be heard one word ( which he often repeated, and
at last was granted him) The Facts laid in the Indictment were not proved, as
to the disowning and casting off the Government, encouraging of Mutiny in the
Soldiers* ^or Disquieting he Peace of the Government: Addressing the King is
the undoubted Right of the Subject, both by common Law and Acts of Parliament.
If the Subject for Complaints of Grieva^ces, set forth by Petition* shall be
attainted for High Treason, we are in a worse Condition than Slaves


Atwood Check^ him, and commanded Silence.

Nicoll The Act of Parliament to punish Governors in ^he Plantations for
Oppressing the Subject, is rendered (...) and of ^o effect (...) the Subjects
are deprived of thi^ Liberty to Complain and set forth (...) Grievances by
Petition to their King.


Prisoner. I crave that Jac^bus Go^let may read over his Paper concerning the
Evidence given, and liberty to controu^ the (...).


This was denied.

Prisoner. I crave that Coll D' Peyster and Capt Wal^er^, who are joined in the
Commission, will declare their Opinions single, (...) they have agreed that to
be Treason which Mr Atwood has declared to be (...). either by the common Law
of Act of Assembly, if the Fact laid in the Indictment should be admitted to be
proved, as indeed they are not.


To this he received no answer.

After this the Jury were sent out, and the Court adjourned till three a Clock
in the afternoon.

At which time the Commissioners meeting, the Prisoner was brought to the Bar;
the Jury were sent for. And being come, were asked. If they were agreed of
their Verdict? Which they answered in the Affimative, and that they found the
Prisoner Guilty.

Co^^e^l. We pray time to offer Reasons in arrest of Judgment.


Atwood. Let these Reasons be offered to morrow Morning. Court adjourned till
eleaven a Clock next Morning.


March 10th. The Commissioners met, and the Prisoner being brought to the Bar,
he offered the following Reasons, in arrest of Judgment, in (...) Viz.

Bayard. That no Overt Act, alleged in the Indictment, is proved by the Oaths
and Testimonies of two lawful Witnesses, as by the (...) of 7 W. 3. is directed.

That if the Overt Act, as alleged in the Indictment, should be admitted to be
so proved, yet neither by the Law of England, or by any legal genui^
Construction of the Act of Assembly of this Country, on which the Indictment is
grounded, any of the said Overt Acts can amount to High Treason.

That the special Commission of Oyer and Terminer (to which he humbly refers)
whereupon this Court has proceeded, is expressly limited, On the 19th of
February to enquire of whatsoever Treasons, etc. committed by the Prisoner and
john Hutchins, and on the said Day to make Enquiry upon the Premises, and all
and singular the Premises to hear and determine. Which has not been performed
accordingly; so that both the enquiry, and the hearing and determing has, and
of necessity must be after the expiration of the said Commission.

Atwood Though the Reasons offered by the Prisouer's Council, are properly and
learnedly offered, I could off hand answer and control them all, yet I will
not do it; let them be left with the Solicitor General.


And adjourned the Court until ten a Clock the next morning; which accordingly
was done.

March 11. The Commissioners met, and the Prisoner brought to the Bar. Mr.
Nicoll offered the following Reasons.

Nicoll It does not appear that any one Overt Act, alleged in the Indictment,
has been proved by the Oaths of two lawful Witnesses, as by the Statute of 7
W^. 3. ought to be done.


Atwood. The Jury are the sole Judges of the Evidence, and if there has been
any omission in that' it is now helped by the Verdict.


Nicoll. Though it is very plain to me, and I suppose to the Court, that what I
have affirmed in this matter is Truth, yet I shall (...) much insist upon it,
because, if the acts themselves should be admitted to be true, they do not fall
under any of the heads or species of Treason so made by the English Laws, or by
any Natural and Reasonable Construction of the Act of Assembly of this
Government; which being wholly matter (...) Law, I shall leave to your Honors
Consideration, and pass to the words of the Commission, which are strictly
limited to the 19th of February; so that whatsoever has been done since. ^
humbly conceive has been C^ram no^ Judice, and therefore void. To prove this,
there is the great Case between the Earl of Le^cester and Sir Christopher
H^yden in Plowdens. Reports: The Case was thus; Sir Robert D^dly was in Arms in
open Rebellion against Queen Mary, for ^etting up the Title of the Lady Jane;
he was taken Prisoner, and a Commission issued out to the Duke of Norfolk, and
diverse others, to enquire of this Treason. (...) eight of those Commissioners
an Indictment for High Treason was found against the said Sir Robert Dudly:
Afterward a Commission issued to the Lord Mayor of London, and others, to
receive an Indictment against the said Robert Dudly for High Treason, said to
be found before Fifteen Commissioners, and the same to Hear, Try and Determine.
Upon this the said Dudly was arraigned before them upon this Indictment taken
before eight; to which he pleaded Guilty, and had Judgment of High Treason.
After this an Act of Parliament was made to confirm this Attainder, and Queen
Mary by her Letters Patents granted the Lands of Dudly to Sir Christopher
Heydon. Dudly was afterward created Earl of Leicester, brings an Action of
Trespass against Sir Chr. Heydon; he pleads in Bar the whole matter before
recited, to which the Plantiff demurred. It was resolved by the Court, That the
Mayor of London, and others, proceeding upon an Indictment found before Eight,
where the Commission was to proceed on an Indictment taken before Fifteen, had
exceeded the Limits of their Commission, and all what they had done was Cor^
a^^ non Judice, and void; and that being so, the Act of Parliament did not help
it, it making no new Attaindor, and could not confirm, where there was none
before, and therefore the Plantiff had Judgment to Recover. The Argument in
this Case is strong^r, being specially limited to a Day, which the
Commissioners have exceeded.


Solicitor. A Day in Law is many times construed not according to the vulgar
ac^eptation or litteral ^ence, but according to a legal Interpretation, as
Judgments given have relation to the first day of the Term, a^^ Acts of
Parliament to the first day of the Sessions, though passed many Days or Weeks
after


Nicoll. If the Commission was in common Form, to construe it according to
usual Practice, were rational; but being wholly our of common Form, to construe
it contrary to the express plain words and against the common sense and
understanding of those words, seems highly unreasonable.


With this agrees the Judgment given in Pl^^dens Reports between Nicolls and
Nicolls, and the Rule there given by H^^pen, in these words. (...) appoint per
Commission non^ ascune poier forsque cio lim^t a (...) per Commission; Persons
appointed by Commission have no other Power but that limited to them by
Commission.

In the Execution of an ancient Office, which is by the Common Law, a man's
Actions shall be construed liberally and favorably, according to usage and
custom but the Actions of men proceeding by special Commission, shall be
construed strictly, and according to the Letter and Limitation of their
Commission.

To make any other Construction would be very inconvenient; for should it be
admitted that Persons acting by Commission, might extend their Power, limited
by their Commissions, never so little, they might by the same Rule extend their
Power ad Infinitum.

Emot. I very well remember that the Court was pleased to tell the Jury, after
they had been together some days, and not being agreed upon the Verdict, That
if they were under any Difficulty whether the Overt Acts (...) in the
Indictment, if proved, were Treason, of they found the Prisoner Guilty, he had
his Remedy by moving the Matter of Law in Arrest of Judgment.

I therefore humbly offer, in arrest of Judgment, That if the Overt Acts laid
in the Indictment were admitted to be proved, yet in point of Law they cannot
amount to High Treason, within the meaning of the Act of Assembly upon which
the Indictment is laid.

For I take it that all Acts of Parliament, and consequently Acts of Assembly,
are to be understood and taken by reasonable Construction, to be gathered and
collected out of the words of the Act only, and that according to the natural,
grammatical, plain and legal Sense thereof, without any forced Interpretation.

Then if so, this Act of Assembly both by the Title, Preamble, and the Enacting
part thereof, plainly demonstrates the meaning of the Lawmakers, and what was
thereby designed for the future to prevent. The Title of this Act is in these
words, An Act for the Quieting and Settling the Disorders that have lately
happened within this Province, and for establishing and securing their
Majesty's present Government against the like Disorders for the future. Now
what these Disorders were, we have great cause to remember, and they are very
well known to this Court to have been occasioned by some Persons setting up an
Arbitrary Power over the Kings Subjects without Authority from the Crown of
England as appears from the Preamble of the said Act, part whereof is in these
words, And whereas the late has^y and inconsiderate Violation of the good and
quiet of this Province by the seting up a Power over their Majesty's Subjects,
without Authority from the Crown of England, both vitiated and deba^^hed the
Minds of many People. etc. For the prevention whereof in time to come, Be it
exacted, etc. That whatsoever Person or Persons shall by any manner of ways, or
upon any pretense whatsoever, endeavor by fore of Arms or otherwise to disturb
the Peace, Good and Quiet of this their Majesty Government as it is now
established, shall be deemed and esteem^d as Rebels and Traitors, etc

From hence it plainly appears, that the Intention of the Lawmakers was only
to declare such Person or Persons Rebels and Traitors as should, for the future
set up a Power over his Majesty's Subjects in this Province, without Authority
from the Crown of England, which undoubtedly is Treason within the Statute of
25 Edw 3

But it can never he understood, (without the greatest of Violence to the
reasonable Construction of the said Act of Assembly, and the plain Intention of
the Makers thereof) to be construed to extend to the signing the Addresses
mentioned in the Indictment, which is the only thing the Prisoner is positively
charged withal; for all the rest are only presumtive, constructive and
accumulative Crimes drawn from thence.

But, says Mr Solicitor, the words of this Act of Assembly are in generals,
That if any Person shall endeavor by force of Arms, or Otherwise to disturb
the peace, good and quiet of the Government, shall be deemed and esteemed
Rebels and Traitors.

Now from the word [Otherwise] Mr. Solicitor would fain insinuate that the
Prisoner is within the meaning of the Act of Assembly: A very fine Explanation!
for by such a Construction as this every breach of the (...), sudden Quarrel
or small Battery shall be d^emed Treason. I shall not further add upon this
Head, but only offer my humble Opinion. That here in the Plantations we are not
capable in our Assemblies to make and declare any new Species of Treason, but
such as are comprehended in the Statute 25 ^dw 3. or some other subsequent
Statute.

(...) to the special Commission of (...) and Terminer, that it is long since
expired by its own Limitation, is very plain and self evident; for it impowers
your Honors even to meet and make enquiry as the City Hall on the 19th of
February, and upon the said Day all and singular the Premises to hear and
determine.

This indeed may be called a Special Commission, for it is not in the common
Form of Commissions of Oyer and Terminer, as our Books direct, for if we look
at the form of this Commission in the Register, or in (...) Herbert's Natar^
Brevin^^, or in the 4th part of Sir Ed^. Cook in his Institutes, they all agree
in one Form, and are very different from this Commission; for by those
Commissions, the Times and Places of their Meeting are left to the discretion
of the Commissioners, and the words are these. (...) Mandamus quod ad (...)
Di^s and Loc^* quod ves vel duo res^erm ad hoc Provideritis, Inqu^s^^tonem
illam factatis.

Yet in this special Commission both the Time and Place of your Meeting,
Enquiring, Hearing and Determining are specially limited to the 19th of
February at the City Hall of this City, and not (...). So that I am of Opinion,
that your Honors are strictly ^yed up by the words of your Commission, and
that all your Proceedings against the Prisoner since the 19th of February are
Unwarrantable, a^ being (...) Judice.

In the Case of Nicolls against N^colls in Plowd^n^, Commentaries, we see the
great Difference and Destruction that is made between Persons acting Virtute
Commissionis and Virtute (...).

1st For Persons appointed to act by special Commission only, as in this case,
they have no Authority but what is specially given them by the very words of
their Commission.

2dly But if Person^d (...) any thing by virtue of their Office, as the Chief
Justice of the Kings (...). Common Pleas, the common Law in a great measure,
explains their Authority and Power.

But, says Mr. Solicitor, a Day in Law is many times construed not according to
the litteral Sense, but according to a Legal understanding; and that a whole
Term (which con^^^^s of 28 Days, to some purposes) is but as one Day in the
Law. (...) what be infers from his I cannot see. unless he could draw this
conclusion, That it will hold, vice versa, (...) Numerical Day, as the 29th of
February, in construction of Law, is taken for 28 Days; which is a great
absurdity.

Though what already has been offered. I hope will be sufficient to stay and
arrest Judgment, yet I have several other things in behalf of the Prisoner (by
your Honors permission) to move in arrest of Judgment, and which are not
mentioned in the Reasons which were a^^igned in writing, and pray liberty to
offer them Ore^ (...).


Atwood Mr. Emot, you have liberty granted you; go on.


Emot. I thank your Honor. And the Reasons that I shall now further assign why
Judgment ought not to pass against the Prisoner, according to the Verdict of
the Jury, are these Three.

1st. That Andries Marshall, one of the Petty Jury, is an Alien, and of
Foreign Birth, born in Zeland, and (...) over into this Province in the Year
1684. and that Jac^bus Go^les, the Fo^^-man of the Jury is also an Alien, and
(...) lately sent for England to precure a De^ization.

2dly, That the Vis^e or Venne in the Precept to summon the Petty Jury, under
the hands of the Commissioners, is wrong awarded, or rather not awarded at all.

3dly, That the said Precept is not returned by the Sheriff, or any Endorsment
thereupon, and signed by him, against the known Laws of England, and more
particularly the Stat. 12 Edw. 2. cap. 5. called, The Statute of York.


Atwood. In a long Speech, said, What the Solicitor has offered is sufficient
to Overruled the Reasons exhibited in arrest of Judgment; for its evidently
proved that the Prisoner has disturbed the Peace, Good and Quiet of the
Government, as it is now established, viz.

(...). By enticing the People to sign scandalous Libells against the
Government, at the Coffee House, and at his own House, by the Oath of Peter
Od^re, telling him, it was for the good of the Country; and his bringing them
to Alder-man Hutchins's makes him equally guilty to the Soldiers signing
Complaints against their chief Officers, thereby enticing them to Mutiny; which
Soldiers are part of the seven Thousand Men ^a^^ed by Act of Parliament for
Defense of the Kingdom, which is High Treason by the Common Law, as well as by
Act of Assembly.

2dly, By the Prisoners disowning the Assembly to be lawful.

3dly, By charging the Lieut. Governor to be Bribed to pass their Acts of
Assembly.

4thly, By charging the Government to be in the hands of hot and ignorant Men.

5thly, By the Address to the Lieut. Governor, disowning and casting off the
present Authority declaring the Lord Cornbury to succeed the late Earl of
Bellomont in the Government.

I hope the Prisoner by this time is convinced of his Crime, as well as that
Clergyman who sp^ke so much in his Vindication, and that the Prisoner will now
be duly Penitent, and make a true Confession of it.


Coll. Bayard. May it please your Honor, I ever abho^'d that hanious and
abominable Crime of High Treason, as much as Death it self; I call God and my
Conscience to witness. That I am as Innocent of it as the Child Unborn: I never
spoke to any of the Soldiers to make any Complaint, or sign any Addresses, or
other Paper whatsoever. I own I was present at the Coffe-House at the signing
of an Address to the King, another to the Parliament, and another to the Lord
Cornbury; and I own that the two first eontained some Complaints of Grievances
we supposed to lie, un^er and the latter a Congratulation. I had the best
Council ^ could get for so doing, and that it was the Subjects Right to
Petition the King, by the Act of the (...) of W. and Mary; and I th^nk the
Subjects should be worse than Saves, if they shall be arraigned for
High Treason for complaining to their Prince.

I must further beg leave to say, Your Honor was much mistaken in suming up
just now what the Witnesses had Sworn; and the Jury by that Paper the Foreman
read in Court) had likewise a wrong Notion of it, which I desired then I might
Control, but your Honor overruled it; as not to be allowed after the Charge
was given. It was not proved by any of the Witnesses that the Peace of the
Government had been disturbed: None of 'em said I had enticed any Person
whatsoever to sign the Addresses; nor that I was present at the Soldiers
signing at Hutchins's, much less that I enticed them to Mutiny. I knew nothing
of their signing, I was not at the House all that time; Mr. Solicitor had Mrs
Hutchins sworn, who said the same None of 'em say, that in said Address the
Assembly was called Unlawful, but only that the Speaker wa^ an Alien; nor that
the Lieut. Governor was ^ribed, but Tempted: Nor that the Government was in
the hands of H^t and Ignorant Men, but that h^t and ignorant Men were put in
Offices, and that thereby the Government was like to be rendered Cheap and
Vile. And as for the Address to the Lieut. Governor, it was only said, We had
received advice from England that the Lord Cornbury was to succeed the Earl of
Bellomont as our Governor; which by no color (...) be construed to be a
^^sting off or disowning of the present (...). And though all had been proved
as it is not) what your Honor, as above, has been pleased to say, I humbly
conceive it cannot amount to a Misdemeanour, and much less to that heinous
Crime of High Treason.


Atwood. The Right of Petitioning the King is not in dispute, but the manner of
doing it, makes it Criminal; Neither does that Liberty extend to the Parliament.


Emot. I humbly move that we may have liberty to offer other Reasons Ore Ten^s.


Which the Court granted.

Atwood. Adjourn the Court till Fryd^^ Morning the 13^h instant.


Adjourned accordingly.

On the 12th in the Morning the Prisoner did write a Letter to Coll. De
Peyster, some of the Contents whereof were by Mr. Atwood retorted upon the
Prisoner in open Court, at the time he passed Sentence against him, for which
reason the Prisoner has permitted it to be published, and is as follows.

Coll. D' Pe^ster, Sir;
I Take leave to acquaint you, That though it has pleased God to suffer your
self, and some of your Relations to be the likely chief Instruments of the
total Destruction both of my self, and all my Family and Posterity, that yet
notwithstanding ^ have that Peace with my self, (and I can but only thank God
for his all sufficient Grace of strengt^ening me in it) that I am Reconciled to
all Mankind whatsoever, and that I hope one of my last Prayers will be, That
God out of his Infinite Mercy will graci^usly Pardon all those that have had a
hand to cut me off. Sir, believe me as you may give Credit to ^he words of a
Dying Man (since I find the Job is to be done, and that it is now past your
Power to stop the current) that shall also dye with a clear and good
Conscience, and as (...) of that horrid Crime laid to my charge as the Child
yet unborn. And therefore I hope Gods Merciful Hand, who has never left nor
fortaken me, will continue to support me to the very last, and that I may look
Death in the face as a good Christian ought to do, humbly submitting my all to
his most Wise, most Just and most Merciful Dispensations; for I am sensible
there is no more than one Death for me, and that in all probability,
considering my Age, it might have been very soon, though this Tribulation had
not befallen me. I shall only add, that I hope in Gods Mercy for the Pardon of
all my manifold Sins and Transgressions, through the only Merits of my Savior
Jesus Christ, and that when I shall be no more, he will continue his Grace to
my dear Wife, and my Posterity: And lastly, That my Blood, which is struck at
(by your Brother's own expressions to my self, and your Brother in Laws to
others, both not long since) may be the last to be spilt on account of our
dismal and unhappy Divisions, though (...) out of my Ashes such further
Calamities may arise to this poor (...) Province, that Posterity will have
cause long to lament; for it is not to (...) expected that all the Plots.
Contrivances and Intreagues used in this (...), (many of which I assure you are
already discovered) will have (...) with my self. ^t had been more pardonable
to have st^b'd me in my sleep, or with Jo^^'s hand, under a pretense of
Friendship, than to do it with Ahab under a color and cloak of Justice, and of
the two, I leave others to consider if this latter exceeds not the former,
since its (...) to be suppose^, that Ahab's was so much out of Mali^^, but the
V^^yard being (...) him on his offering the worth of it in Money, occasioned
^he innocent to be arraigned and slain for a pr^^^ded Crime of Blasph^^y (...)
High Treason.

Sir. These above Lines are the sincerity of my Thoughts this Morning, assuring
you, that I never had a thought before late this Night to (...) your self one
wo^d about this Subject, ^o altogether unknown to all Mankind whatsoever, no^
don't intend them any further; wherefore I desire you will make such use of them,
for your own consideration, as God may direct you. I am, Sir, Your humble
Servant,

N. BAYARD.


March the 13th. The Court being met, according to adjournment, the Prisoner
being brought up, moved, That forasmuch as Mr. Nicoll was out of Town, by
reason of the Indisposition of his Family, another Council might be assigned in
his stead. Which was granted, and the Court adjourned till Monday the 16th
instant, at nine a Clock.

March 16. Before the sitting of the Court the Prisoner sent a Position to Mr.
Atwood, and the rest of the Commissioners, viz.

To the Honorable W. Atwood, Esquire Abra. D' Peyster, Esquire and Robert Walters, Esquire
Judges of this Special Court. The humble Petition of Nicholas Bayard
Shows,
THat your Petitioner being altogether ^^^quainted what is pactic^ble and
allowable in Law to be offered in arrest of Judgment, (...) since your
Petitioners Life, and all what is near and (...) unto him is concerned, he
humbly craves leave (beside the Reasons already offered by your Petitioner's
Council in arrest o^ Judgment) today before your Honors and to pray your
Honors favorable consideration thereupon

First. That the Verdict of the Grand Inquest was not sufficiently found by any
Twelve of that Inquest, as in his former Petition is set forth.

Secondly, That the Petty Jury (in a manner) forced upon your Petitioner, were
all of them Parties concerned against your Petitioner in the very matter he was
Tried, for on account of the unhappy Divisions within this Province; all of 'em
extreme ignorant of the English, (...), to that degree that scarcely one of
them is able to say the Lords Pra^er in the English Tongue, and muchless to
compreheed the matters of Law, and what has been offered in behalf of your
Petitioner at this Trial.

Thirdly, That all what has been Sworn against your Petitioner, was, 1st. That
the Petitioners Name was seen to the Address to the Lord Cornbury, but that
they knew not whether it was hi^ hand writing. 2dly, That the Petitioner had
been present at the Coffee-House, and at his own House when the Addresses to
the King, and another to the Parliament, and another to the Lord Cornbury were
signed by several of the Freeholders, Freemen and Inhabitants of this City,
but that he had desired none of them to sign the same. 3dly That the Petitioner
had brought some Papers, supposed to ^e said Addresses, to the House of
Alder-man Hutchins. 4thly. That the Address to the Lord Cornbury contained only
a Cong^atulation at his safe arrival, and a hearty desire, that with it all our
Divisions mi^h. be healed, and that the very Name of Party and ^action might
vanish and be extinguish'^; and that in the two former, or in one of them,
either to the King or Parliament, some Complaints were made of Gr^evances
without ^emembring the particulars; only (...) Clow^ wore, That to (...)
rem^mbrance, in both, or in one of the Addresses to the King or (...)
Parliament, mention was made. That some of the H^t^st and Ignorantest of the
People were put in Offices; That the Speaker of the Assembly was c^a^lenged to
be an Alien; That the said Assembly had given a Gift to the Lieut. Governor to
temp^ him to pass their Acts, and another to the Judge; and that thereby his
Majesty's Government was like to be rendered V^^^ and Cheap in the eyes of the
People. And Swore further, That in none of them any Reflections were made (as
he conceived) to the prejudice of the lieu^. Governor; and that in none of
them the words Unlawful or Oppression were mentioned.

Fourthly, That all the rest of the Evidences swore nothing (against your
Petitioner) but that they had signed the Addresses at Alder-man Hutchins's,
That two or three of the Soldiers had a Glass of Wine given them, but not for
signing it being Christmas ^ime; and that some of them expected to be made free
of the City, but not of the Garrison.

(...) it please your Honors, Your Petitioner finds, by the Notes himself has
taken at his Trial, that nothing more has been sworn against him; whereupon the
Jury being ignorant People, found him guilty, because some part of the
Indictment was proved, as to the signing of said Addresses and what the
Contents of them were only by the Oath of one Witness.

Your Petitioner therefore humbly prays, That your Honors will be pleased to
take the Premises into your serious Consideration, whether by the Laws of
England or this Province, it can ^^bount to the Crime of High Treason what has
been sworn against him, as above expressed. And if not that our Honors will
favorably order an arrest of Judgment, for the Reasons above mentioned and
what has been already offered to your Honor by the Petitioners Council. And as
in Duty (...), etc.

N. BAYARD.

The Court being met, the Prisoner was brought to the Bar, and the Petition
last mentioned read.

Atwood. Mr. Emot, we are ready to hear the Arguments you have to offer for the
last three Reasons you have assigned in arrest of Judgment.


Emot. I am ready, and shall begin the first. (...). Andre^s (...) one of the
Petty Jury, is an Alien; we have two Evidences to prove the same. And --


Atwood. We cannot admit you any such Proo^, for though this might have been a
good exception for cause before he or they had be sworn, but now its too late;
therefore go on to the next.


Emot. This seems very hard, for we ought to have been tried by the the Kings
lawful Liege People, and we apprehend these (...) not such, but we came not to
the knowledge of this till after the Trya^.


Atwood. Pray, Mr. Emot, delay the Court no longer, but proceed to the second
Reason assigned.


Emot. The 2d Reason is, that the Vi^^s or Ven^e in the (...) to summon the
Petty Jury, is wrong awarded, or rather not awarded (...). Our happy
Constitution of Government is, That all Trials of this Nature must be by the
Verdict of Twelve Men, and that as near as may be of the Neighborhood where
the fact arises, or is alleged to arise in the Indicment. Yet ^^vertheless
the Precept t^ summon the Jury, we find, is directed to the Sheriff to return
Eighty Men of his ^ailwick, where is he is Sheriff as well of the County of
New York, as of the City; and at the same time, the Matters of Fact alleged in
the Indictment are said to be committed in the Dock and East Ward of this City.
So that this is a M^s-Tryal, upon which no Judgment can be given. And of this
we have a multitude ^o A^^^o^ition in our Books; and first, (...) Arundals
case, Co^ Re^o 6 books, p. 378 It was for the Mu^ther of one (...); and the
Case was thus: The M^rther was alleged to be done at the City of Westmin^ter
in a certain (...) there, called Kings-street, in the Parish of St. Marg^^^.
For he (...) of the Issue a Jury was returned (...) Westminster Arn^d^l being found
guilty, moves in arrest of Judgment, assigning for cause, (...) the Jury ought
to have been out of the Parish of St. Mar^^r^^, and not in g^^eral, out of the
Neighborhood of the City of Westmin^ter: And it was adjudged a Mis-Tryal, and
the Verdict was set-side and the I (...), was done upon a special Consult of
the Judges at (...).

So that we see how (...) the Laws of England a^e, and the Judges thereof, that
all Trials of this Nature shall (...) the Ven^^ ^n that the Jury shall be
summoned from the Neighborhood where he (...), And the reason thereof is
grounded upon this Supposition and Presump^^^, That the Neighborhood are the
best and must proper (...) Ma^ers of Fact; for indeed its the Rule in the Law,
That Vicinas (...) vicin^ presumitur s^^re.

But let me observe to your Honors. That our ease at the Far is much more
uncertain, as to the awarding of the Venire sa^^as or (...) ^ummon the Jury;
for the fact is alleged to be done at the Dock and ^a^t Ward of this City, and
Issue joined thereupon. Yet the ^recep is directed to the Sheriff to Summon the
Jury of his Ba^lwick, which, as I said before, contains both the City and
County of New York, and without mentioning any Neighborhood, and therefore may
come out of the County, as well as from the ^ity; and therefore of necessity
must be esteemed a Mis-Tryal.

To this it may be objected, by such as are ignorant of our Laws, That
notwithstanding the (...) was summoned from the Neighborhood of the City of
New York (...) not from the County; for that they know the Persons to be such
But this not appearing to be so upon Record, avails nothing; for the Rule of
the Law is, What appears not, is not Existentibus and non apparentibus cadem
est ratio.

Crooks Rep. In London, the Parish and Wa^d is mentioned and therefore it was
adjudged, That it was not good to allege any thing done generally in London,
but it must be laid to be done in some Parish, from which a Venue may be
awarded.

In Crooks (...). p. 39^. T^eat against West^ome. In this case a Venire fa^ was
awarded from ^. and not de Vicineto de ^. Resolved to be ill, and not
am^^dable. Yet in this Precept the Visire is not so much as a Ward of the City
of New York, nor of any other Neighborhood whatsoever, but in general from his
Bailwick. So that I humbly pray, that for this Reason the Jury's Verdict may be
set aside, this being a Mir^ T^yal, upon which no Judgment can be entered. And
shall proceed to the Third Reason assigned.

^ That the Precept to summon the Jury is not returned by the Sheriff, of any
Endorsement thereupon, and signed by him, against the known a Laws of England,
and more particularly the Stat. 12 Edw. 2 cap 5. This Statute enjoynes that the
Sheriff shall put his Name to every Return made by him, so that the Court may
know of whom they took such Return, if need be. And I shall endeavor to prove
from sundry adjudged cases, since the making of this Stature, That this Precept
to summon (...) not being endorsed (...) the Sheriff, the (...), and not
amendable.

The Case of (...) with against Sir Stephen Proctor, in C^ (...) p. 188. Sir
Stephen Proctor moved in arrest or Judgment, for that the (...) of the Sheriff
was not endorsed upon the Writ of (...) with (...); and it was ruled, That the
Trial was ill, and not amendable by any (...) Statutes of J^^^als For says the
Judges its all one with the care of a Ve^ire facias, where the Name of the
sheriff is not thereto; which (...) ^^equently overruled, as being no Return
not helped by any Statute of (...). For the Stat. 18 Eliz. as I shall show
hereafter from adjudged Cases, and from the best Authorities in Law, does only
help imperfect and insufficient Returns, and that only in cases civil between
party and party; but here is no Return at all.

In Ronsands Case in Lord C^^ Rep. 5 Book, p. 41 in Ejectment upon a Verdict
for the Plaintiff the Defendant moved in arrest Judgment, for the Venire facias
was not returned or endorsed by the Sheriff though the Postea made mention that
the Jury was returned per Mandatum Justic^^rum. Yet in this case it was ruled,
That that would nor help it: for the Judges ^^, That where there is no Return,
it cannot be helped by the Statute 18 ^l^z. or any other of the Statutes of
Jeofals; for that Statute only helps in imperfect and insufficient Returns, and
such as want form, and not such as are not returned at all.

Again, in Sir Arthur Blackmores Case in said Book, Cov. Rep. p. 162 in this
case it was adjudged that Stat. 28 Eliz. does not help a Trial where no Return
is made upon the Writ of Venire ^^ as was formerly, say they, adjudged in
Rowlands case before cited. And our Books are full of Authorities of this
Nature, but shall not give you the trouble to mention any more.


Solicitor. Mr. Emot, These Authorities which you have here cited, its true,
are grounded upon the Statute which you have mentioned of 12 Ed 2. but this
Statute has only relation to Writs, and in this case the Sheriff summoned the
Jury not by virtue of a Writ, but a Precept under the hands of the
Commissioners, which differs the case.


Emot Mr. Solicitor, Then you say that the case at the Bar is not within the
^ords of this Stat. 12 Ed 2 for that this is a Precept to summon the Jury, and
not a Writ, and to consequently the Sheriff not obliged to sign and return the
same. A very wise Distinction.

However, I shall endeavor to show, that this Precept is within the Reason and
Equity of the Statute, and that the same ought to be returned and signed by the
Sheriff In order thereto I shall put this Court in mind, how Statutes have from
time to time been taken by Equity in diverse manners, that those things which
are alike in Reason, are alike in Law; and that where an Act of Parliament has
been made to remedy some Mischiefs, that the same has been extended to other
things in like Degree, and that even in Penal Law. As for Example:

Stat. of Gloucester. cap. 5 By this Statute, an Action of Waste is given
against one who holds for years; yet by the Equity of this Statute, a man shall
have an ^ction against him who holds but for half a year, notwithstanding the
Act be Penal.

Westminster 2. cap. 3. This Statute gives an Action of cui in vita, after the
Coverture disselved by Death, Yet if the Coverture be dissolved by Divorce; the
Wife shall have, by the equity of this Statute, a Writ of cut (...)

And lastly, the Stat. 25 Edw. 3. de proditionibus, This Statute expressly
says, That no case shall be taken by equity unless it be adjudged in
^arliament; and yet by the equity of the words of that Statute, which are, If
the Servant kill the Master, it is taken, If the ^^a^d kill the Mastress, That
this is Petty Treason.

So that from hence I am humbly of Opinion, That we are fairly within the
Equity of this Stat. 12 Edw. 2. Besides, a Writ and Precept in this Case are
only S^nonimous Terms, and signify one and the same thing.


These Reasons were Overruled.

And the Court ordered the Sheriff to make a Return upon the Precept to summon
the Jury, conform to the above Stat. 12 Edw. 2. which the Court said they had
power to do, and to help that Defect.

Emot. I find your Honor has Overruled all the Reasons that we have offered
in arrest of Judgment, in behalf of the Prisoner Coll Bayard, why Judgment
ought not to pass against him, according to the Verdict of the Jury; but have
not as yet observed that either Coll. D' Peyster or Capt. Walters have given
their Opinion to all or any of the Reasons we have offered. I humbly therefore
pray, that we may have their Opinion, so that we may know by what hands we fall.


Atwood. Mr. Emot, You which have been assigned Coun^el for the Prisoner, have
hitherto, in all the Course of the Trial, carried your selves li^e Men of your
own Profession, you must not now therefore begin to menace the Court. You shall
have the Opinion of the rest of the Commissioners.


Whereupon Mr. Atwood turning himself to them, and whispering them, they
severally did declare, That they were of Opinion with Justice Atwood, In that
the Reasons offered were not sufficient to arrest the Judgment.

Atwood. Coll. Bayard, have you any thing to say why Sentence should not pass
against you?


Prisoner. I have nothing more to offer than what my Council have offered, and
what is contained in my last Petition.


Atwood. I am sorry to find you so Impenitent of your Crime, which is so ^eino^
and Abominable in the sight of God and Man. You have lately made Reflections
upon the Proceedings of this Court against you as if it had been a design to do
the Job, comparing your Case to that of Naboth's Vineyard. But I hope God will
open your Eye, that you may be convinced, and Repent of the Crime.


Then Pronounced Sentences in those words,

It is considered by the Court here, That you be carried to the Place from
whence you came, That from thence you be drawn upon a ^urdle to the place of
Execution, Tha^ there you be Hanged by the Neck, and being alive, you be cut
down upon the Earth; and that your Bowels be taken out of your Belly, and your
Privy Members be cut off, and you being alive, they be burnt before your face;
and that your Head be cut off, and that your Body be divided into four
Quarters, and that the Head and Quarters be placed where our Lord the King
shall assign. And the Lord have Mercy upon your Soul.

Prisoner. I desire to know whether I may have leave to answer to your Honor's
Speech made before Sentence?


Atwood. No.


Prisoner. Then Gods Will be done.


The Prisoner was Remanded.

FINIS.

