THE EXCELLENCY OF A Public SPIRIT Discoursed: In a SERMON, Preached in the
Audience of the General Assembly of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England, May 27. 1702. Being the day for Election of Counselors in that
Province.

By Increase Mather.

Psalm 119 46 I will speak of thy Testimonies before Kings, and will not be
ashamed.

Deesse patriae quoad vita suppetat turpe est, sed Camillo, nefas est.

BOSTON in NEW ENGLAND: Printed by B Green, and J Allen, for Nicholas Boon,
near the Old Meeting House. 1702.

The Epistle Dedicatory. To His EXCELLENCY, Joseph Dudley, Esqr. Captain
General and Governor in Chief of the Province of Massachusetts Bay in
New England.
SIR,
WHen I was by the Representatives of this Province in the last General
Assembly desired to Preach on the Day S^ated for the Election of Counselors,
it was hoped that your Excellency might have been with us before that time.
Since you could not hear, I am willing you should see (if you shall think it
worth your Perusal) what I then delivered, not doubting but that you will Seek
the Wealth of your People, who are dear to Christ, and by the Letters you were
pleased to send to me when in England, I perceive that they are so to you.

In the first place I Congratulate your safe Arival to your Country, and to
your Desirable Relations, after so long an absence. A mercy which doubtless you
have Prayed to God for many an hundred time. Now then let your Excellency give
me leave to speak freely to you, and to say, That our Holy Lord Jesus Christ
expects much from you. For He has trusted you with Five Talents, for every one
of which you know Sir, that you must be accountable to Him who has given them
to you. He has blessed you with rare accomplishments both natural and acquired;
and has now put into your hands a Talent of Power and Authority, as that there
is no Person in all New England, so advantaged to Serve and Honor Christ, by
promoting the Welfare of these His Churches, as you are. The Providence of God
has been wonderful toward you* In some Remarkables you have been like Joseph.
Let me pray you to imitate Joseph, not only in Seeking the good of th^se under
your Government, as He did; but in a perfect forgetting whatever may have
seemed grievous unto you. Nor do I speak this, as i^ I believed you needed an
Exci^ation thereunto. You have (I am well assured) that Greatness of Soul in
you, as to disdain any thought of revenge. If a Noble Roman when advanced to
great Honor could say to his mortal Enemy, jam Evasisti, how much more does
such a greatness and generosity of Spirit become a Christian?

Your Honorable Father (whose Memory is blessed) has a lasting Monument
Erected for him in New-Englands Memorial; wherein it is truly affirmed of Him,
that He was a principal Founder and Pillar of the Colony of the Massachusetts,
and that He was a Nursing Father to these Churches of Christ; one that loved
the true Christian Religion, and the pure Worship of God, and Cherished as in
his Bosom all Godly Ministers and Christians. He was exact in the practice of
Piety, in his Person and Family all his life. He lived desired and dyed
lamented by all Good men. This and more is spoken concerning Him in the Book
mentioned. And a great deal more might be, and is related of his Exemplary
Piety in the Church History of New England, newly Printed at London.

Now Sir, since I know not what better wish to conclude with, I earnestly pray
to God, that you may be such a Governor to this people as your Eminent Father
was in the former Generation. So I (...),

Boston, June 24 1702. Sir, your Humble Servant, Increase Mather.

To the HONORED Representatives of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in
New England, Now in General Court Assembled.
Much Honored,
AS it was at your desire that I have Published the Sermon preached on this
last Election Day. So that you and others may see that I am not alone in the
Advice that has been set before you, Respecting the Recommendation, of the
Order of the Gospel, professed and practiced in these Churches, as declared in
our Platform of Church Discipline, which is that whereby New England has been
distinguished from all other Plantations, and that so every word may be
Established by two witnesses, I am willing to reinforce it with some passages,
which I find in a large Letter sent to the Representatives, in a former General
Assembly* by that Reverend man of God Mr. Higginson, who is the most aged
Minister of Christ surviving among us.

For when the two most aged Ministers in the Country, left in the Hands of the
Churches not long since a Testimony wherein were these words.

Concerning all sinful attempts to overturn the Order of the Gospel hitherto
upheld in the Churches of New England, and to spoil that Glorious Work of God
which we have seen Him doing with a Series of Remarkable Providence, in
Erecting such Congregational Churches, we would now bear our Testimony, That
they are doubtless displeasing to our Lord Jesus Christ, who Walks in the midst
of these Golden Candlesticks, and they will prove bitterness in the latter end.

The Representatives of the General Assembly then Sitting did express so much
concern for the Churches, as to Vote their Thanks should be rendered unto those
Reverend Persons for this their faithful Testimony. At which time also one of
them, (namely Mr. Higginson) did in a Letter, all drawn up with his own hand
recommend that matter which is in the Sermon emitted here with again proposed.
In which Letter are the following words.

I look upon it as my Duty, in a few Lines (that may not be mistaken) to
Declare unto your selves, That I did and do own that Testimony [ above
mentioned] as my own Act and Deed, and also to give an Account of my Reasons
for my so doing.

First, Because I desire to be found among the number of the Witnesses of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who said of Himself, Joh. 18 37. For this end was I born,
and for this cause came I into the world, that I might bear witness to the
truth, and Act. 1.8. Ye shall be witnesses unto me. Now I believe with my
heart, and do confess with my mouth; That the Platform of Discipline ( for the
substance, end and scope thereof) does contain such a part of the Truth of
Christ relating to his Kingdom, and the Order of His Churches that I dare not
but bear witness unto it, and against any that shall Rise up in opposition
thereunto.

Secondly, Because I desire to be found amongst the Number of the Followers of
those Holy men of God who composed it, who were our Fathers and Elders, and who
lived and dyed in the practice of the same Truth, and who yet speak to us from
the Dead, Be you Followers of us, as we followed Christ. 1 Cor. 11.1.

Now for a Conclusion (says he) Give me leave I beseech you to propound it to
your Serious Consideration, whether your selves as Representatives of the
Country, in this Hour of Temptation, be not called of God to give forth your
own Testimony to the Platform of Discipline, and against such Innovations as
begin to appear in New England now in these Days: ^n doing of which, you will
be followers of the General Courts that have been before you, from the
Beginning When the Platform of Discipline was first published by the Synod in
the year 1648. It was solemnly owned by the General Court, who added their
Attestation to it, and recommended it to all the Churches as agreeable to the
Word of God, and as a Directory of our Profession and Practice in point of
Church Order. If some such thing should be done at this Court, you will approve
your selves Followers of the General Courts that have gone before you, and that
you mind the things of Christ, as well as your own things of a civil nature, I
am persuaded it will be a Service acceptable to God, honorable to your selves,
and a matter of joy to all the good people of the Land and a good Example to
Posterity for all, time to come. Consider whether it may not be very useful, if
not needful at this juncture of time for the Honorable Court to Order the
Reprinting and Publishing the Platform o^ Discipline, with the General Courts
Attestation to it at the first, and your own Attestation to it now. Thus that
Reverend Person.

I cannot but rejoice in that he has left such a Faithful Testimony now when he
is just going to a better World, by which being Dead he will yet speak. I
likewise rejoice in that a whole Association of Faithful Ministers of the Lord
have lately agreed to Encourage the Republication of the Platform of Church
Discipline, as also the Result of our other Synods.

It is much more a matter of joy, that God has inclined your hearts who are the
Representatives of this Province with a great Unanimity to concur in Voting the
Reprinting of those Synods. I hope it is a token for good, and a sign that the
Lord will not destroy New England, neither cast them from His presence as yet*
2 King. 13 23. Our Fathers were not ashamed to own their Religion. The General
Court of this Colony in the year 1660. Concurred in an Address to K. Charles
II. In which they declare the Reasons of their coming into this Wilderness, and
that it was purely with respect to the Order of the Gospel. It will be good for
us to be Established in the present Truth; and that Posterity should see that
what their Fathers did profess and practice, was according to the Scriptures.
We know not what hours of Temptation may overtake us, or those that shall come
after us.

The never enough lamented Death of our late King of glorious memory, has made
way for great calamities to break in upon the Protestant Churches. If they are
in a flame, will not some of those sparks fly over to New England? New England
could not have lost a greater friend. How often have I heard very kind
expressions respecting His Subjects in New England proceed out of that Royal
mouth, which I cannot now think of without bleeding sorrow. It was doubtless
from a singular favor which His Majesty had for His Subjects in this Province,
that He was graciously pleased to Commission one whose Birth and Education has
been amonst us, and whose Honorable Father many years since Sustained the like
Relation, to be our Governor.

We have great cause to acknowledge the Royal favor of Her present Majesty,
Queen Anne in Renewing a Commission for the Government of this Province to be
continued in the same hand in which His late Majesty had left it. And it is
matter of great Thankfulness to God that there is now on the Throne a
Protestant Princess, who has Emitted a Proclamation against Immorality and
Irreligion, and has showed a singular tenderness to Her Subjects, though
differing in their sentiments as to circumstantials in Religion. A Queen on the
English Throne was an happy instrument of bringing down the pond Spaniard. May
Her present Britanick Majesty humble the pride of France, all Europe will have
cause of joy.

As for what concerns this poor Country: If the King of Heaven will take us
under His Divine Protection* we need not fear though the wa^ers be troubled, and
the mountains shake with the swelli^g thereof. The way to engage him to be for
us, is not to desert His Cause* or to be either ashamed or afraid in the most
public manner to assert His Truth, but rather to do as those who have g^ne
before us have done, esp^cially those who have taught us the Word of God, whose
Faith we ought to follow. So may we hope that the God of our Fathers will be
with us as he was (...) them. Which is the Prayer of him who*

Boston June, 18. 1702. Yours to Serve you in the Lord Increase Mather.

THE Public Spirited Man.
Esther X.3. -- Seeking the Wealth (...) his People, --


COncerning the Penm^^ of this portion of Scripture, there are Various
Conjectures. It is gene^ally thought that it was written ^y Modecai. Only Philo
Iudaeus tells us that Ioa^him a Son of the high Priest wrote this book at the
desire of Mordecai. It is not necessary for us to know who was the Author, as
long as we know that whoever it were, he was divinely and so infallibly
inspired in what he delivered unto us. The Church of the old Testament to whom
were committed the Oracles of God, did with great care preserve them. And with
them this book was not only esteemed as Sacred, but they had a more then
ordinary veneration for it. It is (as indeed the greatest part of the Scripture
is) Historical. We have therein an account of as great a distress, and as
wonderful a deliverance of the Church of God, as ever happened in any age of the
World; which came to pass in the days of Ahasuerus one of the Kings of Persia:
but which of those Kings is controverted: Ahasureus is a Persian word,
signifying one that has Majesty. The dignity of the person is signified
thereby, but it is not a proper name to distinguish one man from another. As
Pharaoh was a common name to all the Kings of Egypt, and Caesar to the Roman
Emperors, so was Ahasuerus to the Kings of the Medes; and of such Persian Kings
as were of the Median blood. But there are chiefly two persons concerned in the
History of this Book, who were near Relations, both of them good, and at last
great ones. One was Esther made a Queen of Persia, who was born for the welfare
of her People. The Jews therefore call this Book Megillath Esther, the Volumn
of Esther, because she is the principal person spoken of in it. The other great
and good person treated of therein is Mordecai the Jew. Of whom three
particulars are noted in this verse. (1) His advancement, He was next unto the
King. i. e. next in Power and Authority. He was under the King the chief Ruler.
(2) Here is noted the Esteem which he had with them that were both his own and
also the Lords people: He was great among them, i. e greatly esteemed and
honored by them. And accepted of the Multitude of his brethren. Commonly if a
man is advanced he is envied of his brethren It was not so with him; his
brethren rejoiced at his prosperity. (3) We have his behavior under his
Advancement, in the words before us to insist on. He did as became one in so
public a station. He showed that he was a man of a Public Spirit. The
providence of God put into his hand a great opportunity to advantage himself,
as to his own secular Interests, but his heart was rather set upon promoting
the welfare of his people. He sought good for them, as the Original carries it.
i. e. He endeavored both by word and deeds to promove those things which would
be for their good. And this is written in the Book of God to the everlasting
renown of Mordecai, and for the instruction of others that shall read or hear
of it.

The Doctrine which the words afford unto us, is,

That as Rulers ought to be of a Public Spirit, Seeking the Welfare of their
People, so when they are such, it will be to their lasting Renown

The Doctrine before us may be confirmed in three Propositions.

PROP. I. Men ought to be of Public Spirits* I^ it true (as in the next
Proposition we shall show) such a Spirit is a Grace requisite in some men above
others. Nevertheless, it is that which every man should have. This is an All
concerning Truth. The Commandment which says, Love thy Neighbor as thy self,
enjoins this on every man. Therefore dos the Scripture say, 1 Cor. 10 24 Let no
man seek his own, that is to say, not that only, but every man's another wealth
So then every man ought to be of a Public Spirit. No man may be, and no good
man is under the d^minion of Cains Spirit, who said, Am I my brothers keeper?
Yes. Every man should be concerned for his brothers preservation and prosperity.

This will appear if we consider what things are implied in a Public Spirit.

1. Men ought to be affected with other men's Condition, and especially with
Public concerns as if ^hey were their own. That's one thing employed in a
Public Spirit. Where there is such a spirit, there is a sympath^zing with
others: and that ought to be. Romans 12 15 R^joyce with them that rejoice, and
weep with them that weep. The contrary to this argues a private, s^^fish
spirit. When if a man is in prosperity himself, he cares not who is in misery:
If he has plenty he cares not who has poverty. The holy Apostle was of another
spirit, 2 Cor. 11 29 Who is weak, and I am not week? who is offended, and I
burn not. Especially we should be concerned for the Public Interest. Ier. 22
10 Weep ye not for the dead, but weep for him that goes away, for he shall
return no more, nor see his native Country. That is, don't weep so much for the
loss of your particular friends, as for the Public Calamity which is coming on
the Nation: In this did our Savior Christ give the greatest Instance of a
public Spirit: He showed more concernedness for the misery of others, than for
his own particular sorrows, though they were greater than ever any man's, when
he said to the daughters of Jerusalem, Weep not for me, but weep for your
selves and for your Children, Luk 23.28. And when he considered what was coming
on that City, He wept over it, because they knew not the things that concerned
their peace, Luke 19 41. Most of all the concernments of the Church of God
should ly near to our hearts. Vriah showed that a pious and public Spirit
ruled in him, when he had more regard to the condition of the Lords People, and
of the Ark of God, than to his own domestic concerns. So Nehemiah was much
affected and affl^cted when he heard that in Jerusalem they were in great
distress. And the holy Penman of the 137. Psalm, preferred Jerusalem above his
chiefest joy.

2. Men ought to, and a Public Spirited man will, not only desire but
Endeavor the welfare of others, especially of the Public Interest. This also
is employed in Seeking. Mordecai sought the wealth of his people, that is to
say, he endeavored all that was in him to promote the^r welfare. The like is
spoken concerning Ne^emiah the Governor of Judea, when that (...) was made a
Province, and a Governor set ^ver them by the King He was a man that sought
the welfare of the Children of Israel, Neh 2 10. He endeavored it with all his
might. Saying and wishing without real endeavors and deeds, is not seeking. If
a man sees his brother naked or destitute of daily food, and shall say to him,
be thou warmed, and filled, but shall do nothing for him, what dos it profit,
Iam 2.15, 16. So if a man shall pretend that he wishes well to the public
Interest, but dos no way endeavor the promotion of it, he is not a true seeker
of it. A Public Spirited man will improve whatever Interest he has in
endeavors to promote the public good. He will improve what Interest he has in
Heaven for that end, by praying, and stirring up others to pray. By this did
Abraham show a public Spirit, in his Intercessions with God for his perishing
Neighbors. So did Moses, and Aaron, and Samuel, and all the holy Prophets and
the godly Kings of Judah, by fervent prayers to God endeavor the welfare of
their people. Or, if he has a great Interest with men on earth, he that is of a
public Spirit, will improve it for the benefit of others and not of himself
only; especially if he has a singular interest in great ones, in whose power it
is to promote the welfare of many. The Prophet Elisha b^ this manifested his
readiness to endeavor ano^hers welfare. He said to one, 2 K^^g 4 13. What is
to be done for thee, woul^st thou be spoken for ^o the King. Thus did Esther
show a public spirit in requesting the King in whose heart she had the
greatest interest, to be kind to her people. So Mordecai in this way sought the
wealth of his people; it is therefore said in the next words, that he did speak
peace to all his Seed. When any of them resorted to him, notwithstanding his
advancement, he received them with much courtesy and kindness; but the words
may be read thus, Seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace for his
Seed, that is for his Country men who were of the same blood with him. Then the
meaning of the words is, that he improved his interest in the King and Court of
Persia for the good of those that were both his and the Lords people. It is
noted in the first verse of this Chapter, that the King laid a Tribute on all
his Subjects, both on the Continent and in the Islands; which probably was by
the advice of Mordecai: only some Writers have said, that Mordecai prevailed
with the King not to impose that Tribute on his Jewish Subjects.

3 Every man ought to, and one of a Public Spirit will deny himself out of
respect to the good of others Such an one will deny himself as to his worldly
interests, provided he may thereby promove the welfare of his people. Such a
Spirit there was in the Holy Apostle when he said, I seek not yours but you,
and I will gladly spend and be spent for you. 2 Cor. 12* 14 15. The like Spirit
was in the forementioned Governor Nehemiah: He might have exacted Money and
Corn of the poor people: Other Governors that had been before him did so; but
he did not eat the bread of the Governor, that is, did not require that
maintainace which as a Governor was due to him; but considering the poverty of
the Country, and that he had an honorable Salary from the King who gave him
his Commission* He was not willing to be chargeable to the people. Neh. 5 10,
14, 15 One that is of a Public Spirit will deny himself as to Honor and
Reputation in the World, in case He may thereby be the more instrumental in
doing good. Thus Moses out of regard to the people of God denied himself of the
honor of a Kingdom. Heb 11 24 He refused to be called the Son of Pharaohs
Daughter: Historians tell us, that that Daughter of Pharaoh was the Heiress of
the Crown, the then King of Egypt^ only Child So that Moses by being adopted by
her, b^came Heir apparent of the Crown of Egypt: This Glory He refused when the
accepting of it was attended with such si^s and snares as would have rendered
him incapable of being serviceable to the Lords people, with whom he was
willing to take his lo^t whether in prosperity or in adversity. The grace of a
Public Spirit where it prevails, will make a man prefer the w^alth of his
people above that of his own person or Family* This we see in Gideon, who when
the men of Israel said to him. Rule thou over us, and thy Son, and thy Sons Son
also, for thou have delivered us from the hand of Median; H^ made a most
self-denying and religious repl^ to them, saying, I will not rule over you, nor
shall my Son rule over you: The Lord shall rule over you Judge 8* 22, 23 We have
another great instance of such a Public Spirit in David, who when he saw the
destroying Angel standing over Jerusalem with a drawn Sword in his hand, said
unto God, Let thy hand I pray thee, O Lord my God, be on me and on my Fathers
house, but not on thy people that they should be plagued 1 Chronicles. 21.17. Thus
did he prefer the ^nterest of his people, especially considering that they were
the people of God, above that of his own person or Family.

4 The man that is of a Public Spirit will hazard himself for the Public
Interest He will not only deny himself, but i^ called thereto, will encounter
the greatest difficulties and dangers for the Publicks sake: Yea, he will not
refuse to hazard his life for it. Thus did Gideon: His Son did Justice for his
injured Father in declaring it. Judge. 9 17. My Father adventured his life far,
and delivered you out of the hand of Midian. The like to this is noted
concerning the Governors of Israel in the time of the Judges, as we see, Judge
5 9. My heart is toward the Governors of Israel that offered themselves
willingly among the people. It was though a lawful, a very dangerous attempt
which the people did engage in to make a Revolution, when they were in the
hands of a powerful Tyrant. The Governors, that is to say, the Chief men
amongst them did willingly hazard themselves with their meaner brethren for the
common safety of them all. Thus also did the Tribes of Zebulun and Naphtali
discover a public Spirit. Verse 18. They jeoparded their lives to the death in
the high places of the Field. That they did to save their Country from ruin:
Such a spirit there was in Aquila and Priscilla; The Apostle speaks thus
concerning them, Rom 16.4 Who have for my life laid down their own necks unto
whom not only I give thanks, but also all the Churches of the Gentiles. They
considered that the Welfare of many Churches was concerned in the preservation
of Paul's life, and were therefore willing to h^z^rd their own lives to save his
We have also an illustrious instance of this in Queen Esther; she had reason to
think that the King had conceived some displeasure against her, considering
that he had taken no notice of her for the space of thirty days past; she knew
what had befallen Vasti the former Queen upon an light displeasure of the King:
She likewise knew that if she appeared at Court execept the King should happen
to hold out the golden Sc^pter, she must ^y; so that she run a desperate hazard
to save her people, but was willing to perish rather than they should perish.
This brings to mind what is reported concerning a Royal Lady in France, who was
Daughter to King Lewis 12 She had under her protection diverse Protestants who
were in the same Castle with her. The Duke of Guise sent a Company of Soldiers
to demand the Protestants to be delivered into his hands The Commander
threatened that with his Canon he would batter down the Walls of the Castle. To
whom she like a Protestant, and like a Princess replied, Do if you think it
best, but as soon as ever you have made a breach in the Wall of my Castle, I my
self will come and stand in the breach, and see if you dare kill me who am the
Kings Daughter: Whereupon the daunted Enemy departed.

PROP. II. Thus to seek the Wealth of their People is in a singular manner the
duty of Rulers. To be of a Public Spirit is the duty of all men, but
especial^y of them that are in public place. The Truth before us will appear
in several things.

1 It is evident from that Relation which is between Rulers and their People
They are called Shepherds, often so in ^he Scripture. It belongs to a Shepherd
to take care of the safety of his Sheep, to defend them from Bears or Wolves,
or any that would make a prey of them. Thus ought R^lers to do. Mic 5.5. When
the Assyrian shall come into our Land, then shall we raise against him seven
Shepherds, and eight principal men A good Shepherd will venture himself far to
save his Sheep from destruction: As we know David when he k^pt his Fathers
Sheep* ventured his life to deliver some of his Flock out of the paw of the
Lion and of the B^ar: Such an Heroic Spirit does become a faithful Ruler. They
are also styled Fathers; When Joseph was (like Mordecai) advanced to be next to
the King in the Government of the Land, it was cried before him, Abreck, which
seems to be an Egyptian word, signifying, Tender Father. Joseph deserved the
Ti^le, having approved himself a Father to that Country, in providing for their
welfare, and saving them from ruin. Gen 41 43 It was for this reason that
Deborah was styled a Mother in Israel, because she was chief in Government, one
that Judged Israel. Judge. 5.7. Not only the Lords people, but the Gentiles
esteemed their Rulers as their Fathers. Among the Philistines, Abimeleck was the
name they gave to their chief Ruler It was not a proper, but an appellative
Name, l^ke that of Ahasuerus among the Persians The English of that word is, My
Father the Ruler. The Romans called their chief Ruler, Patrem Pariae An Heathen
Writer could say, Bonus Princeps non d^ffe^ta bono patre. A good Ruler does not
diff^r from a good Father* Now a Father cannot but be concerned for the welfare
of his Children. His Children cannot suffer, but he will sympathize with them.
He Will prevent their dangers, redress their injuries, procure their happiness to
the utmost of his power. So should Rulers do: Such a Magistrate was that Godly
Prince in Arabia, holy Job, who could say* I was a Father to the poor. Job
29.18 And such an one was Eliakim, of whom it was predicted, He shall be a
Father to the Inhabitants of Jerusalem. Isa 22.21. Again, Rule^s are the Heads
of the Body Politic (...)* Hear this ye the Heads of the House of Jacob, and
Princes of the House of Israel. Now it belongs to the Head to take care of the
Body, and of every member in it: They are the Eyes of the State, as Job said,
He was Eyes to the blind As Ministers in the Church are to be instead o^ eyes
to their people, and therefore have the name of Seers and of Watchmen given to
them. So are Magistrates to be instead of Eyes in the Commonwealth. The
Egyptian Hieroglyphick for a Chief Ruler, was a Scepter with an Eye in it. It
conc^rns them to fores^e dangers coming on their people to prevent them, and to
oversee the M^nners of their people to reform them.

2. The Proposi^ion before is evident, considering that the Welfare or Ill-fare
of a People depends very much on their Rulers. If they are, and do as ought to
be, their people will fare the better for i^; but if they do amiss, the people
will suffer for it. When David numbered the People, those poor Sheep were
killed. Delirant Reges pl^ctuntur Achivi. Two or three p^^ticulars may be
mentioned here, which will make this Demonstration evident to us.

1. It is manifest from those Scripture comparisons whereby Rulers are
described* e. g. They are compared to Foundations: Because of the Iniquity
found among all the Rulers in the Nation under Saul's Reign, the Psalmist
complained that all the foundations of the earth were out of course. Psalm.
82.5. Hence the Hebrews call a Ruler by the name of Adon from Eden, which
signifies a Basis or Foundation. So the Greek (...) If the Foundation is solid,
the Superstructure may stand, but if that be sandy or rotten, all falls to
ruin. Hence also they are compared to Corner-stones. Zech. 10.4 Out of him came
forth the Corner, that is the Ruler. The main stress of the Building lies on
the Corner-stones; remove those and the House cannot stand Hence also Rulers
are compared to Pillars; When Saul was chief in Government, he granted
Commissions to very Ungodly men, he loved to prefer such; but when the
Government came into David's hand, he was all for preferring good men, and by
that means he saved the State from ruin: He therefore spe^ks, as in Psalm 75.3.
The Earth and all the Inhabitants thereof are dissolved. I bear up the Pillars
of it. The safety of an house depends on the pillars of it; if they fall all is
in danger.

2. A people are either happy or miserable according to what Religion is among
them. Prove. 14.34. Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin is a reproach to any
people. By Righteousness, (...) Religion is meant: This makes a people
pros^^rous and famous in the world; but when sin is tolerated, then they become
infamous and miserable. The Romans of Old imputed their great prosperity to
their singular care about Religion. Although they were Strangers to the true
Revealed Religion, without which no Eternal Happiness is to be hoped for in
another world, nevertheless, in many things they followed the dictates of the
light of nature; they would encourage virtue, and punish vice; and they found
that when they did so, Heaven blessed them the more for it. But when the Body
of a People make a profession of the only true Religion, and practice
accordingly; God is wont to pour down his blessing upon them abundantly. It is
said, 2 Chronicles. 12.12. that in Judah things went well; they reformed what had
been amiss among them, and were the only people in all the world at that time,
among whom true Religion was found, and then things went well with them; The
Providence of God smiled upon them, so that their broken State was recruited;
but if a people once degenerate as to their Religion, then it is wont to go ill
with them Judge. 5.8. They chose new gods, then wars were in the Gates, This
truth was of old Preached in a General Assembly, when the Representatives of
the People were Convened, an inspired man of God said to them, The Lord is with
you while you are with him, but if you forsake him, he will forsake you. 2 Chronicles. 15 2. And in that Chapter it is observed, that for a long season Israel
had been without the true God, and without a teaching Priest, and without the
Law, and in those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him
that came in, for God did vex them with all adversity. Now then it is very much
with Rulers to make and to keep their people religious. They may do much that
way by their Example; and they ought to be to those under them patterns, not
only of moral ver^ue, but of true piety; they should excel others in goodness
as much as they do in power. It was excellently spoken by Cyrus (though an
Heathen Prince) that that man is not worthy to Rule, that is not more virtuous
than the most of th^se over whom he does Command A Great man if he is a good
man, will by his Example do a great deal of good; as on the other hand if he is
a vicious man, his example will be pernicious to many: When Rehoboam forsook
the Law of the Lord, all Israel did so with him. 2 Chronicles. 12.1. They may
likewise do much toward the promoting of the Interest of Religion by their
Authority as well as by their Example. It is true, that Conscience is not to be
imposed on; nevertheless it is a great error to think, that the Civil
Magistrate has nothing to do in matters of Religion; Why then are they called
God^ Psalm. 82.6. I have said ye are Gods. Have Gods nothing to do in matters of
Religion; That name of their Office puts them in mind of their duty. One man in
Supreme Authority may have that influence as to cause a whole Nation to become
visibly religious; so it was with the Children of Israel, when the Lord raised
them up Judges, they would serve the Lord as long as that Judge lived, but when
the Judge was dead, they corrupted themselves and served other Gods. Judge.
2.18* 19. When they had Kings over them, if the King were of the true Religion,
the people would be so too; but if he were an Idolater, then they would be so.
And in our own Nation it has been so. In the Reign of our English Josiah
(Edward the 6 th.) the Nation was of the Protestant Profession; when he was
dead, and a Popish Queen got into the Throne, what a dismal change was there
throughout the whole Realm in a few weeks time. I have sometimes been affected
in reading the Martyr, Ridley his pathetical Lamentation for that Apostasy. We
see, then that R^lers may make their people either happy or miserable, b^c^use
of that influence which they have on the Religion of their Subjects.

3. The Welfare of a People depends much on what Laws they have. Good (...)
Walls and Bulwarks for the (...) Peoples Liberty and Property. They are the
very Sinews of the body Politic. Next to Religion, the happiness of a People
consists in Civil Liberties. The Jewish Writers have a Celebrated saying among
them, That if the Sea were Ink, and the Heavens Parchment both would not be
enough to Write down the Praises which are due to God for Liberty. Now civil
Liberties are secured by the Establishment of Righteous Laws for that end. That
which the Legislative Power ought to aim at is not so much the Interest of a
particular man, as of the people in general. The light of nature says, that
Salus populi est Suprema laex, the safety of the People is the Supreme Law. Nor
ought there to be any Law which shall be really prejudicial thereunto. Among
the Venetians if any proposal is offered, the first E^quiry, is, will this
which is proposed be for the welfare of the Republic? So it should be in the
establishment of Laws, but such Laws cannot be without the concurrance of the
Rulers of a People. These things show that it is their duty in a special manner
^o seek the Pub^ick welfare.

PROP. III. That when Rulers do thus it will tend to their lasting Renown.
Mordecai* doing thus has caused him to be renowned in all succeeding
Generations. And many others have had their worthy deeds recorded in the Book
of God, which is a thousand Times greater honor than to have them spoken of in
any other Book. I shall mention but two particulars, which will clear and
confirm the Truth now before us.

1. They that seek the Wealth of their People, are usually much Loved and
Honored whilst they Live, and much more after they are dead. It is too true,
that there is wicked Ingratitude in the Hearts of men, whence Public
Benefactors have been ill rewarded by those whom they have laid under the
greatest obligations. Thus did the Children of Israel deal by Gideon although
it was by his means chiefly that they enjoyed singular Liberties both Civil and
Sacred. Yet they did not do to him according to the deserving of his hands,
Judge 9.16. Nevertheless, natural Conscience has that power in men that except
prejudice prevail against reason, they cannot but value those that have sought
the public Interest. The Jews looked upon such as worthy of honor. They said
concerning the Centurion, He is worthy, for he loves our Nation, and has built
us a Synagogue, Luk 7 4, 5. The Jewish Writers sa^ concerning one of their high
Priests whose nam^ was Simon, that he sought the Good of his Nation in such
wise, as that his Authority and Honor pleased them well, and ^ha^ his
honorable name was therefore ^enowned to the End of the World Yea, and the
Gentiles had those in high esteem who had sought the weal of their Country. The
famous Roman Orator was wont to say, that if he could gain Immortality by
prejudicing his Country, he would not accept of it. And he was exceedingly
Loved and Honored. It is reported of him, that when he was by means of Clod^us
forced into Exile, besides the whole body of the Senate, there we^e above
Twenty thousand men put on Mourning Apparel, and when he had liberty to return,
almost all Italy went out of their Towns to bid him welcome home The Gentiles
used to choose those to be their Kings who had done great service for their
people. And it was counted an honor to their Kings themselves, to be styled
(...), benefactors. Some such have been Loved so as that others have been
willing to lay down their lives for them Although such Instances have been
rare, yet some such there have been. Hence the Apostle speaks, as in Rom* 5.7.
Peradventure for a g^^d man some would dare to die. By a good man in that place
a great Benefastor or one that has done much good, is intended. Some among the
Gentiles have shined with moral, and with that which they call Heroic Virtue,
so that they would readily part with their Lives to Save their Country. So
among the Romans, the Curij, and the Decij, and the Horatij, by which they
obtained a lasting renown in the R^man Histories, unto which the Apostle seems
to have respect. So among the Grecians those young Spartaus were made famous
who offe^ed their lives to save their Country. The people there had dealt
babarously with the Ambassadors of Darius Histaspis the King of Persia
(supposed to be that Ahasuerus spoken of in the Book of Esther) which enraged
the Persians against them, so that they resolved to destroy that City.
Thereupon they called a General Assembly, and proposal was made whether there
was any man that would die to save Spartae from destruction. Two noble young men
readily offered themselves to be made a Sacrifice to the wrath of Persia, and
accordingly went to the Emperor signifying that they came to offer their lives
to appease his anger for the wrong done by their City to his Ambassadors,
praying that their people might be spared. Themistocles is famous on the like
account. His people dealt very injuriously with him notwithstanding singular
services he had done for them, so that he was forced to remove into another
Land. There were great offers made to him, in case he would appear in Hostility
against his Country: but rather than do so he chose to die. That was a brave
rare Spirit in him, and made him honorable to Posterity. Serviceable and
public Spirited men, such as have sought the weal^h of their people, have not
only lived desired, (as Mordecai in the Text before us did) but they have dyed
lamented. We have many Instances (...) in the Scripture. Hezekiah was a man
that set himself to promote the welfare of his people both in Temporals and in
Spirituals, and he was greatly loved and honored both living and dying 2 Chronicles. 32 33. They buried him in the chiefest of the Sepulchers of the Sons of
David, and all Judah and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honor at his
death. The like to this is noted concerning Ieh^jada the Priest. They buried
him among the Kings because he had done Good in Israel, both toward God, and
toward his House, 2 Chronicles 24.16. Josiah was another that set himself with all
his might to seek the wealth of his People. And how did all good men Lament and
their hearts bleed over his Grave? It was the greatest Mourning that ever was
known among the Jews, so that it grew into a proverb, as the Mourning of
Hadradrimon in the Valley of Megiddon Zech 12.11. That is as the Mourning for
Josiah who was slain at Hadradimmon, which was a Town in the valley of Megiddon
And a long time after in their Lamentations, that is, in their funeral Elegies
on other persons, they would drop some tears over Iosiahs Grave. 2 Chronicles. 35
25. Many other Instances there are in Scripture confirming the great Truth
before us, which I omit. Histories also do abundantly declare it. Never was
there man in the Roman Empire whose Life was so much desired and his death
Lamented by all good men as that of the great Constantine, who was the greatest
blessing to the Empire that ever it enjoyed in any one man I shall only add,
that we have seen a recent and Royal instance of this, in our late QUEEN of
glorious Memory who (like another Queen Esther) sought the welfare of her
People. And was resolved, if the Lord had continued her life but a while
longer, to have used her utmost endeavors toward the effecting of two things,
which had it been done the Nation would have been happy, viz. A Reformation of
manners, and an Union among al^ sincere Protestants, and never was there a
Queen in England, that lived more desired or that dyed more Lamented. And as
they that have been great blessings to the World are usually honored whilst
they Live, so much more after they are Dead. Eminent men whilst living are
objects of much envy, but they are less so when dead. -- Livor post fata
quiefcit. Some that would run out against Moses whilst alive, were ready to
worship him after he was dead. The Jews would build the Tombs of the dead
Prophets, and garnish the Sepulchers of the Righteous, who when living were
little regarded by them. Mat. 23 29. There has through the subtilty of Satan
been a sinful excess in this respect. The Gentiles did Idolize their great men
after their death. The great Apostasy of the Christian World has been in their
making Gods of departed Saints. Men are apt to run into extremes.

2. The Lord Jesus Christ will take notice of them before all the world at the
last day, who have with a sincere heart sought the Welfare of his people If
they have done this out of love to the name of Christ, and with an unfeigned
desire that God might be glorifi^d, all men and Angels shall hear of it, in
that General Assembly, which will be when the whole world shall appear before
his Judgment Seat. Whatever Service any man has done for God or for his people,
Christ knows it, and has with him a memorial of it. He therefore said to the
Angel of the Church in Thya^^ra. I know thy Service. Rev. 2 19 He knows both
what men do, and wha^ principle it is that does act them in what they do. If
from a principle of Faith and Love, Christ will acknowledge it, and praise them
for it 1 Cor. 4 5. Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who will
make manifest the counsels of the heart, and then shall every man have praise
of God; that is every man that has been faithful to the Interest of God, and of
his people. Christ when He comes will manifest the fidelity of his Servants
before all the world: He will say, this Servant of mine was in such a place,
and there did such a Service for my name, and in another place he did another
Service. He sustained such and such Relations, and was faithful to my Interest
in those several Capacities. Not the least Service has been done to any one of
those that belongs to Christ, but it shall be gloriously rewarded in that day;
if it has been but a cup of cold water it shall not lose a reward. Mark 9 41.
Then eminent Services will be much more rewarded. If he that shows kindness to
one that belongs to Christ shall not los^ his reward, they that have done good
to hundreds, to thousands, to many whole Flocks of Christ, shall be considered
by him accordingly; who has said, that he will give to every one according as
his works shall be. He rewards his Servants with no less then a Crown, yea,
with a Crown of Glory which fades not away.

USE I. For Instruction and Information.

Inf. 1. This lets us see the great Evil which is in being of a priva^e
self-seeking Spirit. When me^ will do nothing but as their own Interest l^ads
them; I^ any thing is proposed, they do not consider, will this be beneficial
to the Public, but will this be for my profit and all* Public Interests must
truckle to their private conc^rns. There is an ungodly proverb which some have
in their mouths, who say, Every one for himself, and God for us all; nay, but
if every on^ should be for himself, God would be against us all There is a
sinful self-love which is the root of many and great evils. Many complain of
bad Times; but what is the reason that the times are bad? All springs from this
root. ^* Tim. 3.1, 2 In the last days perilous times shall come, for men shall
be lovers of their own selves. There are no fewer than 19. evils mentioned by
the Apostle, as making the Times perilous. This of inordinate self-love is set
in the forefront of all: Men will be lovers of themselves, and then it
follows, they will be covetous, proud, blasphemers, and the rest. Sometimes one
man by seeking to advance himself has brought great misery on whole Nations,
and has caused rivers of blood to be shed. Not many years ago, all Europe was
in a flam^, Cities and Villages not a few, yea whole (...) were made desolate,
and hundreds of thousands of lives were lost, and all because of the Ambition
of one self-seeking man. It is like ere long to be a bloody Time in Europe, and
it may be in America too. Did not some in the world seek their own wealth more
than the wealth of others, it would not be so.

This poor Province is at this day reduced to great straits. The want of money
has brought a deadness on Trade, and incommod^d public Interests. And is not
this Evil owing to a private self-seeking spirit: Are there not those among us,
who if they can themselves grow rich by sending all the money in the Country
away, that is all that they take care for. If former General Assemblies, out of
a due regard to the Wealth of their People, did well in making a Law to prevent
that which would prove injurious to the Province in general, they who ou^ of
respect to their particular interests and gain, have by transgressing that Law
hurt the whole Country, have not done well. Many other things might be
mentioned which show the evil of a self-seeking spirit. It is sadly true, that
there is too much of self in good men; but the reigning power of this evil is
inconsistent with real Christianity. A man cannot be a Disciple of Christ
except he deny himself. Mat. 16.24. It is said of Believers, that none of them
lives to himself. Rom 14.7. They then who seek nothing but themselves, are
like to lose themselves and Souls for ever. What is the Epitaph on a Self
seeker* One says well, that it should be written over his Grave, Here lies a
man that sought himself whilst he lived, and lost himself when he dyed.

Inf. 2. This does instruct and direct those that have liberty of choosing their
own Rulers, what m^nner of persons should be the objects of their Ele^tion. If
you may choose men of public Spirits, that will seek the welfare of their
people never choose others. And therefore you should choose such as are qualified
with the gra^es necessary in order to the being of such a spirit; Men that have
the grace of Courage in them. God in his Holy Word has given us direction in
(...) matter. Exodus 18.21. Thou shall provide out of all the people able me^
such as fear God, men of truth, hating Coveteousness, to be Rulers. When it is
said they must fear God, therein is implied that they must be men of Courage,
that will not fear men; for if they fear them more than God, they will wrong the
public interest to please those men whom they are afraid of. And he that is
Chosen a Ruler should be an Hater of Coveteousness; For if he is a covetous
self-seeking man, a great bribe will tempt him to sell the Public out of
respect to his private interest.

The liberty which you have this day to Choose who shall be the Governors
Assistants, is a great and singular privilege. No other Plantation has the
like. Now to use it well is the most probable way to have it continued. There
are those that envy our happiness in this respect. The wicked men that
solicited to have our former Charter taken from us, are endeavoring that our
Present Charter should be taken from us also. We may by two things provoke the
Lord to suffer them to prevail; one is by unthankfulness for so great a mercy.
By despising it, as if so great privileges as those our present Charter
confirms to us were of no value. If the Lord should be provoked to take them
from us, they will be thought valuable by those that have very sinfully
slighted and cast contempt on them. An Eminent man (since gone to a better
world) wrote me, that if the people in New England were not thankful for the
privileges of their present Charter, all their Friends in England would think
them unworthy of more, and be discouraged from being concerned in their behalf.
The other evil which will endanger the loss of them is the not using our
privileges well. If when a people may Choose good men that w^ll seek their
Welfare to be their Rulers, they will have others rather, it is just with God
to punish them accordingly. Historians have observed concerning the Romans,
that they brought ruin upon themselves by making a bad choice of Rulers, when
they had liberty to Elect whom they would.

Inf. 3. If Rulers in the Civil State ought to seek the Welfare of their
People, than surely they that are appointed Rulers in the Church of God ought
to do so. And the truth is, they have the greatest advantages to promote the
best good, i. e. the Spiritual and Eternal Welfare of their People. For which
reason it is that the Calling of the Ministry is of all Callings the most
desirable. Nor is it beneath the best or greatest men on Earth to be so
employed. Ecclesiastes begins with the Words of the Preacher the Son of David,
King of Jerusalem. He did not think it a dispara^ement to his Royal dignity to
be a Preacher of the Word of God. Isaiah was of the blood Royal, and (as the
Jews tells us) a near kinsman of that King who caused him to be Sawn asunder,
but he did not think it beneath him to Preach the Gospel. Joseph of Arimathea
was an honorable Counselor of State, nevertheless he is thought to be the
first that ever Preached the Gospel in England then known by the name of
Britain* Ambrose was the Son of a Pr^fect, and himself adorned with the dignity
of a Consul, but he thought he might do more good in promot^^g the welfare of
men's Souls than of their outward Estate, and accordingly became an Eminent
Preacher and Writer. Chrys^stom a famous Preacher in Antioch was a noble man.
Since the Reformation, George who was Prince of Anhalt, because he was desirous
to do good to the Souls of his People, Preached the word of God to them. John a
Lasco was a noble Polander, and the Pastor of the first Dutch Church in London.
I remember an Eminent Divine says, The God of Heaven had but one Son, and he
made him a Minister. How can any man do a greater Good than by promoting the
Eternal welfare of men* Is not the Soul better than the Body? Are not the
Everlasting concerns thereof, of infinite greater weight, than the things which
are only T^mporal? That which men ought to aim at in so Sacred a Work, is the
Eternal good of Souls; and not to take up the Ministry (as many do) only as a
trade to live by, which is a very Scandalous thing. They whom God has called to
that Office are concerned, to endeavor to Season the Souls of men with sound
Doctrine. They are the Salt of the Earth, Matthew 5 13. Were it no^ for that Salt
the world would putrify. They may be instrumental of great good to the Souls of
men, by b^ing Vigilant against the designs of Satan, who seeks to sow Tares
in the Lords field among the Wheat, which if they be not Watchful will soon
overrun and ruin all* They may be instrumental of much good by discovering
Seducers. The Angel in the Church in Ephesus did a great Service for Christ and
for the Church, in discovering the false Apostates that were crept in amongst
them, Rev. 2.2. False Teachers are as dangerous to the Souls of men, as Wolves
are to a Flock of Sheep. They will come in Sheeps clothing: They Will pretend
Love to Truth, and a desire of the Salvation of Souls, and it may be a Zeal to
propagate the Christian Faith* then their design is to propagate the Romish
Faith, or Pelagian and Arminian, errors whereby the Souls of those that are
poisoned therewith will be endangered. The Shepherds of the Flocks by
preventing such mischief may do much good* And above all by being Instrumental
in the Conversion of Souls. To Save a body from death is a good work; but to
Save a Soul is a greater good than to Save thousands of Bodies Now he that
Converts ^ Soul Saves ^ Soul, Ia^^. 5.20* He that converteth a Sinner from the
Error of his way shall save a Soul from death. Thus then are th^^ whose office
obliges them to it, concerned to seek the welfare esp^cially the Spiritual and
E^ernal welfare of their People. In doing which they promote their own welfare.
They will (as the Apostle said to Timothy) save themselves in endeavoring to
save those that hear them Nor are there any men under Heaven, under such an
awfu^l charge as they that have the charge of Immortal Souls committed to the^.
How dreadful are the words of God to the Sons of Aaron, Lev. 8.35. Keep my
charge that ye die not. And what was spoken to Ezekiel is no less awful. God
said to him, I have set thee a watchman unto the house of Israel, thou shall
give them warning from me. If thou do not, the wicked man shall die in his
iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hand: If thou warn him thou have
delivered thy Soul Ezekiel. 33.7, 8, 9. This reason one of the Ancients alleges
for his freedom in reproving the sins of men, Timeo damnum vestrum, timeo
damnatione^ meam si tacuero* Nothing can be thought of more fearful than to
have the blood of Souls to answer for. But they that have to the utmost of
their power sought the eternal weal of the Souls committed to their care, shall
have a greater Crown of Glory than other* shall at the last day. The reward of
a Prophet will be greater than the reward of another righteous man. Mat. 10.42.
And they that have turned many to righteousness, shall shine as the Stars for
ever and ever. Dan. 12.3*

USE. II. I conclude briefly with a double word of EXHORTATION.

Exhor. 1. To Lay it to heart as we ought to do, when God takes away Rulers,
who have sought the Good of their People. When Samuel was dead all Israel
Lamented him. When Moses was dead the Children of Israel wept for him. And has
not the Lord taken away a Moses from New England, since the last Election day?
One that was wonderfully Saved out of the Water as Moses was. A man of great
Learning, as Moses was Learned in all the Wisdom of Egypt. He sought the good
of this People when he was concerned in an Agency for them in England I have
heard some there speak Honorably of him on that account, they observed that
his heart was set to obtain good for his People. The reason why he obtained no
more was not his fault, it was not because he would not, but because he could
not do it. Since that, amongst other Evidences of his seeking the welfare of
his People, this is one, he has Loved our Nation, and has built us a College I
wish New England may see such another Deputy Governor. It is a Solemn
Providence that God has beheaded this Colony twice in less than half a year
time. And our being left so long in a bleeding unsettled State adds to the
Calamity.

But what shall I say concerning the dismal Tidings which is Arrived to us
within these few days! Know you not that a Prince and a great Man is fallen in
England, whose fall has made not only Three Kingdoms, but all Europe to Shake!
A Prince that manifested such a Princely and Public Spirit as the like has
seldom been known. A Prince that when a Neighboring Monarch offered his
Assistance to make him a King over the United Provinces, He generously refused
it. A Prince that declared he would appear in the Defense of his Country as
long as there was any part of it remaining, and when all was gone, would
himself die in the last Dyke in Holland. A Prince that sent word to a man of
great Interest in Amsterdam, that he desired his friendship so long and no
longer than as he did seek the welfare of his people.

And when God m^de him our King, he was the great Instrument of delivering our
Nation from Popery and Slavery. A King that has consented to such Acts of
Parliament for the benefit of the Subject as never King in England before him
did. A King that restored Civil Liberties his Subjects, and Religious Liberties
to many of them who had been persecuted and oppossed. And when the Crown of
Scotland was offered to him, he declared, that if it were expected that he
should be a Persecutor of any for their Re^igion, He would not accept of a
Crown on those terms A King that from the Throne has proclaimed his abhorrence
of those immoralities which the late Reigns had debauched the Nations with. A
King that often exposed his Royal Person to the dangers of Death in Fighting
the Battles of the Lord against his and his peoples Enemies. And now behold a
breach is made upon us like that of the Sea, not possible to be withstood were
it not that with God all things are possible. But who can say what a deluge of
calamities will come in at this breach. The Anger of God is dreadful in it.
That such a Royal Life, on whose continuance there were such vast dependences,
should be taken away at such a Time, is a sign of the displeasure of Heaven not
only against our Nation, but against all the Protestant Churches, wh^s^ Head
and Chief Defender on Earth is now taken from them. The Anger of God seems to
smoke against the prayers of his people I believe there was not a man living on
the earth that had so many prayers going for him, by all good men; not only his
own Subjects, but i^ may be more than a million of other Protestants prayed for
him continually. The Churches in Helvetia, were wont in a particular manner to
pray for the King and late Queen of England. But it se^ms the Sins of the
Nations professing Reformation have out cried their Prayers And now the Crown
is fallen from our head, woe unto us that we have sinned. This is for a
Lamentation, and shall be for a Lamentation.

Exhor. 2. To those especially who sustain any Public Relation. There are
many, I suppose more than an hundred such in this Assembly. Oh! Let every one
seek the Wealth of their People. Be able to say with the Apostle, I have not
sought my own Profit, but the profit of many. Consider the Excellency of a
Public Spirit, and how desirable a thing it is to do good. It is a God-like
Spirit. For God is the universal good: He does good to all Psalm 145.9.
Therefore the more good any man does in the World, the more does he resemble
the blessed God. It is a Christ-like Spirit. For Christ is the light of the
World. All Nations fare the better for him. All the Angels in Heaven, and all
the m^n on earth have not done such Service for God and men, as Christ has. Let
us show our sel^es Christians by endeavoring to be (in our measure) like our
Lord and Master.

I^ i^ be said, but wherein may we promote the welfare of our People? The
Answer, is, we may promote their welfare by endeavoring that th^se Evils may
b^ Reformed which otherwise will pull down the Judgments of H^aven on our Land
Have not the Heavens of late been weeping over our heads, and threatening us
wi^h a Terrible Famin^? We have cause to think that one reason of it, is,
because Excess in Drinking is become the Crying Sin of Multitudes in
New England. There is among the Helvetians (especially in Zurick) a Court which
bears the name of the Court of Reformation, which effectually cures Drunkards I
wish there were such a Court in New England.

Again, we may promote the Welfare of our People by tak^ng care that Pure
Religion be transmitted to Posterity; by endeavoring that those who shall come
after us, may walk in the Faith of the Gospel, according to the Order of the
Gospel^ Let us remember the last words which were spoken in this Pulpit, by
that Eminent man of God Mr Norton: And remember the Sermons which were Preached
on Election-Days, by our Blessed Mitchell, and Oaks. Which D^scourses are
Printed, and will witness for ever against those that shall recede from the
Truths therein d^clared from the Word of the Lord.

And one thing let me in the Name of the Lord, Commend to the General Assembly
now Convened. It is that you would cause to be Re-pub^ished, and to be
Recommended to Posterity, the Platform of Church Discipline, together with the
R^sult of the other Synods in this Colony, that so the Generation coming on,
may not through ignorance degenerate or deviate from those holy ways wherein
their Fathers walked. It was a pious design in those R^ubenites who first came
into the Land (...) Canaan, when they built an Altar of Witness, that so their
Children in Future Generations might no^ cease fearing the Lord Who knows but
what is now in the Name of the Lord proposed to you, may be a means to cause
your Children after you to fear and serve the Lord, in the way which himself
has Commanded. Now you have an opportunity for it, and it may be now is your
only time to do this Service for the Welfare of the Present and Succeeding
Generations.

To those whom the Providence of God shall this Day Establish as Rulers, Let me
say, yet not I but the Lord; Consider this people is the Lords people.
Therefore bear with their manners and infirmities, for the Lords sake, and Seek
their wealth with all your might. I have often thought on what I heard a Worthy
man (and a great Friend of New England) speak to the President of the Kings
most Honorable Privy Council. I (said he) know the people of New England very
well; I was once there, I know they are a weak people and full of humors.
Nevertheless they are a people that belong to God: And therefore let me pray
your Lordship to be kind to them, and the God of Heaven will reward you for it
So let me say to Counselors, to Ministers, to Representatives, and to others
also, do all that you can to promote the Welfare of the dear people in New
England, because many of them are dear to God, who has purchased them with his
own blood: Then Christ will take what you do to them as done to himself. All
the men in the world will believe this to be true, in that day which is at
hand, when we shall all see Jesus Christ the Son of God sitting on the Throne
of his Glory, and hear him pronounce those words, with which I conclude. Mat 25
40. Verily inasmuch as you have done it to these my Brethren, you have done it
unto me.

THE Righteous MAN A Blessing: OR, Seasonable Truths Encouraging unto FAITH and
PRAYER In this Day of Doubtful Expectation.

Delivered in Two SERMONS.

By Increase Mather

Boston: Printed for Nicholas Boon. 1702.

To the READER.
THese Sermons were Preached at the Lecture in Boston. Having been informed
that many who live in the Country, as well as in this Town, have desired they
might be published, and one who took in Short hand what I delivered, having
showed me his transcribed Copy, I have perused it, and consented to its being
sent to the Press. And I have the rather done so, because these are the last
Lecture Sermons Preached, or intended to be Preached by me. The other work
incumbent on me, and the advances of Age which have now overtaken me, and the
ill treatment which I have had from those from whom I had reason to have
expected better, have discourage^ me from being any more concerned on such
Occasions.

THE Righteous MAN a Blessing, etc.
Genesis XVIII.26. And the Lord said, if I find in Sodom fifty Righteous within
the City, then I will spare all the place for their sakes.


IN this Chapter we have an account of three men that came to Abraham when he
dwelt in the Plains of Mamre; which men were indeed Angels, only called men,
because they did appear in Humane Shape; Abraham supposing them to be
Travelers, courteously invited them to refresh themselves with him; and so did
as the Apostle speak^, Entertain Angels at unawares. He applied himself to one
above the rest; the reason of his doing so is not mentioned, but probably he
observed that the other Angels did show peculiar respect to that Person. And
afterward he pe^ceived that He was not a Created Angel, but Christ the Eternal
Son of God; for he calls him, the Judge of all the Earth, which Title is
peculiar to the Son of God. And in this Verse, and in several other places in
this Chapter, He is called Jehovah, which is a name that may not be given to
any Angel or Creature, but to Him alone who is the only true God. Two of the
Angels went to the City of Sodom, so that Abraham was left with the Lord alone,
who having intimated to him his purpose to destroy Sodom, because of the
exceeding wickedness of that place, the Holy man with great humility and
importunity begged of God, that he would spare them And that prayer he made no
less than six times over: The argument he makes use of, is taken from the
consideration of the merciful and equitable proceedings of God toward men.

He mentions it as a thing most undoubtedly true, That the Judge of all the
Earth would do right; whereas if he should inflict equal punishment on those
that have been unequal Transgressors, that would not seem to be right. He was
concerned lest the Name of God should suffer, and therefore prays that God
would for the sake of the Righteous spare the wicked, or however spare the
Righteous themselves. This verse is the Lords gracious Answer to Abraham's first
request. It may be (says he) there are fi^ty righteous men in the City, and
wilt not thou spare them for their sakes. The Lord in the words before us
declared that if he found so many in that wicked place, he would spare the
whole City for the sake of such a small number of Righteous Ones. The Doctrine
which the words afford unto us, is,

That Wicked men while in this world fare the better for the sake of Righteous
men.

We shall first premise some Conclusions for the clearing and right
understanding of the truth now before us. And then proceed to mention some
things which are evidences of it.

Conclusion 1. That God is sometimes so provoked by the sins of the wicked,
that he will not spare them for the sake of the Righteous. So that this must
not be understood as an universal standing Rule. The Lords condescending thus
far to Abraham at this time, was not to intimate that if there be any Righteous
men in a place, that then that place shall not fall under destroying Judgments.
In the days of Elijah there were seven thousand who had not bowed the knee to
Baal. Yet Drought, and Famine, and Sword, (destroying judgments) came on the
Land, notwithstanding there were some thousands of Righteous men therein. A
fatal overthrow came on the Land of the Chaldeans by the Sword of Persia, when
all the good men in the world were in that Land. Sometimes God is so highly
provoked at the Sins of wicked men, at that although righteous men set
themselves to deprecate impending Judgments, he becomes inexorable, no
entreaties will prevail with him to stay his hand. When there was a sore
drought upon the Land, the Prophet Jeremiah did earnestly pray that the
Judgment might be removed. God gave him a flat denial, and told him, that
instead of removing that Judgment, he would bring others that should be
greater; and added moreover, though Moses and Samuel stood before him yet his
mind could not be toward that people, Ier. 15 1. Moses and Samuel are instanced
in, because God for their sakes had more than once spared a sinful people, but
then he would not do it. There is a Scripture in Ezekiel, like that in
Jeremiah, viz. that, Ezekiel. 14, 14. Though these three men, Noah, Daniel and Job
were in it, they should deliver but their own Souls by their righteousness. And
many times it has been so, that destroying Judgments have come on Cities,
Provinces, Nations, in which there have been not fifty, but many hundreds, it
may be thousands of righteous men; yea many holy Churches of the Lord Jesus
Christ. When once a sinful people have filled up the measure of their iniquity,
there is no preventing the judgment determined against them. It is said, in
Dan. 8.23, 24. When the Transgressors are come to the full, a King of fierce
countenance shall arise and destroy wonderfully. When the transgressors among
the Jews were come to the full, Antiochus whom Historians describe to be one of
a fierce countenance, was by the dreadful Providence of God set over them as
their King, who proved a bloody Persecutor and Destroyer of that people,
notwithstanding their being the holy People. So then that is the first
Conclusion.

Conclusion 2. Although when destroying Judgments come upon a People, the
Divine Providence does sometimes make a difference between the Righteous and
the Wicked, nevertheless it is not always so. Sometimes God in his Providence
does very signally discriminate between those he has a favor for, and others.
When the Egyptians were visited with ten plagues, the Children of Israel were
preserved. When Sodom was overthrown, righteous Lot escaped. Barak had his life
given to him for a prey, when others were swept away with a b^som of destruction

It was said to the Church in Philadelphia, Because thou have kept the word of
my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation which shall come
upon all the world. Rev 3 10. When the Babylonians laid Jerusalem waste, some
who were Mourners in Zion, experienced signal temporal Salvations. And so it
was with the Christian Jews at that time when utter desolation came on
Jerusalem by the Roman Sword. God did by a miraculous Providence distinguish
them from others, according to Malachi's Prophesy. Then shall ye return and
discern between the righteous and the wicked, between him that serves God, and
him that serves him not. Mal. 3.18. Thus it came to pass. The Lord Jesus
Christ had intimated to his Disciples, that when they should see Jerusalem
compassed about with armies, they should know that the destruction of it is
near, and that therefore they should go out of the City to some other place for
safety. When the Romans came to take the City, they did by a strange Providence
withdraw their Seige. The Christians remembering the words of Christ went out of
the City to Pella, a Town beyond the River Jordan, when they were gone, the
Roman Army came again and never broke up the Seige until they had destroyed and
utterly ruined the City. Thus did the Lord make a difference between the
righteous and the wicked; then also was another Prophecy fulfilled, viz. that,
Joel 2*32. It shall come to pass that whoever calls upon the Name of the Lord
shall be saved. The Christian Jews that Called on the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ were saved, when others were destroyed. And to be sure, whatever comes
on the world, God will secure and save a number of Righteous ones: So that he
will have a Church here on the Earth, whatsoever Confusions and Overturnings
may come upon Nations and Kingdoms; therefore in the seventh of the Revelations
the first verse, we read of four Angels standing on the four corners of the
earth, holding the winds that they should not blow on the earth. The meaning
is, that a terrible Storm was a coming on the whole world, and such a stormy
wind as should overset Kingdoms, and pluck up Nations by the roots, but says
Christ in the 3d. verse, hurt not the Earth, neither the Sea, nor the trees
till we have sealed the Servants of our God in their foreheads. A Seal is
sometimes for notification, as well as for confirmation; like that of the Blood
being sprinkled on the doors of the houses of the Children of Israel. Hereby is
noted, how God does sometimes signally preserve his Righteous ones. When the
world is turning up side down, they are as safe as things that have the Seal
Royal on them, which may not be meddled with. Wonderful it was that when the
Roman Empire was overturned by barbarous Nations, many Professors of
Christianity escap^d the general destruction Nevertheless, though the Lord does
sometimes make a difference as to outward Ju^gm^nts, i^ is not always so;
therefore it is said, Eccles 9.2. There is one Event unto the Righteous and to
the Wicked; And God says, in Ez^k 21.3, 4. that he would Cut off the Righteous
with the Wicked: For alas! s^metimes righteous men do partake too much in the
sins of the wicked, by which God is provoked to bring destroying judgments on
the Earth. And if they partake with them in their sins, it is not to be w^ndred
a^ if they partake with them in the judgments that come for those sins. Come
out of Babylon (says God) my people, partake not of her sins, lest you receive
of her plagues. Rev. 18.4. And which is a sadder truth, righteous men may
through temptation fall into such sins as shall bring temporal judgments on
themselves and others too. Thus Gideon by introducing innovations in Religion,
made a great Schism among the Lords people, which ended in sore calamities,
Judge. 7.27. The like is to be said of David when he numbered the people; and
Iehosaphat when he did too much comply with an ungodly Interest, 2 Chronicles. 19.2.
Should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? therefore
wrath from the Lord is on thee: And what was that wrath? why in the next
Chapter you see how there was a great force from beyond Sea, viz. the Moabites,
who dwelt on the other side of the dead Sea, and other Enemies coming to invade
the Land, and this to punish Iehosaphat, a good man for his sinful compliances;
so then righteous men may suffer with the wicked. And in Epidemical Judgments
it is commonly so, when a War breaks forth, Righteous men are cut off as well as
others; the Sword devours one as well as another: Or if mortal and contagious
diseases happen, Good men as well as others die by this Judgment; when seventy
thousand men were swept away by the Plague in David's time, no doubt but that
there were many righteous men among them. When the Plague was in Germany,
Eminent Ministers, and Great Reformers dyed thereby as well as others. So when
there is a general Persecution, both the righteous as well as the wicked, both
sincere Professors of Religion and Hypocrites suffer in that common calamity.

Conclusion 3. In spiritual respects there is a great difference in those
temporal judgments, which the wicked and the righteous are subject to in this
world For when such judgments fall on the wicked, they are Paenal, they are
part of the Curse; some part of the wages due for their sins, some sparks of
Hell fire lighting on them before they come there. Whereas it is otherwise wi^h
the Righ^eous; the afflictions that befall them are not paenal properly, but
Castigations, and fatherly ones too; the Lord chasteneth whom h^ loves as a
father does his son in whom he delights Prove 3.12. And therefore God always
designs their good in whatever afflictions do befall them, many times their
temporal good. I may b^ great afflictions befall them, to prevent far greater.
So it was with the good figs the Prophet speaks of. They were sent in (...) the
Land of the Chaldeans for their good. Ier. 24 5 Had they tarried in their own
land, as they would have been glad to have done, when the Babylonian Army
invaded the Land, it would have gone worse with them. So that God sent them
into the land of Chaldea for their temporal good, to save them from perishing
by the Sword. However God designs the spiritual good, and the eternal advantage
of righteous ones, when outward judgments do befall them R^m. 8.39 All things
shall work together for their good. All things, all afflictions, that is, for
of them, especially the Apostle speaks, when he says All things. Nay if killing
judgments come on them, they shall be for their spiritual and eternal good;
they shall hasten them to heaven, where they shall never sin and displease God
any more. Sometimes Death is the greatest mercy that can happen to a righteous
man. The Righteous are taken away from the Evil to come. Many a righteous man
had he lived a while longer, his heart would have been broke to have seen the
miseries that would have come upon him, or on his Relations. Therefor God in
singular mercy takes them out of the world, as he did Josiah, that so his eyes
might not see the evil that was coming. We cannot say so of wicked me^^ for
when Death comes on them, H^ll follows with it. They shall go out of one fire,
and another fire shall devour them Ezekiel 15 7. They shall go ou^ of the fire of
temporal judgments, into that fire which never shall be quenched So it was wi^h
the people of Sodom, when Lightning killed their Bodies. E^ernal Fire did take
hold on their Souls; and the^^fore the Apostle Jude says of them, that they are
suffering the vengeance of eternal fire. In this respect God always puts a
difference between every righteous man, and every wicked man There is no
righteous man that shall be punished (...) everlasting destruction. Nay, God
s^^ds tem^oral judgments on them to prev^nt that; they are chastened of the
Lord, that they may not be condemned with the wicked world; whereas ^ere is no
wicked man that shall escape everlasting destruction. Isa 3 10, 11. Say ye to
the Righteous it shall he well with him, woe unto the wicked it shall be ill
with him. So must the Ministers of God say, it shall go well for ever with the
Righteous, but woe will be for ever to the wicked. These things then being
premised for clearing the truth, we proceed to mention the Evidences of it: How
does it appear that wicked men while in this world fare the better for the sake
of Righteous men? For Answer,

1. Sometimes they are spared as to temporal Ruin for the sake of Righteous
men, as the City of Zoar, a whole City, (though but a little one) was spared
for the sake of Lot. Genesis 19.22 So when Paul was Sailing to Rome, all the Ships
Company had their lives saved for his sake: The Angel said to him, God has
given thee all them that Sail with thee. Acts 27.24* There were two hundred
threescore and six^een souls, whose lives were all spared for the sake of a
righteous Paul, that was among them. Thus in the Parable, the tares were spared
for the sake of the wheat that was mixed with them. Mat. 13 29 the Servants
would have been plucking up the tares, no says the Lord, let them alone, lest
you pluck up the wheat also. The truth is, that the world stands for the sake
of a few righteous men in it. And so it has been in every Generation. Prove.
10.25 The Righteous is an everlasting foundation: They as a foundation uphold
the world, and have done so all along from the beginning of the world, and will
do so to the end of it It Is for their sakes any are saved, Mat. 24.22. No flesh
should be saved if it were not for the Elects sake If all the Righteous men in
the world were taken ^ut of it, God would do to this Earth as he did to Sodom
when Lot was taken out of it. If all the Righteous men were taken out of the
Earth, God would set the whole World on fire before to morrow. Then it is for
their sakes that the world stands; when all the Elect are called and snatched
out of the world (as it will be at the last and great day) then devouring fire
shall come and destroy all the wicked. Then that Scripture will be fulfilled in
the utmost extent of it, Man 4 1. For behold the day comes that shall burn as
an O^en, and all the wicked shall be stubble, they shall be burnt up root and
branch.

2. Positive Blessings are bestowed on wicked men for the sake of righteous men
They are not only saved from great evils and judgments, but many mercies and
blessings are bestowed on them: Ungodly Children do many ^im^s ^are the better
for the sake of their Godly Parents; as it was with Ishmael, when his Father
Abraham prayed for him, God said concerning Ishmael, I have heard thee, behold
I will bless him, and make him fruitful, and will multiply him exceedingly; I
will make him a Nation because he is thy Seed. Genesis 21.13: Great temporal
Blessings came on him for his Fathers sake. The Children of Jonathan fared the
better, because of the piety of their Father: Enquiry was made by David, Is
there none of the seed of Jonathan, that I may show kindness unto? And when
Mephibosheth appeared, David said to him, I will surely show thee kindness for
thy Father Ionathans sake. So does God show kindness to many an Ungodly Child
for their fathers sake. And sometimes a whole Family fare the better for the
sake of one Godly person that is in it, though it may be that person is only a
Servant in the Family; as when Jacob was a Servant in his Uncle Labans Family.
Gen 30 27. Says Laban, I have Learned by experience that God has blessed me for
thy sake. So when I^seph was a Servant in Potiphars Family, Genesis 39 5. God
blessed the Egyptians House for Joseph's sake, the Blessing of the Lord was upon
all that he had in the House and in the Field And afterward a whole Nation,
nay m^re than one Nation did fare the better for Joseph's (...). When there was
a terrible famine that lasted for seven years together, it was by means of
Joseph that a whole Nation was preserved from perishing by that judgment, as
the Egyptians confessed to him, in Genesis 47.25 Thou have saved our lives say
they. And indeed the greatest blessing the world does enjoy, it is for the sake
of a few righteous men in it; namely the Gospel, that is the greatest blessing
that is bestowed on the World, now this is for the sake of the Righteous. There
be many that despise the Gospel, yea the greatest part of the world does so,
only there are a few Righteous men that the Word of God is dearer to them than
any thing in the world, and for their sakes the Gospel is continued, and others
have the benefi^ of it.

3. It is evident in that, God has Promised righteous men that they shall be
Blessings. Genesis 12 2. I will bless thee and make thee a blessing. This promise
belongs to righteous ones, to such as are Abraham's Children. God does not only
bl^ss them, but make them to be blessings to others. And there are especially
three ways in respect whereof they are blessings

1. By their Prayers. They obtain good for others thereby, Job 22.30 The
innocent shall deliver the Island by the pureness of his hand. The righteous by
li^ting up pure hands in Prayer unto God, deliver the place where they live
from destroying Judgm^nts. It was said to Abim^leck concerning Abraham, in Gen
20.7. He is a Prophet he shall Pray for thee and thou shall live. Verily ^h^re
is many a man owes his life to the Prayers of righteous ones that have begged
it at the hands of God for them. How far did Abraham prevail? he almost
obtained the life of five wicked Cities by his Prayer to God for them, and if
he could have got ten Righteous men more to have joined with him, he had Saved
them all alive. Yea, Lot was delivered out of respect to Abraham's Prayer.
Although in this Chapter nothing is said of Ab^ahams Praying particularly for
that his kinsman, yet in another place, viz. in Gen 19 29. It is said, God
remembered Abraham and sent Lot out of the midst of the overthrow. The Lord
remembered how Abraham had been Praying for his kinsman. It was then his Uncles
Prayers that were one special cause of his being so wonderfully saved alive,
when all round about him perished in the fire. So likewise Zoar was spared out
of respect unto the Prayers of Lot, Genesis 19 21. See (says the Lord) I have
accepted thee concerning this thing also, I will not overthrow this City for
which thou have spok^^* Zoar was not over^hrown with the E^rthquake as the
other Cities were, because of Lots Praying and Crying to God to spare it.
Sometimes the Prayers of one ^mi^ent righteous man, will do very much with God,
Iam. 5 16. The eff^ctual fervent Prayer of a righteous man avails much. We
see it in Moses, when there was a very wicked G^neration of men, and the Lord
was just ready to kill them all at one blow, Moses held his hand by Prayer;
therefore did God say unto him, Exodus 32.10 Let me alone that I may consume
them Hence the Psalmist speaks, as in Psalm. 106 23 God would have destroyed
them, if his servant Moses had not stood in the Breach and turned away his
wrath He did like a valiant Soldier, who when the En^my has made a breach in
the Wall comes and stands in it, to prevent further destruction, and how but by
intercedeing in Prayer to God for them. The like did Elijah, when a Drought was
on the Land for three years together, and the whole Country like to perish,
Elijah Prayed and Prayed earnestly, and the Heavens gave Showers. So Hezekiah,
when an Epidemical disease was on the People, by Prayer he prevailed with God
to restore health unto his people, 2 Chronicles 30.20 The Lord hearkened to Hezekiah
and healed the People.

2 Righteous men are B^essings by the Counsel that they give to others As D^vid
said to one that gave him happy counsel, Blessed be the Lord th^^ has sent thee
to me, and blessed be thy advice. So there are those that will bless God for
ever because of the wholesome advice which some Righteous ones have administered
unto them; The advice which righteous men give others do sometimes cause them
to reform their evil ways, and then they escape the judgments tha^, otherwise
would overtake them Sometimes God bless^s their Counsel to the ^ff^ctual
Conversion of those that are instructed by them, and then they are saved not
only from temporal but from eternal destruction, Prove. 11.30. The fruit of the
righteous is a tree of life and he that wins Souls is wise. By their Counsel
sometimes they win Souls, and so bring them to life. Their words preserve life,
as the fruit that grew on the Tree of life in Paradise should have done.

3. They are Blessings by their Example, which they set before the World. Phil.
2.15. That ye may be B^ameless and harmless the Sons of God without rebuke in
the midst of a Crooked and Perverse generation, among whom ye shine as lights
in the world. The S^ars in the Firmament, are lights to the w^rld and common
bl^ssings to the world So righteous men are the lights of the world, others may
see by the light of their Example how they ought to (...) And (...)
Conversation is sometimes Blessed for (...) Conversion of others. Many of (...)
God when Providence has cast them (...) a Godly Family, the holy Ex^mple of the
(...) of that Family has been a means of their Conversion* So was it in the
Primitive times, many Pagans were brought to ^mbrace Christianity by beholding
the grace that did shine in the Christians of those days; If their N^ighbours
that had done them the greatest wrong, were sick, or in any misery, they would
visit them, pray for them, and relieve them instead of being revenged on them.
This made many Pagans become Christians. And their Exemplary Patience in
suffering Persecution amazed their Enemies, so that many of them of Pers^cutors
became Godly Christians. Thus then ^ighteous m^n are Blessings: Others fare the
be^ter for them We see the Doctrine cleared in the particulars that have been
mentioned.

We proceed to make some Improvement of it.

1. Hence then we must conclude that Righteous men are exceeding dear to God
The Psalmist said in Psalm. 146 8^ The Lord loves the Righteous. It must needs
be so, if he spares other for their sakes. As when a Prince does spare those
that are risen up in rebellion against him, at the intercession of one that is
near to his Person, all men conclude such a one is a great favorite of that
Prince. It is related concerning the Emperor Augustus, that when the
Alexandrians had off^nded ^im and he had ob^ained an absolute conquest over
them, every body thought that now he would destroy the City, but (said he)
there is such a one in the City, a Philosopher whom I have a singular Love for,
and for his s^ke I will spare you all. Well then, since God spares exceeding
wicked men from temporal d^struction out of regard to the Righ^eous, they be
dear to him. And as God spares others for their sakes, so sometimes he destroys
others on their account, that is such as wrong and abuse them. Isa 43.4. I will
give men for thee, and people for thy life, because I have loved thee, and thou
have been precious and honorable in my sight. God destroyed the Kingdom of
Egypt for his people Isreal's sak^, and when the Ethiopians came against them
with an Army of no less than a million of men, the Lord smote them for his
Peoples sake. When Senacherib came against Jerusalem with a mighty Army, God
sent an Angel that destroyed an hundred fourscore and five th^usand of them in
one night, and this for his peoples sake. So the Babylonian Empire was laid
waste because of the wrong that was done by them to Righteous ones. Isa. 43.14
I have sent to Babylon (says the Lord) and (...) for your sakes bring down
their N^bles, and the Cha^deans whose cry is in their Ships God sent ^he M^des
and Persians against them The Great Ones who had Palaces in Babylon, were
brought down, and the comm^n people among the Chaldeans got into S^ip^ ^or
their safety, where they made a l^mentabl^ cry. This d^struction did the Lord
bring upon them for the s^k^ of his people. Then they are very dear ^o God.

2. W^ (...) here see who a^e the most exc^ll^nt and d^si^ab^e pers^ns in the
world Are they the Rich^st m^n? N^, (...) R^ghteous. Are they the m^st Learned?
N^, but the most G^dly m^n P^ov 12 26. The Righteous is m^^e Excellent than his
Neighb^ur As for un^ig^teous m^n they pull down J^dgmen^s. The w^a^h of God is
revealed from heaven against all ungod^iness and unrigh^eousness of men. Romans
1.18 But it is good being where there be many Righteous: It is good living in a
Family where the Master of that Family is a Righteous man: When Parents have
Children to disp^se of, let them be sure to dispose of them into Godly
Families. Not into a Family in which there is no Prayer, because the Lord has
threa^^ed to poor ^ut his fury on the Families that call not on his N^me, Ier.
10.25 But if you put your Children into Godly Families, they will be lik^ to
fare the better for it in Body, and in Soul too.

3 Hence they that do seek the hurt of Righteous men, and would gladly
^x^irpate them (...) of the world, sin g^ievo^st against the Lord and against
themselves too They that would (...) the world of them, sin against God; ^or
G^d t^k^s what is done against them as done against himself. Zech 2 8 He that
touches y^u touches the apple of his eye* Touch them ((...)) you had as good
touch ^he Apple of m^ Eye. So tender is the Lo^d of them: Such si^ against
th^ms^lves too. When Saul was P^rsecu^ing the C^u^ch of God, Christ from heaven
and to him, Why do thou pe^s^cute m^? it is hand for thee to kick against the
pricks When Wi^k^d men set th^ms^lv^s against the R^ght^ous, they do but ki^k
against the p^ick; (...) do but hurt and wound th^mselves They d^ j^st (...) a
man that cu^s the bough on which (...) st^nds, when that falls he falls and is
ruined The greatest Persecutor that is on the face of the earth at this day,
has boasted that he has extirpated all Heretics out of his kingdom: ( Papists
call the Righteous by that name of Heretics.) And if it be so, it may then be
expected, that God will bring more direful plagues on that Kingdom, than ever
came on the kingdom of Egypt Psalm: 34 21. They that hate the Righteous shall be
desolate. Persecutors that set themselves to destroy the righteous in the
world, do but b^ing desolation on themselves in so doing.

4. Here is ground to hope both as to England and New England. It is dreadfully
true, that our Nation lies under Prodigious guilt; the Sins of Sodom have been
found there. Horrible D^baucheries have filled the Nation, by means of one man
especially who made three Nations to sin. Yea, and the Nation in general is
under the guilt of a greater sin, than ever Sodom was guilty of, namely, the
sin of Disobedience to the glorious Gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ. If such
S^rmons had been Preached in Sodom as have been Preached in England, we may
believe that they would have R^pented in dust and ashes, and have continued
until this day. Were not Two thousand faithful Ministers of Christ Silenced in
one black day? Since which time Gods holy vengeance has smitten our Nation with
very terrible Judgments, with Plague and Fire, and Sword. How awful was that
judgment when an hundred thousand Souls were swept away by the Pestilence, and
that in one City, and in one year. And when the capital City was burnt and laid
in Ruinous heap^, how awful was that judgment from on high. Besides the Wars
whereby the Treasure of the Nation has been wasted. Yet has there not been that
National turning unto God which he h^s expected. There has not been a thorough
Reformation either of manners or of other evils. We may than fear that more
terrible things are at the door than ever yet we have known: Yet not utter
Destruction. It was said of the Jewish Nation notwithstanding all the Sins they
had been guilty of, Isa. 6 13. That the holy seed shall be the substance
thereof. So may we hope concerning our sinful Nation, that the Holy Seed, that
the righteous will be a means to preserve it from utter Desolation: for
doubtless there be many such, and it may be more than in any one Nation in the
World. To be sure there be more than Fifty, yea than Fifty thousand righteous
men to be found in those Kingdoms. I remember I once knew a very holy and
Learned man, (it was Dr. Winter who was the Provost of the College in Dublin
when I belonged to that University Forty four years since) who in a meeting
with his Church, that were assembled together to Pray, pleading for England,
Scotland and Ireland, just as Abraham did here for Sodom, (...) he, if there be
Fifty thousand righteous men (...), Scotland and Ireland, wilt not thou save
the Nations, for the sake of Fifty thousand righteous men* And so went on till
at last he came to ten thousand; upon this he made a pause as one surprised and
amazed, and turned his Prayer into a Thanksgiving, in that his Prayer was
heard. Some inquiring of him afterward the reason of it, he told them, that
God had assured him that for the sake of ten thousand righteous men, He would
not destroy those Nations. So as to New England, there are many righteous men
yet among us: we may then hope that God will remember that word, Ier. 30 11. I
will not make a full end of them. Although we have reason to fear seven time
greater evils th^n we have hi^herto had experience of, nevertheless, God will
not as yet make a full end of us, but while so many righteous are to be found
in the Land, he will spare us for their sakes; And therefore,

Lastly, Let us make sure that we be found among the Righteous And then it will
be well with us It may be signal temporal Preservations shall attend us, in
those dismal Confusions which are hastening upon the World. It may be we shall
be hid in the day of the Lords anger. There is a third woe Trumpet yet to Sound;
and behold! the third woe comes quickly, and it will be the dire^u^^est woe that
ever came upon the earth since the world began. Well, but let our chief care
be, that we may be found among the righteous, and it will be well with us* And
if we would be found among the righteous, we must have a better righteousness
than that of our own, namely, the Righteousness of Jesus Christ the Son of God.
If then we be found Clothed with the glorious righteousness of the Lord Jesus
Christ, what ever comes on the world it shall go well with us for ever. Then
shall our Souls be safe to Eternity. So let us walk in the fear of God, and
remember that Scripture with which I conclude, Eccl. 8.12. Surely I know that
it shall go well with them that fear God, which fear before him.

The Morning STAR.
Revelations XXII.16. The Bright and Morning Star.


THESE words were spoken by the Lord Jesus Christ, who knowing that men, would
be apt to question the truth of the Prophesies con^ained in this Book, to put
all out of doubt, declares that no man or Angel, but he himself was the Author
of it; to intimate which is the scope of this verse, wherein Christ is
described,

1. From his Name Jesus, implying his being the Savior of men. I Jesus have
sent my Angel; therefore not the Angel was the Author of this Book. The Angel
did only declare the M^ssage that Christ sent him with

2. He is described from his Divine Nature, implied in that expression of his
being the Root of David; one that David received his Being from. As there is
not a Branch without a Root, so there had never been such a man as David, if
Christ as God had not given to him his being.

3. He is described from his Humane Nature, in that expression of his being the
Offspring of David, which implies his being the promised Messiah. The Jews
commonly called Christ by that name of the Son of David. God had promised David
that Christ should descend from him: The M^ssiah was to be of his Off^pring, a
Branch of his Family. It was once said to the Jews, since Christ is David's Son,
how does David when inspired by the Holy Spirit of God, call him his Lord: They
were not able to answer that question, because they did not believe that the
M^ssiah was God; but unto Christians it is very plain: As God he is David's
Lord, and so the Root of David, but as man he is David's Son, and so the
Offspring of David.

Lastly, Christ is described from the Glory of his Person, in the words now
before us, which may be cleared under the Doctrine, which is,

That the Lord Jesus Christ is fitly compared to a Star, and in special to the
bright Morning Star.

We have the like comparison to this in other Scriptures. These words seem to
allude to the 24th. of Numbers 17* where it is said, A Star shall rise out of
Jacob, and shall smite the corners of Moab; which words although they were partly
fulfilled in David, who smote the Corners, that is to say, the Princes of Moab,
nevertheless they are chiefly to be understood concerning Christ, and the
Spiritual Moab that has been and shall be smitten by him. Again, in Rev. 2.28.
Christ says, to him that overcomes I will give the Morning Star; when Christ
gives himself with all his benefits to the Believer, than does he give him the
Morning Star. For clearing the Doctrine, we shall, (1.) Inquire into the
Similitude, and (2.) The Dissimilitude which is in this comparison.

1. Then, In what respect is the Lord Jesus Christ compared to a Star, and in
special to the Morning Star? For Answer,

1. Stars are very glorious Creatures. Although there is a great difference
among them as to their glory. Some Stars are of the first, others of the
second, some of the sixth magnitude, as Astronomers are wont to distinguish.
And the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 15.41. That one Star differs from another in
glory; nevertheless, they are all glorious Creatures; and they are a glory and
an ornament to that Heaven where God has set them; therefore is it said, Job
26.13. He has garnished the Heavens; and how? namely with Stars that glitter
there. How do the Heavens glitter in a clear Starry Night! Thus Christ is most
glorious: When he appeared in Humane Shape to the Elders of Israel, Exodus 24
10. there seemed to be under his feet as it were a Sapphire Stone, and the body
of heaven in its clearness. A Sapphire Stone is a glorious Gem full of beautiful
specks resembling Stars. In like sort did Christ's glory then appear. And there
is no Star though of the greatest magnitude that is such an ornament unto the
second Heaven, as Christ is, yea as the Humane Nature of Christ is to the
Heaven of Heavens where he now does shine with inexpressible glory. Therefore
it is said, That the Lamb (that is Christ) is the light and glory of the
Heavenly Jerusalem. Rev. 21.23.

2. Stars are not subject unto such mutation as sublunary Bodies are. They are
of perpetual duration, and therefore it is a phrase in Scripture, as the days
of heaven, to intimate perpetual duration. The Stars are by the Hebrews called
by that name of Chochabim, by Antiphrasis, because they are lights that never
shall be extinguished, they have been shining in the Heavens ever since the
first Creation, and probably will continue to be there when this Earth shall
perish* But Christ is more immutable than any Star (...) heaven Ioh 12 34. The
Jews said, we have (...) out of the Law that Christ abides for ever; (...) less
their meaning was that they had read out of the 110^h Psalm, that Christ is a
Priest for ever: Unto the Son of God it has been said, Thy Throne is for ever
and ever, thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail, Heb. 1.8, 12 Jesus
Christ is the same yesterday and to day and for ever. So then he is fi^l^
resembled to a Star, in regard of his immutable Being

3. Stars in general (and the Morning Star in special) are a common benefit to
the World. All the Nations on the Earth are benefited by the influences
thereof. This must we say concerning the Lord Jesus Christ, he is a Blessing to
all the Nations of the World. It was said therefore to Abraham, Gen 26.18 In
thy seed (that is in Christ) shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed. All
the E^^ct of God, of whom there are some of all Nations do feel the saving
influence of this Star. But besides that, Christ has been a Blessing to all men
whatever; all Mankind has ^ared the better for him; for it is by means of Jesus
Christ that the world has been put under a Dispensation of Divine Patience: The
tree of mankind has not been cut down, because Christ has interposed and
preserved it. As it is said concerning the barren Fig Tree, by which the Jewish
Church and Nation was intended, when there was a sentence passed to Cut it
down, (...) Dresser of the Vineyard said, spare it ou^ year (...), and if it
does not bring forth fruit, then it (...) be ^ut down. In like manner when the
Law of God had sentenced mankind to be cut down, Christ stepped in and said,
spare that tree, till all the Elect be called, and then it shall be cut down.
So that Christ is in that respect a Savior of all men, but especially of them
that do believe.

4 Stars and especially the Morning Star gives light unto the World. Jer.
31.35. God gives the Sun for a light by day and the Stars for a light by
night. Hence is that expression of Stars of light* Psalm. 148.3. Praise the Lord
ye Stars of light. The morning Star is in a singular manner one of those Stars
of light. But this must we say concerning the Lord Jesus Christ: He gives light
unto the world, Luke 1.78* 79* Through the tender mercy of our God, the day
spring from on high has visited us, to give light to them that sit in darkness
Christ is called the Light of the world, Ioh. 8.12 There is light enough in him
to enlighten all the world, and therefore he is said to be a Great light. As in
Isa 9 It Is said* the dimness shall not be as in the Land of Z^bulun and
Naphtali, and in Galilee, the People that sat in darkness saw a great light,
for unto us a Child is born, a Son is given, and his name shall be called
Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God. To open that Scripture as we go along.
The words are a Prophecy that the Messiah should live in Galilee: And so it
came to pass; for although he was by a wonderful Providence born at Bethlehem,
acc^^ding as the Scripture had foretold: and altho^^^ his Passion was at
Jerusalem, and his Ascension was from Mount Olivet near Jerusalem, yet his
Conversation was for the most part in Galilee. When Isaiah wrote those words, a
sad calamity had newly befallen Zebulun and Napthali, which were in Galilee,
the Assyrians had made them De^olate: Now the Prophet to comfort them, tells
them of a thing that should happen in that part of the Land of Canaan, which
would make amends for all their sorrows and miseries, namely that when the
Messiah came, he would live in Galilee, and enlighten them by Preaching the
Gospel unto them; and so it came to pass. For our Savior during his private
life dwelt in the City of Nazareth, a Town in Galilee; and when he Entered upon
his Public Ministry, he did Reside in Capernaum, which was the Metropolis of
Galilee: And all his Disciples were Galileans; the blind Jews obj^cted that
Jesus could not be the Christ, because he came out of Galilee, whereas if they
had understood the Sc^ipture, they would ra^h^r thence have concluded that he
was the M^ssi^h, since the Prophet Isaiah had fore^old that he should Preach in
Galilee: He seldom come to Jerusalem only on the Public Fest^^als, but spent
his time most in Galilee, Preaching the Gospel there: Thus did a great Light
app^ar unto them. Spiri^ual Light is from Christ. The light of saving knowledge
is from him The Scriptures have that light in them. (...) was said to Timothy,
Thou have known the Scriptures which are able to make wise unto Salvation. Now
the Scriptures are the words of Christ, Col. 3.16. They are rays of light from
this morning Star. The world was in darkness and ignorance before Christ came
into it: all the Nations of the world were in thick darkness excepting one
Nation, and that one had as it were but Candle light among them. This I take to
be the meaning of the Apostle, 2 Pet. 1.19. There is a sure word of Prophecy to
which you do well to take heed, as to a light which shines in a dark place,
until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts. The Apostle compares
that light which the Jewish Church had from the Scriptures of the old
Testament, to a Candle that shines in a dark Room, but now (says he) that
Christ is come, and the Gospel dispensation takes place, the day is dawned, and
the day Star is risen in your hearts. It was foretold that the Times of the
Messiah should be Times of very great knowledge, that the light of knowledge
should then abound, Isa* 11 9 The knowledge of the Lord shall cover the Earth,
as the Waters cover the Sea. What abundance of waters be there in the Sea? even
so, in the days of the Messiah, an abundance of knowledge shall cover the
earth It has been so, and there is a day hast^ning, when it will be unspeakably
more so than ever yet has been. As for knowledge concerning future events to
befall the Church of God, that light is from the Lord Jesus Christ. He is in a
special manner in the Text before us represented as the Morning Star, in that
he has brought light to the Church concerning what should befall it even to his
Second coming: what Changes, what Persecutions, and what Glory after all.

Again, there is the light of Saving Grace, that also is from Christ. Ioh. 1 16
Of his fullness we all receive and grace for grace. What ever grace is in any
man's Soul, it is a ray darted into him from this Morning Star: and therefore
Christians have more or less grace, according as Christ is pleased to shine on
them, and impart this light to them. And there is the light of Joy and
Consolation; that is called light in the Scripture. In Esthers time the Jews
had Light and Joy. A joyful day is a light day This light comes from Christ.
Phil. 2 1. If there be therefore any Consolation in Christ, if there be not
Consolation in Christ, it is no ^^ere to be had in heaven or in earth; therefore
Christ is called by that name of Consolation, Luk 2 25 Simeon did wait for the
Consolation of Israel, that is to say, h^ waited for Christ's c^ming into the
world. Once more, there is also the light of Glory* Glory is called the
Inheritance (...) Saints in Light, Col 1.12 This is also from Christ. We are
called to Eternal Glory by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet 5 10 So then inasmuch as Christ
gives light to men, he is fi^ly resembled to the Morning Star.

5 The Morning Star excels other Stars. It has a peculiar glory in it. And
hence men of the greatest Eminency are compared to Stars in the Scripture. The
falling of Stars from Heaven is a fr^quent expression denoting the downfall of
Princes, Rev. 8 10. There f^ll a great Star* from heaven. That Scripture was
fulfilled when Augustulus the last Roman Emperor lost his Dignity. Sometimes a
man that excels all other men, is resembled to the Morning Star, as the King of
Babylon is called by that name of Hill^^^ben Shachar, that is, the bright Star,
the Son of the Morning, Isa. 14.12. How art thou fallen Lucifer, the Son of the
Morning: It Is spoken concerning the King of Babylon. The Morning Star excels
other Stars

1. In Brightness: All the Stars of heaven have a brightness in them, and are
therefore expressed by that of the Brightness of the Firmament, Dan. 12 3 But
the Morning Star has a singular b^ightness in it.

2. It Excels others in Light. The Morning S^ar viewed in the Telescope appears
like an half Moon: It has such light in it, that sometimes i^ has been observed
to cast a Shadow. And it is often seen at midday when the Sun obscures the
light of other Stars. But the glorious Lord Jesus Christ does excel all the
Stars of God. Eminent Saints are called Stars: but Christ excels them all; He
is Fairer than the Children of men, and Anointed above his fellows. The Angels
are compared to Morning Stars, Job 38.7. The Morning Stars shouted for joy,
that is the Angels of Heaven who were made in the morning of the Creation.
Angels are not to be compared with the Lord Jesus Christ; when he appears their
glory disappears The Apostle uses a higher expression concerning the glory of
Christ than may be used concerning any other Man or Angel in Heaven, in Heb.
1.3. He is the brightness of his Fathers glory. So then because of his
brightness and glory he is fitly resembled to the Morning Star.

6. When the Morning Star appears the darkest time of the Night is over. The
Morning Star appears at the end of the night. So did Christ appear at the end
of the Jewish world, Heb 9 28. He has appeared in the end of the world; as the
morning Star does appear in the end of the night. The legal Dispensation was a
dark dispensation, and when that was just ended, Christ appeared, and that
night of darkness which was on the world, vanished presently on his appearing,
1 Ioh. 2* 8. The darkness is passed away and now the true light shines. The
darkness of ignorance that was on the world, the darkness of Judaism and
Heathenism, is wonderfully pass^d away, and Christ in his Gospel is the true
light that shipes. This Star is to be seen in the Morning Even so there is a
blessed Morning that will be here over a little while, when all men shall see
this bright Morning Star, namely the Morning of the Resurrection, when the
night of Death is past, and all Believers shall come out of the Land of
darkness, when the R^surrection World shall take place, Christ will lighten the
whole earth with his glory.

Lastly. The Appearance of the Morning Star is a sure Sign the day is
Approaching, that the Sun will arise and shine very speedily. Some observe that
it is commonly a sign of a fair day if the morning Star is seen. To be sure the
appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ did foretell a happy day unto the world. The
Angel said to the Shepherds, in Luke 2, 10 I bring you glad Tidings of great
joy which shall be to all People, for unto you is born this day a Savior even
Christ the Lord So when Christ appears spiritually to the Souls of m^n, it is a
sign of a blessed day: It Is a sure sign that the day of Salvation shall arise on
their Souls. It was said to Zacob^us, Luk 19.9. Salvation is come to this house
this day. Christ was come to that House and Salvation came along with him. This
may be a special reason why Christ here in this Book of Revelation is
represented as the Morning Star, because in this Book he does bring glad
Tidings unto the World; He brings Tidings of his own coming, as in the Context
before us, Behold I come quickly. In the Morning if you see this Star, you may
conclude that the Sun will quickly arise upon the world. So Christ does in the
conclusion of this Book bring Tidings of a glorious day approaching unto the
Church, that the Church shall one day be Triumphant not only in H^aven to all
E^ernity, but here on Earth too, when New Jerusalem shall come down from
Heaven. When the Saints in glory shall come down from Heaven and be reunited to
their Bodies, and reside here on earth, during the glorious dispensation of
Judgment, then comes the New Jerusalem down from Heaven. And Christ brings to
the Church glad Tidings of such a day. He is then fitly resembled unto the
Morning Star: Thus for the Similitude. We proceed,

2. To the Dissimilitude, which is between Christ, and the Morning Star.

1. The Morning Star shines with a borrowed light. It is in it self a dark
body, as all the Planets are. The Morning Star would have no Splendour at all in
it, were it not for the Sun that shines on it: but Christ shines with a light
that is from himself. And although it is true concerning the Humane nature of
Christ, that the glory of it is received, yet it is received from himself, that
is to say, from his Divine nature therefore Christ said to the Jews, Ioh 2 19
Destroy this Temple. No doubt but (as some have observed) that when Christ
spoke these words he pointed to his own Body, and in three days I will raise it
up. Christ's Resurrection, so his Ascension and Glorification was from himself,
from his Divine nature.

2. The Morning Star is but a Creature: but the Lord Jesus Christ he is more
than a Creature. Though his Humane nature is a Creature, and in Truth the most
glorious Creature that ever was made. There is more of God to be seen in the
Humane nature of Christ than in all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth besides.
But his Person is increated; he is an increated Person, he is the Creator: He
has made the Stars, the Heavens and Host thereof are made by him: and this
Morning Star that appears in the Firmament was made by him; nothing was ever
made but what was made by him. And his being thus the Creator, does distinguish
him from the Morning Star. The first Creature that ever was made did receive
its beginning and being from him: therefore it is said of him, in Rev. 3.14.
That he is the beginning of the Creation of God: the meaning of which is not
(as Arians have perversely interpreted that Scripture) that he was the first
Creature but that the Creation of God received its beginning from him. Thus
then we see the Doctrine cleared in the things that have been insisted on*

For APPLICATION.
1. We should Admire the Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ. The most glorious
Creatures do but a little set forth his glory: the Stars of Heaven, yea the
bright Morning Star has no brightness in it compared with him. The Sun in the
Firmament is darkness it self compared with the Lord Jesus Christ, Job 25:5.
Behold even to the Moon and it shines not, yea the Stars are not pure in his
sight. As for the Morning Star, our mortal eyes may behold the glory of it
without any detriment, but the glory of Christ is such as no mortal eye can
b^hold it, He dwells in glorious and unapproachable light whom never man saw
nor indeed can see. When Christ appeared to Paul going to Damascus, there was a
light above the brightness of the Sun, in its Meridian glory; it was then
midday, but the glory of Christ was greater than the light of the Sun, Act
26.13. Ten thousand Suns would not shine so gloriously as the Lord Jesus Christ
now does When Christ was in his Estate of Humiliation, the Apostle John could
lay his head in his Bosom: but since in his Glorified Estate, that Apostle had
an Apparition of Christ: And (said he) I fell down as dead at his (...) Rev.
1.17. We cannot admire the Lord Jesus Christ too much We may be more taken than
we should be with the glory of Creatures, but we never can with the glory of
the Lord Jesus Christ, though our Admiration should be to Adoration; that is no
more than what is out indispensable duty. To worship the Morning Star as the
Gentiles of old were wont to do, under the name of Venus, and as some Arabians
do (at this day) is idolatry, and a horrible sin: but to worship the Lord Jesus
Christ is our duty. When he first appeared in the world there was a Miraculous
Star seen: it was not a Comet, or such a Star, as is now blazing over our
heads, for it directed to a particular Town, and to a particular house ^lso.
Therefore it was such a wonderful work of God as that of the Pillar of Fire in
the Wilderness, that directed the Children of Israel in the way. It may be (as
some of the Ancients thought) it was an Angel appearing in the form of a Star.
But by this the Wise men of the East knew that it was their Duty to worship the
Lord Jesus Christ. Where is he (said they) that is born King of the Jews, for
we have seen his Star, and are come to worship him. There is not one Angel in
Heaven, but what does worship our Lord Jesus Christ. Heb. 1 6. Worship him all
you Angels.

2. Hence then Christless Sinners are in a dismal Estate. For they, yea their
Souls are in Midnight Darkness. Has not this Star Risen on thee? then what if
thy case? Has not Christ by his Spirit risen on thee with his saving
influences, then thou art none of his, Romans 8 9. If a man has not the Spirit of
Christ he is none of his! And if none of his, then whose art thou? And where
art thou, but in the Kingdom of Darkness, in black chains which thy miserable
Soul is captivated and held fast in them. Has not thy Soul seen this Morning
Star! then thou have no assurance that ever thou shall see a good day. No
Assurance that ever th^re will be a day of Salvation to thy soul What a
miserable case be they then in, that never saw this morning star, that never
heard of Christ; they sin in Darkness and in the Region of the shadow of Death.
And those will be a thousand times more miserable that have heard of Christ,
but never had an heart to believe on him. That this bright Star has risen on
them, but they will not behold the glory of it; they shut their eyes against
this light. This is the Condemnation that light is come into the world, and men
love darkness rather than light; for such in a special manner is Reserved the
blackness of Darkness for ever.

3. Hence then the Lords People should observe Christ's Providential
Dispensations and Appearances to them, so as to be encouraged thereby. Christ
is wont to appear first as a Morning Star, and then as the Sun; that is to say,
he does first give a lesser degree of light unto his people, and that as an
assurance of far greater light, and tha^ the light given to them shall shine
more and more to the perfect day. Christ as a Morning Star has been dispensing
himself to his people in the two last ages of the World. When the Reformation
began, then did Christ appear in his Providence as the Morning Star in respect
of that light of knowledge which he blessed the world with. It was a dark day,
(or a long night rather) during the Reign of Antichrist; but when the
Providence of Christ began a Reformation in the Nations near two hundred years
ago, there did appear the Morning Star. And the Light has been advancing and
growing ever since that day. The Age wherein we now live is an Age of great
light, (would to God it were an Age of great zeal and holiness too) but it is
an Age of greater Light than the former. There are many dark and difficult
places in the Scripture, that formerly could not be understood, which of late
have been opened with great clearness. And especially in this Book of the
Revelations. The first Reformers did very few of them search into it; and those
few that did saw but a little. Calvin though I believe he was the greatest
Interpreter that ever wrote ont the Bible, yet would not meddle with the Book
of the Revelation. He professed he did no know what to make of it: When as in
the last Century very many have looked into it, and made glorious discoveries;
a blessed sign it is that all the glorious things spoken of therein shall be
fulfilled in this very Age which God has now brought us to the beginning of.
Inasmuch as the Book is unsealed, that is a sign the End is very near. There
are two things which have lately happened which I would take notice of, and one
may see the Morning Star in them. Though it is true, that we have cause to
expect a dismal time. A little before break of day is the darkest time of all
the night. Nevertheless the morning star does appear in two things; one is that
wonderful Conversion of Pagans to the Christian Faith that has been in our
days, and very lately.

Papists have boasted of their Xaverins, who they say was an instrument of
Converting many thousands of the East Indians, for which cause the Pope
Canonized him: And in their Books they reflect on Protestants, pretending that
the like was never done by those whom they call Heretics. But alas we may say
of what they have done, as Christ said to the Scribes and Pharisees, Matthew.
23.15 You compass Sea and Land to make one Proselyte, and when he is made, you
make him two fold more the Child of Hell than your selves. The Jesuits Converts
are converted, not to Christ, but to Antichrist: They have taught them to be
Idolaters: And have obtruded a false Gospel on them. Xavier has inserted
diverse ficti^ious things concerning Christ and concerning the Apostle Peter,
which he procured to be translated into the Persian tongue for the service of
the great Mogul. Another Jesuit has added to the Gospel, the Story of the
Assumption and Coronation of the Virgin Mary. Thus have they corrupted the word
of God with their own Inventions, deluding the miserable Heathen thereby, whom
they have made more obstinate in their false belief, than if they were Pagans
still. Protestants dare not teach any thing but what is according to the
Scripture. And it has pleassed God to bless their endeavors with wonderful
Success within these few years past, amongst the East Indians. In the Kingdom
of Ieffana^a^man, the Lord has prospered the Labors of Five Du^ch Ministers,
so as that above an hundred and forty thousand of those Indians, have embraced
the true Christian Protestant Religion. And since that in four years time forty
thousand more of them are b^come Christians, renouncing the Idols whom they and
their Fathers worshipped. Moreover, in Amboina there are thirty thousand Souls
who have lately subjected themselves to the Lord Jesus Christ, although (which
is mavelous) many of them were Mahometans. Of these things I have had certain
Advice from a Learned Professor (Dr Leusden) in the University of Utrick in
Holland, who received the account of them, from the Ministers concerned in this
glorious work This looks like a Morning Star

There has also of late been a notable Conversion of J^ws to the Christian
Religion. In the City of Hamburg, several hundreds of Jews some of them Rabbis,
have by the happy endeavors of one Divine, ( viz Dr Esdras Edzard) been
brought off from their Judaism to Christianity. All these Converts have been
brought to own Christ within these S^ven years l^st past. The like has not been
known since the days of the Apostles: May we no^ then hope that what i^
promised concerning the Conversion of the Israelitish Nation, will ere long be
gloriously accomplished.

4. If Christ is the Morning Star how should Christians long for his Appearing
Do not men that have been for a long night in darkness and in a Storm, long to
see the Morni^g Star appear! So Christians, who are as Passengers in a Sea of
trouble, that have had a Stormy night of it, may well long for the appearing of
this Morning Star to them We should long for Christ's Providential Appearances,
when he will deliver his persecuted Flocks: And when Princes shall oppress his
People no more: Such a day is coming when the man of the Earth shall no, more
oppress And we should long for Christ's Personal Appearing: When he shall appear
the second time unto Salvation, and when the man of sin shall be utterly
destroyed by the Brightness of his Coming, and God shall give rewards to all
that fear him both small and great. Then will he give a Crown of Righteousness
to all that Love his Appearing Amen, Even So Come LORD JESUS, Come Quickly.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 30. line 23. read infinitely. p. 31. l. 18 r. when. p. 34 l. 26. r to his.


