A GUIDE TO Eternal Glory. Or, Brief Directions to all Christians, how to
attain to Everlasting Salvation. With several other brief Tracts, and Spiritual
Hymns.

1 Samuel 25.32, 33. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, which sent thee this day
to meet me, and Blessed be thy Advice.

Boston, in N. E. Printed by T. Green, for Nicholaes Buttolph, at the corner of
(...) Coffee-House. 1702.

(...)
CHRISTIAN Reader, I finding in this latter day, the love of God shining in
some measure with its pleasant beams in my heart, warming my affections,
enflaming my soul, not only to give a spiritual echo in Soul-duty, to so great
a Lover as m^ Savior is, whose transcendant love passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19.
But also the loving and wishing well to all Sions heaven-born Children; for I
find in this day, many poor souls tossed to and fro ready to be carried away
with every wind of doctrine by the sl^ghts of men and cunning craftiness,
whereby the lie in wait to deceive, Ephesians. 4.14. And that there are so many
foundations to build upon that are false, upon which much labor is spent in
vain; that we^ are not speaking the truth in love, neither are they growing up
into him in all things which is the head Christ, Ephesians. 4.15. and if there be a
disjunction From there cannot be a growing In Christ; and without our Union in
him, all that we do as cursed. Thou will find therefore, Courteous Reader, this
ensuing little Treatise, if the Lord be pleased to bless the Reading of it unto
thee, as a shall voice behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk in it, that
thou turn neither to the right hand nor to the left. For the way into that
pleasant path of Soul-justification before God, is in and through the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ; for all our Self-righteousness is as filthy
rags: for surely shall one sa^, In the Lord have I righteousness and strength;
in the Lord shall all the Seed of Israel be justified, and shall glory, Isa.
45.24, 25. It is only the Dying of that just One, for us Unjust ones, must
bring us to God; He that knew no sin, was made sin for us, that we that were
nothing but sin might be made the righteousness (...) God in Him. 2 Cor. 5. 21.
Christian Reader, let all that is of old Adam in thee fall down at the foot of
Christ, He only must have pre-eminence; All the vessels of this new spiritual
new Covenant Temple, from the Cups to the Flaggons, must be all hung upon
Christ; is to bear the Glory, for He is only worthy, for He is to build the
Temple of the Lord and to bear the Glory. He by his Fathers appointment is
Foundation-stone, Cornerstone, and is to be Top-stone; He is the Fathers
fullness of Grace and Glory. Whatever thy wants be, thou may come to Him,
there is balsom enough in him fit for Soul-cure. Reader, The good Lord help
thee to experience this ensuing word of advice, that it may be made by God unto
thee, like Honey, sweet to thy Soul, and health to thy bones; and my Soul shall
rejoice with thee.

Thy Brother in the Faith and Fellowship of the Gospel.

T. Wilcox

A GUIDE TO ETERNAL GLORY.
Or, Brief Directions to all Christians, how to attain a True and Saving
Interest in CHRIST, etc.
A Word of Advice to my own heart and thine. thou art a Professor, and
partakest of all Ordinances; Thou do well, they are Glorious Ordinances: but
if thou have not the blood of Christ at the root of thy Profession, 'twill
wither, and prove but painted Pageantry to go to Hell in. If thou retain Guilt
or Self-righteousness under i^ those Vipers will eat out all the vitals of it
at length. Try and Examine with greatest strictness every day, what Bottom thy
Profession and Hope of Glory is built upon, whether it was laid by the hand of
Christ? If not, it will never be able to endure the storm that must come again
it, Satan will throw it all down, and great shall be the fall thereof. Mat. 7.
2^.

Glorious Professor! Thou shall be winnowed, every vein of thy Profession will
be tried to purpose: it is terrible to have it all come tumbling down, and find
nothing but it to bottom upon.

Soaring Professor! See to thy waxed Wings betimes, which will melt with the
heat of Temptations. What a misery is it to trade much, and break at length,
having no stock, no foundation laid for Eternity in thy Soul.

Gifted Professor! Look there be not a worm at the root that will spoil all thy
fine gourd, and make it die about thee in a day of scorching.

Look over thy Soul (...), and ask, Where is the blood of Christ to be seen
upon my Soul? What righteousness is it that I stand upon to be saved by? Have I
cast off all my Self-ighteousness? Many Eminent Professors have come at length
to Cry out in the sight of the ruin of their Duties, Undone, undone to all
Eternity! The greatest Sins may be hid under the greatest Duties, and the
greatest Terrors. See the wound that sin has made in thy Soul be perfectly
cured by the Blood of Christ, not skinned over with Duties, Humblings,
Enlargements, etc. Apply what thou will besides the blood of Christ, it will
poison the sore: thou will find that sin was never mortified truly, that thou
have not seen Christ bearing for thee upon the Cross. Nothing can kill it but
the beholding of Christ's Righteousness. Nature can afford no Balsom fit for
Soul-cure: Healing from Duty and not from Christ, is the most desperate
Disease: Poor ragged Nature, with its highest improvements, can never spin a
garment fine enough ( without sp^t) large enough ( without patches) to cover
the Souls nakedness: nothing can sit the soul for that use but Christ's perfect
Righteousness. Whatsoever is of Natures spinning must be all unravelled before
the Righteousness of Christ can be put on: whatsoever is of Natures putting on
Satan will come and plunder it every rag away, and leave the soul naked and
open to the wrath of God. All that Nature can do will never make up the least
dram of Grace that can mortify sin or look Christ in the face one day.

Thou art a Professor, go to Hearing, Praying, Receiving, yet miserable
may thou be; look about thee, did thou ever yet see Christ to this day, in
distinction from all other Excellencies and Righteousness in the world, and all
them falling before the Majesty of his Love and Grace. Isa. 2.17. If thou have
seen Christ truly, thou have seen pure grace, pure righteousness in Him, every
way infinite, far exceeding all Sin and Misery. If thou have seen Christ, thou
can trample upon all the righteousness of Men and Angels, so as to bring thee
into acceptance with God. If thou have seen Christ, thou would not do a Duty
without Him for ten thousand worlds, 1 Cor. 2.2. If ever thou did see Christ,
thou sawedst Him a Rock, higher than Self-righteousness, Satan, Sin, Psalm.
61.2. and the Rock does follow thee, 1 Cor. 10.4 and there will be continual
droppings of honey and grace out of that Rock to satisfy thee, Psalm. 81.16.
Examine if ever thou did behold Christ as the only begotten of the Father;
full of Grace and Truth, Joh. 1.14, -- Besure that thou art come to Christ,
that thou stand upon the Rock of Ages* have answered his Call to thy Soul have
closed with him for Justification?

Men talk bravely of Believing, whilst whole and sound; few know it: Christ is
the Mystery of the Scripture, Grace is the Mystery of Christ. Believing is the
most wonderful thing in the world; put any thing of thy own to it, and thou
spoilest it; Christ will not so much as look at it for believing. When thou
believe and come Christ, thou must leave behind thee thy own Righteousness,
and bring nothing but thy Sin: O that is hard! Leave behind all thy Holiness,
Sanctification, Duties, Humblings, etc. and bring nothing but thy Wants and
Miseries, else Christ is not fit for thee, nor thou for Christ. Christ will be
a pure Redeemer and Mediator, or thou and Christ will never agree. Its the
hardest thing in the world to take Christ alone for Righteousness; that is to
acknowledge Him CHRIST; join any thing to Him of thy own, and thou Un-christ
him, Whatever comes in when thou go to God for acceptance, besides Christ,
call it Antichrist; bid it begone, make only Christ's Righteousness triumphant!
all besides that must fall, if Christ stand, and thou shall rejoice in the day
of the fall thereof, Isa. 1.10. Christ alone did tread the Wine Press, and
there was none with him, Chap. 63.3. If thou join to any thing but Christ, He
will trample upon it in fury and anger, and stain his raiment with the blood
thereof. Thou think it is easy to believe, was ever thy Faith tried with an
hour of Temptation, and a true sigh^ of Sin? Was it ever put to grapple with
Satan, and the wrath of God lying upon thy Conscience? When thou were in the
mouth of Hell, an^ the Grave, then did God show the^ Christ, a Ransom, a
Righteousness etc.? Then could thou say, Oh* I see Grace enough in Christ,
thou may say that which is the biggest word in the world, thou Believe.
Untried Faith is uncertain Faith. To Believing there must go a clear Conviction
of sin, and of the Merits of the Blood of Christ, and of Christ's willingness to
save upon this consideration merely, That thou a^t a Sinner; things all harder
than to make a world. All the power in Nature, cannot get up so high in a storm
of Sin and Guilt, as really to believe there is any Grace, any willingness in
Christ to save.

When Satan charge sin upon the Conscience, then for the Soul to charge it
upon Christ, that is Gospel-like, that is to make Him Christ; He serves for
that use: To accept Christ's Righteousness alone, His Blood alone for Salvation,
that is the sum of the Gospel. When the Soul in all duties and distresses can
say, Nothing but Christ: Christ alone, for Righteousness, Justification,
Sanctification, and Redemption* 1 Cor. 1.3^ not Humblings, not Duties, not
Graces, etc. that Soul has got above the reach of the billows.

For all Temptations, Satan's advantages, and our complainings, are said in
Self-righteousness, and Self-Excellence: God pursues these by setting Satan
upon thee (as Laban did Jacob for his Images which Rachel hid, Genesis 31.) These
must b^ torn from thee (be as unwilling a^ thou will) these hinder Christ from
coming in; and till Christ come in Guilt will not out: and where Gui^^ is,
there is hardness of heart; an^ therefore much Guilt argues litt^^ (if any
thing) of Christ: When Guilt is raised up take heed of getting it allayed any
way but by Christ's Blood. Make Christ thy Peace, Ephesians. 2.14. not thy Duties, thy
Tears, etc. Christ thy Righteousness, not thy Graces etc. thou may destroy
Christ by resting in Duties, as well as by Sins. Look at Christ, and do as much
as thou will. Stand with all thy weight upon Christ Righteousness; take heed of
having one foot on thy own Righteousness, the other on Christ's. Till Christ
come and sit on high upon a Throne of Grace in the Conscience, there is nothing
but Guilt, Terrors, Secret suspicions, the Soul hanging between hope and fear,
which is an Ungospel-like state. He that fears to see (...) utmost violence,
the utmost Hell (...) his own heart, he suspects the Merits of Christ. Be thou
never so great a sinner, 1 John 2.1. try Christ, to make Him thy Advocate, and
thou shall find Him Jesus Christ the Righteous. In all doubtings, fears, and
storms of Conscience, look at Christ continually: don't argue with Satan, he
desires no better* bid him go to Christ, and He will answer him; its His
Office, as He is our Advocate, 1 John 2.1. His Office to answer the Law as our
Surety, Heb. 7.22. His Office to answer Justice as our Mediator, Gal. 3.20. 1 Timothy 2.5. And He is Sworn to that Office, Heb. 7.20. Put Christ upon it: If
thou will do any thing thy self for satisfaction for sin, thou renouncest
Christ the Righteous, who was made sin for thee, 2 Cor. 5* Satan may allege
and corrupt Scripture, but he cannot answer Scripture it is Christ's word of
mighty Authority. Christ foiled Satan with it, Mat. 4. In all the Scripture
there is not an ill word against a poor sinner stripped of Self-Righteousness;
nay it plainly points out this man to be the subject of the Grace of the
Gospel, and none else. Believe but Christs-willingness, and that will make thee
willing. If thou find thou can not believe, remember its Christ's work to
make thee believe; Put Him upon it, He works to will and to do of his own good
pleasure, Phil. 2.1^. Mourn for thy Unbelief, which is setting up of Guilt in
the Conscience above Christ, an undervaluing the Merits of Christ, accounting
His Blood an Unholy thing, a Common, an Unsatisfying thing.

Thou complainest of thy self much, does thy sin make thee look more at Christ,
less at Self? That Is right, else complaining is but Hypocrisy. To be looking
at Duties, Graces, Enlargements, when thou should be looking at Christ, that is
pitiful: Looking at them will but make thee Proud; looking at Christ's Grace
will make thee Humble. By Grace ye are saved, Ephesians. 2.5. In all thy temptations
be not discouraged, Jam. 1.2. Those Surges may be, not to break thee, but to
heave thee off thy self, on to the rock Christ. Thou may be brought low,
even to the brink of Hell, ready to tumble in, thou can not be brought lower
then the belly of Hell, (many Saints have been there) yet there may thou
Cry, there may thou look toward the Holy Temple, Jon. 2.2. Into that Temple
none might enter but purifyed ones, and with an offering too, Act. 21.26. But
now CHRIST is our Temple, Sacrifice, Altar, High Priest, to whom none may come
but Sinners, and that without any offering but that of his own Blood, once
offered, Heb. 7. Remember the patterns of Grace that are in Heaven. Thou
think, O what a Monument of Grace should I be! There are many thousands as
rich Monuments as thou can be. The greatest sinner did never pose the Grace
of Christ; do not despair; hope still: when the Cloud is at the blackest, even
then look toward Christ, the standing Pillar of the Fathers Love and Grace,
set up in Heaven, for all Sinners to gaze upon continually. Whatsoever Satan or
Conscience say, do not conclude against thy self; Christ shall have the last
word, He is Judge of Quick and Dead, and must pronounce the final sentence, His
Blood speaks Reconciliation, Col. 1.20 Cleansing, 1 John 1.7. Purchase, Act.
20.28. Redemption, 1 Pet. 1.19. Purging, Heb. 9 13. Remission, Ver 22. Liberty,
Chap. 10.19 Justification, Romans 5.9. Nighness to God, Ephesians. 2 13. Not a drop of
His Blood shall be lost. Stand and hearken what God will say, for He will speak
peace to His people, that they return no more to folly, Psalm. 85.8. He speaks
Grace, Mercy and Peace, 2 Timothy 1.2. That Is the language of the Father and of
Christ. Wait for Christ's appearing, as the morning Star, Rev. 22.16. He shall
come as certainly as the morning, as refreshingly as the rain, Hos. 6.3.

The Sun may as well be hindered from rising, as Christ the Sun of
Righteousness, Mal. 4 2. Look not a moment off Christ; look not upon sin but
look upon Christ first: When thou mournest for sin, if thou do not see Christ,
then away with it, Zech. 12 10. In every Duty look at Christ, before Duty to
pardon, in Duty to assist, after Duty to accept: without this, it is but carnal,
careless Duty. Do not legalize the Gospel, as if part did remain for thee to do
and suffer, and Christ where but a half Mediator, and thou must bear part of
thy own sin, and make part satisfaction. Let sin break thy heart, but not thy
hope in the Gospel: Look more at Justification, than Sanctification. In the
highest commands, consider Christ not as an exactor to require, but a debtor,
an undertaker to work. If thou have looked at workings, duties, qualifications,
etc. more than at the Merits of Christ, it will cost thee dear, no wonder thou
go complaining. Graces may be evidences, the Merits of Christ only (without
them) must be the Foundation of thy hope to bottom on. Christ only can be the
ho^e of Glory, Col. 1.27. When we come to God, we must bring nothing but Christ
with us, any ingredients of ou^ own qualifications will poison and corrupt
Faith. He that builds upon Duties, Graces, etc. knows not the merits of Christ.
This makes Believing so hard, so far above Nature If thou Believe, thou must
every day renounce ( as dung and dross, Phil. 3.7.) thy Privileges, thy
Obedience, thy Sanctification, thy Duties, thy Tears, thy Meltings, thy Graces,
Humblings, and nothing but Christ must be held up: every day thy workings, thy
Self-sufficiency must be destroyed: thou must take all out of Gods hand; Christ
is the gift of God, Joh. 4.10 Pardon a free gift, Romans 5.16 Ah how Nature
storms, fretts, rages at this, that all is of Gift, and it can purchase
nothing with its actings, tears and duties: that all its Tears are excluded,
and of no value in Heaven! If Nature had been to contrive the way of Salvation,
it would rather have put it into the hands of Saints or Angels to sell it, than
of Christ who gives freely; whom therefore it suspects, it would have set up a
way to purchase by doing; therefore it abominates the Merits of Christ, as a
destructive thing to it, would do any thing to be saved, rather than go to
Christ, or close with Him. Christ will have nothing, the Soul will force
somewhat of its own upon Christ; here is the great controversy.

Consider, did thou ever yet see the Merits of Christ, and the infinite
satisfaction made by his Death. Did thou see this in a time when the burden
of sin and the wrath of God lay heavy upon thy Conscience? That Is Grace: The
greatness of Christ's Merits is not known but to a poor Soul at the greatest
loss. Slight Convictions will have but Slight, Low-prizings of Christ's Blood
and Merits.

Despairing Sinner, thou art looking on thy right hand and on thy left, saying,
Who will show us any good* Thou art tumbling over all thy Duties and
Professions, to patch up Righteousness to save thee, Miserable comforter are
all hose to thee. Look at Christ now, look at Christ now: Look to Him and be
saved, all the ends o^ the Earth, Isa. 45.2^. There is none else. He is a
Savior, and there is none besides Him, ver. 21. Look any where else and thou
art undone: God will look at nothing but Christ, and thou must look at nothing
else. Christ is lifted up on high (as the Brazon Serpent in the wilderness)
that the ends of the Earth, sinners at the greatest distance may see him, and
look toward him. The least si^ht of Him will be Saving, the least touch
Healing to thee: And God intends thou should look on him, for He has set Him
upon a high Throne of Glory in the open view of all poor sinners Thou have
infinite reason ^o look on him; no reason at all to look off him, for He is
meek and lowly in Heart, Mat. 11.29. He will do that Himself, which He requires
of His Creatures, bear with Infirmities, Romans 15.1. not pleasing himself, not
standing upon points of Law, ver. 2. He will restore with the spirit of
meekness, Gal. 6.1. and bear thy burdens, ver. 2. He will forgive, not only
Seven time^ but Seventy times seven, Mat. 18.21, 22. It put the Faith of the
Apostles to it to believe this, Luke 17 4 Because we are hard to forgive, we
think Christ is hard. We see sin great, we think Christ does so, and measure
infinite love with our line, infinite merits with our sins, which is the
greatest pride and blasphemy, Psalm. 103.11, Isa. 40.15. Hear what God says, I
have found a ransom, Job 33.24. ^n Him I am well pleased, Mat. 3.17. God will
have nothing else; nothing else will do thee good, or satisfy Conscience, but
Christ, who satisfied the Father. God does all upon the account of Christ. Thy
deserts are Hell, Wrath, Rejection; Christ's deserts are Life, Pardon, and
Acceptance: He will only show thee the one, and give thee the other. It Is
Christ's own glory and happiness to pardon. Consider, whilst Christ was upon
the Earth, He was more among Publicans and Sinners, than Scribes and Pharisees
His professed adversaries, for they were righteous ones. It is not so as thou
imaginest, that his State in Glory makes him neglectful, scornful to poor
sinners; No, He has the same heart now in Heaven; He is God and changes not.
He is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, Joh. 1.29. He has
gone through all thy Temptations, Dejections, Sorrows, Desertions, Rejections,
Mat. 4.3. to 12 and 26, 38. Mar. 15.34. Luke 22.22.44. and has drank the
bitterness of the Cup, and left thee the sweet; the Condemnation is out; Christ
drank up the Fathers Wrath at one draught, and nothing but Salvation is left
for thee. Thou say thou can not believe, thou can not repent, fitter for
Christ if thou have nothing but Sin and Misery. Go to Christ with all thy
Impenitency, and Unbelief, to get Faith and Repentance from Him that is
Glorious. Tell Him, Lord, I have brought no Righteousness, no Grace to be
accepted in, or justified by, I am come for Thine and must have it We would be
bringing to Christ and that must not be; not a penny of Natures highest
improvement will pass in Heaven. Grace will not stand with Works, Tit. 3.5.
Romans 11.6. That Is a terrible point to Nature, which cannot think of being
stripped of All, not having a rag of Duty or Righteousness to look at
Self-righteousness, Self-sufficiency are the darlings of Nature, which she
preserves as her life; that makes Christ's Righteousness such a strange thing
to Nature, she cannot desire Him. He is directly opposite to all Natures
glorious interest: Let Nature but make Gospel, and it would be quite contrary
to Christ's: It would be to the Just, the Innocent, the Holy, the Righteous,
etc. Christ has made the Gospel for thee, that is to, Needy Sinners, the
Ungodly, the Unrighteous, the Undone, the Unjust, the Accursed. Nature cannot
endure to think the Gospel is only for Sinners, it will rather choose to despair
than to go to Christ upon such terrible terms.

When Nature is put to it by Guilt or Wrath, it will to its old haunts of
Self-righteousness, Self-goodness, etc. An infinite power must cast down those
Strongholds, none but the Self-Justiciary stands excluded out of the Gospel;
Christ will look at the most abominable sinner before him; because to such an
one Christ cannot be made Justification, he is no sinner. To say in a
Complement, I am a sinner, is easy, but to pray with the Publican indeed, Lord
be merciful, to me a sinner, is the hardest prayer in the world. Its easy to
say, I believe in Christ, but to see Christ full of Grace and Truth, of whose
fullness thou may receive grace for grace; Its easy to profess Christ with
the mouth, but to confess Him with the heart, as Peter to be the Christ, the
Son of the Living God: the Mediator, that i^ above flesh and blood. Many call
Christ Savior, few know him so. To see Grace and Salvation in Christ, is the
greatest sight in the world: none can do that, but at the same time, they shall
see that Grace and Salvation to be theirs. Sights will cause Applications. I
may be ashamed to think that in the midst of so much Profession, yet I have
known little of the Blood of Christ, which is the main thing of the Gospel. A
Christless, Formal profession will be the blackest sight next to Hell, that can
be. Thou may have many Good Things, and yet let One thing be wanting; that
may make thee go away sorrowful from Christ; thou have never sold all thou
have, never parted with all thy own righteousness, etc. Thou may be high in
duty, and yet (...) perfect Enemy and Adversary to Christ. In every Prayer, in
every Ordinance, labor after Sanctification to the utmost, but make not a
Christ of it to save thee; if so, it must come down one way of other. Christ's
infinite Satisfaction, not thy own Sanctification, must be thy Justification
before God. When the Lord shall appear terrible out of holy places, fire shall
consume all that, as hay and stubble.

This will be found Religion only, to bot^om all upon the Everlasting Mountains
of Gods Love and Grace in Christ; to live continually in the sight of Christ's
infinite Righteousness and Merits (they are sanctifying, without them the heart
is carnal) and in those sights to see the full vileness of sin, and to see all
pardoned In those sights to Pray, ^ear, (...) see thy polluted self, all thy
weak performances accepted continually; in those sights to trample upon all thy
Self glories, Righteousnesses and Privileges, as abominable, and be found
continually in the Righteousness of Christ only, rejoicing in the ruins of all
thy own Righteousness, the spoiling of all thy own Excellencies, that Christ
alone as Mediator, may be exalted in his Throne, mourning over all thy Duties,
(how glorious soever) that thou have not performed them in that sight and sense
of Christ love Without the blood of Christ sprinkled on the Conscience, all is
dead service. Heb. 9.14

That Opinion of Free Will, (so Cried up) will be easily confuted (as it is by
Scripture) in thy heart, who have had any spiritual dealings with Jesus Christ,
as to the application of his Merits and subjection to his Righteousness. Christ
is every way too Magnificent a person for poor Nature to close withal, or
apprehend. Christ is so infinitely holy, Nature durst never look at Him, so
infinitely good, Nature can never believe him to be such, when it lies under
full sights of sin. Christ is too high and glorious for Nature so much as to
touch. There must be a Divine Nature first put into the Soul to make it lay
hold on him, he lies so infinitely beyond the sight or reach of Nature. That
Christ that natural Free Will can apprehend, is but a natural Christ of a man's
own making, not the Fathers Christ, not Jesus the Son of the living God, to
whom none can come without the Fathers drawing, Joh. 6.44.

Finally, Search the Scriptures daily, as Mines of Gold, wherein the heart of
Christ is laid. Watch against Constitution-sins, see them in their vileness,
and they shall never break out into act. Keep always an humble, empty, broken
frame of heart, sensible of any spiritual miscarriage, observant of all inward
workings, fit for the highest communications Keep not guilt in the Conscience,
but apply the Blood of Christ immediately. God charge sin and guilt upon
thee, to make thee look to Christ, the brazen Serpent. Judge not Christ's love
by Providence, but by Promises. Bless God for shaking thee off thy False
Foundations, for any way whereby He keeps the Soul awakened and looking after
Christ; better Sicknesses, Temptations, than Security and Slightness, A Slight
spirit, will turn a Pro^e spirit, and will Sin and Pray too. S^^ghtress is the
bane of Profession, i^ it be not rooted out of the heart by con^^ant and
serious dealings with, and beholdings of Christ in Duties, 'twill grow more
strong, and more deadly by being under Church-ordinances. Measure not thy
Graces by others Seize, but by Scripture-tryals Be serious, exact in
duty, having the weight of it upon the heart; but be as much afraid of taking
comfort from Duties as from S^^s. Comfort from any hand but Christ's is Deadly
Be much in ^ra^er, or you will never keep up much ^^mmunion with God. As you
are in Close^-prayer, so you will be in all other Ordinance. Reckon not dutie^
by high expressions, but by low frames, and the beholdings of Christ Tremble at
Duties and Gifts. It was the saying of a Saint, I am more afraid of my Duties
than my Sins, the (...) often makes me Proud, the other always makes me Humble.
Treasure up manifestations, they make the heart low for Christ, too high for
sin. Slight not the lowest, meanest evidence of Grace; God may put thee to make
use of the lowest, as thou think, even that, 1 John 3.14 that may be worth a
thousand worlds to thee. Be true to Truth, but not tirbulent and scornful.
Restore such as are fallen, help them up again with all the bowels of Christ.
Set the broken disjoynted bones with the Grace of the Gospel.

High Professor! Despise not weak Saints; thou may come to wish to be in the
condition of the mean^st of them. Be helpful to others ^nfirmities, but
sensible of thy own. Visit sick beds and deserted Souls much; they are
excellent schools of experience. Abide in your Calling. Do duty to all that are
Religious as to the Lord. Be content with little of the World; little will
serve. Think every little of Earth much, because unworthy of the least: think
much of Heaven too little, because Christ is so rich and free. Think every one
better than thy self, and carry always a Self-loathing about thee, as one fit
to be trampled upon by all the Saints. See the vanity of the world, and the
consumption that is upon all things, and love nothing but Christ. Mourn to see
so little of Christ in the world, so few needing Him; trifles please them
better. To a secure Soul, Christ is but a Fable, the Scriptures but a Story.
Mourn to think how many under high professions, that are not under Grace,
looking much after Duty, Obedience, little after Christ, little versed in
Grace. Prepare for the Cross, welcome it, bear it triumphantly like Christ's
Cross, whether Scoffs, Mockings, Jeers, Contempts, Imprisonments, etc. but see
it be Christ's Cross, not thy own.

Sins will hinder from glorying in the Cross of Christ. Omitting little truths
against light, may breed Hell in the Consciences, as well as committing greater
sins against light. If thou have been taken out of the belly of Hell into
Christ's bosom, and made to sit among Princes in the household of God, O how
should thou live as a pattern of Mercy! Redeemed, restored Soul, what infinite
sums do thou owe Christ! With what singular frames must thou walk and do
every Duty? Sabbaths, what praising-days, singing of Hallelujahs, should they
be to thee! Ordinances, what a Heaven, a being with Christ, and Angels and
Saints! Baptism, what a drowning the Soul in Eternal Love, as a burial with
Christ, dying to all things beside Him? Every time thou think of Christ, be
astonished, and wonder; and when thou see Sin, look at Christ's Grace that did
pardon it; and when thou art Proud look at Christ's Grace, that shall humble and
strike thee down in the dust. Remember Christ's time of love, when thou was
naked, Ezekiel. 16.8. then He chose thee. Can thou ever have a proud thought?
Remember whose arms supported thee from sinking, and delivered thee from the
lowest Hell, Psalm. 86.15. And sing for ever Praise, ^ace, Grace. Repent daily
and be^^^ve, and pray, and walk in the sights of Grace, as one that has the
Anointings of Grace upon thee: Remember thy Sins, Christ's Pardonings, thy
Deserts, Christ's Merits, thy Weakness, Christ's Strength, thy Pride, Christ's
Humility, thy Infirmities, Christ's Restorings, thy Guilt, Christ's new
Application of His Blood, thy Fallings, Christ's Rising up, thy Slightingness,
Christ's Sufferings, thy Want, Christ's Fullness, thy Temptations, Christ's
Tenderness, thy Vileness, Christ's Righteousness.

Blessed Soul! whom Christ shall find not having on his own Righteousness,
Phil. 3.9. but having his robes washed and made white in the blood of the Lamb,
Rev. 7.14. Woeful, miserable professor, that has not the Gospel within, rest
not in Church-tryal, thou may pass that, and be Cast away in Christ's day of
trial. Thou may come to Baptism, and never come to Jesus, and the blood of
Sprinkling, Heb. 12.24. Whatever workings or seize come not up to clear,
distinct apprehensions of Christ's Blood, Merits, Righteousness, (the main
Object of the Gospel) falls short of the Gospel, and leaves the Soul in a
condition of Doubtings and Questionings; and Doubtings (if not looked to
betimes) will turn to a Slightiness of Spirit, one of the most dangerous
frames. Trifle not with Ordinances; ^e much in Meditation and Prayer. Wait
diligently upon all Hearing opportunities. We have need of Doctrine, Reproof,
Exhortation, Consolation, as the tender herbs and grass have of the Rain, the
Dew, the Small rain, and the Showers, Deut^ 32.2 Do all thou do as Soul-work,
as unto Christ, Zec. 7.5, as immediately dealing with Christ Jesus, as if He
were looking on thee, and thou on Him, and fetch all thy Strength from Him.

Observe what holy motions you find in your Soul to Duties; the least motion
that is from a sight of Christ, the least good thought thou have of Christ, the
least good word thou speak of Him from the heart, is rich mercy, O bless God
for it. Observe of every day you have the dayspring from an high (with his
morning dews of mourning for sin) constantly visiting, Luke 1.17. The bright
morning Star (with fresh influences of Grace and Peace) constantly arising,
Rev. 22.16. And Christ sweetly greeting the Soul in all duties. What Duties
makes not more Spiritual will make more Carnal; what does not Quicken and
Humble, will Deaden and Harden. Judas may have the Sop, the outward privilege
of Baptism, Supper, Church Fellowship, etc. but John leaned on Christ's bosom,
Joh. 13.23* That Is the Gospel-ordinance posture in which we should Pray, and
Hear, and perform all Duties. Nothing but lying in that bosom, will dissolve
hardness of heart, and make thee to mourn kindly for sin, and cure slightness
and ordinariness of spirit (that Gangreen in profession) that will humble
indeed, and make the Soul cordial to Christ, and sin vile to the Soul yea,
transform the ugliest piece of Hell, into the glory of Christ.

Never think thou art right as thou should be, a Christian of any glorious
attainment, till thou come to this, Always see and feel thy self lying in the
bosom of Christ, who is in the bosom of the Father, Joh. 1.18. Come and move
the Father for sights o^ Christ, and you shall besure to speed you can come
with no request that pleases Him better: He gave him out of His own bosom for
that very end, to be held up before the eyes of all sinners, as the Everlasting
Monument of his Fathers love. Looking at the Natural Sun, weakens the eye: the
more you look at Christ the ^un of Righteousness, the stronger and cleare^ will
the eye of Faith be: look but at Christ, and you will love Him, and live on
Him, and think on Him continually. Keep the eye constantly upon Christ's blood,
or every blast of Temptation will shake you. If you will see sin's Sinfulness,
to hate it, and mourn, don't stand looking upon sin, but look upon Christ
first, as suffering and satisfying. If you would see your Graces, your
Sanctification, don't stand gazing upon them, but look at Christ's Righteousness
in the first place: see the Sun, you see all, then look at you^ Graces in the
second place.

When you act Faith, what you first look at, that you expect settlement from,
and make it the bottom of your hope. Go to Christ in sight of your sin and
misery, not to your Grace and Holiness. Have nothing to do with thy graces and
sanctification (they will but veil Christ) till thou have seen Christ first. He
that looks upon Christ through his graces, is like one that sees the Sun (...)
water, which wavereth and moves as the water does. Look upon Christ only as
shining in the firmament of the Fathers love and grace, you will not see him
but in h^^ own glory, which is unspeakable.

Pride and Unbelief will put you upon seeing somewhat in your self first but
Faith will have to do with no^ but Christ, who is unexpressibly glorious, and
must swallow up thy sanctification as well as thy sins: for God made Him both
for us, and we must make Him both, 1 Cor. 1.30. 2 Cor. 5.21. He that sets up
his sanctification to look at to comfort him, sets up the greatest Idol to
strengthen his doubts and fears. Do but look off Christ, and presently (like
Peter) you sink in doubts. A Christian never wants comfort, but by the breaking
the order and method of the Gospel, looking on his own, and looking off Christ's
perfect Righteousness, which is to choose rather to live by Candlelight, than
by the light of the Sun. The ^oney that you suck from your own Righteousness,
will turn into perfect gall, and the light you take from that to walk in, will
turn into black night upon the Soul. Satan is Tempting thee, by putting thee to
plod about thy own Graces, to get comfort from them: Then the Father comes, and
points thee to Christ's (as rich and glorious, infinitely pleasing him) and bids
thee study Christ's Righteousness, (and his Biddings are Enablings) that is a
blessed motion, a sweet whispering, checksng thy unbelief; follow the least
hint, close with much Prayer, prize it as an unvaluable Jewel, its an earnest
of more to come again. If you would pray and cannot and so you are discouraged,
see Christ praying for you, using His interest with the Father for you. What
can you want? Joh. 14.16. and cap. 17. If you be troubled, see Christ your
peace, Ephesians 2.14. leaving you peace, when He went up to Heaven, again and again
charging you not to be troubled (no not in the least sinfully troubled) so as
to obstruct thy comfort, or thy believing, Jo^ 14.1, 27. He is now upon the
Throne having spoiled upon his Cross (in the lowest state of his Humiliation)
all whatever can hurt or annoy thee. He has born all thy Sins, Sorrows, Fears,
Disgraces, Sickness, Troubles, Temptations, and is gone to prepare Mansions
for thee

Thou who have seen Christ All, and thy self absolutely Nothing, who make
Christ all thy life, and art dead to all Righteousness besides, thou art the
Christian, one highly beloved, and who has found favor with God.

Favorite of Heaven, do Christ this one favor for all his Love to thee, Love
all His poor Saints and Children (the newest, the least, notwithstanding any
difference in judgment) they are engraven on his heart, as the names of the
Children of Israel on Aaron's breast plate: Let them be so on t^i^e. Pray for
the peace of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love her. Psalm. 122.6.

A short DIRECTORY for the Great, Necessary, and Advantageous Duty of SELF
EXAMINATION; whereby a serious Christian may every Evening Examine himself.
Translated out of Low Dutch, for the benefit of the English.
I. Questions relating to Religious Exercises.

1. HAve I had any sensible Communion with God in the Exercise? 2. Have I not
neglected my Private, nor my Family Duties* 3. Have I not omitted Reading the
Word of God? 4. Have I not hol^ Meditations, 1st. concerning the Word Preached;
2ndly^ concerning God; 3dly. concerning Christ; concerning Sin; 5thly.
Scriptures, the Word of God; 6thly. Providence, the Works of God; 7thly. about
my Duties; 8thly. about Death; 9thly. about the last Judgment; 10. about Hell;
11thly, about Heaven etc 5. Have I not been careless and formal in Prayer,
either Private in (...) Closet, or in Family-prayers; and performed the same
out of custom, and not out of love and affection to the duty? 6. Have I not
been careless and superficial in reading the word, but serious and zealous to
pray for a blessing, for increase of life and light by that duty? 7. Have I not
for have in worldly business, cut my Prayers short off, or lain upon my bed for
idleness, when I should have been upon my knees? 8. Have I after duty, gone
upon my Watchtower, to look out, and watch for a blessing and the fruits of my
duty?

II. Questions relating to Sins and Temptations.

1. Have I guarded against and feare^ Temptations, or have I heedlesly rushed
among them? 2. What Temptations have I this day striven against and conquered?
3 Have (...) this day done nothing against or contrary to my knowledge etc or
have I not sinned with full purpose and resolution? 4. Do I not knowingly live
in a course of sin, either of omission or commission? 5. Have I carefully kept
my self from my iniquity, or have I again relapsed into it? 6. Have I given any
man occasion o^ offense, or been offended unjustly by any this day? 7. Does no
sinly light upon my heart, so that the Gospel and Grace, Christ and the
Promises are less sweet and precious to me? 8. When I fell into any sin did I
seriously without delay rise again by repentance, and neither palliated or
extenuated my sin?

III. Of Thoughts of the heart.

1. Have I kept my heart in a serious, spiritual, and holy frame, so to be
ready at all times for the exercise of holy duties, and so have gone from one
duty to another? 2. Have I had the Lord always before my eyes, and especially,
are my thoughts on him when I awake? 3. Has Eternity made any impressions on
my heart, and have I set Death and Judgment, with the consequences thereof
before my eyes? 4. Have I made conscience of vain, idle and wandering thoughts,
and guarded against them? 5. Have I been serious and frequent in holy
Ejaculations all the day and so walked with God in all my affairs? 6. Have I
endeavored when private and solitary, to order and govern my thoughts holily?

IV. Questions about Eating and Drinking.

1. Have I seriously and zealously before meat craved a blessing, and after
meat with the same devotion returned thanks; or have I done it out of custom
and fashion only? 2. Have I eat and drank with fear, and to the glory of God;
or did I sit down to table with no better design than the beasts of the field
have, to satisfy hunger and thirst? 3. Have I not been immoderate in my eating
and drinking, even to surfeiting, over-charging my stomach? 4. Have I not risen
from Table without speaking of the Name of God, or of his Word yea, without
once thinking thereon with delight?

V Questions about our Callings.

1. Have I this day, in the duty of my Calling, had respect to the Lord and
served him? 2. Have I been diligent in it, or idle and lazy 3. Have I dealt
justly and honestly in my Calling, have I cheated no man no manner of way, but
done to every one as I would they should do unto me? 4. Have I not broken my
promise in my calling but been as good as my word? 5. Have I not overladen and
over charged my self with worldly affairs, and been immoderately anxious,
solicitous, and careful about them, to the disadvantage and neglect of my Soul?

VI. Questions relating to our Carriage among others.

1. Have I carried and behaved my self as a Christian ought to do in reference
to Superiors and Inferiors, Juniors and Seniors, and my Equals? 2. Have I not
neglected some Duties to them to whom I have a particular Relation, or have I
done nothing contrary to my duty to such but duly and truly discharged it* 3.
Have I (being a Father or Mother) taken care, first for the Souls and then for
the Bodies of my Children, and wrought for them? 4. Have I (being a Child)
honored my Father and Mother, have I loved, been obedient and thankful to
them? 5. Have I (being a Husband) been careful for the Soul and Body of my
Wife, and loved her? 6. Have I (being a Wife) loved, honored and obeyed my
Husband, and heartily cared for his and the Families good? 7. Have I (being a
Master) been careful for the Souls and Bodies of my Servants, and given them
good exhortations, reproofs and examples? 8. Have I (being a Servant) honored
and obeyed my Master, and been true and diligent in his concerns, as a
Christian ought to do? 9. Have I (being a Ruler, either in Church or State)
been conscientious to do the duties of my place? 10. Have I (being a Subject in
the State, and a Member ^n the Church) carried my self as becomes a Christian
toward the Magistrate, Minister highly respecting them, being subject and
obedient to them, and praying for them?

VII. Questions relating to our Time and Opportunities.

1. Have I this day redeemed time for the good of my Soul, as esteeming it
precious? 2 Have I not slept too long, and more than was necessary, so that my
Exercises in Private or in the Family must be shortened, or some necessary or
profitable work omitted? 3. Have I not misspent my time in idle, unnecessary or
fruitless discourse, or with unnecessary and unreasonable reflections? 4. Have
I not fed many idle and vain imaginations and thoughts which time might have
been improved to the advantage of my Soul* 5. Have I not lost time with to much
and long discourse about worldly things, or by doing more about them than was
necessary? 7. Have I diligently improved my time thi^ day for God, and for
Eternal Salvation, striving to take Heaven b^ violence? 8. Have I not this day
omitted some incumbent opportunity, whereby I might have improved my talent,
and done good to the Soul and Bodies of others, either by word or works, of
civility or mercy? 9punc; Have I constantly observed ever^ opportunity to the
good of my Soul either to my instruction or reproof, or to excite to more
diligence?

VIII. Questions relating to good Company.

1. Have I chosen good and holy people for my Companions, and that because they
are such, and for a good end? 2. Have I endeavored to excite such by my
example, and in spiritual conferences to Love and Good-works? 3. Have I carried
my self toward them, as loving them with a hearty and brotherly affection, and
peaceably? 4. Have I delighted in their Company, and rejoiced in their
Prosperity? 5. Have I born their infirmities and covered them, or done the
contrary? 6. Have I been advantageous to them with admonitions, consolations,
reproofs, counsels and other service, and have I sought the like advantage from
them, and found it.

IX. Questions about bad Company.

1. Have I carried my self prudently and wisely among the Ungodly, so that they
have not been a snare to me, nor have they done me any damage? 2. Have I
carried my self so holily, that I have not been a Stone of stumbling to any of
them; but a good Example and Convictionreversed? 3. Have (...) been serious,
courteous, and compassionate toward them, endeavoring to do them good by
reproofs, instructions and admonitionsreversed? 4. Have I not been ashamed of
the Word, Ways and Children of Christ when among those tha^ hate and persecute
themreversed?

X. Questions relating to our carriag^ under v^its Providence.

1. Have I observed the particular Providence of God concerning my self and
othersreversed? 2. Have I endeavored to discern the dealings of God with my
Soul and Body from my Prayersreversed? 3. Have I been thankful for the daily
blessings and benefits received from God? 4. Have I born my cross this day
willingly and cheerfully, and in adversity submitted to the hand and will of
God?

XI. Questions relating to the Exercise of the principal Gifts and Graces.

1. Have I lived by Faith, depending constantly upon the Promises, and on
Christ for help, strength, success, and acceptance with God? 2. Have I with
diligence endeavored to express my love to God, to men, and to my enemies
themselves this day? 3. Have I denied my self this day, and curbed my passions
and affections in all occurrences, so behaving my self as ^ne that denies
himself? 4. Have I walked the whole day in the fear of the Lord, whether in
company or alone in divine worship and service, or in worldly affairs; always
guarded against sin? 5. Have I been humble and in all things eschewed and
striven against Pride and High-mindedness? 6. Have I eschewed or shunned sinful
anger, and carried my self meekly before God and Men? 7. Have I been content
with my state and condition in which the Lord by his Prvidence has set me? 8.
Have I been patient, not murmuring or repining when (...) meet with
difficulties from God and oppressions from men? 9. Have I in all things
expressed and declared m^ uprightness and honesty, and shunne^ and striven
against all deceit and hypocrisy? 10. Have I been heavenl^ minded, and
delighted my self in God and striven against earthly mindedness, and
satisfaction in the vaniti^ thereof?

XII. Questions relating to Silence, and the use of the Tongue.

1. Have I bridled my Tongue from vain, unnecessary, angry and perverse words?
2. Have I not spoken evil of any man behind his back; or did the Lord call me
by discovering the wickedness of another, to advance and further my neighbors
interest? 3. Have I with Reverence used the Name and Word of God, and spoken
thereof to the edification of others and my self, at home and abroad, at my
rising up and lying down? 4. Have I always spoken the truth, and not sometimes
made lies or half-lies? 5. Have I been silent when the Lord called me to speak
for his Glory and the Edification of others? 6. Have I spoken when I should
have been silent?

XIII. An Epitome of the former Questions, when in the Evenings we have little
time or leisure to the Duty of Self-Examination.

1. Have I been serious and jealous in Secret and Family-religious exercises
this day, and have had any sensible Communion with God? 2. Have I striven
against my temptations and guarded against my own inclinations? 3. Have I been
careful to keep my heart from duty to duty in a spiritual frame? 4. Have I not
conceived vain thoughts, nor promove^ vain and idle discourse? 5. Have I had
through the day many Ejaculatory Prayers and Sighs; 6. Have I thought and spoke
much of the Word of God 7. Have I carried my self moderately, Self-denyingly,
and Spiritually in the use of the Creaturesreversed? 8. Have (...) injured no
man this day, neither i^ words nor worksreversed? 9. Have I been all the day
diligent and careful on my wat^^ and guard; 10. Have I not neglected my duty to
those that I have particular relation to, or have I performed itreversed? 11.
Have I not misspent my time, nor omitted any good opportunity to do, or to
receive Good; 12. Have I this day been seriously working for the Glory of GOD,
and my Souls Salvation; 13. Have I not been immoderately pore-ing, and
meditating on Earthly things; 14. Have I not given way to P^ sinful Anger,
Discontento^ness, (...) Impatience? 15. Have I lived by Faith, and fetched all
my strength from Christ? 16. Have I let my light shine among men, and been
profitable both to good and bad? 17. Have I had a right aim and end in all my
doings? 18. Have I walked in Love both toward GOD and my Neighbor?

A short DIALOGUE between a Divine and a Beggar.
A Certain Divine, who (if we may believe the ancient copy) was John Tanlerus
himself, meeting with a Beggar, had this Discourse, containing a most excellent
Example (...) perfect man; whence we may (...) taught how in all things we
ought to be of the same mind, resigned to the will and appointment of God.

There was in times past, a certain famous Divine, who for the space of eight
years had continually importuned the Lord by Prayer, conceiving he wanted the
right knowledge o^ the Truth, notwithstanding all his Learning; and spent whole
night^ therein; begging of God to let him know Him, and know himself, and to
show him any man that might teach him the way of Truth: and when upon a time he
was enflamed with a vehement desire thereof, a Voice from Heaven spoke unto
him, Go forth to the Church-doors, and there thou shall find a man that can
show thee the way of Truth: and going forth, he found there a certain Beggar,
with patcht and torn apparel, and filth^ dirty feet, all whose apparel was
scarcely worth Three-half-pence, to whom, by way of Salutation, he thus spoke:

Divine, God give thee a good morning*


Beggar, Sir, I don't remember that ever I had an evil one.


Div. God make thee fortunate and prosperous. why do thou spak^ in this
mannerreversed?


Beg. Neither was I ever unfortunate or unprosperous.


Div. Be happy! What mean these words of thinereversed?


Beg. Nor was I ever unhappy.


Div. God save thee, now at last speak more plainly.


Beg. Truly Sir, I will do it willingly; Thou did wish me a good morning, and
I answered, I never had an evil one: for when I am pinched with hunger, I
praise God, if I suffer cold, if it hail, if it snow, if it rain; if the
weather be fair or foul* I praise God: if I be wretched and despised, I
likewise praise God: and therefore there never happened any sad or evil morning
to me. Tho^ did likewise wish that I might be fortunate, I answered that I
never had been unfortunate, because whatever God gave me, or I suffered, o^
whatever happened to me, whether it were agreeable to me, or otherwise, were it
sweet or bitter, I gladly received it at his hands as the best, and therefore I
was never unfortunate. Thou said moreover, that God would be pleased to make
me happy; whereunto I answered that I never had been unhappy: for I am fully
resolved through his Grace, to adhere and only to cleave to the Will of God as
the best, (abandoning my own will) into which I have so wholly poured out my
own will, that whatever He Wills, I will also: and for this cause as I said, I
was never unhappy, seeing that I will cleave to His Will only, and have wholly
resigned my own proper will.


Div. This is very strange: But what, I pray thee would thou say, if the Lord
Almighty should Drown thee in the bottomless pit, could thou then be
contented with His Will?


Beg. Drown me in the bottomless Pit! Why certainly if He should, I have two
arms, with which I would still embrace him and clasp fast about him: The one is
true Humility, and that I lay under Him, and by him I am united to His most
sacred Humanity; the other (and that is the right arm) is Love, which is united
to His Divinity, and by this love given to me from himself, I hold him so fast,
that He would be forced to go down to Hell mith me, and it were much more to be
wished by me, to be in Hell with God, than to be in Heaven without Him.

By this that Divine learned, that the most compendious way to God is a true
Resignation with profound Humility. Hereupon the Divine spoke again to the
Beggar and asked him;]


Div. Good Lord! Whence came thou?


Beg. From GOD.


Div. Where foundest thou God?


Beg. Even there where I left all the Creatures.


Div. But where did thou leave Him?


Beg. In humble and clean hearts, and in men of good will, which is his temple
and dwelling place.


Div. I prithee friend, who art thou?


Beg. Who am I? Truly I am a King, and JESUS himself has crowned me with
peace, power and rest.


Div. Art thou a King? But where is thy Kingdom?


Beg. Sir, The Kingdom of Heaven is within me, in my Soul; and I can now, and
do, by his power in me, so ^overn and command all my inward and outward senses,
that all the affections and powers of the Old Man in my Soul, are conquered and
are in subjection to the New Man in me* which Kingdom no man can doubt but is
better than all the Kingdom^ Scepters, Crowns and Glories of the world.


Div. Lord! What brought thee (...) this Perfection?


Beg. My silence, sublime meditation, but above all, my Union with the
Ever-blessed God of Peace and Rest, which is my Kingdom; an^ to say the truth,
I could rest in nothing which was less than God; (...) now having found my GOD,
I have forsaken the unquiet world, and (...) Him I have found Everlasting Peac^
and Rest. Joh. 1.45. Isa. 53.^^ Luke 1.29. Ephesians. 1.23. Jude 25. (...) 42.1. Like
my Servant Job.


Beams of the SPIRIT^ Enlivening, Enlightening, and Cladding the Soul.

Imprim. Joseph Caryl.

To the Reader.
A Dead Soul wants light and life, and therefore must need^ room^ joy. Yea, a
Soul made alive by the new Birth has turns of these want^, by the remnant of
the Body of Sin, which cleaves so fast on, that it cannot be (...) wholly,
until the mortal Body (...) off with it. To both these, Beam^ (...) the Sun of
Righteousness may be ^seful, to make the first rise from the Dead that Christ
may give him light, and life and comfort* and so restore the second after some
qualms of Disertion, Dullness and Discomfort. It was a Saint that said, This is
Comfort in my Affliction, that Thy Word has quickened me. There is a
quickening in the Word, and there is a comfort in this quickening: He is truly
spiritual, whom a spiritual Word quickens; and this indeed may be a comfort
to him: since to a heart still remaining Carnal, neither Life nor Light, nor
Comfort do appear in the Word. But in these words all may be bad, if thou apply
them close to thy Soul, as the living Prophet to the dead Child.

Here is much Virtue on a little Room (...) is a little Time, a gain of Eter^^^

Cordial MEDITATIONS for CHRISTIANS.
1. WHat unthankfulness is this, to think so much upon two or three Crosses,
and to forget an hundred Blessings? What folly is it to darken and straiten our
spirits, and indispose our selves to the taking or doing of good? (2) A limb
out of joint can do nothing without deformity and pain. Dejection takes off the
wheels of the Soul joy is as Oil to the Soul, it makes duties come off
cheerfully from o^^ selves, pleasingly to others, and acceptably to GOD. 3.)
Let us go on to add Grace to Grace. A growing Christian is always a comfortable
Christian. The Oil of Grace will bring forth the Oil of Gladness. (4.)
Melancholy persons are in a perpetual darkness; all things seem black and dark
unto them; their Souls are as it were died black; whatsoever comes to a
melancholic person, comes in a dark way to the Soul. (5.) In all grievances,
let us look to something that may comfort us as well as discourage us* let us
look as well to what we enjoy as to wh^^ we want. As in Prosperity God mingles
some Cross to diet us, so in all Crosses there is something to C^mfort us. As
there is a Vanity lies hid in the greatest worldly good, so there is a Blessing
lies hid in the greatest worldly Evil Is not our Health more than Sickness? Do
not we enjoy more than we wantreversed? (I mean of necessary things) Are not
our good days more than our evil But we would go to Heaven upon Roses. (6.) We
must neither bring sin to, nor mingle sin with our sufferings, for that will
trouble the spirit more than the trouble it self. We are not hurt till our
Souls be hurt. (7.) In sudden encounters, some sin does many times discover it
self, the seed whereof lies hid in our hearts, which we think our selves free
from. What cause have we then to fear continually that we are worse than we
take our selves to be? The force of Gunpowder is not known till some sparks
light on it. (8.) What a sight were it to see the feet where the head is, or
the earth where the heaven is? And to a spiritual eye, it seems as great a
deformity, to see the Soul to be under the rule of sinful passions. (9.) A good
heart, when any Corruption is discovered by a searching Ministry, is affected
as if it found out some deadly Enemy* Touchiness and Passion argues guilt (10.)
The imaginary grievances of this life are more than the real. (11.) The way to
expel wind out of your Body, is to take wholesome nourishment; so to expel
windy fancies from the Soul* is to feed upon serious truths; our best way
therefore, is to propound true objects to the mind, to work upon, As 1st. To
consider the greatness and goodness of God. 2ndly. The joys of Heaven and the
torments of Hell. 3rdly. The last and strict Day of Account. 4thly. The vanity
of Earthly Things. 5thly. The uncertainty of our Lives. (12.) A man naturally
is either weaving Spiders webbs, or hatching Cockatrices eggs; exercised either
in vanity or mischief. (13.) It would much avail to the well ordering of our
thoughts, to set our Souls in order every morning, and to strengthen and
perfume our spirits with some gracious Meditations, especially of the chi^^^nd
and scope wherefore we live; and how every thing we do, or befall us, may be
reduced and ordered to further the main, viz. Gods Glory, and our own
Salvation. (14) Some will be contented to embrace Truth without hatred of the
world; and Christ without a Cross; a Godly life without Persecution: they will
pull a Rose without Pricks: such empty conceits will be too weak to encounter
real griefs. (15.) It is a course that will have a blessing attending it, to
join in a league one to watch over another, and to observe each others ways;
it is usual to join in Prayer, why not in this? (16.) Happy is he that in his
way to heaven meets with a cheerful and skilful Guide and Fellow-traveller,
that carries Cordials with him against all faintings of spirit. (17.) There is
an heavy imputation on them that comforted not the weak: when men will not own
others in trouble, but as the herd of Deer forsake and push away the wounded
from them. (18.) God often suspends comfort from us, to make use of our
Christian Friends, by whom he purposes to do us good: oftentimes the very
opening of men's griefs, brings ease, without any further working upon them:
The very opening of a vein cools the blood. (19.) A Christian when he is
heaten out of all other comforts, yet has a God to run unto, and he can
wrestle with him in his own strength, and plead with him with his own
arguments. (20.) It Is a never failing rule of discerning a man to be in the
state of Grace, when he finds every condition draws him nearer to God. (21.)
Labor to answer every Relation wherein thou, stand to God. 1st* As a Father
(...) trusting on His care. 2ndly. A Teach^^ (...) by s^ng His direction.
3rdly* As a Creator, by depending on Him* 4thly. As a Hu^band, by insepara^
affectionate love to Him. And lastly, As a Lord by obedience to Him. (22.)
Despair is often the ground of Hope: when the darkness of the night is,
thickest, then the morning begins to d^wn* (23.) We may safely expect God in
his ways of Mercy, when we (...) in his ways of Obedience (^^.) By trusting
any thing more than God, we make it an idol and a curse: it will prove a lying
vanity and vexation, bringing that upon us which we looked not for. (25.) Its a
vain pretense to think, that God will give us Heaven, and yet leave us to shift
for our selves by the way. (26) The way to have any thing taken away and not
bles^, is to set our hearts too much upon it. (27.) The greatest honor we can
do God, is when we see nothing for us, but rather all things contrary to what
we look for, then to shut our eyes to all inferior things, and to look
altogether to his All Sufficiency. (28) Its an evidence of true trust, when we
can wait Gods leisure. and not make have. (29.) Faith does no^, especially at
first, so stay the Soul, as to take away all suspicion and fear to the
contrary: yet the prevailing of unbelief is taken away. The Needle in the
Compass will stand North, though with some trembling; and the Ship that rides
at anchor may sometimes be tossed, yet it commonly remains so fast, that it
cannot be carried away by any weather. (30.) Look not on so much on those
miseries which our weak Natures are subject unto, at upon God for strength and
comfort in them, mitigation of them, and Grace to profit by them (31.) The time
of sickness, is the time of purging from the defilements of sin, which we have
gathered in our health, till we come purer our; which should make us the rather
willingly to abide Gods time. Blessed is that sickness that proves the health
of the Soul; we are best for ^he most part when we are weakest* (32.) In all
kind of troubles, (...) the ingredient that God puts (...) the Cup that so much
afflicts, as that of our distempered Passion mingled with them (33.) We are not
much disquieted when we put off ou^ Clothes and go to bed, because (...) trust
Gods Providence to raise us up again; and why should we be afraid to put off
our bodies and sleep ou^ (...) sleep, considering we are more sure to rise out
of our Graves, than out of our Beds; yea, we are alrea^dy risen up in our head
CHRIST* (34.) Let us do our our own work and leave God to do His; Diligen^ and
Trust in Him is only ours, the rest of the burden is his. Let ^s study what is
our Duty, and God will thin^ of what is for our Comfort. (35.) In the worst
times there is a presence of God with His Children. 1st. By moderating the
Measure. 2ndly. the Time. 3rdly. In joining some Comfort with it. And 4thly. By
Supportation. (36.) A good Christian has 1 st. a GOD to go to. 2 ndly. A
Promise to go to. 3 rdly. Former Experiences to go to, besides some present
Experiences. (31.) What is our Life but a Web, woven with interminglings of
wants and favors, crosses, and blessings, risings and fallings, combats and
victories? (38.) God defers, but in his deferring there is no empty space,
wherein no good is done: but there is in that space a fitting for mercy. (39.)
It is folly to think that we should have Physic and Health both at once; Gods
time is the best time, resolve therefore upon waiting His leisure. After a
weary week, comes a Sabbath, and after a fight comes Victory. (40.) Unkindness
of others to us, is but a correction of our unkindness to God. (41.) He that
cannot abound without Pride and High-mindedness, will never want without too
much dejectedness. (42.) Let us not seek our selves abroad out of our selves,
in the conceits of other men. A man shall never live quietly, that has not
learned to set light by others cau^lless ill conceit of him. (43.) Men that set
too high a price upon themselves, when men will not come up to their price,
they are discontented. (44.) Those whose condition is above their worth, and
their pride above their condition, shall never want sorrow; yet we must
maintain our Authority in our places, for that is Gods, and not ours and we
ought to carry our selves so as we may approve our selves to their Consciences,
though we cannot have their good word. (45.) One end why God suffers the Soul
to tire and beat it self, is, that finding no rest in it self, it might seek to
God. (46) A man can be in no condition wherein God is at a loss; if comforts be
wanting, He can Create comforts, not only out of nothing, but even out of
discomfort. He made the Whale which swallowed Jonas, a means to bring him to
land. (47.) The only way to have our will, is to bring it to Gods Will. (48.)
The way patiently to suffer Gods will, is to inure our selves to do it; they
that have not inured themselves to the yoke of Obedience, will never ^ndurs the
yoke of Suffering. (49.) When we can say to God, if thou will have me poor and
disgraced, I am well content; thus a Godly man says, Amen to Gods Amen, and
puts his Fiat to Gods Fiat. (50.) None feel more experience of Gods Providence,
than those that are most resolute in their Obedience. (51.) After we have given
Glory to God, by relying upon his Wisdom, Power, and Truth, we shall find Him
employing these for our direction, assistance, and bringing things about to our
desired issue; yea, above what we desired or thought of. (52.) The more
passion, the less discretion, because passion hinders the sight of what is to
be done, it clouds the Soul, and puts it on without advisement. (53.) It is
good to observe the particular becks of Providence* how things join and meet
together fit occasions, and suiting of things are intimations of Gods will.
Providence has a language which is we understood by those that have a familiar
acquaintance with God: They see a train of Providence leading one way more than
another. (54.) Labor to fit a promise to every condition thou art in: there is
no condition but has a Promise suitable to it. (55.) He that loves too much
will grieve too much: It is the greatness of our affection that causes the
greatness of our affliction. (56.) All our (...) within proceeds from a
discontented swelling vapor of Pride: Its air enclosed in the bowels of the
earth that shakes it, which all the four winds cannot do. (57.) There is an art
of bearing troubles (if we could learn it) without over troubling our selves:
as in bearing a burden there is a way to poize it, that it weighs not over
heavy, if it hangs all on one side, it poizes the body down: the greatest
part of our troubles we pull on our selves, by not parting our care, so as to
take upon us only the care of Duty, and leave the rest to God. (58.) We must
not mingle our passions with our crosses, like foolish Patients, chewing the
Pills we should swallow down. (59.) He that sees not God every where, sees him
no where. (60.) He that loses himself in self-denial, finds himself in the
bosom of God. (61.) In Prosperity fear God, in Adversity love God. [62.]
Praying will make thee leave Sinning, or sinning will make thee leave Praying.
[63.] Our weakness and inabilities, break not the bond of our duties. [64.] No
sin but is easier kept out, than cast out. [65.] What we are afraid to do
before men, we should be afraid to think before God. [66.] Nature vexed and
Nature armed, soon discovers it self. [67.] They that retain the memory of
Mercies, seldom lose the sight of Mercies. [68.] Love prepares the way to
Unity, and Lowliness prepares the way to Love.

Divine HYMNS used by some Christians at the Receiving of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper. With some others.
Hymn I.
1.
OUr Holy Mediator Christ
In time appeared in flesh,
To reconcile our Souls to God,
In Truth and Righteousness.
2
Our nature be upon him took,
On which grim Death did pass,
And to appease his Fathers wrath
He Crucified was.
3
This power he had to lay life down
And take it up again,
The Godhead in him did triumph,
Although his flesh had pain.
4
And conquering he has took place
At his Fathers right hand:
The Cherubims of Glory all
About his Throne do stand.
5
His Spirit now has influence
Upon the hearts of those,
(With full divine Authority)
Whom he before had chose.
To keep 'em safe they might not fall,
As they did once before:
But in Communion live with him,
And serve him evermore.
Hymn II.
1
Here is a banquet thou have made,
A Table of fat things,
Replenished it always is,
Food suitable for Kings.
2
The fare is thine, of thine own (...)*
The Lamb is of thy Fold:
It is the best in all the flock,
Better to us than Gold.
3
No spot in him was ever found,
No blemish, but all pure,
Yet for us he had many a wound:
Thy wrath he did endure.
4
He drank a full draught of thy cup,
That no wrath might remain,
That we might drink in drafts of love,
And live to thee again.
5
And spend our days upon the earth
In joy through thine own Spirit,
Until we come thy glory great
In heaven to inherit.
Hymn III.
1
Hosanna to King David's Son,
Hosanna to the CHRIST:
That in the Fathers name does come,
Hosanna in the highest.
2
For thou wast slain and art alive,
Redeeming us to God,
From every nation, kindred, tongue,
By thy most precious blood.
3
Corruptive things, as silver is,
And gold, redeemed us not,
But Christ, our Savior, precious blood,
A Lamb without a spot.
4
To him that sits upon the Throne,
And Christ the Lamb therefore,
Be Glory, Blessing and Renown,
And Honor evermore.
Hymn IV.
1
The Glory of Salvation
Will come, and will not stay,
Our earnest suit is to the King,
Lord, send thy Son away!
2
We are thy bride, espoused we are
Unto the Lord the King,
The Marriage Supper draws nigh,
And in our ears does ring.
3
The wedding, and the crowning day,
Joyful to us will be;
Enter we shall his Palaces
Our Royal King to see.
4
No wrinkle then shall on our cheeks,
Nor spot be on our face,
But comely all we shall appear
In beautifying grace.
5
Yea, face to face we shall him see
With glory and delight,
And in his presence ever be,
Praising him day and night.
Hymn V.
1
Lo! Christ is sacrificed for us,
Our Passover from Heaven;
Now therefore let us keep the feast
Not with old lumps of Leaven.
2
Who eat and drink unworthily,
Their own Damnation earn.
Because they want a Spiritual eye,
His body to discern.
3
Our hearts with care examined
Let us be stirred up,
To eat of this Caelestial Bread,
And drink this Sacred Cup.
4
As often as we eat this Bread,
And drink this sacred Wine,
We show our Saviors death, until
He come the second time.
Hymn VI.
1
The heavens now retain our Lord
Until he come again;
And for the safety of our Souls,
He there does still remain.
2
A Priest he is to make our peace,
An Advocate to plead,
He Is a Forerunner to possess,
To Heaven he will us lead.
3
Our peace is made, our right is gained
A possession we have:
Our evidence is firmly sealed,
On this side of the Grave.
4
And quickly shall our King appear
And take us by the hand,
And lead us fully to enjoy,
The promised holy Land.
5
Oh let us live a holy Life,
And to Thee honor bring,
Lets follow Christ where ere he goe^
And to his honor sing.
Hymn VII.
1
Thy acts, O Lord, thy noble acts,
In this feast we do see,
Though Rebels are in bondage still,
Thy Children they are free.
2
Free from their sin, thy wrath, and hell,
By Christ our Advocate,
Who interceeds daily for us
Before the Mercy-seat.
3
That we now being brought to God,
Who once were gone astray,
By Christ the Bishop of our Souls;
May sing his Praise always.
4
And whilst we live, we are engaged,
And taught by Gospel Light,
To se^ our faith and hope on work,
We walk not yet by sight*
5
But heavenly Glory will break forth
At last, and will not stay:
Angels and Saints at last will come
And call us all away.
Hymn VIII.
1
Thine eyes, O Lord are still on us,
How e're the case does stand;
A Table thou have furnished,
Made ready by thine hand.
2
Provisions of Heavens dress
Food of the best have we,
The fruits of his own Righteousness
Choice streams of purity.
3
Justification is our Wine,
Salvation is our Bread,
Eternal Life is placed in
Our King, our Crown, our Hea^
4
No people now in all the earth^
Are better fed than we,
Our Manna's from the royal thron^
By thy divine decree.
5
In trouble we are safely kept,
And guarded by thy power,
In midst of all our Enemies,
Who soon would us devour*
6
In honor of his holy Name,
Rejoice with one accord,
And let the very heart rejoice,
Of them that fear the Lord.
Hymn IX.
1
The bread of God so truly called
That gives life unto the world,
^s he that down from Heaven came,
And with this sweet celestial bread
Lord let us be replenished,
And give us ever of the same.
2
For he that (as the Scripture says)
^ays hold on Christ by lively Faith,
shall never thirst or hunger more,
^or by this Faith and feeding so,
Out of his belly there shall flow
Of living waters plenteous store.
3
The Spirit and the Bride do say,
^ome, come away without delay;
And since that they have said it first,
Let all that hear it as we do,
^eply the same, and say so too.
Come every one that is a thirst.
4
The water of Eternal Life,
^ake without price, take without strife
^ake freely whosoever pleases.
Behold the Judge at door does stand,
His coming is so near at hand;
Amen, Amen, so come Lord Jesus.
Hymn X.
1
Lo! Christ has suffered once for all
The Just for wicked men;
That he might bring us unto God,
Now reconciled again.
2
Who bare our sins in his own flesh
Upon the Cursed tree,
That we should live to Righteousness
And dead to Sin should be.
3
All we like sheep have gone astray
To several sins we fall,
And God has laid the load on him
To suffer for us all.
4
A man of sorrow, sure he was
And he has born our grief,
Mean while we hid our face from ^im
And gave him no relief.
5
Lo this is at that good sheperd (...)
That good Sheperd indeed,
That lost his life to save his Sheep,
That they might never bleed.
6
A greater love than this, have none,
Nor none can comprehend;
Than that a man should stake his ^ife,
And lose it for his friend.
7
For scarce will any die for him
That lives righteously.
Yet happ'ly for a special friend*
Some one might dare to die.
8
But God commends his love to us,
And he commends it thus,
In that when we were Enemies
Christ freely died for us.
9
By him therefore lets give to GOD,
The sacrifice of Praise,
Fruit of our lips in giving thanks
Unto his Name always.
A Soliloque on the Lords Supper.
1
Give me my captive Soul or take
My Body (...) thither,
Another life like this will make
Them both to go together.
2
Before that sin turned flesh to stone,
And all our lump to leaven.
A fervent sigh might well have blown
Our innocent Earth to Heaven.
3
For sure when Adam did not know
To sin, nor sin to smother,
He might to heaven from Paradise go,
As from one Room to another.
4
Thou have restored us to this ease,
By this thy heavenly blood,
Which I can go to when I please,
And leave earth to their food.
Another on the same.
1
Welcome sweet and sacred cheer,
Welcome dear,
With me, in me, live and dwell,
For thy neatness passes sight,
Thy delight
Passes tongue or taste to tell.
2
O what sweetness from the bowl
Fills my Soul;
Such as is and makes divine.
Is some Star (fled from the sphere)
Melted there,
As we Sugar melt in wine?
3
Or has sweetness in the bread.
Made a head,
To subdue the heat of sin;
Flowers and gumms, and powders giving
All their living
Less the Enemy should win?
4
Doubtless neither star nor flower
Has the power,
Such a sweetness to impart;
Only God who gives perfumes,
Flesh assumes,
And with it perfumes my heart.
5
But as ^omanders and sweet ^ood
Still are good,
(...) being bruised are better scented;
^o^ to show how far his look (...)*
Could improve,
Here as broken is presenied.
6
Let the wonder of this pity
Be my ^itty,
And take up my lines and life;
Hearken under pain of Death,
Hands and breath
Strive in this and love the strife.
Another of the same.
1
Not in rich ornaments nor fine array,
Nor in a wedge of Gold;
Thou who for me was sold,
To me thy self do now convey,
For so thou should without me still have been,
Leaving within me sin.
2
But by the way of nourishment and strength,
Th^^ creep'dst into my breast
Making thy way my rest;
(...) small quantities my (...)
Which spread their forces into every part
Meeting sins force and art.
3
Yet can these not get over to my Soul,
Leaping the wall that parts
Our souls and fleshly hearts;
But as the Outworks may control
My rebel flesh, and carrying thy Name,
Affright both sin and shame.
4
Only thy grace which with these Elements comes,
Knows the ready way,
And has the privy key,
Opening the Souls most subtle room
Whilst those to spirits refined at door-att^nd*
Dispatches from their friend.
GOD and the Soul.
1.
MY God is all things unto me
All God is also mine,
I am, O Lord, wholly in these,
And also wholly thine.
2
The powr's of each created good
In God are all contained:
In Him my comforts all do bud,
Flourish, and are maintained.
3
He gave me all that he had made,
All which did not suffice
My larger Soul; therefore I prayed,
He gave Himself like wise.
4
(...) midst of good, I live and breath,
In him I Am only bright,
(...) ^ays with which I shine beneath
Are borrowed from his light.
5
O Lord, I am not all mine own,
Nor for another free,
(...) be a reflection
(...) is received from thee.
6
(...) below thee, Lord, I judge
(...) below my Soul;
O let thy neither mind ev^^ grudge
It (...) in (...) to (...)
7
(...) more my self, O Lord, to me
Then I my self have been,
Make me, O God, more one with thee*
Than with my self: Amen.
Psalm. LXIII. 3. Because thy loving kindness is better than Life, my lips shall
praise thee.
1.
THy love is best, and they (...)
That do the (...)
They need not fear (...)
Nothing can the (...)
2
Thy kindness eke, (...)
Of it, as it is (...)
Thy faithful (...)
(...)
But thine does last, and does (...) waste,
As thy dear Children know.
5
O grant me still; that all thy will
I may observe for ever,
That I may not (...) ^arth my lot
Let me forsake thee never.
6
Thy love Lord, let on me be set
(...) kindness is the thing
(...) desire and still admire
(...) my God, my King.
(...) free, Lord give it me
(...) to me show,
(...) continually,
(...) may know.

