THE SPIRIT OF Railing Shimei AND OF Baal's Four Hundred Lying Prophets Entered
into Caleb Pusey AND HIS Quaker-Brethren in Pennsilvania, Who Approve him.

Containing an Answer to his and their Book, falsely called, Proteus
Ecclesiasticus, Detecting many of their gross Falsehoods, Lies, Calumnies,
Perversions and Abuses, as well as his and their gross Ignorance and Infidelity
contained in their said Book.

By George Keith, A. M.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford at the Sign of the Bible in New York,
1703.

To his Excellency Coll. Francis Nicholson, Her Majesty's Lieut. and Governor
General of the Dominion of Virginia.
Worthy SIR;
THe great Respect I have always born to you, ever since the first knowledge I
had of you, and the good Assurance I have of your favorable Acceptance, but
most especially the good Character that you bear among all that truly know you,
of Your Christian Zeal in promoting the Church in these American parts, both by
your large Beneficences to all the New Erected and New Erecting Churches
here-away, as well as by your prudent Advice, and which crowns all, your Pious
and Virtuous Example, have been the Motives which have persuaded me to Dedicate
this small part of my Labor to your Excellency, in Token of my most humble
Respects. I remain,

Your Excellency's Most Humble Servant, George Keith.

THE PREFACE
Friendly Reader;
IN this my Answer to the Book, falsely called, Proteus Ecclesiasticus, lately
published at Philadelphia, I have not followed the Method and Order of his
pages, who composed it; for it is as void of good method as it is of true
matter, and abounds with what is false. But I have drawn up what I thought fit
to Reply to, and briefly, as I well could, under the following Heads.

Sect. I His misrepresenting the chief Controversy, as it began betwixt the
Quakers and me here at Philadelphia about the year 1691. (...) fully detected.

Sect. II. His Calumnies and false Accusations against those worthy Persons,
the eight Ministers, who attested to the truth of my Quotations in my Third and
Fourth Narratives, collected out of the Quakers chief Authors, as well as
against me and D. L. are discovered and repelled, and the Quotations in the
broad Sheet, called, The serious Call, which he had most unjustly excepted
against, I have proved to be true, according to the true correct printed
Copies; and that there were no other faults in any of the most uncorrect
Copies, but what were Typographical, and of small moment, is plainly proved.

Sect. III. I give some Instances of his and his Brethrens most shameful and
deceitful way of straining the Quotations out of the Quakers Books, thereby to
cloak and hide them.

Sect. IV. I have in my just Defense answered to his Instances brought by him
to prove me varied in Fundamentals, which he falsely charge on me, that they
are acknowledged by my self to be such.

Sect. V. I have also cleared my self from the unjust Aspertions he has cast
upon me, as touching my blaming the Magistrates in Philadelphia for their
persecuting me and my Friends in the Year 1692. as also from his false and
invidious Charge of rendering me guilty of Persecution; with several other
Falsehoods and Calumnies of his against me, rejected and disproved.

But, Friendly Reader, Why is it, think ye, that the Quakers neither here nor
elsewhere can be moved to meet me face to face, to debate so much as matter of
Fact with me, as touching the truth of the Quotations, which they say are
false, and I say are true (but the truth can never be so well found out as by
having the Authors Books openly produced, and the Quotations publicly read and
seen in the presence of both parties?) Surely there can be no cause imaginable
why they refuse this, but that they are self-conscious of their being guilty of
the things charged upon them, and they are afraid to have their deeds brought
to the Light.

They say, as this Author also says, That a Heretic (such as they think I am)
ought to be Rejected after the first and second Admonition, and not disputed
with by word of Mouth. But that is a mere Evasion, why do they still dispute
with me in Print, and yet refuse all Dispute with me by word of Mouth, but that
they know they cannot be so easily detected in writ, and as the Proverb is, The
Paper will not Blush, because not one of many Hundreds, though they should read
the Quakers Defenses in Print, when they deny that there are such Passages in
their Books, either have, or know how to have the Books out of which the
Passages are quoted, whereby to examine the truth of them.

The Spirit of Railing Shimei, etc.
SECT. I.
WHereas in in pag^ of his Preface, he says, The Difference between the
Quakers and G. K. here begun by him, about eleven or twelve years ago, was
chiefly about that of the Universal necessity of the Faith and Knowledge of
Christ's outward Death and Sufferings, in order to Salvation.

Answ. This is a manifest Falsehood, not only the printed Books on my side, and
the Manuscripts yet extant on their side, but many Persons now living at
Philadelphia, of good Credit, who were Eye and Ear-Witnesses to our Debates in
public, are sufficient Evidences. The first and chiefest Controversy I had
with them at that time, was, Whether to preach Faith in Christ without us, (as
both God and Man) and also Christ within us, (as he is God the Eternal Word)
was to preach two Christ's? which William Stockdale, one of their chief
Preachers did accuse me of, and which they could never be drawn to condemn. And
whether my asserting, That the Light within men was not sufficient to Salvation
without something else, was an Error, and a Denial of the Fundamental Principle
of Truth; which Thomas Fitzwater, another of their chief Preachers accused me
of. And after that, John D' Lavall, one of their Magistrates and a Preacher,
did publicly in the Bank-Meeting on a first Day of the week, at Philadelphia,
accuse me of being guilty of Heresy, for asserting, That the Light within
every man was not sufficient to Salvation without something else. By that
[something else] I often told them, I meant the Manhood of our blessed Savior,
and his Death and Passion, etc. And at that very Meeting it was, where Samuel
Jenings told the Auditory, The Question betwixt the Quakers and Me, was not,
Who was the best Christian? but, Who was the best Quaker? Of this diverse now
living in Philadelphia can give Evidence; as also, how at a Monthly Meeting in
Philadelphia, I happened to speak concerning the Principles o^ Truth, Alexander
^eards^y, one of their chief Elders, took me up, and said, I know not what thou
means by [Principles] of Truth; for my part (said he) I never know any
Principle of Truth but One, and that One was the ^ight within. O^ this, I can
pr^^^nt, if required, produce Witnesses, men of good credit at Philadelphia who
heard him at that very Meeting.

What I have either by Word or Writing asserted of the Universal necessity of
the Faith and Knowledge of Christ's Death and Sufferings, I have always done
with that care and caution, by my frequent and often repeated Explanations of my
sense, that I have both the Authority of Scripture, and the consent of not only
the ablest Divines of the Church of England, and the 11th, 12th and 13th
Articles of the Church of England, but also of all other Protestant Churches
[as with respect to adult persons, and such as are capable of actual faith and
knowledge of Christ, which Infants and Idiots that have not the exercise of
right Reason, are not] on my side.

Page 2 of his Preface, he says, In a private Meeting at Philadelphia, in the
year 1691. he heard me over and over vehemently press the universal necessity
of Faith, after this manner, viz. I deny him to be a Minister of Christ, who
does not in the course of his Ministry preach Christ crucified without us,
risen again without us, ascended into Heaven without us; and not only so (said
he) but that the Faith and Knowledge of Christ's Sufferings, etc. without us, is
universally indispensibly necessary to all and every one, in order to obtain
eternal Life and Salvation; and yet (said he) if an honest Indian or Heathen,
etc. do but live faithful to the Light within him, he could not miss of
Salvation.

Answ. Note Christian Reader the open Heathenis^ and Infidelity of this Caleb
Pusey and his Brethren, who make this to be an Error or Default in me, which
was the constant Practice of the holy Apostles and Ministers of Christ in their
Preaching, as is fully to be seen throughout the New Testament, as Acts
2.36.3.20.4.11, 12.10.38, 42, 43, 26.22, 23, 1 Cor. 1^.^, 4. and as they
preached Salvation by the Name of Jesus Christ, ( viz. as both God and Man, and
as he suffered Death for us, etc.) and by no other Name, so they preached Faith
in that Name, as Universally Necessary, in order to Life and Salvation,
according to Mark 16.16. John ^0.31. Acts 10.43. Romans 10.9, 10. 1 Cor 15.1, 2,
3, 4 and many other Texts of Scripture to the same purpose, that hold forth the
universal or general Necessity of Faith in Jesus Christ, as he came in the
flesh; which yet does not exclude such as d^e in infancy, born of believing
Parents, or Natural Idiots, from being capable of Salvation, God working by his
Spirit when, where and how he pleases, though in his ordinary way he works by
the outward means of the Word and Sacraments, it being a good Rule both in Law
and Divinity, That Words are to be understood according to the subject matter;
and even the Quakers must restrict the universal illumination they plead for,
its being sufficient to the Salvation of all who obey it, at least to such who
are capable to give that Obedience, which ^nfants and natural Idoits are
incapable of (as is generally granted) as much as they are incapable of actual
^aith in Christ crucified. But Note the Dullness of this ^ Pusey, who seems
almost as void of good Sense and Reason as his Mi^^-stones, as if the
Salvability of virtuous Heathens could not be consistent with the universal
Necessity of Faith in Christ crucified, but by the Notion of the Twelve
Revolutions of Humane Souls into other Bodies, which Notion therefore he would
fix upon me. But without all such Notion I could there, anst still can show the
good consistency of those two Assertions, as well as many worthy Divines both
of the Church of England, and other Protestant Churches have done.

After all his Sophistical Insinuations and Inferences against me about the
Twelve Revolutions (to which I have so fully answered in my former printed
Books (as C. P. may know, had he but common Discretion) so that to say more
would be a superfluous labor) he has sufficiently cleared me in p. 26. of his
Book, where he confesses his Avoucher told him, I never made it an Article of
my Faith.

Page 4. He insinuates, That they who Ordained me a Minister of the Church of
England, have not given me Power to Baptize, which in his scoffing Spirit, he
calls, making of Christians And p. 5. That I am now to be considered as a
Minister, though of the meanest Class. But for this his Mistake he seems to
Apologize in his late Sheet, printed with the Errata of his Book, after some
Copies of his Book were published. What my Answer to his said Apology is, I
refer to my Post-scrip^ at the end of this Book. And as for my Station in the
Ministry, were it of the meanest Class, it is more honorable than the highest
among his Fraternity of false Teachers; however, by the Grace of God I am a
Presbyter of the Church of England, which (for his Information, I tell him) has
but those of one Class above it. And I thank God I am well esteemed by all that
know me, in the Church, both high and low, and have got more new Friends, who
are true Christians, in the Church of England, than I have lost of the Old
among the Quakers, who either were no Christians at all, or the best of them
but erring Christians.

Page 5, 6. His Insinuation, That the Question betwixt the Quakers and Me, here
at Philadelphia, about eleven years ago, was not, Whether Faith i^ Christ's
outward Manifestation was necessary to our Salvation, and of all Markind (to
whom the Sufferings of Christ have been made known and revealed by the
Scriptures, or otherwise) Is Notoriously false, as plainly appears by what is
abovesaid; for if Christ Without is not to be preached as the Object of Faith,
as he dyed for us, and purchased us by his precious Blood, even the Blood of
his Humanity that was outwardly shed for us. And if the Light (...) us ^e
sufficient to Salvation without any thing else, than there is no need of
preaching the Necessity of Faith in Christ without us, or in his outward
Manifestation for our eternal Salvation. Now both these foregoing and
Antecedent Assertions the Quakers here who differed from me about eleven years
ago, had asserted, as is sufficiently known And that this is the Quakers
Principle most generally, does appear very manifestly from the Quotations out
of their chief Authors, recited faithfully by me in my several Narratives, and
in the Serious Call, as particularly where G. W. says, in his Book, called,
Truth defending the Quakers [quoted in Serious Call] p. 22, 65. Faith in Christ
without men is contrary to the Apostles Doctrine: The like he says in his
Light and Life, p. 61. Another while (says he) People must seek their Savior
above the Clouds and Firmament, contrary to the Righteousness of Faith, Romans
10.6. Another while they must look to Jerusalem for Justification, to the Blood
that was there shed, contrary to Deuteronomy. 30.13, 14. and Romans 10. To the same tune
says E. Buroughs in his Works, p. 306. in answer to his Opponent, who had
said, That they who follow Christ aright, must follow him without, to the Cross
without for Justification, or Mount Calvery without -- The Spirit of Christ it
leads to Christ without. N^w (says E. B.) Reader, see if this be not near unto
Popery, or enquire what else ^e means, as if he would have People go a
Pilgrimage; and this (says he) is contrary to Romans 10. Note here, how
perversely E. B. does construe his Opponents words, as if they meant that the
following of Christ was to go a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem. But indeed I needed
not to have gone further for Proofs than the Serious Call, throughout all that
Section, having the Title, Concerning Christ and his Blood, etc.

SECT. II
AND here Observe, Friendly Reader, the Impudence of this Cal^b Pusey, in his
Postscript on Daniel Leeds Almanac, p. 4. where he says, That notwithstanding
the (...) Ministers have attested the Quotations, (viz. in the Serious Call)
yet ^ shall make it appear that they ^a^e all with D. L. to boot, attested to
very false things. He says, that C. K. in his Serious Call cites G. F. in
Great Mystery, p 28. (...) Lig^t that every man has that comes into the
World, is sufficient to Salvation without the help of any other Means or
Discovery Answ. I must now (says C P.) make ^^ld and break in upon these
Attestors, and not in vain neither; for I do affirm there is no such thing to
be found in that page, nor in any part of that Book, That I Know Of.

Answ. But will this [That I Know of] excuse him in his so unjustly charging
those Worthy M^n, the eight Ministers, as well as Me, for one or two Errors
m^erly Typographical, in some Copies of the first Impression, and which were
Corrected in all the following Impressions; and that I sent to Sam. Jenings at
Burlington some Months ago, I first corrected with a Pen before I sent it:
Some of the correct printed Copies I have shown to several Worthy, Persons in
Philadelphia, who having seen the Quotations, and C. P 's Charge against those
eight Ministers, as well as against D. L. and my self, have declared their
admiration at the Impudence of this C. P. For whereas he says, He does affirm
there is no such thing to be found in that page, nor in any part of that Book,
that I know of: Is his [That I know of] any sufficient Proof or Evidence that
there is no such Passage in any part of that Book, and that therefore he must
break in upon us, as false Attestators and be^yers of G. F in his Gr. Mist. as
he charge us in his Book, p 4, of his Postscript. But whereas he so severely
blames the eight Ministers for this wrong Quotation, I desire the Reader to
take Notice, that in the broad Sheet, called, The Serious Call, etc. it is
said, Most of these Quotations (None of which are Retracted by the Quakers,)
are attested, with near 200 more of the same Nature, in G. K's 3d and 4th
Narratives, by eight Ministers of the Church of England. Where the Reader may
see, it is not said in the Serious Call, that the eight Ministers attested to
the Quotations as printed in that Sheet, but that most of these Quotations are
attested by the eight Ministers in G. K's 3d and 4th Narratives. Now, whatever
wrong Quotation has happened in the broad Sheet, of putting the figures 28 for
47. in G. F's Gr. Mist. and which was (...) fault of the Printer, and all
oversight in the Corrector, the like often happens to Quakers Books, as well
as to others, yet Malice is self (...) this on the eight Ministers, who did not
attest to the (...) Sheet, called, The Serious Call, but to most of the
Quotations in that Sheet, collected out of G. K's 3d and 4th Narratives, as
well as to all the rest contained in said Narratives. One of which Quotations
is this out of G. F's Gr Mystry, p 47. truly set down in the 4th Nar. p. 3.
attested by five of the said Ministers, and as corrected in the Errata, thus
Its contrary to Christ to say, it is an Error that the L^g^t (...) every man
has that comes into the World, is sufficient to Salvation without the help of
any other Means or Discovery; G. F 's Gr. Mist. p. 47. And this proves the
Passage, as to the true sense and intent of G. F's Gr. Mist. p. 47. to be
rightly quoted; for what is contrary [ i. e. Contradictory] to an Error, must
needs be a Truth [seeing two Contradictories can never be both True or both
False] and therefore G. F. held it to be a Truth, That the Light which every
one has, that comes into the World, is sufficient to Salvation without the
help of any other Means or Discovery. The substance of which, in effect, G. F.
does in plain words, positively assert, Great Mystery, page 47 For his Opponent
having said, It is an Error to say, That the Light which every one has that
comes into the World, is sufficient to Salvation without the help of any other
Means or Discovery G. F. in his Gr. Mystry, page 47. (as truly quoted in page 3.
4th Narrative) says, Answ. Contrary to Christ, who brought the Jews off of all
other Helps to himself, who said, Believe in the Light, while ye have the
Light; and they that believed in the Light, should not abide in Darkness; and
no man comes to the Father but by me, says Christ; for he was the Way, the
Truth, the Light in Men, and the Life, and there is No Salvation by any other
Name but by him [Note, as above, The Light In Men] -- So he [viz. the Light in
men] is the Only Means, without any other Help -- And Christ will dwell in Man
and walk in man, and what need they have any more Helps? See the place at large
in G. F 's, Great Mystery, page 47.

And whereas again in page 5, of his Postscript, he viz. C. P.) says, Well, D.
L 's next Quotation is this, W. P in his Quake ism a New Nickname. page 6.
says, Faith in Christ's outward Manifestation is a deadly Poison these latter
Ages have been infected with, to the destruction of Godly Living. Also, in
Serious Call, G. K. here has it. I again, (says C. P.) charge all these Nine
Ministers, and five of them in the 4th Narrative, together with D L. to be all
false Attestors; for this Quotation agrees not with the Book; for W. P. calls
not Faith in Christ's outward Manifestation a deadly Poison, etc. but says, The
making holy Life legal, and says in the History, Mark, [the History] of
Christ's outward Manifestation, Christianity is a deadly Poison etc. And he
says, The word Christianity is wrong placed, and should be next after the word
Manifestation, and is so corrected in the Errata; and the words, The History,
they have all of them very unfairly left out, as if there were no difference
betwixt our Christian Faith standing in the History of Christ, and its standing
in Christ himself howsoever manifested, so that they have curtailed his words,
and wronged his meaning.

Answ. In all this Caleb Pusey has been as injurious (...) the eight Ministers
and to me, as in the former; for, as is above-^^^^ none of the eight Ministers
did attest to the broad Sheet, called, (...) Serious Call, but to my 3d and 4th
Narratives, four of them having attested to the third, and five of them to the
fourth. And what Attestation I give to the Broad Sheet, I give to the Copy,
that was rightly paged and Margined, and not to the other that the Prin^er and
Corrector had wronged. Now in my 3d Narr. attested by four of the eight
Ministers, the Quotation is true, and exactly agreeing with the Book, vid. 3rd
Narr. page 7. N. 14.) and is there more full than as C. P. has quoted it. The
Passage, as quoted by me, and attested by the three Ministers, is this, The
Distinction betwixt Moral and Christian, the making holy Life Legal, and Faith
in the History of Christ's outward Manifestation, has (...) a deadly Poison
these latter Ages have been infected with, to the Destruction of Godly Living
So, that it plainly appears, that C. P. has ^elved the eight Ministers as well
as me, and that they and I have not belv^d W P. for the 3d Narrative, to which
four of the eight Ministers have attested, has the Quotation thus, Faith in
the History, etc. and so have all the latter Impressions of the broad Sheet,
called, The Serious Call, though in some Copies of the first Impression, the
word History, by the fault of the Printer and Corrector, was omitted; but this
Omission could be no design, seeing it was in the 3d Narr. and in many
Thousands of the broad Sheet, which have been printed, and was with a Pen
corrected by me on the Margin, in that printed broad Sheet I sent to S.
Jenings, to which this Book of C. P. (as I was informed) is an answer

But that he says the word Christianity is wrong placed, and should be next
after the word Manifestation, and is so corrected in the Errata, is another
fal^hood of C. P. and an Abuse put upon the Reader; for the Table of Errata
does not so correct it, but thus, p. 6. for Outward Christianity read Outward
Manifestation, and not one wo^d to read Christianity after Manifestation; and
indeed the whole Passage is to del^te Christianity. But supposing the Passage
to be as C. P. would have it, it helps W. Penn nothing, but sinks his Cause as
deep in the Mire, to say, Faith in the History of Christ's outward Manifestation
is Christianity, is a deadly Poison, seeing by the word [History,] it is
evident that W P. meant all that is written concerning Christ, as he come in
the flesh, was born of Virgin, and all that he taught, and did, and commanded,
as related by the four Evangelists; and if the faith of that, or in that (to
use W. P 's phrase) be not Christianity, there is no Christianity in any men
upon Earth. But for W. Penn or C. P^sey to insinuate that by Faith in the
History of Christ's outward Manifestation, either his Opponent or the Church of
England, or any other Protestant Churches, meant a Faith in the History,
wrought merely by the History, without any inward Operation of the Spirit
working with and by Means of the History, is a false and groundless Cavil, as
is that also of C Pusey, as if Faith in the History, etc. and Faith in Christ
himself, were so different and opposite, that the one destroys the other, or
were inconsistent. It seems C. P is ignorant of that sound Maxim, Subordinata
non pugnant, i. e. Things subordinate are not Opposite, or fight not one against
the other; and according to St. Paul, Ephesians. 2 20. as the Ephesians were built
on Jesus Christ, the chief Corner Stone, and principal Foundation, so they were
also built on the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, as the secondary,
subordinate and instrumental, that is, upon those Doctrinal Truths of
Christianity delivered by them, as the Doctrine of Moses and the Prophets is
ca^ed by Christ himself, Moses and the Prophets, and the reading of what is
delvered by Moses in his five Books, is called, The Reading of Moses, in the
Scripture.

Again, whereas upon John 5.39. C. Pusey says, Now did not Christ himself
disclaim the Jews from placing their Faith in the History [the said C. P.
reading the words, Ye search the Scriptures, which reading, if allowed, gives
the Quakers no advantage] so as to make that to be saving, or which is to say,
to give Eternal Life, for they were to come to him that they might have Life,
yet not so as to reject, but to search the Scriptures, etc. even so say we.

I Answ. Our Savior reproved the Jews, that searched the Scriptures, and
professed to believe them, and obey them, and in fo^d^^ing to have eternal
Life, without coming to Christ by Faith, that they might have Life. But this is
no Proof that Christ di^claimed them, as he phraseth it, to believe or have
Faith in the Scriptures, as a secondary and subordinate Cause, and a Means or
Instrument whereby they might believe in Christ himself; for said Christ to the
Jews, Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for Moses wrote of me:
By which it is apparent, that by our Savior's Doctrine, as he himself is the
primary and chief Object of the Christian Faith, together with the Father and
the holy Ghost, so the Scriptures are the secondary and subordinate; and if C.
P. will quibble upon the word (In) as, To believe IN the holy Scriptures of the
Apostles and Prophets, were to make a Christ and a God of them, and to be
guilty of Idolatry; nor would this give him any advantage, nor help W. P. out
of the Mire, for, according to Scripture phrase, to believe (In) the
Scriptures, or to believe (In) Moses, and (In) the Prophets, and consequently
(In) the Apostles and Evangelists, is no more but to believe the Truth of what
they have delivered to us in those sacred Records, by a saving Faith wrought in
us by the holy Spirit, as the principal Agent, and by the Scriptures as the
Instrumental. Thus, Exodus 14 31. it is said, The People believed in the Lord,
and in Moses his Servant, so the Hebrew has it, and so it is on the Margent of
some Bibles, particularly that I have, printed by Henry Hills and John Field,
London, 1660. in a large Octavo. And seeing C. P. has confessed, That the
Quakers are not taught faith in Christ's outward Manifestation, by the Light
within, without the Scriptures, How then can they believe in Christ's outward
Manifestation, if they believe not the Scriptures (or which is the same,
according to Scripture phrase) In the Scriptures, viz. as the secondary and
instrumental Object of their Faith, which R. B. calls, The Material Object of
Faith, page 895. of his Work. So that it is a plain case, if we are not to
believe the Scriptures, or in the Scriptures, which (as is said) is equivolent,
according to Scripture phrase, both in Exodus 14.31. and Jo^. ^ 46. so nor are
we to believe in Christ; for though the Greek particle En) in John 5.^6. be not
expressed, yet it is employed in the D^tive Cases of both the Names, as often
elsewhere, both in the Septuagin^ and (...) the New Testament. But seeing we
have no other present outward Manifestation of Christ, [if by outward
Manifestation, is meant, outward Revelation or Discovery, as it properly does
so signifi^] we have no outward Manifestation of Christ, but what the holy
Scripture gives us; that to believe in the History, and to beli^^e in the
outward Manifestation of Christ, is but the same thing in two different
Expressions. And it seems more proper to call the Scriptures the outward
Revelation, Discovery or Manifestation of Christ, tha^ to call Christ himself
(as he was incarnate) the outward Manifestation of Christ. But the several
Instances above-given, prove sufficiently, that the Quaker-Authors above cited,
as well as W. P. do not think it Necessary or profitable to believe in Christ
without us, but hurtful and contrary to Scripture; for proof of which, I had
formerly quoted W. P. in my Third Narrative, page 6 and 7, That seeing Christ
is not now to come in the flesh, they (i. e the Quakers) need not preach what
is not to be again. And that the whole Christian World has so long and lazily
depended on it, without thirsting after his inward holy Appearance in the
Conscience.

Answ This is, in effect, the words of W. P. which, as in the latter part, are
most Uncharitable, so in the former altogether false, That seeing Christ is not
to come again, to be born in the flesh, and suffer in the flesh, he is not to
be preached, as he did so come: Why? Because they need not preach what is not
to be again, says W. P. I desire the Reader to view at more length that and
several more Quotations made by me in my said Third Narrative, p. 6, 7, 8. out
of W. P 's Books, and compare the^ with his Books quoted, and he will find that
his great aim and drift, in these Quotations is to render Faith in Christ
without us, considered both as God and Man, not only not Necessary to our
Christianity and Salvation, but hurtful. And in agreement to W. P. and the
other above-given Quotations, I shall add yet another out of Ed. Buroughs
Works, p. 150, 15^. Whether (says he) it is possible that any can be saved
without Christ manifest within? If so, then whether it is not the Doctrine of
Salvation, which is ONLY Necessary to preach Christ within? -- And is he not a
Deceiver that exhorts People for Salvation, to any other thing than the Light
of Christ, Yea or Nay? And how has Christ enlightened every Man that comes
into the World, if not within?

Thus, I think, I have put it out of Doubt, with all Intelligent and Impartial
Persons, who shall consider what is abovesaid, That the great and chief
Question between the Quakers and their Opponents, as well as betwixt the
Quakers and Me, (I mean, the Quaker chief Authors) was about the Necessity of
Faith in Christ without Us, who have the express Revelation of it given us by
the holy Scriptures, in order to Salvation; and not as Caleb Pusey states it,
as with relation to the Heathens, though that was also a part of the
Controversy, but not the chief part. And for a further Confirmation, I can
produce several Witnesses yet living at Philadelphia, and else where in America
who were present at a Dispute betwixt T. Lloyd and Me at the School-House in
Philadelphia, after the Difference begun betwixt the Quakers and Me, which held
some hours, before a great Auditory of People, where T^o. Lloyd did earnestly
contend against me, That it was NOT Needful to our Salvation to believe that
Christ dyed for Us, arguing from Micha 6 8. and Eccles. 12, 13. To which, or
what else he brought for Proof, I fully answered; and at that very time John D'
Lavall his Son in Law, opposed his Assertion, quoting against him Rom ^0* 8, 9,
10.

As I have showed in my Answer to R. B. his ^pology, R. Barclay did acknowledge
the Necessity of Faith in Christ without us, etc. where it was revealed, viz.
by means of the holy Scripture, his words being, Vb^ Declaratur, i. e. where it
is declared; wherein he does evidently contradict his Brethren above-quoted.
But yet, he did not well to tie the Necessity of that Faith. viz. in Christ
crucified, etc. to such only to whom it is revealed; for though none can be
guilty of not believing in Christ, where it is not revealed or declared, yet
that does not hinder, but that that Faith is Necessary, not only because it is
preached or declared, but therefore it is and ought to be preached and
declared, because it is Necessary to Salvation universally, either expressly or
Implicitly. For if that Faith be only Necessary to any, because it is preached
or declared in the Scriptures, it would follow, That if men let alone the
preaching of it to their Children and Posterity, so as not to let them hear or
read any thing of that Faith, and so (which God forbid) to destroy the Bible,
they should do a kindness to their Children, by preaching only Faith in and
Obedience to the Light in them, for Salvation, and that to be sufficient
without any thing else. But why should C. P. render my asserting Faith in
Christ without, being universally Necessary to men's Salvation, so much to
favor the Doctrine of the Revolutions of Souls, seeing by his and his
Brethrens Doctrine, Faith in, and Obedience or Conformity to the Light within,
is judged as universally Necessary to men's Salvation, as I judge Faith in
Christ without universally Necessary? For as concerning Infants dying in
Infancy, if C. P. will infer, That they must needs Revolve again, according to
my Persuasion, to have Faith in Christ without, seeing that Faith is Necessary
to their Salvation; by the like Argument to that of C. P. I do equally infer as
great Necessity of Faith in the Light within, and Obedience to it, in Infants,
or otherwise that they must Revolve again, in order to have that Faith, seeing
the Quakers generally preach Universally the Necessity of Faith in Christ the
Light within, and Conformity to it, as much as others and I preach the
Necessity of Faith in Christ Without, and Obedience to his Commands outwardly
delivered us in the holy Scriptures, as well as to the Dictates of the true
Light within. If he say, Infants may be or are saved without all actual Faith
and Obedience to the Lig^t within? May not I as well say, That they are saved [
viz Infants of believing Parents] without all actual Faith in Christ without,
and actual Obedience to his Commands outwardly given in holy Scriptures? Next,
As to Heathens, I suppose C. P. will not say, that any Heathens, who are adult,
are saved without all Faith in the Light within, or in Christ within, and
Obedience to him within them, seeing this is their great Universal Principle,
viz. the Necessity of Faith in the Light within, or Christ within, and
Obedience thereto universally, in order to Salvation. But we find no such
Doctrine delivered in the holy Scriptures, that any Faith or Obedience, either
of Jews or Gentiles, without Faith in Jesus Christ, as he came in the Flesh
without, is sufficient to Salvation; neither is there any Promise of Salvation
to such, but on the contrary St. Paul does very evidently prove, That the
Gentiles as well as the Jews are all under sin, and none of them can be
justified by their Works without Faith in Jesus Christ, considered as he is the
promised Seed, as he outwardly was to come, and so did accordingly come in the
appointed time. Besides that, Faith in Christ Within was a Doctrine as
Universally unknown to the Heathens as Faith in Christ Without.

And whereas C. P. thinks to prove me guilty of varying in Fundamentals, by his
laboring to fix upon me the Notion of the Revolutions he ought not only to
have proved the Notion of the Revolutions to be an Error, but to be a
Fundamental Error, inconsistent with and repugnant to some Fundamental of the
Christian Religion, which I find not that he has done, or so much as essayed
to do, notwithstanding of all his Bawling and Outcry against me, to render me
Odious, if he could, but I thank God, I am sufficiently armed against him; And
the Pi^ he thinks he has dug for me, (if he be of the faith of his
Brethren) he is fallen into it himself; for however he inveighs against the
Revolution of Humane Souls into other Bodies, he and they do not believe that
the Souls either of good or bad Men shall at the Resurrection come into the
same Body for Substance they lived in on Earth, but quite other Bodies, other
in Substance; for W. Penn says, Its as absurd or more than Transubstantiation,
to say, A Natural Body and a Spiritual body can be the same, viz. in substance.
And R. Claridge severely blames me in his Lux Evang. attesta^a, for affirming,
That Christ has the same Body in substance in Heaven, he had on Earth.

And as to the Opinion of The Revolution of Humane Souls into other Bodies, so
frequently mentioned by C. P. as I know no Christian that holds it either as an
Article of Faith, or Matter of Opinion, so I sincerely declare, I neither hold
it as an Article of my Faith, nor to much as a probable Opinion; for it is
inconsistent with the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Body after Death; but
this Argument can have no weight with C. P. and his Brethren, who own not the
Resurrection of the same Body for substance; nor did I think it a probable
Hypothesis, as it is commonly supposed to have been held by Jews, Pythagorians,
and Platonists. But whatever thoughts I had of the Doctrine of the Revolution
of Souls, as an Hypothesis (like Copernicus Hypothesis of the Earths Diurnal
and Annual Motion) will a change of Mind in that respect prove me to be varied
in a Fundamental Principle of Christianty, as C. P. would fix it on me, seeing
I never made it an Article of my Faith, as he has ( I think) sufficiently
cleared me?

There is but one Quotation more in all the Broad Sheet, called, The serious
Call, that to the best of my Observation, in reading C. P. 's Book, I find he
quarrels at, and accuses us with false Quotation. And first, he tells, That we
have wrong quoted the page, quoting Page 40, for p. 250. in Gr. Mystery. But
let any look into D. Leed's Almanac, and they will find that D. L. has not
quoted p. 40. but p. 250. Therefore in this, the false Quotation is his, not D.
L' s, And in all the Copies of the Serious Call, that I can meet with here, the
page quoted is p. 250. and if it be otherwise in some printed Copies, it is but
a Typographical Error, that does not affect me, far less the eight Ministers.
For whereas he blames us for leaving out the Word [And] before the following
words, which had the Ministers and I omitted, it was no material Omission; but
the word [And] in that place seems superfluous, as well as the following [And]
when the whole Paragraph or Period is set down; but both the Ministers, and I,
who sig^ed to my Third Narrative, p. 14. where this Quotation is, set the word
And in its proper place, And the Devil was in thee, And thou says, etc. But
let Us examine C P 's Quotation, which is as follows, in his Book, p 13 (...)
thy Book, stuffed with Lies, Low thou have been (...) come out of thee, and the
Devil was in thee. (...), says C. P. here is the end of that part of the
Sentence. But let (...) Person read the Passage in Gr. Mist. p 250 and he will
find the contrary, that the words, And the Devil was in thee, are not the end
of the foregoing Sentence, but the beginning of the following; for before the
words, And the Devil was in thee, there is a Semi-colon, thus [;] which divides
it from the end of the foregoing words. And for the Readers satisfaction I
shall set down the words, as pointed in Gr. Mist. p. 250 And thou have showed
in thy Book, stuffed with Lies, how thou have been tormented, and of the filthy
(...) come out of thee; [Note here the Semi colon, which ends the first part of
the Period; and then follows] And the Devil was in thee, and thou says, thou
art saved by Christ without thee, and so have Recorded thy (...) to be a
Reprobate; so it is pointed only with a Comma at the end of the words, the
Devil was in thee. And though C. P. might excuse G F. for his Ignorance in
Comma's and Semi colons, as well as in his Mother Tongue (for his Gr. Mystery
is full of false English) yet the sense of the words foregoing and following
do plainly demonstrate the dull fallacy of C P 's Defense of G. F. But C. P. is
yet more false in his false and unjust Accusation of Chr. Wade, as if C. W. did
not believe the Doctrine of Christ within, and affirmed, It was dangerous to
preach Christ within Man. But C. P. has no evidence for this but G. F. who had
falsely accused him in this, as in diverse other things, and particularly G. F.
accused C. Wade, That he denied the Equality of the Son with the Father; which
C. Wade in his Book, Quakery Slain, p 23, 24. proves to be a Lie in G. F. for
he owned the Equality of the Son with the Father, but C W. clears himself, That
he denied the Equality of G F. and Creature adopted Sons wish the Father; A
full account of this I have given in my 4th Narrative, p. 15 attested by five
of the eight Ministers.

And that C. W. only denied G. F 's blasphemous Notion of Christ within, which
was, That the Quakers had Christ in them, God and Man, FLESH and SPIRIT, and
that Christ's Flesh and Bone was a Measure in one, and a Measure in another; for
which see Gr. Mist. page 246. But C. Wade has fully cleared himself (against
the false Accusation of G. F. That he owned Christ within, in the true sense of
Scripture, to wit, as he was God, and one and the same God with the Father; see
the words quoted at large in my 4th Narrative, p. 16.

Thus I have thought fit to answer what Caleb Pusey has falsely and unjustly
objected against the eight Ministers and Me, as touching the Quotations in the
broad Shee^, as well as the Sheet it self, as it is corrected in several
Thousand printed Copies, many of which are to be sold in Philadelphia and
New York, as well as the Third and Fourth Narratives, out of which those
Quotations were taken, and which were attested by the eight Ministers, as they,
stand in said Narratives, against which C. P. has not made, nor can make the
least Exception, being in said Narratives as C. P. has quoted them, or rather
more fully. And (...) C. P. nor any other Quaker so far as I have heard or read
in any of their Books, have objected so much as the least wrong Quotation in
any of the rest, either as to the Words or Pages of the Books, it may pass for
an Authentic Confirmation, That all the Quotations in the said broad Sheet,
called, The Serious Call, being at least Fifty in Number, are exactly true.

SECT. III.
BUt Caleb Pusey's next fallacious Evasion, is, to put such streigned and
perverse Glosses on the words of the Quotations collected in the broad Sheet,
as might seem to weak and inconsiderate Readers to be sound; and in this
Undertaking he has used the help of G. W. in some of his Sophistical Defenses
of himself and his Brethren, particularly in his Book, called, Truth and
Innocence. But I have so fully and amply detected his fallacious Methods in
that Undertaking, as well as the Author of the Switch (whose help C. P. seems
to have ^orrowed) in my several late Narratives, especially the Fourth
Narrative, that to do it here again would seem to be superfluous. But to give
the Reader a False in two Instances only at present, of C. Pusey's and G.
Whiteheads deceitful way of defending their Brethrens Blasphemies. Whereas it
is expressly said in Sa^l's Errand, p. 8. He that has the same Spirit that
raised up Jesus Christ, is Equal with God; To render this Orthodox, C. P. cites
G. W 's Truth and Innocence, p. 9, 10. thus defending it; The words (says he)
HE THAT HAS should be le^t out, as being contrary to G. F and our Principle.
But that they were contrary to G. Fox or F. Howgil either, who defends the like
Blasphemy, he has not given any real Proof. And at this rate, not only the
highest Blasphemy and vilest Heresy, but Atheism it self may be defended by C.
P. and G. W. for it is but to take away the words of any Sentence, that renders
it Blasphemous or Atheistical, as if one should say with the Fool in Psalm.
14.1. There is not ^ God, this Method of C. P. and G. W. does excuse him, if
admitted; for when any find fault with the Expression, it is but to tell them
the word [Not] should be left out, and what remains is Orthodox. But why did
not G. W. and C. P take the same Method to excuse the Blasphemy of Fr. Howgill,
which has been twice printed without any Correction, first in a Treatise by it
self, and next in the Collection of his Works, Page 232. the words being
charged thus, They that have the Spirit of God are Equal with God. F. Howgill
denis not the words, nor does he say, the word [They that have] must be left
out; for then, being Pl^ral, the following (...) would not be good Sense, i. e.
The Spirit of God are Equal with God. But as George Whitehead had taken the
liberty to say, He that has, should be left out, he might with the like
Confidence have said, the word [A^^] is to be left out, and the word [^^] put
in its ^oom. Judge Reader what Juggling this would be, and what Juggling this
Defense of C. P. and G. W. is, which ^ay excuse the worst of Heresies and
Blasphemies. Now, as to Fr. Howgill's Distinction of Equal in Nature, but not
in Stature, defended both by G. W. and C. P. let them take it either of the
holy Spirit, or of Men who have the holy Spirit, it is still blasphemous. If of
the Holy Spirit, it is Blasphemous to say the holy Spirit is not equal to God
in Stature, but in Nature; for there is no Distinction in God betwixt his
Nature and Stature, and the Spirit of God is in all respects Equal with God;
and it is no less blasphemous in G.W. and C.P. to say, Because the Saints are
partakers of the holy Ghost, or of the divine Nature, that therefore they are
Equal with God in Nature, but not in Stature; for they are no wise equal with
God either in Nature or Stature.

The second Instance of C. P 's as dull as fallacious ways of defending W. P.
in his Proteus, page 31. The words of W. P. being in Serious Apology, p. 146.
That the outward Person that suffered at Jerusalem was properly the Son of God,
we utterly deny. C. P. says, This has been fully answered to other
Adversaries. But I say, no otherwise than fully and fo^ly deceitful, even as C.
P. labors to do it. He says, W. P. meant it only of Christ's outward Body.
But how could he mean it only of that? was that Person only an outward Body?
This is as great an Error as the former; for that very Person who suffered [at
Jerusalem] was both God and Man, the Word incarnate, and not a Body abstractly.
as C. P. wordeth it, to wit, abstracted either from his Soul or from the
eternal Word personally united with it. But as W. Penn did not believe that
outward Person, that he was properly the Son of God, so nor did he believe that
his outward Body was any part of him, so as in part to constitute him the full
and entire Christ, as sufficiently is evident from W. P's dispute with John
Fald^, in his Rejoinder to J. F. for about sixteen pages, viz. from p. 296. to
p 312. And whereas in p. 269. he quotes J. F. saying, The Apostle Paul calls
his and the Saints Bodies their Clothing, 2 Cor 5. yet they were nevertheless
a part of themselves. To this W. P. answers, A mere Rattle for Children! did
the Body, God prepared for his Son to do his Will in, help to constitute him
Christ, as much as the Apostles Body did help to constitute him Paul. And in p.
305. W. P. makes the Body o^ Christ to be Christ only, from that familiar Usage
o^ Speech, the thing contained for the thing containing. Note Reader, this
familiar usage of Speech is that called by Rhetoricians a Metonym^, as so
indeed G. W. else where calls it; and says G. W. I distinguish betwixt
Christ's having Flesh and Bone, and Consisting of it; Which still is a vile
Heresy; for though Christ, as he was God, and before his Incarnation, did not
consist of Flesh and Bone, yet when he was Incarnate, it was a real part of
him, as he was God and Man, and yet one Person, and he did consist of it, as
well as of his reasonable Soul, as Man, respecting his Manhood, and of his
Divinity considered as God. And it is very apparent, that C. P. is in the same
Error with both W. P. and G. W. by his arguing, And was not he the Son of God,
that was before Abraham was! And was not he glorified with the Father before
the World began? But we do not read that the outward Body was before the World
began, nor before Abraham. But to this dull Sophistry, I Answer, The Son of
God, the true Christ was before Abraham, and before the World began; but he was
not both God and Man, the Word Incarnate, before he took Flesh in the Virgins
Womb; and Christ thus entirely considered, as both God and Man, is the entire
and complete Christ and Savior, and therefore it is, that his Blood is called,
The Blood of God, Act. 20.28. though this is denied by G. W. as I have showed
in my Narratives, as also, that he has denied, that Christ has a created Soul
(see G. W 's Divinity of Christ, 2d part, p. 18.) And I further prove, That G.
W. in the same Book, p. 35. has denied the Generation of the Son of God to be
Eternal, or from Eternity, in answer to T. V. who did argue for the three
Persons in the Godhead, from their Personal Acts, John 14, 15* 16. Chapters. To
this G. W. Replies, Where does the Scripture call them Personal Acts? Were they
not Spiritual Acts of the divine Spirit and Power of God? And was there any Act
but what was brought forth in Time? And was the Fathers begetting the Son a
personal Act? However (says he) was it not an Act in Time? If so, how says T.
V. That the Generation of the Son must be Eternal? What distracted confused
Work is here!

Judge Reader, if this Discourse of G. W. be not as plain a denial of Christ's
Eternal Generation, and so of his being God equal with the Father, even as
A^ius or any A^ian ever was guilty of. And thus, while G. W. their chief
Apostle now living, has both denied that Christ, as God, had an Eternal
Generation, and that, as Man, he had not a created Soul, as above quoted, to
speak with Reverence, he is, according to G. W. neither Uncreated nor Created,
and consequently there is, according to him, No Christ at all; Not Uncreated,
because whatever is Uncreated, was from Eternity; Nor Created, seeing he has
denied that he has a created Soul, or indeed any created Body, so much as in
part to constitute him Christ.

It avails the Quakers nothing to say (though C. P. brings it up against me)
That I defended G. F. and others of their Authors, in former times; for I had
not in those days seen many of the Passages in their Books, which I have seen
of late times, and some that I had seen, I had not well considered; but that
ever I defended any of their Blasphemies or Fundamental Errors, or ever had any
of them, I utterly Deny.

SECT. IV.
ANd this leads me to vindicate and clear my self from the Nine particular
Fundamentals, wherein C. P. says, I am varyed since I left the Quakers and
joined to the Church o^ England, which, I thank God, I can very clearly and
easily do, as well as sincerely, notwithstanding all the Dirt that C. P. has
cast upon me, which I can as easily shake off as St. Paul did the Viper.

The Nine Fundamentals charged, are as follow, viz.

First, The Necessity of Faith in Christ, as he outwardly suffered for us.

But I am not changed in this, in the least, I thank God; I hold still the same
Fundamental, and he and they who hold it not to be a Fundamental of
Christianity, are gone from Christianity to Heathenism. But observe Reader, how
he endeavors to convict me of Contradiction, for saying, The Express Knowledge
and Faith of Christ, as he outwardly suffered, is necessary to the perfecting
men's Salvation, who have it not before Death. I had sufficiently cleared my
sense in my Book, called, The pretended Antidote, in answer to the Ministers in
Boston, That such who have had an Implicit Faith in Christ here in this World,
and not an Express Faith, for want of Opportunity to have it revealed, they
shall have it in Heaven after this Life, for Then is men's Salvation perfected,
and not till then. Whereupon these of Boston, or some of them, would infer upon
me, I held a Purgatory, and as unjustly C. P. through his supine Ignorance,
would infer upon me, That I am guilty of a Contradiction; for Contradictories
are neither in respect of differing Times, Places and States; and therefore
this is no Contradiction.

And in p. 12 of his Proteus, he argues against my saying, That the term
[Express] in one case, implies [Implicit] in another, which he thinks to Refute
thus, ^^at because I had affirmed, that Cornelius before Peter preached to him,
had no Express Faith and Knowledge of Christ, that therefore, according to G.
K. Cornelous had an Implicit knowledge and faith of Christ; and yet within a
few lines after, I said, Cornelius had no knowledge nor faith of Christ
crucified.

Answ. But this is no Contradiction; for Express and Implicit, though opposite
Terms of Distinction, yet they are not Contradictory, no more than White and
Black, Man and Beast are Contradictory. That Cornelius had no express faith of
Christ before St. Peter preached it to him, will not prove either that
Cornelius in his former state had or had not an implicit faith of Christ; for
many Moral Gentiles neither have an express nor implicit faith of Christ; but
whatever Faith of Christ any men have, it is either express or implicit, as
every Annimal is either Man or Beast; but many things are neither.

The second Fundamental is, Of Christ's subsisting of a reasonable Soul and
Humane Flesh, according to the Athanasian Creed. But C. P. would have his
Reader believe, I denied this fundamental Article of the Athanasion Creed,
because in one of my former Books ( ^ector Corrected, p. 27.) apologizing for
G. F. or some of the Quakers, who denied the humane Nature of Christ, as G. F.
used to argue, Humane is Eart^ly, I boggled at the Term Humane, as not being
express Scripture; but I was not aware in that day how G. F. and other Quakers
deny^d the real Manhood of Christ, consisting of a created Soul and Body, like
to us in all things, sin excepted, which I ever believed while a Quaker; and I
challenge C. P. or any whomsoever, to give the least Instance to the contrary.
But is the Denial of the Term Humanity or Humane, a fundamental Error in
Christianity, while at the same time I owned the equivolent of it in true
English, Latin and Greek, as Manhood and Manly in English, Vir, Virilis,
Virilitas in Latin, and Anthropos, Anthropinos in Greek? After I came to
detect the Unsoundness of G. F. and G. W. their denying that Christ had any
other Soul or Body that did constitute him Christ, but what was no real part of
Man's (...) Nature, and having well considered, that if we reject the Term
Humane, because coming from a word that signifies Earth, we should by the like
reason refuse to call Christ the second Adam; for Adam comes from the Hebrew
word that signifies Red Earth, and yet the Scripture calls Christ the second
Adam, and we are warranted by Scripture so to do I cannot find that G. F. owns
any other Flesh of Christ, but what came down from Heaven, as I have noted in
my 4th Narrative; but I always believed that Christ took real Flesh of the
Virgins Substance, and had a real crated Soul, and was of the same Nature with
all Mankind, but without all sin. But to say, The Soul of Christ did pre-exist
(not from Eternity, but before its infusion in the Body, even from the
beginning of time, (with which he charge me, when a Quaker) I never
understood was reckoned a Fundamental Error by Orthodox Divines. Now E. Burro^
calls it Blasphemy to say, That Christ is in Heaven in our Nature, page 301,
306. of his Works. But W. Penn in his prim. Christianity, says, That Christ
took our Nature, and Triumphed in our Nature; which is a perfect Contradiction
to Ed. Buroughs, unless that W. P. meant that Christ took the Quakers Nature,
but not the Priests Nature, or the Nature of other Men. But if Christ had not
taken the Nature of all Men, his Death for all Men had not been a sufficient
Ransom. And as impertinent is he in charging me with denying the Fundamental of
Christ's having the same Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones he had on Earth, because
I said, It is no more a Body of Flesh, Blood and Bones, but a pure Aetherial,
i. e. Heavenly Body; and yet in the same Book I plead, it is the same in
Substance, though greatly changed in Condition and Qualities* and as I have
elsewhere explained it, as in my Book, Errors Corrected, it is heavenly Flesh,
being endued with heavenly Qualities, no more subject to Death and Hunger,
Thirst, Sleep, etc. But I charge it on W. Penn and R. Claridge, as also on C.
Pusey (if he own their Doctrine) for a fundamental Error, in denying, that the
Body of Christ in Heaven is the (...) in Substance it was on Earth; which they
both have denied; and Christ's glorified Body is not Flesh and Blood in that
sense, 1 Cor. 15.50.

The Third Fundamental. Proteus, p. 14. The Light within.

This I still hold to be a Fundamental and Essential of Christian Religion, as
really as Annimal is essential to the Definition of a Man, as really is the
Light within, considered universally, essential to Christianity; but as Annimal
is only the Genius, which constitutes not the Species of Mankind, without the
specifical Difference b^twixt Men and Brutes, that is, Rationality: So the
Universality of the Light, teaching some Moral Duties to God and our Neighbor
(but not faith in Christ crucified, which the special Light of Revelation
gives, that is not Universal) does not constitute Christianity in Specie,
without the superadded Light of special Revelation. And I charge the Quakers to
Err Fundamentally, who hold with G F. G. W. and E. B. That the Light within
every Man, or any Man, is sufficient to Salvation without any thing Else; Which
was never my Faith or Persuasion; and I challenge any Man to prove it against
me.

But, Reader, pray take Notice how these two Infallible Brethren, R. Claridge
and C. Pusey contradict each other about the sufficiency of the Light. In some
of my former Books I had distinguished betwixt what the Spirit of God can do by
his absolute Omnipotency, and what he is pleased to do, according to the Method
that his divine Wisdom has appointed, and his divine Providence has afforded
of sufficiency of Helps to lead all Men into all Truth necessary to Salvation,
without the holy Scriptures; I having affirmed the first, but denied this last,
as with respect to his ordinary way of Providence; the like or the same
Distinction, in effect, C. P. uses in his Proteus, p. 5. of his Postscript,
And also seeing (says he) the Dabate is not about what God and Christ does do,
but what God and Christ IS sufficient to do. Here the Reader may see that C. P.
seems to use the same Distniction I had used, in effect; for I never
questioned, nor do question the sufficiency of God or Christ, what they can do,
I have always acknowledged that God and Christ can and could have Taught all
Men all that is sufficient to Salvation without the holy Scripture, and without
all outward Mea^s and Helps of Instruction; but we find by Experience that he
has not ^o done, nor is it the revealed Will of God that ever he will so do
(...) Mankind, but the contrary, according to many places of Scripture,
particularly Romans 16.25, 26. And yet, for this my Distinction, which C. P.
seems to have copied after me, R. Claridge does severely blame and oppose me,
page 15. of his Lux Evang. attest. That is opposes the Attributes of Gods
Omnipotency and Wisdom, and sets them, as it were, (...) variance. And if I be
guilty of this Charge, so is his Brother C. Pusey. But leaving these two
infallible Brethren to reconcile the matter between themselves, which will be
hard, nay, impossible for them to do, I say, it no more opposes Gods
Omnipotecny and Wisdom, than when Christ said, Mat. 26.53, 54. Think thou
that I cannot now pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than
twelve Legions of Angels; but how then shall the Scriptures be fullfilled, that
thus it must be? Here it is plain, that both Christ and God could have done
what they did not, and what their Wisdom thought fit not to do. And many such
Cases might be instanced, none of which does oppose the Attributes of the
divine Wisdom and Omnipotency; for when we say, God can do this or that, which
his Wisdom thinks not fit to do, we abstract, by a mental Abstraction, from
Gods secret Decrees, and also from his Revealed Will delivered us in the holy
Scriptures, but respecting them, it is most true, that God cannot any wise
contradict his Will either secret or revealed. And it being Gods revealed Will
that we should obtain Salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ who dyed for us, and
by his Death, Blood and Passion, Resurrection, etc. which are something else
than the Light within, taken in the highest sense; and therefore I still say,
The Light within,(call it God, or Christ (as God) in a figurative sense, by a
Metonyme, as when David said, The Lord is my Light and Salvation, i. e. the
Author both of my Light and of my Salvation, yet) it is not sufficient to
Salvation without the Manhood of Christ, and his Death and Sufferings,
Resurrection, etc. for neither God nor Christ can contradict the Revealed Will
of God, which is, not to save us (1 These 5 9, 10) without the Death and
Resurrection etc. of Christ, but by it, with other concurring Causes and Means,
all in excellent Harmony. And though it is not Gods Revealed Will to teach all
Mankind all that is needful to their Salvation, by any Light within them,
without the holy Scriptures, or some outward Means of Instruction equivolent,
yet we know not but some he may teach so, as he taught Adam and the first
Prophets, who had none before them. Again, it is one thing to say, God by his
internal Word or Light can teach, or is sufficient to teach Us and all Men what
is Necessary to Salvation, if he had so pleased; but we find he has not been
pleased so to do; And it is far another thing to say, God or Christ in Men is
sufficient to Salvation without any thing else; for this places men's Salvation
wholly upon God and Christ as within men, and wholly excludes the Manhood of
Christ, and all that he has done and suffered for us, and his Mediation in
Heaven, from being concerned in our Salvation, as any necessary cause thereof.
And indeed, as this was the chief Difference betwixt the Quakers and me here at
Philadelphia, about eleven years ago, so I find it has been the chief
Difference betwixt the Quakers and all Orthodox Christians who have opposed
them. And it is a palpable Contradiction in C. P. as well as in G. W. and many
others of the Quakers, to say, The Light within is sufficient to Salvation
without any thing else, and yet to say, Not without respect to Christ
considered as he suffered and dyed for us; for if that respect be absolutely
necessary, it necessarily infers, that the Light within is not sufficient to
Salvation without Christ's Death and Suffering, etc. and if they mean, it has a
respect to the same, but not an absolutely necessary respect to Christ as he
came outwardly and dyed for us, etc. they still cheat all that hear them as
well as their own Souls; for in so doing, they make the Light within the entire
complete Savior and Christ, and Christ God-Man without us merely Accessory,
and at least but Necessary to the facilitating our Salavtion, but not to the
very being of it, or rather indeed not at all necessary, so much as to
facilitate it; for if the Light within be the entire Christ and Savior, it
were a much more easy way to obtain Salvation by Obedience to the Dictates of
the Light within only, than by Faith and Obedience to all the positive Precepts
of Christ in the Scripture, as well as to the Dictates of the true Light within.

But whereas C. P. labors to prove me at variance with the Ministers of
Norfolk about the Light within, his labor is vain; they say nothing in
derogation from the true Light within, but from the Notion of it as taught and
held by the Quakers, which is indeed so very false, that their Notion o^ it may
be and is justly called Ig^is Fatuus, or what other Names they give it, even as
our Savior called the false Light that the Pharisees and Jew-set up in then
(in Opposition to Christ and his Gospel) Darkness But let us examine and
discover R. Claridge his sophistical Syllogism he uses to prove That in Gods
Ordina^y way the Light within is sufficient to lead and guide the faithful into
all Truth necessary to their Salvation, without the holy Scriptures, Lux Evang.
attest. p. 18, 19. His Syllogism or Argument is this, Christ is Gods ordinary
way of Salvation, And the Light within is Christ, etc.

Answ. Christ is Gods ordinary way of Salvation, not as within only nor as God
only, but as both God and Man, and as revealed to us in the holy Scriptures, as
well as inwardly enlightening us; but in this sense the Minor or Assumption of
his Syllogism is altogether false; for the Light within is not Christ, as both
God and Man, and as he is revealed in the holy Scripture, our Prophet, Priest
and King without us. Thus it appears his Syllogism or Argument is a mere
Sophism and Fallacy.

The Fourth Fundamental he says, is of Perfection.

But I no where remember that ever I called it a Fundamental Doctrine of
Christianity to assert a sinless Perfection in this mortal Life to any of the
Saints; or if I did it will not therefore follow, that it is a Fundamental, or
that I am obliged to hold it to be a Fundamental; for instead of thinking it to
be Fundamental Doctrine of Christianity, to assert a sinless Perfection in this
Life, I think it is an Error to assert it, though not a fundamental Error, so
long as I did not believe I had attained it, as I never did, nor did I ever
know a Person that I thought had attained a sinless Perfection among the best
Quakers that ever I conversed with; but I still hold both Perfection and
Freedom from sin attainable (and attained in this Life by many) in Scripture
sense, as I have explained it in my answer to R. Bar^lay's Apology. And seeing
C. P. thought to press me so hard with his Consequences to own the Revolutions
(but without all success) let me press him and his Brethren a little from his
and his Brethrens Doctrine of a sinless Perfection, not only attainable in this
Life, but absolutely Necessary to be obtained by every one before Death,
otherwise they cannot immediately after Death go to Heaven, as they commonly
teach. Now, it is most certain, that many of their Friends have dyed, and had
not obtained this sinless Perfection before their Death, but were very far
(...) of it, even as far as many others, and much f^rther, having dyed in great
Error, sinful Ignorance, much Incharitableness and spriritual Pride and I think
C. P will scarce dare to affirm That all his deceased Brethren before Death
were arrived at a sinless Perfection; I Query therefore, as the Quakers use to
argue against their Opponents) Whither are thy gone? Not to Heaven, nor to
Hell, Nor to Purgatory, they will or much say, by their own Argument, for they
do not profess to believe a Purgatory; what then remains, by ^. Pusey's and his
Brethrens way of arguing, but that the Souls of his Brethren that dyed, before
they had attained to a sinless Perfection, must needs Revolve into other
Bodies, in order to attain to a sinless Perfection? I am sure this Consequence
is more necessary and proper against C. P. and his Brethren, for the
Revolutions, than any argument he has used against me, to infer them, from any
words or passages i^ my former Books. This is an Argument ad Hominem.

The Fifth Fundamental, he says, is concerning Prayer.

But I do not remember that ever I asserted, That the Difference betwixt my
Persuasion and the Church of England, about Prayer, as whether in the extempore
way, or by set Forms,) was a fundamental point of Difference; and had I thought
so then, it will not follow, that it was a real Fundamental, or that I am
obliged now to think it so. But I suppose the fallacy of C. P. lies here, that
because in a Book which was printed with my Name, styled, The fundamental
Truths of Christianity, there was a small Treatise added concerning Prayer,
pleading for Praying by the Spirit, without set Forms; but that Treatise had
nothing to do with the Title of the Book, and many years ago, I declared in
print, that I never gave it that Title, the Book being printed, and the Title
and Preface added by a Person in England without my knowledge, while I was in
America; and so soon as I saw the Book, I corrected the Title with my Pen, thus
Some fundamental Truths (which Title wholly belonged to the first part, as the
Book will show, which yet proves not, that I reckoned every thing in that part
^ Fundamental, no more than if I should say, There are some or many Quakers in
Philadelphia, that therefore there are none else in i^ but Quakers.

The Sixth and Seventh Fundamental he gives, are aginst S^^aring and paying
Tithes.

Answ. But this fallacy depends on the same false Foundation with the former,
that because perhaps both are mentioned in that called, Some Fundamentals, (for
I have not the Book by me, and I do not well remember the Contents) therefore I
h^ld, not swearing and not paying Tithes to be fundamental Doctrines of
Christianity, which I can safely say, I never did; for if I had I behoved to
think, that all who did either Swear or pay Tithes erred fundamentally, and so
were in ^ state of Damnation; which I was far from thinking; for I was more
Charitable, as my Books writ, when I was under the Profession of a Quaker, ^an
show.

The Eighth Fundamental he charge on me, is about the Three Persons, which I
formerly opposed, and now I own.

But this is as dull Sophistry as a^y of the former. I never disputed against,
nor opposed any of the substantial Doctrines concerning the holy Trinity, but
only boggled at the Terms Three Persons, being led into that Error by the
Quaker-Teachers, who cried out against them, as not being express Scripture;
but I had not then discovered the Mystery of Iniquity that was in these false
Teachers, who under a pretense of but disowning the Terms, disowned the whole
Mystery it self, which I never did; for I can sufficiently prove I owned that
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost were Three from all Eternity, destinct by their
Incommunicable relative Properties, and but One in Essence; and that the Son
had an Eternal Generation, and that the holy Ghost did from Eternity proceed
from the Father and the Son; that neither the holy Ghost nor the Father was
incarnate and made Man, but only the Son, as appears from my Book, called, The
Way cast up, and that other, in defense of it, called, The true Christ owned.
Now where the whole Doctrine is owned and only the Terms of Three Persons
scru^led at, no charitable and judicious Persons will call this a Fundamental
Error, though an Error it is, and too great an Error also, as too many others
were that I held. But that the chief Authors and Writers of the Quakers (and
particularly G F. G. W. F. H. and W. P.) erred in the substantial parts of the
Doctrine of the holy Trinity, and therefore erred fundamentally, I have
effectually proved in my fourth Narrative, from p. 28, to page 36. to which I
refer the Reader [Any who desires to have the use of it, or of all my five
Narratives may have them in the Librarys belonging to the Churches of New York
and Philadelphia.] And for a further Instance that W. Penn has erred
fundamentally, in the Doctrine of the holy Trinity, he thus argues in his S^ndy
Foundation, p. 14 For if that the only God is the Father, and Christ be that
only God, then is Christ the Father. So if that one God be the Son, and the
Spirit that one God, then is the Spirit the Son, and so round. Here it is
evident, that he concludes, that Christ is the Father, and the Spirit is the
Son, which is a fundamental Error, and being received, Overthrows the Christian
Faith. But his Argument is a mere Sophism and Fallacy, and proves him as
ignorant in true Logic, as he is in true Divinity* for his Syllogism has four
Terms in it, contrary to that Infallible Rule in true Logic, That every true
Syllogism ought to have but three Terms, and each of these three terms ought to
have but one Signification in both Propositions, otherwise the Terms are four,
or more, and not three; whereas the middle term, That one God, in the first
Proposition, signifies the Father; but in the second Proposition it has another
signification, and signifies the Son. For though the One God is the Father, yet
that one God is not the Father Only, but also the Son and holy Ghost; and
therefore to make his Syllogism in due form, it should be thus,

The One God is the Father, the Son and the holy Ghost.
The Son is the One God;
Therefore the Son is the Father.
Here it is evident, that the One God, in the first Proposition, signifies all
the Three, but in the second Proposition, it signifies only the Son; therefore,
as I have said, the Syllogism has four Terms, and is a mere Sophism and
Fallacy. If this detection of W. P 's Sophism exceed the Millers ( viz. C.
Pusey's) capacity, I am not to be blamed, but he must blame himself for meddling
in a matter that he does not understand; for I write not this Observation to
him, but to them who can understand it; and as the Shoemaker should not go
beyond his Last, so by as good Reason this Miller should not go beyond his
Mill, unless he was a good Logician, as well as a Miller. He has charged me in
his Proteus with several Contradiction, which only his Ignorance, assisted with
his Malice, has prompted him to do; for he little better understands the true
nature and properties of a Contradiction than the Millstones of his Mill do.
But however short he is in true knowledge either in Naturals or Spirituals, he
as much abounds in Uncharitableness, and most uncharitable and bitter
Expressions, notorious Falsehoods, Lies and Slanders, as is obvious to any that
reads his Book. And I intend to give, at the end of this Treatise, a List of
some of the most notorious Falsehoods in his Book, beside what are given
already, and may further be given.

The Nineth Fundamental C. P. charge me to have varied in, Proteus, p. 18. is
about the Resurrection, That whereas formerly I deny^d the Priests carnal
Notions of it, in my Book, called, The Pres. and Independ. vis. Churches, I
must now be one with them that hold those carnal Conceptions.

Answ. This proves no Change in the Fundamental of the Resurrection; for he who
believes the Resurrection of the same Body for substance, that the Soul lived
in on Earth, though he hold it carnally and grossly, cannot be said to deny the
Fundamental of the Resurrection. But what I said in that Book was not to the
Ministers of the Church of England, but to Presbyterians and Independents of
New England, who I then thought held the Resurrection of the Body too grossly
and carnally; but I know none at present of the Ministers of the Church of
England with whom I differ about the Doctrine of the Resurrection: As some have
erred in holding the Resurrection too carnally and grossly, so others may have
erred in having a wrong Notion of it spiritually, so as to turn it all to mere
Spirit; neither of which Extremes (I think) I am not guilty of.

But this C. P. who neither believes the Resurrection nor understand what a
Contradiction is, yet abounds with his charging me with new Contradictions
about the Resurrection, even when I was under the Profession of a Quaker, but
the Contradiction is only lodged in his own confused Brain; as if it were a
Cantradiction to say, The Mortal and Corruptible puts on Immortality and
Incorruption at the Resurrection; and to say, That which rises neither
consumes in the Grave nor corrupts. But this is no Contradiction, any more in
me than in St. Paul, who has said, This Mortal shall put on Immortality, and
this Corruptible shall put on Incorruption; and yet the same St. Paul compares
the Body that dies and rises again to a grain of Corn, that though it
corrupts in one sense, yet it corrupts not in another. It so far
corrupts, that by its Corruption, the Seminal substance in the Grain is
loosed, and as it were set at liberty from the Husk or drossy part, that kept
it, as it were in Prison, which Seminal substance corrupts not, i. e. it is
not lost nor perished, for it becomes a Saminal Principle to a new Generation,
and therefore it is not lost nor perished; for if it were lost and perished in
the ground, where it was ^own, it could never rise.

The large Quotation he gives out of my Book, called, The correction of Errors,
or Truth advanced, page 115, 116, 117. as concerning the Manner of the
Resurrection, and some Circumstantial Points about it, whether true or false, I
think not C. P. (for his great Ignorance) a Person proper to dispute with (...)
about them; for his extreme Ignorance makes him a continual Wrangler; I had
said enough in my Book, called, ^^^^-christ and Sadduces, writ against him some
years ago, sufficiently to convince him of his vile Heresy and Unbelief, both
about the Resurrection, and other things therein contained. There is no
judicious and impartial Person that r^ads what I have said in the pages quoted
by C. P. in that Book, and elsewhere in the other pages on that Head, that
will charge me with denying the Resurrection of the Body, though perhaps
judicious and impartial Persons may differ from me about some Circumstances of
it, and yet both they and I well agree about the Fundamental Doctrine of the
Resurrection. For I having again and again asserted in that very Book the
Resurrection of the same Body for Substance, that is, the true Body of Man that
dies, leaving nothing behind but Dross and Corruption, that is no more any
real part of the true Body, than the Dross in Gold Oar is a part of the true
Body of Gold, No Man but such who is as Ignorant and full of Prejudice as C. P.
can charge me with denying the Fundamental of the Resurrection; whereas Ca.
Pusey and his Brethren are justly chargeable with Denying the Fundamental of
the Resurrection, if they be of their Brother R. Claridge's mind, That neither
the Body of Christ now in Heaven, nor the Bodies of the Saints at the
Resurrection are the same in Substance with what they were on Earth. This is a
full and absolute Denial of the Resurrection; for if the Substance is gone of
any Body, nothing of it can remain; and to say that Accidents can remain
without a Substance, is a great part of the Popish vile Error about
Transubstantiation. But because I quoted Job 28.6. compared with Rev. 21.21.
where mention is made of Gold, in a figurative sense, that to render my words
Ridiculous, he questions me, Whether the Body at the Resurrection is to be made
of Golden Dust, as vulgarly understood? Whereas it is obvious to every Vulgar
Capacity, that I understood it not in a Vulgar Sense, but in a Metaphorical, of
which there are frequent Instances and Examples in Scripture. He might as well,
in his scoffing Spirit, ask, Whether the White Robes, mentioned Rev. 6.11. were
White Robes, as vulgarly understood.

And because I had said in that Book, That many of the dear Children of God
never had an outward and visible Se^ulchre, he concludes that therefore I hold
no Resurrection but what is within [Men] or at least whether I can be clear of
such a Notion, as to hold only the Resurrection within men? O the so^tish
Blindness of this Caleb Pusey! as if nothing that is of an invisible and inward
Nature and Property, can be any where but Within Men. The words Invisible and
Inward in the case being of the same Signification. Is not the Body of Gold,
that lies in the impure Oar o^ Mineral, invisible and inward, in respect of the
(...) that vails and hides it? and the like of the other Metals. But are all
the Metals no where but within Men? What if I should tell him the Bodily
Substance of his Millstones is invisible and inward, as indeed every Bodily
Substance is invisible and inward, in respect of the visible and sensible
Accidents that are inherent in them, and are as it were, the outward Garment;
does it therefore follow, that his Millstones are within him? I beg my Readers
leave for tempting his Patience to read such Ignorant Objections answered,
therefore shall say no more upon this Head, nor any more upon any other so
charged by him; for it is enough.

In page 27. C. P. taking it for granted, That he has proved me varied in all
those Nine Fundamentals above charged, and therefore thinks he can, to a
Demonstration, prove me an Apostate from my own Definition of an Apostate, that
is, a Person who has changed from one or more true Fundamentals of
Christianity. But by that Definition which I adhere to, I form the contrary
Argument,

He who cannot prove me varied in one Fundamental of true Christianity, cannot
prove me an Apostate,

But Caleb Pusey cannot prove me varied so much as in one Fundamental, and his
labor to do it, has been in vain,

Therefore he has not proved, nor can prove me an Apostate from true
Christianity.

But that he thinks it gravels me so much to be called an Apostate by him and
his Brethren, he and they are greatly Mistaken; I am sorry indeed for their
Ignorance and Prejudice against me, on their own account; but since I have the
Testimony of a good Conscience, and the Spirit of God bearing witness with and
in my Conscience that I am No Apostate, but a True Christian, having the true
Christian Faith, which (I thank God) I feel to be lively and operative in me, I
rejoice to suffer Reproaches for Christ's sake, believing the Truth of his
Promise, That such are blessed, and shall be blessed.

I grant, I had too many Errors when I was under the Profession of a Quaker,
which through Gods Mercy and Grace I have renounced and Retracted, which makes
me a better Christian than I was, and notworse, but I am not conscientious that
I held any Errors denying any Fundamental of Christianity, nor have I found any
that has proved it against me. That Contradictions may be found in some of my
former Books is probable, though I think I was less guilty of that than many or
most Quaker Wriaers. But a man may be guilty of twenty Contradictions in points
Circumstantial and remote from Fundamentals. And suppose in my former Ignorance
I held some things to be fundamental, or which the Quakers thought so, and
which they still think so in their Ignorance and erring Minds, and now I think
them not fundamental, this will not prove me changed in any true Fundamentals.
For it is not what men think to be Fundamental, that is always so, but what men
think so from the certain knowledge they have that they are so, by warrant from
the holy Scriptures. Nor has C. P. any advantage against me that he takes
Notice, That I have freely acknowledged, that I as well as R. Barclay have said
and writ many things repugnant and contradictory to true Principles and
Fundamentals of Christianity, at least Indirectly and Consequentially; for no
Man can be justly charged by indirect and remote Consequences, that may be
drawn from rash and inconsiderate Expressions that may fall from his Pen, that
therefore he denis the Principles that those indirect and remote Consequences
are repugnant unto, unless he himself see the necessary tendency of those
Consequences; and that this ought not to be charged upon men that hold the
Principles, to which they seem Repugnant, is the Judgment of all sound and
judicious Persons.

In his following part of his Book, he calls, Some few more Instances, etc. I
find nothing New that is worth Observation, but what I have already
sufficiently answered unto, except that I have Retracted my Errors in what I
had said or printed against Baptism and the Supper, and some of those many
things that I had Retracted in part, some years ago, upon true Conviction and
clear Illumination, which he Ignorantly as much as Maliciously calls, my
Sayings and Gain sayings, i. e Contradictions. But what a man Retracts of his
former Errors, in so doing he is not chargeable with Contradictions; for he
only is guilty of Contradictions that at one and the same time holds
Contradictory Propositions to be true, which I have not done; and indeed no man
can believe real Contradictories, no more than he can believe that a part is
equal to the whole.

But seeing C. P. will needs have it so, that by my ^oyning in Doctrine and
Faith, as well as in Practice, with the Church of England, I have departed not
only from one, but a great many true Fundamentals of Christianity, and that
consequently I am an Apostate, and No Christian. This must needs infer that the
Church of England, as it is now established, is guilty of denying all those
Fundamentals which he charge me to deny, and to have departed from, which I
held while I was under the Profession of a Quaker, and consequently that the
Quakers Fundamentals in as many things as he charge me with, are directly
Contradictory to the Fundamental Principles of the Church of England. But how
does this agree with what many Quakers have said, of late, yea, and some of
their Authors, who are of Note among them, That the People called Quakers
differ not in Fundamentals from the Church of England, in matters of Faith; and
especially W. Pen says, in his answer to the Bishop of Cork, to this effect,
That he and his Friends agree with the Church of England in all her Articles,
excepting a few concerning the Sacraments, and Church Discipline and
Government, or such other as are not Fundamental; To this effect, I think, he
has confessed; I have not his Book by me, but, I think, I have given in effect
the sense of his words, whether he meant sincerely or not, I am not concerned
at present to enquire. Besides, many of the Quakers at present have confessed,
That they own all or most of the Articles of the Apostles Creed, and if leave
be given them to put their sense upon them, they say, they will own them all;
and they say, There is no Fundamental Article of the Christian Faith either in
the Apostles Creed, or any where in Scripture, but they own, as well as the
Church of England; and particularly W. Penn has told us in his Key, They own
the Scripture Trinity; and to be sure the Church of England owns no other: But
how insincere he is in this, his Sandy Foundation is a standing Witness. And if
Joseph W^yeth in his Switch is to be belived, and I think C. P. does believe
him, The Quakers differ little or nothing at all in Doctrine from the Church of
England about the Trinity, except as to the words Three Persons, which if true,
can be no fundamental Error; but however C. P is bound to believe him, and I am
not bound so to do, as I do not; but I argue only Ad Hominem with C. P if he
have so much Sense and Learning to know what an Argument ad Hominem is, viz.
that which binds my Adversary, but not Me; and such is the late Policy or Craft
of the more crafty sort of Quakers, especially the Teachers, that were it not
for the standing Quotations in their printed Books, that witness against them,
they could hardly be convinced that they differ in one Fundamental, and perhaps
scarce in any other Article of Faith, that is extra-Fundamental. Now if the
Quakers and their Writers agree with the Church of England in all Fundamentals
according to W. P. and others of their Authors, then I think it will follow,
That when I was a Quaker, and a great Writer for them, as they say, (and my
Books in print generally approved by them, before they were printed) that I
agreed in Fundamentals with the Church of England as much as they [still I
argue ad hominem] and seeing I now also agree with the Church of England in
Fundamentals, and have subs^ri^ed my assent and consent to the Thirty Nine
Articles, this C.P. must be very injurious to me, to charge me that I have
departed from any Fundamentals, either of Quakers or Church of England, seeing,
according to W. P. they are one in Fundamentals. But if C. P will differ from
his Brethren in this, and particularly from W. Penn, That the Quakers differ
from the Church of England in Fundamentals, and that therefore G. K. is an
Apostate, I Query then, What must all Persons of the Church of England be, with
whom G. K. is one in Doctrine and Religion, (Our gracious Queen Anne not
excepted, and all other the most Virtuous Persons of that Church) but No true
Christians at best? But will C. P. 's Distinction that he gives in his Book,
page 46. betwixt the Queens Religion and Christian Clemency, resolve the
Question? I say, Nay; for whoever have not the true Christian Religion, have no
Christian Virtue, and consequently nor Christian Clemency, which is a great
Christian Virtue. Persons who have not the Christian Religion, may have Moral
Virtues, and among the rest that of Clemency, but these Moral Virtues, in
Persons who have not the Christian Faith, such as the Moral Heathens, are not
Christian Virtues, but widely differing, because not springing from a Christian
Root and Principle, nor regarding the great Object of the Christian Religion,
the Root of all the Christian Virtues being Faith in Jesus Christ, considered
as God and Man, etc. the great End and Object being the Glory of God, not only
in the Work of Creation, but also and most especially and chiefly in the Work
of our Redemption.

But to go round again, both according to W. Penn and G. Whitehead, as well as
many other Quakers, the Religion of Moral Gentiles and the Religion of the best
True Christians, differ not in kind or specie, but are one and the same, as I
have sufficiently proved out of their Books, in my five Narratives, and
particularly W. P. in his Quakerism a New Nickname, p. 6. does greatly blame
them who make a Distinction betwixt Moral and Christian; and therefore,
according to him; every Moral Heathen, Turk or Jew, is a Christian, and the
Religion of Heathens, Jews and Turks is all one with Christians, the One
Fundamental Principle thereof is the Light Within, as W. P. and they say; and
whose Religion is one, their Fundamentals are one, for one and the same
Religion cannot have differing and contradictory Fundamentals in differing
Persons; and therefore not one of the Nine Fundamentals above charged against
me by C. P. nor any other Fundamentals but what are commonly received by Jews,
Heathens and Turks, who are Moral persons, are Fundamentals of Christianity,
and consequently (on supposition that I denied all other Principles but what
are common to all Moral Jews, Heathens and Turks) I am No Apostate, by W. P. G.
W. and C. P. but as good a Christian in Principle and Doctrine as any of them;
and for my Practice I may compare with the best of them, I bless God. And so
much for my Arguments ad Hominem.

But to make it appear that I am a true Christian, as really now as when under
the Profession of a Quaker [and a much better Christian now] it is generally
agreed among all true Christians, That the Apostles Creed, for the Simpliciter
Credenda, contains all the Fundamentals of Faith; The Ten Commandments
(respecting what is Moral in the fourth contain all the Fundamentals of
Practice, for the Agenda; and the Lords Prayer, contains all the Fundamentals
for Devotion and Worship, being used in Faith, and in the Name of our blessed
Mediator, and through him, by the help of the holy Spirit, in respect of the
Pretenda; and all this I held sincerely when I was under the Profession a
Quaker, and endeavored to practice accordingly, as well as to believe and
worship God and Christ in Truth and Reality. And all this I continue still to
do, and much more abundantly, with several other things, at least of Practice,
I now own, that then through my sinful Error, I omitted and opposed, such as
Baptism and the Lords Supper. And whereas when under the Profession of a Quaker
I was guilty of a sinful Separation from the Church, as well as diverse other
erroneous Practices, as the Quakers now generally are; but now I am joined to
the Church, and have reformed what was Erronio^s in Practice, in the judgment
of all true Christians, I am a true Christian still, and am not departed from
one Fundamental of true Christianity, by leaving the Quakers and joining with
the Church of England. But if I have departed from Principles of Quakers, which
either they or I h^ld Fundamentals, but were no real Fundamentals of
Christianity, but Dr^ss and Rubbish built on the true Foundation, this will not
me prove all Apostate from Christianity, but only from the Dross and Dregs of
Quakerism, or what is worse; and ^et them call me so, if they will, in that
sense; for we find in Scripture the word to Apostate, according to the Greek,
used in a good Sense, Whoever ^^mes the Name of Christ, let him depart frrm
Iniquity; The Greek word here is [Ap^steta] i. e. let him Apostate from
Iniquity.

SECT. V.
THere now remain only two things that I think material to clear, and after
that to give the List I promised.

The one is, My charging the Quaker Magistrates in Pennsilvania to be guilty of
Persecution, in their proceedings against me at Philadelphia, in the year 1692.
and that not only a little, as their Fineing me five Pounds in their Court at
Philadelphia, for calling S. Jenings an Ignorant, Presumptuous and Insolent
Man, and being too high and impe^ious in Worldly Courts, and which has been
sufficiently known. Whereas much harder and more severe Names were given by W.
Penn to the Mayor of London and the Justices at the Sessions in the Old Baily,
London, above twenty years past, as witness his and W. Mead^ printed Trial;
which, to be sure, neither W. P. nor any of the Quakers, judged a breach of any
just Law in him so to do. And the like Instances may be found in G. P.'s
Journal, of giving more hard and severe Names to some in Commission of the
Peace in England; and if G. F had been ^ined for this, it would have been
judged by the Quakers to be Persecution; and therefore was this of the Quakers
against me, Persecution. But this was little to what I shall hereafter show.

After Twenty eight Quaker Preachers had given forth a formal Sentence of
Excommunication against me at Philadelphia, without any hearing, trial or
conviction, for my Opposing their vile Errors, I appealed to their next yearly
Meeting, that was to be at Burlington in September, 1692. which Appeal was
printed, and many of them yet to be produced, which contained Twelve Queries,
the foul last of which did so offend the Quaker Magistrates and Justices, that
they publish^d a Proclamation against me, without all calling me before them,
to convict me, and caused it to be published at the Marketplace in
Philadelphia, 27 August, 1692. and afterward posted it up against me before S.
Jening's Door.

Now that the ground of this Offense may appear altogether Unjust, upon the
Quakers Principle, I will here set down the sum and substance of those four
Articles for which they pretended their Offense, and they are as follows, viz.

The Nineth Query,

Whether the Twenty eight Judges had not done much better to have past Judgment
on some of their Brethren, who hired men to fight, and recover a Sloop (that
was stolen) by force of Arms, and some of them, being Justices, gave a
Commission so to do?

The Tenth Query.

Whether to hire Men thus to fight, and also to provide the Indians with Powder
and Lead to fight against other Indians, be not a manifest Transgression of our
(the Quakers) Principle against all Use of the Carnal Sword and other carnal
Weapons?

The Eleventh Query.

Whether it be according to the Gospel, that Ministers should pass Sentence of
Death on Malefactors, as some pretended Ministers here have done?

The Twelfth Query.

Whether there is any Example or President for it in Scripture, or in all
Christendom, that Ministers should engross the Worldly Government, as they do
here, which has proved of a very ill Tendency?

For these four abovesaid Querys, they gave out, as is said, their
Proclamation against me, signed by three of their Ministers, who were also
Justices, viz. Arthur Cook, Robert Ewer and Samuel Jenings, and other two,
viz. Arthur Cook, Robert Ewer and Samuel Jenings, and other two, viz. Samuel
Richardson and Anthony Morris, wherein, among other cruel and and unjust
Aggravations, they say, Yet we cannot, without Violation of our Trust to the
King and Governor, as also to the Inhabitants of this Government, pass by or
connive at such part of the said Pamphlet and Speeches, that have a tendency to
Sedition and Disturbance of the Peace, as also to the Subversion of the present
Government. And in their Mittimus to send two Men to Prison, for spreading and
uttering the said Appeal, they call it, A Malitio^s and Seditious Paper,
tending to the Disturbance of the Peace and Subversion of the present
Government. And they further say in their said Proclamation, We have thought
fit by this public Writing, (...) only to signify, that our procedure against
the Persons now in the Sheriffs Custody, as wed (...) what we INTEND against
others concerned in its proper place, respects only that part of the said
printed Sheet, which appears to have the tendency aforesaid, and not to any
part relating to Differences in Religion.

Here Note, First, These others were G. Keith, T. Budd, G. Hutchinson, and
three more, six in all, who signed that printed Sheet.

Secondly, That this Prosecution that they intended against us, was quite
another thing than the Trial that G. K. and T. B. had at the Sessions in
Philadelphia, December 1692. and on quite another account th^n (...) calling S.
Jenings, (in our printed Book, called, The Plea of the Innocent) an Ignorant
Insolent Man, etc. as abovesaid.

Thirdly, That to clo^k their Spirit of Persecution, they say, What they intend
against other concerned, in its proper place, etc. respects not any part
relating to Differences in Religion; Whereas what they intended against us was
wholly and only relating to Differences in Religion, as the words of the
Queries above-quoted do plainly prove. For what I writ, and we all six signed,
in the printed Sheet, called, An Appeal, was because that we found that the
Quakers who had hired men to fight, and did pass Sentence of Death on
Malefactors, had trespassed their own professed Principle, especially as to
fighting, which the Quakers generally have professed to deny, so much as in
Self-Defence, and consequently not to defend themselves against Robbers and
Murderers by any Carnal Weapons, and therefore not by Gibbots or Gollows. And
whatever our Adversaries thought in the case, it was a matter of Religion to
us, at that time, in no case to use a carnal Weapon. And that this was the
Principle of G. F. and the Quakers in general, appears not only from R. B 's
Apol. These. 15.. 15. but by the Quakers printed Declaration presented to K.
Charles, 1660. signed by G. F. and eleven more of their Number, most of them
great Preachers and Authors, and there they expressly say, We have used no Force
nor Violence against any Man, etc. When we have been wronged, We have not
sought to Revenge our selves. Judge Reader, if these abovementioned Persons,
Quaker Justices in Philadelphia, who not only fined some of us, and put some of
us into Prison, but intended the highest Rigor and Severity against us, that
they thought they could act (so far as they had any color or pretense of Law
to defend them) did not transgress this printed Declaration of G F. and eleven
more at London? Did not the Quakers use Force and Violence against us, when
they cast some of us into Prison, and ^ind us? And did they not declare their
Violent Intention against us, especially T. B. and My self, when in their
Proclamation they tell the World, They intend to proceed against us, for that
part of the printed Sheet above quoted, that they have charged to be a
Malicious and Seditious Paper, tending to the Disturbance of the Peace, and
Subversion of the present Government? In pursuance of which their cruel and
bloody Intention, some Months after T Budd and I were presented by a grand
Jury of Quakers, Alexander Beardsly being Foreman, for trespassing that
Fundamental Law in the Province, made by the Assembly held at New Castle, May
10. 1684. and that very day that the Grand Jury presented us, it was told and
reported over the Town of Philadelphia, and some of my Friends came and told me
of it, how T. Budd and I were to be tried at the next Court for the breach of
the abovesaid Law, which was construed by many, as well as by me, that they
would make it a Capital Crime, and punish us accordingly; for whatever they
accused us of, they wanted neither Will, Interest nor Power to make us guilty,
by packing a Jury to their content, (to satiate their Cruelty) to find us
guilty of the Breach of that Law, which has the following (...) in it, That if
any person shall Con^emptuously, Maliciously and advisedly by Writing,
Publishing or Speaking, express, utter or declare, by any Words or Sentences,
to ((...) up or incite any of the People of this Province or Territories, to
hatred or dislike of the Person of the Proprietary and Governor, or do or
commit any act or deed tending to the Subversion of the established Government,
shall suffer Imprisonment for any time not exceeding Twelve Months, and
undergo such Corporal Punishment as the Quality of the Offender and the Nature
of the Offense may require.

But by the good and merciful Providence of God, before the next Count could
sit, which was to be in about a Month after the said Presentment, they who
were my chief Adversaries were turned out of the Government, and Governor
Fl^tcher came from New York, and received the Government of Pennsilvania by the
K. and Queens Commission, and put a stop not only to our Trial, which they
intended, but to several other Trials of Persons that were presented at the
former Sessions, on other accounts, as I was informed to the number of Ten
several Presentiments, but whether so many, or any other (but that concerning T.
Budd and my self,) is not my present business to resolve. And as to the
Presentment of the Grand Jury of Quakers, all of them my cruel Enemies, who had
signed in their Monthly and Quarterly Meetings against Us, I can give
sufficient Evidence both here and else where; for T. Budd and I obtained a Copy
of the said Presentment from him that kept the Record, (and paid him well for
it) which we carried with us to London, and had it read at the Quakers Yearly
Meeting there, in the year 1694. at the Bull and Mouth, in the hearing of
William Penn himself, and where also my answer to it was read and heard. And
some years after this, that Governor Fletcher came to London, I went to visit
him, and thank him for his rescuing me and my Friends ( Peter Boss being in
Prison for his fine of 7 l. for writing a private Letter to Sam. Jenings,
telling him of some of his faults, and W. Bradford and J. M' Comb being
Prisoners for Printing and selling the said Sheet, called, An Appeal, etc which
Persons Governor Fletcher set at liberty) out of the cruel hands of the
Quaker-Magistrates of Philadelphia; He told me, that what he had done in that,
which was very just, and his Duty to do, Mr. Penn had made a great complaint of
it against him to the Government in England. And indeed, so highly, did William
Penn resent things against me at London, that he told me, as well as others, I
had spoiled his Country. These things considered, it is sufficiently evident,
what the Quaker Magistrates judged of me, and what Cruelty they intended
against me; also, they made it their Work in their public Meetings, such of
them as were Preachers and Magistrates, to make me highly Criminal against the
King, insomuch that on a Sunday at the Bank Meeting in Philadelphia, Arthur
Cook and John D' Lavall did publicly accuse me, in the hearing of hundreds of
Persons there present, that I said in that Meeting, The King had broke his
Coronation Oath. But I appealed to the People there present, Whether I said any
such thing, or any thing like it, my words being an answer to a Query the two
aforesaid Persons put to me, to ^nsnare me, as they thought, Whether a true
Christian might be a Magistrate? To which I readily answered, Yea; but
according to the Quakers Principles, either to Swear or Fight was short of
Christian Perfection; after which I added the following words, God forbid that
I should say the King is no Christian, because he took the Coronation Oath. For
effectual proof of this, I have an Instrument signed by a great many credible
Persons then present, wherein they have cleared me, that these were the words I
sp^ke, and not those which the abovenamed Persons accused me of. And further
Instances I could give, to what height of fury the Quaker Magistrates at that
time were enraged against me; and though their pretense was, That it was for my
being an Enemy to the King and Government, and speaking and writing what te^ded
to the subversion of the Government here, plainly appears from their words in
their Proclamation, above mentioned; We cannot (say they) without Violation of
our Trust to the King and Governor, etc. see the words at large, as
above-quoted; and see good Reader, how like they are here to the Jew^ and
Tertullus, Acts 24. who would have made St. Paul guilty of moving Sedition,
which they thought worthy of Death. And the Mittimus they made to send William
Bradford and John M' Comb to Prison, goes in the King and Queens Authority,
(which Mittimus is printed both in the Trial and Appeal) thus, These are
therefore by the King and Queens Authority, and in our Proprietarys Name to
require you to take into your Custody the Bodies of William Bradford and John
M' Comb, etc. I say, though this was their pretense against me, yet the chief,
and indeed the only ground and rise of their Offense was my blaming their false
Doctrine, and charging them with vile Heresies, such as no Protestant Society
would tolerate.

And for a proof of my not being guilty of the Crimes charged against me by
those Quaker Magistrates, contained in their said Proclation, and in the
Presentment of the Grand Jury of Quakers, after Governor Fletcher came to the
Government of Pennsilvania, Coll. Markham, Andrew Robinson, and others, being
then Magistrates under Governor Fletcher (and Coll. Markham being then Deputy
Governor) drew up a public Instrument, and signed it, wherein they cleared me
fully of all things the Quaker Magistrates had laid to my charge, withal
declaring, That the Difference betwixt the Quaker Magistrates and Me were
merely about points of Religion, plain contrary to what they affirmed in their
Proclamation against me. And upon application made by W. Bradford and J. M'
Comb to Governor Fletcher for enlargement from their Imprisonment, he
examined into the cause of their Commitment, and finding it was upon Religious
Difference, discharged them, and caused W. B's printing Letters to be restored
to him, which the Quaker Magistrates had taken and detained from him.

But now, for my affirming in some of my late Prints, That I was presented by a
Grand Jury of Quakers, whereof Alex. Beardssy was Foreman, as abovementioned,
for trespassing the Law of Province made against them who should express, utter
or declare any words or Sentences tending to the Subversion of the established
Government, etc. C. Pusey accuses me, as follows, p. 39, 40, 41. of his
Book, That I am so infatuated to publish such Falsehoods, as by the words of the
Presentment it self, published by him and themselves, here plainly appears.

But if C. P. be not infatuated, he has a forehead of Brass and Impudence, to
publish such a Cheat and Deception to the World, especially in a place where
Matters of Fact was so well known; for the Presentment given in against me, for
being guilty of Writing and Publishing a Seditious Paper, tending to the
Subversion of the Government, etc. was not until several Months after the
first Presentment and Trial, wherein I was fined 5 l. for calling Sam. Jenings,
An Ignorant Insolent Man, in my Book, called, The Plea of the Innocent. But C.
P 's notorious Falsehood and lying Spirit appears in this, that he would make
the World believe, there was no other Presentment made against me, but that set
down in page 24. of our printed Trial.

Now let us hear how he makes it appear, that I am guilty of the following
Falsehoods, and false Insinuations. First, he says, page 40. by their saying,
The Presentment would have been prosecuted if the Government had not been
changed; whereas the Presentment was prosecuted, and brought to Judgment, and
that long before the change of Government, and he only was fined 5 l. etc. Now
mark the Cheat, Good Reader, The Presentment against me, for calling S.
Jenings, Ignorant, Insolent and Presumptuous Man, was prosecuted, and I fined
five pounds, which was not exacted, for they had a more dreadful Punishment
behind to exact of me, after the second Presentment (had Providence suffered it
to come to Trial; but it was not suffered to come so far) had it been
prosecuted against me. Now observe the Logic of this C. P. The Presentment was
prosecuted, and he tried, and fined accordingly, Therefore there was no other
Presentment, after the first Presentment made against him. Whereas I have given
sufficient Evidence there was a second Presentment against Me some Months
after the first, and altogether upon another account, and that they intended to
prosecute Me to be guilty of writing a Seditious Paper (viz. the Appeal that
was printed) tending to the Subversion of the Government, appears evidently
from the words of their Proclamation above-quoted, where they declare, what
they intended against others con^^rned (as touching the printed Appeal) signed
by Me and five more, thought their Fury was principally against me.

His second Falsehood that he charge on me, page 40. recoyleth on ^^^self,
(...) the first, and proves him guilty of a Notorious Falsehood, as well as my
Innocence. He blames me for saying, I had been accused for endeavoring to
alter the Government; and this, he says, is a falsehood. Now that it is no
Falsehood, but a real and certain Truth, I have made it evidently appear by the
words of their Proclamation against me, above quoted, where they accuse me of
words that had a tendency to Sea^^ion and Disturbance of the Peace, as also to
the Subversion of the present Government; the same Expression they have
concerning the printed Appeal, in their Mittimus, as above quoted.

His Third Falsehood charged on me, is, That in the Presentment G. K. was not
accused for endeavoring to alter the Government. But still, the perpetual
Cheat of this Fraudulent Person, is, That there was but one only Presentment
against me, and which was prosecuted, and tried, and found guilty, for calling
calling Sam. Jenings an ignorant and insolent Man, in my Book, called, The Plea
of the Innocent. Whereas in the Proclamation they put forth against me, (which
is in print, and I have to show) there is not a word of the Book, called, The
plea of the Innocent, but the great Accusation against me, in the said
Proclamation, was for that part of the printed Appeal that had a tendency to
Sedition and Disturbance of the Peace, and also to the Subversion of the
present Government; and for this, they declare what they intend against me and
others on that s^ore. Judge now, Reader, if his C P. be not as fast held in the
Net as if he had a Thief fast in his Mill; for if words spoke or writ, which
has a tendency to Sedition and Subverting the Government, be not an
endeavoring to alter the Government, I know not what is.

But, lastly, C. P. says, Nor had we any Law to make it Capital; he adds, But
that they would have found him guilty of Death, a more wicked, malicious and
false Assertion G. K. could hardly have invented against those then in the
Government. From this he infers, That G. K. is aposta^ized from common Honesty.

To which I Answer; That they wanted no will to have made me guilty of Death, I
have sufficiently proved, by their severe Accusations against me, of speaking
and writing what tended to the Subversion of the King's Government, as well as
that of W. P 's. This, in my apprehension, I being no bred Lawyer, nor
accustomed to the terms of the Law, in their strict signification among
Lawyers, I took to be a Capital Crime, and whatever it is in the sense of the
Law, it still appears to me, in the sense of Gods Law, and the Law of Reason,
writ in men's hearts, That Sedition, and endeavoring to subvert the Kings
Government, is a Capital Crime, i. e. such a Crime that deserves Death, and so
it was judged both among Jews and Romans, Acts 24.6.25.1. and I am told that
the Civil Law does so determine it.

But let us examine a little what C. P. says, viz. We ( i. e. the People in
Pennsilvania) had not any Law that made it Capital.

Answ. This is no Evidence that they had no mind to make that Capital which
they accused me of in their Proclamation, and for which I was presented a
little before the Government was changed, and committed to Governor Fletcher,
let the judicious and impartial Reader well consider, and weigh the words of
their Law above-quoted, which was made in the Assembly the 10th of May, 1684.
where the Law determines, That w^o by speaking or writing do or commit any act
or deed tending to the Subversion of the present Government, shall suffer
Imprisonment for any time not exceeding twelve Months, and undergo such
Corporal Punishment as the Quality of the Offender and the Nature (...) may
require. Here it appears, that as to the Corporal Punishment it is not
expressed nor limited, what it shall be, either as to (...) in special, but
wholly left to the Arbitrary Will and Pleasure (...) the Judge or Judges, to
make it as severe as they will; and such who were to be my Judges (had
Providence permitted them to have brought me to a Trial) were sufficiently
known to have had Will enough to have gone not only to the utmost Extent of the
Letter of the Law against me, but to have exceeded as far, as they went beyond
the Law to make that Sedition in me, and tending to subvert the Government,
which had nothing in it deserving such Censure, nor indeed any Censure at all,
being only a querying or expostulating with them, for their manifestly
trespassing against their professed Religious Principle, as above showed. And
that they had a mind to make it Capital, is evident, that one of their own
Profession, who knew their Designs, told me, They were preparing a Gibbot for
me; this I can attest upon Oath, when duly required, that he so told me. And I
having enquired at the ablest Lawyers here at Philadelphia, (and who were
recommended to me as the ablest here) Whether the Corporal Punishment mentioned
in the said Act, was not Capital, i. e. might not, by the Letter of the Law, be
construed to extend to Death, seeing Death was but a Corporal Punishment, and
there is no Limitation or Restriction in the case; and it is wholly (...) to
the Arbitrary Will and Pleasure of the Judges to determine, whether as to G K
's Offense, that the Quality of the Offender, and the Nature of his Offense,
does not require it to be Capital i e. worthy of Death? The said Lawyers, I
say, have unanimously answered me, That though they could not hang me by that
Law, yet they could (if it was their Will so to do) cause Whip me to Death; for
if Whipping be the Corporal Punishment intended by the Law, there is no
Limitation, as to the Number or Severity of the Lashes, or time how long, nor
any other Limitation, insomuch that one of the Gentlemen Lawyers, and who is
reckoned one of the ablest Lawyer^ in the Province, told me, by that very Law
the Quaker Magistrates might have Oatified you, that is, (said he) they might
have caused whip you, with an intention to whip you till ye dye, and so it was
intended (said he) as was reported) to be done against Dr. O^^es. But why
should I more be mistaken in the true sense of the word [Corporal] i. e. Bodily
Punishment, than W. Penn? for though all Corporal Punishment is not Death, yet
that Death inflicted by the Magistrate is Corporal Punishment, [i. e. Bodily] I
have at least Governor Pen^'s own Authority for it, who in his Rejoinder to J.
Faldo, makes the Death of Hanging, or any other Death inflicted by a
Magistrate, whether justly or unjustly, to be Only the Death of the Body, but
not the Death of the Man himself, except by that familiar Speech (he means a
Metonymi^) where the thing contained is put for the thing containing. And he is
so much for this Notion, that he affirms, That the Death of Christ, as well as
of other Men, to be the Death of his Body ONLY; see W. P 's, Rejoinder, p. 305,
306.

And why have they changed this Law made in the year 1684. against Sedition,
and what tends to the Subversion of the Government, but that upon more mature
Deliberation and Advice, they did consider, or some that were better skilled in
the Law, taught them to understand, that the said Law, by which they intended
to try me for Sedition and what tended to subvert the Government, might be
construed to extend to some Capital Punishment. The Law now made in the year
1700. for the same Offense is but 5 l. or three Months Imprisonment. Note,
Reader, is not this a great Change!

Now if C Pusey should still be so hardened as to deny that there ever was any
second Presentment made against me (after the first which was prosecuted, as
abovesaid) I think I have given sufficient Evidence to the contrary. Its true,
I have not the Copy of that Presentment here by me to produce, but I have
sufficient Evidence of some at present alive, and some of them not far from
this, and who are of good Credit, that will attest it, if need be, as I am also
ready to do, were it before a Magistrate (and that with a good Conscience) when
required. In the mean time, I doubt not but this will satisfy all impartial
and unprejudiced Persons, that C. P. has most unjustly and insincerely charged
me with those Falsehoods, and that they most justly reflect upon himself, and he
is chargeable with them. And for the Truth, that there was such a second
Presentment against me, as abovementioned, I would have appealed to the
public Records, but that I have been informed, that some Records (which they
thought made against them) have been quite ^azed out, or altered.

The other Accusation that C. P. does make against me, and which he extremely
^ggravates, is That in some of my late Prints I have taken advantage to st^r up
the peaceable Government to Persecution; and for this he quotes my Book,
called, An Account of the Quakers Polliticks, p. 28. where I said, What
Security has the Civil Government, but when they think fit, and apprehend they
are annimated by the Spirit so to do, but that they may make use of the Sword,
considering their Numbers, Wealth, Polliticks and Methods of Correspondency to
carry on their Designs. And upon this he cry out, O Envious Scoffer! O
Murdering Spirit! But I may cry out most justly against him, O gross Perverter
of my Words! there is not the least shadow of Persecution either in the words
quoted, or any where in that Book, nor indeed in any of my Books. All that I
did infer from it, was, to give warning to the Government To keep a watchful
Eye over them, lest they should so do. And I pray, what hurt is in that? for it
belongs to them to watch over all, and especially over such, who by their
dangerous Principle of Wild Enthusiasm, may be tempted to such Extravagancies
as the Ana-baptists in Germany were, by the same dangerous Principle of Wild
Enthusiasm. But I had cleared the Quakers, that I believed they had no such
present Intention, nor do I know that ever they had; but what they have not
had, they may be tempted to have, especially considering what the
Quaker-Magistrates did against their peaceable Neighbors here, which they can
never clear themselves of, but that it was Persecution, and had not Providence
prevented, would (in all probability) have come to a great hight; and that
which makes it more suspicious against the Quakers in England, is, that to this
day they have never blamed the Extravagancy of the Quaker Magistrates for their
persecuting here at Philadelphia in the year 1692.

But C. P. thinks he has great matter of Argument against me, to (...) a
persecuting Spirit, for my saying in plain Discovery, page 25 (...) Civil
Magistrate should punish them, and use some outward (...) by hindering their
preaching in public Assemblies, and p^^nting, it (...) Persecution. I say
still, no more it would, considering the vile (...) and Blasphemies that they
have ve^ted and uttered, and continue so to do, in their Preaching and Writing,
in England especially, and having gives more offensive words to Magistrates in
England (...) they did prosecute some of the Laws against them, than ever I
(...) of my Friends ^^^med to do.

(...) observe, Reader, how wretchedly and perversely this C. P. (...) from my
sober words, That Coertion and Restraint upon th^se of the Quaker Teachers,
that ^ent abominable Heresies and Blasphemies, is no Persecution. To conclude,
That I am for the Inquisition, saying, p. 44. Are not Gortion and Restraint
some of (...) Tools of the Inquisition? And what th^n? are not Prisons and
Gibbets some of the Tools of the Inquisition also? And had not the Quaker
Magistrates such Tools, and have they them not still? Have the Quakers forgot
Sam Jenings distinction, that what they did against us, was not Persecution but
Prosecution?

And let the Impartial Reader further judge, whether it be not another
abominable Perversion of my words, to infer from my saying, It would be no
Persecution, if Coertion and Restraint upon the Quaker Teachers to hinder them
from publishing their vile Heresies, etc. That I would have the Government in
England become Executioner of my private Revenge upon the whole Multitude of
them; yea, so great a Multitude as 150000. in England and Wales, for so great a
Number, by modest Computation, I did judge might be in England and Wales. But
as I have no private Revenge against them, I thank God, so I have freely and
plainly declared my mind, that I would not have them exposed to Suffering,
which is what they call Persecution, meaning the People who are led away by the
false Teachers that swarm among them, but that their false Teachers might be
restrained from Preaching and Printing their vile Heresies and Blasphemies, to
the poisoning men's Souls. But this C^^^tion and Restraint C. P. does construe
it, that they must not breathe. Yes, let them breathe, and live, and have all
that is due, but let them no^ breathe forth their Blasphemies and Anti
christian Principles; and if they will needs do it, I say still, to use
Coertion and Restraint in the case, would be no Persecution.

What my judgment i^, about the best way to deal with the Quakers, in order to
bring them out of their dangerous Errors, I have fully and amply declared in my
Answer to R. B's Apology, page 454 where I say, At the case stands at this day,
I think an Expedient may be used to reclaim the generality of the many
Thousands that are seduced by the vile Errors of Quakerism, without the least
just occasion of Complaint of Persecution, which I desire not the least to come
upon any one of them, being sensible that they would rather be hardened by what
they commonly call Persecution, than amen^^d by it. What that Expedient is, the
Reader may see, if he please to turn to page 454. of that Book, where I show,
the Invalidity of R. B. 's Arguments, which he brings to prove, That
Magistrates have no Power to punish for Heresies, even the worst. But yet I
give some Instances, that considering some Circumstances, it may not be safe
nor proper for the Magistrate to inflict Punishment upon them for their
Heresies; but to use some Coertion and Restraint toward false Teachers I think
may be warrantably done, as to restrain Madmen, or them who have the Plague or
Leprosy, from the converse of them who are Healthy.

I have now done what I proposed, by way of Answer to C. P 's Book, omitting
Nothing that seemed material to require an Answer. As for his Scur^ilous
Expressions and Ra^lings against me, they are so many that, I think, to number
them, would fill several Sheets of Paper; indeed there is but little in all his
Book, but what is of that sort.

In the Close (as I said I intended) I will here give a Life of some other
Falsehoods and Lies, that he and his Brethren have invented against me, and
which he has printed in his Book.

1. He accuses me, ( Proteus, page 38.) That in the parts of America, between
Piscat^away and Philadelphia, I had brought false Accusations against the
Magistrates of Pennsilvania. But what I have said above proves the contrary.

2. He says, I came to the Quakers New Meeting House on Rhode Island, as
appears by Relation from Rhode Island, being the 6 day of 6 Mo. and being the
first day of the Week [ Note, This is a great Mistake, for it was not the first
day of the Week, but the Fifth, as any ordinary Child may find, that can count
the days of the Mo^eth, tha^ (...) sixth day of August this year was on the
fifth day of the Week. Had G. K. committed such a Blunder, what noise of Lying
and Falsehood would C. P. have made of it, as he did for a mere Eroor of the
(...) the broad Sheet, called, The serious Call, where p 28. is put for p. 47.
and which afterward was corrected in man. Thousand Copies, which he is bound
to allow, seeing his own Book has many Errors of the Press, that were not at
first corrected, and some of them are not as yet corrected, in his Table of
Errata] And G. K. (says that false Relation) being in a Turbulent Frame,
called to the Governor, in a commanding way, that he might be heard.

That this Relation is false, I have many Persons of Credit, that were present,
who can attest, that in Moderation and with due Respect I desired the Governor
to command them to give me a hearing, for that they had broken the Rule of all
Civility and good Morality, to interrupt me, when I began to speak, wherein
they were far short of Heathens, as well as of those Jews, Acts 13.15. who did
not interrupt St. Paul, when he began to speak in their Synagogue, but the
Rulers of the Synagogue invited him to speak, though he was as much gone from
Judaism then, as G. K. at Rhode Island was gone from Quakerism; yet they did
not reproach him, with calling him Apostate, as the Quakers did me in several
of their Meetings.

3. That I called to the Governor, that the Auditory might be compelled to
stay and hear me.

This is utterly false. The Governor being no professed Quaker, but a Favourer
of their way, departed out of their Meeting soon after I began to speak, and at
the Door, as he was going out, he said to me, he thought I would do ^est to let
them alone till they had done, and then offer to speak I Replied to him, That
their way was, when I offer to speak, at the end of their Meeting, in all haste
to go away; but if he would persuade them to stay and ^ear me, I would stay
till they had done.

4. That else I would complain to the Queen.

Answ. This is utterly false. But after that Walter Clark, Deputy Governor and
Quaker Preacher, had interrupted me very u^civilly, and proffered to read a
printed Libel against me, and some of them had threatened me with incurring the
Penalty of 20 l. Fine, for interrupting them; but I did not interrupt them, for
I was silent all the time that their Preacher was speaking; but they did
interrupt me, and so brought themselves under the Penalty of the Act. Mr Myl^s
(...) the Q^^e^s Name, That I was a Missionary from the (...), that had a
Patent from the Crown of England for the propagating the Gospel in Foreign
parts, and if they would not suffer me to speak in their Meetings, Complaint
would be made to the Queen.

And whereas some began to wrest my words, as if I (...) said, I was sent by
the Queen; I Replied, I know not that ever the Queen (Whom God ^less and
preserve) heard of my Name; but that I was a Missionar^ from the Corporation,
who has their Authority from the Queen.

Whereas they say, I told them, I had as much to do there as they; I grant it,
and so I think I have still, or rather more; for if they have right to preach
Error there, I had more right to preach Truth; and there is no Law that forbids
a Minister of the Church of England to speak in a Quakers Meeting, when all are
silent; and where no Law is, there is no Transgression.

5. That I desired the Justices that they might compel the People.

Answ. It is utterly false. I desired the Justices indeed to command that I
might have a hearing, and not be interrupted; for they came there to keep the
Peace, such as I spoke to, and were my good Friends, and Members of the Church
of England, who will attest the contrary to this false Relation.

6. That their Meeting was finally disturbed by me.

Answ. It is false. What Disturbance happened was wholly made by them; and
after their Preachers and others were gone, many Quakers and others staid and
heard me peaceably for a considerable time.

7. That I applied to the Governor two days after, to force the way to the
Meeting House.

Answ. Utterly false. There was no need to make any such Application, to force
the way to the Meeting House, nor did I desire any such thing of him; but what
I desired he readily granted, that I might have leave to meet in the
Townhouse, there to detect the Quakers Errors out of their Books, as
accordingly I did, and the Quakers, by agreement, met with me one Meeting; but
how poorly they acquitted themselves, many in the place can witness; for they
did not so much as offer to answer to one Quotation of their vile Errors, which
I read out of G. F's Great Mystery, and other Authors, no, not so much as to
own or disown, though pressed to it, but spent most of the time in reading
Nameless Libels against me, stuffed with Lies, etc. particularly that called,
One Wonder more, where it is falsely charged on me, That I took the Scots League
and Covenant, and Walter Clark, some days after, said to me, before many (...).
That (...) prove it was a truth; but I proved to his face that it (...) false,
for I was born in the Year 1638. and the (...) League and (...) was taken in
the Year 1643. and 1644. when I was but five years Old, and so was incapable of
it, and it went through the Nation but that one time. Whereupon Walter Clark
was mute, and seemed to be convinced of his Rashness.

8. That I pretended I could open or lock up their Doors, as I pleased.

Answ. A Notorious Falsehood, I never pretended any such Power. But when the
Quakers threatened me again and again at Rhode Island and at Flushing on
Long Island, that I had broke the Act of Toleration and incurred the Fine of 20
l. every time I offered to speak in their Meetings; I told them, if they will
stand to that Act, any Justice of the Peace might lock up the Doors of their
Meeting Houses, none of them being recorded, as the Law requires, and none of
their Preachers being qualified as the Act requires; and if they did shut the
Meeting House Door upon me, I might procure it to be opened.

9. That I disturbed the Quakers Meetings in all the other places in
New England and Long Island into which I came.

Answ. All false, for what Disturbance was made in any of them, was wholly made
by them, and never by me; and so Insolent and Presumptuous were the Quakers at
Flushing in Long Island, that though two Justices of the Peace came with me to
the Meeting, to desire them to give me a peaceable hearing, as I had given
them; and though his Excellency Edward Lord Cornbury Governor of the Province,
had sent a Letter to the Justices of the Peace, and told them, I was to be
heard, yet they would not regard the Governors Letter nor what the Justice of
the Peace Coll. Jackson said to them.

10. That a rash precipi^ant Person (who by his Garb looked like a Minister of
the Church of England) read certain abusive Manuscripts in their Yearly Meeting
at Shrewsbury in East-Jarsey, and that I sent him, (see Proteus, p 46.

Answ. The Person is my worthy Companion Mr. Talbot, (well reported among all,
except the Quakers, whose Tongues are no Slander) who went most voluntarily,
without my sending, for I had no power to send him, but in love and good will
to me, and to serve the Truth, he went and read my Advertisement to them,
declaring my purpose to have a Meeting at a House near their Meeting House, to
detect their Errors out of their own Books, the Day, Hour and Place being
mentioned. And after that, another day, they sent me a scurrilous Answer, as
their manner is, to which I sent a sober Reply, and which the same Person read
in their Meeting, which Manuscripts, with their Answers, I have to show.

10. That I alleged, I had a Power from the Bishop of London to speak in their
Meetings, which when produced proved only a Letter of Recommendation, p 45, 47.
Upon which they Query, Does not G. K. with his fellow Disturbers and
Peace-breaking Ministers of the Church of England, also abuse the Bishop of
London, by using these Letters of Recommendation beyond their due limits?

Answ. That I alleged I had any such Power from the Bishop, is an utter
Falsehood; and as for my Lord of London's Letter of Recommendation, that I used
it beyond the due limits, is also false; and what use I made of it, was very
moderate, and to such to whom it was directed.

This is but a hint of many more gross Falsehoods, Lies and Calumnies he and his
Brethren have heaped up against me, from the Father of Lies, so that it may be
justly said, The Spirit of Railing Shimei, and of Beals Lying Prophets has
entered this Caleb Pusey, as the many Instances throughout his Book, which I
have produced (and were it worth the while, I could produce many more) do
evidently prove.

But, Reader, it is worth Noticing, that after the Quakers both in New England
and Long Island had threatened me with the 20 l. Fine in the Act of Toleration,
when they understood by some plain clauses in said Act, that their Preachers
were excluded, particularly for not owning the Doctrine of the holy Trinity,
according to the Church of England, then they said, that Act did not reach
these American Parts.

Postscript.
SInce (as C. P. acknowledges in his additional Postscript) that about 18 or
twenty of his Books were dispersed, before that Postscript came out (and most
of my Answer to it was writ before I saw his Postscript) he does acknowledge,
That it is a Mistake in him, If G K. have other Orders or Powers than that of a
Deacon. How then will Caleb Pusey save himself from that dreadful Thunderbolt
of G. Fox, not only for his confessed Mistake concerning me, but also his gross
Falsehoods and Perversions, which to be sure are not from God? G. F 's
Thunderbolt is this, Gr. Mystery, p. 98. And thou, and you all, that speak and
write, and not from God imme^^at^^ and infallibly, as the Apostles did, and
Prophets, but only have gotten t^^ words, you are all under the C^^se, in
another Spirit, ravened from the Spirit that was in the Apostles. And in his
Book, called, Readiness Errand to Dama^cus, page 7 he says, They are Conjurers,
and Diviners, and their Teaching is from Co^j^ration, which is not spoken from
the Mouth of the Lord, and the Lord is against all such, and who are of God are
against all such. Note, These absolute words of G. F. quite overthrow that
distinction that some Quakers have given, That they do ^o ascribe Infallibility
to their Preaching and Writing simply, but only to the Spirit of God, which is
Infallible, and to their Speaking and Writing so far as it is from the
Infallible Spirit. But here we see G. F. speaks Absolutely, not Conditionally
Neither was it ever any part of the Question, between the Quakers and their
Opposers, Whether the Spirit of God is Infallible, or Whether such who follow
the Infallible Spirit are so far Infallible as they so do; for its granded by
all who believe there is a God. But the true Question betwixt the Quakers and
their Opposers, is, Whether what the Quakers speak and write, is by the
Infallible Spirit? and if it be not, by G. F 's Thunderbolt, they are all
under the Curse, and what they speak is Conjuration, and they are Conjurers and
so is Caleb Pusey by G. F 's Censure, and so indeed was G. F. himself also.
Another principal part of the Controversy betwixt the Quakers and their
Opposers, is, Whether Quakers, or others, are inspired and moved by the Spirit
of God, to speak or write, without all Use of the holy Scriptures, as the Means
and Instrument whereby the holy Spirit works in the hearts of true Believers?

Again, Note Reader, That though C. P. severely breaks in upon the eight
Ministers, and me the nineth, and accuses us with belying the Quakers, and G.
F. in giving false Quotations, simply for two or three very small Errors of the
Press, that happened in some Copies that were first published, and which were
corrected in all the following Copies, after it was discovered by some of my
Friends and my self; and yet this C. P. himself, has found in his own Book,
Proteus Ecclesiasticus, above forty Errors of the Press, which he has corrected
in his Table of Errata, after many of his Books were published without any
Correction; which shows his great Partiality and eager Spirit falsely to
accuse me without ground: Would he not say that I had done unfairly by him, if
I should have blamed and found fault with Letters or Figures that have happened
to be wrong printed in his Book, and published before he had corrected them?
yet upon this very occasion of mis-printing a Figure in some Copies that were
first published, he accuses me for belying the Quakers and G. F.

Page 56. He accuses me, That in my Book, called, The Quakers Standard, etc.
page 476. I falsely and craftily say, that R. B 's method of arguing against
unlawful Games, unprofitable Plays, and superfluity of Apparel, etc. was
chiefly against the Abuse and Excess of these things; and charge me with a
great and wilful Abuse upon R B. as if he was not against the use of Games,
Plays, Sports, superfluity and vanity in Apparel.

Answ. I know none in the Church of England that do justify, as neither do I,
unlawful Games, unprofitable (...) and superfluity of Apparel, etc. and too
much of that sort there is among many; but it is not every thing what the
Quakers call vain, superfluous and unlawful, that is so; nor was I obliged to
take notice of R. B 's Intentions, but his Arguments, which, as I said then, so
I say still, are not against what is lawful innocent Recreations, (that are
profitable both for the Body and Mind) and distinction of Apparel, but the
abuse and excess of them; for R. B. himself being a Gentleman that had an
outward Estate, had Apparel suitable to his Quality, far above what his
Servants had, and others that were his Tenants, and did freely suffer his own
Children to play, for innocent Recreation, according to Zech. 8 5. and so did
W. P. and so do Quakers commonly both here and in England, and the Rich Quakers
Wives wear as costly Apparel, or rather more costly than they do, whom they
call the Worlds People, both here and in England.

Page 8. of his Remarks on Dan. Leeds Almanac, he quotes G. W 's Truth and
Innocence, to justify G. F's saying, Your Gospel, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John
is Dust, which is the Letter, page 14. N^ws out of the North. But G. F 's words
are so palpably Scandalous, that he seems ashamed to set them down in Print.
But how does he justify them? Why he brings some other places, where the holy
Scriptures are clearly owned, as spoken by the Lord. Well then, either our
Gospel, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John is not holy Scripture, or by G. F 's
Blasphemy it is Dust still. Is not this a ^^re Justification?

Obj. But G. F. says this only of the Letter, the Paper and Ink.

Answ, But that is not the Controversy, neither the Church of England, nor any
other Protestant Churches think, that the Gospel is either Letter, Ink or
Paper; but the [Gospel] which is the Word and Words of God, are writ in the
Letter, and with Ink on Paper, though by a Metonymie, or usual Speech (as a
Cask full of Wine, is called Wine, so) the Book of the holy Scripture, done
with Ink and Paper, is called the Holy Bible or holy Scripture; but who, though
they were Mad, or perfect Sots, will say, that the Cask or Vessel, that has
the Wine in it, is Wine? So that this Excuse of the Quakers is a mere Juggle,
and gross Deception.

Page 8. of his Remarks, C. P. says, about the Scripture being the Word of
God, We own them (says he) to be the Words of God, as it is written, Exodus
20.1.

Answ. But are the Words of God Dust, Ink and Paper? This is still Blasphemous.
Or, are not the Scriptures of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John the Words of God, as
well as those in Exodus 20.2?

Again, in the same page, C. P. says, And indeed I could never see this their
Cavil to be any more than a strife about words, inasmuch as both they and we
own them to be writ by divine Inspiration.

Answ. Suppose this were a Cavil, and but a strife about words, Who began it?
Why, first the Papists, who to exalt the Authority of their Church above the
Scriptures, and set up Humane Traditions of parcular Persons, that are contrary
to the Scriptures, gave such Names of Contempt to the Scriptures, as Ink and
Paper, dead Letter, etc. and the Quakers in that, as in many other things,
danced after their Pipe, and they call the Scriptures, Death, Dust and Serpents
Meat. But this Controversy with the Quakers about the Word of God, is no Cavil
nor Strife about words, but a very material Controversy, because all these
Places of Scripture in the Old and New Testament, that mention the Word of God,
or the Word of the Lord, and set forth the great Use and Benefit of it to the
Souls of Men, for their Conversion and Edification, the Quakers turn all to the
Light within, and will own nothing to be the Word of God, but what they call
the Light within, and Christ within; Whereas, though Christ is called the Word in
several places in Scripture, as he is also called, The Light of the World in
Scripture; yet he also called the Apostles The Light of the World So that the
Name Word of God, as it is sometimes in Scripture given to Christ, so much more
frequently to the whole Truths delivered in the holy Scriptures, by the
Inspiration of the holy (...), and which God has appointed the ordinary means
of our Instruction, Conversion and Edification, by the Operation of the holy
Ghost; and above a hundred (...) Scripture might be quoted, that mention the
Word of the Lord and the Word of God, which cannot be understood of Christ at
all, but of his Doctrine, and Precepts, Promises, Threatenings, etc. and to
distinguish betwixt the Word of God and the Words of God, (as the Quakers do)
universally, i^ a most falacious and deceitful Cavil and Quibble, by which the
false Teachers of the Quakers have led their blind-folded Followers to reject
the Word of God contained in the holy Scriptures, from being the great and
primary Rule of Faith, and the necessary and ordinary Means, whereby the holy
Ghost does illuminate the faithful; thereby making the Light within a full Rule
to lead to Salvation, as G. W has expressly affirmed in his Book, called, The
Glory of Christ's Light within, p. 32. And therefore seeing the Quakers hold the
Light within universally, in all Mankind, to be both a full Rule, to lead to
Salvation, and the primary Rule, (and yet they grant that it does not teach any
one peculiar Article of Christ's Birth, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, etc.
without the holy Scriptures, which either it should do, or these Truths are no
essential and necessary Truths of Christianity) whatever Judas kiss, at times
the Quakers seem to give the holy Scriptures, yet the Contemptibl^ Names that
George Fox, their chief Founder, and their great Authors have given them in
their Books, plainly show the mean esteem they have of them. And whatever use
they make of them, to teach their Children sometimes, yet since they do not
allow the reading of them, nor practice it in their Meetings, although they duly
read G. F's Orders in their Quarterly Meetings from time to time) it is very
evident that they make little use of them, while they themselves, as well as
their Children, are grossly ignorant in the true sense and understanding of
them, and will not allow them to be the Word, affirming that Christ is the Word
only, and that is the Light within, which is in every Man, Jew, Turk and
Heathen, etc. But though Christ is the Personal and Essential Word, according to
John 1.1. and Rev. 9 13. and diverse other places of Scripture, yet that hinders
not but that there is an outward declarative and written Word, which is not
Christ, nor God, but both God, Christ and the holy Ghost are the Author of it,
and use it as the Means, whereby Souls of Men are enlightened, convinced,
converted and built up in the holy Faith, according to Psalm. 19 7, 8, 9, etc.
compared with Psalm. 119. throughout. And that by the Word is not meant Christ
himself, but the Words of God spoken and written in the following Texts (and a
hundred more that might be produced) is very (...), as Isa. 28.13. and 8.20.
John 15 25. 1 These. (...) Cor. 4.20.

Page 11. Some Remarks, etc. C. P. most deceitfully glosseth upon the words of
Edw. Buroughs, p. 47. of his Works, That Is no Command of God to me (says E.
B.) what he commands to another, as if E. B. only meant it of singular and
extraordinary Cases, and not of common Duties of Prayer and Preaching; but the
very words of E. B. in that same very place, within a few ^^nes, prove C. P 's
gloss to be false; for the case mentioned by E. ^. expressly near the end of the
page, is that of Prayers, Preachings, Ordinances and Churches.

Page 11. He is as deceitful in justifying W. P's gross and vile Error, saying,
Christ in us offers up himself, and there he stops, being, as seems, ashamed
or afraid to set down the whole Sentence, because of the Unsoundness and
Offensivenes;s of it; whereas the whole Sentence is this, Christ in us does
offer up himself a living Sacrifice to God for us, by which the Wrath of God is
appeased to us. These are the very words in W. P's Rejoinder, page 284. Now
there can be no Sacrifice that appeaseth the Wrath of God toward Men, but that
alone Sacrifice which was offered upon the Cross, and had his Blood shed. But
the Quakers have devised an inward Sacrifice of Christ in men; whose Blood is
inwardly shed in them, to quench the Wrath of God, and who is crucified and
buried in them. All which contradicts the holy Scripture, and is altogether
derogating from Christ, that alone Propitiatory Sacrifice, when he offered
himself upon the Cross, who, as he is the alone Sacrifice, so was but once
offered, and there is no other Sacrifice Propitiatory, but that alone that was
offered without us; it being the nature of a Propitiatory Sacrifice, that
properly and really it must be slain, and the Blood thereof shed, which to
affirm of any inward Sacrifice, is an overthrowing of the Christian Faith, as
much, if not more, than the Popish unbloody Sacrifice in the Mass.

Page 12. And as deceitful is C. P. to quote me to justify W. P 's assertion;
It must be granted (said I, Serious Appeal, p 27. as he quotes me^ that the
Life of Christ in the Saints, is a sweet Incense before God, and is a Sacrifice
in another sense My meaning is plain, it was in another sense, even as he
Sacrifice of Incense, was not Propitiatory to reconcile M^n to God, as the
Sacrifice that was to be slain was, and the Blood to be poured out. And C. P.
is gross, deceitful to ask D. L. Does he think that W. P. was so weak to
understand it of that Sacrifice without us on the Tree of the Cross? Answ D. L.
did not so think, but to understand two Propitiatory Sacrifices, by way of
Merit to atone for sin, is most contrary to Scripture; for this inward
Sacrifice is not only another from the outward, that W P. has set up, but
Manifold, even as many as there are Saints, at least, and as many Christ's.
Beside, nothing could be Propitiatory Sacrifice for sin, but what was really
Man. Now unless Christ be really M^n, in all the Saints, and really slain, and
his Blood real shed in them all, and multiplied into as many Men, or Manhoods
is, as Saints, it is impossible that Christ should be a Propitiatory Sacrifice
in Men. But the Sacrifice of Incense was not to atone nor propitiate, nor was
it to be any thing that could be slain, or have Blood to be shed, but did
presuppose the Atonement already made, and that the Life and lively Breathings
of the Spirit of Christ in the faithful, is as a sweet Incense before God, in
that sense as true and right Prayer and Thanksgiving is, that is spiritually
performed, I still assert; but this does nothing defend W. P 's vile Errors.

Now that neither W. P. nor G. W. did own Christ as he was outwardly crucified,
and his Blood outwardly shed, to be a real and proper Sacrifice, Propitiatory,
for sin, is evident from their words faithfully quoted in my first Narrative.
W. Penn in his Christ. Quaker, p. 97, 98. first Edition, says, One outward
thing cannot be the proper figure or representation of another; nor is it the
way of holy Scripture so to teach us. The Outward Lamb shows forth the inward
Lamb. Here it is evident W. P. will not allow the Man Christ, that was outward,
to be the Lamb that was sacrificed for us, but the inward Lamb. i. e. the Light
within. And G. Whitehead in his Light and Life, p. 56, denies that Blood
whereby God did purchase his Church, Acts 20.28. to be outward Blood, but
inward and spiritual. Now the Blood of God (says he) or that Blood that
rela^es to God, must needs be spiritual, he being a Spirit, and the Covenant of
God is inward and spiritual, and so is the Blood of it.

Some Remarks, Page 2. C. P. alleges against D. Leeds, That he has altered
the Terms of the Accusation about calling Christ, as Man, Finite and Impotent.
Where (says C. P.) did I ever take or go about to take W. P. off from calling
Christ, as Man, Finite and Impotent only? This seems to me a free Confession of
C. Pusey, That W. Penn did call our our blessed Savior Finite and Impotent, as
Man, though not Only, and I remember not that D. L. does so charge it with the
word Only. Now though Christ, as Man, is Finite, as the best of created Beings
are Finite; yet to call him Impotent, I think is very Unwarrantable and
Irreverent, if not Blasphemous. Christ indeed, simply as Man, is not
Omnipotent, yet it will not follow, that because he is not Omnipotent, simply
as Man, that therefore he is Impotent; for it implies some great Defect or
Imperfection: There is a midst betwixt Omnipotent and Impotent, viz
Multipotent, and such our blessed Savior, no doubt, was, even as Man, having
all Power given him in Heaven and Earth. Beside, W. P 's false and sophistical
Reasoning in his Sandy Foundation, page 20, 21, That Christ neither did nor
could satisfy divine Justice, either as God, or as Man, nor as God and Man, is
a great undervaluing of our blessed Savior, and renders him (which is horrid
think!) an Impotent Savior; for without his making Satisfaction to the divine
Law and Justice, he could be no Savior to Men; and yet W. Penn affirms he
could not make Satisfaction as God, nor as Man, nor as God and Man. Its true,
he could not make Satisfaction simply as god, though the Reasons given by W. P.
are not good, nor rightly stated. The true Reason why he could not make
Satisfaction, simply as God, is, because the Person who should make that
Satisfaction behoved to suffer and dye, that being the Penalty of the Law, for
the sins of Men; but had Christ been only God, he could not have dyed or
suffered, God being an infinite Spirit, and infinitely perfect every way,
without Body, Parts or Passions, according the first Article of the Church of
England. And it is also true, that Christ could not make that satisfaction [ As
Man simply] because had he been mere Man, what he did or suffered could not
have been of full and sufficient Value to make that Satisfaction which the
Justice of Gods Law required. But W. P 's reason why Christ could not satisfy,
as both God and Man, is extreme weak and false. His Reason is this, For where
two Mediums (says he) or middle Propositions are singly incosistent with the
nature of the end, for which they are at first propounded, their conjunction
rather does augment than lessen the difficulty of its accomplishment. And this
(he says) he is persuaded must be obvious to every unbyassed Understanding.

I Answ. First, the words of his Argument are in very improper Terms, as two
Mediums or middle Propositions, which in the present case are neither Logical
nor Grammatical, and far less Scriptural; for if he allude to a Syllogism,
every true Syllogism can have but one Medium, and but one middle Proposition;
and what other he means by two Mediums, or two middle Proposition; and what
other he means by two Mediums, or two middle Propositions in the case, as I do
not understand, so nor (as I think) can the best University Scholar in Oxford
or Cambridge; for to say the truth, being applied to the present case, they are
plain Nonsense: for, who that ever was but ordinarily well studied in
Divinity, did say or think that Christ, as both God and Man, are two Mediums or
middle Propositions? The Scripture says, There is one God and one Mediator
between God and Men, the Man Christ Jesus: But this Mediator is both God and
Man, and not two Medators, nor two Mediums. But if W. P's intent in this
argument is this, That where two Causes, dis-junctly or seperately considered
cannot produce the Effect intended, that therefore when they are conjoined and
operate conjunctly, the cannot produce that effect, the Argument is apparently
false, as is obvious to every ordinary Understanding, whereof many Examples can
be given to prove the contrary, but at present I shall only produce this one;
The Body can neither eat nor drink the Meats and Drinks proper to it, without
the Soul, i. e. the Soul being separated from it; nor can the Soul eat or drink
the said Meats or Drinks without the Body, but does it therefore follow, that
the man, who is the composition of both Soul and Body, vitally united, can
neither eat nor drink? surely nay.

And as weak and impertinent are W. P 's Arguments against our Savior's
Satisfaction for our sins, Sandy foundation, page 21. That men's sins being not
only against the Father and the holy Ghost, but against the Son also, that
therefore the Son must be satisfied; and who shall satisfy him?

Answ. It is granted, the sins of men are against the whole Trinity, and the
satisfaction required and paid by the Son, as both God and Man, is, properly
speaking, made to the Justice of the divine Law, which is the Law of the whole
Trinity, which being infinitely Holy, would not suffer their Holy Law to be
transgressed, and the Transgression pardoned, without a due satisfaction to the
Justice of the Law, that so the Justice of God, and his (...) being an
essential Perfection of the whole Trinity, as well as Mercy. And seeing the Son
only was Incarnate, and was both God and Man, and not the Father, nor the holy
Ghost, therefore the Son only being both God and Man, could make the
Satisfaction, though the divine Decree and Appointment, whereby that Satisfacton
was made, and the Wisdom, Goodness, Justice and Power, whereby that Decree was
executed, was of the whole Trinity.

And, Lastly, as impertinent is his other Argument, That if man, or suppose a
Prince or King can pardon, without a satisfaction any great Crime, as Murder,
Rebellion, etc. that therefore God does pardon men's sins without a satisfaction
to his Law: For, first, some sins, as willful Murder, Adultry, and the like
heinous sins ought not to be pardoned by the greatest King on Earth, without
satisfaction to the Law of God; the sin of Murder requires Life for Life by
Gods Law still in force; nor was there any Sacrifice for those heinous sins
under the Law, without due satisfaction to the Law. Memorable is that Passage
of Zaleucus the King of ^ocreuses, who would not pardon the Adultry committed
by his Son, without satisfaction to the Law made by himsslf, That whosoever
committed Adultry should lose both Eyes; and that the said King should show
himself just as well as merciful, he took one Eye from his Son, and another Eye
from himself, which fully satisfied the Law; and which does also partly
resemble the various suffering of our blessed Savior, who suffered for our
sins, the penalty due to us, in our vice and stead, the Just for the Unjust.
This notable Instance of both the Justice and Mercy of King (...) is made use
of by Gr^tius in his Treatise of The Satisfaction (...), to illustrate, in some
sort, our Savior's satisfaction to the divine Law for our sins, though this
and all other Examples fall (...) of this great Mystery of our Savior's
satisfaction. Nor is (...), as W. P. would render it, that the Son should (...)
the Justice of his own Law transgressed by us, as well as (...) Law of the
Father and of the holy Ghost. But, Secondly, (...) and offenses we commit
against our Brethren, which (...) commanded to forgive, upon their Repentance
and acknowledge (...), our blessed Savior has given full satisfaction for
them, (...); yet the Law against wilful Murder and other heinous sins, requires
still that the Offender suffer a Temporal Punishment, according to the Equity
of the Law. Nor does Gods requiring a satisfaction to his Law, hinder his
forgiveness to be free and of free and rich Grace to us, because it was his
free Love and Grace (without all Merit on our part) that provided such a
satisfactory Sacrifice for us, as his own dear Son. In (...), seeing W. P.
denis in his Sandy foundation, That Christ either satisfied as God, or as Man,
or as God and Man, he renders him altogether An Impotent Savior; and he
renders him, as Man, not only to be Finite and Created, which all Orthodox
Christians hold as well as I, but a Finite Impotent Creature, because he
utterly denies that That outward Person who suffered at Jerusalem was properly
the Son of God, (v^^. (...) Apology, page 146). And who was that but the Man
Christ Jesus? And in his Rejoinder to Jo. Faldo, as above quoted, he denis that
the Body o^ Christ that suffered did help to constitute him Christ, and
consequently that that visible man that suffered, was not God; and then what
was he, but A Finite Impotent Creature? Thus it appears how vain and idle C.
P. has been to clear W P. of that horrid Assertion; and as vain and idle is C.
P. to quote for his Justification; for though I have said, and say, that
Christ, as Man, had, and still has a created Soul and Body, and in that
respect is a finite created being, yet that very man being God, by the Personal
Union of his Manhood with God the Son, I never thought nor said that he was
Impotent, or a Finite Impotent Creature; most Unjust therefore is Caleb Pusey
to lay this at my door.

FINIS

