GODS Frown IN THE DEATH OF Useful Men. SHOWED IN A SERMON Preached at the
Funeral of the Honorable Col John Pynchon Esquire. Who Deceased January the 17th.
1702/3.

By Solomon Stoddard, Pastor of Northampton.

BOSTON, N.E. Printed by B Green, and J. Allen. Sold by Benjamin Eliot, under
the Townhouse. 1703.

Imprimatur
J. DUDLEY.

GODS Frown IN THE DEATH of Useful Men.
Isaiah III. part of v. 1st. with the 2d. and 3d. Verses. The Lord, the Lord of
Hosts does take away from Jerusalem and from Judah, The Mighty man, and the man
of War, the Judge, and the Prophet, and the Prudent, and the Ancient, the
Captain of Fifty, and the Honorable man, and the Counselor, and the cunning
artificer, and the Eloquent Orator.


THE Sins of the Prosessing People of God do provoke Him to Anger; Men are
wont to make many Pretenses and Excuses, and by them they mitigate the terror
of (...): but this does not prevent the displeasure of God: and if God be angry
with his People, it will before it be long break out upon them: if there be
Prosperity at present, yet in a little time Changes shall pass over them. Thus
it was with the People of Judah, they were at present in great Prosperity: Isa
2.7. Their Land is full of Silver and Gold, neither is there any end of their
treasures, their Land is also full of Horses, neither is there any end of their
Chariots. But they carried themselves very badly: We have an Account in
general, Chap. 3. v. 8, 9 Their tongue and their doings are against the Lord to
provoke the Eyes of his Glory, the show of their Countenance does witness
against them, and they declare their Sin as Sodom, and hide it not. In
particular they were guilty of Idolatry, Chap 2 v. 8. Their Land is full of.
Idols, they worship the work of their own bands: and of horrible Pride, Chap.
3. v. 16. The Daughters of Sion are haughty, and walk with stretched forth
necks, and wanton eyes, walking and mincing as they go, and making a ticking
with their feet. And accordingly God is threatening of them with dreadful
Judgments, v 1. with Famine and Drought, v. 2.3. with the Removal of Useful
men:

For the understanding of the words,

Consider;

1. Who he would take away? A. In general, Useful Men: such as in their
several Capacities were very Serviceable and Profitable to the Commonwealth;
Men that were an honor to the Land, and capable to advance and promote the
Welfare of it. Some by reason of their enjoyments, as the Mighty Men: some by
reason of their qualifications, as the Prudent, the Artificer, and the Orator:
some by reason of their experience, as the Ancient: some by reason of the
Offices and Stations that they were in, in the Common wealth, as the Judge, the
Prophet, the Counselor, etc.

2. How does he threaten to take them away? A. As a Judgment on the Public
Society. There might be anger against some of them: some of them might be taken
away in anger against themselves, as Saul: God took him away in his wrath, Hos.
13 11. Some of them may be taken away in mercy to themselves: they are taken
away from the Evil to come, Isa. 57 1. But here it is threatened as a Public
Calamity; that which enfeebles the Common wealth, and exposes them to sorrow.
God may take such away by Mortality, in Battle, by Captivity: he does not say
that he will take away all such, but many of them.

DOCTRINE.
There is many times a Great Frown in GODS taking away those that are Eminently
Useful. GOD has many ways to punish a disobedient People; sometimes he
punishes them by Wars, by Sicknesses, by Inundations, by Earthquakes, by Fires,
by Blastings, by a Spirit of Division; this is one among the rest, by the Death
of Useful men. There may be a great Frown in Gods taking away such Young men,
as were hopeful to be men for Public Service; as when he took away Jeroboams
Son: so especially when he takes away such as were men of Service: this is not
always a Frown, for if God have no Controversy with his People, yet such must
dye according to the course of Nature; but ordinarily it is a Frown: Useful
and Serviceable men are a Public Blessing; and it is a Public Frown when God
removes them: as God Frowns upon a People, when he takes away their Health,
their Peace, their Wealth; so he does likewise when he takes away those that
were a means to preserve their spiritual and outward Prosperity: Men that are
eminently Useful are the Pillars of the Church and the Commonwealth, and it
is a great weakening to the Society when such are removed. God smiles upon a
People, when he raises up Serviceable men, and he Frowns upon them, when he
snatches such away: many times it is a token of great anger when such men are
removed, and they feel the bitter effects thereof many years after: when their
Lives are lost, the Public Society has a great loss: much of the Prosperity of
a People is buried in the Graves of Useful men. Hezekiah. Death and Josiahs
gave a deadly wound to the People of Judah, and was matter of great Mourning, 2 Chronicles 35.25. Jeremiah Lamented for Josiah.

Reason 1. Because Useful men are an Honor to the People. Useful men are
upon that Account Honorable. Their Usefulness does command Reputation: they
deserve respect and a good report upon that account. 1 Samuel 9 6. He is an
honorable man. 2 King. 5.1. He was honorable, because by him the Lord had
given deliverance unto Syria. And their honourableness does reflect honor upon
the People that they belong unto. As vile base men are a reproach and disgrace
to the People that they belong unto, men are ashamed of them; so honorable and
useful men are an honor to the place. It was an honor to the People of
Israel, that there were so many Worthies in the Land in the days of David. It
is a commendation of a People in other Countries: Useful men are an honor to
all that are related to them. An Useful man is an honor to his Parents, to
his Children, to his Wife, to the place of his Nativity, to the place where he
Lives: Honorable men make the place renowned where they dwell: it is an honor
to a People to have choice men for Magistrates and for Ministers; it raises the
Estimation of a People in the Eye of the World. Zech. 10.4. Out of him came
forth the corner, out of him the nail, out of him the battle bow, out of him
every oppressor togegether; that is, such as suppress and subdue their
Enemies. Psalm. 87.5. Of Sion it shall be said, this and that man was born in
her. And when such men are removed the honor of a People is diminished; their
Estimation and renown does decay and wither away: their honor will sink
because the foundation of it is taken away; those that supported it are
removed: So they lose much of that fame and respect that they had.

Reason 2. Because such men have a great interest in the affection of others.
Useful men discover Love: their qualifications are lovely, and their Service
draws forth Love: the Consciences of other men do give a testimony unto them,
and their hearts are Captivated thereby. Partly from the testimony of their
Conscience, and partly from a sense of their own benefit, they have a Love to
such men, and cannot but prize them; they love to see them, and love to
converse with them. Job 29.11, 12. When the ear heard me then it blessed me,
and when the eye saw me it gave witness unto me, because I delivered the poor
that cried, the fatherless, and him that had none to help him. 1 Samuel 18.16.
All Israel and Judah loved David, because he went out and came in before them.
And because they have an affection to them, it is an affliction to have them
removed. If a man have a great affection to his Wife or his Child, it is the
greater affliction to have them taken away. People are smitten with grief and
sorrow at the Death of such Persons, their hearts are wounded, their joy is
turned into sorrow, it makes them go with heavy hearts. 2 Samuel 1.17. And David
Lamented with this Lamentation over Saul and over Jonathan his Son.

Reason 2. Because such men do procure a great deal of Good and prevent a
great deal of Calamity. They are profitable to the Societies that they did
belong to. So was Jehoiada, 2 Chronicles. 24.16. They buried him in the City of
David among the Kings, because he had done good in Israel, both toward God,
and toward his house: When such men are Dead People many times want their
Service, and so are exposed to a great deal of Calamity, which by their
presence might have been prevented.

1. Some by their Justice do a great deal of good. They are careful to deliver
them that are innocent. Many men would make a prey of others, and under
pretenses of Law devour the Estates of other men, but while those that are in
Authority are men of Justice, they will give no countenance to such things. Job
29.15, 16, 17. I was Eyes to the blind, and Feet was I to the lame, I was a
Father to the poor, and the cause that I knew not I searched out: and I brake
the jaws of the wicked, and plucked the spoil out of his teeth. So did David, 2 Samuel 8.15. David Entented Judgment and Justice to all his people: So Josiah,
Jer. 22.15. Did not thy Father do Judgment and Justice. Such men will not be
overruled by affection, bribed by men's Money, or frighted with their
greatness: Job 31.34. Did I fear a great multitude, or did the contempt of
Families terrify me, that I kept silence and went not out of the door. But
after such men are dead, sometimes instead of the Firr-tree comes up the thorn,
and instead of the mirtle-tree comes up the briar; men get into Place of Power,
that prevent Judgment, that encourage those that are wicked. Isa. 1.22, 23. Thy
silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water, thy Princes are, rebellions,
and companions of thieves, every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards,
they judge not the fatherless, neither does the cause of the Widow come unto
them.

2. Some also by their skill, wisdom and experience do a great deal of good.
Some are well skilled in the Law and able to direct in difficult cases; they
are men of ability to discern between right and wrong, to see through cases
that have intanglements and perplexity in them: This was that, that he prayed
for, 1 King. 3.9. Give thy Servant an understanding heart, to judge thy People,
that I may discern between good and bad. They are men of prudence to find out
proper means to advance the public good; to find out expedients in difficult
cases, and to discern what is to be done, to advance Religion, to prevent
miscarriages, to advance peace, and compose differences. 2 Chronicles. 12.32. Men
that had understanding in the times to know what Israel ought to do: By their
experience they are fitted to take right methods in doubtful cases. But many
times when such men are dead, such may arise after them, as are ignorant and
unskilful, rash and unexperienced men, who by their precipitate counsels expose
a Land to much misery: So the Young men that were bred with Rehoboam gave
foolish counsel, and laid a foundation of lasting sorrow to Israel by their
rashness, they opened a gap that let in a flood of misery: 1 King. 12.10, 11.

3. Some by their valor. Leading men, that have been men of valor, have done
mighty Service to their Country: they have been instruments under God to save
it out of the hands of Enemies; and to enlarge the Dominions of the Country:
Valor inables men to look dangers in the face; makes them willing to run the
hazard of their lives. Judge. 12.3. I put my life in my hand. They are
instruments to free the Land from Servitude and Bondage: a valiant Leader
animates Soldiers, his Courage begets Courage in others, and damps and
discourages Enemies, such Leaders are a terror to Enemies. Genesis 49.9. Judah is
a lions whelp from the prey, my Son thou art gone up; he stooped down, be
couched as a lien, and as an old lion, who shall rouse him up? In this way
Barak and Gideon and Saul and David did abundance of good in their Generations,
they vanquished the Enemies of Israel: From the blood of the Slain, from the
fat of the mighty, the bow of Jonathan turned not back, and the sword of Saul
returned not empty, 2 Samuel 1.22. But many times when such men are dead, for
want of others of the same Spirit, people are harressed and brought under
hatches.

4. Some by their Examples also do much good. They are exemplary in Religion,
diligently practicing all the rules of it. So David was a diligent Worshipper
of God; so was Job, Job 1.1. One that feared God; they are examples of
sobriety, of humility, of peaceableness, of chastity and charity; and hereby
others are led on to carry themselves well, many will follow the examples of
principal men, and out of a respect to them, comply with their ways, and so
get good habits: But sometimes when such men are dead, there arise others in
their room, that give bad examples, don't much countenance Religion, are pot
companions, men of rude behavior, tainted with corrupt practices, these
examples will poison other men, and infect a Country, others will quickly learn
such ways, Prove. 29.12. If a Ruler hearken to lies, all his Servants are wicked.

5. Some by their Honourableness also do abundance of good. They are men well
respected, and upon that account capable to do abundance of Service; their
proposals are much hearkened to by those that are in Supreme Authority in the
Country: If they make a motion for the good of the places where they live, they
are readily hearkened unto, their judgment and fidelity is relied on; they can
do a man a kindness with their word. The Prophet enquires of the woman of (...)
whether she would be spoken for to the King or to the Captain of the Host, 2
King. 4 13. He could have done her a kindness in that way: They can have access
to those in Chief Authority, when others cannot; their word will be regarded,
when the word of others will not. So being honorable, they bear much sway
among the people: In many cases their judgment is a law, they can easily crush
evil motions, and put a stop to corrupt and factious designs; they can persuade
and draw people to that which is for their good: Others will be willing to
please, will be fearful of displeasing, will have an high opinion of their
judgment. 2 Samuel 3.36. Whatsoever the King did pleased the people; but many
times when such are dead, others that come after have no such influence; their
advice and proposals will not bear sway: others will slight them and thwart
them: They that dared not to speak a word in the days of Solomon, grew
troublesome after he was dead. 1 King. 12.3, 4.

USE I.
It is a great Mercy when God raises up Serviceable Men among his People.
Sometimes it is otherwise among the People of God. Isa. 51.18. There is none to
guide her among the Sons which she has brought forth, neither is there any
that takes her by the hand, of all the Sons which she has brought up. But it
is a great Mercy when he raises up Serviceable Men. Amos 2.11. I raised up of
your Sons for Prophets, and of your Young men for Nazarites Isa 1.26. I will
restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning.
Jer. 3 15. I will give them Pastors after my own heart, that shall feed them
with knowledge and understanding. This greatly helps forward the Welfare of a
People: It is Gods work to raise up Serviceable men: He gives them their
qualifications, natural and acquired; He gives them those enjoyments that fit
them for Public place: He makes them Conscientious, Religious and Godly men,
and he bestows actual advancement on them; He makes them to find favor that
they may be put in place. And when he does thus, he greatly favors a People,
for this makes way for the outward Prosperity of a People, that they may live
quietly and peaceably; and this makes way for their Spiritual Prosperity, that
they may be a Religious, Godly and well carriaged People; it is a special means
to make a People happy.

1. This contributes more to the welfare of a people, then for their Rulers to
know their duty. If Rulers be not fitted to be Serviceable, all things will run
to ruin though they know their duty; if they know they should be just, and give
good examples, and seek the public Welfare, yet they may lie in the woeful
neglect of it. Some men's knowledge does but make them more capable to do
mischief; knowing men if they be not well disposed, will do abundantly more
hurt than good; if they be like toads, it will be little advantage that they
have got pearls in their heads; it had been well for a Country if some men had
been born fools: David was more afraid of Ahitophel then of others. 2 Samuel
15.31. O Lord, I pray thee, turn the Counsel of Ahitophel into foolishness.

2. This contributes a great deal more (...) good Laws. It is a great part of
the care of Rulers to make good Laws: Good Laws in Civil, and so in Criminal
Cases, have their influence into the Welfare of a Country. That was one thing
wherein the Children of Israel were more happy than other people; they had good
Laws prescribed unto them. What Nation is there so great, that has statutes
and judgments so righteous, as all this Law which I set before you this day.
Deuteronomy 4.8. But good Laws will signify little, if the men that are at Helm, be
not fitted for Service. Laws are like a Sword, which if it be kept in a
Scabbard will do no Execution The Children of Israel had very good Laws, Laws
given them by God himself, yet many times were very miserable. Laws are like
Physic, which if it be not administered, or duly administered, does no service.
Laws as written may do a little good, but as Executed do far more: The
Execution of the Law does rectify miscarriages past, and prevent miscarriages
for the time to come. But good Laws will be as a nose of wax, as the Papists
say of the Scripture, if Joel and Abiah have the management of them. 1 Samuel
8.3. They followed after lucre, took bribes, and perverted judgment.

3. This will contribute more than Learned Education. Several Young ones in the
Country have liberal Education, and are furnished with Learning, whereby they
are more enabled to get skill in the Law, and to discover the fraud in false
pleas: But this will not make the Country happy, if they have not a Spirit to
do Service. Men of Learned Education through other unfitnesses may expose a
People to great Calamity. Learned Education is an help both to Civility and
Piety, but it cannot effect either. Some Learned men had need to Learn somewhat
more, before ever they will do any great matter, in order to the happiness of
the Land. The Scribes and Pharisees, had Learned Educations, yet helped forward
the ruin of the Jews: Men that are brought up at the feet of Gemaliel, have
need (as Paul) to see a light from Heaven.

USE. II.
Such men as are Useful and Serviceable should not be despised. There is an
evil Spirit prevailing in some, and they are ready under one pretense or
another to despise Useful men: as Michal despised David in her heart. There be
many that honor them, yet there be others that undervalue them. It is the
Spirit of men of Belial to despise such, 1 Samuel 10.27. But if men be
Serviceable men, they are great Blessings, and it is a Frown when God removes
them, and those men are blame worthy that do despise them, whatever notion they
do it under.

1. Some do it under a notion, that they have such and such Infirmities. But if
we grant that they have, (though some men count those things faults and
infirmities that are none;) yet they may not be despised. Humanum est Errare,
where shall we find men without infirmities? If David acted rashly in the
matter of Mephibosheth, must he be despised? If Asa did not take away the high
places, must he be despised? If Jehoshaphat was overseen in joining with Ahab,
must he be despised? If Hezekiah's heart were lifted up when the Ambassadors
came from Babylon, must he be despised? If it were a precipitate thing for
Josiah to take the field against the King of Egypt, must he be despised? Men at
the best are but men compassed about with infirmities. God honors men though
they have infirmities. 2 Chronicles 19 3. Nevertheless there are good things found
in thee. God hears the Prayers of his People, though they have infirmities.
James 5.17. Elias was a man subject to like passions as we are, and he Prayed
earnestly that it might not rain, and it rained not on the earth, by the space
of three years and six months. Their infirmities are a dishonor unto them, but
they are to be honored notwithstanding their infirmities: infirmities are
blemishes, but yet They may be praise worthy for all them.

2. Some do it under a notion that we have plenty of men sit for choice
Service. That we want rather Offices for men than men for Offices: the Country
it full of able men. It is very fit that we should take notice of what there is
of that nature with thankfulness: But indeed many things must meet together to
make men meet for some Offices. He that may do God and his Country good
Service, in a lower Station, may be altogether unfit for an higher Station. The
Country runs low enough in men. We have nothing to boast of but have cause to
be humbled before God, that there be so few every way accomplished for Public
Service; it is a small matter in such a Country as this to make a Profession of
Religion. Some that carry pretty well are not like them that went before them.
2 King. 14 3. He did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, but not
like David his Father. When the foundation of the Second Temple was laid, the
young men rejoiced, but the old men wept.

3. Some do it under a notion that they might have been more Serviceable. It is
acknowledged that they do a pretty deal of Service; but men despise them
because they had Opportunity and Advantage to have done more. But if the thing
be true, yet they are to be honored on the account of what they have done: if
they had had more zeal and industry and of a Public Spirit, it had been
better: yet possibly they have been great blessings: if through mistake they
did not rectify some abuses, if temptation did prevail with them, to be more
indulgent than they should, yet they are not to be despised. Where is the man
that might not have done more good, than he has done? Neither Asa's nor
Jehoshaphats, and Hezekiah's Reformation were so perfect as Josiahs, yet they
were men greatly to be honored.

4. Some do it under a notion that they were Ancient. They were grown old, and
had less activity than before, that their Judgment and Memory began to fail
them. But we find in Scripture the Ancient and the Honorable joined together,
Isa. 9.15. Ancient men are to be honored on the account of what they have
done. The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of
Righteousness, Prove. 16.31. Ancient men are to be honored upon the account of
their Prudence and Experience; the Prudent and the Ancient are joined together
in the Text. Job 12.12. With the Ancient is Wisdom. The Ancient men that stood
before Solomon, might be thought timorous and inclining to dotage by Rehoboam,
but it would have been well for him, if he had followed their advice: They were
fitter to give counsel than he was to receive it.

USE. III. Of HUMILIATION.
That God is removing Serviceable man from among us. We have cause to look upon
this a great frown from God: beside several others that God has taken away in
former times, He has more lately removed his Servant DANFORTH, and since that
his Servant STOUGHTON, and now another Honorable man is taken away: a great
man is fallen this is day in our Israel, and it becomes us to Mourn and Lament
under this dispensation.

1. Observe, That God has removed one that has been along while Serviceable.
That has been improved about Public Service for above Fifty Years: he has been
Serviceable unto the Country in general, and in special among our selves. He
has had the principal management of our Military Affairs, and our Civil
Affairs: and labored much in the settling of most of our Plantations, has
managed things with Industry, Prudence and Moderation. He has been careful in
time of War, and as there has been occasion, he has been a Peace Maker among
us, and helpful in composing of differences: he has discountenanced Rude and
Vicious Persons, bearing his Testimony against them.

2. It is to be feared that we shall feel the sorrowful effects of his removal
a long while. Some times when Parents dye, Children don't at present so much
feel the want of them, as they do afterward. We may have occasion afterward
to remember with sorrow that we had such an One among us: Though we have other
Useful men, yet there may arise such Cases wherein there may be great need of
his conduct and help. He was honorable and had great influence upon men in
Authority abroad, and upon the People at home, and had more experience by far,
than any other among us.

3. This comes in Conjunction with other Sorrows. We are under an expectation
of Trouble from Enemies; and are under the heavy Hand of God, in the Diseases
that prevail in the Land. The Afflictions of our principal Town are very great,
many Families are Mourning over their Dead. God is pleading his Controversy
with us in that Terrible Mortality, and in such a day as this, God has added
this Affliction to aggravate our Sorrow; if it had come alone, it had been
heavy, but now we have one wave and billow upon another. Our Afflictions are
like Jobs, one comes upon the neck of another. There was great anger before,
but God sees cause to make this addition to it: Our Cup was bitter before, this
makes it more bitter: if it had come in a time of Prosperity, it had been sad,
but being in a time of Adversity, it is more sad. It is the manner of God many
times to comfort his People in their Affliction, but he is adding to the grief
of them that were wounded before.

USE IV. Of EXHORTATION
To such of You as are in Power, or may upon this occasion be put in Power.
Carry so that we may not have so much cause to lament this Dispensation. The
more Serviceable you are in your Places, the less there will be of a Frown in
the Removal of this Honorable Person. If you answer the expectation of God and
man from you, that will wonderfully moderate our grief. You commend him for
being Serviceable, be you so too; you say he was a Father to the Country, be
you so too; you are capable to do a great deal of Service, do so, and that will
be like clear shining after rain.

Particularly I entreat you,

1. That in all Causes that come before you, you would act in the fear of God.
You must not act either with a preposterous zeal, or with a spirit of sinful
indulgence. You must have a great care that you do not condemn the Righteous,
or justify the Wicked; such proceedings are both of them alike abominable unto
God: in all Controversies between man and man, you must act impartially: you
may not out of love, or pity, or anger be influenced in giving Judgment: if
you have a mind to befriend men, befriend them in other ways; but in Judgment
have no respect of persons; it is proverbial, That a Friend in the Court is
better than a penny in the Purse; but you must be friends to no man, any
further than his Cause requires; you must have a care that you do not
countenance any malicious prosecutions, but act in the fear of God. 2 Chronicles.
19.6. He said to the Judges, take heed what you do, for you judge not for man,
but for the Lord: v. 7. Let the fear of God be upon you; take heed and do it,
v. 9. Thus shall you do in the fear of God faithfully, and with a perfect
heart, 2 Samuel 23.5. He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of
God. You must so act, that when men hear what judgment you give, they may not
do as those, Luke 23.48. They Smote their breasts and returned; but as it was
with the people, 1 King. 3.28. They feared the King, for they saw that the
wisdom of God was in him to do judgment.

2. That you be good examples to the people. They who are to reclaim others
from evil, should themselves carry well: if you be bad examples, you will draw
on others to do the like; others will be hold from your example: Your practices
will be presidential, and will be used as an argument either to justify or
excuse evil. With what face can you punish evil in others, and practice it your
selves. Leading men should be sure to lead well. If you carry holily and
regularly, you will bring good carriages into request: that will make men to
love such carriages, that will make men to expect no favor if they carry
(...). Ministers must be Examples, 1 Pet. 5 3 And so must Magistrates too; so
was Hezekiah, and Josiah, and others. Be Examples of Religion, be Examples of
fair honest dealing, of sobriety, of chastity, and peaceableness, and all other
virtuous carriages. Bad carriages in Rulers are a greater reproach than in
other men, and of more pernicious consequence; Good men are grieved, and bad
men are hardened thereby; though they do punish others for their miscarriages,
they do more for the increase, then they do for the suppression of Sin; they
are but pretended friends to Holiness, for they are real enemies to it.

3. That you do nothing to promote any man of vicious Conversation. The
principal power of promoting men to place of Command lies with others; but you
may have a considerable influence by information and request. But it is surely
an ill Office to help forward the promotion of any vicious person, either to
Military Offices, or to Civil Power. It is a great wrong to any people to have
vicious men Set over them; the Setting up of vicious men in places of Power,
opens a door to abundance of iniquity; they will mightily increase the
Degeneracy of the Land. Let men learn to govern themselves, before they be set
to govern others: Honor is not seemly for a fool. Such men have more need to
be ruled than to rule. Such men have no need to be encouraged, but to be
discountenanced; holy and well carriaged men are more like to do Service. If
men have wit and understanding, yet they will do more hurt than good, if they
be vicious: their wit is an argument against their promotion, not for it; for
the more witty, the more mischievous. Labor to promote holy men, Psalm. 101.6.
Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the Land, that they may dwell with me,
He that walks in a perfect way, he shall Serve me.

FINIS.

