A BOMB thrown amongst the Quakers in Norwich, which will Reach their Friends
in Bristol, and set fire no the Combustible Matter through their whole Camp in
England, Wales and America.
Mr. Pit,
I Have not only seen your Book against Mr. Wright and considered the Weakness
of it, (to say no worse) but have been told by some Quakers, that when I was
left at Norwich, you sought me with design to dispute me in defense of
Quakerism, and it so (which I much question) this is to let you know, that I am
now at the George Inn in Norwich* And also, that on Condition the Quakers will
depute you under the hands of Six or more of them, promising to assent to, and
stand by your Defense of their Principles laid down in their Books, as their
Act and Deed. That I will then give you a Meeting. In order to which, let us
meet this Evening, or on Monday night next, to appoint time and place, and
adjust Preliminaries. The Charge I offer to prove upon them out of their Books
wrote by Fox, Whitehead, Penn, B^rrough, Smith, etc. their approved Authors,
that consist of these six particulars following, which if I make full proof of,
I hope you will grant that their Doctrine tends to subvert Christianity, viz.

First, By their contempt of Holy Scriptures, calling them Dust, Death,
Serpents Meat, Beastly Ware, an Idol etc. saying, it is the highest Blasphemy
to call them the Word of God.

Secondly, That they deny the ever Blessed Trinity, in a Blasphem^us as manner.

Thirdly, That they deny Jesus to be Christ, the Son of God.

Fourthly, That they neglect, contemn and deny the Sacred Ordinances of the
Gospel, namely, Baptism with Water, and the Supper with Bread and Wine.

Fifthly, That they undervalue the Death and Sufferings of our Savior, by
affirming their own Sufferings to be not only greater, but more unjust, than
the Sufferings of Christ, his Holy Apostles and Blessed Martyrs.

Sixthly, That they not only undervalue, utility and contemn the Holy
Scriptures, as abovesaid, but they overvalue their own Sayings and Writings,
as not only to be the Word of God, but also of greater Authority than the
Bible, which they say can in no sense be called the Word of God, which so to do
(say they) is the highest Blasphemy.

This is the Charge I propose to prove, and if you get a Deputation, as
abovesaid, let us meet and settle Terms for a Conference; but if they think you
not ^, acquaint them, that I will give any one of them a Meeting Publicly;
First settling Terms, appointing time and place Mutually.

I am your Friend, Francis Bugg.
October. 17. 1702 POSTSCRIPT.
AND now to John Fiddiman, Richard Asbby, etc. If you refuse to ^^pute Mr Pitts
to be your Apologi^, to defend your faith and principles, I then (...) to meet
other of you, or any other of your People, upon Terms we shall mutually agree
upon and to prove the within-written Charge upon you in the Six Particulars;
And thereby show, That when you pretend in your public Meetings to own Christ
Crucified, and faith in him, you do not mean what you speak, as Mr. Wright has
well observed, For your while Business is to deceive, and my Business in this
Affair is to undeceive the deceived. And I know of no better way to effect this
then to discover the Deceivers, according to the Doctrine of your Friend Tho
Ellwood.

I am your Friend, Francis Bugg.
October. 17. 1702 I sent a Copy of this to M. Pitts, and another copy to John
Fiddiman.





Here (...) a Brief Reply to Mr Pitt's Answer to the aforesaid Letter.
Mr. Pit, October. 20. 1702.
I Received yours of the 19th Instant, and perceive you are but a Novice in the
Principle of Quakerism except in that of Scurrility, which perhaps your
interest Leads you to; you tell us, that what you have affected in their
Vindication, is from the words of their approved Authors which is littel to the
purpose; for if that were sufficient, you may fi^ some Flashes here and there
which look Orthodox in the Work of Muggleton, or any other Books of the ancient
Heretics; my Charge seems to you (I perceive) ^; but if you search their
Books, said to be given forth from the Mouth of the Lord, and by the Movings of
the Eternal Spirit of God, which contain their Principles, if they have any,
you will find my Charge true upon them; but if they think I wrong them let them
appear, or depute you for their Champion; but their declining so to do, may
satisfy impartial ^, that they are self condemned, and sensible of the truth of
the Charge; if they be not, it would be then interest to appear and acquit
themselves; this they know they cannot do, and therefore dare not appear. I
shall not enlarge herein, at present but hereafter you may hear more when I can
learn to what People you belong; for if you be not a Deist, or Socinian I still
marvel you should Apologize for Quakering, which is the Sink of all Heresies;
and as the Protestaint Dissenters have well said, are thus chargeable viz. They
render (...) Holy Scriptures to be of no ^ Authority than AEsops Fables; That
the Blood of Christ is no better than the Blood of another Saint; That they are
no other than the Spawn if the Ranters; That they owning Jesus Christ as indeed
no other than a M^stical Romance; That the Tendency of all their reasoning
about Instituted Religion, is to Debauch Mankind; That their Principles
improved are distructive to all Human Society* That they are Cheats, Liars, and
impostors, and Implacable Enemies to the Christian Religion, as vile impostors
as even were, etc. See their Friend Tho: Ellwood's Book, Entitled, Forgery no
Christianity, etc p: ^7. by him Collected out of their Books, by him and
others, with much more of the same nature; see my Book VOX POPULI, etc. where
many of the like Charges are given by the Presbyterians, Independents and
Anabaptists; and if you be one of them first condemn your Brethren, and deny
their Works, and consequently them too, and then tell me what you are, for I
profess I cannot well tell, unless some Runagado, or Scabby Goat, setting your
self on the left hand. I am your friend, though I tell you the Truth

Francis Bugg.

A CAUTIONARY APPENDIX.
Having known by self-Experience, as well as by what mine eyes have been
touching the Danger of Hearing the Quakers speakers, who gild over their
poisonous Doctrine by many seeming Fair and Orthodox Pretenses* I cannot but
advice all to beware of their Leaven, knowing that what they declare touching
the Faith of Christ Crucified, they mean not a word of what they say, and my
advice shall be bottomed on Two Heads.

First, From Scripture Precept. Secondly, From Reason and Experience.
And First From Scripture, it is written in S. Mark's Gospel, chapter 4. v. 24.
Take head (said our savior) what you hear; this of it self ought to be not
only a caution, but a warning for us to be aware both what, and who we hear;
especially when he has fore told us, as in St. Matthew ^4. saying. v. 1^. Many
false prophets shall arise and deceive many, again, v. 24. There shall arise
false Christ's and false Prophets, ^^^^ing great Signs and Wonders, insomuch
that (if is were possible) they shall deceive the very Elect. And that the
Quakers are these very false Christ's, and false Prophets, foretold of by our
savior, is plain both from their Doctrine and Practice, and that in express
words; for they tell us, that the Name Jesus and Christ belong to every Member,
as well as to the Head, meaning as well to every believing Quaker, as to Christ
the head; and for a proof of this and other places in their Books, see my
Sle^ford Conference, etc. p. 119 to 156 where there is nigh forty instances of
the like Nature, all which may serve for a caution to take heed what we hear.

Secondly, From Reason and Experience.

First, Our Members of the Church of England have all the reason in the World,
to believe that our Religion is true, and founded upon the Divine Authority of
the H. Scriptures, of which it is needless for me to enlarge, since we have so
many Excellent Books, wrote by our Divines, Answering all Objections; As well
as by Law established; yet the Quakers tell us in Burrough's Epistle to Fox's
Great Mystery. That they deny our whole Religion, And that our Service Book,
bottomed on the Divine Authority of the Sacred Word of God, and established by
Act of Parliament, is Idolatrous, because we prey saying O Son of David have
mercy upon us. Nay, they will not join with us in any one Act of Devotion; for
let a Quaker and a Christian happen to Dine together, and if the Christian, as
in Duty bound, shall but say, Good Lord, Pardon all our sins, and Sanctify
these thy good Creatures to our use, and us to thy self and service, and all
for Jesus Christ's sake: The Quaker will sit with his hat on in Testimony
against this Known and Common Duty: and the Reason is Twofold, 1st, in that we
beg for pardon of our sins; 2ly, and that for Jesus Christ's sake; for they
say, we therein acknowledge our selves Sinners, which they cannot do; 3ly, We
pray and petition, and give Thanks, in the Name, and for the sake of a Dead
God, as in their Prophet Burrough's Books, p. 101. 518. Why then shall we hear
these Infidels?

Secondly, They tell us all that Preach Christ without, and bid people believe
in him as he is in Heaven above, are false Ministers, Witches Deviles,
Sodomites, Bloodhounds, Anti Christ's, etc. and thereupon will not for a World
come and hear one of them; Why then should we countenance their Heresy, so far
as to go and hear them?

Thirdly, They not only Testify with Hearts full of Indignation against our
Ministers, for thus Preaching, But they Testify against, Villify and contemn
the written Word of God, as Death, Dust, Serpents Meat, Beastly ware, as Idol,
etc. saying, it is the Highest Blasphemy to call them the Word of God; Why then
should we go to hear such implacable Enemies to the Christian Religion, taught
us by us our Blessed Savior, his Holy Prophets and Apostles, and practiced by
all Christian Churches; and now, thanks be to God, Established by Law.

Fourthly, And since the Quaker-Prophets have plainly declared in Print, their
Aversion to give Liberty of Conscience to the Episcopal Church; as in the Works
of R. Hubers^^^^, p 228. Edw Burrough's Works p. 635. Why should we so far
Countenance them as to hear their vain Bablings?

Fifthly, Nay, They Account us such abominable Idolaters, Heathens, and what
not* because we call the Scriptures the Word of God, the Sacraments of Baptism
and Lord's Supper, the Institutions of Christ, that they first Separate from
us, will not join in any act of Devotion with us; nay, they will neither Marry
nor Bury with us; And for this they give us the same Arguments St. Paul gave to
the Believing Gentiles at Corinth, 2 Cor. 6. 17. See their Book, F^^ites of
Retirement, etc Preface, to which I have replied in my Sheet. The Quaker's
Charm Discovered, etc. Why then shall we hear such as compare us to the Gentile
Idolaters, whom 6. Paul affirmed Sacrificed to Devils, and not to God; and
their Cup and Table was the Cup and Table of Devils; and he would not that the
believing Gentiles should have Fellowship with the Cup of Devils and Table of
Devils: And how frequent it is with the Quakers to charge our Communion Table
to be the Table of Devils, and the Cup we receive the Wine in the Cup of
Devils; how then can we, if we have but a spark of Zeal for our Holy Religion
which our which our Martyred Ancestors suffered in the Flames for) go and hear
such Blasphemous Wretches?

Sixthly, And for the like Reasons they account our Christian Kings,
Parliament, Judges, Justices, etc. Apostates, Spiritual Egyptians, etc. And if
they command a Fast to be kept, they will take no notice of it; make an Act of
Association, they will not Subscribe it, an Act of Abjuration they will not join
with us in it, nor hear Arms for the Defense of our Religion, Laws and
Liberties, No! their Consciences will not suffer them; while their pretense to
Conscience is every day more and more discovered to be made only their Stalking
Horse, for all their holy Cheats, their Irreligion, and downright Blasphemy;
why then should we hear such seditious Ringleaders?

Lastly, I cannot enlarge, but let them appear, pursuant to my Challenge and
all these things, and more I offer to prove upon them* you, and much more,
which I reserve to the next.

Francis Bugg.
T(...), October. ^^1. 170^. Since honest Francis is not here, to do this good
Office for Friends, they may please to take notice, That there is one John
Talbot at Burlington, who will do as much for them, or rather more, if they
desire it, at their next Yearly Meeting: He has got Friends Books, and Enemies
too; but let us not judge either till we hear and see what they say. God give
us Understanding in all things; So prays,

(...)




