THE Way for a People To Live Long in the Land that GOD Has given them.

A SERMON Preached before His Excellency, The GOVERNOR, the Honored Council
and Assembly of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, on the
26. of May 1703. At the Election of Her Majesty's Council there.

By Solomon Stoddard, A. M. And Pastor of Northampton.

BOSTON: Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, for Benj. Eliot, and are
to be Sold at his Shop under the West End of the Townhouse. 1703.

The Way for a People to Live Long in the Land that GOD has given them.
Exodus XX. 12. Honor thy Father and thy Mother: that thy days may be long
upon the Land, which the LORD thy God gives thee.
THE Moral Law was revealed unto men from the beginning of the World: it is
probable that God implanted the habitual knowledge thereof on the minds of Adam
and Eve: if so, this work was much of such a nature, as when God taught the
Apostles at once diverse Languages, that they had never Learned. This work
differs from two other ways of writing the Law on men's hearts: One is spoken of
Romans 12. 15. Which show the work of the Law written in their hearts. This is
nothing else but the giving of men natural Understandings and Consciences, able
to discern the difference between right and wrong. The other is spoken of, Jer.
31. 33. I will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their hearts.
The thing intended is that God would give them a disposition to keep his Laws.

In succeeding Ages God handed down the knowledge of his Laws partly by
immediate revelation, partly by the instruction of the Patriarchs, until the
time that the Children of Israel were come into the Wilderness of Sinai: at
that time God published the Ten Commandments both by word of Mouth, and also in
writing on two Tables of Stone. This Publication of the Law was attended with
many awful manifestations of the Majesty of God. There were thunders and
lightnings, and a thick Cloud, and the sound of a Trumpet, exceeding loud,
Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke, because the Lord descended upon it in
fire; and the smoke ascended like the smoke of a furnace, Exodus 19. 16, 18.

One ^^ason of this terrible appearance at the giving of the Law, was to
prepare the Children of Israel for the Observation of it. They were a rude and
untractable People, and needed such discoveries of the greatness of God, as
might make an abiding impression on their hearts, and dispose them to keep his
Commands: But there seems to be another reason of it; which is, that though the
Children of Israel were not under a Covenant of works, yet they were under a
Legal dispensation of the Covenant of Grace: this dispensation that they were
under did shadow forth a Covenant of works: and therefore Paul makes use of the
threatenings and promises of Moses, to set forth a Covenant of works, Gal. 3.
10, 12. And therefore he gives a representation here of the dreadful danger of
those that are under the Covenant of works.

This Law is divided into two Tables, the first respects duties of worship unto
God, the second duties of love to Man. These words contain the first
Commandment of the Second Table: where you may Consider, (1.) The Precept. (2.)
The Promise.

Quest. 1. Who are meant by Father and Mother?

A. Nextly natural Parents: But the words are not to be limited to them, they
are particularly instanced in: but all Superiors are comprehended; for other
Superiors are called Fathers in the Scripture: 2 King. 5. 13. 2 King. 2. 12.
And there is an honor due to them, which is required in this Commandment.

Quest. 2. What is the Honor here required?

A. That honor that their relation calls for. Reverence, Obedience,
Recompense, according to the nature of the Relation. Men must carry toward
Parents, Masters, Teachers, Magistrates, suitably to the honourableness of that
Station, which God has set them in.

Quest. 3. What is further employed by this Precept?

A. That Parents and all Superiors do carry so as to deserve Honor. That
Superiors do their duty to their Inferiors: as God don't allow a liberty to
Children to carry as they will to their Parents, so he does not allow Parents
to carry as they will to their Children. As he takes care of the Parent, so of
the Children.

Quest. 4. What is intended by the Promise?

A. 1. That Obedient Children shall have their lives lengthned out. This is
indefinitely promised. The Apostle does so explain it, Ephesians. 6. 2, 3. Besides it
is employed that they shall have such outward blessings as shall make their
lives comfortable.

2. That while the Rulers and People of Israel keep this Command, God would
preserve them in their own Land and bless them there: it was the manner of the
Babylonian Kings when they conquered a People, to transplant them, and carry
them into some other Countries. So the Ten Tribes, and afterward Judah were
carried into Captivity. But God promises, that while they keep this Command, it
shall not be so, but he will bless them in their own Land. This is evident
because the Law was not only given to them as a rule of Life to particular
Persons, but as the Condition of a public Covenant with the Church and
Commonwealth of Israel, Deuteronomy. 5. 2. The Lord our God made a Covenant with us
in Horeb. And God promises to bestow public blessings on them, in case this
Command be kept.

DOCT. The way for a People to be Preserved and Blessed of God, is for the
Public Rulers and the Ruled, to do their Duty to one another. It is a matter
of great concernment for a People to be blessed of God: and in this way God has
promised to bestow it upon them. Many of the Rulers of the World do neglect to
do their duty to their People; they are Tyrants, they are Oppressors, they are
Persecutors: and many People carry contrary to their Duty to their Rulers, they
are guilty of Seditions, Insurrections and Murmurings, and are otherwise
faulty, such carriages open a door to Ruin. But if the fifth Commandment be
kept the People will be kept. It is a difficult thing for Rulers, to carry as
they ought to the People, and there is difficulty in the Peoples carrying as
they ought to their Rulers, but there is great encouragement to do it, so long
as they do it God will preserve them. While Rulers and Ruled do their duty one
toward another, it is a sign of a considerable degree of Religion, and a
procuring cause of Prosperity. Their Observation of this Command will be their
preservation: it is not a matter of indifferency how Rulers carry to the
People, and how People carry to the Rulers, Gods blessing or cursing of the
Land does depend upon that. The abuses that are offered unto a People by their
Rulers, and the abuses that are offered unto the Rulers by the People are
deeply resented by God. But while Rulers and Ruled do attend their relative
duties, God will continue his relation to them, and be their defense; while
they keep this Command, they will keep their Land, their Lives will be long on
the Land which the Lord their God gives them.

Consider 1. God has appointed diverse Orders of men, both in the
Commonwealth, and in the Church.

1. He has appointed that in the Commonwealth, some should be Rulers, and
others Ruled. It is agreeable to the light of nature that it be so: if there
were an equality all things would run into confusion: if there were none to
Govern, there would be many to Tyrannize. If there were no Order among them,
there would quickly be intolerable disorder: Government is that which unites
and strengthens, and makes them move regularly: but the principal foundation of
Civil Power is divine Ordination, Romans 13. 1. The powers that be, are ordained
of God. The being of Rulers is not only by divine permission, but by divine
precept: Deuteronomy. 16. 18. Judges and Officers thou shall make thee in all thy
gates. Though the persons be appointed by man, yet their Authority is
established by God. The particular forms of Government are humane Ordinances;
God does not confine all Nations to one particular form, there may be diversity
in forms of Government, without any affront to God: the^e be several forms,
that have their conveniences and inconveniences, and if one be best, yet others
are allowed; that matter is lef^ to the appointment of men, 1 Pet. 2. 1^, 14.
Submit your selves (...) every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it
be to the King (...) Supreme, or unto Governors, as those that are sent by him.

2. God has appointed that in the Church, some should be Rulers and others
Ruled. A Church is an orde^^^ Society, like an Army, consisting of Rulers and
Ruled: as God ^ppointed Priests in the Jewish Church: so he has appointed
Offers in the Gospel Church. A Church is not a confused body of people, but
they are brought into order, and each one must observe his proper Station: It
is compared to a natural body, wherein there are diverse organs appointed to
their peculiar Services. 1 Cor. 12. 14. and seq. Ephesians. 4. 11. God has not only
appointed a Government in the Church as in the Commonwealth, but he has
appointed moreover what Officers shall be in the Church: the persons that shall
be Officers he leaves to the choice of men, according to general rules: But the
Offices themselves are appointed by God; and men may neither augment nor
diminish their power. Moses must do all things according to the pattern showed
him in the Mount.

Quest. What is the work of Rulers to the People?

A. 1. To do the work of their particular Office faithfully. The Government of
a People is not entirely in one hand; but it is distributed among many: Many
persons have an hand in the Government. Some are fixed in an higher Orb, and
some in a lower; some of them are Counselors, some Judges, some
Representatives, some Justices; and it is every ones duty to do the work of his
own Office. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. He said to the Judges, take heed what you do, for
ye Judge not for man, but for the Lord: and ver. 11. Amariah is over you in
matters of the Lord, and Zebadiah the Ruler of the House of Judah for all the
Kings matters. It is not the duty of one Ruler to fulfill the Office of another,
but every one is bound to attend the work of his own Office. They do not
discharge their duty by complaining one of another, but by fulfilling their own
work. Col. 4. 17. Say to Archippus, take heed to the Ministry that thou have
received of the Lord, that thou fulfill it.

2. To be good examples to the people. Rulers are Leaders, and their actions
are presidential. They may not pull down with one hand, what they build up with
the other: The practices of Rulers have a great influence as well as their
Laws; Rulers teach others as well by their Conversation, as by their Laws and
Sentences. Good Carriages in men of Public Place, do stir up others to
imitation; their good carriages make others fear to carry badly, and sometimes
to love to carry well; but if the head be ill, the whole body will be out of
order. The ill behavior of Rulers is greatly Infectious; bad examples in such
imbolden others to carry badly: bad examples in such draw and invite others to
carry badly; bad examples in such, are made an apology for others that carry
badly: Bad Carriages in such, make them to lose much of their Authority.

Quest. What is the Duty of People to their Rulers?

A. 1. To submit to their Government. The people must not Overruled their
Rulers. 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake. Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your
selves: People must submit to the Laws and Orders of Rulers, they must submit
to the Sentences of Rulers, they must submit to the Taxations of Rulers: all
Disobedience and Seditious Practices are contrary to the duty of the people:
Sheba was a Rebel, when he said, To your Tents O Israel. Dathan and Abiram were
Rebels, when they said, We will not come up. Numb. 16. 12. When Corah and his
Company gathered themselves against Moses and Aaron, they took too much upon
them, Ye take too much upon you, ye Sons of Levi, Numb. 16. 7.

2. To Assist and Encourage them. They must strengthen their hearts, and
strengthen their hands; they must assist them with their prayers, that they may
obtain help from God for them: they must assist by information; wickedness may
quickly overrun a Land, if the people are not careful to inform Rulers; they
must assist them with their Purses, they must support the Government, and when
there is need they must assist them by force; a spirit to desert Rulers, and a
spirit to murmur against them, are very repugnant to the duty of the people.
Take here two Cautions.

1. There be other sins that bring Calamity beside the miscarriages of Rulers
and Ruled about their mutual duties: the Condition of the Covenant is universal
Obedience unto the Commands of God. So that if Rulers and Ruled do attend their
relative duties, yet upon the account of other transgressions, God may bring
Judgments. Let Rulers and Ruled carry never so well to one another, that is no
security to the Land that they shall have no Calamity: all ^isible Disobedience
does expose unto the Judgment of God: a People have no liberty to break any of
the Commandments of God without punishment. Gods Covenant gives no toleration
of sin, Deuteronomy. 6. 25. It shall be our righteousness, if we observe to do all
these Commandments. If a People manifest a spirit of Pride, or Worldliness, or
Unbelief, they lay themselves open to Judgment.

2. Lesser failings of Rulers and Ruled about relative duties will not bring
ruin upon a People. Gods way is to proportion his dispensations to the
carriages of his People: though the prosperity of a People does much depend
upon the keeping of the fifth Commandment, yet there may be some lesser
failures in this matter and yet a People continue to be a prosperous People,
Psa. 130. 3. If thou Lord should mark iniquity, O Lord who could stand? There
may be some Obedience to the fifth Commandment, yet a People be very miserable:
there may be some disobedience to it, and yet a People be very happy. There
were failings in the days of Asa, Jehoshaphat and Hezekiah, yet Judah enjoyed
much of Gods presence: lesser defects will not make a breach between God and
his People.

The Reasons of the Doctrine.

While Rulers and Ruled do their duty to one another the Covenant will be kept
as to the substance of it: if they keep the fifth Commandment, they will keep
every one of the Commandments: the fifth Command is an hedge about the rest.
Let Rulers and Ruled do their duty one to another, and that will keep them
from all sorts of heinous transgressions against the first or second Table of
the Law: if Rulers be remiss in their work, that Opens a door to a world of
Wickedness, iniquity will break in like a flood upon a People: as when there
was no King in Israel, every one did what was right in his own eyes: or if the
People be headstrong and will not submit to Government; they will quickly cast
off the Government of God and take a Licentious liberty: but so long as
Government is duly managed by Rulers and submitted to by the People, the
substance of the Covenant will be kept.

1. Much Sin will be prevented. The making of good Laws and Orders, and
faithful administration of Justice, prevents abundance of iniquity: the
punishing of One transgression may prevent an hundred transgressions. If
transgressions were not punished, men would be bold to commit iniquity; the
great design of humane punishments is the prevention of sin: that Israel may
hear and fear and do no more so wickedly. Abundance of men would carry badly
if they durst: Rulers are a terror to evil works, Romans 13. 3. So the faithful
Preaching of the word is a great means to prevent iniquity: it awakens the
sparks of light that are in the Consciences of men: it stirs up a principle of
Grace where it is: and a principle of natural Conscience where there is no
Grace. Rulers have Opportunity many ways to discountenance sin; and thereby to
give a check to men's corruptions: the holding the reins of Government strait,
bridles men in and restrains them from much evil.

2. Much of that Sin, which is committed by particular Persons, will not be
imputed to the Land. Under the best Government, many times there will be a
breaking out of sin, though Rulers and People do what they can to prevent it,
yet particular persons will be guilty of flagitious crimes. But if the People
do their duty to inform Rulers, and Rulers theirs in bearing a due testimony
against them* these are not the sins of the Land; God don't charge these sins
upon the Country: the Country is not guilty of the Crimes of particular
Persons, unless they make themselves guilty; if they countenance them, or
connive at them, they make themselves guilty by participation: But when they
are duly witnessed against, they bring no public guilt. Deuteronomy. 13. 5. So shall
thou put away evil from the midst of thee.

U S E. 1. See hence that it is matter of great concernment to a Land to have
Godly men, to be Rulers in the Commonwealth and in the Church. Holiness alone
will not sit men for place of power, but yet it is a very necessary
qualification: Holiness is no insignificant quality in a Ruler, neither is it a
mere Ornament to a Ruler: but it is needful to the welfare of a People, Exodus
18. 21. Thou shall provide out of all the People able men such as fear God.
Rulers need to be Godly for the Salvation of their own Souls, Rulers need to be
Godly for the welfare of the People that are under them. It must be
acknowledged that Persons that are not truly Godly, may be Serviceable in a
public Office: but other qualifications do no better supply the want of
holiness, than a wooden Sword does supply the want of a Sword of Steel.
Godliness is a more durable principle: moral qualifications may wear out in
time: if men's corruptions are but chained up, they may be set at liberty again:
if the unclean spirit be gone out of a man, yet it may return again: Godliness
is of more universal use, then other qualifications. Respect to reputation and
a desire to please the People, may help in some particular cases, but Godliness
does more directly and universally, stir up Rulers to do their duty: Godliness
will preserve Rulers from running into both extremes: Godliness does more
powerfully prevail to make them do their duty, then other qualifications:
Godliness will prevail over such temptations, as will prevail over other
qualifications: Godliness urges men to their duty upon higher considerations,
than other qualifications do: Godly men will not be easily flattered, nor
easily frighted out of their duty: Godliness makes Rulers to be like Solomon's
brazen Pillars, which he called Jachin and Boaz: Godliness is powerful to
excite to duty; powerful to vanquish temptation: Godliness is more powerful to
persuade than any Rhetoric, more powerful than the entreaties of friends:
Godliness makes men rule their own spirits; it overrules fears, it overrules
carnal desires, carnal hopes, carnal passions. The work of a Ruler us to carry
holily in his place; and holiness is needful to make him carry holily. He that
rules over men must be just, ruling in the ^ear of God, 2 Samuel 23. 3.

Especially it is needful they should be holy upon these three accounts.

1. That they may advance and promote Religion. It is the duty of Rulers not to
tolerate Religion only, but to encourage and advance it; and holy men will be
the best friends to Religion. Holiness makes men love Religion; Holiness makes
men hate that which is contrary to Religion: a great part of holiness lies in
Religion: if men be Godly they will be Enemies to Heresy, Superstition and
Profaneness. Godliness will make men concerned for the interest of Religion:
Godliness will make men zealous for the truths of God, and zealous for the
Worship of God; if men be godly, they will be careful that God ^e honored,
they will be careful that means be used to make men godly, and to comfort those
that are godly. Religious Principles, and Religious Practices suit a godly
heart. Others may advance Religion for vain glory, from fear, from the workings
of natural conscience; these will do it out of love: Such men will be Nursing
Fathers to the Church. Those men that fear God, will promote the fear of God in
the Land. If Saul do something to advance the Worship of God, David will do
more; if Jehu do something, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah will do more. Jehu had
a mind that Jonadab should see his zeal for the Lord, but all Israel might
plainly see that he wanted zeal for the Lord.

2. Holiness is needful, that Rulers may suppress sinful practices. The Angel
of the Church of Ephesus could not bear them that were evil. If men be indeed
Godly, they will be afraid of the Judgments of God, because of the sins of the
Land, and labor to suppress them. Holy Rulers will be reforming Rulers, Holy
Rulers will be no Enemies to Reformation: Holy men will not be indifferent
about Reformation; they will be careful to prevent sin, and faithful to punish
sin: that which is contrary to holiness, is contrary to the spirit of holy men:
Holiness will make men careful to find out what is provoking to God, and
careful to suppress it. Holy men look upon sinful practices not only a
dishonor to God, but the very things that do undermine the peace and Welfare
of the Land: The Corruptions of a people are like diseases in the natural body;
and holy Rulers, like careful Physicians, will labor after a cure. Holiness in
Rulers makes them to be men of zeal, and men of courage for the suppressing of
sin. Job. 31. 34. Did I fear a great multitude, or did the contempt of families
terrify me, that I kept silence, and went not out of the door.

3. Holiness is needful, that men may do that which is just between man and
man. When there is no temptation, unholy men may do that which is just; but
when there is temptation, holiness is a great help to justice. Some men favor
the Plantiff, to bring griss to their mill; but holy men will look on Plantiff
and Defendant indifferently: Holiness teaches men to shake their hands from
holding of bribes: Holiness makes men act like Levi, who did not acknowledge
his Brethren, nor know his own Children. Deuteronomy. 33. 9. Friendship draws love,
Greatness stirs up fear, Poverty stirs up compassion, and these affections are
snares: but holiness will deliver men from them, they will rule justly that
rule in the fear of God, 2 Samuel 23. 3.

USE. II. See from hence what Dispensations to expect from the Hand of God. We
have had a great deal of sorrow, some that are not very Young may say, as,
Psalm. 90.9. All our days are passed away in thy wrath; and we could be glad to
sp^^d the rest of our days in prosperity: But we may judge how it will be for
the time to come, by the carriage of Rulers and Ruled toward one another: if
they do their duty one to another, God will preserve and bless the Land; if
they neglect it, they do it at their peril. If Rulers do not their duty, God
will plead the cause of the people; if the people do not their duty, God will
plead the cause of the Rulers; if neither Rulers nor Ruled do their duty, God
will vindicate the Rule.

1. If Rulers be careless in promoting Religion and Morality, God will punish
the Land. Rulers are to be keepers of both tables; and as they must practice
Religion and Morality themselves, so they must take care that the people do it;
they must use all proper means, for the suppression of Heresy, Profaneness and
Superstition and other Corruptions in Worship; it was the great commendation of
Hezekiah, Josiah, and Nehemiah that they were careful in this matter; sometimes
Rulers through ignorance do countenance such Doctrines, and Worship, as are
cross unto the Word of God; sometimes their hearts are so taken up about other
concernments and enjoyments, that they neglect the promoting of Religion;
sometimes they want zeal in the cause of God, and choose rather to live quietly,
then to be at the trouble to rectify such things as are amiss; so though
something be done for the redressing of moral evils, yet not so much as might
and ought to be: So if Ministers in their places are slighty, and don't lay out
themselves according to expectation, for the promoting of Piety and Morality:
this is a matter of controversy. The houses that Solomon built for Ashteroth
and Chemosh, brought his own house out of repair. Jeroboam set up golden
calves, but God broke his Family to pieces, with a rod of Iron. Nor only the
Idolatry of Ahaz and Menasseh, but the Luke warmness of Amaziah and Uzziah were
nauseous unto God. The carelessness of Gallio in the matter of Religion, and
the double diligence of the Pharisees for the Traditions of their Fathers, were
both offensive unto God. Breaches of the first Table shall be punished: Hos. 8.
14. Israel has forgotten his Maker and builds Temples; but I will send a
fire upon his Cities and it shall devour the Palaces thereof. And breaches of
the second Table shall be punished: Hos. 9. 9. They have corrupted themselves
as in the days of Gibeah, therefore will he remember their iniquity and visit
their sin.

2. If People be headstrong and will not be reclaimed by suitable means, that
will bring Judgment. Aaron says to Moses, thou know this People, that they
be set on mischief. Sometimes a People are grown so untractable, that good
Preaching, and the ordinary course of Justice will not restrain them from their
sins. Hos. 5. ^ They will not frame their doings to turn unto the Lord, the
spirit of Whoredoms is in the midst of them. Sometimes a People are so tainted
with corrupt affections, that let Rulers do their uttermost, their is no
keeping them in Order: Josh. 24. 19. Joshua said unto the People, ye cannot
serve the Lord. Sometimes the body Politic is full of bad humors, that all
its Physicians are not able to perserve it in an healthy estate. God sent many
Prophets to Israel, but they made their hearts like an Adamant: the Sons of
Zerujah were too strong for David. Sometimes the iniquities of a Land rise up
like a flood, and men will not bear to be restrained; then God whets his
glittering Sword and his hand takes hold of Judgment; Numb. 24. 3. Israel
joined him to Baal Peor: v. 9. Those that dyed of the Plague were Twenty and
four thousand.

USE. III. Hence see that great care should be taken of the Education of such
as are designed for Public Service. Indeed great care should be taken of the
Education of all Young persons, but especially of such as are to be Leaders in
Church or Commonwealth: It was a great advantage to the Sons of the Prophets,
that Samuel was appointed over them, and that in aftertimes, they were under
the Tuition of Elijah and Elisha. The College has been a great blessing to the
Country, and if due care be taken it may be so still. Indeed no Education is
sufficient without Gods blessing; but however great care should be taken, that
such persons may have a good foundation of Learning; so likewise that they be
not tainted with any Heterodoxies, and that their hearts may be seasoned with
the fear of God. Places of Learning should not be Places of Riot and Pride:
ways of profuseness and prodigality in such a Society, lay a foundation of a
great deal of sorrow; fond and proud Parents should not be suffered to
introduce evil customs; it is not worth the while for persons to be sent to the
College to learn to Complement men, and Court Women; they should be sent
thither to prepare them for Public Service, and had need be under the
oversight of wise and holy men. We read in the 1 Samuel 19. 20. Of the Prophets
Prophesying, and of Samuels standing as appointed over them.

If there be not due care taken, one of these two things are like to follow:
Either,

1. That persons will not be improved in Public Service, after Parents have
been at great expense to bring them up. It is an heavy thing to many Parents to
bestow Accademical Education on their Children, and as it is ordered, it is a
great deal heavier than it needs to be; the whole Family is fain to pinch that
they may go through with it: And it is a great disappointment, when after all,
the person is laid aside as unworthy of improvement; the Money might have been
spent to far greater advantage, in another way: But this is a private calamity,
the next is public.

2. Or else persons will be improved that are tainted with evil habits. I
readily grant, that what Errors soever there be in the way of men's Education,
God may in Sovereign mercy preserve some from being tainted, and recover others
that are tainted. But if due care be not taken of the Education of such, it is
without question, that many will be improved, that are tainted with ill
properties. Churches must take up with such as they can get, that that is
wanting cannot be numbered: And some men by interest and religious shows, will
get into improvement, that are not very fit for it, this will prove an undoing
thing unto the Land. Pride and loose carriages in such persons, will be as
infectious as the Plague. I know there are difficulties in the way of Settling
the College, but it were better for the Country to wade through them at the
first opportunity, than to expose our selves to those Calamities, that may come
upon us, for want of a good Settlement.

U S E. IV. Of Exhortation, To Rulers and Ruled, to do your Duty to One
another. You profess a desire of the Prosperity and Happiness of the Country:
and we have reason to desire it especially upon these two Account; One is,
because we are the Lords People: A People planted in this Wilderness upon the
Account of Religion, and have been signally owned by God, and had many tokens
of his presence. The other is, the Interest that we have in the Land: for our
Own sake and the sake of our Children, our Kindred and our Acquaintance. We
have reason to desire its Welfare. David says, For my Brethren and Companions
sake I will say, Peace be within thee, Psalm. 122. 8. Joab makes use of these
two Arguments, 2 Samuel 10. 12. Let us play the men for our People and the Cities
of our God. Let us upon these two Considerations seek the Prosperity of the
Country. And in Order to it, Let Rulers and Ruled do their duty one toward
another. There may be many ways of Prudence proposed, to advance the Wealth and
Safety of the Land, but this is a special means to promote our Happiness: L^^
the fifth Command be kept, and your Lives will be long in the Land which the
Lord our God gives you.

Particularly 1. To Rulers in the Commonwealth. Let me direct my Speech to
Your EXCELLENCY, the Honored COUNCIL, and the rest of the Gentlemen of the
General Assembly, together with others who hear a part in the Government; Do
Your Duty to the People. And suffer me to remember you of a few Rules.

1. Be good Examples. You must be Examples of Piety, Humility, Sobriety,
Chastity, and all virtuous carriages. Good Examples teach men their duty, good
examples stir up those sparks of light that are in the Consciences of other
men, good examples provoke to emulation; and it is especially needful for
Rulers to give good examples. Holiness in Rulers is like a precious stone set
in gold, their Dignity sets it off with greater luster: Holy Carriages in
Rulers make the people honor them; they cannot but honor such in their hearts:
Holy Carriages in Rulers make the people fear them: Holy Carriages in Rulers
have a magnetic virtue to draw others to do the like. People will follow their
example, that they may be like them, and that they may be liked by them. When
Rulers give good examples, men cannot make their carriages to be an argument
for the lawfulness of their sinful ways; they cannot take occasion from their
carriages to be bold to sin. Good Examples in Rulers bring good carriages into
credit and into fashion: Good Examples in Rulers are a comfort and confirmation
to them that are good, and a bridle to them that are evil: Holy Examples in
Rulers prevent their reproach; when others carry badly, men cannot say their
Rulers harden them; when men commend you for your skill and knowledge, they
will have no occasion to say, what pity is it, that you don't carry well; when
you punish other men, they cannot say, you have more need to look at home.

2. In promoting men to Place of Power, have a special respect to Godliness.
You don't certainly know who are Godly, but you must be careful to promote
those that appear to be such: Godliness alone is not a sufficient qualification
for rule, but it is one principal thing to be respected. If Wealth alone would
fit men for Rule, Nabal would have been a fit man; if Parentage alone would fit
men, the Sons of Samuel would have been very suitable persons. Men that are of
loose Conversation are not fit for the honor of Government: Honor is not
seemly for a fool. Those men are not to be advanced to Place, that are not fit
to do the work of their place: Artificers make use of such tools as are proper
for their work: They that break Laws are not fit to be trusted with the
Execution of Laws. Men had need be careful into whose hands they put the Sword
of Justice, men that cannot rule themselves, are not fit to rule others; it is
well for the World, that he that has the Supreme Power over all, is Holy and
Righteous; and it would be better for the World than it is, if Inferior Rulers
were all like him. Rulers are called Gods, and it is pity that they that are
like him in Power, are not like him in Holiness also. 2 Samuel 23. 3. He that
Rules over men, must be just, Ruling in the Fear of God. If Good men be so
scarce in the Country, that there is a necessity of Choosing bad men to place
of Rule, the condition of the Land is to be lamented.

3. Do not lay unnecessary burdens on the People, yet be willing to Expend what
is necessary. When People are put to unnecessary charge, they are Oppressed,
and when they are Oppressed they are abused: it is directly contrary to the
Office of Rulers, to lay heavy burdens on the People: One great part of their
Office is to redress the Injuries of others: a People are in a bad condition,
when they that should be Bullwarks to them to preserve them from the Injurious
carriages of others, are Pillaging of them themselves: When their Shepherds
prove like Evening Wolves. If the Country were Richer than it is, yet it were
an abuse to put them to unnecessary charge: But yet you may not decline any
necessary Expense: What is necessary for the safety of the Land must be laid
out. The Commonwealth of Carthage and the Empire of Constantinople, were lost
through the Penuriousness of the People. So what is needful for the Support of
the Government must be laid out. I judge a Governor may live more happily
here, though his Maintenance be not altogether so great than in any other of
the English Plantations in America, because of the advantage of good Society
and Spiritual Opportunities; yet it is very fit that the Governor should be
Honorably Supported. The GOVERNOR'S work is Great and his Power is Great, and
his Encouragement should be proportionable: it would be a Temptation to most
men, to have a great Title, if their income did not hold some proportion. Men
spend a great deal for their own honor; more than half of many men's Expenses
is for their honor; men spend a great deal that they may have honorable
Houses, honorable Household Stuff, have honorable Apparel, keep ^n honorable
Table, etc; and it is very meet that in Maintaining the Governor, they should
have a respect to the honor of the QUEEN, and the honor of the Country. The
managing of the Government with Fidelity and Wisdom, does so much conduce to
the Welfare of the People, that they may well afford a Liberal Maintenance as
a reward of it. Let not the Governor fare the worse, for being Born and Bred
among us. I hope that will be done, that will cut off all Occasions of
jealousy, and manifest a Spirit of hearty Love, and oblige unto reciprocal acts
of love.

4. Labor that such things as are Provoking to God may be Reformed. God has
had a great Controversy with the Country for many years; the Judgments of God
have diminished the Country, and have impoverished the Country. I do judge that
a third part of that income, that the Country has had or might with an ordinary
blessing have had, these Forty years, has been taken away by the Judgments of
God. There is therefore great need that you should Labor in the Work of
Reformation. Labor then to Reform the Profaneness, the Pride, and Sensuality of
the Land: there have been several attempts that way, but they have had a
miscarrying Womb. Attempts for Reformation, have been like attempts to find the
Philosophers Stone. Indeed it is a matter of great difficulty to bring the
Country to Reformation. We are much to seek what should be Reformed: Sinful
practices have not only got power over men's Affections, but over their
Understandings also. That which some count Sinful others count indifferent;
that which some count Sinful others count Duty: there is a mist before the eyes
of men: men put darkness for light and light for darkness, Isa. 5. 20. It is
pretty much with us as it was in Corinth, where every one ^^d a (...), had a
Doctrine, had a Tongue, had a Revelation, had an Interpretation, 1 Cor. 14. 26.
Yea many men's carnal interests, lead them to oppose Reformation. Some men make
a gain of the Sins of the Land. Yea many People are very dull to advance
Reformation; it is a troublesome work and attended with a great deal of
Temptation: but yet there is a necessity of Reforming in order to our Peace
with God. Keeping a Fast Day now and then will not serve the turn: Reformation
is the condition of the Public Covenant between God and the Land; and it is,
your Duty to lead in it: it is not enough to Wish for it and Pray for it, but
you must improve your Power that way. It was said to Ezra, Ezra 10. 4. Arise
for this matter appertains unto thee. So I must say to you: You may do a
great deal to bring the Country to an outward conformity; and if you cannot
effect so much as you would, you may undoubtedly effect that which is
considerable: the People of the Land are not so Stubborn, but that if Rulers
would heartily join, they might prevail much, but if you should not, God would
say of you as of David in another Case, 2 Chronicles. 6. 8. Thou did well in that
it was in thy heart.

2. To the Ministers.

1. Labor after the Saving Conversion of men. The People among whom we live
are already Converted to the Profession of the Gospel: Labor after their
sincere Conversion. It is to be lamented that many men are grown ignorant of
the doctrine of Regeneration. Some take Baptism for Regeneration, some think
that men may be Regenerate, without any antecedent Preparation. It must be your
principal care to help forward men's Regeneration. Regeneration is necessary to
Salvation, Joh. 3. 3. Restraining Grace is not sufficient in order to eternal
life; yea there must be a good measure of inward Piety, in order to the
reforming of the Land: if there be not, a people may Reform in a pang, but they
will return to their vomit again. Psalm. 78. 37. They were not steadfast in his
Covenant: if they do reform some particular sin in an abiding way, as the Jews
did, the sin of Idolatry, after the Babylonish Captivity, yet there will not be
a general Reformation without it. If there be not a pretty deal of real Piety
in the Land, neither regard to reputation, nor the safety of their Souls will
make them carry well: if the Country should have many Judgments, that would not
bring an Unconverted People unto Reformation, Judgments will sooner destroy the
Bodies of men and the Estates of men, then their Lusts; it is an easier matter
to break the bones of men, then the hearts of men. Pharaoh had ten Plagues, but
they did not cure him of the Plague of his heart. Yea if the Country should
Covenant to walk in Gods ways, yet they would not do it. The People were
forward to Promise in Moses's time, but God said, O that there were such an
heart in them, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. They were forward to Promise in Joshua's time, but
he tells them, they cannot serve the Lord, Josh. 24. 19. Unless God give a new
heart, the Co^^try will not reform, Ezekiel. 36. 26, 27. Therefore labor in this
matter, by warning, directing, searching them, that they may savingly turn unto
the Lord.

2. Don't take up Principles upon trust. The Judgment of wise men is a probable
argument, and all sorts of men, when it makes for them, do make use of it: but
we may not depend upon the judgment of men; it is not sufficient to prove a
thing to be a sin, to be lawful, to be a duty that men say so. Some are apt to
depend upon the judgment of men, under a notion that they are Wise and Learned:
some under a notion that they have much of the presence of God: But we may not
depend upon the judgments of men that are Dead, neither may we depend upon the
judgments of men that are alive; we may not depend upon the judgment of single
men, neither may we depend upon the judgment of Societies of men. There are two
ways that men depend upon the judgments of men, One is when they espouse an
opinion because men are of that judgment, that is the preponderating
consideration, and that which over-ballances that which is said against it:
they have little to say for it, others have much to say against it, but this
turns the Scale with them, that such men say so. There be many men that cannot
tell how to take pains to search the Scripture, that is a matter of labor and
difficulty to search out the truth, and they had rather take things upon trust.
The other is when men espouse an Opinion, because others judge it is the
meaning of such and such Scriptures; some men think they do not depend upon the
judgment of men, but upon the word of God; and they can allege ten Scriptures
for their Opinion. If they did know that to be the meaning of the Scripture,
they would say true, but it may be they don't know that to be the meaning of
one of those Scriptures: but they depend upon men's interpretation of them; and
the meaning of them is utterly perverted: we must take no Principles upon trust
from men, Isa. 8. 17. To the Law and to the Testimony. It cost the young
Prophet dear that he took a liberty upon trust from the Old Prophet of Bethel,
I King. 13. 23, 24.

3. Don't comply with the Vanity and Luxury of the Age. We live in a corrupt
age, and multitudes of men take a licentious liberty, in their Drinking and
Apparel, and Company, and Recreations, and Unsavory Discourses; and Ministers
living in an infectious air, are in danger to be infected also, and they and
their Families are ready to be carried away with the dissimulation: this proves
a great temptation; sometimes it works upon the Minister, makes him to wave
discourses about those things; and if he do bear a Testimony against such
things, the People lay little weight upon it, they think it is spoken
diciscausa, the Minister can coin some distinction to vindicate himself, but
the People cannot understand it: if the Minister take too much liberty, the
People will take more, many of them will venture farther than he, let him
venture as far as he dare: if the People judge his practice warrantable, they
will imitate it, if unwarrantable they will be scandalized: 1 Timothy 4. 3. Be
thou an example to the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in
spirit, in faith, in purity.

4. Keep the Worship of God pure. Confine your selves to that Worship and those
Ordinances, that God has instituted: Men's additions will not perfect Gods
institutions: all additions to instituted Worship are Corruptions. When men
take upon them to add to the worship of God, it may be said to them, who gave
you this Authority: God don't leave it to the wit of man to devise ways of
worship: it is not fit that such Power should be put into the hands of men, as
to appoint what worship God shall be contented with and accept: Men in taking
such power, take upon them to rule God. Will Worship is corrupt Worship. Col.
2. 23. Moses was not allowed to vary an hairs breadth from the institution.
Heb. 8. 5. that is a condemnation of any thing in Worship, that it is devised
by men, 1 King. 12. 33. He offered in the month which he devised of his own
heart. No man is able to bless any Ordinance to the good of men's Souls. One
great end of ordinances is men's Spiritual Edification: And it is great boldness
for men to appoint God in what way he shall give forth spiritual blessings:
Yea, God will not bless, but will blast the inventions of men: Mat. 15. 9. In
vain do they worship me, teaching for doctrines the commandments of men. All
additions of men's invention, do defile and take away much of the Efficacy of
Ordinances.

3. To the People: Carry to your Rulers according to your Duty.

1. Don't murmur against them. The Children of Israel often fell into this sin,
and they smarted for it. 1 Cor. 10. 10. Neither Murmur you as some of them
murmured, and were destroyed of the Destroyer. Moses and Aaron were as good
Leaders as a people could desire, yet they could not escape the scourge of the
tongue: then men murmur against Leaders when they complain of them without
cause* though they think with Jonah, that they do well to be angry. Sometimes
they complain of Rulers, when there are necessary burdens laid upon them, and
sometimes when they have not success, though Rulers are not in fault: so they
murmur when they complain more than they have reason to do; when they aggravate
the failings and mistakes of Rulers beyond measure: they murmur also, when in
their complaints, they talk rudely and rebelliously: these murmurings are the
froth of a discontented spirit; Murmurers are like the raging Sea, that casts
forth mire and dirt: Murmuring weakens the hands of Rulers, is a preparation
for Sedition, and a degree of Rebellion: Murmurers pretend to be great
sufferers, but be sure, they are great Sinners: These are murmurers,
complainers, walking after their own lusts, Jude 16. Men that murmur against
their Rulers, show an unruly and ungoverned spirit. When men murmur against
their Rulers, it is no wonder if God plead for them by his Judgments, if Rulers
miss it, it is better to tell them humbly of it, and to bewail it before God,
then to make a noise and uproar about it, inflaming one another spirits.

2. Assist your Rulers. It is impossible for Rulers to keep a people in order
without their help: the Rulers are but few in comparison, and the Ends of
Government will never be answered without the assistance of the People.
Military Officers may as easily vanquish Enemies without the assistance of
their Soldiers, as Rulers in the Commonwealth can keep a people in order
without their help; he says to Ezra, We also will be with thee, be of good
courage and do it, Ezra 10. 4. There are two ways in special, wherein the
people are to assist their Rulers: One is, by Governing their own families
well; if Family Government be neglected, a people will grow wicked,
notwithstanding the faithful endeavors of public Rulers: Good Government in
Families does much facilitate the work of Public Rulers; if Families be not
well Governed, a Country will be filled with wickedness. If Children be not
taught at home, they will not profit much by public teaching; if they be not
well governed at home, the burden of Rulers will be intolerable: Errors in the
first concoction, will not be mended in the second; if we have rude families,
we shall have a rude Country: but if persons be well trained up in families,
Public Rulers will not have so much trouble with them. Prove. 22. 6. Train up a
Child in the way he should go, and when he is old, he will not depart from it.
Another way of assisting Rulers, is by informing of such miscarriages as Rulers
must witness against. Sometimes people are very backward to do their duty that
way; in ordinary cases if they can bring Offenders to repentance privately,
they do their duty; but they neither do that, nor make those in Authority
acquainted with it; they are unconcerned about the honor of God, and
reformation of the Land, they are loath to anger men, cannot abide to give
themselves trouble; are afraid that others will complain of them, and so they
neglect their duty. Abundance of wickedness, Swearing, Drunkenness, and Sin
goes unpunished, because people neglect to give information to Rulers: Some
things are secret because men cannot inform; these do not bring guilt upon the
Land: Other things are secret, because men will not inform.

3. Be not causelessly jealous of your Rulers. Some men pretend to be wiser than
others, and they throw out hints of bad designs, and many times those things
will spread like a grangreen among the people; one would think they were
troubled with the spleen, and overrun with melancholy: If they would set
their reason on work, they might free themselves from such jealousies. If a man
will suspect that the Stars will fall, who can hinder him: but men do ill when
they give way to such a spirit. 1 Cor. 13. 5. Charity thinks no evil:
Causeless jealousies are injurious; such things are a great provocation to men
of honest intention; sometimes they do exasperate, and sometimes they do
discourage the hearts of Rulers: by such practices, people throw themselves
into temptation, they disturb their own spirits, and make themselves uneasy
under the Government. So if people entertain jealousies of their Ministers,
that they design to introduce corruptions in the Churches, they will grow
troublesome and vexatious: it is an ill spirit when men's actions are fair to
accuse them of bad designs; they act the part of Sanballat, faining things out
of their own hearts, Neh. 6. 8.

USE. V. It is a great mercy when God does prepare the hearts of Rulers and
Ruled to do their duty to one another. If they do their duty, they will prevent
many Judgments, if they do not; they will bring Judgment. Therefore it is a
great mercy, when God does prepare them to do their duty; if they be not
prepared to do their duty, they will not do it; there will fall out a multitude
of occasions, to make them neglect their duty. If they be told of their duty,
and urged to do it, yet they will not do it; if they be not prepared to do it:
if they suffer much for the neglect of their duty, they will not do it, if
their hearts be not prepared. If the hearts of a people be prepared, they will
do their duty, though it be attended with much difficulty. So in Hezekiahs
time, They cleansed the house of God suddenly, and offered up many oblations,
because God had prepared the People, 2 Chronicles. 29. 36. So if God prepares the
hearts of Rulers and Ruled to do their duty to one another, they will do it.

There are two ways especially by which God does prepare them to do their duty.

1. (...) giving tender Consciences unto them. There is a twofold tenderness
of Conscience; there is a legal tenderness of Conscience from the illumination
of men's natural Consciences, whereby they are afraid to do any thing that may
bring down the wrath of God. And there is a gracious tenderness of Conscience,
from the Sanctification of the heart, whereby men are not only afraid of
Judgment, but of doing any thing that will be a dishonor unto God: Both of
these are useful, especially the latter: and the more there is of it the better
it is: this makes men afraid to do any thing that they know to be sinful; this
makes men afraid to do any thing that they suspect to be sinful; a tender
Conscience is a spur to stir men up to their duty, and as a bridle to restrain
men from evil. If the Consciences of Rulers be tender, that will help them
against all sorts of temptation: if they have provocation, yet they will not
dare to neglect their duty. Joseph had been provoked by his Brethren, but he
says to them, Fear not I will nourish you and your little ones, and he
comforted them and spoke kindly to them, Genesis 50. 21. If they have opportunity
to make a prey of other persons, they wont do it. Job would not lift up his
hand against the Fatherless, when he saw his help in the gate; for destruction
from God was a terror to him, Job 31. 21, 23. If their Consciences be tender
they will do their duty, though they expose themselves to danger. Job 31. 34.
Did I fear a great multitude, or did the contempt of families terrify me. A
tender Conscience will make them to be nursing Fathers to the Church: if their
Consciences be tender, they will be sensible of the wrath of God against the
Country, and strive after Reformation. So it was with Josiah: His heart was
tender and he did humble himself before God, when he heard his words against
that place, 2 Chronicles. 34. 27. So if the people have tender Consciences, they
will be prepared to do their duty to their Rulers; if their Consciences be
hardened, and there comes a suitable temptation, they wont regard to give that
honor to Rulers that they owe to them. Israel in the wilderness oftentimes
affronted Moses and Aaron: they will talk extravagantly and act rebelliously,
and have more regard to their own will, than to Gods Laws; there is no security
that a People that do not fear God, will carry well to their Rulers: but if
their Consciences be tender, they will have a tender care to do their duty to
their Rulers; if their Consciences be tender, they will check them for any
thing that is contrary to that reverence and obedience, that they owe to their
Rulers. David's heart smote him because he had cut off Saul's skirt, 1 Samuel 24.
5. If their Consciences be tender, the words of God will be like goads
quickening them to their duty: Levi feared God and was afraid before his name,
Mal. 2. 5. And that made him attend the command of Moses.

2. By making them drink in good Principles. A tender Conscience misguided may
run a man into great miscarriages; if men be under mistakes and judge that
lawful which is unlawful, that gives them a liberty to sin; if they judge that
duty which is sinful, their Consciences will urge them to commit iniquity: but
if their Consciences be tender and their Judgments rightly informed, they will
then attend their duty, tender Consciences will make them design their duty,
and good Principles will preserve them from mistaking it. A man that is well
disposed, may under one specious pretense or other be led into abundance of
transgression: but if he be well principled that will keep him in a right way,
Psalm. 119. 104. Through thy Precepts I get understanding, therefore I hate
every false way. There be many bad Principles that men drink* in respecting
matters of Morality. Some run into one extreme, and they judge ways of
Licentiousness lawful, they have lost a pretty deal of the light of nature, and
cannot distinguish between good and evil. Some run into the other extreme, and
make strick rules for themselves and others that God never made. Many men have
bad Principles respecting the Worship of God: some allow too much to the
authority of men: and some allow too much to the judgments of men; as if they
were in their Nonage or Dotage, that they don't know to choose the good and
refuse the evil: Some have bad Principles respecting the Relative duties of
Rulers and Ruled. Such things open a door to much transgression: there are many
ways whereby persons come to be ill Principled: some by their Conversation with
men of bad Principles; some by hearkening to the voice of carnal affections;
some by being too tenacious of old Traditions; some by being given to change.
We should attend the light of Nature, search the Scriptures, and beg the
teachings of the Spirit of God. If men of tender Consciences were well
Principled, they would carry well: if Paul had not been under a mistake, he
would not have Persecuted the Church; if David had not been under a mistake, he
would not have put the Ark into a Cart: if the Church at Jerusalem had not been
under a mistake, they would not have contended with Peter, for eating with
those that were Uncircumcised, Act. 11. 2, 3. If Rulers have tender
Consciences, and be convinced of their duty to the People, they will carefully
attend it; and if the People have tender Consciences, and be convinced of their
duty to their Rulers, they will carefully attend it; and so your Lives will be
Long in the Land which the LORD your GOD has given you.

FINIS.

