Daniel Leeds. Justly Rebuked for abusing WILLIAM PENN AND HIS FOLLY and
FALIS-HOODS Contained in his two Printed Chalenges to CALEB PUSEY made
Manifest; With some remarks also by way of Rebuke on the Author of the Book
called News of a Strumpet.

Psalms 56.5. Every day they Wrest my Words: all their thoughts are against me
for evil.

Ps: 21.11. They Imagined a mischievous device, which they are not able to
perform.

Ps: 64.5. They encourage themselves in an evil matter: verse, 6. They search
out iniquities; they accomplish a diligent search.

Printed at Philadelphia by REYNIER JANSEN 1702.

THE PREFACE
Friendly Reader.
AS I hope, upon thy Serious consideration, thou (...) not take it amiss, that
we have at this time, and in this manner appeared, against G. K. especially,
considering the Fresh occasion he has given us, since his (...) Arivall in
America; some Relation of which appears in this following Book, so also thou
art Seriously desired to consider, whether it does not necessarily behove G. K.
as he would approve himself, not only to be a Man of Pen; but also a Man Sound
in Judgment, to prove himself consistant with himself, in and about diverse
Principles of Christianity, acknowledged by himself to be Fundamentalls,
concerning which he is hereby plainly proved, to ly under great variations,
Inconsistances, and Confusions; I say, does it not behove him so to prove
himself, inste^d of his thus Disturbing us, (or others in our peaceable
Religious Assembly^, or otherwise, since he that T^^ches another, ought
certainly first to Teach himself. And now as to the difference between our
Friends, and G. K. here, begun by him, about eleven or twelve Years ago; it was
chiefly about that of the universal necessity of the Faith and knowledge of
Christ's outward Death and Suffering, in order to Salvation; for though he begun
at that time, to Pick up such Sentences and passages, out of our Friends works,
^s by S^^aining and perverting, he thought he could render Odious to the
People; and also to catch at some weak, unadvised, and unwarrantable
Expressions, from here and there an unweary Person, about other matters, (and
disapproved by our Friends, on all occasions^ yet that about the universal
necessity of Faith in Christ without us, was confessed by himself, several
times in Print, to be the main matter of Controversy with our Friends here, as
in the following book is shown: and he charged (...) that time, several
Friends, with such words, as I have heard them (...) to be in her (...). And
indeed, the first (...) him (...) with (...) Friends, was about this (...) in a
Private Meeting at P^ph^^, in the year 169^. (...) and (...) he vehe^^^tly,
P^^^t the universal necessary (...) this manner viz Says he, I deny him to be
a (...) of C^^^st, who does not in the Course of his Ministry, (...) without
us; Ri^en again without us; Ascen^^^^ Is^^^n without us; and not only so (...)
he); but that the (...) and knowledge of Christ's Sufferings etc. without us,
(...) Univers^^y (...) di^^ensibly necessary, to all and every one, in (...) to
out in E^^nall ^^fe, and Salvation; and yet said he, I say, if an honest Indian
o^ H^athen etc. do but live Faithful to the Light within him, he could not
miss of Salvation. And I found in a Book of his, Printed but a little before,
where he says of such, they could not perish, though they I (...) in that ^at.
Se Re^u^^ (...) pa. 40. This made me I must Confess begin to admire, what the
Man was all of a Sad (...) so hard driving at; for thought I, it such Gentiles
could not perish, though they Dyed without that Faith and knowledge of Christ in
the outward, and yet could not ^e Saved, without they had that Faith and
knowledge; where then must they have it, in order to save them? But quickly
upon this, there was an honest Friend, and then a late Intimate of G. K's told
me, G. K's Notions of the twelve Revolutions of Humane Souls: And that
according to those Notions, those Faithful Gentiles, as also Infants, born
Idiots etc. should some time or other live again, by being born in other
Bodies, in some place of this World, where they may have the Gospel expressly
Preached to them, in order to perfect their Salvation: These things of so long
standing, I speak not as trusting only to Memory; for I committed them quickly
to writing, to prevent mistakes, through shortness of Memory. And hearing also,
that G. K. had been deeply Concerned, in Writing a Book of 200 Queries,
concerning those twelve Revolutions. I got a sight of it, and soon found, that
his above method of Doctrine Exactly, Coresponded with the said Revolution
Notions, as also did diverse Passages though some of them Coucht in several of
his Books, than lately Printed against some in New England and Rhoad Island; in
which I ^ound, that he then held, that the [Express] Faith and knowledge of
Christ without etc. was absolutely, and Indespensibly necessary, to the
perfecting of me ^s Salvation: And hearing, that that Revolution Book was (...)
in the year 81 or thereabouts, I searched what Books I could get, of all he had
published, from that time to the time of his differing here with us: And I
think, I found scarce one; but had more or less, some Expression dropped, or at
least Co^ch^, which really seemed to depend upon those Revolution Notions; but
most plain, as the time came, or drew near, to his suffering with our Friends
here.

And now, since in pa. 25. 26. of this book, I gave a relation of some concern
betwixt G. K. and an other Person, about the Revolutions, James Coper Cloth
worker of Darby, did many years ago give it, and more of his Strange Nations
under his hand and is ready to give more (yet upon occasion) of his Whim^ies,
that he was then (...) with, as he is now ^^gg with Inveterate Hatred, and
Persecuting Enmity, against his old Friends, who seeing, and being sensible of
his Spirit in time, could not humor him, upon which he grew so disorderly and
ungovernable in the Church, that our Friends saw a necessity of disowning him
as a Minister of the Peacable Gospel among us.

And whereas, in this book pa. 8 there is mention made of G. K's Couching the
Revolution Notions, In several ^^eks; but for brevitys sake, did not insert
them there, being Pl^^^y of the said books, the Country, yet least some may be
des^^^ous to ^e something of it who cannot get the books, I shall the (...)
however insert one or two Pass^^es, not ^etracted, that I think, must needs
make his Revolution Notions, speak out plain enough, to show, how deep he has
Prank those Notio^s in.

Object. But he says, he could never Justly own himself to be the Author of
that Book, for others were concerned pa. ^.

Ans. I know not who ever Charged him to be the whole Author; but for him to
say, others were concerned, Implys, he was concerned as well as others.

Ob. But he says, those Books, (meaning those, where (...) him about the
Revolutions), they were generally approved as, (...) Friends of the Ministry
Anti. and S^duce. pa. 9.

Ans. But he does not say, they were all so aproved, however we Read in J^de 9.
There were some, who were not Right that Crept in at unawares, Mark, at
[unawares]; and it was told by the Apostle Peter: that there should be false
Teachers, who would Privet^^y bring in Damnable Heri^ies etc. So that is no new
thing.

And now, whereas, there are in the said Revolution Book, many of the Queries,
that really seem to be as Texts, to save all Passages in some books, afterward
writ by him, as above; I shall therefore, before I cite the Passages, lay down
one of them, that it may be seen, how close he keeps his Doctrine to the Text,
it is the 37. query, and the words are these, (viz.) seeing Christ said, that
this Gospel of his Kingdom,should be Preached to all the World, for a witness
against them; is it not evident, that all the World, that is every Man that is
born into the World, from the First to the Last, must have that very Gospel of
the Kingdom, in which Mention is made, of the Woman's Pouring Ointment on his
Body, Preached unto them, as well [Outwardly] as inwardly, before it can be made
a witness against them; compare Math. 24.14. with Math. 26.13. Thus much as to
the Text: Now let us se G. K's Doctrine, as agreeable thereto, Pretended
Antidote pa. 105. Where speaking of the meaning, (...) Extant of Christ's
words, where he Commands his Gospel to be Preached to all Nations, and of his
saying, so it shall be before the End; he says, as his meaning upon those
Texts, thus; The Gospel that began to be Preached, from Adams Fall Immediately,
shall be Preached to all Men, that Ever lived in the World: some time or other,
before the End of the World; so that such as shall not Live in the latter Ages
of the World, have had it Preached in the former Ages when they Lived in the
World

And therefore, (says he) the Preaching of the Gospel to all the World; is
the Preaching of it, to all Mankind, that ever Lived, and shall Love in the
World, in all Ages, from the beginning to the End etc. Thus far G. K. in pa.
104. 105. Pretend. Antidote. pa. 107. Speaking of the like matter, he says (as
a Scripture Proof) Else how is the Gospel Preached to every Creature; and how
is Christ's Command to be fulfilled, that he has given to his faithful
Apostles, and to their Faithful Successors, in all Ages? And how is the
Prophecy of Christ fullfilled, that so it shall be before the End? etc. From
all which the Reader may observe, that as the above cited Revolution Text
explains the above mentioned Commands of Christ, to Preach the Gospel to all
Nations etc.) to mean, that it shall be Preached to all Mankind that Ever lived,
or shall live in the World, so does G. K's Doctrine too: And as that Text, by
saying, it shall be so Universally Preached; not only Inwardly, but also
OUTWARDLY, Implys, that it shall be so Preached by the Apostles, o^ their
Successors; so does G. K's Doctrine too: But how the Apostles, or their
Successors should Preach the Gospel to that part of Mankind, that have
hitherto dyed without it, as Infants, Heathens, Deaf and Dumb Persons etc.
unless they come again, according to the Revolution Doctrine, I think it might
beh^ve G. K. to make out if he can; since he says, he is of the same Faith, as
he has been above this ^0 years, Exact Narrati^^s pa. 20.

CALEB PUSEY.

Friendly READER,
IT is surely a certain truth, that the Church of CHRIST, (...) because of the
many Adversaries and (...) she has to encounter (...), before it can be truly
said of her, her warfare is accomplished etc. For (...), her members have many
inward enemies, many inward butterrings* as well as many inward temptations and
allurements; and accordingly it is truly said, a man's greatest enemies are
those of his own house: and as man's Soul's e^^^ty was never wanting to suite
his temptations according to the natural inclinations of men in general; so ^e
was, and also is at this (...) no less industrious to ensure assault and
overcome the members of Christ's Church^ particular; some whereof, for want of
watchfulness, he has caused in all ages to stumble and fall; and although evil
minded men have taken occasion thereby to vaunt and cry, Abe, Ab^; yet it would
be good for them to consider, that, unless they repent, their own Judgment
lingers no^, (...) their condemnation ^^umbers not. And in the day of account
all those false suggestions against us, and particularly those in the preface
to the book called News of a Strumpet; (viz:) that we deny our selves to be
fallible or deceiveable etc. and the pretense therein made, for denying us the
common privilege of mankind on that score, will not abide the test of gods
righteous and just Tribunal; (...) as much as God the searcher of all hearts
knows, that from the beginning he has caused by his light and grace the people
called QUAKERS to see their own exceeding great weak^esses, infirmities, and
failings, through a true sight and sense of which they have still professed and
owned themselves to be both fallible and deceiveable; and therefore have they
in^^^santly made it their business to provoke and stir up one another to hear
and to fear, to watch and to pray, as assuredly (...) that without which, and
without the assistance of Gods Holy Spirit, which they pray for, they can no
wa^es be (...) from falling under, and into Temptation; nor are indeed (...)
secure than other men; notwithstanding the (...) adversaries in their straining
of our Principles about perfection and their misconstruing some of our friends
writings (...) ^^^allibility and discerning: and although thousands should
(...) on the right hand, and ten thousands on the left; yet that should be no
reason now, any more than of ^old, to discourage or hinder others from keeping
straight on in the way of the Lord their God^: and whereas the Strumpet-Author
says in his title page. (viz.) nothing can be written, but something may be
objected against it. And* That Is true (Else, how could D. L. in his page: 71
have objected against a passage writ by G: W: (viz.) where G: W* says "We
prefer the holy Scriptures above all the ^ooks extant in the World; But
because he did not there name the Book called the Bible expressly. Therefore D:
L: in^inua^es that he did not mean the BIBLE; but that he carried a double face
to deceive his Reader; Nevertheless as when things are truly written, nothing
can be truly objected against the truth thereof; so, if the said Strumpet
Author, did but dare to show his head, he might possibly be told and showed
that he has written things of our Friends, very unjustly and thereby has
basely aabused honest men among the m^in particular and numb^^^ them with the
guilty; as well as that he has abused the Quakers in general although indeed
by this his doing and then concealing his name (...) ^^^^ing of the (...) the
Serpent, (...) nothing of the (...) but whereas he in^inuates that we called
(...) that is not so it is true in as much as D: L: would (...) meddling and
^^^^ing our Society with having (...) among them; it was but reasonable that to
clear the (...) a so have named the guilty, otherwise every innocent member
(...) as guilty; but first as this was not calling for (...) thing; so 2dly,
what was said, was ^o D. L. the (...) to no body; For so I call this nameless
Strumpet: (...) though some matters of fact mentioned by the Strumpet, were not
true; yet they were not all done about Delaware that D. L. spoke of; neither
did D. L. speak of any other, but of late (...) but this Strumpet has not only
brought examples of above (...) years standing; but also has extended his
ropes to pull some of them as far as from Rhoad Island, Maryland; yea, and
(...) Old-England to: but lastly, however, methinks, he should make no Pretense
whatsoever for abuising honest men, as he has done: and now this
Strumpet-author in his page 19. seems to suspect we will reflect on him for
taking up dir^; well in as much as nothing short of turning scavenger has
served him, let him not blame us, if we reflect on him for being partial, and
not trusty in his office; for a Scavenger ought to go through the streets and
take up the dirt, where found, at every door; but instead of doing that, and
instead of taking up the dirt that lies, (...) is generaly suffered to lie at
the doors of other protest Christians (...) moved and possibly much unreproved,
he la^es his dirty ^a^e only at the door of the Quakers; though the dirt, to
wit, such as was the actions of J: M: T: T: H: J. and that about Keyes-Boat,
with other condemnable practices, that have been found to have lain there, have
been by themselves removed, and the parties concerned proceeded against by
Church Di^cipline, as in such cases under the Gospel, is required, long before
this Scavenger appeared with his dirty ^ake to heap it up; and so the poor Man
therein has lost his labor; but, pray, what is all this labor for? What is
all this exceeding partiality and inve^eracy against us for? But to render
honest men odious by (...) bring them with the guilty: and would this Strumpets
innocently but defend him* now he has done this, from being (...) to show his
(...); but come forth, and defend what he has done, and prove to us, that
there lies at our doors unremoved such aforesaid black dirty stuff, as he
charges us with, and that he has writ nothing there against us, but what is
true he might then be the more excused for appearing with (...) (...) us; but
on the other hand, we shall expect thou (...) that when, we have proved, that
he has brought dirt from his own Channel (to wit, (...) his own evil heart)
and laid it at (...), endeavoring thereby to make the world believe we are
chargeable with what we are not; I say, then we shall expect (...) he should
own and confess he has abused us, and it (...) this come forth and show
himself, we might think i^ ^o nothing more worth ou^ while. ^o make a more
strict and (...) into those dirty ma^^e^s many of (...) unjustly (...) at the
doors of several persons among (...) in particular; as also at the Quakers door
in general; but (...) shall one say? such lying i^ wa^ for haltings, and such
inv^te^^^e ^atr^d ^^o^n evil (...) have been the (...) of good People in all
ages: And (...) man gives a (...) i^: wi^d. ch^p 2. (viz: (...) they were
grievou^ unto him ever (...) behold: and for that his life (...) men's and (...)
of another f^^ion; (...)) let us (...) the righteous: (...) ^^ng the Law (...)
which leads me to have the (...) and come to speak (...) thing of another way
and manner the (...) had (...) has to try and (...) the professors of Truth
with, which has (...) up his instruments pri^ts and others to prove the (...)
which they have lived (...) is (...) that was born (...) Ba^ist^^^ts
Confiscations of goods and (...) by (...) how also some for want of (...) of he
(...) and the ease the (...) ^ook Paul for^ook the^ (...) they (...) truth:
Another (...) again the (...) had: and still has, which is to cause some who
(...) to be of the Church of Christ, (...) up from (...) of speaking perverse
things; (...) and that as many formerly (...) done, (the wit) (...) but (...)
those sorts (...), though (...) of their profession* as also to the exercise
and (...) of the (...) have stood faithfully; yet those (...) who have been
truly penitent, have (...) against and by deep humility and repentance have
found mercy wit^ the Lord for his (...) who (...) others (...) the evil men
(...) old have (...) by their (...) have (...) and (...) enemy (...) the
Christians, that Julian the (...) as to (...) past and also in this Age in
which the (...) gathered and drawn (...) people to worship (...) spirit and in
truth; diverse have risen up (...) thereof to oppose the progress of (...) this
(...) now concerned (...) one who in his (...) against out Friend (...)
grievously to abuse (...) them and then works as (...) be seen in my book (...)
is being (...) of ^n answer so his News of a Trumpet etc. we began not (...)
with us endeavoring by his many abuses and (...) in the way of the weak; our
part has been defensive, in o^de^ to remove those stumbling blocks (...) the
way: and now among the rest of his abuses he has strangely (...) accusation
against W. P. and falsely accuses him with (...) particular (...) as a great
abuse: Next he (...) ^^per called a challenge to (...) which (...) freedom to
^^^ly (...) and (...) better in (...), and (...) it by (...) (...) instead of
his (...) had (...) threatening (...) he sends (...) which he (...) and (...)
put out a fresh challenge (...) to that purpose but under (...) he could think
(...) with the challenge and Letters are hereafter (...) book on (...) has
packed out the (...) against him; the publishing whereof must (...) more
ganerally to show whether D. L. has (...) matter or not, more than the
greatest dis^^^ would do, and (...) he has taken to (...) to Answer his
challenge (...) for him now to be c^ntent to take an Answer in as public a
manner as he has given his challenge and charge. -- (...) of the following
discourse I have laid down by (...) ^^tion, ^uestion and Answer ^aking it (...)
I may in a more familiar manner clearly set forth those things I have
undertaken to speak to; and so in that method I shall proceed having first laid
down his first (...) challe^^^^ (...) large, which is as follows. --

A Challenge to Caleb Pusey^, (...) and Forge^^es, etc. (...)
I It Is three years since I published a Book called, (...) ^et etc. which has
(...) and ^all'd the (...) vile Errors and Heresies further disco^^^ (...) some
Consultations there has been among (...) bring forth an Answer, which
accordingly, (...) and at last have met with a right. Scurril^^^ (...) (...)
Caleb Pusey, Satan's Harb^ger by Title wherein he preten^^ (...) there a bit of
my said Book: (...) with silence; and what he (...) place^ (...) my Sentences
to pieces, (...) of the (...) to make me speak (...) had of G. Fox.] to render
me ^dio^^ To prove this, I Will (...) pa^^age, (...) very first Quotation he
brings of (...) where he le^ves out these Words* According to wh^^ was made
manifest to them and so makes it spe^^ as he (...) has a (...) a wind. B^^, he
^^^ing sucked such Wickedness from he fo^^d (...) of their Religion, he cannot
leave it (...) he ceases to be a (...).

For great part of those confused sayings which I quote he sends me to a
Quakers Book for an answer, viz. to G. K 's. Books while he was one (...) them.
Alas poor man! is the Quakers ca^se so (...) he is forced to support it with
one Quakers Book to help ^^other, which duly considered, no ways helps him
^^^th^r. I have ^^read above half his Pamphlet, yet meet with between (...) and
forty Lies, Perversions, Forgeries, etc. Lies of all sorts double and single;
in order to prove this I Will not (...) his Book neither, but take that one
Passage, that he quotes in his Pref^^^ where he charges me of shamefully
al^^^ng a saying of (...). Penn in (...) Sandy Foundation, p. 20 There ^e denis
that (...) W. Penn (...) Christ, as man The finite impotent Creature.

This I charge on Caleb Pusey as a Lie; Nay, it is (...) for he (...) W. P.
(...) ^t of us sinners; whereas the ou^^^^ly (...) that W. P. 's there (...) is
Jesus Christ as the (...) son in the (...) ca^^s. The finite Impotent Creature^
and deneis him to have satisfied the offended infinite Ju^tice (...) ^ther for
(...) sin, for that (...) Books of W. P (...) People that (...) the Book for
that purpose to discover the baseness of (...) Caleb Pusey.

(...) admire (...) W. Penn (...) and (...) should (...) so deeply (...) Power
to (...) prevented it; certainly if he believes (...) give account of his
Steward^hip to Almighty God ^he (...) believes this thing ^ill rise in Judgment
against him which is p^^^^sely (...) to deceive and delude poor ignorant
People. (...) C. Pusey I have ^ore son to expect better fruits from him ^or he
is (...) honest in Morals, he unjustly with holds par of in Estate from the
Executor of Thomas Cross; but be it known to him (...) force him so (...) be
honest provided his ^^rethren are no Judges in the case. However he is a fit
Tool in ^erve the Q^akers (...) be the ^ye and abuse men without shame. But to
the neither.

Let this one passage in his Preface, which he (...) Crime against me [by
repeating it diverse times over and over in (...) Book, and calls it an
abo^i^able L^e] he the (...) and (...) of Trial between us in the case, and to
try the rest of (...) stuff in his Book. Therefore I here challenge him in the
face of the World to let us choose four six or more ^ud^rious Men to judge of
this Passage, and if they find wrong and he right, I Will be bound to print what
sort of Con^emnation Caleb Pusey shall assign. But if they find me right and he
wrong, he shall be (...) to print what Condemntation I shall assign him.

Now with this Mill^stone, through Gods ^^^^stance, will I grind this Miller
and by this Token it (...) be known to the World that his case is Naught, that
he makes Lies the Quakers Refuge, (...) not refer it to any but his own Party
who are his encouraggers in this wicked Work, and at whose Charge he prints and
not at his own for New Rome has a Public Stock to carry on her under ground
Designs (...) is otherwise with (...), I must (...) (...) ^^^efore till (...),
my Challenge, this is (...) to give (...). Mean tim, (...) by divine Providence
in England, (...) has been Reprinted and (...) for the (...) my (...) in
De^^ance of (...) of his (...) which will prevail (...) those (...) Conquered.

Daniel Leeds.

(...) perceive by the foregoing discourse, I may expect an (...) said
challenge relating to D. L. charging W: P: with calling the Man-Christ, the
finite, impotent creature, by w^^t (...); But why say thou to some other
matter of his challenge as first where he speaks, as i^ his the (...) Quakers
(...) errors and heresies has vexed and gall^d (...)?

An^: That Is merely begging the question, he not having prov^^ what they hold
any vile errors and heresies; nor that what he writ (...) vexed o^ g^^^ed them.

Obj: (...) he saves there was some consultations among you how to bring (...)
answer.

An^: As to that, I know of none; and there being so many (...) ^^is^^oods and
^^urri^^es (...) in the said Trumpet, and the Author so notoriously known to
most people her^ away, (...) for ^^y part (...) Friends here (speaking
generally) (...) the notice of (...) care to answer, as of any book that (...)
came (...); neither was what I writ, the effect of any consultation about it*

Obj* Well* but he (...), thou ^eaps ver 4, 5, or 6. pages at (...) to answer
here (...) a ^itt.

(...) was sufficient to (...) o^ manifest his great abuses of our Friends; and
(...) did not answer other parts of his book (...) not many of (...) quoted, by
me to examine them by his quotations; and I sufficiently showed, I had no
reason to credit them (as from him) without trial and examination.

Obj. But he says, that what thou speaks to in many places* thou tears his
Sentences to p^e^es etc. The true Method of G. Fox etc. And leaves out these
words [according to what was manifest to them.]

Ans. I shall pass by his proofless reflections upon that good and heavenly
minded man G. F. and now tell D. L. that unless he had shown wherein those
words I left out, would have given him any relief, if I had added them, I look
upon his Objection but merely frivolous, and I know no relief it would have
given him; for whereas, he says it is his real belief that Quakers at first
came forth in life and power and made a good beginning; now, that it was but
according to what was made manifest unto them; surely all sensible people will
take it for granted; for Good men in all ages came forth in life and power, no
further than what was manifest to them; this is therefore surely a poor cavil;
but how his citing this one place should prove my tearing his Sentences to
pieces in many places as he speaks of, he will be harder put to make out, than
the passage' it self proves him to have committed a great blunder, for how
could his citing this one place prove me guilty in many places.

Obj. But he speaks, as if then sends him to G. K's. books (whilst a Quaker)
for answer.

Ans. I do not remember, neither has he showed me one place that I have
undertook to answer him, in which I have not used sound arguments prove him in
the wrong, and our Friends in the right, besides what I cited of G. K's. books;
and my often citing G. K's. books was chiefly by way of arguing Ad h^minem, and
to show his great partiality in pretending he would have taken in G: K's. books
equal with our Friends; but that he has retracted etc: as aforesaid; whereas
those of G: K's. passages which I cited, as agreeable to those D. L. cited of
our Friends, was not retracted by him; and therefore w^ren I cited G. K. I
often used these words [not retracted] as is to be seen in diverse places o^ my
Book; and therefore often (...) upon D. L. to be impartial, o^ the like, see
page 12. 14. and 17 etc. As for G: K's writings, they are still his, being not
retracted; and why might not I make use of them against himself or his Friends:
did not Paul make use of the Heathen Poets Doctrine, (...) 17: 28. to prove
that in God we lived, moved and had our being; also did not be make use of
un^^dy vain talkers and deceivers to prove the Cr^tians liars etc. When he
said, one of themselves, even a Prophet of their own said, the Cretians are
always liars etc* (...). ^.10.12.

Qu^: B^t what say (...). Lies he says (...) in reading about (...) thy
books?

Ans: As I know of none; so he has proved none, and I (...) he charge.

O^j: (...) to prove it, he says; he will take but one passage in thy (...).

Ans: (...) help his blundering here neither, how can th^^ o^e passage in my
preface prove me guilty of Thirty or Forty (...) in my book O^trange
infatuation!

Obj: But he (...) thou adds that W. P. meant the words, FINITE IMPOTENT
CREATURE of us sinners; And this he calls a double lie.

An^: (...) question not, but I shall prove it less than a single one by and by.

Obj: But he sai^s, the only subject W. P. there treats upon, was Jesus Christ,
as he is the second person in the Trinity etc.

Ans: That Is not so; the chief and only subject W: P: there treated upon was
against impossibility of Gods pardoning sins upon repentance, without a plenary
satisfaction made by Christ the second person etc. as will be seen hereafter.

Obj. But D. L. admires that W. P. should countenance such (...).

Ans: (...) has no need to be touched or concerned at what D. L. faith of him
in the matter, knowing himself who^^^ innocent as to what he charges him with;
and he absolutely, denies his infamous and false accusation, and says it is a
horrid abuse upon him.

Obj: Well, but he taxed thee for with holding part an Estate belonging to the
Executor of Tomas Cross, and that he can for^^ thee thus far to be honest etc.

Ans: I suppose by this, as well as by what I have formerly heard, that D. L.
himself is one of the Executors; now, as I am not satisfied I owe the Estate of
Tomas Cross any thing; so neither has D. L. at any time, either by word or
writing, demanded any thing of me: Thomas Cross and I had formerly, many years
concern of business and dealings together; and from the first true of our being
concerned to the day of his Death, I do not remember that ever we differed
about our accounts or payments; and had he been living himself, I do think he
would have disdained to have thus deal^ by me: what, accuse a man of being
dishonest, and unjustly withholding part of an Estate, and yet never ask him
for it, nor discourse him, about it, this surely shows his invete^^te and
disigenuous aptness to take Poor mean, and pitiful advantages to b^ s^atter
those he differs with; but what shall I say? As is the man; so is his manner of
treatment; however, as I think I formerly told his then Nighbou^ George Deacon
that there was a matter that had long been in susp^^^ betwixt Tomas Cross, on
the Account of his deceased Son, my self, and another person; so know tell D.
L. that, for ought I know, it lies ^n suspense still, and notwithstanding his
(...), yet if he or any on his Account come to me or meet me, at any time at
Philadelphia I shall be ready to inform and assist him, as to that B^siness and
I presume, no man can inform better than my self: and if it can be made out
that there is any thing due from me to the Executor o^ Tomas Cross; as I have
always been, so I shall be ready to pay it to any person legally authorized to
recei^e (...)

Ques: But what say thou to the substance of his challenge where he says,
(...) us cause Four, Six or more judicious persons to Judge whether WILLIAM
PENN called the man Christ, the FINITE IMPOTENT CREATURE?

Ans: About a Weeks time after I received his said challenge, I writ this
following Letter. (viz;)

Philadelphia the 6th. 8th. month 1701.
Daniel Leeds, Though I much more prefer peace above controversy; Yet in
consideration of thy particular charge against me as a Liar; and also that the
truth and the matter about which thou take so much occasion to traduce me,
may be cleared, I do hereby let thee know that I accept of thy challenge to
me, in thy Pamphlet, Entitled a Challenge to Caleb Pusey etc. And am ready (by
Gods assistance) to meet thee at Philadelphia, or rather than fail, at
Burlington at any time within Ten-dayes from the date hereof in de^en^ of W. P.
against thy infamous and blasphemous charge of his calling the Man Christ the
Finite Impotent Creature, about which it is, thou have so much traduced me: the
appointing the day within the said Tenn-dayes; as also which of the above
places we shall meet at, I leave to thy self to appoint, And desire thy answer
to the whole by this bearer, who am thy abused Friend.

CALEB PUSEY.


^^est: What was D. L's answer?

Ans: Why, after all this Goliah-like; boasting and his threatening to grind me
with that Millstone, as he terms his Challenge; and that by it, it shall be
known, that my case is naught; and that I dare not refer to any but my own
Party etc. I say after all this great vaunting I taking him up, he sends me
back this following Letter (viz.) --

Little Egg-harbour October the 12. 1701.
Caleb Pusey, In answer to what thou have sent me I retu^n this, I did order a
Challenge to be printed (...) August wa^ (...) (viz) (...) August 1700. I then
^^^lling a^ ^^^^aware, convenient to have taken thee up; but if it, or
something else instead thereof, be Printed, I have not seen it nor so much as
heard of any thing printed in my name now; but I cannot blame thee, but the
Printer for that; however what I have written I will stand to; and cannot but
admire at thy confident impudence, who after thy many lies and abuses in thy
book besides, that thou should insist upon that passage of W. P. and that only
too I suppose for that you have a mind to kidnap me; that would be brave sport
for you having the power and command of Prisons in your own hands; yea in both
Provinces, if I mistake not: Be it known to thee I will first have some ground
to believe thou meanest what thou writest to me, and also be secure in person,
before I will so fool my self to follow an idle piece of Paper subscribed CALEB
PUSEY. If I should so do, not only you, but those you call the World would
laugh me to scorn who am thy Abused Friend.

DANIEL LEEDS.
Pray excuse the sense if it be not well penned; for the Messenger was in such
haste, that I had not time to consider, as well as to write.




Quest: Well, what think thou by all this?

Ans. What do I think: I think the old Proverb is much verified in D. L. (to
wit) the hellow ^ub makes the greatest sound; and the stick that makes the
greatest Crack soonest breaks; for, as for his formerly dwelling at Delaware,
what is that to the purpose? if he had not been desirous his vaunting challenge
should have come abroad, because of his going to Egg-h^rbour; why did he not
stop the Printing of it? a thing I do not find, he (...) much (...) pretends
to: I question not, but his Printing it, was upon a presumption, that I would
not take him up.

Obj: But he says he supposes you have a mind to kidnap him.

Ans: Truly notably thought on; but had I been in his place, and the messenger
in such ^aste as he said, I think I must have stayed his longer than he was
willing to have staid, before I should have found out such a trivolous, and
altogether groundless excuse; though possibly the guilt of his Conscience for
abusing W. P. might put him in mind of such a thing; I know not what else it
could be; for was not the power and command of Prisons in both Provinces as
much in our hands, when he ordered his Challenge to be printed; as it has been
since; therefore what sincerity can there be in this excuse.

Quest. But why does he call thy Letter an idle piece of paper Subscribed C. P.

Ans. I know not indeed; and I think there is no reason in the world, but that
I might as well have called both his challenges to me subscribed D. L. by the
same name; especially considering how idly he excuses his not standing to his
first challenge; and pray what certainty have or had I from him that he mean^
what he writ when he challenged me, more than he had from me, when I took him
up thereupon; Now as for his aforesaid Almanac challenge, before I go any
further, I think fit^ to ^ranscribe, as follows (viz.)

Whereas I lately published a challenge to Caleb Pusey; but appointed no day
when to meet, whereby he took an advantage to put a trick upon me, by sending
me a Letter dated October the sixth, to meet him within ten days after the date
of that le^^^r, Seven of the said ten being expired before I received his
better: he either knew it impossible for me to prepare my self, and come near
eighty-miles, and end the business, and all in (...) ^ays time; or else had
some base design upon me: therefore I now renew my challenge to him, formerly
printed, and appoint the twelfth day of May next at Burlington, to refer the
matter to some judicious men, (not Quakers) as noted in my challenge in the
manuscript, to judge whether or no W. P. call^ the manhood of Christ ^he finite
impotent Creature; but there happened a typographical error in the printed
copy, so that the words [not Quakers] were left out; however they are inserted
in the following words, where I say he dare not refer it to any but his own
party, and I hope he will take no advantage of a Typographical error, seeing
his Brother Tomas ^^^hood would not allow G. K. to do it; for I know right well
that if take two Quakers against two others we do just nothing at all* for the
Quakers dare not in such cases determine any thing against one another: I say,
I will ( God willing) be ready at Burlington the Twelfth of May, provided he
gives me at least Tw^ months notice under his hand and the hand of one of their
Justices that he designs to meet me then and there; Burlington* November the
4th.

DANIEL LEEDS.


Q^st: Well, what do thou observe from this challenge?

Ans: I observe Four falsehoods; first that I either put a trick upon him or
else had some base design; for my Letter and intent was without Trick or Base
design. Secondly, that Seven days were expired before he had my Letter; for it
was but Six: Thirdly that the words [not Quakers] are inserted, meaning, in his
First printed Challenge; for there is no such words inserted there. And Lastly
that the Quakers in such cases dare not determine any thing against one
another; for, that they are tha^g ^t to do where there is just cause; not only
in such, but in all case. Next I observe, that whereas he tells of near Eighty
miles he was off, that was more than I knew; I was told o^ about Fifty (...)
most; and really expected he might ride it in one day: And the same day of the
date of my Letter I sent it over the River to D. C. in order for conveyance
with all speed; and at the messengers return he told that he (viz: D. C.)
intended to go with it that Night or at furthest the next day Early; but it
happened he did not go so soon as expected, and lost his way to (...); so that
it was the Twelfth day of the Month early in the Morning that he delivered the
Letter ^o D. L. but the was also more than I knew till after his second
Challenge was published; however, as impossible as D. L. makes it come^^ ^ar,
and end the business in the limited time; and as far as it was D. C. told me he
came from D. L's. house on the twelfth day and riding all night was at
Philadelphia ^n the ^^teenth day in the morning: besides it ten days time had
been too little to suite any circumstances he might then be under, why did not
he make that his plea, and desire more time? But not one word of that then; no
then it was in general terms, that he did not live convenient, and wanted to be
Secured in person etc. but how is it, that he has not conditioned the security
of his person in his second challenge? ^^^re being the same reason for it, as
when he writ his letter; but what does he (...) of three days time to come and
end the business: for in the first place he had near four days notice.
Secondly, what great business was it but to see whether. W. Penn in his 20 page
of S^n^y Foundation Shaken, called the man Christ, the finite impotent
creature? that surely needed no (...) time to see? besides though the tenth day
was the (...) day ^^mitted to meet; yet that would not have tied us up to have
^nded the business on that day. As for his saying, I dare not r^^er it to any
but my own party, he is at best much mistaken in that; for when I took him up,
I did ^^^lly expect he would chu^e on his part such as was not of our own
party; and then why I should I be tied up from choosing my friends, any more
than he? and why he should say, let [us] cause four, six or more; and yet limit
[me] in my choice; pray what choice is that? besides I see no reason at all,
why I my not suspect the candidness of his party, with as much reason as he
does mine: and what obligation does he think ou^ Justices are under, any more
than theirs, to set their ^ands to any design of mine, sons to signify what
design to do? and why had not he Justice's hand to his challenge? does he th^^k
his credit so much better than his neighbor's, after his (...) ^rif^ing with
the world by his vaunting and whi^^ing cha^^^^? Upon the whole, as I am
satisfied ^s (...) way (...) with the honor and reputation of the Truth we
pro^ess, to ^^^pose this adversary in the same path that he comes out against
us; which in this case is by the way of the press; and therefore* by gods
assistance, so I intend so to do and clear W. P. and my ^eit of those false
charges this D. L. has cast upon us, and trouble my self no further to answer
him in his vaunting and uncertain challenges, let him challenge as often as he
pleases. And so I come now to the great point (viz to try whether WILLIAM PENN
in the 20 page of his Sandy Foundation Shaken, did call Christ as man, the
FINITE IMPOTENT CREATURE D. L. says he did; I say he did not; and that the
reader may see for himself without going either to Burlington or to (...)
harbor for satisfaction or Information, I shall transcribe the ^ssage at
large^, as it lies in the said book, so far as relates to that head in which
those words [finite, impotent creature] are placed.

Quest. Prey^, what was that head that occasioned those words?

Ans* Why the Presbyterian doctrine being this (viz.) That it was impossible
for God to remitt or forgive sins without a full satisfaction made him by
Christ the Second person in the Trinity. William Penn to prove that doctrine
false; undertakes to re^u^e it under two distinct heads, the one from
Scripture, the other from right reason; now, that wherein those words are, is
at the conclusion of that head, by which he refutes the said doctrine from
Scripture.

Quest. By what arguments does he refute the said doctrine from Scripture.

Ans^ By three sorts of Arguments, the first is, that it cannot be impossible
for God to pardon and forgive; because he had often promised so to do; for
which he cites Exodus 34.6, 7. And the lord passed by before him, [Moses] the
Lord God merciful and gracious, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity* transgression and Sin; with many more of the like import in his
Second argument was, that it could not be impossible for God to forgive, since
it was not only possible, but enjoined to men to do it, for which he produced
Matthew the 6.12.14 thus, Forgive us our debts, (...) forgive our debtors; for
if you forgive men then (...) passes, your Heavenly Father will also forgive
you etc. The Third Argument was, that Gods love to us, was not the effect of
Christ's satisfaction; but that Christ is the proper gift and effect of Gods
love; for which he produced this Scripture, John the 3.16. For God so loved the
World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believed in him
should not perish, but have everlasting Life; with many more such like
Scriptures; now, he having proved by those Three sorts of Arguments backed with
Three sorts of Suitable and distinct Scriptures, that it was not impossible for
God to forgive without a plenary satisfaction made, he in the conclusion sums
up the matter in short in his page 20. showing thereby the absurdity o^ that
Doctrine when compared with the sense of those Sciptures and so places them in
order in 1st. 2d. and 3d. heads; as he had before placed his Scripture
arguments to show their Doctrine false by; and made the First absurdity to be
thus; (viz.) that God is gracious to forgive (he having so proved from
Scripture) and yet impossible for him, unless the debt be f^ll satisfied.

The Second obsurdity, which is to our point, was thus that the Finite impotent
Creature is more capable of extending Mercy and forgiveness than the infinite
and omnipotent Creator, he having before proved that Man who is a Finite and
Impotent Creature was not only capable of extending Mercy and forgiveness, but
was enjoined to do it. And now that the Reader may more fully see that I have
not mingled or clipped William Pen's words so as to pervert the sense of them.
I shall bestow the Transcribing of them verbatim where he begins thus vizt.

Doct^.
That man having transgressed the Righteous Law of God, and so ^x^c^^d to the
penalty of eternal Wrath, it is altogether impossible for God to remit or
forgive without a Plenary satisfaction; and that there was no other way by
which God could obtain satisfaction, or save men, than by inflicting the
penalty of infinite w^ath and vengeance on Jesus Christ the Second Person of
the Trinity, who for sins past, present, and to come, has wholly ^or^ and paid
it (weather for all or but some) to the offended infinite justice of his Father.

1 And the Lord passed by before him, Moses) and proclaimed, ^xod. 34.6, 7.
The Lord, The Lord merciful and gracious, keeping mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniquity; transgression and sin. [From whence I shall draw this
Position, that since God has proclaimed himself a Gracious, Merciful, and
forgiving God, it is no^ inconsistent with his Nature to remit, without any
other consideration than his own Love; otherwise he could not justly come under
the imputation of so many gracious Attributes; with whom it is impossible to
pardon, and necessary to exact the payment of the utmost fasthing.]

2. For if ye return again to the Lord, 2. Chron. 30.6
the Lord your God is gracious and merciful, and will not turn away his face
from you. [Where how natural is it to observe that God's remission is grounded
on them repentance; and not that it is impossible for God to pardon, without a
Plenary satisfaction, since the possibility, nay, certainty of the contrary,
viz. his Grace and Mercy, is a great Motive or Reason or that loving invitation
to return,] --

3. They hardened their Necks, and hearkened not to thy Commandments, but thou
art a God ready to pardon, ^ch. 16.17.
gracious and merciful. [Can the honest hearted Reader conceive that God should
be thus mercifully qualified, whilst executing the rigor of the Law transgrest,
or not acquitting without the Debt be paid him by another? I suppose not.

4. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; Isa.
55.7.
and let him return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him, and to our
God, for he will abundantly pardon. [Come let the unprejudiced judge, if this
Scripture-Doctrine is not very remote from saying his Nature cannot forgive
sin, therefore let Christ pay him full satisfaction, or he will certainly be
avenged; which is the substance of that strange opinion.]

5. Behold, the days come, says the Lord, Jer. 31.31, 33, 34.
that I will make a New Covenant with the House of Israel; I will put my Law in
their inward Parts; I will forgive their iniquity, I will remember their sin no
more. [Here is God's mere Grace asserted* against the pretended necessity of a
satisfaction to procure his Remission: And this Paul acknowledges to be
dispensation of the Gospel, his eighth Chapter to the Hebrews. So that this New
Doctrine does not only contradict the Nature and (...) of the second Covenant,
but seems in short to discharge God both from his Mercy and Omnipotente. Mich.
7.18.
]

6. Who is a God (...), that pard^ne^^ iniquity, and posseth by the
transgression of the (...) of his (...)? He retains not his a (...), because
he ^e^gin^^^ in Mercy. [Can there be a (...) express passage to clear, not only
the possibility, but t^^l inclinations in God to pardon sin, and not (...) his
anger for ever; since the Prophet seems to challenge all other Gods to try
their excellency by his God, herein de^^^thing the supremacy of his Power, and
superexcellency of his Nature, (...) be (...) iniquity and (...) not his anger
for ever: so that i^ the S^^st^ctionists should ask the Question, (...) is a
God (...) to ours, that cannot pardon iniquity, but retain his anger until ^^me
body make him satisfaction (...) answer, Many amongst the (...) and (...) of
the Nations; but as for my God, he is exalted above them (...), upon the Throne
of his Mercy, who (...) iniquity, and retaine^ not his anger for ever, but will
have com^^ss^on upon us.]

7. And forgive us our Debts, M^t. 6.12
as we forgive our Debtors. [Where nothing can be more obvious than that which
is for given, is not paid: And if it is our duty to forgive without a
^atisfaction received, and that God is to forgive^^s us as we forgive them,
then is a satisfaction totally excluded: Christ further paraphrases upon that
part of his Prayer. v. 14. For if ye forgive their trespasses, your Heavenly
Father will also forgive you. Where he as well argues the equity of Gods
forgiving them, from their forgiving others, as he (...) ^^^ges them to forgive
others, from the example of God's Mercy in forgiving them; which is more amply
expressed in chap. 18. where the Kingdom of Heaven (that consist in
Righteousness) is represented by a King; Who upon his Debtors Petition, had
compassion, and forgive him; but the same treating his fellow Servant without
the least forbearance, the King condemned his unrighteousness, and delivered
him over to the Tormentors. But how had this been a fault in the Se^^^^ if his
Kings Mercy had not beer proposed for his Exam^^^ How most unworthy therefore
is it of God, and blasphe^^ous, may I jus^ly term it, to be in ^^^y's daring
to assert that forgiveness impossible to God, which is not only possible but
enjoynd to men.]

John 3.16.
8. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosover believed in him, should not perish but have everlasting Life. [By
which it appears, that God's Love is not the effect of Christ's satisfaction,
but Christ is the proper Gift and Effect of God's Love.]

Act. 10.34.
9. To him gave all the Prophets w^^nes^, that through his Name whosoever
believed in him, shall receive Remission of sins [So that Remission came by
believing his Testimony, and obeying his Precepts, and not by a pretended
satisfaction.]

Romans 8.31, 32.
10 If God be for us, who can be against us? He that spared not his own Son,
but delivered him up for us all. [which evidently declares it to be Gods Act of
free Love, otherwise if he must be paid, he should be at the charge of his own
satisfaction, for he delivered up the Son.]

2 Cor. 11 5.18, 19.
11. And all things are ^s God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus
Christ, and has given us the Ministry of Reconciliation, to (...) that God was
in Christ, (...) the World unto (...), no repating their tress^^^^^ unto them.
[How unde^^^ably (...) parent is it that God is so far from standing on (...)
high displeasure, and upon his terms, contracting win his Son for a
satisfaction, as being otherwise (...) to be reconciled, that he became himself
the Reconcile by Christ, and afterward by the Apostles, his Ambassadors, to
whom was committed the Ministry of Reconciliation.]

Ephesians. 1.7.
12. In whom we have (...) through his blood, the forgiveness of sins occording
in the riches of his (...). [Now what relation, satisfactor has to forgiveness
of (...) or how any can construe Grace to (...) Justice, the meanest
understanding may determine.]

12 But the God of all (...), to (...) us unto his 1 Pet. ^ 10.
(...) Glory, by Christ Jesus [He does (...) say that God's (...) consideration
of Christ's Satisfaction, acquitted (...) has past, present and to come, and
therefore has (...) to his eternal Glory, but from his Grace.]

1^. In this, was manifested (...) love of God toward us, 1 John 4: ^:
because that God sent his one ^ begotten Son into the World, that (...)
through him: [Which plainly attributes Christ in his Doctrine, Life, Miracles,
Death, and Sufferings to God, as the Gift and Expression of his Eternal Love,
for the Salvation of men.]

1: In ^o^^hing that other Covenant, which consisted in External and (...)
Ordinances, and that made none clean as concerning the Conscience.

2: In (...) his message of a most free and universal tender of Life and (...)
all that believed and followed him, (the Light) in all his Righteousness, the
very end of his appearance being to destroy the wo^^s of the D^^il, and which
every man only comes to experiment, as he walks in a holy subjection to that
measure of Light and Grace, wherewith the fullness has enlightened him.

3: In seconding his Doctrines with Signs, Miracles and a most innocent self
denying life.

4: In ratifying and confirming all(with great love, and holy resignation) by
the offering up of his Body to be crucified by wicked hands; who is now
ascended far above all Heavens, and is thereby become a most complete Captain,
and prefect Example:

So that I can by no means conclude, but openly declare that the Scriptures of
truth are not only silent in reference to this Doctrine of Satisfaction; but
that it is altogether in to silent with the Dignity of God, and very repugnant
to the Conditions, Nature, and Tendency of the second Covenant, concerning
which their Testimony is so clear.

The Absurdities that unavoidably follow the Comparison of his Doctrine, with
the sense of Scripture.
THat God is gracious to forgive, and yet impossible for unless the Debt be
fully satisfied:

2. That the finite and (...) ^^eature, is more capable of ^^^tending Mercy and
^orgiveness, than the Infinite and Omnipotent Creator.

3. That God so loved the World, he gave his only Son to save it; and yet that
God stood off in high displeasure, and Christ give himself to God as a comple^t
satisfaction to his offended Justice; will many more such like gross
Consequences that might be drawn:

Now I appeal to the candid reader whether D. L. had any ground in Truth to
assert and maintain, as in his challenges he does, that W. P. here called
Christ, as Man, the finite and impotent Creature; For first, though he says
those Priest's Doctrine compared with Scripture, that the finite impotent
Creature is more capable of extending Mercy and forgiveness etc. Yet by those
words [finite impotent Creature] it is clear he meant it of us that were
enjoined to forgive one another; but not of Christ, as man, by the reference
those words have to those Scriptures he had before produced about our forgiving
Trespasses (who to be sure are finite impotent Creatures) to confute that
Doctrine by: The sense of which Scriptures being compared with their Doctrine
makes the absurdity; but he had no where mentioned any thing of Christ
forgiving us, to occasion such a reference; but it was of our forgiving one
another; Just as the words next before them, to with [that God is gracious to
forgive] have a reference to the Scriptures he had there before mentioned to
prove him so, as also. Just as the next words after to wit [that God so loved
the World that he' gave his only Son to save it etc.] have a reference to those
foregoing Scriptures he there produced to prove it.

Obj: Well, but D. L. says, the only subject W. P. there treats on, is Jesus
Christ, as he is the second person in the Trinity, whom he calls finite
impotent Creature; and denies him to have satisfied the infinite Justice of the
Father, for that very reason; and calls it an absurdity so to believe.

Ans: That Is not the only subject W. P. there treats on, (...) before.

(...): But what do those words [so to believe] signify of (...) late to?

Ans: They relate to the absurdity of any ones believing that the finite
impotent Creature should satisfy, the infinite Justice of the Father.

Obj: But D. L. says That by finite impotent Creature W. Penn meant Christ, as
Man.

Ans: That cannot be reasonably supposed.

Quest: Why so?

Ans: Because though both the Priests and William Penn did own that Christ as
man was finite Yet the Absurdity there laid down by W. P. was the Priest's
aforesaid Doctrine of satisfaction only compared with the Scripture.

Quest: What was the Priests Doctrine? was it not that Christ, as man did
satisfy?

Ans: No, no, and this is Close to the point; for the Priests Doctrine was that
Christ satisfied, as he was both God and Man, and not otherwise. As may be
clearly seen by William Penn's then present opponent Thomas Vincent, who in his
book called the Foundation of God etc. Says It was necessary that the Person
that should make Satisfaction should be man; because none but a Creature could
Suffer: it was necessary he should be God otherwise the suffering and
satisfaction would have been but finite; and in page 65 He says God, separately
cannot satisfy; because he cannot suffer: And man separately cannot satisfy;
because the Satisfaction would not be of infinite value; yet as God-man (says
he) he satisfied: Now from what has been said it is plain, that W. P. did not
place the absurdity from the Priests believing that Christ as man, did satisfy
etc. For that was not the Priest's Doctrine; but the Priest's Doctrine was,
that Christ the sacred Person in the Trinity satisfied, as he was both God and
Man;(...) that unless W. P. had intended by what he then said, that Christ, not
only as he was Man, but also he was God* was the finite impotent Creature;
surely no man of understanding and charity can Judge that W. P. there intended
the words [Finite, important Creature] to be meant of Christ in any respect:
but in short, as the Priest's Doctrine was that God could not pardon without a
full Satisfaction made by another, so the Scriptures brought by W. P. to prove
that Doctrine absurd by, do clearly show that the absurdity was, that we that
are finite impotent Creatures, are, as by Scripture he proved, capable to
extend Mercy and forgiveness more than God, who is the infinite, omnipotent
Creator; because he could not (by their Doctrine forgive without a full
satisfaction made as aforesaid: but as too much of D. L's business has bee^ to
trava^l with iniquity; so the effect has been in a great degree to conceive
mischief, and bring forth falsehood, but his mischief must return upon his own
head: And pray observe, when all is done, had the charge against W. P. been
True, as it is false; how much less is G. K. chargeable of the same thing? Who
in his exact Narrative of his Meeting at Turners hall page 61 sticks not to own
and defend, that he had called Christ, as man, Created; and then surely nothing
Created can be either Infinite or Omnipotent: And so I shall leave this matter
to the candid and impartial Reader to Judge. whether W. P. there called the Man
Christ FINITE IMPOTENT CREATURE.

Postscript concerning the Strumpet-Author.
It may be well for all sorts of professed Christians to consider whether if any
Atheist, Turk, Jew or other Person should (...) take example from this
Strumpet-man, as to take up what (...) be collected of the miscarriages but of
one Year among (...) professed Christians and communicants too; as he has
Coll^^^ from among the Quakers of things done though not in less than above the
space twenty Years; and should also pu^^^ as many falsehoods and abuses
proportionable to the number (...) us and them; so many eminent men in
particular, and the whole Societies in general, as this Strumpet Author has
done of the Quakers; and should the^ by improve it with such aggravations, in
order to make the whole body of Christians look black and odious in the eyes of
all men, as he endeavors to make the Quakers look. I say, it may be well for
all to consider, whether i^ any person should go through with such a work, how
exceeding black and odious, and now like a Cage of unclean birds (to use the
Strumpets words) would the whole body of Christians seem to look in the eyes of
Jews, Atheists and Infidels; and whether can any think, any more than we, that
such a person would have the reward of well-doing for the (...). And as for
what he in his preface says that in our answers to those heaps of confusion
that Mr Leads quotes out of their books, they do not own one error, no, not one
failing in all their friends books, infallibility must not give way in the
least etc. To which I answer that he again insinuates, as it we held our selves
infallible, which we deny; and as W. P. in his just rebuke to 21 divines page
22, says, we are horribly abused, in saying we pretend all our Ministers to be
infallible; for we ascribe not (says he) infallibility to men, but to the
grace of God and to men so far as they are led by it: and who can say, that so
far as men are so led, they are not so far infallible, without reflecting on
the leadings of Gods grace? and so far we (as all men are) are infallible too;
but there is too many so far from being led by it, that they have rejected it
as an insufficient leader; and therein we greatly differe and as ^e accuses us
for not owning any one error that D. L. has quoted out of our Friends books;
so he has not there (...) any one error quoted by him; and though in page 104
and (...). of my book I have showed how D. L. has written (...) our Friends in
14 plain particulars; yet neither D. L. (...) have owned that he has committed
any one error (...) of those things; nor in any other part of his book:
Methinks this they should do at ^ast, before they (...) the Quakers of the
contrary, and of standing upon the (...) above the level of all the rest of
mankind, as this Strumpet Author does accuse ^s.

by CALEB PUSEY.

