Proteus Ecclesiasticus OR GEORGE KEITH Varied in FVNDAMENTALLS; Acknowledged
by himself to be such, and Proved an Apostat, From his own Definition,
Arguments, and Reasons. Contrary to his often repeated false pretentions,
whereby he has Labored to deceive the People; telling them he is not varied
from any Fundamental Principle, nor any Principle of the Christian faith, ever
since he first came among the QUAKERS.

With Remarks on DANIEL LEED'S abusive Almanac for the Year 1703. by way of
Postscript.

Thou which Teach another Teach thou not thy self?

Romans 2.21. A double minded man is Unstable in all his ways

Jam. 1.8. Printed at Philadelphia by Reynier Jansen

THE PREFACE
Friendly Reader.

AS I hope, upon thy Serious consideration, thou will not take it amiss, that
we have at this time, and in this manner appeared, against G. K. especially,
considering the Fresh occasion he has given us, since his last Arivall in
America; some Relation of which appears in this following Book, so also thou an
Seriously desired to consider, whether it does not necessarily behove G. K. as
he would approve himself, not only to be a Man of Pen; but also a Man Sound in
Judgment, to prove himself consistant with himself, in and about diverse
Principles of Christianity, acknowledged by himself to be Fundamentalls,
concerning which he is hereby plainly proved, to ^y under great variations,
Inconsistances, and Confusions; I say, does it not behove him so to prove
himself, instead of his thus Disturbing us, for others in our peaceable
Religious A^^emblys, or otherwise, since he that Teaches another, ought
certainly first to Teach himself. And now as to the difference between our
Friends and G. K. here, begun by him, about eleven or twelve Years ago; it was
(...) about (...) of the universal necessity of the Faith and knowledge of
Christ's outward Death and Suffering, in order to Salvation; for though he begun
at that time, to Pick up such Sentences and passages, out of our Friends work^
as by Straining and perve^ting, he thought he could render Odio^s to the
People; and also to catch at some work, unadvised, and unwarrantable
Expressions, from here and there an unweary Person, about other matters, (and
disapproved by our Friends, on all occasions yet that about the universal
necessity of Faith in Christ without us, was confessed by himself, several
times in Print, to be the main matter of Controversy with our Friends here, as
in the following book is shown: and he charged ^t that time, several Friends,
with such words, as I have heard (...) (...) to be spoken by them. And indeed
the first time (...) him (...) with our Friends, was about this (...) thing,
(...) Meeting at Philadelphia, in the year 1691. were (...) and (...) the
universal necessary (...) Faith (...) (viz.) Such he, I deny him to be a (...)
of Christ, who does not in the Co^^se of his Ministry, (...) without us; (...)
again without us; (...); but that the (...) of Christ's Su^^rings etc. without
us, (...) necessary, to all and every one, in (...), and Salvation; and yet
said he, I (...) he could not miss of Salvation. And I found in a Back of his,
Printed but a little before, where he says of (...) they could not perish,
though they Dyed in that state. (...). This ma^e me. I must Confess begin to
admire, what the Man was all of a ^^^dom so hard driving at; for thought I, if
such Gentiles could not perish, though they Dyed without that Faith and knowledge
of Christ in the outward, and yet could not be Saved, without they had that
Faith and knowledge; where then must they have it, in order to save them? But
quickly upon this, there was an honest Friend, and then a late Intimate of G.
K's told me, G. K's Notions of the twelve Revolutions of Humane Souls: And that
according to those Notions, those Faithful Gentiles, as also Infants, born
Idiots etc. should some time or other live again, by being born in other
Bodies, in some place of this World, where they may have the Gospel expressly
Preached to them, in order to perfect their Salvation: These things of so long
standing, I speak not as trusting only to Memory; for I committed them quickly
to writing, to prevent mistakes, through shortness of Memory. And hearing also
that G. K. had been deeply Concerned, in Writing a Book of (...) Queries,
concerning those twelve Revolutions. I got a fight (...) it, and (...) found,
that his above method of Doctrine Exactly. Coresponded with the said Revolution
Notions, as also did ^ivers Passages (though some of them Coucht, in several
of his Books, than lately Printed against some in New England and Rh^^d Island;
in which I found, that he then held, that the [Express] Faith are knowledge of
Christ without etc. was absolutely, and Indespensibly necessary, to the
perfecting of men's Salvation: And hearing, that tha^ Revolution Book was w^^t
in the year 81 or thereabouts, I searched what Books I could get, of all he had
published, from that time to the time of his differing here with us: And I
think, I found scarce one; but had more or less, some Expression dropped, or at
least Coucht, which really seemed to depend upon those Revolution Notions; but
most plain, as the time came, or drew near, to his Differing with our Friends
here.

And now, since in pa. 25.26. of this book, I gave a relation of some concern
betwixt G. K. and an other Person, about the Revolutions, James Coper Cloth
worker of Darby, did many years ago give it, and more of his Strange Notions
under his hand and is ready to give more (yet upon occasion) of his Whi^ fi^S,
that he was then bigg with, as he is now bigg with Imeterate Hatted, and
Persecuting Enmity, against his old Friends, who seeing, and being sensible of
his Spirit in time, could not humor him, upon which he grew so disorderly and
^^governable in the Church, that our Friends saw a necessity of disowning him
as a Minister of the Peacable Gospel among us.

And whereas, in this book pa. 8, there is mention made of G. K's Couching the
Revolution Notions, in several books; but for brevitys sake, did not insert
them there, being Plenty of the said books, the Country, yet least some may be
desireous to se something of it who cannot get the books, I shall the (...)
however insert one or two Passages, not retracted, that I think, must needs
make his Revolution Notions, speak out plain enough, to show, how deep he (...)
Drunk those Notions in.

Object. But he says he could never Justly own himself to be the Author of that
Book, for others were concerned pa. 3.

Ans. I know not who ever Charged him to be the whole Author; but for him to
say, others ^ere concerned, Implys, he was concerned as well as others.

O.b. But he says, those Books, (meaning those, where we cite him about the
Revolutions), they were generally approved on, by Friends of the Ministry An^^.
and Sadu^^ pa. 9.

Ans But he does not say, they were all so aproved, however we Read in Jude 9.
There were some, who were not Right, that Crept in at unawares, Mark, at
[unawares]; and it was told by the Apostle Peter: that there should be false
Teachers, who would Privetaly bring in Damnable Herisies etc. So that is no new
thing.

And now, whereas, there are in the said Revolution Book, many of the Queries,
that really seem to be as Texts, to several Passages in some books, afterward
writ by him, as above; I shall therefore, before ^ci^e the Passages, lay down
one of them, that it may be seen, how close he keeps his Doctrine to the Text,
it is the 37. query, and the words are these, (viz.) "^eing Christ said, that
this Gospel of his Kingdom, should be Preach to all the World, for a witness
against them, is it not evident, that all the World, that is every Man that is
born into the World, from the First to the Last, must have that very Gospel of
the Kingdom, in which, Mention is made, of the Woman's Pouring Ointment on his
Body, Preached unto them; as well [Outwardly] as inwardly, before it can be made
a witness against them; compare Math. 24.14. with Math. 26.23. Thus much as to
the Text: Now let us se G. K's, Doctrine, as agreeable there^), Pretended
Antidote pa. 105. Where speaking of the meaning, or Extant of Christ's words,
where he Commands his Gospel to be Preached to all Notions, and of his saying,
so it shall be before the End; he says, as his meaning upon those Texts, thus;
The Gospel that began to be Preache^, "from Adams Fall Immediately, shall be
Preached to all Men, that Ever lived in the World: some time or other, before
the End of the World; so that such as shall not Live in the latter Ages of the
World, have had it Preached in the former Ages, when they Lived in the World

"And therefore, (says he) the Preaching of the Gospel to all the World; is
the Preaching of it, to all Mankind, that ever Lived, and shall Live in the
World, in all Ages, from the Beginning to the End etc. Thus far G. K. in pa.
104.105. Pretend. Antidote. pa. 107. Speaking of the like matter, he says (as
a Scripture Proof) Else how is the Gospel Preachr to "every Creature; and now
is Christ's Command to be fulfilled; that he has given to his Faithful
Apostles, and to their Faithful Successors, in all Ages? And how is the
^ro^^ecy of Christ fulfilled, that so it shall be before the End? etc. From all
which the Reader may observe, that as the above cited Revolution Text explains
the above mentioned Commands of Christ, (to Preach the Gospel to all Nations
etc.) to mean, that it shall be Preach^ to all Mankind that Ever lived, or
shall live in the World, so does G. K's Doctrine too: And as that Text, by
saying, it shall be so Universally Preached; not only Inwardly, but also
OUTWARDLY, Implys, that it shall be so Preached by the Apostles, or their
Successors; so does G. K's Doctrine too: But how the Apostles, or their
Successors should Preach the Gospel to that part of Mankind, that have
hitherto dyed without it, as Infants, Heathens, Deaf and Dumb Persons etc.
unless they come again, according to the Revolution Doctrine, I think it might
behove G. K. to make out if he can; since he says, he is of the same Faith, as
he has been above this 30 years, Exact Narrative pa. 20.

CALEB PUSEY.

Proteus Ecclesiasticus or GEORGE KEITH Varied in FVNDAMENTALLS etc.
IF the Controversy depending between Us and G.K. were to be determined by the
Erring Judgment of his Partial votaries; the disadvantage would doubtless be
ours; But since our appeal is rather to the Truth in the hearts of the
unbiased, who are willing to see for themselves, weigh matters in the Scailes
of Justice, and then Judge; we see no reason to doubt, but that we shall be
Justified in all their Consciences, it being for their sakes, the advancements
of Truth in their esteem, and the removal of some of the S^mbling-blocks out
of the way of the weak and unweary, ^^st by this Adversary; that now I appear,
and not to gratify his Contentious Temper with fresh fuel to his fire of R^ge
and Envy.

The unparalleled Confidence of this hardened man might have been matter of
Admiration to such as have heard him in^^^m Auditories in America since his
last coming over, b^^dly affirm That he is not varied from many Fundamental
Principle of the Christian Religion ever since he fi^^^ came under the Pr^f
(...) the Quakers; (...) his shameful Confession and s^^^ onward (...) that
particular as well as in other things had not appeared in Print from time to
time, for these Ten or Twelve years past: But though that false pretense of his
Stability, in the Fundamentalls of the Christian Faith, and unity with all the
Faithful Brethren (now decry'd and Exposed by him) was his main Stratagem,
whereby he betrayed diverse into that unchristian separation, which several
have both seen and lamented; so well is he now known in these parts of America
that the Journall of his Travells and works of envy when published will not
afford (I hope) any great Instance of the Efficacy of his Labors; even among
those that formerly went aside with him (save it may be some few of his Country
folks about Shrewsbury who might possibly delay their Sprinkling, till he
should have the Trophy though his now Masters, seem not to have so much assurance
of him as to trust him, with making of Christians) and perhaps not one may be
ensnared, and deceived by him from among the whole multitude of other
persuasions.

That G. K. in the beginning of the difference here Imposed upon his followers
by telling them he was not changed in his Principles; Se his Truth and
Innocence page: 17. Some Fundamental Truths page: 11. l. 13. An Appeal page 5.

That G. K. has since ascerted That he knows not any Fundamental Principle,
nor indeed any one Principle of the Christian Faith, that he had varied from,
to this day; ever since he came among the Quakers; and that he is of the same
Faith, he has been above these Thirty years; and that he has not retracted
nor renounced any one assertion in any of his former Books, that ever was
judged by him an Article of Faith: Se his Exact Narative p. 15, 38. also his
preface to his Retractations.

^st. For a more evident demonstration that G. K. is varied from diverse
Principles, formerly acknowledged by himself to be Fundamentalls of the
Christian Religion; he is now to be Considered as a Minister (though of the
meanest Class) of the Church of England, and that what ever he has heretofore
laid down as Fundamentalls, not Embraced by the fd. Church as such, he is now
varied from, by taking upon him Orders among them: Especially since himself
says; In "the main Articles of Faith ALL HER MEMBERS (much more her Ministers
say I) are of one Mind. Se his Reasons for renouncing Quakerism etc. p. 34.
Justified by him in his plain discovery page 6.

2. Secondly by a Summary Collection of diverse Articles of Faith, Expressly by
himself called Fundamentalls, besides what may be alleged against him, by Just
Consequence as a Minister of that Church, as aforesaid.

1. I shall begin with what he has often called the main matter of
Controversy, at the beginning of the difference with us here; viz, The
necessity of Faith in Christ, as he Outwardly Suffered for us etc. (...) he
has called a Fundamental Exact Narrative p. 14. And that he has pretended
this to be the main matter of Controversy with us here; Se Plea of the
Innocent p. 17. Some Fundamental Truths p. 14. Exact Narr. p. 49.

But by the way, it was Observed by Us ten years ago, and also committed to
writing, that G. K. has been very dexterous (or rather Sinisterous) and
fallacious in wording the Matter in all those places to the altering of the
State of the (then) Controversy. For the Question was not whether Faith in
Christ's Outward manifestation was necessary (...) Our Salvation and of all
mankind to whom the Sufferings of Christ have been made KNOWN and revealed,
either by the Holy Scriptures of otherways; for he was then told expressly in a
great mixed Auditory at Philadelphia by one of Our Friends, when he was
discoursing hot^y with us about the necessity of that Faith; That that Faith
was Indispensible necessary to all such to whom it was revealed or made Known:
But that this answer did not satisfy him, se Truth and Innocence pa: 7.

2. Secondly of Christ's Subsisting; not only with a reasonable Soul; but
Humane Flesh also. Which according to the Athanacian Creed, (now owned by G. K.
must be a Fundamental.

3. The Light within, he has sufficiently owned to be a Fundamental: Se his
Preface to his universal free grace and his some Fundamentalls p. 10.

4. The fourth is about Perfection.

5. About Prayer.

6. Concerning our universal Testemony against Swearing.

7. Our Testamony against paying of Tiths; all with several others he calls
Fundamentalls in p. 10. and 11. of his Some Fundamental Truth's etc.

8. In the Doctrine of the Trinity of Persons. And that this is a Fundamental;
Se the said Creed where it is said, He "therefore that will be saved must thus
think of the Trinity viz. that there is three Persons etc.

9. In pa: 14. of Exact Narr. a belief of the Resurrection of the body that
dies he calls a Fundamental.

If G. K. or any for him (...) that he has retracted as former Errors; That
would be nothing o the purpose in this Case; For (as above in his preface to
his Retractations) he Confesses that he has not any where Retracted any one
assertion contained in any of his former Books, that was ever Judged by him an
Article or Faith: But those Nine particulars above mentioned are not o^^^y
accounted by him Articles; but also Fundamental Articles of Faith. Neither do
I find, that he has, any where, retracted, any of the abovesaid Assertions;
viz. That he is not Changed in his Principles.

Nor varied in Fundamentalls.

Nor has renounced, nor retracted any thing, that has been Judged, by him, an
Article of Faith etc. which till he do, he must needs stand Chargeable, with
Inconsequent and Confused Consequences, that necessarily follows from them,
Compared with the aforesaid nine particulars; for proof, whereof observe what
follows.

1st. Fundamental. In the year 1670. In his Light and Truth etc. pa. 6. he
deny's the [Express] knowledge and belief of Christ's taking upon him the form
of a Man, and his Obedience and Sufferings therein, to be absolute necessity
unto Salvation; where it has not been revealed to them.

But again in the year 1689. in his Presbyterian and Independent pa: 113. he
Says It may be very safety concluded that the Express knowledge and faith is
absolutely and Indispensible necessary, unto the finishing and perfecting of a
man's Salvation.

About this time he seemed very bigg with his Revolution Notions whereby great
stress is laid upon the [EXPRESS] knowledge and belief of the outward Coming
and Suffering of Christ in the Flesh etc. Se the 200. Queries pa. 37. the
writing whereof he has owned himself, in this Country to be concerned in; and
se also his faint Defense when charged with it. Truth and Innocence pa. 3. But
before the publication of that book I could never yet find that he would own
that [Express] Knowledge and belief to be absolutely necessary, where it was
Not Revealed; But those Notions making that Faith and knowledge feasible to all
Nations, and to all the Heathens, Infidels and Infants* that have departed this
Life, from the beginning of the World, by being born again in Christian
Nations, where these things are Preached and believed; I find he has not only
in the said 200. Queries Insinuated his whimsicall Imaginations of the
Revolution of humane Souls: But likewise in diverse parts of his said Indep. and
Presbiter, Couched the same; Sep. 100. 102. 103. 105. and also in some other
books, by him published about that time as his (pretended) Antidot, pa. 98.
104. 105. 109. 110. a Refutation etc. pa. 40. 43. 44.

But again in the year 1692. When he might easily perceive his Revolutionism
was not like to take with the People, he then denied that [Express] knowledge
to be necessary, save to those to whom it is revealed, Truth and Innocence pa.
10. 17.

So that with G. K. in the year 1670. the EXPRESS Knowledge etc. was NOT
necessary, where not revealed. In the year 1689. the Express knowledge etc. was
absolutely and INDISPENSIBLY NECESSARY, and round about again, in the year
1692. and since, the Express Knowledge etc. was NOT unversally Necessary; yet
he would have us believe he is not Changed in his Principles.

But again, in his Truth and Innocence pa. 10. G. K. denis the Distinct as well
as EXPRESS knowledge to be universally necessary; but in page 106, 107. of his
pretended Antidot, he accounts that Religion, where Chrisst, (as Com in the
flesh) is not distinctly preached; is but such as Cornelius had, before Peter
preached Christ unto him: And such Religion (says he) is, perhaps, not
unfittly by some called Deism: And that such is the first part of Religion
toward God as Creator, but not Christian; From all which, as well as from his
affirming, in the Year before, the Express knowledge to be necessary, it is
observeable; that in the years (89) and (90), when possibly he might have some
hopes, the Revolution Doctrine might have taken footing, Then again both the
[distinct and Express] knowledge was necessary; Because without the first men's
best Religion was but Deism, and not Christian; and without the Last, men's
Salvation, was imperfect; But then again in the Year (92.) when he had so
greatly differed with our Friends, about these matters, and his Revolution
Notions had taken air; but not like to take Root in the People, and we begun
to Confront him with his former books; O^ then, neither the [Distinct] nor the
[Express] Knowledge was universally necessary; but then comes forth the new
Distinction, that though neither the [Express] nor [Distinct] knowledge was
necessary: Yet there is an [Implicit] knowledge that is UNIVERSALLY necessary;
-- What Strange Worke's here? Is this an Judication of his great MEMORY, Parts,
and Learning? Se his Truth and Innocence p. 17. Antichrists and Sadusces, p.
24. 25. etc.

Again p. 26. Ibim, he i^^^^uates, as if Robert Barclay and himself were of one
mind, in using the terms EXPRESS, DISTINCT, HISTORICAL etc. To signify, that
they did not intend, that any were saved with Eternal Salvation, without all
knowledge of Christ without us: That they were of one mind, in those days, is
likely to be true; but that either of them, did then intend, by using those
Terms, that none Could be Saved, without the Knowledge of Christ's Death, and
Sufferings without us; I cannot think is True. First, because Robert Barclay,
in his Apology pa. 132. 4 Edition says; As this Light is " Received, and not
Resisted, it works the Salvation of all; even of those, who are Ignorant of
the Death and Sufferings of Christ.

Secondly, because G. K. in his Universal free grace etc. p. 117. Says, That
the Knowledge of him as in the outward, "is of necessity unto Salvation, we
grant NOT Save only where it is revealed.

Again there is a Book in Manuscript, under G. K's own hand (but I have not yet
seen it in Print, (and possibly he may remember, who once said, printing is but
a circumstance) It Is called Certain Propositions of the Christian Religion etc.
In the Second part whereof he says; He "that believes in Christ, as he is the
Word, the Light, the Life, the Power and Wisdom of God. The Gift of God,
Revealing the Mercy and Love of God to his Soul, and is Faithful and Obedient
unto that Manifestation, shall be saved, though the outward coming of Christ in
the Flesh, and his Suffering and Death (...) not (...) to them.

Also, to the said book, there is another (...), Entitled, Some Short
Observations upon H. M. his Remarkes upon my book of Immediate Revelation. In
the Second part whereof p. 5. he says thus, viz. Christ within us is the "more
necessary for us to know, and more important for our particular Safety to know;
for they who know Christ without them, if they do not know Christ within them;
cannot be saved; but they who know and believe in him within them, they may be
saved, although they do not know him without; He as without having never been
Revealed unto them.

Now compare all these things with his late Doctrine, of the absolute necessity
of the knowledge, and faith of Christ without, [Vniversally] in Order to
perfect Justification and Salvation, (Se Truth and Innocence in several
places) and se if he be not Varied? And note, this is about one of those four
Fundamental Principles, That at Turners Hall he accused us of denying. Se
Exact Narrative p. 14.

But now we Expect to be attested by G. K. as he did John Pennington, in his
Antichrists and Sadduces pa. 24. for calling this distinction of [ Express and
Implicit] a late distinction; For, says he, it is an ancient distinction, and
Sufficiently Employed in my Oldest books, and though he mentioned the term
[Express] and did not Express the term [Implicit] yet it was really understood
by him, as (says G. K.) the Term [Iure Divino] implies the other term of the
distinction when not Expressed viz. [Iure Humano] so the term [Express] Implies
the other term [Implicit] though not Expressed.

Thus G. K. has contrived a way (as he thinks) to make out the matter, and to
prove, that he always held, that the Knowledge of Christ in the Outward, was
Universally necessary to Salvation; and that he allways understood, the Term
[EXPRESS] to Imply the Term [Implicit] But I shall now evidently show, that
this could not be his meaning in his former books, without such great
Contradiction to himself, as, I am apt to think, such a man as he, would be
very unwilling to be found guilty of; For if he understood in his former books
that the Term [Express] implies the Term [Implicit] then in Presb. and Indep.
p. 111. he Says. It Is certain, at that time when the Angel "was sent to
Cornelius, he had no [Express] Knowledge, nor Faith in Christ Crucified. Now if
he understood the Term [Express] Implied the Term [Implicit] then Cornelius
had, at that time when the Angel was sent to him, Some knowledge of Christ
Crucified etc. And yet about seven lines lower he says, Cornelius when the
Angel was sent to him, had no Knowledge nor Faith of Christ Crucified.

Again in p. 113. ib. Says he It may be very safely Concluded," that the
[Express] knowledge, and faith of Christ Crucified, is not of absolute
necessity, to the beginning of man's Salvation etc. Now, if by the Term
[Express] he understood the Term [Implicit] was Implied, then the [Implicit]
knowledge of Christ Crucified etc. And consequently some knowledge thereof, was
absolutely and Indispensibly necessary, to the beginning of man's Salvation; and
(...) next page before, he says Men may ha^ (...) "Salvation begun in them,
when the Mystery of (...) and Resurrection, is not revealed unto them.

Now is not here Contradiction upon Contradiction (...) and yet this is the
man, that his Turners-hall company (whom he has since deserted, as he did his
mistaken followers here* Ca^l^ in preface to seasonable Testimony A good
Instrument "in the hand of God to Open the understandings of many and unfolding
the deep Mysteries of the Gospel.

But Alas! what is much of it but Confusion; Saying and gainsaying; more like
some of the Merchandise of Mystery Babylon, than the Simplicity of the Gospel
of the Lord Jesus. From the foregoing it is clear that when he used the Terms (
Express knowledge) he did not understand that ( Implicit knowledge) was Employed
Therefore a late distinction, and, as I. P. told him 'twas to serve a turn. I
now hasten to the Second Fundamental viz.

2. Of Christ's Subsisting of a Reasonable Soul and Humain Flesh that this is a
Fundamental, with them se the Athanacian Creed, where it is said; That this
(among other things there) is the Catholic Faith ^ which except a man
faithfully believe he cannot be saved.

Now G. K's in his Rector corrected p. 27. pleads against the word Humane as
applicable to Christ's Body, thus. Indeed the very Outward Visible flesh, which
he took of the Virgin, seeing it was not produced or formed by Humain
Generation, -- and that after Death it was not Subject to Corruption; the Name
Humane is but too mean a Title, whereby to express it far; less should it be
called so now, when it is Glorified. And in p. 29. he brings Hilarious saying
Jesus "Christ was not formed by the Nature of Humain Conception; And also asks
why is the flesh conceived of the Holy Ghost, Judged by the Nature of a Humain
body?

In way Cast-up p. 131. he says of Christ's body, That it is no more a body of
Flesh, Blood and bone; but a pure Atheriall, heavenly body, like unto which,
the bodies of the Saints are to be at the Resurrection, (though the said Creed
says; he has Humain flesh etc.) Here we see G. K. once disowned the word
Humain Flesh also, to be applicable to Christ's body; especially since it is now
Glorified. Now is he not in this also Varied? as much as to say at one time,
Christ HAS Humain Flesh, and at another time, Christ has NOT Humain Flesh.

3. I come now to the third Fundamental viz. The Light within. It Is well known
how largely he has Vindicated this acknowledged Fundamental: as to call it God
and Christ, Hericy and Hatred p. 14. and that God and Christ can do all things,
and that both God and Ghrist is in all men, se his Refutation p. 39.

Again, says he, it has not only an enlightening property; but it has all
these other properties, To Sanctify, to purify, to Heal, to Mortify etc. For
it being the Image of God it has its Perfections answerable unto those which
are in God; So that as in God, there is Light, Life, Love, Goodness, Mercy,
Righteousness, Wisdom, Power, etc. So in this Light that comes from him, there
are all these things, by way of Participation, or Communication, Universal
free Grace etc. p. 7.

Again ibim p. 94. We averr, this universal grace, to be that very
Evangelicall and Saving Grace, and not another, through which, it being Closed
with, in Faith and Love, Salvation is Obtained, And we affirm it to be the very
Grace of the Gospel, and Object of the Faith thereof.

Now behold, is not G. K. Varied from this? being now Joined to those, whose
Teachers, for the most part, (as in the same page he affirms) call this Light,
only a Natural Light, proceeding from man's own Nature: And possibly G. K. may
have seen the book, written by a Priest, called Remarks etc. p. 19. 23. Also
his Brethren, the three Norfolk Rectors, in their book Intit. The Principles
etc. p. 6. 57. where they call the Light a MERE CHEAT, GRAND IMPOSTOR, SPARK
FROM THE DIVILS FORGE, A WHIMSICALL WITNESS fetched from Terra Incognita. Do not
they (with whom G. K. is now in unity) here vary from the large Confession of
G. K. (as above) To the Divinity, Goodness, Righteousness, Mercy, Wisdom, and
Power of the Light within? Behold the Great Unity of G. K. and his (now)
Brethren, and (by the same figure of speech) how Little he is Varid in
Fundamentalls!

4. His fourth Foundamentall is, of Perfection. Se his Rector Corrected p. 196.
197. where he sufficiently ownes a freedom from sin to be attuniable, by the
Grace of God in this Life; which says he, to the Rector of Arow, we Affirm,
and thou denyst; Now he having once Affirmed this his acknowledge Fundamental,
and they denying it as G. K. there ascerteth, and he being now joined with
them, and that they are all of one mind; is he not therefore Varied in this
Fundamental also?

5. As to the fifth Fundamental, viz. concerning Prayer. In his book called
The Fundamental Truths of Christianity (viz.) p. He says; I^ it had been the
will of God, that such a way of Worship should have been used in the true
Church, as a Com^on Liturgy or Set forms of Prayers, it would have (...) in the
Apostles days. Nothing of this kind was known in the Church; either in Justin
Martyr's, or Tertulians time, who died above 200. Years after Christ. Now since
G. K. Owns that such a Worship, and such set forms of Prayers, is not according
to the will of God; because not used in the Apostles days, nor for, above 200.
years after; and if he be not varied, let him reconcile this viz. That it is
not according to the will of God, that such Worship, or set Forms of Prayer,
should be used, with the practice of their Church, who continually use it.

6. As to the Sixth, about our refusing Swearing, acknowledged by him to be a
Fundamental as aforesaid; Se if he has not renounced this article when he was
made a Sworn Deacon, and Joined to a Church, that allows of Swearing;

7. As to the Seventh Fundamental; about refusing to pay Tyths; Has not G. K.
renounced this, since Joined with those, who will not Stick, to Subpaena a poor
man, perhaps 200. miles or more; even from the uttermost parts of England to
London: For Tyth to the value of two or three shillings, or less; when for
Conscience Sake he cannot pay them; whereby many times their Families are
ruind, though they have an easier way to recover it: And, perhaps, it may not be
too uncharitably thought, that his reasons, for renouncing this acknowledged
Fundamental, are so great, that thereby he is become more willing to renounce
the rest, both Fundamentalls and others; that he might obtain the benefitt of
his renouncing this ONE Fundamental. But be it as it will, it is clear he has
renounced this ONCE acknowledged Fundamental.

8. The Eighth Fundamental, is that of the Trinity of Persons; G. K. in his
Way Cast up p. 88. Says, The Holy Ghost has not taught us these unscripturall
Terms; and ^aith, they rather darken than explain the Mystery and calls the
Terms Three Persons in the Trinity; unfound and unscripturall Terms: And that
it is great presumption, and smells of a Persecuting Spirit, to impose upon
others those words, which the Spirit of God has not taught nor left upon
Record in the Scripture, And* further says. That Augustine disputes Solidly
that the words three Persons are not properly applycable to the Mystery it
self* And that Jerome denied and disputed against the three Hypostases. p. 86,
87, 88. ib.

Again, concerning Christ's being the Second Person in the Trinity. This is a
mere quible about the Invented words "of Man's Wisdom (says he) which we deny.
Se Way Cast up p. 85. Now is not G. K. varied here? being joined to that Church
that expressly mentions the Trinity of Persons and hold it for a great
Fundamental, that they expressly say; "He therefore that WILL BE SAVED, must
THUS thinck of the Trinity etc. Se the Athanacian Creed in the Com. Prayer
book. Then, surely it is a great Fundamental with G. K. which he did not thinck
so of formerly; therefore varied in this Fundamental also, as much as to say
of it one time, there are NOT three Persons, and at another time, there ARE
three Persons.

9. I come now at last to his ninth Fundamental viz. Of the Resurrection, of
the body that dies; Now observe, In his Presb. and Indep. p. 229. he denis, in
our Friend's Name, the Priests, CARNAL conceptions of the Resurrection; and
holds (as himself terms it) to Scripture words; so that, since the Church
whereof he is now a Minister, are all of one mind, he must consequently, be one
with them them that hold those carnal conceptions, contrary to which Church,
his former conceptions must have been Spiritual; So that he must now differ,
and vary from what he then hold, about this great Fundamental, as much as
Carnal Conceptions differ from Spiritual.

Again, in his book called A Testimony against that absurd Opinion etc. p. 3.
he Says That which rises is "the Mortal which puts on Immortality, and the
Corruptable that puts on Incorruption. But in Truth Advanced, p. 113. he says,
of that which rises; It neither consumes "in the Grave, nor corrupts;
neither is that which rises Material Flesh, but flesh in a more excellent
sense, than that vulgarly understood.

Now observe again, since in one book he says, of that which rises, it is the
CORRUPTABLE; is he not varied in the other? Where he says, that which rises
remains in the Grave, but Consumes not, NOR CORRUPTS; and since that which
Rises he owns to be Flesh But not Material Flesh, as Vulgarly understood; is
he not varied? Who Joins with those, who hold it as it is vulgarly understood,
the Same Material Visible boby of Flesh is to rise; Year that even our Lord
himself Glorified in Heavens, has a reasonable Soul and HUMAIN FLESH,
subsisting.

And, that G. K's Strange Notions about this Fundamental, I may yet more
appear, to be much various, not only from the Church he is now Joined to, but
also from the Common Belief of Christendom, I shall bestow upon him, a Large
Transcript, out of his Truth advanced page 115, 116, 117; That it may be seen,
what Vnscripturall N^tions he has about it: And note, this book was published,
some Years after, he was Separated from the Quakers here, and after he had
accused them, of denying the Resurrection etc., Now thus G. K. viz. The true
Body of Man "that shall arise at the Resurrection of the Dead, lies hid
(invisible to our gross and carnal Eyes) within that visible gross appearance
of Flesh and Blood, even as the Kirnel of a Grain of Corn lies within the
Husk, or as the precious Gold lies within the course and gross Mineral or
Mine; until the pure and precious Metal be separated from the Dross. And
because this Separation betwixt the pure and noble part, and that drossy part
in Man's Body, is not immediately effected, therefore some time is requisite
after Death to effect that Separation in the Grave, the measure of which (...)
I will not determine, and when that Separation is made, the Body remains and
is lodged by divine Providence, that gives to every thing its proper place, as
in a certain invisible Grave or Sepulcher, that was mysteriously figured by the
burial place, called Machpelah, that signifies a double or twofold Cave or
Sepulcher, which Abraham purchased from Ephr^^ the Hittite for four hundred
pieces of Silver, Genesis 23. the which as it was literally true, so is an
Allegory, as diverse Mystic Writers observe, and points at the Mystery of the
Resurrection Body out of the Mystical and invisible Machpelah or Sepulcher in
Hebron, in the Land of Israel, figuratively and mystically understood; for
Ephron signifies the Dust-eater, and by 400 pieces of Silver, i. e. by so many
Virtues (signified by Silver) this most excellent Burial-place is purchased
from Ephron; but he who has not these Virtues cannot ^ave the Privilege to be
buried in this most excellent place (which was in Hebron) that in Hebrew
signifies bordering or joining; therefore it is said to be in the end of
Ephron's field) and who cannot be buried there for lack of these Virtues, an
Untimely Birth is better than he, as the holy Scriptures declares, Eccles. 6.
3. For it is no such Misery nor Unhappiness not to have an [outward] and
visible Sepulcher, which many of the dear Children of God have, not had; but
surely they have this [other more excellent] burial in the mystical Land of
Israel, where all the dead Bodies of the Saints shall be raised up, and stand
with the Lamb upon Mount Zion, to wit, not the litteral Zion; but the mystical.

"But whereas some Object, How can these 400 pieces of Silver (signifying so
many Virtues) be paid to Ephron, the Dust-eater, if Ephron be the Devil, to
whom it was said, Dust-shalt thou eat? I Answ. Things spoke by way of Allegory
and Parable, are not strictly to be understood in every Circumstance; but the
design and intent of the Parable is principally to be minded, as in the parable
of Christ concerning the Seed sown in the Highway, which Seed Christ expounded
to be the Word, and the Fouls that picked it up to be the Devil; and yet it
cannot be said, that the Word of God is the Devils Food; but the design and
intent of this Parable is to show, that the Bodies of all Saints, who have
these Virtues, signified by 400 Pieces of Silver (the Number 400 being produced
of 4. answering to the Four elemental Principles or Qualities of the Body) and
the Number 10. answering to the Ten Commandments of the Law, and that again
multiplied by other Ten, because every one of the Ten Commandments may well be
understood to be branched forth into other Ten, are not under the Power nor in
the Possession of Ephron, but are the Lords; and that therefore they shall be
raised up by him to Life Everlasting.

"Now some of the Jews carnally understood, That the Bodies of the faithful,
who are true Jews, shall all rise in the outward Land of Israel; and therefore
some are earnest to have their Bones carried thither to be buried; but they are
confuted by the more intelligent of their own Writers, called Mysticks, who by
the Land of Israel, where all the Saints shall be raised up, do not understand
the outward Land of Israel, but another Mystical Land of Israel, whereof that
outward Land was but a figure, even that called in Scripture, The Land of the
Living, which is that New Earth wherein the Righteous shall dwell; that is no
part of this visible Glob, but yet near to it. And that Joseph gave charge
concerning his Bones to be carried to the Land of Israel, as outwardly, was but
a figure and type, holding forth his Faith concerning the Resurrection of the
Dead. Hence it does appear, that the Graves that shall be opened at the
Resurrection of the dead, are not any visible places on this Glob of the Earth,
but certain invisible places to our carnal Eyes, where they are lodged by the
All-wise disposing Providence, until the time of the Resurrection. And thus
commonly men have two Graves, the first given them by men, until the Separation
be made betwixt the Kirnel and the Drossy part, by Putrefaction (as suppose
after a Year, or more or less) the Second given them by God, who probably may
use the Ministry of Angels therein (see Jude 9.) even as it is said, That
Lazarus, after he dyed, was carried into Abraham's Bosom, viz. his Soul, and so,
why not also his Body into Abrabam's Sepulcher, mystically understood? In p.
115. he would not determine the time; but here he gives a very notable hint at
the deep Mystery.

"And it is not to be denied, but as the Seed of Corn that rises, gets many
additional parts to it of a new Body, whereby it is multiplied into many
Grains, so the Resurrection Body has also that which is added unto it of that
excellent Earth, out of which it arises; which is not this visible Earth that
we tred upon, but far more excellent; the Dust whereof is Gold, and the Stones
of it Saphires, Job 28.6. compared with Rev. 2^.21. And as the Body of Man at
first was made of such excellent Dust, in Hebrew called Apher or Opher, so it
shall be made up again of the same.

Having thus Transcribed his LEARNED Doctrine on this Subject, I shall leave it
to the Christian Reader to observe, Consider, and Judge.

1. Whether G. K. has (as he says p. 118. ibim) here "delivered and opened [
the Doctrine of the RESURRECTION] by plain Evidence of holy Scripture, and in
Scripture words and Terms; to which (Says he) it is only Safe in this and in
all other things to keep close?

2. Whether G. K. is not Varied in this Fundamental since now he is Joynd to
the Church of England, which holds not thus concerning the Resurrection?

3. Whether the Scripture be his Rule for these Notions seeing he owns it to be
the Rule of Faith?

4. Whether it be generally understood by profes^ Christians that the Graves
that shall be opened at the Resurrection, be not visible places of this Gl^ble
of the Earth, or that men commonly have two Graves.?

5. Whether the dust that the body of man was at first made, of and shall be
made up of again; be not of this visible Earth? or whether it be to be made of
Golden dust according to G. K's. Notion? or whether this Golden dust be such as
vulgarly understood, since he has not told us his mind in that Respect?

6. Do but Seriously Consider, after all the Noise that has falsely been made
against us the Quakers; as if we denyd any Resurrection but what is within,
whether G. K. this Great Doctor, this Great Correcter of Errors himself, can,
by what he here writes, be clear of such a Notion; since in page 115. he
speaks of the Burying-place, which was Mysteriously figured by the
Burying-place that Abraham purchased, where none but those who have 400 virtues
shall be buried, which is said to be at the End of Ephron's Field, and that
those who have not that Burying place, an untimely birth is better than he.?
And quere whether G. K. himself has 400 virtues, that is thus given to Change,
or whether an untimely birth be not better than he, by Just Consequence, for
want of virtue.

Now observe, he adds it is no such misery nor unhappiness not to have an
OUTWARD and visible Sepulcher, which many of the dear Children of God never
had; but (says he) sure they have this other more excellent burial in the
Mystical Land of Israel; where all the dead bodies of the Saints shall be
Raised up; Therefore'tis evident (according to G. K.) That though many of the
Children of God have not had an Outward and visible burial; yet they have had
a more excellent and Mystical burial in the Mystical Land of Israel; where
also they shall be Raised, and that it is not an outward and visible one. In
short what can be inserted from hence, but that it is an Inward and Invisible
burial, where there shall also be an Inward and Invisible RESURRECTION. This
is so very Misty Mystical, that One might have thought he had written this
Inadvertantly; had he not Confirmed it below, where he seems to Censure some
Jews as being Carnal; for that they Carnally, understood that the Bodies of
the faithful shall rise in the Outward Land of Israel; and says they are
confuted by the more intelligent or their own Writers called Mysticks, who by
the Land of Israel, where all the Saints shall be raised, do not understand the
OUTWARD Land of Israel; but another Mys;ticall, whereof the outward was but a
Figure: Now since he deems it carnal in these Jews, to understand it of the
outward Land of Israel, where the Saints are to be raised, and that they were
Confuted therein; what can be more naturally inferred from hence? (since he
accounts to understand it of the outward is Confutable); but that to understand
it of the Inward and Mystical, is both Spiritual and unconfutable.

This is the Man, that would be accounted the great Corrector of Errors in
other men; but as for himself he is (Strange Confidence!) always found in
Fundamentalls. Monstrum Horrendum! This is the man on whom Doctor Bray in his
Printed Letter Prodigally Squanders this Epithet viz. The Excellent Mr. Keith.
Telling the World how the field is Sown here (in Pensilvania etc.) by him. But
O ^ what a miserable Crop must needs be expected from such Confused
Miscellaneus seed, since where the wind is sown, the Whirlwind only is
reaped. The Increase or Crop of this Seed may probably well deserve Thrassing;
but it is Scarce worthy of grinding.

Here reminding what I have said before Intituling G. K. to the Revolution
Whimsies, I might expect his reprimand, but that I am so well provided with
proof, that he may rather blush and be silent, till he has either come to
another Revolution himself, or brought his now brethren (if it were Possible)
over to the same Imaginations; For besides what he has Couched of this Stuff
in his books, in the Years 89. and 90. and besides what he knows an honest
friend, and once an Intimate of his, affirmed to his face; that G. K. told him
at New York, (to this purpose) that he believed. God would lay it upon him to
Preach the Revolution Doctrine; and besides his implicit acknowledgement in
page 2. of Truth and Innocence* That he was concerned in Writing that
Revolution-book, called the 200 Queries; I say, besides all this, I shall here
acquaint him, what a very Intelligent person, yet living, who at first followed
G. K. in his Separation, did several Years ago, among other things, give upon
occasion under his hand, which take as follows, viz. That he once discoursing
with G. K. one point they had in hand, was, how God would save the Heathen,
that never heard of Christ etc. And what would become of Infants, and such as
were Deaf, Dumb, and not capable of Instruction; Seeing they Laid it dowd for
Doctrine, that no Salvation was Perfected without an outward Confession to the
the Faith of Christ etc. To which G. K. replied, that he had always
distinguished betwixt Salvation begun, and Salvation perfected; and added, that
the Doctrine of the Revolutions, would put an end to that, and many other
things, then disputable; But that it was not time yet, the World was not ready
to receive it, but it was a coming on -- Also that G. K. told him from Ephesians:
1. ^0. That Paul there mentions the Redemption of all the World, both
V^gitables and Animals etc. Then said the Friend, we must hinge it upon the
Revolutions: then G. K. Smiled, and said, we need not be so blunt; for when
they tax me with it, I can shift it and say, Its RATIONAL: But I never made i^
an Article of my Faith. I^e tell thee, said G. K. its Rational enough, that
Spirits revolve into bodies again, otherwise many things that were acted by
such, as were the people of God, could not be Warranted, neither could the
Scriptures be true; then named some seeming difficult places of Scripture; But
concluded, that this Doctrine would make all agree. Much more might be it
st^n;c'd; but here is enough, to show, that it was not without grounds, that I
have loaded G. K. with these Revolution Notions; and its very questionable,
whether an itch to bring forth these Notions to the World: (That he might be
the Parent of some new sect to be called by his Name;) was not the true ground,
of what he called often the main matter of Controversy with us here, as
aforesaid, and which Spurred him so fast on, to press so hard upon us, to own
the universal necessity of the knowledge and Faith of Christ witbout us, his
Death, Sufferings etc. So that none that ever had lived in any age, from the
Foundation of the World, either Jew or Conscientious Heathen, or other Infidel,
nor any Deaf or Dumb person, nor Infant could be saved, without that Faith and
Knowledge; and yet could not perish; though they dyed in a State without it. Se
200. Queries pa. 40. and his Catechism pa. 8.

G. K. an APOSTAT.
Having destroyed G. K's Foundation of vain glorying, as not changing or
varying in Fundamentalls, by clear demonstrations that he has varied, and
fixed also upon him his dim Divinations or Revolutionism, I now proceed to give
the World that of G. K. which he has sometimes seemd to require, when he has
been called an Apostat: I mean a proof of his Apostasy, which he has been
exceeding loath to own; and which has ever been a most of fencive and
ungrateful Epithet to him, (though due) where ever he has met with it: From
which his votaries and Abettors also, have with all the skill they could
advance, endeavored to shroud him, as a thing so Ignominious, that if duly
proud; it were enough to ruin his and their wicked, and impossible design, of
rendering the Quakers no Christians, and worse than Heathens; thereby to
Subject us to the hatred and Persecution of all people.

But now to the matter. Let it first be premised, that in all reason, nothing
ought to conclude and satisfy G. K. and his Adherents more in the Case, than
his own difinition what an Apostat is, and his own Practice to prove him such
an Apostat; and then I shall prove both one and the other.

In his Exact Narrative pa. 45. he says, that a Stranger, at one of his
Meetings at Turners-Hall, said, That to Apostatize, is to Apostatize from the
Whole Faith; but I find G. K. himself in his Way Cast up pa. 43. 57. 171. to be
of another mind, Charging the Church of Rome, as also the Presbyterian Church,
to be Apostatized; and yet we know, neither of them is Apostatized from the
whole Faith. Also in his said Narrat. p. 15. he appears to be of another mind,
where he places the Apostasy upon a man's being Changed in ANY (note any)
Fundamental Principle; for says he, if you cannot prove me, to have changed
in any Fundamental Principle, ye ought not to charge me to be an Apostat; well
then by the rule of Contraries, since I have proved him [as before] to have
changed, not only in ONE but in DIVERSE Principles, acknowledged by himself to
be Fundamentalls; therefore by his own Arguments, he must needs be an Apostat.
And here note '^is very probable, that the great endeavors G. K. has used, to
make the World believe, he has not, from the beginning, varied Fundamentalls,
was ^o the end, he might not be charged with the due, though Odious and
Ignominious Epithet of Apostat; but all his Covers are not able to hide him,
from us that so well know him to be an Apostate; not only from the Doctrines
which once he held and Preached, Writ for, and for which he dis^nted; but also
from the Meak and Peaceable Spirit of the Lord Jesus, into Envy and Rage,
perverting diverse Writings, and sayings of our Friends, Imposing his own Sense
upon them, and that sense upon the World, to the utter offending and stumbling
of some against the way of Truth it self, in revenge to its followers.

Again in his preface to Help in time of Need And in pa. 24, 25, 26. of the
same book, He charges some Presbyterians, for being (shamefully degenerated,
and declined, from what they had (them), but late themselves so zealously
ascerted and maintained, to be the Work of God, which they had shuck from, and
turned like the dog to the vomit, were not (Says he) set forms of Prayer Cried
down also in Scotland; as Lifeless barren things, and the service bo^^ Denied?
and now (says he) have ye not licked up the Vomit? and have not your Brethren
in England taken it up again? and when it is offered to you to read, will you
not also do the Like? There is no question but most of you will, and worse also
when you are put to the Trial.

Now have ye not Apostatized herein also, and mixed "your selves with the
Profane Rabble of the World? And ye can Pray and Sing and Communicate with
such, ^is not this Babylon indeed, which is to say Confusion?

First, for a short digression, Note these Words [ Worse also] what is that
Worse than the Common Prayer here meant; but the M^ss-Book, and if it was not
uncharitable in G. K. to suspect such worse things of them, from his
presumption only, that they would follow their brethren in England, when
tried, to Lick up the vomit, viz of set forms of Prayer, and the Service book?
I thinck his ought not to count it uncharitable now, if some cannot but suspect
such things of him if he should be tried, he having, actually Licked up those
things again, he once had vomited.

Now Observe, If taking up set forms of Prayer, Service Book etc. Rendered the
Presbyterians Apostats(as says G. K. it did) then if G. K. has done so too,
G. K. from his own Mouth must be an Apostate. But G. K. has so done therefore
from his own Mouth he is an Apostat.

But that which yet further renders G. K. an Apostat out of his own mouth, is,
what he delivered to his Auditory, in the Barbados house in Philadelphia, about
the time of his going for England, which was to this purpose viz. That if they
should hear (after his arrival in England) that he Preached amongstt he
Independants or Presbyterians, they ought not to call him an Apostat for that;
but if ever he put on the Canonicall-Robe (that is Priests Gown) then they
should call G. K. an Apostat; And to others in particular G. K. has said that
if ever he turned to the Church of England, then they might call him an Apostat.

To sum up the matter in short, and so come to a Conclusion; since a man may
be an Apostat, though he does not Apostatise from the Whole Faith, and since G.
K's Changed in diverse Fundamental Principles, and Joined to those that use set
Forms of prayer, and the Service book, And since he is become a Preacher of the
Church of England, and put on the Canonicall-Robe (all which G. K. himself has
given us as marks of an Apostat); Therefore G. K. is proved out of his own
mouth to be an Apostate, and ought not to be angry for the future, with such as
may give him that Charracter.

Having thus Established G. K. under his due Disignation of Apostat. It now
falls in my way to Justify our dear and honorable Friend W. P. against the
unworthy Suggestions and Insinuations of G. K. and other Cancer'd and hardened
Apostats, so often reiterated against him on purpose to defame him, and us with
him, viz. That he has said. "That the outward Person that Suffered is properly
the Son of God, we utterly deny, This has been fully answered to other
Adversaries (of whom G. K. is Chiefly a Copy) but ^east some in those Parts
(among whom G. K. upon his Stage, may have renewed that Charge against W. P.)
may not have seen any such Answers, I shall bestow a little further Pains about
it, for their Information.

It Is clear by some following words of W. P. that he meant it only of Christ's
outward body; where he says a Body "have thou prepared me Said the Son to the
Father) So the Son was not the Body though the Body was the Sons, And ind^^d if
that outward body ( abstractly was the So^ then God by that Body made the
Worlds; for by the Son its said, God made the Worlds Heb. 1.2.11.3. And was not
he the Son of God that was before Abraham was? And was he not Glorified with
the Father before the World began? But we do not read that the outward body was
before the World began, nor before Abraham: For in the fullness of Time he was
made of a Woman, of Seed of Abraham, after the Flesh and was then and is also
God, blessed for Ever. And we also find, that Christ himself distinguished
between himself and his Body Mat. 26.12. But to show that W. P. though he did not
believe the Son of God, to be strictly Limited to that outward body, (so
prepared for him of the Father, as aforesaid); yet in the same place it is Clear
W. P. owned the same Christ that Suffered, to be the true Son of God in these
words viz. He that Laid down his Life, and "Suffered his Body to be Crucified
by the Jews, without the Gates of Jerusalem, is Christ the Son of the Most high
God.

And in pa. 49. W. P. very fully expresses his and our belief again in these
Words, viz. -- We do believe in One "holy God Allmighty, who is an Eternal,
Spirit; the Creator of all things, and in One Lord Jesus Christ, him only Son;
and Express Image of his Substance, who took upon him flesh, and was in the
World, and in Life, Doctrine, Miracles, Death, Resurrection, Assention, and
Medeation, perfectly did, and does continue to do the Will o^ God, To whose
holy Life, Power, Mediation and Blood, we ONLY ascribe our Sanctification,
Justification, Redemption and perfect Salvation; and we believe in one Holy
Spirit, that proceeds and breaths from the Father and the Son, as the Life and
Virtue, both of the Father and the Son; a Measure of which is given to all to
profit with; and he that has one has all, for these Three are One, who is the
Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, God over all Blessed for ever.

But above all men, I thinck G. K. should not throw this at W. P. as if he here
denied the Son of God, considering what he has Writ in his Way Cast up pa.
102. Thus, "We have as good cause to believe him to be true and real Man,
before his outward birth in the flesh, as after; for it is not the Outward
flesh and blood that is the Man; But it is the Soul or Inward man, that is the
man most properly; such as Christ was from the beginning.

Again in pa. 104. he Says Let all the Scripture "be Searched out and it shall
not be found, that Christ became Man; and took to himself the Soul of man, at
his conception, in the Womb of the Virgin Mary; but ONLY that he took flesh,
and was the Son of Mary David, and Abraham, according to the flesh; but
according to his heavenly Nature, even as Man, he was the Son of God, and was
the Father and Lord of all the Faithful, in all Ages; the Mighty God, the
Everlasting Father etc. Here it is clear, that according to G. K. himself (who
says he was allways found in Fundamentalls), that it is not the Outward flesh
and blood, but the Soul or Inward man that dwells in the outward flesh, that is
the Man most properly: Surely then if not the Outward, that is the man most
Properly, that is not the Outward, that is the Son of God most Properly.

And since he says, it was according to his Heavenly Nature, that he was the
Son of God; and that he was the Father and Lord of all the Faithful, in all
Ages; the Mighty God, Everlasting Father etc. Surely all this could not be said
Properly of his Outward Person, as he was the Son of Abraham and David,
according to the Flesh, only.

As for what he so much Objects as if Friends G. F. and Fr. Howgill should say;
they were Equal with God; this also has been Answered very often,
Particularly by G. W. but three years ago, in his Truth and Innocence pa. 9,
10. The Answer is large; I shall therefore cite some of it, thus: The Charge
against G. F. was that he had said; He that has the same Spirit, that raised
up Jesus Christ is Equal with God, Souls Errand p. 8.

To this G. W. Answers, We deny the Words as there " Printed, to be according
to G. F's Sense, or Ours, which is, That the Holy Ghost and the Son is Equal
with the Father, in Power and Glory; then if any come to Witness the Holy
Ghost, they come to Witness that which is Equal in Power and Glory, with the
Father etc. And that G. F. being Charged with it, Posatively denied the Charge;
but confessed, that the Father and the Son are one; and that Christ and the
Holy Ghost, are Equal with God; and the words [He that hath] should be Left
out, as bring contrary to G. F's and Our Principle; and to his own very words
and Confession, a little before in the same book, where he posatively denies
the Charge.

And as for F. H's words pa. 232. of his Works, he is thus quoted; He that is
joined to the Lord is one " Spirit there is Unity; and the unity stands in
Equality it Self; where the Son is Revealed, and speaks, the Father speaks in
him, and dwells in him, and he in the Father. To which (as G. W. says) here
the Equality is placed between the Father and Son, as the union between him,
and them, who are joined to the Lord in Spirit, and live and Dwell in that
Spirit, which is Equal, where is then the Blasphemy? Se Christ's Prayer John
17.21. That they all may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee; that
they may be also One in us.

Again says G. W. The equality in nature [Objected] re^^^es to the Divine
nature, which every Child of God partakes of in measure, Se 2 Peter ^: 4.

And of the Words [Tho' not Stature] G. W. also Says, they relate to the Child
THAT Divine Nature, is one and unchangeable; but our participating of it, and
growth in it is Graduall, until all Christ's whole Church and Body, come unto
the measure of the Stature, and fullness of Christ Ephe^. 4.12.13. and he there
denis an Equality between the Saints and him that Created and renewed them; and
tho Perfect in Holiness and Righteousness, is required and believed of all
(...) and Faithful Christians in Christ Jesus; yet (says he), we do not
pretend to the Infinite fullness of Wisdom and Knowledge, as it is in God and
Christ, or to his manifold Wisdom; but to a Degree of Divine Wisdom, and
understanding, according as his Spirit reveals it to us; and we capable to
receive it, which is therefore Perfectly true, and certain, in every measure
and degree thereof. I have rather Chose to Cite our Ancient Friend G. W's
words, because, as he there Says, They who were conversant with those deceased
Friends, when living, have more right to interpret their Words, to such an
Evangellicall Sense as they knew they intended, than their Adversaries have to
Charge them, with Blasphemous Principles from their own partial, minced,
mangled, and boken quotations etc And that this Previledge cannot be denied by
G. K. here what he said, when he was clearer from Prejudice than now he is, in
his Serious Appeal, in Answer to Cotton Mather pa. 7. Thus, It may have happened
"to some among us, to have, at times, in Writing or speaking, delivered things
not so warily or Cautiously worded, in every respect, as need were; But in this
Case, all but Prejudiced Persons will say, if it can be found, by Comparing
their Words one with another, that their Sense and Meaning is found, though not
altogether so Safely or Cautiously Worded in every respect, Charity is to be
allowed, and the best Construction ought to be given to their Words, or they
themselves or Friends for them, in respect of their absence or Decease, who did
best know them ought to be allowed to give their sense of them; For though we
affirm, that the Spirit of God (...) us and all believers, in every discovery
gives ^is Infallible; yet we have he Judged (...) In^allible etc. Thus far G.
K. And as when he was here Writing, in defense of the Truth, of our Principles;
which he is now Writing against; he then allowed (before he had lost his
Charity), that Charity is to be allowed, and the best Construction, is to be
put upon our deceased or absent Friends words, by them who did best know them;
And it is to be observed, that in that very book he has himself cleared G. F.
from the Imputation of Blasphemy, he now Charges upon him; both about being
equal with God, and about the Soul; His Words are thus, to Cotton Mather pa.
60. And whereas "he would in the Conclusion fix it upon G. F. that he thought
himself equal with God, and that the Soul of man was God or a part of him, W.
P. has Sufficiently vindicated G. F. and also G. F. has cleared it in his,
book, that he did Witness, both the Son and the Holy Spirit revealed in him,
who are Equal with God the Father, as he takes notice of the Westminster
confession, acknowledgment. And what G. F. speaks of the Soul as being a part
(but more properly, a measure of the Spirit) of God; he does not understand it
of the Soul of man, that is essenciall to man, but of the Divine Soul or Spirit
in man or to Speak with the Scriptu^^^, the Soul of God, as it is Written; if
any draw back my Soul shall have no pleasure in him etc.

Now here we se that G. K. in his better days, has cleared G. F both from his
owning himself to be equal with God, and that the Soul of man that is
essential to him, as man, was any part or measure of God; And I really believe
it may be truly said of our Religion, as G. K. said to Cotton Mather, in the
same page, viz. Blessed "be God; our Religion is not that, as he would make it
to be, nor are we such as he discribeth, and it is great question to me, if he
does really thinck those things, that he says of us, to be true, either in
General, or in Particular; and if he does nor thinck so, the greater is his
Sin; Thus says G. K. and therefore let him look to it now; and indeed I cannot
thinck G. K. believes in his heart, that G. F. whom he once said, was safe in
the hand of him, that holds the Seven Golden Candlesticks Rector Corrected pa.
^ did ever in the least esteem of himself, as that he was equal with God,
neither did the Saints of Old so esteem themselves* though they spoke of their
being made partakers of the Divine Nature; And though they said, he that has
this hope in him, purifieth himself even as He is pure. And though, they said, as
He is, so are we in this World. And that though, they had an unction from the
Holy one, whereby they knew all things; yet I do not believe, they thought (no
more do we) that they were as God is, in the fullness of Wisdom, nor as God is,
in Greatness, Glory, Omnipresence, Omniciency, and Omnipotency, with others his
Great and Glorious Attributes; for Blessed be the Lord, he has made us (in
measure) Sensible that before him, all Nations are but as the drop of a
B^^k^rt, or as the small dust of the Balance: And though in his Serious Call
etc. He Charges the Quakers Indifinitely, of thinking themselves Equal with
God, yet I hardly thinck, that he is so Extraordinarily blinded with Prejudice,
as to believe, that if all the Quakers in the World, (who have their natural
Senses) were asked, (and he says there cannot be reckoned in England and Wales
less than 150000. Old and Young,) besides what is in other Places Se his Quakers
Politics pa. 16) expressly, one by one, and privetly, whether they did esteem
themselves to be equal with God; but that they would one by one deny it, with
great detestation, and utter abhorrency; Even as we are informed by the now
Living, that when G. F. was asked, whether he owned Himself to be Equal with
God; he Cried out, as abhorring the thing: Geo: Fox dust and Ashes! Geo: Fox
dust and Ashes!

Some few things more, yet further to Demonstrate, the further Confusion and
Falsehood of this hardened Apostat, and then for this time to have done with him.

It Is no Secret in the parts of America, between Piscatuay and Philadelphia,
where he has traveled in his work of E^^y, what accusations (though False) he
has openly brought against the Magistrates of Pensilvania; as if before he
went for England, they would have Tried him for his Life, and also have taken
it: (O! Murdering Envy and Falsehood!) if the Government had not been happily
Changed upon the very Juncture as a Miracle for his Diliverance; nor has his
self opposing Pen, been formerly less industrious, though to as little advantage
on his side, with those that thought it worth their while to observe it; some
Instances whereof accept as follows.

In his Exact Narr. pa. 40. he insinuates as if the Prosecution of him in
Pensilvania, would have been for his endeavoring to alter the Government; and
that they would have found him guilty, and put him to Death, if the Government
had not in the mean time been Changed. But, in Oposition to this; in his
Quakers Politics p. 20. (which might have been more fitly styled G. K's
Persuasions to Persecution) and Bloodshed; he Says, it was for Telling them,
That by taking the Sloop from the Privetiers etc. they had Transgressed (as
they would make the World believe), then known Principle, against Fighting,
That he was Presented by a Grand Jury. Alexander Beards^ey Foreman, and the
rest also mostly Quakers; at a Session held by Quaker Justices, in the year
1692. to be found guilty of a Capital Crime; in order to be Tried for his Life
a Month after; but that by the Wonderful Providence of God, that wrought his
deliverance, they were turned out of the Government, before the Month Expired;
But again in Reasons for renouncing Quakerism pa. 24. (which in his Plain
Discovery pa. 6. he says, he can well enough stand to Justify) it is said, it
was for his saying: 1st. That Christ's body Rose out of the Grave: 2ly. That it
was Lawful to Pray to Jesus Christ Crucified; and 3ly. That the best Saints
had need allways to come to God by the Medea^er the Man Christ Jesus; And that
for these things, they Excommunicated him, first and afterward; presented him
by a Grand Jury at Philadelphia; and that they would have found him Guilty of
Death, if the Government had not been taken our of their hands: So that we se,
that though he has published so many Evidences against us; yet these Evidences
do not agree: But that which is yet more observable is that he should be so
Infatuated, as to publish such Falsehoods, as by the words of the Presentment it
self, Published by him and themselves here, plainly appears. The words of which
Presentment, in their book called New-Englands Spirit etc. pa. 24. and printed
with the Trial it self, is, as follows: We of the " Grand Jury, do present,
George Keith and Tho. Budd, as Authors of a Book, Entitled The Plea of the
Innocent; where in page 3. about the Latter end of the same, they the said G.
K. and Tho. Budd, defamingly accuse Samuel Jennings, (he being a Judge and a
Magistrate of this Province) of being too High, and Imperious, in Worldly
Courts, calling him Impudent, Presumteous, and Insolent man, greatly Exposing
his Reputation, and of an ill Precedent, and contrary to the Law in that Case
made, and Provided.

Now in the relation of the matter, above cited by G. K. etc. there are these
following Falsehoods, and false insinuations; First, by their saying the
presentment made Would have been Prosecuted, if the Government had not been
Changed; whereas the Presentment was Prosicuted and brought to Judgment; and
that long before the Change of Government; and he only was Fined five Pounds,
which never was, nor (I suppose) never would have been exacted, if the
Government had not been Changed.

Again he says, he had been accused for endeavoring to alter the Government,
which was Capital by their Law, and that they would have found him Guilty of
Death, if they had not been turned out of the Government.

In which are these falsehoods, and false insinuations. For First, in the
presentment, he was not accused for endeavoring to alter the Government, for
there was in the presentment nothing like it, nor Secondly, had we any Law that
made it Capital: But that they WOULD have found him guilty of Death; a more
Wicked, Malicious, and False ascertion G. K. could hardly have Invented,
against those then in Government. Surely, I may say of him (as he told Tho:
Ellw^^d) that he is Apostatized from Common Honesty, as well as from diverse of
his own Acknowledged Fundamentals of Christianity.

Again a little further to show G. K's Persecuting Spirit, we find, that
because our Friends in England, have not so taken upon Trust, all that G. K.
has Printed, concerning the taking of the Sl^op, as to condemn those Friends
concerned therein; he takes advantage thereby, to vent his very great Enmity
and Prejudice against us, and to stir up the PEACEABLE GOVERNMENT at home to
PERSECUTION. For, ^ays he in his said Politics pa. 28. What Security has the
Civil Government; but "when they thinck ^i^t, and apprehend they are animated,
BY THE SPIRIT So to do; but that they may make use of the Sword, considering
their Numbers, Wealth, Politics, and Methods of correspondency, to carry on
their Designs.

O Envyous Scoffer! O Murdering Spirit! what havoc would thou make upon the
Earth, amongst an Innocent and Peaceable People? who ever have and still do
live quietly in the Land, and for whom the Lord Jesus; through his Eternal
Love, laid down his holy Life, and shed his most precious blood, as well as for
others; But thou art Limited and Restrained, and that may be part of thy
torment; and, we hope, thy Wicked desires will never be answered: And we both
pray for and hope, greater filicity to our Native Land, than tha^ ^ver her
Rulers shall take Council, of such a Cruel ^^^^diary

Next he has, in p. 36. 37. Published and abstract of a Letter sent him (he
Pretends) from [his thorough paced peevish Procelite] R. B. giving (as in pa.
30.) he says, a farther account of the Quakers Politics; where the said R. B.
speaking of the general Collections, made by our Friends, for several
Services; confesses, they are made as there is a Seasonable Motive to Charity,
and after he has told something of the way, and manner of Collecting, those
Charitable Contributions, he tells, that the motives for the (then) two last
General Collections, was, the Distress in Ireland in the Late Wars, and the
late Scarcity of Food in Scotland; upon which last motive (Says he) and the
general Service of Truth, the general Collection rose high, And after having
made such Observations as he thincks fit, upon those our Christian and truly
Charitable practices, (which he maliciously calls Policies) he most envyously
makes this use of it: As if it were dangerous to the Government, in these
words, viz. And it may also with Reason "be Suggested, That should they be
Suffered, or Tolerated in their Policies; it may by degrees occasion a
Convulsion both in Church and State etc. Behold what Spirit of Persecution
appears with open face, in these Brethren in Iniquity! What Worse or more
Malicious Suggestions did the Jesuits and Friars in France Suggest to that
King, against the poor Protestants there; But thanks be to God (the King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords, the only Ruler of Princes,) who has Graciously
inclined, the hearts of our Superiors, to a more Christian moderation toward
us, and all others their Conscientious Protestant Subjects, than those Julian
like Apostats would have them to use; and we have still great Cause, to be
thankful to Allmighty God, who has ^o preserved us in our Christian Testimony,
that though those envyous Apostats, and Back-sliders, above all others, would
render us Obnoctious, and Dangerous to the Government we live under; yet they
can Prove no greater matter against us, than the Maintaining or Continuing our
Christian care, to promote Piety, Charity, and real Christianity, amongst us.

And how can it be any thing but bitter Enmity and Malice, in this G. K. above
all Men, thus basely to insinuate against us? because he having been among us
so many years, and as an Elder, concerned in those Meetings too? cannot but
know in his Conscience, how innocently (and Inofencinly to the Government)
those Meetings are kept and managed.

Again in Plain Discovery pa. 25. It Is still farther evident, that G. K. is
earnest to stir up the Magistrates to persecute us; though the Name of
Persecution, is so Odious among men, to be sure he is not willing to own it;
yet since he is so really and openly for the thing, he must not be peevish, if
I tell him of it; for see what here he says in plain Words, viz. What the
Quakers call Persecution, "I mean some COERTION and RESTRAINT, that should be
used upon their TEACHERS, by the CIVIL MAGISTRATE.

Again, If the Civil Authority should PUNISH Them, and use some OUTWARD
COERTION, by HINDERING their PREACHING in PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES; and PRINTING, it
would be no PERSECUTION; No George! no Persecution, for all this? Here the
Serpent shows his Sting, and Spits his Venom; but all in vain; for the first he
must draw back into his own mouth, from whence it came; and the Latter, does
but infect his own Bowe^ls. Are not COERTION and RESTRAINT some of the Tools of
the Inquisition? When thou metst with these things at Aberdene, and afterward
at London; thou then thoughtst them Persecution, which if thou had escaped in
thy own Country, Some are ready to thinck, thou had no^ so soon left it, nor
troubled us so soon here from England.

And may not these words PUNISH THEM Comprehend all the various ways of
Punishment and Tortures, mentioned in the Books of Martyrs? or practiced in the
Inquisition, whether Dungeons, cutting of throats, Grid-Irons, or other
Punishments whatsoever? and which is yet more Cruel than the Grave? our breath
must be stopped, and our voice not heard to Complain; and those means taken away
whereby to Discover the Persecutor If not Murderer: we must neither Preach nor
Print It seems; and then G. K. might have the more scope to abuse us at
pleasure; and go on in his Lies, false Accusations, and, Slanders undetected,
and without Contradiction.

And we understand that G. K, is of the same wicked mind still, if not worse
and worse; And more and more Presumteous, Imperious, Insolent, and
unreasonable; as appears by this following relation sent from Road-Island: viz.
On the 6th. day of the 6. mo. the said G. K. with "one Miles, and another
called Ministers of the Church of England. came to our new Meeting House, and
took a place, and sat down in time of Meeting, being the First day of the Week:
After some time our Friend E. S. stood up and Declared, which was to the
Comfort and Edification of the Meeting in General, and after his Testimony was
ended, the said G. K. stood up, and said, That ^. S. had spoken many good
Truths; but mixed with Error. Reply was made, That we desired to enjoy our
Meetings, ^^ceably (not being yet ended); and if he or they had any thing to
offer AFTERWARD the House should be (...) to him, and as many as would, might
hear him; but he still pressed for audience, and being in a Turbulent frame,
called to the Governor in a Commanding way to ORDER that he might be heard;
and that the AUDITORY might BE COMPELLED TO STAY and HEAR HIM; or else HE WOULD
COMPLAIN to the QUEEN of him. Thus pressing the matter, answer was made him;
that the House was our Own, and we ought not to be Disturbed: Then he
Pretended, he had as much to do there as we; Then we desired to se his Power;
upon which he again called to the Justices, that they might Compel the People:
The Justices answer was, The Deputy Governor was there; Then he applied
himself to him, who told G. K. That it was our Previledge to Enjoy our Meetings
Peaceably and agreeable to that Constitution, where all had enjoyed that favor
near Sixty Years. Notwithstanding G. K. persisted in his abusive Reflections:
So that our Meeting was finally disturbed by him. And two days after, when G.
K. with others went to the Governors, house, and there read that which he
called his Power from the Bishop I suppose of London) it proved only a Letter
of Recomendation; the Sum whereof was, that Mr. K. had been an Instrument to
bring many Souls to God, and desired he might be kindly treated in these parts:
And yet G. K. had still the Confidence to continue his applycations to the
Governor, to force the Way to the Meeting House, and to order that he might
have a hearing there; G. K. pretending he could Open or Lock up our doors as he
Pleased; but the Governor absolutely Refused to gratify him therein; saying,
he would do nothing by force: Then he desired the Governors Leave that the
Justices might Assist him: which he also prudently Refused; but at last Granted
him Leave, to meet in the Courthouse.

Thus G. K. at Newport on Road-Island, besides all the rest of his Disturbances
of our peaceable Meetings there, and on other parts of the Island, and likewise
in New England, Long Island, and of our Yearly Meeting at Shrewsbury, in
East-Jersey, and though he came not himself to that Meeting yet he several times
sent a rash Praecipitant person (who by his garb looked like a Minister of the
Church of England,) to read certain abusive manuscripts, which he did several
days Successively, in the time of our Worship; and also told us, that he did
not know, but that he had as much Right there as we; In the reading of one of
which Manuscripts, the said Person, in G. K's name, made use of the name of the
QUEEN and Nobility of England to us, (as G. K. himself did afterward in words
on another occasion) pretending to be of their Religion, the better (as some
thought) on the one hand to awe us, and on the other to Magnify himself in the
view of the People. But what Point soever G. K. aimed at in all these things,
yet I can fully distinguish, between the Religion, and Christian Clemency of
the Queen, Nobles, and Commons of England, who have graciously, under God,
continued to Tolerate us, in the free exercise of our Religion, and the
Apostasy of G. K. and Irreligion of him and his Abettors, who would move
Persecution and Destruction against us. May the council of the True God ever be
with the Queen, and Government of England, and all their Advisers; and then we
fear not at all what G. K. and envy can hatch against us, with respect either
to our Liberty, Property, or Religion; but rather hope, for a just reprimand
upon G. K. for his audacious use of the Queens Name; (and some thinck without
Her knowledge in his Illegal and Turbulent treatment of us, in our Religious
and peaceable Meetings, in times of our Worship of the True and Living God, if
Complaint shall be made to the Queen, of these his abuses and proceedings,
since his arrival in America; For does not G. K. in all these things greatly
mistake, and abuse the tender and Christian disposition of the Queen, toward
her peaceable people, and the Genious, and Temper of her Government at Large?
that is for gently Ruling and Governing, not rigerously Destroying or
Disturbing her Subjects, either by Punishing them, to gratify the devouring
Spirit of Persecuting G. K. or Forcing them to hear him with such others as
come, not to preach the Gospel of Peace, but to Disturb them, contrary to the
Statutes and Government of Her Kingdom of England.

And does not G. K. with his fellow Disturbers, and Peace-breakeing Ministers
of the Church of England, also abuse the Bishop of London? by using these
Letters of Recomendation beyond their due Limits? and under that pretext and as
Ministers of the Church of England; abusing the Queens Subjects in their
Religions, and peaceable Meetings? And does not G. K. reproach the Religion of
the Queen, Lords, Commons, and Magistrates, of England? to say they are of the
same Religion with him, That would use COERTION and RESTRAINT upon our
Teachers, HINDER our PREACHING in PUBLIC and our PRINTING; and PUNISH us? and
not only thus; but would have them ORDER for himself a hearing; and COMPEL
the PEOPLE to HEAR HIM: And LOCK up and OPEN our Meeting-House-Doors at
Pleasure; and so by all these doings Invade our Liberty, Property and RELIGION:
But we are assured through the great Mercy of God, this is not the QUEEN and
Nobilities Religion, nor the Religion nor Inclination of the Magistrates or
people in general; But of G. K who may Justly be st^led a Son of Ap^llyon the
Destroyer.

Now if it be true (as he has Suggested to render us dangerous to the
Government), that there is 150000 of Us in England and Wales, besides what may
be in other parts of the Queens Dominions; then he must needs be very
unreasonable to Imagine the Government should become Executioner of his privet
revenge upon so great a multitude; the generality of whom, if not every Soul of
them come to the years of discretion, may be more Serviceable in the Common
Wealth by their labor and Indo^stry, than himself, whose greatest employ seems
to be in vain J^rgling and Fruitless Contention.

And now to conclude, whereas on the one hand G. K. does so often tell us, that
we are unsound in Fundamentalls, and on the other hand we say we know not any
one Principle of the Christian Faith, that we are not sound in; and since those
things which some may esteem Fundamentalls; others esteem none, as G. K. in his
Serious Appeal told Cotton M^ther, that they did not hold all Our Fundamentals;
and also says, That the Priests in New England hold 12 particular false
Doctrines, and that some of them are Fundamental; But does not tell which of
them are so* s^ Pre^b. and Indep. p. 204. 215. It may therefore (one would
thinck) highly concern G. K. in order to prevent any from thinking they hold
all the Fundamentalls, before they do, to sho^ what all those matters of Faith
and Doctrine are, which he himself calls Fundamentalls, and prove them to be
such (and so necessary as he makes them) by the Holy Scriptures which he
himself calls the Rule. With this Caution, to be sure to be Consistant with
himself, and his now brethren, as well as with the Scriptures, about them; and
then he may publish something to prove, if he can, that we do not hold all
those Fundamentalls.

And as for meeting with G. K. at his peremptory Sumons from time to time, in
order to dispute him, that we look upon as an Inposition, no ways obigatory
upon us, as also very unreasonable. First, because the Apostle says: If "thou
have any thing against thy brother, tell him of it, between him and thee, and
if he hear thee, thou have gained thy Brother; if he hear thee not, take two or
three with thee, that in the mouth of two or three Witnesses, every word may be
Establised; and if he will not hear, then tell the Church, and if he will not
hear the Church; let him be unto thee as an Heathen man, and Publicain* Again,
An Heritick after the first or Second " Admoniti^^ (...) knowing that such, is
Condemned of himself. And since G. k. has also himself in his Presb. and
Indep. pa. 212. Writ to the like purpose* viz. I do "not find (says he) any
Command or practice in all the Scripture, for you to decline a fair dispute
with men, suppose Heriticks or false Teachers, UNLESS you have FIRST DEALT with
THEM, in order to Convince them; and even you ought not to reject an H^ritick,
till after the first and second Admonition. Implying that having FIRST dealt
with them and given them First and Second ADMONITION, Declining to meet SUCH to
Dispute, and also to Reject them, is Justifyable and Warrantable. Now G. K.
whilst among us, having had such Gospel Order as aforesaid and not only
first, but second and many Admonitions and much Condiscention, Long Suffering,
brotherly kindnss, and patience used toward him, under all his false
accusations, slanders and abuses; both of particular persons and of Meetings;
and also of Yearly-Meetings, both in America, and in England, in which, after
all, he persisting, both by Word* Writing and Printing; he has therefore been
long since rejected, and thereby become unto us as an Heathen man^ and a
Publicain; and being Condemned out of his own (...) (in this bo^k before, as
also in many other Prints of ours, plentifully proved,) he is (to us) no better
than an Heritick^, whatever those may thinck of him, that have newly Embraced
him for a Minister among them; All which duly considered, together with our
Reasons, in a Sheet Entitled, A Word to the well Inclined etc. As also because
what we see occasion to do in order to Wipe off the Reproach Cast upon the
Truth and our Friends by him, the Way of the Press begun by himself, is surely
best for General Information, and least Liable to M^sunderstandings,
Misrepresentations, and Exceptions; especially since our Principles, have so
many years, and upon so many occasions as well of late, as formerly, been made
known in Print to the World, and by which also, the Objections made against
them, have and may be sufficiently answered. I can not se, how any Sober and
truly Religious and Impartia^l person, of any Persuasion among professed
Christians, can justly blame us, for declining any further disputes with him,
or for our not so gratifying his restless and contentious Temper, and the
rather, since the Apostle also Advises Timothy, to withdraw himself from such
as were doting about Questions and Strifes of Words; whereof comes Envy,
Strife, Railings, Evil Surmisings, Perverse Disputings of men of Corrupt Minds;
and Des;titute of the Truth; Supposing that Gain is Godlyness. But to follow
after Righteousness, Godliness, Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness; And to Fight
the good Fight of Faith. 1. Ti^. 6.4, 5.11, 12. Which Council we will take with
the Lords Assistance.

SOME few more Instances of the many, that might be brought of G. K's sayings,
gain sayings, and False sayings etc.
AT first he could say, and plead hard Against-Forced maintainence; and
Produced the Ancient Protestant Testimony against it; and that to Force Wages
for Preaching, was a Papish, but not a Protestant Principle; se Pretended
Antidote pa. 68, 69, 70.

But of late he can Plead as hard for Tyths, and say, it is to be coped that
the Parliment will never make an Act to have them put into the Public
Treasure. Se from pa. 378. to 384, of that he Falsely calls the Quakers Standard.

Again in defending Water Baptism etc. He can now say, he knows no Society in
Christendom, that has laid them quiet aside, but the Quakers; Quakers Stand.
pa. 430. yet in Serious Apeall pa. 34. he could say, that Infants Baptism was
not Practiced until the third Age or Century after Christ; and was not brought
in by the Commandment of Christ; and that there are many of greater note for
Learning and skill in, Antiquity, far more famous then Cotton Mather is ever
like to be; that asert the same.

Note although G. K. has retracted what he formerly held, about Baptism; yet
these Learned Men's skill in Antiquity, is still in force against him, unless he
could prove, that they have retracted also; And further; since Infants Baptism
is no Commandment of Christ, as any where to be found in Scripture, nor
Practiced till the third Age or Century after Christ; it is therefore evident,
that it was brought in, and continued by the Doctrines and Commandments of men.

Again, he could once say, in pa. 88. of Way Cast up* when speaking against the
term Persons in the Trinity; that Persons signifies Substances, and not the
Modes and Properties of one Substance; but now he can say, they are Three
Persons; consequently, from his own Mouth Three Substances* Query, is he better
skilled in Philosophy, since he writ that book, or will he venture to say now,
Three persons in the Trinity, are Three Substances; seeing again in pa. 30. of
his Fourth Narative, he brings a Similitude, that they may neither be Three
Substances, nor Three Nothings; for says he, there is a plain distinction of a
medium in Created beings, betwixt Substance and Nothing. The three dementions
of a body; Length, Breadth, and Depth, are neither three Nothings, nor three
Substances. Query* And suppose, that were true; does it therefore follow, that
three Persons are not three Substances? According to his former sentments? And
yet again, observe a little lower Ibid, he says, that all Created beings are
improper to express this Mystery; though I find nothing Produced by him to
express it: But Properties, and Created beings, as Persons, Personal,
dementions of Length, Breadth, and Depth of a body etc.

In the Fundamentall-Truths of Christianity, again he could say, that set Forms
of Prayer etc. were not used in the Church till upward of 300 Years after
Christ; which plainly shows them also, to be but Commandments and Traditions of
Man. Yet now he can say for them; and use very weak Arguments to prove them to
boot; se Quakers Stand. pa. 389. 391.

Again, for G. F's being accused, for saying. He was Equal with God; and that
the Soul was Part of God; he could once say, and Justify G. F. from those very
Calamnies; yet now he is turned about, who but he, to accuse G. F. about those
things; and that from those very Passages, which he once vindicated him in; se
more in this Book: Observe, is it likely he should see G. F.'s words, better
now then when his Eyes were Younger?

Again, he could say, since he was Separated from Us* that his Present Doctrine
concerning the Faith of Christ, he had showed and demonstrated, that it was
well consistant with. -- Robert Barclays Printed Books (particularly his
Apology; Truth and Innocence pa. 10.

Again, now he has a mind to it, he can say, that the whole method proposed by
the same Robert Barclay, in the same Apology, is a mean sham, of Deism or
natural Relii^^; Note, since G. K's Doctrine eleven years ago, about this
great Fundamental of Faith in Christ, was well consistant with Robert Barclays
Apology; (whose whole method and Sistom here G. K. now says is but mere Deism,
and quite another Gospel, and Way of (...), than what our Savior gave his
Apostles to Preach. (se Quakers Standard pa. 282, 283.) and if G. K. is not
Changed in Funmentalls; then is not he yet as unsound in this great
Fundamental, as he would render R. B. to have been.

Again in his Presbiter. and Indep. pa. 7. when speaking of the Scripture, not
being properly the Word of God; he could say, that (according to the Greek),
the term [Word] mentioned in These 1.5. signifies Word of Talk or discourse:
But in his Reasons for Renouncing Quakerism pa. 16. he can say that by that
very term Word, in that very place now, is, meant Doctrine.

Again, in his Universal free Grace etc. from 1 cor. 2.1, 2. where the Apostle
says; he determined not to know any thing among them, save Jesus Christ and
him Crucified. G. K. could once say, that according to the Greek, it is thus:
not to know any thing [in you] save Jesus Christ, and him Crucified. And which
he there says, is understood of the seed that suffered in them.

But now he can say in pa. 11 of his Retraction book, that that very text is to
be understood, as he was Outwardly Crucified; and but consequently of his
Inward appearance: (Note) this is the Man, that is so much Valued by some, for
his skill in the Languages. Query But what Dependancy is there upon these
Languages, which possibly not one of 1000 understands, since they who do or
pretend to understand them, can interpret them as they Please. The premises
considered, methinks G. K. should not take it amiss that the Title of this Book
is PROTEUS, (who of old was said to be one, who could turn himself into what
Shape he pleased) especially since in page 31. of his fourth Narative, he uses
that term Himself to G. W.

Again he could say in Quakers Stand. p. 507. that Robert" Barclay and himself,
held all the Principles of Christianity, that were Fundamental; called The
Simpliciter Credenda; and yet but a few lines Lower, he could say, that they
both said and writ many things repugnant and Contradictory to the same; at
least Indirectly and consiquentially, [and in the next page,] he says, that
whatever their defaults were they acted not against their Perswas^ons etc.
Observe here then, that whereas G. K. said and writ many things Repugnant, and
Contradictory to the Fundamentalls of Christianity; it was but according to his
Persuasion (as he says), so that, then he had Persuasions it seems that were
repugnant to the Fundamentalls of Christianity, and yet at the same time held
all the Fundamentalls of Christianity.

Again in his Quakers Stand, pa. 476. he can say, though "falsely and craftily,
that Robert Barclays method of arguing against unlawful Games, unprofitable
Plays and Superfluety and vanity of Apparel etc. was chiefly against the abuse
and exess of those things; and therefore he would not contend with him about
them; observe; this is certainly a great and wilful abuse upon Robert
Barclay. to render him, as if he was not against the use of Games, Plays,
Sports Superfluety and vanity in Apparel etc. But only against the abuse of
them, whereas, in diverse places, Particularly, in pa. 515. he tells us in plain
words, that it is not Lawful, to use them. It Is very like, G. K. had a reach
here to save his Creditt, in thus giving the goe-by, to Robert Barclays weighty
Arguments, against those things, least he should have offended the most
Serious, on the one hand, or those, who are not so on the other hand.

I would not willingly mistake G. K. but really, I can not inmagine, what else
should occasion him, thus so obviously to stretch the Point, by abusing R. B.
but be it as it will, we se he can say, and write very false and uncredable
things, when he has a mind to it. For thus he could once say, as in this book,
and plead, that the Experss Knowledge and Faith of Christ's Sufferings etc. is
not absolutely Necessary to Salvation, except where it was Revealed.

Again, he could say, that the Express Knowledge etc. is Absolutely and
Indespensibly Necessary.

Again, he could say, that the Express Knowldege etc. is not Indispensibly
Necessary, Except where Revealed, as above; Note, is not here Variation, in a
Fundamental Doctrine?

And now notwithstanding, all these sayings, and gainsayings, mentioned in this
book, with diverse others that might be named, if what he says be true; he was
allways found in Fundamentalls, nor chanded in his Principles, but is of the
same Faith, that he has been of, above this 30 Years; but as for the Quakers,
with whom he walked 28 of that 30 Years; Alas! their Religion is no more
Christian, than the T^^kes or Jesus is: They do not belive one Article, of the
Apostles Creed, in true sense of Scripture; ^ay, if it was not for their
Habits, they would all be taken for (...); see his Reasons for Renouncing
Quakerises pa. 14. 15. as if we were in all things else, believers in that
Grand Impostour. keeping the sixth day of the week, to Worship him, often
visiting his Tomb etc. I say, as it in all this, and much more, we were like
Ma^^^^^^ns; for it we have nothing to distinguish us from Ma^o^^t^^s, but our
Habitts, then must we be Guilty, of so believing, and so Practicing, and to
show, that this did not Drop from him inadverantly appears, for that as above
he said, the Quakers had no more Faith in Christ, than Turks and Jews, and that
he would prove it before any Impartial Auditory* also at Shrewr^bury; last
Fall, he told us, that the Quakers Religion, and the Turks was all one, and
that he could prove it, if we would give him an Opportunity: By this we may
perceive, what little heed is to be taken, to what such an Envious and ^avish
man says, though he adds, he can Prove it; for Alas^ since he will undertake to
prove such Obvious Falsehoods, to be true, what will he not venture at, when he
has a mind to it, though contrary to our own Knowledge and Experience. And
thinks we are oblidged to dance after him, by meeting him to hear his
reiterated and often answered noise; or otherwise, when he has a mind to find
(...) his, Perumtory Challenges: But that which puts a Check, to the carreer,
of his so many ab^s^s toward us, is, for that he meets with so few Bigots,
from whom he can Extor^a belief (with all his miss Quoting Clipping and
pe^verting ou^ Friends Words, sense and meanings) that we are as he would
render us to be. Indeed, he may pudder him self as long as he will: Read
Quotations out of our Friends books, Strain their sense, pervert their meaning,
as long as he may be permitted or take hold of any omission o^ (...) of here
and there a word, either by Pen or press; of that are not so Cautiously worded,
in every respect as need were, though if by comparing their words, one with
another, their sense and meaning appears sound; G.K. when he had more Charity,
and less prejudiced, then he ha^t now, could say, all but Prejuduced Persons
will say, Charity is to be allowed, and the best construction ought to be given
to their Words etc. Serious Appeal pa. 7. but for want of that Charity he now
puts the worst sense that he can with any Color devise; thus he may write, and
write again; and if he write 1000 more books than he has yet done; I hope he
shall never make it appear, that ever the Quakers were or are unsound, in the
Faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, either outwardly or inwardly; of that they do
not Faithfully and sincerely believe every Article of that called the Apostles
Creed, in the true sense of Scripture; or that our workship, is not that which
Christ, declared to be the true; when he said the hour comes, and now is, when
the true Worshippers shall Worship the Father in Spirit and in Truth; for the
Father s^cketh such to Worship him: John 4.23. Or that it is not according to
the Apostle, where he faith; We are the Circumcision, who Worship God in
Spirit, and Rejoice in Christ Jesus; and have no Confidence in the flesh etc.
Phillip 3.3. And since we find not that our Savior or his Apostles, either
Commanded or Practiced those diverse needless Practices, ways and manners of
Worship, so much used in saverall Churches in Christendom, since the Apostles
days; and are therefore but needless inventions of men, and set up in the night
of Apostasy, and tho 'as we are Satisfied, that that degree of Reformation,
both in Doctrine and Practice, in the Ancient Reformers, and their denying and
laying aside as the Inventions of men, so many of those needless Practies,
Ceremonies and Customs in the Church of Room, (there being no Precept nor
Example in Scripture for, them) was the work of God in that day, even so we
are, satisfied, that the more effectual Reformation and laying aisde the rest
of those needless Practices or Ceremonies and Customs (for which we find no
more Command or Example, then those other) is the work of God, and of his
Requiring in our days.

POSTSCRIPT.
Being some Remarks on Daniel Leeds 's abusive Almanac for the Year 1703.

DANIEL LEEDS in his Almanac, seems to value himself, for that the Quakers
think it worth their while to print books against him; for (says he) as
Rediculous "and Inconsiderable a Runagado etc. As the Foxonion Quakers term;
yet they think worth their cost to print books against^ me etc. Answer Let not
that make him Proud, for was not Alexander the Copper-Smith writ against for
doing much Evil in his days se 2 Timothy 4.14. but he says, they are Invictiv'd
Lying Pamphlets. Ans. But he should have told us wherein; for I assure him,
that without Information, I cannot find them; tho it is true in his Printed
Challenge he mentions, between 30 and 40 Lies, Perv^rsions and Forgeries in my
book: But was c^nning enough not to name one, except that wherein he so
notoriously abuses W. P. by falsely accusing him, as calling Christ as man, the
Finite Impotent Creature; for which I detected him in Satan's Harbinger; and in
D. L. Justly Rebuked etc. To the last of which (says he) I have returned a
Reply to "the main point of what therein relates to me; a little to open the
Juglers Box, and show his Sophest^y, in taking W.P. off from terming Christ as
Man Finite and Impotent. Ans. Is his Stomach a little come down, indeed I say a
little, because it is not so much as it ought, yet so much as that he is fain to
make use of the Juglers box himself, (to save his Credit but all in vain) by
altering the terms of his accusation; for where did I ever take, or go about to
take W. P. off from terming Christ as Man Finite and Impotent only; it really
seems to me, as if in his Reply, that he speaks of (which I suppose is not yet
published) he is not only shifting from the terms of his accusation, but from
the page also, from whence he took it; for the accusation was, that W. P. had
in his book called the Sandy Foundation Shaken, called Christ as Man, the
Finite Impotent Creature: The place was page 20; but now I am apt to think, he
sees, that neither the place nor matter will hold water; and so is fain to slip
over to page 21, where possibly he may fancy, he can make a noise with
something there, a little to amuse the Reader; for in the said 21 page, when W.
P. was arguing the point, then indifference by other sort of arguments, than he
did in page 20, there he asserts that Christ as Man was Finite, and therefore
could not as such satisfy Infinite Justice, which thing the Priests also
acknowledged, as I showed in D. L. Rebuked pa. 25. therefore how did I go
about, to take W. P. off from terming Christ as Man, Finite and Impotent, when
the term Finite I Expressly said W. P. owned; and as for the word Impotent, I
said nothing about it; he is not like to shift his accusation so, and to Creep
out by that; but possibly he may think, he has matter against W. P. for
holding (as did also the Priests) that Christ as Man, being Finite, could not
Satisfy Infinite Justice; and that that employed Impotency in Christ as man;
and so perhaps make some noise of that, unless the consideration Of Christ's
own words John 5.30. ((...)) I can of my own self do nothing, should make him
(...) little upon it however: Let D. L's thoughts be what it will in that
matter; yet as his accusation was not* for that W. P. had in pa. 21. Expressly
or Implicitly termed Christ as man Finite and Impotent; so there was no such
matter, therefore laid down for me to vindicate him about; but that W. P. did
as D. L. says in p. 20. use such ^^^ghting In^everent,(or to use D. L's own
words), Blasphemous Expression as to call the man Christ, the Finite Impotent
Creature; as I utterly deny it, so I have in D. L. Justly Rebuked it, and
plainly showed the contrary: And D.L. may write again and again, frett and
flu^^er in his own nett as long as he will; but until he can get the art of
proving a thing to be, which is not, he will never be able to prove that
against W. P.

I shall conclude this head, after having told the Reader, that about two
Months ago, I happened to see a book of G. W's called Truth and Innocence etc.
Printed in the Year 1699. which I never saw, nor heard of before. One part of
which, was an answer to a ^ibel, the Author of which, had accused W. P. of this
very thing; where it is like D. L. might pick it up; and which in page 70 W. P.
Answers for himself thus (viz.) Which is so "gross a strain of Envy and Abuse,
that no ingenious person can read it without an abhor^ency of the Authors.
Temper and work, and shows how little Credit ought to be given him in the rest
of his wo^k^s; for it is plain, W. P. made the absurdity lie here, that the
Doctrine he opposed, makes it imposible for God to forgive without a ridged
Satisfaction, end yet man, who is a Finite Impotent Creature, is not only
capable of it, but Commanded to do it, se S^ndy Foundation pa. 4. Seit 7. thus
far W. P. which was published in England, a little before Satan's Harbinger was
published here: well I next take notice, as to his Quotations, what D. L. says
and boasts in the said Preface, concerning the Truth of them, thus* "As to the
following Quotations, there is few if any, but what have been examined in
England, by Eight Ministers, who have attested to the Truth of them, so that
it will be in vain for the Quakers to say I belie them etc. And he might have
put in G. K. for the ninth Minister* for in his Serious Call, there G. K. says
of his Quotations, that they Exactly agree with the Books, out of which they
were taken, as Cited in the Margin, and that he will prove it to our faces; O!
for notwithstanding they have attested them; yet I shall make it appear, that
they have all, with D. L. to boot, Attested to very false things: I begin with
his Almanac; Eleventh Month-Page, where he Cites, as also does G. K. in his
said Serious Call, G. F. in great Mis. pa. 28. the Light which every man has,
that comes into the World, is Sufficient to Salvation, without the help of any
other means or discovery.

Ans. I must now make bold, and break in upon these attestors, atest and not in
vain neither, for I do affirm, there is no such thing to be found in that page,
nor in any part of that book, as I know of; therefore it is not in vain to say,
D. L. G. K. and the Eight Ministers, have belyed G. F. here, though had those
words been there, methinks it should not be to them Offencive, seeing G. K.
says the Light-within, is God and Christ Hericy and Hatred pa. 14. and also
pa. 65. of his Catichism, in the Year 98. And also seeing the Debat^ is not
about what God and Christ does do, but what God and Christ is sufficient to do;
for as G. K. said when Beniemen Keith said, the Lighter, could not give, among
other things there mentioned, Eternal Peace and Salvation; G. K. tells him, it
is a real Degree of Blaspheming etc. And his Reasons are; because (says he)
God and Christ can do all things, and does God and Christ is in all men; not
only, as that general presence in all his Creatures: but in a Special way of
Revolution, as being the Offspring of God; se Re^utation pa. 39. but (says he)
it is one thing, what God and Christ can do, and f^r another thing, what they
commonly and Universally do: Ibid, Even so say we, it is one thing what the
Light can do, and another thing what it does do; now that God does not by the
inshining of his own Light in our Hearts, without Respect had to Christ's Death
and Sufferings etc. without us, save any of Mankind, we did still Grant, se
Modest Appeal pa. 17. Well D. L's next quotations (...) this; W. P. in
Quakerism, a new Nickname pa. ^. says, Faith in Christ's Outward M^^i^^station
is a Deadly Poison, these latter ages have been infected with, to the
Destruction of Godly Living. Also in Serious Call, G. K. H^re has it. I again
Change all these 9 Ministers and 5 of them in the fourth Narrative, together
with D. L. to be all false attestors, for this Quotation agrees not with the
book; for W. P. called (...) Faith in Christ's Outward Manifestation, a Deadly
Poison etc. But says, the making Holy Life Legal, and Faith in the History;
Mark [the History] of Christ's outward Manifestation, Christianity is a Deadly
Poison, these late Ages have been infected with, to the Destruction of Godly
Living etc. Now ( Mark the word Christianity, is wrong placed, and should be
next after the word Manifestation, and is so Corrected in the Er^ate; and the
words [the History] they have all of them, very unfairly left out, as if there
were no difference between our Christian Faith, standing in one Hist^^y o^
Christ, and it is standing in Christ himself, howsoever manifested; so that they
have curtailed his words, and perverted his meaning, for the true sense of W.
P's words there, is thus (viz.) to make Holy Life Legal, and to make Faith in
the [History] of Christ's Outward Manifestation, to be Christianity; is a
Deadly Poison etc. And surely, it is one thing to ground our Christian Faith
upon the [History] of Christ's Outward or Inward Manifestation, and another
thing, to ground it upon Christ himself, as Christ said to the Jews; ye search
the Scriptures, for in them ye think to have Eternal Life etc. and ye will not
come to Me, that ye may have Life: Now did not Christ himself here disclaim the
Jews, from placing their Faith in the History, so as to make that to be saving;
or which is to say, to give Eternal Life; for they were to come to him, that
they might have Life; yet not so as to Reject: But to search the Scriptures
etc. Even so say we.

Well next, as to what W. P. has said, about Christ's outward Person that
Suffered etc. It Is spoken to, in the foregoing book; but as to the fearful
noise D. L. makes, as if those Words of W. P's were Encouragement to Atheists,
Turks, or Jews, to Despise and Ridicule the Christian Religion.

Ans. How can that be, since W. P. in almost the next foregoing words, to those
cited by D. L. in plain words declares our belief, that he that laid down his
Life, and Suffered his Body to be Crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem; is
Christ, the only Son of the Most-High God: thus W. P. which neither of th^se
Pervertors, nor false Citers have taken notice of, as I can se; and as to the
encouragement that Turks and Jews etc. may have, or take at our Writings, let
that ly at their Door, who thus pervect them, and miscite them; and suppose,
any should make so bold, to Clip the above words of Christ, and set them down
thus; ye search the Scripture, for in them ye have not, ye think to have
Eternal Life; now would not that give encouragement to Jews or Atheists to
Redicule the Holy Christian Religion, by thinking they expected Eternal Life
from the Scripture; but not from Christ himself; yet after this manner, do
these sort of men, often deal with the Quakers Writings, and ^hen Confidently
affirm, they exactly agree with their Books.

As for his twelfth Month page, it runs chiefly upon Begging the Question,
taking false Quotations for true ones, and so taking that Granted which we upon
Truths Botom deny; yet I cannot, but take notice to the Reader, how like one of
the Profane Persons of the times, he scofs at our Friends Exercise, in their
Preaching; as also in their solemn Prayers to Allmighty God.

As for his first Month page, concerning the Scripture; G. F's Words are in
Answer, to a Priests Expressions. (viz.) Outward Writings, Paper and Ink, and
that that is not Infallible, nor is it not Divine; but Humane, and if this be
un^ound, th^^ the contrary, to writ that outward Writings, Paper and Ink,
(...) In^^llibl^ (...) Divine, but which of the^^ is most (...), let men of
(...) Judgment Judge? And I (...) well Satisfied, that as to George Fox, the
Holy Scriptures were Precious unto him, (...) in pa. 23. of his Journall ^e
conf^^^^s, and that he had no slight esteem of them and that ^he Holy men of
God writ them; as for what he (...) of (...) out of the North pa. 14. though I
have never seen that Book, yet I have seen such Quotations from it, as clearly
shows, that G. F. was no ^lighter of the Scriptures. The Citation is ^n Truth
and Innocence, by G. W. page 19. thus; Though this News out "of the North, is
quoted against us, yet it is very partially and unfairly done, for in the same
Book, the Holy Scripture is Chearly owned, as spoken by the Lord, and his Holy
Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles pa. 5. 8. the Law of God, and the Prophets
expressly so owned pa. 23. 28. though they that put the Letter for the Light,
Preaching their own Words, and Imaginations, thereupon are disowned pa. 12.
consequently, the Holy Scriptures are owned, but the Pervertors and Perversions
(...) owned. And to conclude this Head; let them publi^h their reiterated
Citations, that have been so often answered, or others as much as they will,
yet I am persuaded, they shall never be able to find any thing therein to prove
that we do not own the Scripture, to be given ^orth, by the movings of the
Spirit of God, nor that the Doctrine or matter therein contained, is not
Infallible, or Divine or that it is Dust or Serpents m^at; for as we firmly
believe, they were given by Divine Inspiration; so they are to us, exceeding
Precious; the most instructing, and the most Edifying-Book of all books in the
World; therefore, whatever Books our Children miss of Learning, we eve^ take
care, that they miss not to Learn the Holy Scriptures.

As so his Second Month page, first, about the Scripture being the Word of God.
We own them to be the Words of God, as it is written, as in Exodus 20.1. and Gid
spoke all these Words, and Revelation the first and third: Blessed is he that
Reads, and they that hear the Words of this Prophecy. And whereas he says G.
F. says of his own writings; To you, This is the Word of the Lord. Ans. but
what was that [THIS] it was not the Ink and Paper, no more, than it was so in
the Prophets time, when they said, the Word of the Lord came unto me saying
etc. Now the Word of the Lord came unto them, before they writ, and from that
Word, were the words written, and the word of God was in the beginning,
according to John 1. v. 1. but that Scriptures was not so, and indeed I could
never see this their C^vell, to be any more then a strife about words, in as
much, as both they and we own them to be writ by Divine Inspiration, as above;
and we believe all the Doctrines therein contained, and all the Precepts
therein given, to mankind in general, ought by all men, who have the knowledge
of them, to be believed, and Practiced, and that whatsoever is contrary
the^^to, ought by all to be retected. As to his Citing Edward Buroughs about
Scripture Commands and of W. P's Vindicating him; I have always understood it,
to intend only particular Commands, such as to Baptize, Preach the Gospel, or
as when the Disciples were sent forth to Preach; they were Commanded to provide
neither Gold nor Silver, nor Brass in their Purses Matt. 10.9. and as where
Christ bid the Young Man go his way, and sell whatsoever he had, and give to
the Poor, and he should have Treasure in Heaven Mark 10.21. Now I suppose,
neither D. L. nor G. K. does understand this last Command to be binding upon
them, any more than the Quakers do, nor do they believe (I suppose) that where
Christ Commanded his Disciples to wash each others feet, from the Example of
his Washing their feet, as he then says, I have given you an Example, that ye
should do, as I have done to you, se John 13.14.15. And although this was so then
Required of his Disciples, and Practiced afterward in the Church; even in
Tertullions time, as will be seen by and by; yet I suppose, few Christians of
any sort, if any at all, looks upon this binding upon them, and that it was
such particular Commands that Edward Burough meant, and in which W. P.
vindicated him, is clear from his own next words which D. L. has left out,
(viz.) I Challenge, (says he) to find an Example for it, they were oblidged
every one by their own commands, and then explains his meaning thus; one was
sent to Baptize, and Preach the Gospel; another was sent not to Baptize: But
to Preach the Gospel etc. Therefore why should W. P's words [No Commands] be
taken in such a strict sense, since according to the Maxim, words ought to be
taken, according to the Subject, men are ^reating about; and indeed, the
Particle [No] cannot allways be taken in a strict sense in Scripture, without
one place Contradicting another; for in the one place, the Scripture says of
Christ, that he has [no Form] nor Comeliness Isaia 53.2. but in another place,
it speaks of being in the [Form] of God, and that he took on him the [Form] of
a Servant Phill. 2.6, 7. and as to the word Comeliness, in Cant: 2: 14: it is
said of Christ, that sweet is his Voice, and his Countenance is Comely; yet
here is no Contradiction, unless we take the particle [No] strictly; but neither
in this, nor in W. P's case is ^here any need to take it ^o:

As for his third Month page, what he says therein of William Shewin* I having
not his book, and W. S. being deceased, I shall take G K's own Rule in Serious
Appeal pa: 7: and give G: W's Explanation on W: S's words, for there G: K.
allows, that where the sense and meaning is sound, though not altogether so
safely, or Cautiously worded in every respect, Charity is to be allowed, and
that they themselves, or Friends for them, in respect of their absence or
Decease, who did best know thm, ought to be allowed to give their sense of
them: Now I have Reason to think, scarce any Friend living, knew W: S: better
than G: W: did, who in his Truth and Innocent pa: 55: Explains W: S: thus: I
know his intent "was not to Jesus only, as the son of Abraham and David, and
Mary; but as he is God over all, Blessed forever: All Worship, Honor and Glory
belongs to him:

As for what he says about W: P's saying, Christ in us, Offers up himself;
this I have Answered already in Satan's Harbinger pa: 23, 24: As also, that
about Christ paying the Dept to God for us; not any of which does, D: L: take
any notice of: I also told him in pa: 25: How and where W: P: Expressly owned
Christ in Life, Doctrine, and Death, fulfilled his Fathers will, and Offered
up, a most Satisfactory Sacrifice; but not to pay God, as being otherwise
unable to save men, as his opposers then held, and which was the cause of that
debate, as in pa: 23 I told; and now I also tell him that G. K. in his Serious
Appeal no^ retracted, has said in pa. 27. -- (viz.) It must "be granted (says
he) that the Life of Christ in the Saints, is a sweet Incense, before God, and
is a Sacrifice in another sense. Meaning in another sense than that of his
Sacrifice, without us, upon the Tree of the Cross; he having be^n speaking of
that Just before. Was G. K. so wise then, and both D. L. think W. P. was so
weak, as to understand it of that Sacrifice without us, on the Tree of the
Cross, where our Lord became Obedient unto Death; even the Death of the Cross,
as in Phill. 2.8. But W. P. mentioned there nothing of a Sacrifice unto Death
nor of the Death of the Cross, but of a Living Sacrifice; and we do not in the
least understand, that by Christ's apeasing the Wrath of God, now in an
interceeding and mediatory way, should be in opposition to, but only and alone,
for the sake of that great offering of Christ, on the Tree of the Cross without
us.

Well in the same page D. L. tells us, and so does G. K. in his Serious Call,
that G. F. said to Christopher Wade, "the Devil was in thee, thou say, thou
art Saved by Christ without thee; and so have Recorded thy self a Reprobate,
^reat Mystery pa: 40.

Ans. As (...) place is miss quoted, so the passage is miss rendered; for it
should have been, if any where, in page 250. And here again, I charge them,
both with a ta^se Citation; for they have both of them so Clipped ^. F's words as
much as to alter the sense of them, though but by leaving out the word [And] For
G. F's words are thus, first he tells, C. W. (viz.) Thou have showed in thy
book stuffed with Lies, how thou have been Tormented, and of the filthy air,
come out of thee, and the D^vill was in thee. Note, here is the end of that
part of G. F's Sentence, which clearly shows, that G. F. spoke those words, and
said, the Devil was in thee, because of the Lies he had stuffed his book with;
which Reasons they had left out. And then G. F. begins in the other part of his
Sentence with an [A^d.] And thou say thou art saved by Christ without "thee,
and so have Recorded thy self a Reprobate, and art Ignorant of the Mystery of
Christ within; for without that, thou do not know Salvation: G. F. having
showed in the same page, that Cristopher Wade was so far from believing in
Christ within, that he said; it was dangerous to Preach Christ within man; now
here lies the falsity, and the abuse, in great part, of these men, that they
left out the word, [And] after the words, [the Devil was in thee;] and so made
it look, as if these words, [the Devil was in thee] were because he had said,
[he was Saved by Christ without him;] whereas th^se words [the Devil was in
thee,] were because of his Lies he stuffed his Book with; and which he called*
the filthy Air that came out of him, and these words; [so thou have Recorded
thy-self a Reprobate*] were because he has said, [he was Saved by Christ
without him*] he having as above, denied Christ within; and we know according
Scripture, if Christ be not in us, we are Reprobates. Now is it not in vain, in
this vain man D. L. to say, ^t's in vain for us to say, he has belyed us,
because Eight Ministers have attested these things.

Well in his fourth Mon^h's page, he is an vain, in endeavoring to Render our
Friends in Confusion, about the Light; and Pray where is the confusion? why W.
P. says* there are not two Lights in Man, that Regard Religion, no^ that
Repro^es or Condemns for ^in. And Edward (...) etc. Says of some, that their
^^ght is only Nat^^^^^ (...) Carnal, and does only make manifest Carnal
Transgre^^ions, and who Judge by the natural Light etc. Now note, (says D.
L.) here are two Lights within most plainly, which W. P. does so posative^y
oppose.

Ans. Surely D. L's. Da^kness and Envy has occasioned him to loose his honesty
or common sense; for his own quotation shows that W. P. only denied two Lights
in man, that Regarded Religion* and Condemns for Sin which neither E. B. nor
Richard Hubberthorn. (who he also quoted), did oppose in the least; therefore
no Confusion in them: And as for the Carnal Light that E. B. spoke, of that
made manifest Carnal Transgressions; they did not say, it Regarded Religion,
nor Condemned for Sin; and there was a Law, which he called a Carnal Law, by
which it seems he was then Impris^ated, and by their Carnal or natural Light,
they could se as Carnal and natural men, when men transgressed their Law;
even as the Servants of King Ahasuer^s could easily enough tell by their
natural Light, that Mordecai had transgressed the Carnal Law of the King, in
not bowing to Proud H^man, according to the Kings Commandment; for said they,
why Transgressed they the Kings Commandment; and E. B. being Imprisoned at that
time, only for writing to a man, of his being Guilty of Pride, Drunkenness and
Whoredo^; therefore though he was willing to Answer for himself (...) Authority;
yet he refused to (...) that cause into the (...) of Lawyers, who Judged by the
natural Light, as he there says* but (...) ^s all this to W. P's saying? there
is not two Lights in men, that Condemns for Sin; because that which Condemns
for Sin, is a Super-naturall and a Spiritual Light.

As to his fifth Month page, he speaks of Edward Buroughs Epistle to G. F's
great Mystery, where he says; this Infallible Spirit was given to every one of
us, in particular etc. Now pray, what hurt is in all this; for it is no more
then to say, that they had the Spirit of Christ, and if D. L. have it not, he
is none of his: For Paul says, if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is
none of His Romans 8.11. And surely, the Spirit of Christ is infallible. As for
that old third-bare Story of G. W's saying, I may see cause otherwise to word
the matter; and yet our intentions be the same; I did in Satan's Har^inger pa.
26. 27. largly Answer: Which Answer he takes no notice of; but Repeals it, as
if what he writes, were all as unanswerable and Infallible, as he would make us
believe, the attest of his Eight Ministers is; though I shall show him, how he is
Guilty in this very Almanac, of the same thing; for in his eleventh Month's
page, he says, W. P. calls Faith in Christ's outward Manifestation, a Deadly
Poison etc. And but in the next page, he repeating the very same thing, by the
reference he there makes to it; his Charge is, that Faith in the Outward
Christ, [as if there were two Christ's] not the Faith in Christ's outward
Manifestation; but Faith in the Outward Christ is a Deadly Poison etc. Here
though he means the same thing, yet he has otherwise worded the matter, and
abused the sense to boo^^ Well he says, I would in D. L. Rebuked pa. 1. ^ave
made People think the Quakers own themselves Sinners; but how is he so wise, as
to know that; I am very sure, I said no such thing there as [own] themselves,
being in the present tence, it is true, I said that the Lord had let them se
their We^kness, and Failings; and that without the assistance of Gods Holy
Spirit, they can no ways be preserved from Falling, under and into temptation:
But how far any had been preserved from fallings under the Devils Temptations,
or not preserved, I meddled not with; but had I expressed my self according to
D. L's strain; must we therefore conclude it False Doctrine, to say* God had
given them the Infallible Spirit? For is not a manifestation of the Spirit
given to every man to Profit withal? Cor. 12.7. Yea he gave his good Spirit to
the Rebellious Jews; but they Rebelled against it, as in Nehemia 9.20. And is
not Gods good Spirit Infallible? Again, ^t's said when he Ascended upon high,
he led Captivity Captive, and gave g^^ts unto men, to the Rebellious also, that
the Lord might dwell among them, se Psalms the 68.18. Compared with Ephesians 4.8.
But what a great degree of Darkness is this man gone into!

In his sixth Month's page, he greatly abused W. P. in saying, he Laughs at the
Church of England, for confessing themselves Sinners.

Ans. That W. P. Laughs at the Church of England, by these words, Alas Poor
Souls! is more than he can prove; was not the Prophets Commanded to C^ye A^as!
for all the Evil Abominations of the House of Israel Eze (...) And though I
never se the Passage. I cannot think he meant what he there said, of all the
Members of that Church; yet it is too manifest, how that Church then Induldgeo
her Members in great Vanity; as in Excess;ive Pride and Vanity in Apparel,
which greatly displeases the Lord, as may be seen by the Prophet Isaia, in the
third Chapter: And is also against the advice of the Apostle, which was, that
Women should adorn themselves in Modest Aparel, (...) 1. Tim. 2.9. And now as
to other great Vanitys so much then Induldged, as Plays, Sports, Cards, Dice,
Dancing, Comodies, Revellings, often A companied with Quarrelling, Profane
Swearing Drinking etc. Of which I shall not say so much as G. K. himself has
said of them, in his Rector Corrected pa. 5. where he speaks concerning the
Church of England thus; That no People in all England" are known to be worser
Livers of those called Protestants, than some of those that hear the Common
Prayers, and are Members of that Church; and in pa. 99. he speaking of their
Ministers, says, Do they not make the "People vain? do not they teach the
People, that many things that they use in Eating and Drinking, and putting on
Apparel, Games, Plays and Commodies, wherein there is much Vanity, are Lawful
and no Sin in them, and which the Lord has Raised us up to test^fie against
etc. So that it seems, when he was of the Lords Raising, he could then Testify
against them, as also against their many vain Idle words, Ceremonies and
Complements; as ^e also says; Is it not now a sign that he is fallen down,
"from whence he is once raised? But to the matter, these things above being
Practiced year after year, without any Church censure, on those that use them;
and then again a year after go to Church, and Cry, Lord have Mercy on us etc.
I am persuaded was the Occasion of these words then spoken by W. P. not for
their acknowledging; but the acknowledgment and still persisting, and so much
pleading for these things, that his concern was to speak against. But though this
false D. L. pretends in his Preface, that he had concerns of greater Moment,
then to Answer my book, (viz. to detect our pernicious Principles as he falsely
calls them;) does he think this will ever do with him, for false quoting and
perverting our Friends words, or does he think, that he and his eight Ministers
bare say so, is enough, though manifestly contrary to Truth? as I particularly
proved upon him in Satan's Harbinger pa. 104. 105. As also upon them, and G. K.
too, in some of the quotations now, in consideration; I say for all his
pretenses, of a concern of moment against us, contemning our Principles, and
his endeavoring to render us in Confusion about them; yet I never saw so much
as one word, that he has writ this ten years, with the least concern either
against, the above vain Practices, or G. K's great confusions in his books,
about Doctrine, and Fundamental Principles of Religion, though he says, he is
of the same Faith, as he has been above this thirty years, And always sound in
Fundamentalls; therefore whether that which Prompts this D. L. on to this work,
be not his great partiality and Enmity against the Quakers, together with his
thinking thereby to Justify himself, for deserting their Meetings; let all who
are truly desireous to commune with those, whose Doctrine, Discipline and
Conversation is most agreeable to the Simplicity and Truth of the Gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ, consider of; and then Judge by the line of Truth: And
though D. L. (...) his Al^^^ack Chronology, used to make great noise against the
Quakers, as if they had Persecuted for Religion, though to ca^ that so, which was
but for the Authoriteys dealing with some, who at that time insinuated fa^se
things against, and falsely accused some then in Government: For my part, I
often looked upon it, G. K. did then just trifle with the word Persecutions; but
yet I say, now G. K. is co^^ out, and stirrs up the Government at home, what in
him lies, to real Persecutions indeed, (which partly he may be Suffered to do,
as a Judgment upon him, for his so trifling with the word Persecution here):
But now I Will Warrant you, as to G. k's turning Persecutor indeed, as far as he
has Power, D. L. is as Mute as a Fish; not one word of that have we from him;
and although, in his twelfth Month's page, he makes a noise of the Care, he
pretends he has for his own, and other's Children, that they may not fall into
the Snares of the Devil, for want of Care etc. As if he suspected, his
Children would not take after their Father, to Read our books, with such a
wrong prejudiced and perverting mind, as he has done; however they may learn
Pride and Vanity, vain Sports, and shows, Gaiming, and Revelling, confused
Nations in Religion; yea and may learn of G. K. to be a real Persecutor for
Religion too; for any Cautions that ever I have seen him give against it, and
as for his there Cautioning against throwing off the old Religion, may not this
put them upon turning Papists? the oldness of whose Religion they render as a
great prop to seppost it, but the true Religion is oldest of all.

As for G. F's saying in great Mystery pa. 101. that it is the Doctrine of
Devils, to Preach, that men shall have Sin' and be in a Warfare as long as
they be on Earth.

Ans. The contrary of which must surely be, that men must Sin as long as they
live; but then let that be compared with the saying of our Savior: If you Dye
in your Sins; whether I go you cannot come; and although in one sense, the best
of Saints may be said to be in a Warfare: Yet it does not follow that they must
allways Sin; which is always to be overcome in that Warfare; for it is said,
whatsoever is born of God, overcomes the World, and whatsoever is born of God,
Sins not; se 1 John 54.18. And as to what he has picked out of E. B's book;
(viz.) " God does not accept of any, where there is any failing etc.

Ans. According to Scripture, Acceptance is in the well doing, as in Genesis 4.7.
If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and it thou do not well, Sin
lies at thy door; and the Apostle faith: He that sears God, and works
Righteousness, is accepted of him Acts 10.35. And though the greatest of Evils
is forgiven us for Christ's sake, upon true Repentance, which is Confessing and
Forsaking; yet without that, we find no Promise of the forgiveness of any Sin
at all.

In his Seventh and Eighth Month's Pages, he speaks, as if G. F. had falsely
quoted and perverted the Priests words, in his Answers to them; to which not
having the Priest's books to Examine the matter by; I shall say no more to it
at present, than first to let the Reader know, that if I had no other Reason
than these following, for not trusting him in his quotations without
Examination, it would surely excuse me; for after he having said, that Tho.
Crisp shows in a book called an Esaias, that G. F. had in answering Priest's and
Professors books, falsely quoted and perverted them etc. And that when he first
saw the said Tho. Crisps book, he could not believe G. F. would be so wicked
etc. And then D. L. adds, But I have since seen "the Quakers Answer to this
very book of Tho. Crisps, subscribed Ed. Pennington, and I Read it diligently,
and in all the Answer I do not find he denis any one passage that Tho. Crisps
quotes, which if they had not been truly quoted, I am sure he would have done,
by which I know G. F. was Guilty as T. C. charged him etc.

Ans. I must say, it was very subtily done in D. L. to conceal the Title of Ed.
Penningtons book, that we might be at a loss, how to detect, and lay open to
the World, his baseness in abusing both Ed. Pennington and his Reader; for
observe, E. P's said Answer to T. C. is contained in about one Sheet of Paper,
and he having Read it diligently, could not but know the reason, why E. P.
could neither own it, no^ deny it, (to wit) because he knew not where to meet
with the Priest's books, as he there expressly tells us; se the Introduction to
his book, called Ra^shkah etc. And to trust T. C. without examining the thing,
I se he could not; for in the next page, he tells him, that in point of
quotations, he would never trust him more, now is not this D. L: a base, false,
deceitful Scribler, to pretend to say, he was sure Edward Pennington would
have denied it, had it not been true, when he knew it was for want of the
books, that he could not tell, whether it was true or false; and therefore I
come upon D: L: again, where he says, (viz) When I wrote "my News of a
Trumpet, I was of a belief, that the Quakers began well, having not seen the
contrary, as I since have, as above etc.

Ans. Did he then believe that the Quakers begun well, how was it then, that at
that very time, and in that very book, he so much accused the first Instruments
of that beginning, as G:F: E:B: etc. in their ancient books of False Doctrine,
Blasphemy, or at least, a mere hoap of Confusion; all which sufficiently
manifest 's his own Confusion, as for his great Lie about our Friends, as not
daring to read opposers books as he talks of: I say had that been true, as it
is false, I had neither had the appertunity nor trouble, to have detected him,
for his so many foul abuses toward us.

I come now to his ninth Month's page, where he has patcht up as great a
parcel of Lies against W: P: as I think a man could almost invent, he speaking
again of G: F: perverting (as he says) the Priest's words, and which he calls
Forgeries; and then runs on, as if he cared not what he said, or as if he
counted it Lawful for himself to be Guilty of the same thing, and so asks a
question, and then Answers thus; But have they no Cloak to cover these
Forgeries" of G:F 's? Yes the Fluent Tongued Penn, has invented such a Cover,
as no Equivacating Jesuit could out do it, it is ^ Penns Preface, to Foxes
Journall, in Recommending of him; he says: It proceeds from one side of his
understanding, which was toward the World, and which he there acknowledges, was
somewhat Dark or Weak; thus D: L: now this I say first, what difference there
may be, betwixt the Priest 's words, and G: F 's Quotation? I know not; but I
am assured, D: L: has both false cited and quoted G: F's Great Mis: in this
very matter; but Secondly, if G: F: did at any time miss the matter, in
repeating the Priest 's Expressions, how know^ D: L: but that the Priest 's
complained (as it was likely they would) to G: F: of it, and that upon which
the mistake may have been owned and Rectified above forty years ago; but
admitted, it were all true, as D: L: here says, and never yet Rectified, that
can be no cover for D: L 's present, as well as former manifest Forgeries and
perversions against our Friends, of which this following is another palpable
instance; and unto which his Eig^ M^nisters are by him Entitled, unless he
would distinguish any one quotation from the rest, unto which they had not
attes^ed Se his Preface, and I proceed to the Forgery it self; for what can be
a greater piece of Forgery, than first to render it so, as i^ W: P: had taken
for granted, that G: F: was Forger, and then to excuse him, said it proceed,
(Mark [i^] proceed that is to say, the Forgery) from one side of his
understanding etc. And lastly, that W: P: there acknowledged it was somewhat
Dark or weak, all which I do affirm, is most notoriously False; for first,
there is not one word of G: F'r being a Forger, or any other offender; so much
as hinted at in the least: Secondly, neither is there any such relative
expression, nor any thing like i^, as [it proceeds] as D. L. has most
abusively rendered it, neither is there any such, or such like expression, as
he says W. P. acknowledges, (to wit) fom^ha^ Dark or Weak. Upon the whole, the
Proverb is here made good upon this D. L. (v^z.) The F^rge Pi^t, he has been
"digging for others, he has Justly fallen into himself; but to what a Degree
of hardened Wickedness will he come to at last? I heartily with, he may se it in
time, and Repent o^ it; and can D. L. think, that such doings are a good
pattern for his Family and Children to ^earn by? surely if he do, such thoughts
m^st needs proceed, from that side of his understanding, that lies next to the
Pit of Darkness.

As for what he accuses G. F. of, in his tenth. Month's, page, about Sacrements
(so called.) have never seen the book as I know of; however, this I say, I
suppose they who use the outward Water Baptism, and the outward Supper, or
Bread and Wine, do not account it Spiritual, any more than the meats ane
Drinks, and diverse Washings, and Carnal ordinances, mentioned by the Apostle,
in Hebrews 9.10. were so; and which were imposed on the Lords People, till the
time of Reformation.

As for G. F's saying their Communion of Bread and Wine, is the Table of
Devill's; I know not to whom G. F. then spoke; but if it was to such as from
year to year, live in the aforementioned Practices, as Pride, vain Shows,
Sports, Tables, Dice, Cards, and other Games, with Profane Sweari^g and
Revelling etc. So much, and too Gene^^^y indulged among professed Christians;
surely the Cummunion of such cannot be the Communion of Saints: For as
Chris^stom affirms, that not God but the Devil found out Plays; and or this
Reason Mant^a affirms it, to be unlawful to Play at Tables and Dice* because
invented by the Devil; and Eliberus says, a Christian Playing at Tables or
Dice (...) not to be admitted to the Holy Communion: But after a Years penence,
and Abstention* and his total Amendments etc. Jeremia Tailor's. Ductor Debut.
etc. pa. 469 470.

As for Edward Buroughs saying that Sprinkling Infants with water, is Baptism
into the Faith; is a Doctrine of Devils.

Ans. If it be not the Doctrine of Christ, Pray whose Doctrine is it then? That
it is not the Doctrine of Christ, is Evident; not only because we find not any
where, that ever Christ Commanded it: But also because it was not Practiced by
his Holy Apostles, not by their Successors, until the third Age, or Century
after Christ, as George Keith in his Serious Appeall pa. 34. assures us, and
quotes, Curcelius; saying that the custom of Baptizing Infants, was brought in
without the Command of Christ; and did not begin before the third Age after
Christ was born, and that in the two former Ages, no sign of it does appear:
Now this being matter of History, 'twill be but triffling in any to say, G. K.
has retracted. Upon all which the Reader may do well to consider, that since
it was not the Command of Christ, and seeing it was set up by men 300 years
after Christ, what our Blessed Savior faith, in Math. 15.9. (viz) "In vain do
they Worship me, Teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of men; as for D. L's
talk of throwing down Christ's Ordinances, is but begging the question; and as
for his talking Papist like, of throwing down the old Religion: I say, it is
not the Old nor the Older; but it is the Oldest Christian Religion, that we
ought to walk in; and now whereas many lay great stress upon the Practice of
Water Baptism, and the Supper so called, because (say they) it was Practiced by
most Christians, from the Apostles time unto this Age etc. To this I answer,
and will again bring no less Learned Historian on than G. K. himself, to prove
what I say; to wit, that there were many things Practiced in the Church, even
from the Apostles time; not only till some hundred years after Christ, but down
to this very Age, as expressly Commanded in Scripture as outward Baptism, and
the outward Supper, which Christians (especially Protestants) do not Practice,
nor account them as Gospel Ordinances; and now for proof, take a large
Citation out of the said G. K's Rector Corrected, beginning in pa. 67. where
he, speaking of the outward Supper, puts his Adversary, (a Church of England
man) to prove this, (to wit) that all true Christians since the Apostles days,
"have constantly continued in the Practice of that outward observation, or that
all Christians did Practice it in the Apostles days; seeing nothing is mentioned
of it, to have been the Practice of either the Churches of the Galathians,
Philippians, Collosians, or Thessalonians, in all the Scripture; and although
many Practiced that outward Observation, so did they other things, which ye
your selves do not follow: The believing Jews did Practice Circumcision, long
after the Apostles days, Witness Eusebius. And the Seventh day of the We^k, was
long observed also: Even among the true Christians, and abstaining from Eating
Blood, did continue among Christians, in T^r^ulian's his days, and Washing of
one another Feet, (which Christ Commanded as expressly, as that other,
concerning Eating and Drinking) and also, the Anointing the Sick with Oil;
which the Church of Rome continues unto this day, and some Christians (so
called) in some Remote parts of the World, continue Circ^mcision to this day,
as the Historys do confirm; and therefore the continuance of a thing, cannot
simply prove the necessity of it, or that it is Commanded; for the Mystery of
Iniquity begun to work early and soon after the Apostles days, increasing still
more and more, until the Dark night of Apostasy came on; so that the true
discerning was in great Measure lost, what to continue, and what to leave or
forsake; and they continued something of no Moment; as observation of Days,
Meats and Drinks, and other Rites, which were but the shadows; and they
discontinued, and did forsake the best things; even that, which was the
Substance of Life it self. Thus far G. K. which I have taken the more Pains to
transcribe, for the sake of the Sober Inquirer, who may think (because of it is
being so long Practiced, though after diverse fashions, as it may be, and is made
appear in Thomas Lawsors book, called a Tretis concerning Baptism, that
therefore it must needs be an incumbant Christian duty; if so, than and for the
same reason, Washing Feet, Circumcising, Anointing with Oil etc. must also be
incombant duteis; which Protestants allow not to be such.

Well, this Postscript being much larger than at first I did expect, I must
draw to a Conclusion; only to acquaint the Reader, that as I have herein proved
D. L. only a Perverter of our Friends words; but a False Citer, in diverse
respects; so also in Satan's Harbinger I have done the like, in diverse places;
but most particularly in a Summary Collection, in pa. 104. 105. I have showed
how he had belyed our Friends, in diverse particulars, as to instance two or
three. First, that W. P. had said, that Christ could not pay what was not his
own dept; Secondly, that Christ had a dept of his own, to satisfy God;
Thirdly, that G. W. said that Christ had not the Body of Men: All which with
many more, there laid ^own, besides what is in other places of my said book, is
most notoriously False; and therefore the weight of these things, particularly
that of his falsely accusing W. P. for calling the man Christ, Finite and
Impotent Creature, does stick so fast upon his Shoulders, that unless, he can
be persuaded to an honest retractation, doubtless there it will stick; and
however, although he did or might believe the Quakers to be as Erroneous in
their Doctrine as he renders them; yet his abusing them, in order to make them
look, as they really are not, is as a Beam in his own Eye, and which he should
first pull out, before he can descern the Mo^e in his Brothers: And until he
make satisfaction as above, for the said abuses, I hope, no indifferent
Impartial Person, our Peaceable Neighbors or others, but will deem us
excuseable, it we should not so particularly follow him for the future, if he
continue to Print against us; but reject him as a Person, whose Tongue nor Pen
is no Slander; and we cannot se, that what we have hitherto done or writ
against him, or G. K. can be Justly esteemed contentious, wrangling in us, they
first Loading us, and our Christian Profession with heavy abuses, Collumnies,
and Slanders; so that we are but in the defencive part, in throwing them off.

C. P.

An Additionall POSTSCRIPT.
SInce the above book was Printed, I have seen D. L's book, called THE REBUKER
REBUKED etc. which I suppose he intended as an Answer to my book, called DANIEL
LEEDS Justly Rebuked etc. Though in his Title Page, he calls his book A Brief
Answer to CALEB PUSEY's S^^rrilo^s Pamphlet, Entitled, A Rebuke to DANIEL
LEEDS etc. Whereas, I never writ any book under that Title; but this is not the
First time D. L. has stumbled at the threshold, and this is all the use I
intend to make of this his blunder, and shall let the Reader know, that as to
the substance of what is material in his said book, it is sufficiently spoke
to, and Answered in my said book; and in the foregoing Postscript: In the
first, his first Challenge to me, my Letter to him in Answer thereto, and his
Almanac Challenge, (all mentiond in his Preface) is set down Verbatim; And my
observations thereon, together with the Scriptures preduced by William Penn,
and his Arguments from them, which evidently makes out, that W. P. by those
words, [The Finite Impotent Creature] meant it of us Sinners, that needed
Forgiveness, but not of the man Christ, that never Sinned: To which said Book
and Postscript I refer the Reader, for his satisfaction in General, as also in
particular; about what D. L. says in this book of Lies and Perversions, he
pretends he has met with in my book, and of his not meeting me, according to
my Letter to him, and that about the eight Ministers attesting to the Truth of
G. K's Quotations, and of his pretending the want of timely notice to meet me;
and about his choosing men of his own party, and about W. P's owning Christ as
man to be Finite, and about my not meeting him at Burlington, according to his
Almanac Challenge, and about the three sorts of Arguments W. P. made use of;
all which is sufficiently spoke to in my abovesaid Book and Postscript; but
note, I said nothing in the said book of Three distinct Heads, as D. L. very
falsely renders me, and says I tell a Deceitful Story of Three distinct Heads;
and then Vaunts upon his man of Straw, and says, as if W. P. wanted this
Millers help, to draw this matter into heads, and Tails, se his pa. 7. where he
quotes me pa. 19. but I affirm there is no such words, as Heads and Tayls
either.

Obj. But in his Preface he says, that he came to Burlington the twelfth of
May, to meet this Champion C. P. (viz.) according to his (D. L's) Challenge.

Ans. Yes, but I also observe, in his page eight he says, he could never
believe I would accept of his Challenge; and indeed I know not how he should
expect it: Because it was upon sush unreasonable conditions; as first, that I
must not choose Quakers; secondly, that I must have one Justice of Peace his
hand, that I designed to meet him. Besides I must give him two Months notice
beforehand of it; which notice (for reasons in p. 19. of D. L. Justly Rebuked)
I never gave him; therefore he had reason enough to conclude, I would not be
there; so that it seems his boast of his coming to meet a Champion at
Burlington, is to be understood, that he was first satisfied, he would not be
there.

As for what he says of Samuel Richardson's threatening to lay him in Goal.

Ans. That D. L. never gave the Authority or Government, any just occasion to
deal with him, I cannot avouch for him: But this I can truly say, I never knew
of any design among us so to deal with him.

As for what he says in pa. 9. about Robert Youngs demanding somewhat of me,
about the estate of The. Crose, I do say, that according to the utmost and best
recollecting of my Memory that I can make, I remember nothing that ever Rob.
Young said to me about it. And why did he not set down, when and where it was,
what he demanded, and what was my Answer? In pa. 8. he says. I let us him know
my design was to choose Quakers, which was contrary to the terms of his
challenge; and that therefore my intentions was deceitful, and only to Mock
him.

Ans. I appeal to the candid Reader, whether this be not an abominable Abuse
upon me, for he owns in his Almanac Challenge, that those words [not Quakers]
were left out in the printed Copy; and being so, which way did he think I
should know what was in the manuscript; therefore what silly Idle stuff is this
charge of his; and as silly and Idle is it in him, where in p. 9. he tells us
of a Maxim, (but possibly of his own devising) to wit, who so Labors to prove
a thing to another, himself distrust it.

Ans. Does he so; then surely D. L's Friend G. K. who has so long Labored to
prove the Quakers no Christians, must himself distrust it. And where D. L.
himself has Labored so hard to prove the abovesaid charge against W. Penn,
that he himself distrust's it. And possibly this might drop from him at
unawares, as some product of his own experience, for he has certainly given
occasion to Suggest such a thing of him.

Well again I take notice, that in his pa. 10. Since I find he cannot charge it
as an Error in W. Penn, for terming Christ as man Finite, without bringing G.
K. and the Priests Guilty too, he ventures upon a great Falsehood, and says, he
did never bring it against W. P. as false Doctrine, neither dared he to call it
Blasphemy, (viz.) I affirm " Christ as man Finite and Impotent; whereas, in his
book styled NEWS of a TRUMPET: So highly Magnified by himself; he tells us that
W. Penn; BLASPHEMOUSLY calls the Man Christ, a Finite Impotent Creature; se his
page where his No: 58. is.

Well here is plainly seen D. L's evident partiality to the Quakers; for it
seems when he would father it (as he falsely renders it) upon W. Penn, so to
affirm, then it seems it must be called by D. L. Blasphemy; but now he being
shown wherein G. K. and the Priest's, own as much as he would fasten upon W.
Penn, now he says, he dare not call it Blasphemy. Oh! the persidiousness of
the Man.

Again, Lastly in the same page, he asserts another great falsehood, where he
says, I confess it, (meaning W. P's words) as charged by him D. L. which is
utterly false, for I never confessed any such thing; for though I never denied but
owned that W. P. in pa. 21. of Sandy Foundation Shaken, termed Christ as Man
Finite, yet I always did, and do still utterly deny D. L. his charge, (viz.)
that in page 20 W: P: used such slighting and Irreverend expressions, as to
call the man Christ, a Finite and Impotent Creature.

C: P:

ERRATA
THe Reader is desired to take notice, that there is about 18 (...) ^0 of these
books dispersed without this Errata; which is not to be charged on the Author,
he being wholly Ignorant of it. And where any word is not well spelled, the
Reader is desired to Correct by his Judgment, and as the sense will ^ear.

Preface the first side line the 8th. for Pen, read Peace. l. 2^. ^. out of our
Friends works, 1. of our Friends. S. 2. l. 5. f. the, r. that. l. 10. f.
Indispensibly, r. and Indispensibly. S. 3. ^. 27. f. the Country, r. in the
Country. S. ^. l. 3. f. pa. r. and in pa.

And in the book page 5. l. 2^. f. pretended, r. himself owned. p. 8. l. 5. f.
book, r. Revolution book. p. 11. l. 18. f. Attested, r. Accosted. p. 13. l. 9:
10. f. Implicit, r. any. p. 24. l. 22. f. Confutable, r. Carnal and
Confutable. pa. 26. l. 21. f. loaded, r. Taxed. p. 27. l. 10. f. it were enough
to Ruin, r. might Damn. p. 29. l. 16. f. first, r. but now. p. 31. l. 20. f.
body Math. 26. 12. r. body only John 14. 9. p. 41. l. 22. f. first because the
Apostle says, r. besides acc^rding to Christ's Doctrine. p. 50. l. ^. f. you,
r. you (meaning the Priest's) l. 23. f. in, r. as in. pa. 52. f. at, r. as. p.
53. l. 31. f. Created beings, r. Creaturely Similitudes. pa. 54. l. 23. f.
proper^^s and Created beings, as Persons Personall^, r. Creaturely Similitudes,
as Persons, Personal, Acts and propertys etc. l. 27. f. mean sham, r. mere
System. p. 55. l. 3. f. Sistom, r. System. l. 14: ^5. f. now is, r. is. p. 57*
l. 6. f. least, r. least by Answering them. l. 27. f. nor, r. nor. p. 58. l. 2.
f. in, r. in the. l. 6. f. keeping, r. and keeping. l. 25. f. thinks, r* then
thinks p. 59. l. 3. f. indeed. r. and indeed. p. 60. l. ^ f. and, r. they.

POSTSCRIPT: p. 1. l. 7. r. term me. p. 3. l. 29. f. ^ud* r. and. p. 4. l. 14.
^. for, r. but. p. 5. l. 4. f. Ligeh, r. Light. l. 18. f. Appeall, r. account.
l. 23. f. hear, r. so. p. 6. l. 16. f. ye search, r. search. p. 7. l. 12. f. ye
search, r. search. l. 13. f. have not ye think, r. think. l. 22. f. granted. r.
for granted. p. 11. l. 1. f. of, r. of his. p. 13. l. 29. f. in vain, r. vain.
p. 18. l, 14. f. with him, r. with men of sense, thus to evade what is so
Justly charged on him. p. 19. l. 2^. f. not take, r. take. p. 22. l. 6. blott
out [and therefore] l. 22. f. as great a parcel of, r. such. p. 24. l. 16. f.
have, 1. I have. p. 28. l. 8. f. men, r. Man.

As for those words in pa. 4. (viz.) [Tho' his (meaning G.K 's) now Masters
seem not to have so much assurance of him, as to trust with making Christians]
which I understand, some makes a Glamour bou^t, as a Falsehood in me; Where^^
what I said, is Caution^ with these words [seem not to have] and that which
made (...) seem so, was, for that it was often* Reported, that he had but
Deacons orders, and such had no Power of Sprinkling etc. which if he has other
orders or Power, I think the most that can be made of it; is, that it seemed
from those Reports, that he had not the Power which he has; and if so, then I
should and do ^^knowledge it (...) a mistake.

C. P.


