The Voice of GOD, IN STORMY WINDS.

Considered, in Two SERMONS, Occasioned by the Dreadful and Unparalled STORM,
in the European Nations. November. 27 th. 1703.

By Increase Mather.

Job 36.24, 25. Remember, that thou magnify His Work, which men behold. Every
man may see it, man may behold it afar off.

Quis cladem istius noctis, quis funera fando Explicet, aut possit lacrimis
aequare dolores!

Boston in N. E. Printed by T. Green, for Nicholas Buttalph. 1704.

TO THE Reader.
THERE are some who would be esteemed the Wits of the world, that Ridicule those
as Superstitious and Weak persons, which look upon Dreadful Tempests as
Predromous of other Judgments. Nevertheless, The most Learned and Judicious
Writers, not only of the Gentiles, but amongst Christians have Embraced such a
Persuasion; their Sentiments therein being Confirmed by the Experience of many
Ages. It may be, it will not be altogether Unedifying, for me on this occasion
to mention some few Instances of unusual Storms, which have been the
forerunners of greater Calamities immediately following them. That such
tremendous Dispensations of Providence have sometimes been Prognostics of a
Storm of Persecution coming on the Church of God, there wants not Examples to
induce us to believe. A. D. 375 There was a prodigious Tempest at
Constantinople, which pro^'d fatal to more than a few persons. The next Year
the Arian Persecution under the Emperor Valentinian was a terrible Judgment.
A. D. 1620. There was a fearful Tempest throughout Switzerland, immediately
upon which horrendous Popish Cruelties ensued. But it has more often been
observed, that such Tempests have been the forerunners of most bloody Wars, and
popular Commotions. I know not whether any History does mention a more dismal
Storm than that which happened in the Low Countries, in the Year 1421 causing a
Flood which overwhelmed Seventy Six Villages, and destroyed above an Hundred
Thousand Persons; which J^dicious and Learned men have judged to be Portentous
of the dreadful Desolations which soon after that, were made in Europe by the
Sword and Wars raging in many Nations. A prodigious Tempest in Millain A. D.
1510. preceded the coming of the French into Italy, with Fire and Sword. An
unusual Tempest throughout Germany was followed with the Rustic Sedition,
attended with horrible Slaughters; many Thousands having in a few Days time
their Throats cut, as if they had not been Men, but Beasts.

These Examples with many more, too long with the Circumstances of them to be
here recited, should awaken the world out of its Lethargy: which would be the
way to avert the Omen of such Portentous Providence. For we know that when the
most high God sees cause to menace Nations, whether by His Word, or by His
awful Works, these Threatenings are Conditional. When He speaks concerning a
Nation to destroy it, if that Nation against whom He has Pronounced turn from
their Evils, He will Repent of the Evil that He thought to do unto them.
However it shall be, Certain it is, that the Voice of God who sometimes spoke
to Job out of the Whirlwind is speaking to the Nations in that Stormy Wind
which has Fulfilled His Word, in a manner most terrible.

Nothing can be more Dangerous than for Mortals to Contemn dreadful
Pro^^dences, and in particular, Dreadful Tempests. A worthy Helvetian Divine, (
Bart. Anhorn.) gives us an account of an awful Judgment, which lately befell a
very impious man in Suevia, where they are often visited with terrible
Thunders. When some were gathering in their Corn, a Thunder Storm coming upon
them, most of the Company hastened into their Houses: only one Atheistical man
remained in his Cart. A Clap of Thunder breaking close by him without doing him
any hurt, the Prodigious Heaven daring Atheist uttered such words as these,
Charge again for thou have not hit me! Immediat^^y a second Thunder struck him
Dead in a moment. The same Author speaks of another, who was wont profanely to
Swear by the Thunder and Lightning. This man in the Month of July 1682. said,
he had something else to do than to Die as yet: he was resolved to dispatch some
business in the Country first. The next day after he had thus irreligiously
Expressed himself, the Lightning by which he was wont to Swear, Killed him
before he could be at leisure to Die, or could finish his Rural Affairs.

Some have said, that the Demon spoke True, when he affirmed that the best
Verse in Virgil was; Discite justitiam monitiet non temnere Divos.

We are sure, that the Royal Psalmist was Divinely inspired when he said,
Because they regard not the work of the Lord, nor the operation of His Hands,
He shall destroy them, and not build them up.

The dismal Tempest which has occasioned the subsequent Discourses, did not
reach us in America. Nevertheless, the next day, (viz. No^^m. 28 th. 1703.)
there was with us a more than ordinary S^^^y Storm, so as that several Towns in
the Country could not attend the Public Worship of God on that Lords Day. And
some among us in New England, felt the sad Effects of that in England: For one
of our Ships then at Anchor in the Downs, with several of our Neighbors,
Perished in that doleful Night. On which account, there is a Voice of God
therein speaking to us also. We must be Deaf indeed, if such loud Calls, if
such astonishing Providence do not at all awaken us. Especially, Considering
that the last Month, and the last Day of it, (viz. Feb. 29 th.) of the Year
past, ended with a Tragical Storm of another Nature, when Barbarous Indians,
animated by Bloody Frenchmen, fell upon the Town of Deerfield, Killing or
carrying into a miserable Captivity, one-half of the Inhabitants; amongst whom
was the Pastor of the Church there, whose Wife and one of his Children were
cruelly Murdered; Himself (a Faithful Minister of God) with Four of his
Children then made Captives by the Enemy. If such things are done to the Green
Tree, what will be done to the Dry? The Lord give us Grace to be always
prepared for what may befall us, in this Vale of Tears, in this Valley of the
Shadow of Death, and to set our affections on the things which are Above, and
not on the things which are on the Earth.

INCREASE MATHER.
Boston, N. E. May 6, 1704.
The Voice of GOD IN Stormy Winds.
Psalm. CXLVIII.8. Stormy Wind fulfilling His Word.


THE Penman of this Psalm is not mentioned; but we know it was an Inspired man
of God that wrote it, who therein calls upon all Creatures to give Glory unto
God. Man was the last Creature that was made, and therefore he is in the last
place spoken unto. The Psalmist begin, with the Inhabitants of the Third and
Highest Heavens; Namely, the Holy Angels, ver. 1, 2, and incites them to Praise
the Lord. Not that they need any Excitation thereunto; but when he calls upon
them, it implies, that to Praise God is as their Practice, so their Duty.
Praise ye the Lord from the Heavens: Praise Him in the Heights. Praise ye Him
all His Angels; Praise ye Him all His Hosts. Then the Psalmist descends unto
the Starry Heavens, ver. 3. Praise ye Him, Sun and Moon; Praise Him all ye
Stars of Light. Which words are a Poetical Rapture. Those Creatures are not
able to Praise God after such a manner as Men may do. But in speaking to them,
the Psalmist reflects upon the Idolatry of the Nations in the world, who were
will not to Worship the Hosts of Heaven. Whereas if the Stars had Rational Souls,
and were able to speak, they were bound to Praise God that made them. Then the
Psalmist descends, (in ver. 4.) to the Lowest Heavens, viz. the Air. He speaks
to the Waters above the Heavens, viz. the Clouds which are above the Air, that
they should Praise the Lord. Lastly, He descends to the Earth and Sea, and
calls upon all Creatures therein that they should Praise the Lord. In the
former part of this Verse, he speaks to the Fire and the Hail, the Snow and
Vapor. That is to say, both hot and cold Vapors that they should Praise the
Lord. And still by the same Poetical Rapture, in the words before us he speaks
to the Wind. There be some Winds Gentle and Refreshing, and there are other
Winds that are Stormy and Terrible, and that bring dreadful Desolations on the
Earth. Concerning which the Psalmist says, They ^^^fil the Word of God;
Namely, the Word of His Decree, and the Word of His Providence.

DOCT. That there is a Providence of the God of Heaven, in whatsoever Storms
fall upon Men on the Earth.

The Doctrine before us may be Opened in Three PROPOSITIONS.

PROP. I. That among other Calamities which men in the world are subject unto,
that of Storms and Tempestuous Seasons is one. Sin has made this world to be a
Tempestuous Stormy World. Soon after man had Sinned, God said to him, Genesis
3.17. The Earth is Cursed for thy sake: And Storms are some part of the Curse,
which the Sin of man has brought upon the world. If Adam had not Sinned, there
had been no hurtful Storms known on the Earth. But now, men are oftentimes
Exposed to extreme dangers thereby. Sometimes by Storms at Sea; 'so it was with
Jonah, and those that were with him Sailing to Tarshish. Jon. 1.4. A great Wind
made a mighty Tempest in the Sea; so as that the Vessel had like to have been
broken. Thus the Disciples being on the Sea, Mar, 4.37. there arose a great
Storm of Wind, and the Waves beat into the Ship, which caused them to Cry to
the Lord Jesus Christ, Carest thou not that we Perish? The Apostle Paul, when
he was at Sea, and an Hundred and Seventy Six persons with him, there was a
Tempest so great, as that all Hopes that they should be saved was taken away.
Act. 27.^0. Stormy Winds have not only proved Hurtful, but Destructive; and
that not only at Sea, but on Shore too. Sometimes when men have been in their
Houses Eating, and Drinking, or Sleeping, a Stormy Wind has broken down the
House, and Killed every Soul of them. That has sometimes been the Fate of Godly
Men, as well as of others. So it was with Jobs Children. Nevertheless, there is
reason to think they were Godly Persons. When his Sons and his Daughters were
Eating and Drinking in their Eldest Brothers House, there came a great Wind
from the Wilderness, which ^in^te the Four Corners of the House, and caused it
to fall, and they were all Killed by the fall of it. Job 1.18, 19. Yea,
sometimes whole Towns have been destroyed with Dreadful Storms that God has
sent upon them. So it was with Sodom, and Three Cities more: A Thunder Storm
attended with an Earthquake, overthrew them all in one moment. There was a time
when the whole World was destroyed by a miraculous Storm of Rain: When the Sins
of the world were ripe for Judgment, God opened the windows of Heaven, and
poured down the Cataracts of His wrath on a Sinful Sinning World, and they all
perished, excepting one Family. Some have thought, that there were more men in
the world at that Time, than has been in any one Age since. Doubtless, the
world wa^ then exceeding Populous, considering; the longevity of man before the
Flood. Many living Eight Hundred, yea Nine Hundred Years and mere. But a
prodigious Storm of Rain, caused such an Inundation of Waters as overwhelmed
all the Earth; and every living Creature, excepting what was in the Ark
Perished.

PROP. II. That Storms and Tempestuous Seasons do not hap^en in the World,
without the Providence of God. The Stormy Winds do not come of themselves, but
it is the Word of the Lord that does raise them. Psalm. 107.25. He commands
and raises the Stormy Wind: and He lays the Stormy Wind again; ver. 29. He
makes the Storm a Calm. When Jonah, and the Mariners with him were in great
Danger by a Storm, it is said, The Lord sent a great Wind, and there was a
mighty Tempest in the Sea. Whether we speak of Storms in a Literal, or a
Metaphorical sense, there is the Hand of Heaven in them. Nahum 1.3. The Lord
has His way in the Storm, and in the Whirlwind. Men cannot cause Storms and ^ay
them again at their pleasure: But the Great GOD of Heaven can do it, and does
do it. Psalm. 135.6. Whatever the Lord pleased, that did He in Heaven and in
Earth, and in the Sea, and in all deep places. This will appear from several
Things.

1. In that whatever comes to pass is Decreed in Heaven. And therefore there is
a Providence of God therein: For His Providence is a fulfilling of His Decree.
Act. 15.18. Known unto the Lord are His works from the beginning of the world.
There is a Foreknowledge, and so a Predetermination of God concerning all
works that shall be done in the world. Ephesians. 1.11. He works all things according
to the Counsel of His will. The great Philosophers among the Gentiles, would
acknowledge that there was an hand of Heaven in mighty Events and Revolutions
in the world: but they thought it was beneath the Divine Majesty to have an
Hand in little matters. But the Scriptures teach us to believe, that there is
not the least thing that comes to pass in the world without Gods Decree and
Providence therein. Christ therefore said to the Disciples, Mat. 10.29, 30. Not
so much as one Sparrow does fall to the ground without your Father: The hairs
of your Head are all numbered. Which implies that there is not the least thing
that happen^ to men in the Earth, but there is the hand of Providence ordering
of it. And if not so much as a little Sparrow does fall to the Ground without
the Providence of God, then surely so great a thing as a wonderful Storm, that
shall tear Trees up by the Roots, and overturn Houses, and cause many Vessels
to be Shipwrecked, and thousands of Lives to be lost, does not come to pass
without the Providence of God. Job does acknowledge the Win^ which broke down
the House and killed his Children, was a fulfilling of the Decree of God. Job
23.14 He performs the thing that is app^^^ed for me. As God faith to the Se^,
Hitherto shall thou come, but no further; and here shall thy proud waves be
stayed. Job 38.11. So does the Lord say to the Stormy Wind, Thus far shall thou
go, and no further: Such a place shall thou fall on, and not another. It is the
Lord that Determines where and when it shall be, and how many hours it shall
continue; what persons shall be hurt by it, and who shall escape ^^s fury.

2. Second Causes are Overruled by Him who is the First Cause of all things.
God ^^n by His Word make Stormy winds, without making use of Natural Causes,
were that His pleasure; As by His Word He Created the world out of nothing. But
He makes Natural Causes to serve His Providence in raising the Stormy wind. As
Rain proceeds from Natural Causes: the Vapor which arises out of the Earth by
the influence the Sun has upon it, produces Rain. Job 36.27. He makes the
Drops of water according to the Vapor thereof. The Rain is more or less
according to the quantity of the Vapor. These Vapors rise out of the Earth,
and especially out of the Sea. Amos 9.6. The waters of the Sea He pours them on
the Earth. The Rain is generated out of the waters of the Sea, and so poured on
the Earth. And therefore when the Prophet Elijah had it revealed unto him that
there should be a mighty Rain, he sent his Servant to look toward the Sea. 1
King. 18.43. There appeared rising out of the Sea, a little Cloud like to a
m^ns hand, and presently the Heavens were black with Wind and Clouds, and a
mighty Rain followed. The Prophet knew that in the course of Nature, Rain did
arise out of the Vapors that were from the Sea, and so from the moist^ Earth.
Now it is God that makes these Vapors to ascend. Thus the Prophet Jeremy, Jer.
51.16. He causes the Vapors to ascend from the ends of the Earth ^ that is,
from the Sea; for the Earth ends at the Sea. Again, The Sun, Moon, and Stars
have a Natural influence in causing Storms on the Earth. Amos 5.8. S^^k Him
that makes the Seven Stars and Orion. That is in other words, seek Him that
does make both Benign and Tempestuous seasons. The Seven Stars are attended
with sweet influences. The Scripture speaks of the sweet influences of the
Ple^ades, which are the same with the Seven Stars. When the Sun enters into
that Constellation (which it does on this Month, yea^ on this very day of the
Month) where the Seven Stars are, there are those kind influences which cause
the Grass to spring, and the Trees to bud and blossom. But then, Orion is a
Tempestuous Constellation: it has been called Nimbosus Orion, Stormy Orion; it
is a Constellation that appears in the Month of November, and as many times
attended with great Sto^ms. That the Stars of Heaven have a Natural influence
on stormy tempestuous s^^s^ns, we learn from that Scripture Judge. 5.20. where
it is said, That the Stars did fight in their Courses against Si^era: How did the
Stars fight against Si^era, but by a terrible Storm; the Providence and Power
of God s^arpening their influences? The Jewish Historian informs us, that in
the memorable Battle fought with Si^era, there was a terrible Storm of Wind and
Rain, mixed with Hail, and that the Providence of God did so order it, as that
the Wind was on the back of the Children of Israel, and in the face of their
Enemies, which made them unable to use their Bows and Arrows, and Darts and
Slings. Thus did the S^ars fight against Si^era. Now the Stars and all their
Influences are according to the Word of the Lord: they are all under the
Conduct and Government of Divine Providence. Job 9.7. He commands the Sun,
and it rises not; and Seals up the Stars. ver. 9. He has made Arct^^us. He
that has ^^ade A^c^^^us, does surely overrule the influences of it by His Power
and Providence. A^c^i^^^ is a Northern Constellation, that rises in the latter
end of the Year, when storms are frequent.

Again, When there are great Tempe^^s the Angels oftentimes have an hand
therein. The Angels are the Instruments of Divine Providence. Many (...) Holy
Angels, if God has any Execution for them to do thereby. When a storm of
Lightning fell upon an Hundred men that came against the Prophet Elijah, and
flew them by Fifty at a time, there was an Angel that had an hand it. Therefore
when the last Fifty came humbly and begged for mercy, the Angel said-to the
Prophet, Be not afraid, go along with him: 2 King. 1.11. And it is very
probable, that in the dis^^^ Night when an Hundred Fourscore and Five Thousand
were killed in the Army of the King of Assyria, that it was done by a storm of
Lightning; and we know that an Angel was the instrument of Providence in that
dreadful Execution. I^a. 37.36. It is said, That the A^gel of the Lord went
forth and smote the Camp of the Assyrians, and in the morning there were so
many of them dead Corpses. However, it is certain that when Fire and Brimstone,
and an horrible Tempest was Rained down on Sodom and Gomorrha, that the Holy
Angels of God were the instruments of His Providence therein: For the Angels
said to Lot, Genesis 19.13. We will destroy this place, God has sent us to
destroy it. The holy Angels of Heaven had an h^^d in that most dreadful
Tempest. Now the Angels are all ordered by the Word of God: Not only by the
Word of His Decree and Providence, but also by the Word of His Precept; they
Fulfill that. Psalm. 103.20. Ye His Angels that Excel in strength, that do His
Commandment, hearkening to the Voice of His Word: Ye Ministers of H^s, that do
His Pleasure. Yea, and sometimes by Divine Permission, Evil Angels have a hand
in such Storms and Tempests, as are very hurtful to men on the Earth. This we
see in the History of Job. Satan had no sooner obtained leave from God, to fall
on what belonged to Job, but presently there was a storm of Lightning that
killed his Sheep and his Servants; and a stormy Wind that broke down the House
and killed all his Children in one Day. But Satan is limited by the Power and
Providence of God. Though he has an Exceeding great natural Power, he can do
nothing without Gods permission: he cannot so much as bl^w a Feather, much less
cause a wind that shall blow down a House, Except God give ^^ve. He would fain
have, taken away Job Life as well as his Children but God would not let him do
it. The Devil could not possess so much as one of the Gadarens swine, till
Christ gave him leave to do it. So then as to Second Causes, we see they are
overruled by Him that is the First and Great Cause of all things.

3. The Truth before us is Evident, In that the God of Heaven is the Lord of
Hosts. All the Creatures in the world are his Hosts. He is often set forth by
that style in the Scripture. He is called, The Lord of Hosts, no less than an
hundred and thirty times by two Prophets, Isaiah and Jeremiah. For that all the
Creatures in the world are at His beck, and disposal. Dan. 4.35. He rules in
the Armies of Heaven, and does according to His Will among the Inhabitants of
the Earth: None can stay His hand; or, say to Him, what do thou? There is a
Glorious world, which is to us Invisible, and in that world there is a mighty
Host: There are Ten Thousand times Ten Thousand holy Angels; many Millions of
them that are at Gods Command, whom they all acknowledge as their only Lord and
Sovereign. Neh. 9.6. The Host of Heaven do^s worship Him. And all Creatures in
the Sta^ry Heavens, are also part of his Host, and at the Disposal of the most
high God. If He says to the Sun in the Firmament, Stand st^ll thou Sun! It
shall not stir one Inch. As in the days of Joshua, he being inspired by the
Spirit of God, Josh. 10.13. spoke to the Sun, and said, Thou Sun stand still
over Gibeon, and thou Moon over Aj^lon: and the Sun stood still, and did not
hasten to go down for about a whole day together. Or, if He says to the Sun
that it shall go backward, it will do so the Sun will fufil His Word. As in the
days of Hezekiah, Isa. 38.8. the Sun went back Ten Degrees. And as to all the
Stars of God that are in the Firmament, they are all at His beck. He tells the
Number of them: which is more than any mortal man can do. Late Astronomers have
by the help of the Telescope, discovered great Numbers of Stars which in former
Ages men had no sight or knowledge of. In the Asterism of the Pleiades wh^^^
the naked Eye Now can see but six Stars, there are above forty. A famous
Astronomer affirms that in the Constellation of Orion, he observed above two
thousand Stars. The Kings Astronomer affirmed to me, thirteen Years since,
being then in London, that he had by the help of h^s Telescopes discovered
Eighteen Hundred Stars which no man before him had ever taken no^ice of. Thus
we see that men cannot tell the Number of the Stars. Whenas the God that made
them does not only Number them, but Calls them all by their Name. Psalm. 147.4.
He has a Name for every particular Star in the Firmament: Which implies His
absolute Dominion over them. No Soldiers in an Army are at the Command of
their General, as all the Stars are at His Word, who is the Lord of H^sts. So
concerning inferior Creatures in the Air, Earth and Sea, all of them are at
the disposal of His Will. The Clouds are so, Isa. 5.6. He Commands the Clouds.
If Storms brake out of Clouds, God Commands the Clouds when it is so. And when
there is a Snowy Storm, that fulfils His Word, Job 37.6. He says to the Snow,
be then upon the Earth. So concerning the Hail, Job 38.22. Has then (says God
to Job) seen the Treasures of the Hail, which i have reserved against the time
of Trouble, and against the day of Battle and War? And the Lightning stands
ready p^^ss^d for the service of God, whenever He shall please to send it.
Job 38. 35. Can thou send Lightnings, that they may go and say unto these,
behold, here are we? The Lightning says to God, Here we are ready for any
service thou have for us to do. These Coals of Fire, are the Arrows of the
Lord of Hosts. Psalm. 144.6. No man shall ever receive any hurt by Lightning,
Except the Word of the Lord say it shall be so. And no man can Escape that
Arrow, if the Lord of Hosts say it shall strike him: Theodoricus (an impious K.
of the Franks) as he was robbing a Church, was killed with that Fire of God.
And I have somewhere read of a King, that was killed by Lightning in the midst
of his Army. All his Army could not save him from that Arrow of the Lord of
Hosts. The like also is to be said concerning the Winds* they are at the
dispose of Him who is the Lord of Hosts. Psalm. 18.10. He rides on the wings of
the Wind. The Lord is said to ride on them, as denoting to us that He orders
and disposes of them. He is said to hold the Winds on His fist. Prove. 30.4. He
lets them go to do Execution when and where he pleases; and restrains them
again when He pleases. Therefore He is said to bring the Wind ^ont of His
Treasure. Psalm. 135.7. For that He has as much power to dispose of the Wind, as
any man has of that which is his Treasure, that he may dispose of as he wi'd.
Thus we see that God is the Lord of Hosts, and therefore all Creatures are
ordered by Him. Well then might the Prophet Isaiah speak, as in. Isa. 29.6.
Thou shall be visited by the Lord of Hosts, with Thunder, with Storm and
Tempest, and the Flame of devouring Fire. God who is the Lord of Hosts, orders
such visitation for the Children of men here in the world.

PROP. III. The God of Heaven has Holy Ends in it, when He does visit the Earth
with dreadful Storms and Tempests. He has Infinite Reason for what He does: He
does nothing in vain. In the Day of the Revelation of the righteous Judgment of
God, all the world will see that at is so.

But more particularly;

1. Sometimes God sends dreadful Storms in Mercy. In mercy to those that are
His. Some of the Elect of God, have by such Providence been brought to the
acknowledgment of the Great God, so as to seek and serve Him. Psalm. 83.15.
Persecute them with thy Tempest, and make them afraid with thy Storm, that they
may seek thy Name. God sometimes causes Storms and Tempests to make men seek
his Name, humbly to fall down before Him, and beg for his Favor. Some
Careless, Graceless Souls have thereby been Awakened to Pray. Psalm. 107.23.
They that go down to the Sea in Ships, see the wonders of God in the Deep; He
raises the Stormy Wind, they mount up to the Heaven, and go down to the Deep;
they reel to and fro, and are at their wits ends: And, ver. 28. Then they Cry
to the Lord, and He saves them out of their Distresses. Some that have lived
without God in the world, yet when they have been in terrible storms at Sea,
they have Cried and Prayed to God. And although it be sadly true, that most
commonly men that have done so, after the Storm is over, and they delivered
from their Fears and Dangers, forget the God of their salvation. Nevertheless,
it is not so with all. It is not wont to be so with the Elect of God, whom He
has purposes of mercy unto. They will never forget the Storms which they met
with at Sea, and their Sea-Deliverances, and the Vows they have made to God to
be His Servants. Thus the Mariners that were with Jonah, Jon. 1.15. After God
had sent a terrible Storm on them, and had wonderfully Delivered them, ^is
said, the men feared the Lord Exceedingly, and therefore Sacrificed and made
Vows. Did they not make Vows that they would be the servants of true God as
long as they lived? And indeed that Storm proved a Mercy to the greatest City
in the world. It did occasion the Prophet Jonah, to go and Preach the Word of
God to them, which else he had not done, whereby many of them were brought to
Repentance. Many times, that Storm which is a Judgment to some, proves a Mercy
to others. The Storm that happened on our Coast Yesterday and the Day before,
This was Preached the 9 th. of April, 1704.
has proved a Mercy unto us, in that the French Privateer designing to do us
hurt, has suffered Shipwreck; a Stormy Wind has done more for us in one Day,
than we have for a long time done for our selves. But it is the Lord that has
done it. The same storm that sends some to Hell, carries others to Heaven. The
Prophet Elijah went up by a whirlwind into Heaven. 2 King. 2.11. Many that
belong to God have been translated to Heaven by a stormy Whirlwind, which has
then been a Mercy to them. Yea, sometimes a dreadful Storm, has proved a Mercy
to a whole Nation. So did that Hail-storm, which fell on the Army of the
Canaanites, who were the Enemies of the Lords People, in the days of Joshua,
when God did cast down Hailstones from heaven which discomsited and destroyed
them. A dreadful Storm that happened when the Israelitish Nation was under the
Government of a Woman as the Chief Ruler, it was a National Mercy to the People
of God. It is said concerning their Eenemies, That the River of Kishan swept
them away. Judge. 5.21 Writers tell us, that the River Kishon was fordable;
ordinarily men might safely wade over it, but a sudden Storm raised the River
so as that when the Canaanites in their Flight attempted to pass over it, they
were drowned in it. And besides what is mentioned in the Scriptures, I may put
you in mind of other instances, in which Storms have proved a great Mercy to
the Church of God. So it was in the Days of the Emperor Theodosius, when he
was sorely distressed, and his Christian Army in extreme danger of being routed
and ruined, the Lord by a Tempest caused the weapons of the Enemy to turn upon
themselves, so that the Good Emperor and the Christians with him obtained a
Glorious Victory. In the Year 719. a stormy Wind scattered a great Navy of the
Saracens who were then infecting the Christian world, so that scarce Ten Ships
of many Scores escaped that Destruction. Holland has often suffered much by
Storms and Inundations. Nevertheless that which happened 1574. was a Mercy to
that Nation: For it delivered them from the Spaniards, who were then Encamped
before Leyden. The English Nation ought never to forget the memorable 1588.
when the Spanish Armada thought to carry all before them, but they were in part
destroyed by Storms; so that the Duke of Parma blasphemously said upon it, That
the Four Elements were become Lutherans; and that God Almighty was a Lutheran
on that Day. So then dreadful Storms have sometimes been a Mercy to the Lords
People, and therefore God sent them.

2. For the most part, such Storms are sent by the Providence of God as a sign
of His Displeasure for the Sins of men. As Elihu said, Job 37.13. They come for
Correction. They come as a Judgment. There is a real Truth couched in that
Fiction of the Poet, That Pallas Destroyed a whole Fleet for the wickedness
which one Ajax had been Guilty of. We know that Thousands fared the worse for
the sin of one Achan. And certain it is, that the sin of one man in a Vessel,
may cause the most High to send a storm that shall endanger all the Ships
Company. Therefore Jonah made a most ingenuous Confession, Jon. 1.12. I know
(said he) that this great Tempest is upon you for my sake. When there was an
unusual Thunder Storm in the Land of Israel, Samuel told them that it was a
sign of Gods displeasure, and that they had been guilty of great Iniquity in
rejecting that Theocracy which they had been blessed under, and desiring a
Conformity in their Government to the heathen Nations. 1 Samuel 12.16, 17. When
God rained down an horrible Tempest on Sodom and Gomorrha, it was because there
were Crying Sins in that place. And as to that dreadful Storm in the Nations of
Europe, which has occasioned me to Preach on this subject, we may believe that
it is come as an intimation of the Displeasure of the most high God, and that
He has a Controversy with the Nations. The Anger of God is often in Scripture
set forth by that Metaphor and Comparison of Stormy Winds. Jer. 23.19. A
whirlwind of the Lord shall go forth in sury. God said concerning the Wall that
the False Prophets had been building, Ezekiel. 13.13. I will rend it with a Stormy
Wind in my Fury. Stormy Winds are oftentimes a sign of Gods Fury. And so may we
fear with respect to the late Storm in the European Nations. The Queen of
England has Published a Pious Proclamation, In which She declares, that the
like astonishing Calamity has not befallen that Kingdom in the memory of any
person living therein. And that She must needs acknowledge it is a Token of
Divine Displeasure, and that it was the Infinite Mercy of GOD, that the QUEEN
and all Her People were not Destroyed; and has therefore Commanded a FAST, to
be observed throughout all the Realm; Charging Her Subjects to Pray to GOD, for
the Pardon of the Crying Sins of the Nation, which have drawn down this heavy
Judgment. Blessed be God for that Royal Proclamation.

3. The Providence of God does sometimes send such Storms as Prognostick's and
terrible Warnings of Great Judgments not far off. Terrible Judgments are used
to follow Stormy Winds. When Enemies break in suddenly upon a People, a Storm
falls upon them. David says, Psalm. 55.8. Oh! that I had wings like a Dove,
that I might hasten my Escape from the Windy Storm and Tempest. What is that
Windy Storm? Was it not Absoloms Rebellion? Which put the Land into horrible
Confusion. It is said, Isa. 28.2. The Lord has a Tempest and a Destroying
Storm. What was that, but the Army of the King of Assyria, who made dreadful
Desolation in the Land? The Prophet Ezekiel, saw a Whirlwind coming out of the
North. Ezekiel. 1.4. What was that, but the King of Babylon, and his dreadful
Army? So as to these latter Ages, the Prophet Daniel has foretold, That the
King of the North shall come like a Whirlwind on the King of the South. Dan.
11.40. When the Turks broke in upon the Southern Nations, then was that
Whirlwind. Now as Desolating Judgments are compared to Stormy Wind, so dreadful
Tempest are signs of such Judgments; and that the Days are approaching when we
must expect Great Revolutions. That the Day is at hand, when God will Overturn,
Overturn, Overturn: Direful Storms come to be Prognostic; and Intimations of
it. Yea, the Coming of JESUS CHRIST the Son of God, to Judge the world, will
have Storms to be the forerunners of it One sign mentioned as Prodromous of it,
is, That there shall be Earthquakes in diverse places. Luke 21.11. Many times
terrible Storms are attended with Earthquakes: As we hear that Storm in
November last, was attended with an Earthquake in diverse places. And
Earthquakes are usually attended with dreadful Storms. So in that Earthquake in
Sicily, a few Years ago, when an hundred and forty Thousand fouls went down
alive into the Pit in a moment of Time, there were Dreadful Stormy Winds,
Thunder, Lightning, Rain; such things must be as forerunners of the Great Day,
when Christ will come to take possession of this lower world. Another sign
mentioned of the Lords coming, is, That the Sea and the Waves shall Roar. ver.
25. You know it was so in the late dreadful Storm. How did the Sea and the
Waves Roar? The words may admit of a Mystical Interpretation, that there will
be Storms of War among the Nations, which will put them into strange
Confusions; the like not known in the world. We may also interpret the words
Literally, That fearful Storms and Tempests shall be sent as Prognostics that
the Coming of the Lord draws nigh.

The late Tempest seems to be the more Ominous, in that it comes in Conjunction
with other awful Providence. At a Time when the Kingdoms are moved, when
Nations are shaking. When there is Distress of Nations, with great Perplexity:
Men's Hearts failing them with Fear and Expectation of the things that are
coming on the Earth. The Almighty God has cast the Nations into Travailing
Pains. And is not what we see ARCHE ODINON. Mat. 24.8. The beginning of
Sorrows, Will not these throws issue in some great Birth? Since the Lord is at
this Day shaking the Heavens and the Earth, and the Sea, and the Dry Land, may
we not hope that e're long, The Desire of all Nations will come?

SERMON II.
THus for the Doctrinal Handlng of the Truth before us. We proceed to some
APPLICATION of it.

USE I.
We may from hence Infer several Instructions, for our Information and
Direction.

1. If, Afflictive Storms do not come to pass but by the Providence of God,
then the like is to be said concerning all other Afflictions, That there is a
Divine Providence Ordering of them. Affliction comes not forth of the Dust, nor
does Trouble spring out of the Ground. No, It has an higher Original. The hand
of Heaven is in it. Indeed as to the Evil of Sin, God is not, nor can He be the
Author of it. He cannot look upon that Evil. He is of purer Eyes than to behold
Iniquity. But as for Evils of Punishment, they are all from Him. Sin is Evil
and has no Good in it, but the Punishment of Sin is Good. Thence there is no
Punishment, no Affliction whatsoever but it is from Him. Amos 3.6. Is there any
Evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? There is no Evil of Affliction
but the Lord has done it. If we speak of Particular Personal Afflictions, the
Word of the Lord is fulfilled in them. If a man is afflicted in his Body, with
painful Diseases; if he is chastened with Pain on his Bed, and the multitude of
his Bones with strong Pains, it is the Lord that orders that affliction for
him. If he is afflicted by Losses as to his outward Estate, although men may be
Instruments therein; Pirates, or Privateers may take his Estate from him, yet
it is the Lord that has done it. Isa. 42.24. Who gave Jacob to the Spoil, and
Israel to the Robbers, did not the Lord, He against whom we have Sinned? And if
a man is afflicted in his Name, if he is made the subject of much Reproach and
Sl^nder, the Word of the Lord is fulfilled in that Affliction also. Therefore
when David was Reviled by a wicked Shimei, he was wonderfully patient,
considering as in 2 Samuel 16.10. The Lord has said to Shimei, Curse David. If a
man is afflicted by the loss of his Liberty, if he is made a Captive, or a
Prisoner, the Word of the Lord is fulfilled in that Affliction. When Joseph was
sold for a Slave into Egypt, the Word of the Lord tried him, and Joseph said
afterward to his Brethren; Genesis 45.8. It was God that sent me hither, not you.
There was a mighty Providence ordering that Affliction for Joseph, in order to
the Salvation of many Lives and Souls. Or, is any afflicted (as many are in
these sad Times) with the loss of Friends, of near and dear Relations? It is
the Word of the Lord that has ordered that Affliction for them. And therefore
that Godly Widow Naomi, who was in great Bitterness for the death of both her
Sons, said, Ruth 1.21. The Lord has Testified against me, the Almighty has
Afflicted me, and dealt very Bitterly with me. So Job when he lost not only his
Estate, but his Children too, in one dismal Day, says, Job 1.21. The Lord has
taken away, Blessed be the Name of the Lord. It was a Stormy Wind that took
away his Children from him, which he was not unacquainted with; but for all
that he said, It is the Lord that has done it. And if Personal Afflictions are
from the Providence of God, then much more may it be said, and ought to be
believed concerning Public Judgments, that the Word of the Lord is in them. If
a People is Afflicted with scarcity of Provision, it is God that orders such an
Affliction for them. Amos 4.6. I (says the Lord) have given you cleanness of
Teeth, and want of Bread. If there is want of Rain, it is the Lord that has
called for a Drought on the Land: ver. 7. I witheld the Rain from you, I caused
it to Rain on one City, and caused it not to Rain on another City. Or, if there
are Blastings on the Fruits of the Earth, it is the Lord that brings that
Affliction. ver. 9. I have smitten you with Blastings and Mildew. Or, if
noxious Creatures are multiplied to the Destruction of the Fruits of the Earth,
it is God that has sent them. The Caterpiller, and the Palmer-worm, (says God)
they were my great Army which I sent among you. So when Contagious, Epidemical
and Mortal, Diseases break in upon a People, it is the Lord that has sent that
Besome of Destruction among them. When the Pestilence was in Egypt, and there
was not one House throughout the Land but the Plague was in it, it was God that
sent it. Psalm 78.50. He delivered their Lives unto the Petilence. The like is
to be said concerning that Calamity of War, it is the Lord that sends it. He
makes Peace, and He Creates Evil. That Judgment of the Sword is by way of
Eminency called, Evil. Isa. 45.7. When the Reubenites made War upon the
Hagarites, and overcame an hundred Thousand of them, it is said, 1 Chronicles. 5.22.
The War was of God. Afterward, the Reubenites were overcome by the Assyrians,
who Killed many, and Captivated many, now it is said, ver. 26. That the God of
Israel stirred up the spirit of the King of Assyria, who carried them away.
Although Nebuchadnezzar in making War upon the Jews had his Ambition and Revenge,
he fulfilled the Word of the Lord in what he did. It is therefore said, 1 Chronicles. 6. 15. The Lord carried away Judah and Jerusalem, by the hand of
Nebuchadnezzar. It Was God that did it, though Nebuchadnezzar was the instrument.
That Whirlwind out of the North, could never have overset the City of
Jerusalem, if the Word of the Lord had not been in it. Lam. 3 37. Who is he
that says and it comes to pass, if the Lord Command it not? The Emperor of
Babylon might determine to lay Jerusalem wast, but it would never have come to
pass, if the Lord had not Commanded it. But especially when there is (as at
this Day there is) a Flame of War broke out among many Nations, the Word of the
Lord has done it. When there is a War in which many Nations are concerned, it
causes a mighty Storm in the Earth. Thus when the two Greatest Kings in the
world fell out, and were engaged in a bloody War. (Namely, the King of Persia,
and the King of Babylon,) it put a great part of the Earth into a Combustion.
There was in it a notable fulfillment of the Decree and Providence of God, and
of what the Prophet Isaiah had foretold, who had Prophesied of a Tumultuous
noise of Nations, and Kingdoms, the Lord of Hosts mustring them for the Battle.
Isa. 13.4. So then, such things on the Earth are ordered by the Hand of Heaven.

2. Hence for men not to Acknowledge God in such Dispensations is a great Evil.
When Stormy Winds happen, men are apt to impute it to Second Causes only, to
the Disposition of the Air, the Season of the Year, or the Influence of the
Constellations in Heaven, but we should look higher than the Stars when such
things come to pass. Our thoughts should be on Him who Rules in the Armies of
Heaven. When Devastations are made by a Stormy Wind, People are apt to say, the
Storm has shattered so many Houses, sunk so many Vessels, taken away the Lives
of so many Men: But still we must remember, that it was the Word of the Lord
that did it. Whatever Storms of onekind or another, whatever Afflictions
dobefal men, they ought to take notice of God therein; As David did, Psalm.
39.9. I was silent because thou did it. The Philisti^s when they were smitten
with ^ deadly Destruction, were willing to make a Question of it, whether it
were the Hand of God or no? Therefore (...) wou^d make an Experiment for their
satisfaction in it, saying, If so, then we shall know that His hand has
smitten us, but if otherwise, we shall know it was not His Hand, only a Chance
that happened to us. 1 Samuel 6.9. For men not to see the hand of God in awful
Judgments that comes on the world, and especially on themselves, argues great
Atheism and hardness of Heart. Yet such Stupidity were the Lords Professing
People guilty of. Isa. 42.25. When God poured on them the Fury of His Anger,
and the Strength of Battle, they knew it not, they laid it not to Heart. Truly,
not to acknowledge God in any Judgment, is to be more Irreligious than the
Magicians of Egypt were. When a prodigious Judgment came on them, they could
confess, Exodus 8.19. This is the Finger of God. Wherefore for men not at all to
observe the Finger of God in His Judgments, is to be more Irreligious than
those wicked men were. And it provokes the Holy. God to send greater Judgments,
when Men don't own His Hand therein. Isa. 26.11. When thy Hand is lifted up,
they will not see: But they shall see, (...) and be ashamed. Yea, to deny.
Providence in such Dispensations of this nature, is such Epicurism and Atheism,
as brings Destruction on those that shall be found Guilty of it. Psalm. 28.5.
Because they regarded not the Work of the Lord, nor the Operation of His Hand,
He shall destroy them.

3. We see that the Lord is a Great GOD, and Greatly to be Feared. The Power of
His Word declares it unto all the world, in that his Word can do such mighty
things, and shall be fulfilled. God says, Isa. 46.10. My Counsel shall stand,
and I will do all my Pleasure. There is no Resisting the Word and Will of God
All the Creatures in the world cannot prevent. His Word from being fulfilled.
Romans 9.19. Who has Resisted His Will? God by His Word made the world, and
therefore all the men in the world ought to fear Him, and to stand in awe of
Him. As the Psalmist says, By the Word of the Lord were the Heavens made, and
all the Host of them; Let the Earth Fear the Lord, let all the Inhabitants of
^he world stand in A^e of Him: He commanded and it was done. Psalm. 33.6, 8, 9.
And it is the powerful Word of God (...), does preserve all the Creatures in
the world. Heb. 1.3. He upholds all things by the Word of His Power. All the
Creatures in the world would be Annihilated in one moment, if God should speak
the Word, and say it shall be so. His Power on the account whereof He ought to
be feared, appears in the Ordinary works of His Providence. It does so in His
bringing Rain, especially great Storms of Rain. Job 37.7. The great Rain of His
Strength. God shows his Strength, His Power in great Rains sometimes. So in His
overruling the Wind, Isa. 27.8. He stays the East Wind, in the day of His
Rough-wind. God has done mavelous things sometimes by Stormy-winds. He has
rent Mountains thereby. As when the Prophet Elijah was in Horeb, 1 King. 19.11.
There was a great wind that rent the Mountains, and broke the Rocks to pieces,
before the Lord. God by a mighty Wind caused the Red Sea to be divided when the
waves thereof did Roar, and made it to be a dry Land, for His People to pass
over, Exodus 14.21. And after that He caused his Wind to blow, and the waters
returned, so as that King Pharaoh and all his Army were drowned; they sank a^
Lead into the mighty waters. And when all the Earth was overflown, that the
highest Mountains were fifteen Cubits under water. God by making a wind pass
over the Earth, turned back the waters again, and caused the dry Land to
appear. Genesis 8.1. So then He is a Great God and greatly to be Feared. It is
said of the Children of Israel, that when God sent an unsual Thunder Storm
among them, They feared the Lord greatly. 1 Samuel 12.18. And in Ezra's time,
when there was such a Storm of Rain as did threaten a Famine, Ezr. 10.9. All
the People trembled because of the Great Rain. You heard the last Lords Day,
that when God sent a mighty Tempest, the Seamen who were Sailing to Tarshish,
feared the Lord Exceedingly. God has made men to stand in awe of Him (and they
ought to do so) by such Dispensations of his Providence. They should fear to
offend so Great a God. Psalm. 65.8. They that dwell in the utmost parts of the
Earth are afraid at thy tokens. That is to say, at the tokens of thy
Displeasure. And what are those tokens of the Anger of God? Thunder, Lightning,
Earthquakes, Stormy Winds, Dreadful Tempests, and the like. These are the
tokens of Gods Anger, and the effects of His Power, that should make men
afraid. Shall not poor mortal Creatures be afraid to offend that God, who can
by a Stormy Wind blow them into Everlasting Destruction when he pleases. Fear
Him, yea, I say unto you, Fear Him.

4. We may hence Conclude that Wicked men who are the Enemies of God must needs
Perish. He can by His Word bring a Destroying Storm upon them, which they can
neither resist nor escape. It is said of a sinner, Job 27.21. An East wind
takes him away, and a Storm hurles him out of his place. God can soon raise
such a Whirlwind as none of his Enemies shall be able to stand before it. As He
threatened Rabbath, the chief City among the Amonites. Amos 1.14. That it should
be destroyed with a Tempest in the Day of the whirlwind. Such a Whirlwind is
coming on the wicked of the Earth Jer. 23.19. A whirlwind of the Lord shall go
forth, and it shall fall grievously on the Head of the wicked. There is then no
standing before that God, who can by His Word do such things. The Sixth Seal in
the Revelations is a Prediction of wonderful Revolutions (long since
accomplished) to be in the world, that all the Pagan Powers in the Roman Empire
should fall, and that Christianity among the Nations should prevail. The Devil
and all his instruments did whatever they could to hinder such a thing from
coming to pass, but the Word of the Lord was fulfilled in it. The greatest of
men could not then stand before a provoked God. Therefore the Greatest Men on
Earth, Kings, and Mighty Generals, are introduced as calling upon the Rocks, to
hide them from the fa^e of Him that sits upon the Throne, saying, The Great
Day of His wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? It will not be long
before the Son of God will come down from Heaven, when there will be the most
terrible Storm of Thunder and Lightning, that ever was known since the world
began; whereby the Proud, and all they that do Wickedly shall be Consumed. Then
will that Scripture be fulfilled, Psalm. 50.3. Our God shall come, a Fire shall
devour before Him, and it shall be very Tempestuous round about Him.

Thus by way of Instruction: We proceed to the Second Use.

USE II.
Let us hence be Exhorted to make a due Improvement of that dreadful Storm that
the Lord has sent among the European Nations: The astonishing tidings whereof,
arrived to us in America, a few day^s since. We may not think that because we
were afar off from the Fury of that Storm, that therefore we need not to have
any concerned thoughts ^^out it. It was said to those that we^e afar off from
Jerusalem, Jer. 51.50. You that have escaped the Sword, remember the Lord afar
off, and let Jerusalem come into your minds. Even so, We that have escaped the
Destruction of that Stormy Wind, yet ought to remember what the Lord has done
afar off: and let it come into our minds. For truly, the Providence of God was
very Extraordinary in it. Whether we speak of the Extent of it, which has been
beyond what has been ordinarily known. For it raged not only in England, but in
Holland, and the Spanish Netherlands, and France, Hamburg, and in many places
in Germany, Denmark, and all along the Coast of the Baltic Sea. Or, if we
speak of the dismal Devastations made by it: Come and behold the Works of the
Lord, the Desolations which He has made in the Earth. We hear that in France,
their Capital City received much Damage, and all the Neighboring Country,
besides several other places. In that Kingdom, it is said that Callis, and the
City of Roan have suffered very much; and that Eight French Ships of War were
Destroyed by that Stormy Wind. And no Question but that whole Kingdom has
received more Damage by it, then we are as yet informed of. In the Spanish
Netherlands, no less than Six Cities were shattered by it as if they had been
Bombarded. In Ostend, a third part of the Town destroyed, and an Hundred Ships
lost. In Holland, several Villages at the Texel laid under water. In Friseland,
the Sea broke in upon them, and overwhelmed a Fourth part of the Country. And
in England we know that it was Dreadful. Several Ships of War, and Hundreds of
other Vessels lost. And it is supposed that not less than Seven Thousand Seamen
perished: Many Houses utterly demolished, and many more greatly defaced. So
that there is in this Providence a speaking Voice of Heaven to the whole World
that shall hear of it. God has been terrible in His Doings. Therefore are we
concerned to make a due Improvement of it! And what Improvement?

1. It should awaken us to Repent and Turn to God test He send Storms on us
also. As when the Children of Israel saw some of their Brethren perishing by an
Earthquake, Number. 16.34. They fled at the Cry of them; saying, lest the Earth
swallow us up also. Doubtless, there was a Great Cry in the Vessels Cast away,
when the Seamen saw themselves perishing, there was a Great Cry among them* and
a Great Cry among their Relation^, when they understood what God had done. We
that hear of that Cry, should turn to God lest the like befall us also. Our
Savior Christ has instructed us, to make this Improvement of awful
Dispensations Luke 13.5. When there was some taken away by a sudden stroke,
those (says Christ) were not greater Sinners than others, but Except you
Repent, you shall likewise Perish. That is the Use we should make of this
tremendous Hand of Heaven, to Repent, that we might not likewise Perish. GOD
that sent such a Storm on England, ca^^ send such on one, and a greater on
New England. God can soon do to Boston, as He has done to London, to Bristol,
to Salisbury, and to many other Towns in England. Then, are we not concerned to
Turn unto Him, that we may escape the terror of his Hand? When the Enemies of
the Lords. People were cut off by dreadful Judgments, God expected that
Jerusalem should fear Him. Surely when not our Enemies only, but our Brethren,
and those of the same Christian. Protestant Religion with us, are bleeding
under doleful Judgments, we should receive Instruction thereby. Zeph. 3.6. I
cut off the Nations (says the Lord) and made their Towers desolate: I said,
surely they will fear me. Not long before that Prophecy, Nebuchadnezzars Father
sacked Nineveh, the greatest City in the world; on whose Walls there were
Fifteen hundred Towers. Now God expected that Jerusalem should Repent of those
Sins. that provoked him to deal so with the Nations who were some of them afar
off. Let us by Repentance prevent a Storm. Zeph. 2.3. Gather your selves, that
is in a way of Repentance and solemn Humiliation, before the Decre^ bring
forth, before the Anger of the Lord come on you. And if we do so, It may be we
shall be hid in the Day of the Lords Anger.

2. This awful Providence should put us upon Earnest Prayer to God, that the
Wrath of Heaven may not fall upon our Nation. For truly this Storm seems to be
Ominous of a Storm of another Nature hastening^ on the Nation. The tearing up
so many Trees by the Roots, makes me think of the threatening the Lord denounced
against His People Israel, 2 Chronicles 7.20. I will pluck them up by the Roots, out
of the Land I have given them. If when there was but Eighteen men destroyed by
the fall of a Tower on them, it was an Omen to the Jewish Nation and to the
City of Jerusalem, that their Towers should fall, that the Temple should fall,
that the National Religion Established among them should fall: May we not fear,
when not Eighteen only, but more than Eighteen Hundred have at once been taken
out of the world, by a sudden unexpected expected blow, that it may intimate
terrible things coming on a Sinful Nation. But the most dreadful Omen of all
is, he Sins ra^^ are and have been in the Land. In one of the latter Reigns,
the whole Land was overwhelmed with horrible Debauchery. And we may fear that
there is yet a terrible Wrath from Heaven coming for those Sins. Moreover, The
Caroline Persecution was a dreadful one. How many Thousands did then perish by
cruel Imprisonments? Nay, how many Thousand Families were ruined, because they
dared not sin against their Consciences? And although in the Last, and in the
Present Reign, (which the Lord make prosperous) indulgence is granted in
matters relating to Conscience (that may be a lengthning of Tranquillity;)
Nevertheless, in the Day that God visits the English Nation, He will visit on
the account of Former Iniquities, as well as for Latter ones. What a Glorious
Reformation was there in Josiahs Reign? Yet 2 King. 23.26. God did not turn
from the fierciness of His Anger, because of the Sins that Manasseh provoked
him with. Manasseh the King of Judah had been Dead some scores of Years before
the Nation was destroyed for his sins. But there are still grievous Sins in the
Nation. I mentioned it before, that the QUEEN in Her Proclamation for a Fast to
be observed all the Kingdom over, because of the Displeasure of God maninested
in that dreadful Storm, says there are Crying Sins in the Nation, which have
drawn down that heavy Judgment. Alas that there are Heaven-daring provocations.
I was the last week amazed to read a Printed Letter, written by a Conformist,
who says, They have cause to be afraid left England have Sodoms Punishment,
and be destroyed with Fire and Brimstone from Heaven. For some were so wicked
as to bid open Defiance to the Judgments of God. That very Day the Storm was,
in a Playhouse they acted Thunder and Lightning, and the falling down of
Chimnies, the Audience clapping their Hands, and making themselves Sport
thereat. Be Astonished at this, O ye Heavens! Will not the Lord be avenged on
such a Nation as this! O the Infinite Patience of the long suffering God, that
the Earth does not open its Mouth, for such sinners to go down alive into the
Pit! History tells us, that when Aladius (one of the old Latin Kings) would be
so impious as to imitate Joves Thunder and Lightning, the Earth in that moment,
opened its mouth, and he and all his House were swallowed by it. But that ever
any in a Christian Nation should bid such Defiance to Heaven, is prodigious.
This may make us fear, and should awaken us to implore the Mercy of Heaven,
that utter Destruction may not come on the dear Land of our Fathers Sepulchers.
Who knows, but Prayer may be a means if not wholly to Avert desolating
Judgments, yet to Divert them for a time. As it was with Nineveh when they
Cried to God, that Judgment which otherwise had overtaken them in Forty Days,
did not come until Forty Years werexpired. They said, Who can tell, if God will
turn from His fierce Anger that we perish not? So, who can tell what Prayer may
do? And we have the more reason to Pray, for that our own welfare is wrap^ up
with theirs. If Desolations come upon England, it cannot be well with
New England. However, if direful. Plagues must make the Earth Empty, let them
find us Praying, and Mourning for the Sins of the Times, and whatever comes it
shall go well with us. When Angels with Slaughter weapons i^ their hands, are
to destroy utterly, there is a ^^ack set on them that Sigh and Cry for all the
Abominations that are done in the midst of the City. Ezekiel. 9.4. It may be they
shall be favored with signal Temporal Preservation: But if not, they shall
have Spiritual and Eternal Presentations, which are a Thousand times more
desirable.

3. Another Improvement that we should make of this awful Providence is to
beware of those. Evils that use to be attended with Storms. Whether we speak of
Storms in a Literal-sense, or of Storms of (...) Judgments. As now, Security is
one of those Evils. When men are secure; God sends a Storm to awaken them with
a Vengeance. 1 These. 5.3. When they say Peace and Safety, then sudden
Destruction comes on them. It was so with the Town of Laish* (it were well if
it were not so with Boston,) they were Secure, Judge. 18.10. and when they least
thougt of it, Six Hundred Men fell on them with the Sword and Destroyed them.
It has been often observed, that when a People are most Secure, then terrible
Judgments have been near to them. It was so with old Babylon. Bei^azz^^ made a
very impious Feast, for a thousand of his Lords; yet at that time, their
Enemies were investing the City; but they feared not: they had a River to
defend them; a treble Wall, Provision for twenty Years, and Scorned what the
Mides, and Persians, with their Army could do unto them. But while they were in
the midst of their mirth, the Scripture assures us that that Night the King of
Babylon was slain: and History informs us, that all his Nobles were slain with
him in that Night of their profound security. And Mystical Babylon, ( Rome that
is) when she shall say, I have no sorrow, then her Plagues, Death and Mourning
come upon her in one Day. Therefore beware of Security, which brings unexpected
Storms. And let us beware of Sinful Storms. Where there are great Divisions and
Contentions, there use to be Sinful Storms: And such Evils are oftentimes
attended with Storms of Persecution. It was so as to diverse of those
Persecutions which befell Christians in the Primitive times: Especially before
that of the Emperor Aurelian; Professors of Religion were scandalously abusing
one another. When Sheep are scattering from one another, God lets loose Wolves
to drive them together And Oh! Beware of Crying Sins. It was the Crying Sins of
Sodom that brought the horrible Tempest on them. But what were they? Oh! that
there were not any of them in Boston. But the Prophet Ezekiel tells us that the
Sins of Sodom, were, Pride, Fullness of Bread, and abundance of Idleness. Are
not those Sins in Boston? Is there not a great deal of Pride, as to Vanity in
Apparel? And are not Prosessors of Religion in such a doleful time as this is,
indulging their Children in haughtiness, in learning to walk mincing as they
go, without regarding either God or Man, that Testifies against them? And does
not the Third of Isaiah say, that for this, Thy Men shall fall by the Sword?
And is there not Fullness of Bread, aye, and Fullness of Drink too? How doleful
is it to be spoken, that Excess in Drink is become a Crying Sin of New England.
And Abundance of Idleness. Are there not Persons in Boston, that spend their
Time in Public Houses, there Gaming and Drinking to Excess, and in the mean
time their poor Families in want and distress? Oh beware of such things, lest
you pull down Storm of Wrath from Heaven, on the place where you live.

4 We should endeavor that our Hearts be taken off from all things (...)
below, and fit upon that World where there are no Storms. While Gods People are
in this world they meet with Storms, and Tempests of more kinds than one. Of
the Church of God it is said, O thou Afflicted and tossed with Tempest! Isa.
54.11. Afflictions come like waves of the Sea, one rolling on the back of
another. One Affliction no sooner gone, but another comes. The Waves and the
Billows pass over them. Deep calls to Deep: Afflictions so near, that they are
within Call one of another. But then there is a World in which there is no
Storms. If Adam had not Sinned, there would have been no Afflictive Storms on
men here in this world; and truly, in the Second Adams World, that is, in the
Resurrection World, there will be no Storms. It Is said of that World, Rev. 21.1.
There shall be no more Sea. Even so, when the Servants of God are got safe into
the Heavenly World, there shall be no more Sea. They shall be no more tossed
with tempests and troubles: They shall not there meet with such a Sea of
Trouble, as here in this wo^ld oftentimes they are disquieted with. Therefore
our hearts should be set on that blessed world. Why should we set our hearts on
things below? Why should our hearts be set on Earthly Riches, when a Storm may
come, and take them all from us in one Day, in one Hour? Yea, why should we set
our hearts inordinately on Friends, Relations, Children? A Storm may Drown
them, or throw down an House over them and kill them, as it was with Jobs
Children. Therefore our hearts should be set on things above. Remember the
Apostles Exhortation, Col. 3.2. Set your Affections on things Above, not on
things on the Earth. And Christ says, Lay up treasure for your selves in
Heaven, where Thieves cannot break throw and Steal. So where Storms cannot break
in and deprive of that Treasure. And if our hearts be on the Heavenly world, it
will be a sign that our Treasure is there: And if we have our Treasure there,
we have great Riches that shall never be taken from us. A Famous Minister of
Christ, when his house was burning, and all his estate taken from him, lifted
up his e^es to Heaven and said, there is my All. Th^re he had an estate, which
no fire, nor water, nor storm could deprive him of.

5. We should from the Consideration of such Providence learn, To be always
preparing for sudden Changes and Death. What sudden Changes did the late Storm,
which has occasioned our present Discourse, cause in many Families, as well as
on particular Persons? And sudden Deaths too. We don't know but sudden Death
may take us out of the world. It may come on us in a Night. Job 27.20. A
Tempest steals him away in the Night. It was so with many in the late Tempest
which came at Midnight; and destroyed Thousands in a Night, and some too
Persons of a considerable Figure. One of them an Eminent Bishop, whom I was
well acquainted with. He was a Person of great Learning, and of great
Moderation to those that Dissented from him, in things that are not the
Essentials of Religion. Yet the Storm broke down his House, and killed him and
his. We see that no Ranks or Order of men are Exempted from Casualities, and
Calamities of this Nature. Therefore should all make it their Care to be ready
for Death at all times, let it come never so suddenly. Nor is this the only
Storm that has destroyed Houses and the dwellers in them in a moment. In the
Year 1500. in Rome part of the Popes Conclave was blown down by a violent
Tempest, Three of his Minister's killed by it, himself the next day taken out
of the rubbish sorely wounded. Our English Chronologies speak of a Thunder
Storm, that made an House to fall wherein a Knight and Eight of his Family were
killed. And some parts of our American world have been subject to Stormy winds,
that have taken away great Numbers out of the world. Do you not remember since
the Governor of Barbados, and many with him were carried away by an Hurricane
and never heard of more? And among us there have been more than a few, that
Storms of Thunder and Lightning have taken them out of the world. It was so
with the Captain of the Castle, a Good Man: not to mention others, of whom many
Years since I gave a Public Account. And sometimes a Stormy Wind without
^hunder, has proved fatal to such as have stood in the way of it. There was ^
Cambridge, here in New England, in the Year 1682, a Windy Tempest very
Remarkable. It broke out of a dark Cloud; it laid all flat to the ground where
it came. Many Trees were torn up by the roots, others were broke off in the
bodies of them, as if they had been shot off, not hurting the stocks. Old Trees
which lay on the Earth, and Stones of a great magnitude were carried away by
it, some of which could not be found again. The Cloud it self was filled with
Stones, Brush, Boughs, and other things which it had taken up from the Earth,
so that the sides of the Cloud seemed like a green wood. A Young Man being in
the field was suddenly slain by this Tempestuous wind, and his body much
bruised and many of his bones broken. Wherefore let Young men as well as
others, prepare for sudden Death. But Sea-faring-men, especially are concerned
to be always ready for death. It is a sad thing that so few of them are so. Are
not the generality of them profane Swearers, and guilty of other Impieties,
although there is but a step between them and death continually? The dreadful
Tempest has been fatal to that Tribe of men above any other. On which account
there is a Voice of God in this Stormy Wind, calling to Seamen to turn from
sin, and to make ready for sudden death, that so if their Bodies should in a
moment sink into the deep waters, their precious and immortal Souls may not
sink down into the bottomless pit forever.

Finally, The dreadful Storm which we have lately been advised of, Should cause
us to make sure of an Interest in Christ, that so our Souls may be safe
forever, from the Storms of Divine and Eternal Vengeance. It Is said, Isa. 32 2.
A Man shall be an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the Storm. What
Man is that, but Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God, that Man who is God as
well as Man. What Storm is it that he preserves from; bu^ the Terrible Storm of
the wrath and Vengeance of God? Who can stand before that Storm? No mere man
nor creature can do i^. Who can stand before him when his Fu^y is poured out
like Fire, and the Rocks are thrown down by him? Now the Lord Jesus Christ has
made that Storm a Calm, and the waves to be still. Jonah was an Eminent Type of
Christ in this respect, he wa^ willing to be thrown into the Sea, that so^ the
storm might cease. Joh. 1.12. Take me and cast me into the Sea, so shall the
Sea be Calm unto you. Thus the Lord Jesus Christ has been willing to be cast
into the Sea of Divine wrath that would else certainly have destroyed all
mankind. So that S^a ^s C^a^m. And therefore our greatest concernment is to
make sure that Christ is ours, and then we ne^d not fear any destroying storms,
no nor any destroying Angel. When the Children of Israel had the Blood of the
Lamb sprinkled over the doors of their houses, the destroying Angel might not
touch them. Therefore the Apostle Ju^e speaks of them that are preserved in
Jesus Christ. How preserved in Christ? Even as the Children of Israel were
preserved from the destroying Angel, when every house in Egypt felt his power,
and the anger of God in it. If we are in Christ, why should we fear? We need
not fear let the Times be never so dismal: let never such Storms arise in the
world we need nor fear. As the Church said, We will not fear, though the
Mountains be removed into the midst of the Sea, and the Waters roar. So, if we
have an interest in Christ, although as terrible a Storm should come on the whole
Earth, as there was in Noah's Flood, we need not fear. Such as were in the Ark
were safe when that storm came. If our Souls are A^ked in the Lord Jesus Christ
we are safe enough. God said to Noah, that he should enter into the Ark, and
shut the door that so he might be hid and safe till the Calamity that was to
destroy the whole world should be past and gone. So the Lord bids us do. He
invites us and encourages us to come to Christ for our eternal safety. I
conclude therefore with that comfortable word, Isa. 26.20. Come my people,
enter into thy Chambers, shut the doors and hide thy self, ^ntil the
Indignation be overpast.

A Brief Discourse Concerning the Praise Due to GOD, for His Mercy, IN GIVING
SNOW like WOOL. Delivered in a SERMON, By Increase Mather.

Psalm. 145.10. All thy Works shall Praise thee, O Lord, and thy Saints shall
Bless thee.

Qui nivibus celsos operit, cen vellere montes:

Buchan. Nulla super campos tendit sua vellera nubes.

Lactant. Boston Printed by Timothy Green, 1704.

To the READER.
THE Ensuing Sermon was Preached some Years ago, at the Lecture in Boston. Many
have handled this Subject under a Philosophical Consideration. Especially the
Learned Barthol^^us, whose Discourse F^c^ls al^ that I have ^^en. But no one
that I know of, has in this way written Theologically upon it. For which cause
I was the more inclined to this Publication; withal considering the Affinity
there is between this and the other Subject relating to Storms. I have
therefore ^erked the Notes which one of my Auditor's took from me in
Shorthand, and Consented the Printer should have them. I have Endeavored to
Express the Truth with such Plainness and Perspicuity, as th^^ the mos^
Ordinary Capacities (whose Edification I design) may understand what they Read.
Altho^ there is a Time when the Meditation on some Works of Providence is more
Eminently seasonable, yet it is never unseasonable. The Summer is now come.
Nevertheless, Snowy Weather will in due Time return again, when Cont^mplations
of this Nature will be a proper Entertainment. If what is herewith Emitte^,
shall Illuminate or Excite any in ascribing to God the Praises which are due to
His Name, my Labor will not be lost.

GOD is to be Praised, For Giving Snow like Wool.
Psalm. CXLVII.16. He gives Snow like Wool.


THERE are Five Psalms which begin and end with the word Hallelujah; that some
have styled the Hallelujatical Psalms. This is one of them. As for the Penman
of it, there is nothing certain to be fixed on. Some have thought it was
written by Nehemiah; on occasion of the Re-building the City of Jerusalem. The
Seventy Greek Interpreters, suppose that the Prophet Haggai, or Zechariah were
the Penmen of it, whose Names are in their Translation prefixed to it. But they
are not in the Hebrew Original, therefore neither may we affirm them to be the
Authors of it. As for the matter of it, it is Hortatory. The Psalmist does call
first upon all in General, and then upon Jerusalem in Special, to Praise the
Lord. Several Arguments are mentioned as Inducements thereunto.

1. Those Temporal Blessings that God had Graciously favored them with. In
that their City Gates were set up and made strong, and that their Children,
that is to say, the Inhabitants of the City were blessed and increased, and
that Peace and Plenty was restored to them after much Trouble.

2. He does Excite them to Praise God on the account of His Providence in the
Works of Nature, causing them to be for the benefit of His People. In that He
makes the Winter and the Summer, in the several Vicissitudes thereof. The
Winter is Described in this, and in the 17. ver. The Spring and the Summer are
mentioned in the 18. ver.

3. And then he concludes with those peculiar Spiritual Blessings which
Jerusalem had above others, viz. The Word of God and His Ordinances.

The words before us to insist on, fall under the Second of these Particulars,
in which we hear the inspired man of God calling on the Lords People to Praise
Him on the account of what He does in the Winter. We are at this Day in the
midst of Winter, and therefore I have singled out the words which have been
read, as s^iting with the present works of Divide Providence.

DOCT. That Men ought to Praise the Great GOD because He gives Snow like-Wool.

Three PROPOSITIONS will come under our Consideration, all contained in the
Doctrine.

PROP. I. That the Snow is fitly resembled to Wool. Snow like Wool says the
Psalmist. And not only the Sacred writers, but others make use of this
Comparison. The Grecians of old were will not to call the Snow, ERIODES HUDOR,
Wooly Water, or wet Wool. The Latin word Floccus, signifies both a Lock of Wool
and a Flake of Snow, in that they resemble one another. The aptness of the
similitude appears in three things.

1. In respect of the Whiteness thereof. Isa. 1.18. The Lord says to His
People, though your sins have been as Scarlet, they shall be white as Snow, though
red like Crimson, they shall be as Wool. Scarlet and Crimson are of a red
Color, and Snow and Wool of a white. Although there is Black Wool, and in some
parts of the world there is Snow that will turn Red after it has lain long on
the Earth, nevertheless, usually Whiteness is the Color of it. It is a
Scripture Expression, white as snow.

2. In respect of Softness. Hence is the Proverbial Expression, As soft as
wool. So as soft as snow. When it first falls on the Ground, if a man should
fall on it, he will receive no more hurt thereby than if he should fall on Wool.
It is near akin to water in respect of the softness of it. This our senses
confirm I am not ignorant, that some late Enquirers into the works of Nature,
suppose a Snowy Cloud to be an infinite Number of Icicles, and that Snow is
Ice, and therefore hard. We must then call it woolly Ice.

3. The Third and Chief reason of the Comparison, is, In respect of that
warming Virtue that does attend the Snow. Wool is warm. We say, As warm as
Wool. Woolen-cloth has a greater warmth than other Clothing has. The wool on
Sheep keeps them warm in the Winter season. So when the back of the Ground is
covered with Snow, it keeps it warm. Some mention it as one of the wonders of
the Snow, that though it is it self cold, yet it makes the Earth warm* But
Naturalists observe, that there is a saline spirit in it, which is hot, by
means whereof Plants under the Snow are kept from freezing. Ice under the snow
is sooner melted and broken than other Ice. In some Northern Climates, the wild
barbarous People use to cover themselves over with it to keep them warm. When
the sharp Air has begun to freeze a man's Limbs, Snow will bring heat into them
again. If persons Eat much Snow, or drink immoderately of Snow-water, it will
burn their Bowels and make them black. So that it has a warming virtue in it,
and is therefore fitly compared to Wool.

PROP. II. The Snow is a work of God. It is He who gives Snow like Wool. The
Great God owns and challenges the Snow to be His Creature. Job 38.22, 23. The
treasures of the Snow which I have reserved. We see God challenges the Snow as
His property. He and He only has power to dispose of it. As other the like
Meteors (as they use to be called) are His work. It is said in the Context
before us, that He Scatters the hoar frost like Ashes. And the Ice is
ascribed to God as His Creature. He casts forth His Ice like Morsels. Job
38.29. Out of whose womb came the Ice, and the Hoary Frost of Heaven, who has
gendred it? It is the mighty God that makes the soft water hard thereby. So
Job. 37.10. By the Breath of God Frost is given, and the breadth of the Waters
is strained. The Frost drinks up the Waters, and straitens them. The old
description of Ice, that it is Copia Aquae in Augusto, a great deal of water in
a little room; late Philosophers approve not of. But we are certain that the
Breath of God, that is the cold freezing Wind, is the cause of it; which Wind
proceeding from the Providence of God, is therefore called His Breath. So
again, the Rain is another Meteor that God is said to give. Job 38.28. Has the
Rain a Father? Who has begotten the drops of the Dew? The meaning is, that it
is Gods Creature. The Rain has no Father but that God who is the Creator and
Father of all things. Jer. 14. ult. Can any of the Vanities of the Gentiles,
that is their Idols, cause Rain? Can the Heavens give Showers? They cannot of
themselves give Showers. It is true that there are Natural causes of the one
and the other. For Snow and Rain are no miraculous things, but that which
according to the constitued order of Nature uses to happen. Nevertheless, the
concurrence of Second Causes does not hinder, but imply the Efficiency of the
First Cause. God is oftentimes in the Scripture, said to do that which He does
not do by His own immediate Hand, but which He makes use of Instruments or
Secondary Causes in the Effecting of. The Snow is said to be the Gift and
Dispensation of God.

1. In that the matter out of which it is generated is of Gods making. The Snow
is made out of the Elements: But those Elements God the Almighty made by His
own Infinite Power. There is Fire and Light in the very Snow. But who made the
Fire? It was as all other Creatures are, originally from God. Some late
Astronomers have observed, that there is a mighty Ocean of Fire in the body of
the Sun. It is the Great God that has made that Fire. He has placed it in the
Heavens: Nothing can be hid from the heat thereof. Psalm. 19.6. There is Air in
the Snow, as appears by the Levity of it. God made the Air. There is Water in
the Snow, you see it melts into Water. God made the Water. There is Earth in
the Snow, when it is distilled Earthly particles are observed in it. God made
the Earth. So then the Snow is Gods work. The Snow is generated as the Rain is,
viz. by the influence of the Sun and Stars, Exhaling Vapors from the Earth and
Sea, which are turned into Clouds of rain, and into Clouds of snow by the
Providence of God: And there is a Glorious Providence of God in causing it to
be so. The holy Prophets of old were affected with the Contemplation of it. We
see the Prophet Jeremiah was so. Jer. 10.13. And hence when there was a sad
Drought on the Land of Israel, the Prophet Amos speaks, as in Amos 5.8. Seek to
Him that makes the Seven Stars and Orion. That is to say, that makes Summer and
Winter. The Seven Stars are the Summer Constellation, they bring on the spring
and summer; and Orion is a Winter Constellation, which is attended with snow
and cold, as at this Day.

2. The Snow is wholly at Gods Disposal, and therefore His Creature. There is
not a Flake of snow that falls on the Ground without the hand of God. Mat.
10.29, 30. Not a sparrow falls to the Ground without the Will of your Heavenly
Father, all the Hairs of your head are numbered. So the Great God has numbered
all the Flakes of Snow that covers the Earth. Although no man can number them,
that God that tells the number of the Stars has numbered them all. Who is it
that orders where the Snow shall fall? Amos 4.7. (says the Lord) cause it to
Rain on one City and not on another. So the Lord causes it to Snow on one part
of the Earth, and not on another. As we often see, in such a place there is but
little snow, go but a few miles further there is a mighty snow. It is God that
orders as Where, so When the snow shall fall, and how long it shall continue on
the Ground, and what Effects it shall have; all these things are ordered by
Him. Job 37.12. He turns about the Clouds according to His Counsel, they do
whatsoever He Commands them in all the Earth. Psalm. 148. 8. Firs and Hail, Snow
and Vapor, and Stormy Wind fulfilling His Word. If there is a storm of
Lightning, or a storm of Hail, or a storm of Snow, or a storm of Wind, all
these fulfill His Word. So then this is His work; and indeed His only. Men cannot
by all their. skill produce that which is the First matter of the snow: although
a man when he has the Materials before him may by his Art produce it. He may
turn Water into Ice in the hottest day in the summer. By his Philosophy and
knowledge in the Nature of things, he may when materials are before him,
produce Hoar-frost and Snow. But as for the first matter, not all the Men on
Earth, nor all the Angels in Heaven are able to Create it. Nor can men give
Snow like Wool. They cannot give it in that abundance as to cover the face of
the Earth. They cannot adorn the Earth with that white Robe. No, it is the Great
GOD that has made that Winter-cloathing to keep the Earth warm. Therefore the
snow is said to be one of His Treasures. Job 38.22. Have thou entered into the
Treasures of the Snow? A Treasure notes a great Quantity. The Great God has
such Quantities of Snow in His Treasures, as that he is able not only to cover
the Earth, but to destroy the Earth therewith, if that were his Pleasure.

PROP. III. That God ought to be Praised on the account of this Work of His.
Praise the Lord O Jerusalem, Praise thy God O Zion. Why? For He gives Snow
like Wool.

For,

1. God makes the Snow to be a Benefit to Mankind. It does sometimes come from
Heaven as the Gift of God; so when seasonably, viz. in Winter, and not in
Summer. For in summer it is prodigious and undesirable. Solomon designing to
show how unsuitable and pernicious a thing it is to promote Ungodly men to
Honor, compares it to Snow in Summer. Prove. 26.1. But when it comes neither
too soon, nor too late, nor continues longer than is proper for the Earth, it
is a Gift of God, and a Benefit to Mankind. For the Snow has a fructifying
Virtue in it. Isa. 55.10. The Rain comes down, and the Snow from Heaven, and
waters the Earth, and makes it to bring forth Seed to the Sower, and Bread to
the Eater. If the Scripture did not tell us so, yet common Experience proves
it. The Husbandman finds it true, That a winter with seasonable Snows, is
commonly followed with a Fruitful summer. Snow-water is many ways beneficial.
Sometimes Floods caused thereby greatly Enriches the Earth. And it has a
singular Cleansing Virtue in it. Job 9.30. If I wash my self with Snow-water,
and make my hands never so clean. Of old, in hot Countries they made use of
snow to cool their Wines in the summer time, which is the meaning of that
Scripture, Prove. 25.13. As the cold of Snow in the time of Harvest, so is a
faithful Messenger to them that send him: for he refreshes the Soul of his
Master. He does not mean snow that falls in time of harvest, for that (as I
said before) would be prodigious. It did not rain, much less snow in Palestine
in time of harvest, therefore when on Samuels Prayer it rained, at that time,
the People trembled. It was a miracle for it to rain in that Country at that
time of the Year. So then by snow in harvest is meant that which was reserved
till summer. At this Day in some hot Countries, they have their Snow, ^^llurs,
where it is kept in summer, and if moderatedly used, is known to be both
refreshing and healthful. There are also Medicinal Virtues in the snow. A late
Learned Physician, has found that a Salt Extracted out of snow, is a sovereign
Remedy against both putrid and pestilential Feavors. Therefore Men should
Praise God who gives Snow like Wool.

2. The Glory of God is discovered in this work of His. Indeed all the works of
God do manifest his Glory. Psalm. 145.10. All thy works Praise thee. That is to
say, they give just occasion to men to Praise God. All His works, and in
particular this of the Snow, discovers the Glorious Attributes of God before
all Mankind.

As now;

1. We may see the Wisdom of God therein. Psalm. 104.24. How manifold are thy
works? In wisdom have thou made them all. So as to this work of his, the Wisdom
of God is seen therein. As for the Clouds that contain the snow, the Wisdom of
God does appear in them beyond all Humane Comprehension. The astonishing Wisdom
of God is seen in framing and forming the Clouds. If we consider the Number
thereof, Job 38.27. Who can number the Clouds in wisdom? Job was a knowing man,
and yet by that Argument, God convinces him of his great Ignorance. And if we
consider the Weight of the Clouds, we see the Wisdom of GOD in upholding of
them. Job 37.16. Do thou know the Ballancing of the Clouds, the wondrous
works of Him who is perfect in Knowledge? God shows the Perfection of his
Knowledge, His infinite Wisdom in this work of his. He weighs the Cloud as it
were in a Balance; He knows its weight. What man can do this? The Clouds,
those weighty Bodies hang in the Air, which shows both the Power and the Wisdom
of God. And in that the Clouds of Rain distill by Drops on the Earth; and the
Clouds of Snow does fall not all at once: Should one Cloud fall down all at
once, it would destroy a whole Country. Moreover, Late Philosophers by the
help of the M^croscope have observed the wonderful Wisdom of God in the Figure
of the Snow: Each stake is usually of a S^ellate Form, and of six Angles of
exact equal length from the Center. It is like a little Star. A great man
speaks of it with admiration, that in a Body so familiar as the Snow is, no
Philosopher should for many Ages take notice of a thing so ^bvious as the
Figure of it. The Learned Kepler, who lived in this last Age, is acknowledged
to be the first that acquainted the world with the Sexangular Figure of the
snow. Ought not Infinite Wisdom to be Praised? God is Infinite Wisdom: witness
every Flake of snow that falls on the Ground, which Proclaims to all Mankind,
that there is a God whose Wisdom is Infinite.

2. The Power of God that also is seen in the Snow. As in the Rain, so in the
Snow, Job 37.6. the small Rain, and the Great Rain of His Strength. It Is called
so, because God does show his strength, what He can do when great Rain comes.
So the great Snow declares His strength: as other the like works of His
Providence declare the Power of God. In the next verse it is said, Who can
stand before His Cold? So, who can stand before His Snow? His Power is such
that He can make the Cold so Extreme as that ^o mortal can stand before it. Job
37.22. Fair weather comes out of the North, with God is terrible Majesty. In as
much as Fair weather comes out of the North; as when God causes the North wind
to blow, there is a marvelous alteration in the weather, this shows that with
God there is Terrible Majesty. And the Ice declares the Glorious Power of God.
Sometimes there are great floating Islands of Ice terrible to behold. And some
of those Islands of Ice have been several scores, ^ay some hundreds of Miles in
length. The Almighty God whose Power can thus congeal the Water, what is not He
able to do? In some Northern Countries, the Sea has been so frozen as that
Armies with Horses and Wagons, have passed for scores of Miles over it.
Chronologers inform us, That in the Year 775. the Sea was frozen for Fifty
Leagues, and the Ice was compacted as into a Rock Thirty Cubits deep; also such
a quantity of snow falling, as that it was raised to the height of Thirty
Cubits above the Ice. When God divided the Sea, for the Children ^ofo Israel to
pass over, He showed His Power. So when He makes Bridges of Ice, that men may
pass over great Rivers and great Seas, there is in it an Evidence of the Power
of the mighty God. So are we to say concerning the snow: Especially considering
God does cause it to come by a Word. Job 27.6. He says unto the Snow, be thou
on the Earth. God speaks the Word and it is done presently. As in the Context
before us, His word runs very swiftly. We often see it, when the Ground is
bare, if God speaks the word, the Earth is covered with snow in a few Minutes
time. Here is the Power of the Great GOD. If all the Princes and Great Ones of
the Earth, should send their Commands to the Clouds, not a Flake of snow would
come from thence.

3. The Goodness and Mercy of God that also is discoverd by His giving Snow as
Wool. Deuteronomy. 28.12. He shall open his Good Treasure. As the rain, so the snow is
part of that good Treasure, which God opens for the Children of men. In some
parts of the world, not only the Earth is made Fruitful, but Rivers and Springs
are maintained by the snow, which the Mountains of God are never free from.
Jer. 18.14. Will a man leave the Snow of Lebanon which comes from the Rock of
the Field? Or shall the cold flowing Waters that come from another place be
forsaken? In the Field were Rocks, and out of these came springs fed by the
snow of Lebanon. In some Northern Countries, the Inhabitants would not be able
to subsist, no not in the Winter, if it were not for the snow that covers the
Earth like wool. So in Lapland, where there is little or no light of the Sun in
the depth of Winter, there are great snows continually on the ground, and by
the Light of that they are able to Travel from one place to another. O that men
would Praise the Lord for His wonderful works, and for His Goodness to the
Children of Men: Yea, for this goodness, which appears in this giving Snow like
Wool.

4. Sometimes God makes known His Justice and His Wrath by the Snow. He has
dreadfully Punished men therewith. He brings forth not only Hail, but Snow out
of His Treasures in the Day of Battle and War. Sometimes it is a Mercy, and
sometimes God makes it to be a Judgment. Though the snow fructifies the Earth if
seasonable, yet if it lies too long it consumes the Land. In England in the
Days of King Edward the Confessor, a great snow continued very long, and
destroyed the Fruits of the Earth, that the next summer there was a terrible
Famine. So does God sometimes Punish Men. Job 36.31. By them He judges the
People. By the Clouds, Rain, and Snow, and such like things, He Judges the
People, He thereby Executes His Judgments on them. Historians have Recorded,
that in the Month of April, an unseasonable Snow destroyed all the Vines in
some Countries, to the exceeding damage of the People there. God can make the
Snow as well as the Rain a cause of sickness. Not only the Disease called
Bulimia, but others more fatal have come out of the Snow. Geographers give us
to understand, that in some Countries Vapors from the Snow have killed
multitudes in less than a Quarter of an Hour. Sometimes both Men and Beasts
have been destroyed thereby. Writers speak of no less than Forty Thousand men
killed by a great Snow in one Day. So then we see the Justice of God sometimes
appears in this Work of His. He is therefore to be Praised. Exodus 15.11. He is
Fearful in Praises: He* is to be Praised for His fearful awful Providence.
Thus we see the Truth Cleared. For APPLICATION.

USE I.
If we should Praise God for His giving Snow, surely then we ought to Praise
Him for Spiritual Blessings much more. The Psalmist Praises God for Temporal
Blessings, but concludes with Praises on the account of Spiritual Ones: They as
being the Chief are mentioned in the last place. If we are to Praise God when
He causes the Clouds to drop Rain, or the Snow to fall on the Earth, then if
He makes His Doctrine to drop on us as the Rain; if we have showers of His Word
falling on us every Week in the Year, Praise the Lord O Jerusalem, Praise thy
God O Zion. We should Praise God for the Snow, because it is by His Blessing
instrumental to produce that whereby the Lives of our Bodies are sustained, but
the Word of God, the Means of Grace are that whereby Spiritual Life in the
Souls of His People is nourished. How then ought we to Praise God for this
Mercy! Are our Souls Enriched with the River of God to make us Fruitful, and
shall we not be Thankful to Him? And for Eternal Blessings, these are
unspeakable Gifts of God. Grace and Heaven are so; and above all, CHRIST is so.
Therefore Praise the Lord, O our Souls, and let all within us Bless His Name.

USE II.
We should Humble our selves under the Hand of God, when Snow in the season of
it is witheld from us. For the same Hand that gives it, witholds it. Amos 4.7.
I witheld the Rain, (says the Lord) when it did not Rain Three Months before
Harvest. So when the Snow in the season of it is witheld, it is His Almighty
Hand that does it, which sometimes proves a sore Judgment. If God should
withold the Snow but a Winter or two, it would be an undoing thing. It is
mavelous that no more Lands are deserted for want of those supplies of
Heaven. In the Days of Constantine, for several Years there had been no Rain
in the life of Cyprus, so that the Inhabitants began to desert it. But such
Providence rarely happen. Nevertheless, the sins of men provoke the holy God
thus to Afflict them. The Heavens are shut up, because men have Sinned against
Him. 1 King 8.35. The heavens may be shut up in the Winter as well as in the
Summer. There has been something of this among us this Winter, the snow has
been held off a long time. But on our Day of Public Thanksgiving, this day
sevennight, when we began to Praise the Lord, He gave us Snow like Wool.

USE III.
Hence all Atheists will be left Eternally Inexcusable. For this Work of God
does plainly make it appear that there is a GOD, who Rules in the Armies of
Heaven. There are Athiests in Opinion: Men that deny the Existence of God, or
deny the Providence of God. There was a sect of Philosophers, called
Epicureans, who are mentioned in the Scripture, Act. 17.18. these denied the
Providence of God. I say the Works of God leave them inexcusable. For the
Heavens declare His Glory. Not only the Stars in Heaven, but the Clouds which
are there, declare the Name of the Lord, so as to leave Mortals without Excuse,
if they do not Glorify Him as God, who has not left Himself without Witness, in
that He gives Rain from Heaven, and Fruitful Seasons: So in that He gives Snow
from Heaven. Every man may see, and ought to acknowledge that there is a God of
Infinite Power and Goodness, who does thus dispense Himself to the Children of
Men. But there are also Atheists in respect of Practice, that Live as if there
were no God. They will not deny that there is a God, or a Providence, yet they
live as if there were neither. The Snow falls round about them, but they see no
God therein. And are there not men that do not fear to Offend this God? Jer.
5.24. They say not in the^r Hearts, let us fear Him that gives the former and
the latter Rain. There are many that say not in their hearts, let us fear Him
that gives Snow like Wool.

USE IV.
We should hence Learn to make a Spiritual Improvement of the Snow. As of other
Works of God so of this. It should raise our hearts-in our Meditations
Heavenward and Godward. It would be so with men had they Spiritual Hearts. The
works of Nature and of Providence, would then cause spiritual and holy Thoughts
to be in their minds. Our Savior Christ had Heavenly Thoughts in his Heart,
when he beheld Earthly Objects, and was ever wont to make some Spiritual
Improvement of them. So David, when he considered the Moon and Stars Psalm. 8.3.
Many have wondered that David says nothing of the Sun ^ he speaks of the Moon
and Stars, but nothing of the Sun in the Eighth Psalm. I am apt to think, that
the Jewish Rabbi's are not mistaken, when they think that Psalm was one of
David's Night Meditations: So when we look on the Snow, it should occasion
Divine Meditations to be in our Minds. When we see the snow, it would be good
for us to think of some Scripture or other that speaks of the snow, and improve
it spiritually. It may well make us think of Scriptures that put us in mind of
our own sinfulness. There were Lepers white as Snow. Gehazi was such an one. 2
King. ^. 27. Such a Whiteness is ^oful Blackness. Original sin is a spiritual
Leprosy. Then reflect, Is that Leprosy which has infected my soul healed? When
we see the snow, we may think of a Scripture that puts us in mind of our own
Mortality, of Death and the Grave to which we are going, Job 24:19. As the Heat
consumes the Snow, so does the Grave those that have Sinned. When we see the
snow, we may think of Scriptures that put us in mind of that Soul-Purity which
we should Labor after. The Dignity of some Persons of Quality in Jerusalem, is
denoted by saying, they we^e Purer, than the Snow. Lam. 4.7. Let our Souls be
so. And if washed in the Blood of Christ they will be so. David Prays, Psalm.
51.7. Purge me with H^ssop, and I shall be whiter than Snow. If the greatest
Sinners in the world shall have their Sin-polluted souls washed in the Blood of
Christ then they shall be whiter than the Snow. When we behold the snow it may
bring this Meditation to our thoughts. God can soon bring his Church out of a
dark into a light and prosperous Estate. The Condition of his People of old,
was for some time dark, and dismal, and bloody, by reason of the Wars which
their Heathen Enemies raised against them, but the Almighty by scattering those
Kings brought Snowy Whiteness out of Darkness. What though at present, the Church
of God in some parts of the world is lying among the Pots, and Hearth-stones,
and thereby discolored and deformed, it shall in due time be made White like
the Snow in Salmon, both in respect of Prosperity and of Purity and Holiness.
Psalm. 68.13, 14. Finally, Let us Meditate on the Glory of our Lord Jesus
Christ. If the Snow be so Glorious, as that we cannot without dazzling our Eyes
look on it, O how Glorious is the Lord Jesus Christ! Should He appear to us in
His Glory, our Mortal Eyes would not be able to look upon Him. The Apostle fell
down as Dead at his Feet when he had an Apparition of Christ, whose Head was
white like Wool, as white as Snow. Rev. 1.14. The Lord fill us with holy
thoughts continually, and let us remember, that to be Carnally minded is Death,
but to be Spiritually minded is Life and Peace.

Boston, January 23. 1695.
THE END.
ERRATA.
PAge 30. Line 13 Read infesting. p. 40. l 27. for had r. acted. p. 44.l 1.
dele such. p. 75.l.8. r. Constituted.


