A REPLY To Mr. Increase Mather's Printed Remarks ON A SERMON Preached by G.K.
at Her Majesty's Chapel in Boston, the 14th of June, 1702.

In Vindication of the Six good Rules in Divinity there delivered.

Which he has attempted (though very Feebly and Unsuccessfully) to Refute.

By George Keith, M. A.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford at the Bible in New York, 1703.

A Reply to Mr. Increase Mather's Remarks, etc.
THE Occasion of the Author of those Remarks, his publishing them in Print,
was, as he declares in page ^. That he was importuned by some, who are
scandalized by that Discourse, to anni^^advert upon it. To which I say, That on
my through perusal of his Remarks, I do not find that he has discovered any one
thing therein that can be said to give any just scandal to any. The first part
of my Sermon, that goes before the Rules, he has said nothing against, and in
Charity I judge he has nothing against it.

Page 1. Sect. 1. He says, The Author, instead of keeping to his Text, (...)
to the Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, has obtruded upon us Notions of
his own, which ^e ^alls Good Rules in Divinity, but every one of them, if not
taken with grains of Salt, are unsavory Divinity.

Answ. Seeing all this is said, without proof, I shall not regard it, but
recommend what is contained in those Rules to every well informed Conscience of
those that have read, or may happen to read them, (and who shall compare them
with what he has said against them, and with what I say in vindication of
them) whether I have not well kept to my Text, and also to the Doctrine of the
holy Prophets and Apostles. If what I have delivered, as touching those Rules,
taste Unsavory to him, and others of his Taste, vitiated by the Prejudice of
Education and Male Information, I am sorry for their Distemper; but neither his
not any other Men's Taste whatsoever is the proper Test or Touchstone, where-by
to judge of true or false Rules i^ Divinity, but the alone proper Test and
Touchstone in the case, is Gods holy Word contained in the holy Scriptures, to
which, in this as in all other things of Religion, I submit to fair Trial. But
to make Men's Taste their Rule of Judgment, savours too much of Quakerism, as
indeed do not (...) few other things delivered by the Author in his Remarks.

But before I further proceed, I desire the Impartial Readers to observe a
great inconsistency (as appears to me in the Author of those Remarks. F^^^t,
That in page ^. he calls the Rules given by me, Notions o^ my own, I have (...)
upon them. -- And yet, in page 2. he tells, That I have not said any thing out
what crambe bis cocta, said by others, and has been answered more than Twenty
Times. Now, how he can call those six Rules My own Notions I obtrude upon the
People of New England, and yet all of them said by others, before me, more than
Twenty times, ^ do not understand* for what we call a Man's own Notions, we
commonly attribute to his own ^^vention* However, I am glad the Author does not
give me the hono^r of inventing them, or of the first discovery of them, as
indeed I am not; for as they are all well grounded on holy Scripture
(notwithstanding what this Author has said to the contrary) so I freely
acknowledge I have found the Substance and Matter of them all in the Pious
Works (...) diverse Pious and Learned Teachers of the Church of England, to
whose Piety and Learning I presume, in Cha^i^y, the Author of the Remarks, will
not compare himself, in way of Equality. And what if these Rules have been
above twenty times answered? so have good Protestant Principles of true
Divinity maintained by the most Pious and Learned Protestant Writers, been
above twenty times answered by popish Authors, but ^o as little purpose, and
with as feeble Arguments as this Author of the Remarks has answered those six
Rules. We are not to Notice, Quoties or quam Mult^m, how often or how much Men
have answered to Books or Discourses that they dis-relish, but Quam been et
quam vere, i.e. how well and how truly.

Page 1. Whereas he says, This Writer has not long since been famous for
^orrupting many in the Fundamentals of Religion, in which he has seen and
renounced his Errors*

I Answer: That I am not at present conscious, nor do I remember that ever I
corrupted any one in the Fundamentals of Religion, as they are commonly
reckoned by Christian Protestant Authors, that is, such Doctrines of Faith and
Precepts of holy Life as are essential and necessary to Salvation, so as no Man
can be saved without them; these are commonly reckoned Fundamental by
Protestant Authors, and all th^se, to (...), all the Articles of the Apostles
Creed, and all the Contents of the Decalogue, with many other Gospel Precepts,
together with the Promises and Threatening thereof, and also the Contents and
Words of the Lords Prayer, I did Piously and Devoutly embrace all the time of
my being under the Profession of a Quaker, and carefully taught them, in the
time that I had a School, both in England and Pennsilvania, to the
School-Boyes, and caused them get them by heart; and I think it will be a work
too hard for this Author, in any of my Books published by me, when under the
Profession of a Quaker, to find that I had corrupted any as touching one
Fundamental of the Christian Religion. And ^ not only [as I humbly conceive]
held all the Fundamental Articles and Precepts, as aforesaid, that may be
called Fundamental, but also many others belonging to the Super str^cture, as
the Integrals thereof; I do not say this to extenuate or excuse my too many
Errors I was too much leavened with, which were Wood, Hay and Stubble I built
on the Foundation; and I thank my most merciful and gracious God, that has
given me both Eyes to see those Errors where withal I had been corrupted, and
be^d instrumental to corrupt others, and an heart to Repent of them, and freely
to confess and Retract them, and be zealously concerned to Rescue others from
them, so far, as by the blessing and Grace of God I might be instrumental
therein. But had I been guilty of the Author's Charge* it looks not so very
Christian in the Author, that after I have found Grace of God to Repent of
them, and his Merciful Forgiveness, [as I trust I have] to bring up my former
Errors to Remembrance, with an in^^nuation as if my Repentance had not been
sincere, or at least, that I have brought my self [since I left my former
Errors] under a new Guilt of a very deep stain; for though he seems to praise
me on the account of Renouncing my former Errors, as worthy of Commendation,
yet he comes immediately after with a severe Sentence against me, saying,
Nevertheless it seems by the Publication of his present pretended Sentiments,
he arms at gaining a Reputation by endeavors to seduce other Men from the
Truth, in matters relating to that Order of the Gospel which is of divine
Institution. So that by his Uncharitable account I am a (...) still, for
Preaching and publishing those six Rules. But since the ablest and best Men in
the Church of England both for Piety and Learning, in neither of which the
Author, I think, will presume to equal himself, [by his own confession] have
taught and published those very Rules, he must either assoil me, or own those
worthy Persons, as Mr. Hooker, Dr. Sanderson, etc. and all those excellent
Divines of the Church of England, who have published those Learned and Pious
Treatises of the London Cases, of late collected into one Volumn, to be equally
guilty with me, or rather far more guilty* by means of whom, I freely confess,
I have been enlightened (as I hope also that God has internally enlightened me by
his holy Spirit* to understand, assent and believe them to be true and good,
notwithstanding of all the Author's busling against them. But is the Author's
Charity (...) scanty, that he will not allow others to differ from him so much
as about what he himself calls the Circumstantials of Religion, as he is
pleased to call those Rules, but presently he must pass Sentence upon them all*
however so Pious and Learned, many or most of them have been, and are beyond
him in Piety and Learning, as a company of Seducers, endeavoring to seduce Men
from the Truth, in Matters relating to the Order of the Gospel, which is of
divine Institution. At this rate not one Man shall differ from the Author, in
what he calls the Circumstantials of Religion, but he shall stigmatize him with
the infamous Character of a Seducer. I heartily with him and all his Brethren,
of the same Alloy, more Christian Tenderness and Charity.

Page 2. After his having repeated the first Rule, viz. Whatsoever is enjoined
by our Superiors, if it contradict not Gods Commands in holy Scripture, ought
for Conscience sake to be Obeyed, according to 1 Pet. ^. 13, 14. Romans 13. 5.
Heb. 13. 7. 17. And if what they e^joyn is not made a Command of God, or an
Article of Faith, or a Means of Grace; he adds, First, Such a Rule as this
would do very well among Papists.

I Answer: It would indeed do so very well among them, that it would in great
part, if notwholly Reform them from Popery, and bring them over to true
Christian and Protestant Principles, did they well observe and Practice it. I
observe, it is a fault too frequent with such Men as this Author, to use this
Policy, that what they cannot Refute with fair Argument, to brand it with
Popery, as one has fulsomly done, in that called, A brief Discourse concerning
the Unlawfulness of the Common Prayer Worship, printed in New England, supposed
by some to be this Authors, which has been, I judge, effectually answered by a
Worthy Divine of the Church of England, whose Answer I have read to my great
Edifi-cations.

But what says the Author to Refute the said first Rule? Why! It does not very
well agree (he ^aith) with the Apostles Rule, who taught Christians not to use
their lawful liberty, when the use thereof cannot be without S^^ndal, Romans 14.
22. He says further, That the said (...) implies that the Determination of ^
Superior will take away the six of Scandal, and make it a Duty for a Man to
offend his Brother.

Answ. Nothing he here has said does in the least prove my Rule to be false;
for the Limitations expressed in it, sufficiently guard it against This, and
all his other Exceptions, which are Digressions from the proper Subject of
Dispute. If what Superiors enjoin give just cause of Scandal, all that is
contradictory to what God commands, which is (...) express Limitation in the
Rule given. I suppose the Author is not so ignorant in the Casuist Divinity,
but he has learned the distinction of of Scandal, into datum et acceptum, i.e.
into Scandal given and received: A Scandal may be received, and yet not justly
given, and where it is not justly given by the Commands of Superiors, is
renders them not guilty, nor their Commands unlawful.

As concerning his Authorities, quoted by him, out of Dissenters from the
Church of England, I am not to regard them, where I find them not to agree with
Scripture and right Reason, so shall not spend much time and Paper to answer to
any of them, wheresoever scattered through his Book, though many of them, even
as quoted by him as that of Dr. Ames and Mr. Gillespy) make against him, and
not for him; for what Dr. Ames says, That Obedience is not due to Superior^,
when acting contrary to Edification and Charity, does nothing militate against
either the first Rule or any of the six; for what is enjoined contrary to
Edification and Charity, does contradict the Command of God, and so agrees
with the Rule that is given. As also, what Mr. Gillespy ^aith, as quoted by
him, makes nothing against the said Rule, viz. That whatsoever Superiors
command in such Matters, as any way appertain to the Eternal Worship of God,
must be both Lawful in the Nature of it, and Expedient in the Use of it. The
Author further adds, That the divine Law binds men to do nothing which is not
for Edification, quoting for Proof, ^ Cor.6. 12. and 14.26. All which is
plainly contained within the Limitation expressed in the Rule, and therefore
not contrary to it. Again, in answer to the Scriptures cited by me, in proof of
the abovesaid* Rule, he says, Their Divines say, there is a difference
between Subjection and Obedience, Subjection may be where there is not
Obedience. But what says this against the Rule given? Though all Subjection is
not active Obedience, yet all Active Obedience is Subjection* Can the Author be
so ignorant to think that in those Scriptures quoted by me, in proof of the
first Rule, Active Obedience to Superio^s, in things lawful, is not required,
but only and alone Passive Obedience, or a subjection to Punishment? This would
make the Commands of Superiors universally Cruel, and the Condition of their
Subjects very Miserable.

Next, whereas he says, page 4. W^e^her the thing required be so, ( viz. for
Edification) every Man has liberty to examine by the Judgment of Discretion;
for which he quotes Davenant [a worthy Doctor and Bishop of the Church of
England] But what, or how, does this make against the Rule above given, which
the said Bishop himself did own as ^ound and good? It is not questioned by any
true Protestant, but readily affirmed, that every Man has liberty to examine,
by the judgment of Discretion, whatever is required of him; but his Judgment of
Discretion must be no Rule to others, nor indeed to himself; but his Judgment
of Discretion should have for its Rule, the Word of God contained in the holy
Scriptures, and right Reason; for it often happens that Men's Judgment of
Discretion is Erroneous, and the dictate of an Erring Conscience. Wherefore, it
is only safe for all, both Superiors and Inferiors, to submit their Judgment of
Discretion to the Rule of holy Scripture and Right Reason, which will never
disagree.

And whereas he says, Mr. Keith designing to exalt the Churches Authority,
alleges Heb. 13. 7. Doubtless his meaning is, That in things (...) forbidden
by the divine Law, the Commandments of Bishops must be obeyed.

Answ. That is doubtless my meaning, for the very words of the Rule plainly
import it. But I find nothing to the purpose either of Argument or good
Authority, that he says against it. What the Author quotes out of Dr. Richard
Smith his Recantation, viz. That Bishops and Ministers have no Authority in
making Laws and Decrees, besides Gods Word, I reckon may charitably be
construed, in Opposition to Popery, to mean such Laws and Decrees as Popes and
Popish Councils commonly make, both against Gods Word, and besides it, as if
they were Commands of God, or Articles of Faith, or Means of Grace; all which
the first Rule expressly provides against. That St. Paul as an Ecclesiastic
Person had Power to command what the divine Law did neither command nor for
bid, see Philemom v. 8. and 1 Cor. 7. 12.

But whereas he does peremptorily affirm, That it belongs to Christ alone to
appoint Laws for the Government of his Church. If he mean such Laws as primarly
and by themselves immediately bind the Conscience, and concern the substantial
part of the Government of the Church, I grant; which nothing militates against
the above given Rule. But that our Superiors, both Ecclesiastic and Civil,
have not power to make Laws and Rules in Circumstantials, that do not bind the
Conscience primarly and immediately by themselves, he has not in the least
proved, but takes it for granted without all Proof, and contrary to all good
Reason and common Practice of all Christian Societies. For the Laws of Christ
in Scripture, many of them being general, in order to their being the better
understood, and obeyed, require some particular Rules made by Superiors, and
even by the Community, where the Community is a Democracy (such as I guess
these called Independent Churches generally are, or at least very near to, in
resemblance (which sort of Democracy in a Christian Church, I can no where find
in holy Scripture) even the said Community gives Laws and Rules, binding not
only the Makers of them, but their Children and Successors after them, that had
no hand in the making of them. For it is hardly possible that any Society,
whether Ecclesiastic or Civil, can consist without several Rules determining
such particular Circumstances, as to Times, Places and Persons, which general
Laws of Scripture do not determine, as, To meet for Religious Worship at such
Places and Times, Who, or What Persons shall be Past^rs of such a Congregation;
and many other Cases of great and weighty Circumstances. And upon a very
slender Search, I think it will be easy to find, that these called Independent
Churches in New England, and elsewhere, have Laws and Rules among them, which
they as really and severely impose on all that come in to them, after such Laws
are made by the Community, as any other do, insomuch that who will not submit
to them, are not to be received into their Community; and among other things,
that called by them their Church Covenant, which they make a distinct thing
from the Baptismal Covenant, and to be sure widely distinct from Episcopal
Confirmation, not only I, but many Thousands of good Christians cannot find any
Warrant for it in Scripture, by the best Judgment of Discretion that we can
make; but on the contrary, we not only think it superfluous, but more burdensome
to our Consciences, should we submit to it, than all the Ecclesiastic Canons,
on the supposition that they were as Unprofitable to Edification as the Author
and his Brethren render them to be. Besides, as to the time and manner of
receiving the Lords Supper, do ye not make some Law or Rule when the
Congregation is to receive it, as at or before Noon, or some time before Night,
though at its first Institution it was practiced at Night, and after the
Passover Supper? And do ye not as much impose it on your People, that they
should not kneel at the receiving the Lords Supper, but sit, as ye think the
Church of England imposes it no her Members to Kneel? And why do ye not allow
or practice your Males sitting with their Hats upon their Heads at the
Communion Table? Do ye not hold this Practice of Men's sitting at the Communion
Table with their Hats on their Heads in time of receiving, a very indecent
Practice, as I have heard some Independents confess? And suppose a great Number
of a Congregation should begin to receive with their Hats upon their Heads, or
lying on their sides, would ye not think ^it to make some Law or Rule against
it? This is but a hint in a few things, instead of many more that might be
objected in your own Discipline. Which, if they have not sufficient weight to
you, No more, but indeed far less has what ye object against the Commands of
Our Superiors to us, as touching the Circumstantials of either Religious
Worship or Church Government. Besides, Ye have no Command in Scripture
enjoining you to sing David's Psalms in Meeter and Rhyme (the putting them into
Rhyme being altogther done by Humane Art) your ground then of doing it must
either be a Law made among you, or such a constant Custom as is equivolent to a
Law. And if no Law be warrantable but what is commanded by Christ, as to
Circumstantials of Worship and Discipline in the Church, by the like Reason, or
rather by greater Reason, ye may argue against all Customs not commanded by
Christ in the holy Scriptures. And why do ye not read the holy Scripture in
your Congregations, which are given for Men's Instruction to be read and heard
in Public, as well as in Private? I think ye had much better agree to make it
a Law, that every time the Congregation meets, One Chapter, at least, of the
Old Testament should be read, and another of the New, and that in good Order,
than to neglect it, as ye generally do, One only Congregation at Boston
excepted, as I am informed. Now though the reading of the holy Scriptures in
Public is well warranted by Holy Writ, yet What, or How Much ought to be read
every day the Congregation meets, the Scripture determines not, and therefore
in This, as in Other the like Cases, Ecclesiastic Superiors may give Laws or
Rules, What is to be done, according to the Limitations given in the first Rule.

Page 6. His Exceptions against the Second Rule, are as weak and Insufficient,
as These against the first. The Second Rule being this,

That whatever Church holds the Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, and has
the Word o^ God d^ly Preached, and the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords
Supper d^ly Administered, such a Church is a True Church (...) Christ, and to
separate from such a Church in external Communion* and in external Acts of
Worship, is a sin, the which sin is the sin (...) Schism.

In the first place, he says, It is evident by these words that G.K. has not
attained unto the true Notion of a Schism. According to him (meaning ^.K.)
Schism consists in a Separation from a true Church in external Acts of Worship;
but according to Scripture, Men may be guilty of Schism, and (...) h^ld
external Communion with the Church where they have made a Schism, instancing
Corah in the Church of Israel, and the Schismatics in the Church at Corinth.

I Answer: Here he fights against his own Shadow, and not against the Second
Rule laid down in my Sermon. I did not give the full and entire Notion of
Schism in that Rule, no^ had I any occasion ^o to do; it is sufficient to
justify the Truth of the Rule, That whoever separate from a Church so
qualified, as I have described in that second Rule, are guilty of Schism;
though it is confessed that Persons may also be guilty of Schism in diverse
Cases, who hold external Communion together; for there are diverse parts and
degrees of Schism, of which (...) only touched at one part.

But to make the Second Rule seem false, he quotes again only about two Lines
and a half of it, as it stands in his Printed Remarks, and argues against it;
whereas had he argued against the Second Rule, as entirely considered, there
would have been no place for his Objections, as, first, where he instances, If
false Doctrine be imposed, instead of true. 2dly. If a true Church walk
disorderly, and not hearken to the Admonitions of those that would reclaim them
from the Error of their way. For if he mean that the whole Church be guilty of
those things, the Qualifications expressly given in the second Rule secure it
sufficiently against his two Objections, as they do against the other two
following, (...), 3 dly, That it is not only lawful, but a Duty to separate
from the Church of Rome. I cannot but wonder at the Author's inadvertency here,
for waving that Question, Whether the present Church of Rome be either a true
Church or a Church Vera, though not Vera. The present state of the Church of
Rome does altogether disagree with the Qualifications of the Church given in
the Second Rule, which are, That she has the Word of God duly Preached, and the
Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper duly administered; None of which due
Qualifications will the Author dare to say the Church of Rome has; and
therefore in this Third, as well as in his Fourth, he has discovered his great
Inadvertency, as where he says, It is possible that a true Church may impose
(...) its Members Unlawful Terms of Communion. I say, in that case, She ha^ not
the Word of God duly Preached, nor the Sacraments duly administered.

But to make his matter seem the more pi^^sible, he leaves objecting against
the second Rule, and falls upon accusing the Church of England, That she
Imposes on her Members U^^^wful Terms of Communion. But as I know no such
Things that the does, ^o whether the does so or not, are wholly beside the
present subject of Dispute: And as for his several Instances of such
Impositions, they are all easily answered; but I refer the Reader to that
Treatise, called, A brief Discourse concerning the Lawfulness of Worshipping
God by Common Prayer, and other Treatises of Pious and Learned Writers in the
Church of England, that have Piously and Learnedly answered to all his
Objections, or any others of the the like Nature. But as his Objections against
the Church of England are a wide Digression from the present subject of Dispute
contained in the Second Rule, which mentions not one word of the Church of
England, so should I answer him, as he thus widely digresses from the proper
subject, I should be guilty of the same fault.

But whereas he says, One of the first things in the Liturgy is Mathematically
false, for it ^iveth a Rule for the finding of Easter Day forever, at fallible
as Mr. Keith' s Rules of Divinity. Passing his Sarcasme against what he calls
My Rules in Divinity, none of which he has proved either false or fallible,
for all his attempt, I think it very rashly and inconsiderately done by him, to
say, That one of the first Things in the Liturgy is Mathematically false, to
wit, the Rule given in the Liturgy for finding Easter Day forever; and for this
to give no Proof but his bare Affirmation. Besides, in so doing he presumes to
be more skillful in the Mathematical Sciences than they who gave that Rule, and
continue to practice it. But I think to persons but ordinarily skilled in the
Mathematics, it will appear by the Author's Charge against the Rule, about
finding Easter, that he is very unskillful in the Mathematics; and he cannot
but know, that there are at present in the Church of England as good
Mathematicians as the World affords, that could easily have discovered the
Error of the said Rule, if it had (...) Methematically false. For to say the
Truth, the Mathematics have nothing to do with it, it hangs on no Mathematical
Theoreme or Canon, but only on an Ancient Practice or Sanction, ever since the
(...) Council, that whereas the Equinoctial about that time happened upon the
21 th Day of March, after which Equinoctial the Jews, under the Old Testament
began the first Month, and the 14 th Day was the Day of the Passover, counting
from the first New Moon after the said Equinoctial, the Atient Latin Church,
that it might not seem to Judaise, did keep the Christian Easter, not precisely
on the fourteenth Day of the Moon or Month, but on the Lords Day following.
Now though the Equinoctial has gone back from the 2^ th Day of March to the
Tenth of March, now, as in our present Age, and as the World continues, may go
back, after some Tract of time, to the first of March, and so still backwards;
yet this is no Error in the Rule for finding Easter, either Mathematically or
otherwise; and none will or can so say, but he who is extremely ignorant in all
true Mathematics.

But perhaps he has some other Reasons, that are as weak as the former, for I
remember I have read objected by some Dissenters, That Easter Day, in some year
past, in the Church Kalander, did not answer to the Day of Easter in some
Astronomical Almanac. Which was nothing else but a plain instance of those
men's Ignorance how to distinguish betwixt the Astronomical and Civil beginning
of the Day, the Astronomical beginning of the Day being at Noon, and the Civil
at Mid Night. O^, Lastly, The ground of his Charge may possibly be, That
according to the New England Churches, the Lords Day, and all other Days begin
at Sunset or Evening. But this is more Jewish than Mathematical, and the
Mathematics do in no part Contradict the Rule given in the Liturgy for finding
Easter forever. And without changing that Rule, though the World should
continue many Thousands of Years, the Time of Easter may be so fixed, as not
(...) make any considerable difference, as to the Season of the Year wherein it
falls, to wit, by adding one Day more to some Moves of the Year, after the
space of each Hundred and Thirty Years is expired. Or, if the Author has any
further to Object, than what is mentioned here, let him in his next produce it,
and I question not, but he will thereby, to the Intelligent, show, That he had
as little ground to object against the Rule in the Liturgy, for finding Easter,
as against the Rules in Divinity given by M^*

Page ^^. But says the Author, G.K. has put a Weapon into our hands which
slays himself.

Answ. Has he so! how, I pray? Why George Keith and his Brethren separate from
the Churches of New England, and other Independent and Presbyterian Churches,
who have the Word of God duly Preached, and the Sacraments* duly Administered,
and hold the Fundamentals of the Christian Religion, and therefore are guilty
of Schism.

Answ. The Author is here guilty of what Logicians call Petitio Principij, i.e.
A begging the Question; for the Church of England, whereof G.K. is a Member,
(...) not think that the New England Independent (...) (...) the Word duly
Preached, and the Sacraments duly (...), (...) want of (...) O^di^a^ion, and
other considerable Defects, which (...) charged on the Church of England*
Besides that, the Church of England is (...) Mother Protestant Church,
retaining her first Purity, from whom the (...) made the Schism, and not S^e
from Them, the which Schism is contrary to the Word of God. Nor yet does the
Church of England stand to averse from the Churches of New England, such as are
Presbyterian especially, or such as incline that way, that the does freely
allow her Members to join with the Presbyterian reformed Churches in France,
Holland and Switzerland, in external acts of Worship, and particularly in
receiving the Lords Supper with them, as has been frequently practiced by her
Members in those abovementioned Places. And were not most of the Churches in
New England more averse from Us of The Church of England, than we are from Them,
and most Uncharitable to Us, We could not only join with Them here in
New England, in most external Acts of Worship, but Preach and Pray in their
Churches, as some of Us have lately done, at the Charitable Christian Request
of some Ministers of some New England Churches, where we were well and kindly
received, both by Ministers and People, and thanked by both for our Christian
Doctrine and Labor of Love. And were we ever to desirous to join with you in
that most Solemn Act of receiving the Lords Supper with you, ye would not admit
us, but exclude us, by imposing upon us Your Church Covenant, whereby ye would
bind us up from Communion not only with the Church of England, whereof we are
Members, but from all other Protestant reformed Churches* Thus* what the Author
charge most unjustly upon the Church of England, as, That she imposes on her
Members Unlawful Terms of Communion, is most justly chargeable upon him, and
his Brethren; for we, with many others of tender Consciences, do look upon your
Church Covenant to be very unwarrantable and disagreeable to holy Scripture
considering the rigor of it, in binding up the People that come (...), from
holding Communion with other Protestant Churches, (...) in receiving the Lords
Supper with them, but in noosing them up (...) that Narrowness, that the People
bound with your Church Covenant ^are scarcely, without your severe Censure, so
much as come and hear a good Sermon in any of our Churches, far less to join
with us in the public Prayers of the Church; This we think is a Yoke of
Bondage ye put upon People, by which means ye have frighted away many of the
People of New England from joining with you, and having had no where else to go,
in many places, many of the young Generation, who are not within your Covenant,
are little better than Heathens, and are exposed to be leavened with Quakerism,
and other vile Errors, as too many already are so leavened these-with*

This your Church Covenant (we think) is an heavy Yoke, which ye impose upon
the People, both Ministers and Others, that has no Warrant from Scripture; but
Thanks be to God the Church of England lays no such York upon her Members,
but allows them full liberty to join in Communion with all true Protestant
Churches, who hold Communion with her, in Holland, France, Switzerland,
Germany, and other parts. But they who deny to hold Communion with her, as most
of the Dissenters do* both in Old England and New, they cannot (...) blame her
for not holding Communion with them.

And notwithstanding of this Authors and his Brethrens great Clamor against
Impositions, of things not commanded in Scripture, We find Them much more for
Impositions, than those against whom they so complaint and indeed it is very
ordinary, that none are more for Impositions upon Others, than they who yet cry
out against i^ upon Themselves. For, does not your Church impose (at times)
Days of Fast upon People, which if they do not observe, though they are not of
your Church, ye will be severe upon them?

Page 12. He has no other way to except against the Third Rule delivered in my
Sermon, but by putting an Uncharitable and streined Sense upon the words of it;
The which Rule is this,

What things we see amiss in particular Persons, are not to be charged upon the
whole Church, unless the Church do Justify those Persons in those Things; and
what we cannot amend, we ought to bear; for there is no Christian Society on
Earth but has some particular Persons that do amiss; and all Dissenters, when
particular Failings of particular Persons are objected to them, give the like
Excuse.

Now the streined Sense which he puts upon the words of it, is this, That by
Justifying, I mean an avowed defending of Scandalous Criminals, at least he is
very jealous that I so meant it, otherwise why should he find fault with this
Third Rule? The Author cannot be ignorant, that Not to justify, does several
times in Scripture signify not only not to defend or approve, but severely to
Censure and blame, as where Job said to his Friends, God forbid that I should
justify you, and where God is said, Not to clear or justify, (as the Hebrew
does bear it) the Guilty, i. e. He does severely censure and judge them; and
like that of St. Paul to the Corinthians, Shall I praise you in this? I praise
you not, i. e. I greatly dispraise and blame you. All which is said by a
Rhetorical Figure frequent in Scripture, as well as in other Writers, called, A
Meiosis, where something more is understood than is expressed. And that my
plain meaning was, That scandalous Persons, who gave public Scandal, are not
only Not to be defended or connived at, but that they are to be publicly
censured and a due Testimony born against them, is evident from my saying, That
all Dissenters, when particular Failings of particular Persons are objected to
them, give the like excuse. And All Dissenters include the New England
Independents as well as others, who profess, That scandalous Persons ought not
only Not to be defended, but to be duly Censured, and a due Testimony born
against them. And the Author knows in his Conscience, That The Discipline of
the Church of England requires this: He had therefore no just reason to object
against the Third Rule. But where he cannot find a fault, in this or any of the
Rules, it seems he was resolved to make one, and to set up a shadow of his own,
and fight against it. But suppose a Church is r^m^s in due censuring scandalous
Persons, though this (...) is a great fault in her, as it was in the Church of
(...), an^ in that of (...) and Thyatira, yet that fault did not Unchurch them,
nor justify the Separation or withdrawing of Members from them in external
Acts of Worship.

But when the Author cannot find sufficient matter against this Third Rule,
(the only proper subject of the Dispute) he preceeds after his former manner to
inveigh against the Church of England, for her neglect of Discipline: Though in
many places good Discipline is used in her (praised be God) and there are as
many good Christians eminent in ^ound Faith and good Life in her Congregations
as in any Church upon Earth, comparing Number with Number, and where it is
otherwise, I pray God it may be amended. But as want of Discipline in some
particular Places and Congregations, is no Refutation of the Rule given, so nor
is it any just Cause of Separation from the Church: And dare the Author say,
there is no want or neglect of due Discipline in the Churches of New England?
And are all the Failings of particular Persons amo^^g them duly censured? And
is a due Witness publicly (...) against them? Have they ever to this day born
a public Testimony against the Severity and Cruelty of these who hanged three
Quaker Men and One Quaker Woman? and if any few did blame it, how long were
they silent, and did rather approve it than Condemn it? Or, have they born a
due Testimony against these of their Churches that caused ptu many Innocent
Persons to Death for Witches? And has the Author himself born a due Testimony
against the unfound Doctrine of Mr. Samuel Willard, President of the College
at Cambridge in New England, who, at the public Commencement there the first
day of July last, did openly defend that Position, That Adams Fall was (...) by
Gods (...) before all time, and by his Determination in Time, of Adam' s Will
to sin, and (...) the rest of men's Actions; wherewith not only I, but some of
his own (...) were offended.

Page 14. As to that the Author quotes out of the Liturgy, to cast Blame upon
the Church of England, That in the (...) Church there was a (...) Discipline,
and that it is much to be wished that Discipline (...) be (...), I suppose the
Author does not know what they (...) who (...) those words, which indeed was a
Discipline in a more strict and exact way required of Penitents, than at
present is performed in any Protestant Church whatsoever, or has been
performed since the Reformation, and to ^e sure is not performed, not ever has
been, in the Independent Churches of New England, and were such a strict
Discipline upon Penitents so much as offered to be put in practice among them,
its like most of them would be ready to cry out against it, not only as
Imposition, but Intolerable Severity and Cruelty; and yet for want of such
sort of Discipline he severely blames the Church of England, That no care has
be taken for the restoration of that Discipline to this very day. But how knows
he that no care has been taken about it? A thing may be long cared for, and
much Care and Thought be taken about it, before it be effected.

But that he might more severely and uncharitably reflect upon the Church of
England, he says, page 14. The Discipline of Christ is become a Pecuniary
Business in the Church of England, as well as in the Church of Rome. If the
Author has not writ this against his Conscience and Conviction (as *hope, in
charity, he has not) he has showed his great Ignorance and Rashness in
condemning her at the rate he does, and equelling her, in a manner, with the
Church of Rome in the Sin of Simony, it having passed as a Proverb among
Travelers, who have been at Rome, Omnia sunt venalia Romae, All things may be
sold, or are to be sold at Rome; But dare the Author say, with a good
Conscience, that it is ^o in the Church of England, where Simony is judged a
horrid Crime, and abhorred by many Thousands of that Church; indeed, generally
it is so; but if some do most hypocritically practice it in secret, when they
are found out, are severely punished for it. This is no good Argument against
the lax Discipline of the Church; but that it is severely punished, when
discovered, is a good argument for her Discipline being so far good. Besides
that, the Ancient Discipline of the Church was severe upon the Deserters of it,
and such as did separate and make a Schism there from; the which severe
Discipline were it now, or but the half of it performed upon all the deserters
(...) who have without all just cause gone from her) of the Church of England,
the Author would Cry as much against that Discipline, if restored, as Cruelty
and Persecution, as now he does cry out against the Church for the want of it.

Page 14 and 15. I cannot ^^ed any thing that the Author offers against the
Fourth RULE, that has any show of Reason; for, after having repeated the Rule,
which is this,

To join in external Acts of public Worship, where the Matter is sound, though
there be a great Mixture of Unsound Members, with others sound, is no sin, but
our Duty, for which we are warranted by the Practice both of the Prophets and
Apostles, etc.

He says, This Argument, though often urged, is not Cogent. But how does he
prove that it is not Cogent? Is his bare Authority or Word a sufficient Proof
against the Rule, which was the main subject of the Dispute, as stated by
himself? for I find not that he gives any other Proof, only to divert his
Reader from the proper subject, he tells, That it is controverted among learned
Men, whether there were any Ecclesiastical Discipline in the Jewish Church, in
respect of Moral Offenses; but however, the Author himself affirms, that
Heresies (and to be sure they are great Moral Evils and Offenses) were
censurable among them. And this is all he says against the Fourth Rule, which
is just nothing. But when all his Shot is spent against the Fourth Rule, after
his wonted manner, he makes a fresh Assault upon the Church of England, so that
his Spleen is mainly against her; and were but the Rules as much in favor of
the Churches of New England, called, Independents, its very like he could
swallow them all down very kindly, and easily digest them. He tells us, That I
cannot but know, that the Dissenters from the Church of England find fault with
some particulars in the matters of the Worship required in the Liturgy. They
verily believe that such things are therein commanded, as God has forbidden;
whether they are Mistaken in their Judgment, the day will declare it. And then
he has a Hit at the Ceremonies of the Church of England, telling us, That the
Non-Conformists believe that they are forbidden in the second Commandment. But
what is here of real Argument either against the fourth Rule or the Church?
What this Man ^aith, or that Man says or believes, is no good Proof whether a
thing ^e true or false, except ^e bring Scripture or good Reason for him. He
says, He will not dispute that point which has (...) so elaborately handled
by many others. But why then does he bring (...) up to cast blame on the
Church? We know that many Pious and Worthy Divines of the Church of England
have more truly and more elaborately also answered all their Arguments against
what they call the Ceremonies of the Church of England. But have the
New England Independents no Ceremonies among them, that is, no things that they
use relating to Circumstantials of Worship or Religion, but what is contained
in Scripture? Have they nothing of Humane Institution among them? Dr. Saywell,
in a Book of his, in answer to Mr. Baxter and Dr. Owen, says, He knows but
One Ceremony in the Church of England, and that (...) the Use of the Sign of
the Cross after Baptism, which has no more Idolatry or Superstition in it, than
for a Man in Writing to write a Roman X to stand for the word Cross; for the
word [Cross] it self, is but a Sign, as all words are, Verba sunt signa rerum
(...) conceptum, i. e. Words are Signs of Things and of Thoughts, say all
Logicians. But after that he has cried out against the Church of England for
using the Sign of the Cross after Baptism, he brings not the least Reason to
prove it sinful, only tells us, That Non-conformists complain of the Sign of
the Cross in Baptism, as a corrupting addition to an Ordinance of divine
Worship. But he should have said, [ after Baptism] and not [ in Baptism] for
the Church of England makes not the Sign of the Cross any part of Baptism; and
therefore it is not [ in it] but [ after it] and many are baptized in the
Church of England daily, who are not (...) all signed with the Sign of the
Cross, to wit, such sick infants who are baptized in their Parents Houses, many
of which dye before they could be brought to Church, and yet are esteemed truly
baptized, and true and real Members of the Church.

Again, He first blames the Church of England for kneeling at the Lords Supper,
and yet with the next Breath ^aith as much as does clear her for he grants, p.
16. That the Church does declare that Christ is not Bodily present in the
Sacrament; and that the Bread is not real Christ; for which cause (he says
many that do kneel, do not violate their Consciences. But why not [all] as well
as [many] who are sound in the Faith of the Church of England? for if any do
not believe as the Church of England declares, they are not of her.

But why does he make all this Cry against the Church of England for holding,
That to join in external acts of Worship, where the matter (...) sound, though
there be a great Mixture of unsound Members, with others Sound, is no Sin, but
Duty? Have they of the New England Independents no Unsound Members among them?
yea, do they not join, and allow others to join with them in external Acts of
Worship, as Prayer and Singing who are no Members of their Church, and many of
which are known to be Unruly Walkers? Their own Practice therefore does (...)
this Rule, notwithstanding he is so set against it.

In his disputing against the Fifth Rule, he is as weak, as against (...) the
former. The Rule is this:

What things soever were commended of God or allowed and practiced lawfully
under the Old Testament, that were neither any part o^ the Ceremonial Law, nor
of the Jewish Polity, peculiar to that Nation, are still binding to Us under
the New Testament; and a proof out of the old Testament in all such Cases is as
good as a Proof out of the New.

Now what says he against this? Surely nothing to prove the Rule to be false;
for what things were either commanded or permitted to the Jews, that are not
lawful, no^ necessary to us, were either parts of the Ceremonial Law, or
belonged to the Polity of the Jewish Nation, as that of Poligamy and Divorce
(except in the case of Adultry) To Pray with their Head or face covered, was
part of the Ceremonial Law. Concerning putting off their Shoes when they
entered into the Synagogue, if they had any such Practice, he but very weakly
proves it from (...) 5. 1. I no where find it commanded to the People of
Israel; if it was a Custom among them, and ^et had no Command of God to warrant
it, as he has showed none, This makes against him, That Customs may be lawfully
used in the Church, and have no Command of God in particular; which is contrary
to the mind of the Author, of Whom it may be said both here, and often
elsewhere, (...) se jugulavit gladio, i. e. He has slain himself with his own
Sword.

In Opposition to the fifth Rule, he says, They may a firm two things, first,
That the Apostasy of the Christian Church has consisted partly in its
Judaizing. But how this is any Proof against the fifth Rule, I see not, nor can
any other Man that has his true sight. Do Christians Judaize, if they practice
neither what was Ceremonial, nor what was only proper and peculiar to the
Jewish Nation, but only what was either commanded or allowed by the Moral Law,
and some other positive Precepts? I cannot but often wonder at the Author's
Inadvertency* He mentions the Observation of Easter, and some Holy Days that
were observed among the Jews; and that they had Music in their Temple Worship,
and the Priests had Holy Garments to distinguish them from others; and from
this he infers, That the Church of England does Judaize in observing the
Christian Feast of Easter, and other Christian Festivals, and having Music in
their Cathedrals, and some other places. But he has made no Essay to prove his
Consequence, which is with as good Authority denied, as by him affirmed. And
why did he not as well argue, That because the Jews heard the Old Testament
read in their Synagogues and in the Temple, and Prayed and sung Psalms, that
therefore it is judaizing for the Church of England to either Pray or Sing in
their Congregations, or to hear the Old and New Testament read in their
Assemblies. This last, it seems, they think Judaizing, and therefore do not
practice it; only (as I am informed) Mr. Colmans Church at Boston has the
Scriptures read in it, which I suppose the Independent Brethren do reckon not
only Judaizing in them so to do, but coming too near to a Conformity to the
Church of England. The Author should better know or at least consider, That
(...) like Practices, when done on different Reasons, and to different Ends,
the one may be good and justifiable, the other bad and condemnable. But is it
not a rare Argument of the Author against the fifth Rule, that the Jews in
Swearing, should say, By the Law I Swear? But did the Law permit or command any
such thing? Surely Nay; and our Savior taught the Jews, They were not to Swear
by any Creature, But the Jews, when they Swear, did lay their hand on the
Pentateneh. What then? we do not find that our Savior did blame any of them
for this, if they so did; nor can the Church be charged with Judaizing, for
allowing her Members to lay their hand on the Bible when they Swear. He may as
well argue, Quaker-like, That because Jews did Swear, therefore all Swearing
under the Gospel is Judaizing; yea, and all Self-Defence by Carnal Weapons, as
the Quakers say, and argue with as much Strength as this Author does against
the Church of England for some aforesaid things, such as the Jews practiced,
but on quite different Reasons, and to quite different Ends.

Page 20. Whereas I had affirmed, That Proofs out of the Old Testament are in
all Cases as good as Proofs out of the New, which I brought as a Reason or
Illustration of the Fifth Rule, the Author says, No Man doubts of that,
provided they be Proofs indeed, and not Scriptures Misinterpreted or
Mis-applyed. And does the ^th Rule import or imply any such thing, that
Scriptures Mis-interpreted or Mis-applyed are good Proofs either out of the Old
Testament or the New? Surely Nay: Therefore all this said by him is nothing to
the purpose against the truth of the Rule. But this I throughout observe, that
the Author, instead of proving the RULES to be false, which was his main
Undertaking, he makes it his main Business to ^ight against the Church of
England, as if by these very Rules he could prove Her to be such, that an good
Christians should forsake her, and separate from her, which at last confirms
the goodness of the Rules, though against his own Will and Inclination. But if
the Rules be all false, then he has not done well to measure and try The
Church of England by such false Rules, and so pass a Judgment against Her.

Page 20. But that he says, It is only the New Testament that informs us what
Officers, what Sacraments, what Censures are to be allowed of in Churches of
Christians to the end of the World.

I Answ. If all this were granted, yet it says nothing against the Truth of
the fifth Rule. Besides, he but barely affirms it without Proof, That Only the
New Testament informs ^s of those things; for though they are more clearly
Revealed in the New Testament, yet under the Old Testament they were held forth
in Promises, Prophecys, Types and Figures, as well as Faith in Jesus Christ,
and other Gospel Truths of greatest Moment.

Page 21. As to the Sixth and Last Rule, he seems to grant to it, in the case
of Psalm-Prayers: But why not in the case of Prayers and Thanksgivings in Prose
as well, seeing we have no command to put any part of our Prayers and
Thanks-givings into Meeter of Rhyme, and sing them with Musical Tunes and
Notes, and yet the Independent Churches do so, as well a^ the Church of
England, and I sappose enjoin it to be done too. But, as I said in my Sermon,
(which I find not that the Author has noticed) Why singing with the Book (a
thing practiced by many Dissenters) in consistent with singing with the Spirit,
and yet praying with the Book is not consistent with praying with the Spirit,
is unaccountable. If the Author publish any Answer to this Reply, I desire him
to give a particular Answer to This, as well as diverse other things of weight
he has past without all Notice.

Page 21. He says, It is not Our Opinion that all Forms are Unlawful; and that
a late virulent anonimous Author has slander^^sly (...) to be the Opinion of
him th^^ wrote a brief Discourse concerning the Unlawfulness of Common Prayer.

I Answ. I have not that Book that treats of the Unlawfulness of Common Prayer,
to compare it with the Answer of that Worthy (...), eminent in the Church of
England both for Piety are Learning, whereby to examine whether he has wronged
him o^ ^ot (...) who is supposed to be the Author of that Book, (...), A (...)
Discourse concerning the Unlawfulness (...) Common Prayer Worship, had done
more manly either to have refused that Book above-ment^^^^d thoroughly and
entirely, or at least to have proved him guilty of those things, whereof he
accuses him, which I find not that he has done; nor by any thing that the
said Mr. Mather has yet said, can I find, that he has wronged him. He now
says, That it is not his Opinion that all Forms are Unlawful. But why then does
he set himself so much against all Liturgies, which contain nothing but Forms?
If Forms be lawful, why may it not be thought that they might be used in the
earliest Times of the Church? And if lawful in private, why not also (...)
Public?

Page 21. Whereas he says, They ( i. e. the Author and his Brethren) maintain,
that there was no such Common Prayer Book of divine Institution, as our Author
and some others have imagined.

But I Answer: Where did I ever maintain, that the Jews had a
Common Prayer Book? I remember nothing of it, either in my Sermon or else
where. They viz. the Jews) might have had some short Forms in the days of the
Prophets, which they might have used without Book* But that they used the Book
of the Psalms of Davi^ in their Worship, I suppose the Author will not deny.
And seeing that he has granted that (...) Forms are lawful, even of humane
Composure, providing the Matter be Scriptural, and proper for the occasion, I
see not how he can deny, but that All are lawful as well as (...), if they have
the like Qualifications. And why they may not be writ or printed in a Book, as
we^^ as David's Psalms, he has not told us.

P. 22* He quotes Sa^b^^^, d^p^ecibus Hebreor^m, p. 123. to prove, That from
the Time of M^ses to the great Sanhedrium, there was no o^nary Form of Prayer
among the Israelites, but every Man made a Prayer for himself.

I Answer. If all this were true, which yet may be questioned, notwithstanding
of his one Author* yet that proves not, but is the (...) of our Savior (as
well as long ^^fore) they had (...) of Pr^yer i^ common, (which our Savior did
^ot find ^ault with* otherwise how was it that (...) taught a Form of Prayer to
his Disciples, and our Savior to his? And if he (...) not against all Forms of
Prayer, why does he not use that form of the Lords Prayer in Public, for I do
not hear that he does i^ at any time?

Page 22. He greatly wrongs me, as if I inferred from Isa. 29. 1^. that
therefore the Jews had a^^inted L^^^rgy, or used a Common-PrayerBook; I only
inferred from Isa. 29. 13. and Mat. 15 8. and some other Scriptures, as* Joel
2. 17 Hos* 14. 2, 3. That they prayed Vocally with their Mouths and Lips,
together with the Minister; a plain instance whereof we have in Neh 9.
throughout; for whether it was a free conceived Prayer only in that instant,
that (...) was born or brought forth, or whether they ( viz. the Levites
together) or any of them had premeditated it before hand, and committed it to
Memory, this is evident they Uttered it together, and the People had some ^^are
or part in it, even Vocally, as appears, verse. 2, 3, 5. of that 9 th Chapter,
etc. He grants Some Forms of Prayer to be lawful, and yet denis that our
Savior gave or commanded the Lords Prayer to be used as a Form. But why then
does he allow of any Forms? If that most excellent Form of our Lords own
Composing be not to be used, why should any other?

He says, p. ^4. We do not find that ever the Apostles concluded their Prayers
with the Repetition of these words, viz. Our Father, etc.

Answ. Nor do we find that ever they used the Form of words in Baptism, In the
Name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost, and yet we have cause to
believe they used that Form, because he Commanded it; and as plainly he
commanded them, Luk* ^^. 2. when they pray, to say, Our Father, etc. which had
it been only intended for a Platform and Directory, would not have been given
in words of the first Person (...) respecting them that pray, and immediately
directed ^o God in the second Person singular, as, Hallowed be (...) by Name,
Thy Kingdom come, etc. Directories for Prayer use not to run in (...). Besides,
if the Apostles needed no Forms of Prayer, but were taught to pray altogether
by the Spirit, without any external Form, why did they need a Directory or
Platform afterward? Was it not the work of the Spirit to as^^it and furnish
them as much to one as to the other? (...), in this very case of Prayer, as to
rejecting the Form of the Lords Prayer, the Author does too much (...) with
Quakerism. (...) other things. But the Quakers refusing to use this, or other
Forms, learned it of other Dissenters, and not the Dissenters from them; which
led the way to Quakerism.

P. ^4. He thinks this will finish the Argument, If there had been any need of
a Common Prayer Book for the Edification of the Churches, doubtless the
Apostles would have composed one, which they never did.

Answ. This Argument is as weak as any of the former, and is far from
concluding against Forms of prayer to be used in Public; for he might as well
argue* The Apostles would have made forms of Catechisms, Confessions of Faith
and Directories, which We find not that they did; and yet the Independents have
their Confessions, Catechisms and Directory. (...) was no need for the Apostles
making a CommonPrayer for the Church after their days. They knew and believed
that the holy Spirit would assist the Pastors of the Church to compose Forms of
Prayer for public Use sufficiently, by means of the holy Scriptures.

P. 2^. But says he. Supposing it to be a Duty to make use of Forms, which were
of divine Inspiration, it does not at all follow, that it is then ^ Duty to use
Forms which are of Humane Composure.

I Answ. This spoils all his former Confession, That he is not against all
Forms; for he allows Men who have not the Gift of Prayer to use a Form in their
Families, rather than not to pray at all; and I suppose that he will allow such
Prayers to be, as to form and order of words, of Humane Composure. But of what
Composure, I pray, are the Author'S, Prayers in the Church, and his Brethrens,
are they not of Humane Composure as well as the Prayers in the Liturgy of the
Church? if they are not, but wholly Divine, by the same aid and assistance of
the Spirit as the Prophets and others had in extraordinary cases, they may be
bound up in the Bible as parts of Canonical Scripture. Thus through his
Inadvertency he falls again into the Spirit of Quakerism, who contend that all
their Preaching and Prayers are the immediate Dictates of the H. Spirit. And
what else case the Author pretend his Prayers at least to be, if as to the form
and order of Words, they are not of Humane Composure, as much as the Prayers
contained in the Liturgy.

P. 27. The Author has again Wronged me, as that from St. Cyprian's Words,
Publica (...) est et Communis oration, I did infer, that the Christians in his
Time had a Common Prayer Book; but I made no such Inference, only I did argue
from thence, That the people prayed Vocally with the Minister, which could not
well be out in known Forms* and (...) People had a part and share in the vocal
Prayers of the Church, by giving a Vocal Response to the Minister, appears from
St. Cyprian's Relation of Matter of Fact, how the Minister said, in the
Congregation, S^^sum Corda, i. e. Lift up your hearts; and the People answered,
Habem^s (...) Dominu^, i. e. W^ lift them up unto the Lord. It seems not that
ever the Author has read St. Cyprian on the Lords Prayer, otherwise he is very
forgetful or unfair not to have taken Notice of this Passage, which proves that
People gave a Response to the Minister; and it is not likely that there was but
this one then used in the Church, for the Minister saying Dominus vobisc^^, i.
e. The Lord be with you, and the People answering, et Cum (...) Spirit^, i. e.
And with thy Spirit, is very Ancient; both which are in the Liturgy of the
Church of England.

P. 27. Whereas he says, He has that Charity for me, as to believe that I did
not my self consult Cyprian, but made use of that Sentence, as I found it
quoted and perverted by Dr. Comber,

I Answ. I had no need of his Charity in that respect, for I have several times
read it with my own Eyes in St. Cyprians own Works, and not only a good while a
go, but so very lately as when I was at Boston in July last, where I found St.
Cyprians Works in the House of Mr. Miles, one of the Ministers of the Queens
Chapel in Boston.

P 31 He Ridicules, but does not give any answer to my Illustration, That New
Forms of Prayer are no more necessary, but rather more improper, than for Men
to put on a new suit of Apparel or New Shoes every day, which a King would not
do* From this he Ridicules me Consequence of his own making, which is this,
Ergo, a Christian should not make a New Prayer every day. But my words were not
as he represents them, but thus, Why should People be so much for a continued
Novelty of Forms of Prayer, that a New Form must be used every time? This I see
as little need or convenience of as New Shoes every day; and as the Form needs
not to be New, (...) nor need^ the Matter of it to be New every time, but
rather on extraordinary Occasions; yet it ought always to be New in respect of
New hearty Affections and Desires, and that by the special aid and assistance
of the H. Spirit. The like ^ay of Ridiculing he makes with my arguing from Romans
15. 6. and 1 P et. 2. 5. but says nothing, in effect, to answer my Arguments,
but th^^, That the Refutation of such weak arguing is Confutation sufficient.
But in this he is not to be his own Judge, but it is to be left to the more
impartial Judgment of Intelligent Readers.

P. 32. He has another Hit at me, (...) charging me, That I wrote a very wicked
Book, 1689. sull fraught with (...) and (...), and with Revilings and
Slan^^^ings of the Ministers and Churches of Christ.

I Ans. ^n this he has over charged me, for I do not remember that there was
any real Blasphemy in it* or a^y (...) or Error oppugning directly any
Fundamental of Chris^^anity, though other Errors were in it, I confess (...)
and too great^^ especially in Opposing those Institutions of Baptism and the
Lords Sapper, which yet I did not wilfully, but being deceived by false
Teachers, to whom I too much trusted. But seeing I have found Mercy and
Forgiveness of God concerning those Errors and Uncharitable Speeches against
Protestant Churches and Ministers, which I have freely Retracted, it does no^,
(I think) savor so well of a Christian Spirit thus again and again to bring it
up against me; should be not rather be like our heavenly Father to Forget, or
not to remember our sins, as well as to Forgive them.

But the main Offense the Author seems to take against Forms of Prayer, is the
Imposing them. For, says he, Indeed we look upon the Imposition of Forms as
sinful, but not all Use o^ them. What the Author means by the Church her
Imposition, other than Enjoining, I know not, and that only to her own Members,
or any others especially, that would come into Communion with her, and most
especially the (...) the Church of England, or any others that on due Trial of
Qualifications, would offer themselves to officiate in the Ministry, as some
have done, of such who had their Education among the Dissenters, and its to be
hoped many others will in time follow the^^ Example. But do not the Independent
Churches in New England as much i^^ose on their Ministers and People their way
of Worship, by what they call free conceived Prayer. (called otherwise
extempore Prayer?) Will they allow any of their Ministers to use those forms of
Prayer, as contained in the Liturgy of the Church of England, (against which
they can make no exception, as to the Matter) or the People to join with them,
on supposition that some of their Ministers and People were most desirous to
have their liberty to use them as thinking them more edifying, as well as more
safe; for that they can the more safely join with them, and put a Seal of Amen
to them (such as a Man's Seal that he puts to a ^ond, which no prudent man
would readily do at once hearing?) I think the Author will say Nay, to this
weighty Question; and I leave it to impartial Men to consider, whether then the
Independent Churches are not equally Imposers in One Way, as they judge us
Another Way? And why what is lawful, and not (...), may not be enjoined by our
spiritual Fathers, as well as they may be imposed on Children and Servants by
their Natural Fathers and Masters, I understand not. However, I think I have
proved the Imposition (if it be proper so to call it) is equal on both sides.

If it be said, But the Parliament in King Charles the 2 d's Reign, imposed a
Fine of One Shilling on every one that would not come to Church on Sunday,
according to a Statute made in Q. Elizabeth's Reign.

I Answ. But since the Act of Tolleration, that Statute and the Use of it is
expired; beside, it was not the Church but the Civil State that made it. But if
I am rightly informed, the Independents in New England have (since they set up
in N. England) imposed, i. e. enjoined a greater Fine for them that come not to
their Churches every Lords Day; so that still the Imposition is equal on both
sides, or rather greater on their side. And what severe Laws the Independent
Magistrates (who were eminent Members of their Churches, made against the
Quakers, only as Quakers, and who did but distinguish themselves from others by
their Thou and Thee to one, and Not Saluting with their Hats, the Author knows
well enough. This the Quakers complained upon to be Imposition, and I think
might justly so complain against the Independents as guilty of Imposition, and
such Severity as the Church of England never practiced.

But whereas the Author says, page 23. I affirm that there is not One Instance
in all the Bible of Men's rea^ing their Prayers (still remembering that we
distinguish between Psalms and Prayers) but there are very many Examples of
free Prayer.

I Answ. As many Prayers are not Psalms, so many Psalms are Prayers, and such
as are Prayers (as the Book of Psalms abounds with such) ought, when used in
Acts of Worship, to be used as Prayers; and if some of the People of Israel had
them all by heart, yet its not likely that all had them so, but rather they
used the Book to help their Memory in Prayer; and the Author can never show a
right Reason why a Book may not be as lawfully used in Prayer as in Singing,
seeing both are high Acts of Worship, and ought to be spiritually performed.
Nor does the Church of England think that bare reading a Prayer or Prayers,
either in private or public, is any acceptable Worship to God (and no more is
extempore Prayer) but as it comes from the heart, with Sincerity and true
Devotion and Life. Many of most that use the Book in Preyer have all the
public Prayers in the (...) (most commonly used) by heart, and pray them from
the heart, with sincerity and fervor, yet to use the Book so far us to have it
lie open before them, to help their Memory, as they need it, I cannot see what
sin is in this, suppose we had no Example of it in those most early Times of
Primitive Antiquity when Printing was not known, and Writing was rare and very
costly, so that every one could not have a Common* Prayer -Book.

But whereas in my Sermon, p. 16. I showed, That the Church of England has this
advantage over all the Protestant Churches in Holland, France, Germany, etc
that the people pray vocally with the Minister, which (I said) cannot be well
or safely done without set Forms. In Answer to this the Author says, He
(meaning G K.) cannot be ignorant that in Antiphones and Responses in public
Worship the Church of Rome out-does the Church of England.

To which I Answer: The Author of the Remarks, I think, cannot be ignorant that
the common People have no part in those Antiphones and Responses, being all in
Latin, which is an unknown Tongue to the generality of the people, and
therefore he cannot be ignorant that his comparing the Church of Rome to the
Church of England, so as even to outdo her, is very Unfair, seeing all the
Prayers in the Church of England are in the English Tongue, and very
intelligible to the generality of the People.

The Author charges me to be a little Mistaken about the Protest an^ Churches
in Germany, for some of them do, viz. pray vocally with the Minister. Answ. If
some of them do, of the more obscure sort, yet it is no great Mistake (if any
to be Noticed) seeing even in Scripture style, by the word All is signified the
most part, of greatest Number of the Species, as where it is said, All Judea
were baptized by John, and yet the Pharisees were not.

Page 32. The Author is not yet satisfied with his so severe upbraiding m^ with
my former Errors again and again, which he too Uncharitably calls Blasphemies;
if taken in the common sense, none of which (^o far as I can remember) I ever
had, or ever preached or printed; but through his Mistake or want of due
Information, he charge me for my not making a penitent Acknowledgment of my
great sin, for my former Errors, as to matters of Religion [As to Morals, I
thank God, I have been preserved from my Infancy free of all Scandal] for I
have again and again, in a much more public place than Boston in New England,
(to wit, in public Churches in London, and elsewhere, as at Turners (...) in
London, before many Witnesses of Worthy Persons, both Ministers and People of
the Church of England, as well as many others of Dissenters) made from the
sincerity of my heart, with great Sorrow and Cont^^tion, a penitent
acknowledgment of my former Errors, when under the profession of a Quaker, and
have particularly named them, not only by word of Mouth in those public
places, but in several of my printed Books, and particularly I have, some years
ago, printed a Book of Retractations as well as Explanations of many Passages
contained in my former Books; and, as I have above quoted him, he confesses,
That I have seen and renounced my Errors: And what would he have more? Must
there be no end of public Repentances? This is more severe tha^ the severest
Penances that the ancient Church laid on Delinquents. If I had a mind to
Recriminate I might, but I willingly forbear. If he thinks he has treated me
somewhat more civilly than the Quakers have done, in their scurrilous and
lying Pamphlets, I thank him for it, (though I think in several Passages of his
Remarks, he has been too severe and uncharitable toward me, and I have taken
care hitherto, and intend so to do throughout my whole Reply, to treat him not
only as civilly, but more civilly than he has treated me, so as to abstain from
all Personal Reflections, and indeed from all other Reflections but what the
Thread of his Discourse necessarily leads me unto, either by direct Argument,
or by what we commonly call Argumentum ad Hominem, which he has used against
me, as I have against him: And whether He or I have the best cause, I leave to
Intelligent and Impartial Readers. Besides, if the Author has but overly
considered the Contents of my Sermon, he could not but fi^d my free
Acknowledgement of my former great Error and Sin in my uncharitable Censures of
the Church of England, and Separation from Her (which was with respect to
Doctrines as well as Practices not only of the Church of England, but of other
Protestant Churches* and to his Son Mr. Cotton Mather I made a free
Acknowledgment to his face, in his own House, That I acknowledged my Errors and
Uncharitableness toward Him and his Brethren, in my several late Books of
Controversy with them, while I was under the profession of a Quaker; and I
desired him to signify so much to his Brethren.

I grant what the Author says, page 32. He ( viz. G.K.) has reason to walk
softly all his days, from the consideration of the hurt he has done to the
Souls of Men. And so I hope I do, by the Grace of God, and ever (...) do. But
that ever I led any into Blasphe^ses (as the word is commonly taken) as he
seems to charge me, I deny. If the Quakers can be believed, they will scarce
allow that ever I brought over ^^y to be right Quakers; for some of Note among
them, particularly Arthur Cook told me in a Quakers Meeting in Philadelphia,
That I was never any thing (while under the Profession of a Quaker) but an old
rotten Presbyterian; and the main reason he gave in the Meeting for his thus
c^n^u^ing me, was ^or my directing the Friends to Christ as God-Man without us,
as the object of Faith* for Salvation; and for my saying, The Light within was
not sufficient ^o Salvation without something else, meaning by that something
else, Christ himself, as both God an^ Man without us, and yet but one Christ,
and also the Doctrine of Christ, as outwardly preached, and as is contained in
the holy Scriptures. But to say the Truth (excepting the Errors I had, both too
many and too great, which yet did not destroy the Foundation that was laid in
me) I was nearer in my Persuasions (even when a Quaker) to the Thirty Nine
Articles of the Church of England, than to any other called Protestant Churches
or Communions in Britain, which made my coming to her Communion more easy to
me, alter that God in his great Mercy had so far further enlightened me to see
and renounce my former Errors, and I humbly thank my gracious God for the good
Foundation of Faith that was laid in me under the Education I had, by the Grace
of God (before I came among the Quakers) in my Native Country. But how much ^o
ever I have been (through my Ignorance and Errors, being deceived by false
Teachers of the Quakers, through their high pretenses to Immediate Revelation,
in the same time and manner as the Prophets and Apostles had) prejudicial to
the Souls of any, by leading them into such Errors as I had my self, yet I hope
I can say, without boasting, it has pleased God by his Grace, to make me
Instrumental to recover more out of the Abiss of Quakerism, than ever I led
any, into the more shallow places of it.

Whereas the Author says, page 32. There have been many Conformists whom for
their eminent Piety and Learning, we shall always love and honor.

I Answ. But all these were as zealous for the Church of England, and her way
of Worship and Discipline, as G. K. and much more, and have defended Her, and
her Liturgy, Discipline and Constitution, by the same Arguments and Means as I
have used, and which the Author has called Crambe recocta, as used by me; why
then might he not have bestowed on me some of that Charity of Judgment which he
has on them, whom he says, he shall always love and honor, for their eminent
Piety and Learning* But who will well consider the severe Censures that the
Author has past on the Church of England, in these his Remarks, as well as
elsewhere, and upon her Judaizing, Paganising, Apostatising and Affinity to
Popery, as he would have ignorant credulous People believe, one would judge he
had not Charity to think there was one truly Pious in that Church; for seeing
they were, and are all engaged in the same cause with Me, and far better and
abler Defendants of it than I, who have but borrowed their Weapons, as the
Author himself affirms, why he should pass this severe Censure on Me, of being
a Seducer, or endeavoring to seduce Men from the Truth, in Matters relating to
the Order of the Gospel, which is of divine Constitution, and yet not only let
those pass Scot-free, but highly commend them for their eminent (...) and
Learning, whose Words and Arguments I have but as Copied out (if the Author may
be believed) in my delivery of those Six Rules; and I suppose he never knew any
of the Church of England eminent for either Piety and Learning, but held them,
as much as I do.

Lastly, Whereas the Author says, Would Mr. Keith make it his Business without
concerning himself in those Circumstantials in Religion, about which Godly and
Learned Men differ in their Judgments, to undeceive that Miserable sort of
people by him formerly Deluded, he might do a Service for Christ.

I Answ. I have indeed made it my main Business ^o to do ever since God has
been pleased further to enlighten Me, and purpose by his Grace so to do for the
future; for to Them, I confess, I am the greatest Debtor; and yet why I may not
at Times, and upon Occasion, when I see a Service, plead for the Skirts and
Garments of the Church of England, (which is the most beautiful, as well as the
strongest and ablest of all her Sister Protestant Churches, and the greatest
Bullwark against Popery, as well as against all other Heresies) which Author
and His Brethren would strip her Naked of [ I mean not Garments or Skirts in a
litteral but figurative Sense] and not only strip Her to the Skin, but would
fley Her Skin off Her Body, and besides all this, would go about to put Her in
the Attire of a Whore, as some here have done, and continue to do, Yea, and
even the Author in these very Remarks, and in some (...) of His Books
(especially if that called, A Discourse concerning the Unlawfulness of
Common-Prayer-Worship, be His, as it is reported to be, at last, He is a
Vindicator of it) has too much so done. Were these but the Hundred part of the
able Divines of The Church of England here in America, to ease me of that Work,
its very like I should have altogether been concerned in my Labors, in this
part of the World, to endeavor to Undeceive the Deluded Quakers. But finding
the Harvest great, even in several parts of New England, (where I have preached
among considerable Numbers of Persons born and bred up in the Churches of
New England, and near Ripe to be gathered into the Church of England, as (...)
of Corn into the Barn, and but few Laborers of the Church here (Though, God be
thanked, those few have labored with good Success, and I hope shall continue
so to do) I could not but put my Hand, and give my Assistance in so good a
Work, as to persuade the differing sorts of Protestants here to join in the
Christian Bond of Truth and Peace with The Church of England. And be it so,
that those Things of Difference betwixt The Church of England and the
Independent Churches, in point of Worship and Discipline, are Circumstantials
of Religion, as the Author calls them, yet they are so Great Circumstantials in
the Author's account, that if the Six Rules delivered in my Sermon should come
to be owned to be true, by the Ministers and People of New England,
Independents in general, he is ready to conclude, their Hedge would be broken
down, of Church of Order, and the Name of Independent Churches, and their Order
of Discipline, would be buried, and the Church of England would spread like an
Olive Tree, or a Vine, filling the several places of it. Of this, it seems, he
is sore afraid, and therefore has assaulted me with his Remarks upon the Six
Rules in my Sermon, all persuasive to Peace and Union. But as much as he thinks
himself concerned about the Circumstantials of the Independent Chhurches, in
order to preserve their Visible and External Constitution, I think I ought to
be as much concerned for the Circumstantials of the Church of England, in order
to Her Preservation, where she is, and Her Multiplication where she is not.
Besides, these Six Rules which I gave in my Sermon, and are printed therein,
were not only for the Information of Independents, to remove their Prejudices
against the Church, but as well for the Information of the Quakers, some of
which heard me Preach that very Sermon, and diverse others have read it, and
more, I hope, will read it. And these Six Rules, next to the first past of my
Sermon, I did and do judge, that when it pleases God to give them a right
Understanding of the Truths of both the first part of that Sermon, concerning
the true Foundation of Faith, and also of the Second part of it, containing
those Six Rules, it will be as ready a way and means, what is contained in both
these parts of my Sermon, as any I know, to bring off the Quakers not only from
many of their gross Errors, but also to direct them safely (when brought off)
where to take up their Residence, even in the Church of England, the Mother
Protestant Church of all English Men, and the best Church (I sincerely believe)
that God has on Earth, both for Purity of Doctrine and Worship, as well as for
the excellent Lives of many Thousands of Her Members, notwithstanding of the
Scum and Dross of too many who call themselves by Her Name, as Her Children,
but are not, as many of Old were called Israel, who yet were not of Israel.

Thus, I think, I have gone through all the Material Things in (...) Book of
Remarks, which seemed to Me any wise to deserve a Reply: And what I have not
Noticed or Answered, I purposely omitted them, as being but improper
Digressions from the Subject of the Dispute, which mainly, or rather only was
the Contents of those Six Rules delivered in my printed Sermon.

G.K.
Newport in Rhode Island, Sept. 8. 1702.
FINIS.

