A CONFESSION OF FAITH OR, A Summary of Divinity.

Drawn up, By a Young Gentlewoman, In the Twenty-Fifth Year of her Age.

And now Published, for the Benefit of ALL, but more especially of YOUNG
Persons; That they may Attain to a competent Knowledge, in Saving and Divine
Truths.

Boston, Printed for, and Sold by Benjamin Eliot, under the West End of the
Exchange. 1704.

The Publisher to the READER.
PERHAPS your Curiosity may Enquire, whence this small Composure had its
Original? To satisfy this Curiosity, I am willing to let you know thus much;
That being in the House of a private Friend, I had this small Script presented
to my view, upon the perusal whereof, I could not but Express my value for it,
and my just Acknowledgements unto the then unknown Author of it; whom upon
Enquiry, I find to be a Deceased Gentlewoman (formerly the Religious Consort
of the Reverend Mr. Moses Fiske, Pastor of the Church of Brantrey) who, at her
Admission into the Church, gave this as a Confession of her Faith, drawn up by
her, altogether without his Assistance. Upon due Consideration, I thought the
Publication hereof, would be of no small advantage unto the Children in this
Land, (and not altogether to be despised by riper Years) who have herein,
briefly summed up the main Articles of their Creed, yet fully, perhaps
exceeding any Composure, ordinarily to be met withal, of the same Dimentions.
It Is not with a design to blazon the Fame and Reputation of any Person, that
this is now presented to the Public View: But as the design of it is purely to
do Good, so I hope it will be received with all Candor, without any carping or
critical Reflections, upon any thing merely Circumstantial, since the Main is
Serious, Solid, and no ways to be disapproved

That it may be followed with a blessing upon all, that shall employ their
Minutes in the perusal of it, but especially upon Young Ones, who may hence
gather the Fragrant Flowers of Divine Knowledge, is, and shall be, the Hearty
Desire and Prayer of him, who is

A wisher of your Souls Welfare. ^. B.

A CONFESSION OF FAITH. etc.
I Believe, That the Holy Scriptures, the Books of the Old and the New
Testament, Penned by the Prophets and Apostles, are the Infallible Word of God,
the Subject of true Divinity; That only Rule of Faith and Manners, teaching
what man ought to Believe concerning God, and what Duty God requires of man.

I Believe, GOD is a most Pure, Powerful, Eternal, Unchangeable Being,
Independent, Incomprehensible, Invsiible and Glorious; in whom all Fullness
dwells, both of Holiness and Righteousness, Grace and Mercy, Wisdom and Truth.

I Believe, That there is but ONE God, and that there are Three Persons in the
Godhead; The Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. The Father is of Himself;
The Son of the Father; and the Holy Ghost from the foregoing Persons in the
Trinity.

I Believe, The Decrees of God are His Determinate Purpose of Effecting all
things, by His Allmighty Power, according to the Counsel of His Will.

I Believe, God does Execute His Decrees, in the works of Creation and
Providence.

I Believe, The work of Creation is that, whereby God made the world and all
things therein, of nothing, and very good.

I Believe, The Providence of God is that, whereby He accomplisheth in His
Creatures, what He intended in his Counsel.

I Believe, That as Man at first, was formed of the Dust of the Earth,
consisting both of Soul and Body, being made Upright, Clothed with the Image
of God; the Effects whereof, were a sweet and blessed Harmony of Union and
Communion with God; so from this estate of happiness, all men fearfully Fell in
Adam, through wilful Disobedience, in contradicting the Express Commandment of
God, by Eating the Forbidden Fruit. The Act of this Transgression, was
completed by our First Parents Eating that forbidden Fruit; in the Guilt of
which Act, all the natural Posterity of Adam, are by the just imputation of God
involved. The principal (blameable) cause was their abusing their Freewill: The
helping cause was the Devil. Altogether unblameable was the Command of God,
against which Adam dashing himself, as a stately Vessel against a mighty Rock,
made Ship-wreck of his whole estate. The Consequents whereof, were Guilt,
Filth, and Punishment.

Guilt, is that Obligation, whereby the sinner is tied to undergo due
Punishment.

Filth, is that Spiritual Pollution, whereby the sinner is made void of all
comeliness and honor, and is become vile.

Punishment, is the Reward of Evil, inflicted upon the sinner because of sin;
which is, Death, both Spiritual and Corporal.

I Believe, That the sin which follows this Fall, is either Original, or Actual.

Original Sin, is an habitual inclination to walk contrary to the Law of God.

Actual Sin, is a continual Exercise of the Act, in going contrary to the
Command of God. This comprehends both Sins of Omission and Commission.

The inchoation of Corporal Death, lies in a miserable privation of the good
things of this Life; the consummation whereof, is the separation of Soul and
Body.

Spiritual Death, is a miserable privation of the comfortable life and
happiness [especially] of the inner man. The Inchoation whereof consists in a
desperate privation of the sweetness of Gods favor and presence. The
Consummation whereof is a final Dejection from the face of God, into Hell; of
the Soul immediately after the First Death, and of the Soul and Body, joined
together at the day of Judgment.

And though all are thus fallen, yet,

I Believe, That there are some, (though but a few,) their number and names,
being only known unto God, who shall be everlastingly saved from sin and
sorrow, and freely received into everlasting life; being such as the Lord in
His infinite wisdom has made choice of, before the world was, to be His
Militant Servants on Earth, and to be His Triumphant Saints in Heaven, through
Riches of, Grace in Christ Jesus.

Restitution, is that whereby a man is lifted up, from a state of Sin and
Death, into a state of Grace and Life. The parts whereof are Redemption and
Application.

Redemption is that, whereby a man is freed from the Bondage of Sin and Satan,
through the satisfaction of a Redeemer.

I Believe, That this Redeemer is the Lord Jesus Christ, by in ineffable
Generation, the Eternal Son of God, whom the Father has appointed from all
Eternity, to purchase the Salvation of all the Elect of God; who willingly gave
up himself to be a Sacrifice, for the sins of his People, and in order
hereunto, took upon Him our Nature, in every thing made like to us, Sin only
excepted, and the manner of His subsisting; and therefore He was made a fit,
and suitable Redeemer, both in respect of His Person in that He was Godman, and
His Offices which he has freely taken upon him, accomplishing from time to
time, his Prophetical, Priestly, and Kingly Mediatorship. His Prophetical, in
Revealing to man the deep things of the Wisdom and good Pleasure of God. His
Priestly, in Expiating for Sin, and purchasing Favor with the Father, and
making continual Intercession for us. His Kingly, whereby he leads men to the
attainment of Holiness and Blessedness by an uncontrollable Power: Conquering
his and our Enemies, and at last Raising us from the Dead. Thus Christ Redeems
his Elect both by his Humiliation and Exaltation. His Humiliation, in that
Abasement of Christ, whereby he became subject to satisfy Divine Justice, for
our Offenses, and to merit life and happiness. His Exaltation, whereby he
obtains a stately Victory, full of Glory and Triumph, over His and our Enemies.

I Believe, That the Effectual and saving Application of Christ and all his
purchased Grace, in a Gospel way, is Exhibited in due season, to every one that
belongs to the Election of Grace; which consists in Union and Communion with
Christ.

Union with Christ, is the consent and agreement, whereby a Believer is joined
to Christ, as his Spiritual Head. This Union is begun, in the powerful Ministry
of the Law, whereby the Soul is convinced of Sin, and the necessity of a
Savior; but it is accomplished in Vocation, which is a fruit of the Covenant,
whereby the Lord powerfully accompanying his Word by his Spirit, does not only
graciously Invite, but effectually Draw the Soul to accept the Tender of Grace,
and to embrace Fellowship with Christ Jesus. The special Graces here required
are, Repentance and Faith.

Faith is that Grace of God, whereby the Soul is brought to confide, and
acquiess in the Lord Jesus Christ, both for the Grace it stands in need of
here, and for Glory hereafter.

Repentance is a turning of the whole man, from Sin unto God, with a resolution
of, and endeavors after New Obedience.

Communion with Christ, is that whereby the People of God do participate with
him, in all his Benefits revealed in Scripture* having his Righteousness
imputed, together with his Active and Passive Obedience, for their
Justification; and withal, the Privileges of Sonship or, Adoption, the
Impress of Christ's likeness, upon their Souls in Sanctification; made Perfect
in the Heavenly world, in a state of Glorification.

Justification is an Act of Gods free Grace; whereby he blots out all the Debts
and Arrearages, of every believing sinner, for Christ his sake, and withal
gives him a Bill of Discharge, from all the Accounts, that were between God and
his Soul, receiving him as Righteous in his sight, both for the satisfaction of
his Justice, and glory of his Mercy.

Adoption is that Grace of God, whereby he receives every believing sinner, in
owning Himself to be their Father, and they to be His Children, and
consequently, that they have right unto, and in due time shall have the
possession of the promised Inheritance, which appertains to such a Relation.
The effects whereof are Freedom from Sin, and Boldness to approach before God
in Prayer.

Prayer is a going to God in the Name of Christ, by the help of the Spirit,
whereby we present our desires before him, for things according to his Will.

I Believe, That Sanctification is a Work of Gods power, whereby sinners are
translated from the pollution of sin unto the perfection of the Image of God;
which is begun in a state of imperfection in this life, made perfect and
complete in the world to come. The parts whereof, are Mortification, and
Vivification. Mortification is a putting off the Image of Adam, by applying the
Death of Christ. Vivification is a putting on, the Image of Christ, by applying
the power of His Resurrection.

I Believe That Glorification is that perfecting Grace of God, whereby the
number of his Elect, having completed their warfare and work in this world,
according to the will of God, are freely discharged of their sin and the events
thereof, forever; and made Fellow-heirs with Christ, of all the promised
Inheritance.

I Believe, the Church, the Subject of this blessing, is either General or
Particular.

I Believe, That there is but one General, Universal, Invisible Church of the
Saints, in which is contained, the whole number of Gods Elect, that one
Mystical Body, Christ's Bride; the particular Members whereof, have the same
Father, the same Christ, the same Spirit, the same Faith and Baptism. This
Church is not completed here, at one and the same time; for it is partly
Militant, and partly Triumphant.

I Believe, That a Visible Particular Church, is a Society of Faithful ones,
with their Seed, who are in Ecclesiastical Confaederation with God, and one
with another. Or, a convenient Number of Faithful ones, Saints and their Seed,
Orderly, Solemnly, and Religiously, Covenanting with God, and each other, for
the advancement of the Kingdom of God, and their own mutual Edification, by the
improvement of all those means that are appointed to that end.

I Believe, This Church being complete, consists of Officers and Members.

The Officers are Pastors Teachers, Ruling-Elders, and Deacons.

The Office and Work of a Pastor, is that whereby he bends himself, especially
to apply the Word to the hearts of his Hearers, according to their several
occasions and necessities.

The Labor of the Teacher is that, whereby he bends himself, especially to
open the Scriptures, and divine principles, refuting errors

The Work of a Ruling-Elder, consists in waiting at the Doors of the Sanctuary,
watching over the Church, and ways of Church Members.

The Office of a Deacon is to collect and distribute, the outward Estate of the
Church, providing for the Table of the Lord, (...) Ministers, and the Poor, and
that with all Cheerfulness and Fidelity.

I Believe, That this Church thus constituted, and thus furnished, has a right
of Administering, both Seals and Censures.

The Seals are Baptism, and the Lords Supper. The former of Initiation the
other of Education.

I Believe, That Baptism is that washing of the Flesh with water, in the Name
of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, whereby is signified, Christ in the promise,
by whom we are washed from Sin, and made Righteous, deliverd from Death, and
restored to Life.

I Believe, That the Lords Supper, is the second Sacrament of the New
Testament, instituted by Christ, wherein by the signs of bread and wine, and
the actions that concern the same, is showed forth his death; and God does
signify, seal, and exhibit the body and blood of Christ, with all the benefits
of his Death and Passion, to every worthy receiver, for his Spiritual
Nourishment, and Growth in Grace.

The Censures are Admonition and Excommunication. Admonition is that whereby a
Brother openly offending, or not hearing his Brethren in private, is convinced,
that he may be gained. Excommunication is that, whereby a Brother offending,
and not hearing the Church, is excluded from the Communion of the Saints, for
the cure of his Spirit, and the preservation of the Church.

I Believe, That as the world had a beginning, so it shall have an end: At what
time, both those that are Dead, and Alive, shall be gathered together before
the Lord Jesus Christ to Judgment, at the sound of the last Trumpet; where
every one shall receive a full Reward of their works: The Sheep being set at
his right hand, are acquitted of sin, and received into glory; but the Goats at
his left hand, are Sentenced irrevocably to suffer Everlasting Torments, with
the Devil and his Angels, in the Lake of Unquenchable Fire and Brimstone.

FINIS.

