The NOTES of the TRUE CHURCH With the Application of them to the Church of
England, And the great Sin of Separation from Her.

Delivered in A SERMON PREACHED AT Trinity Church in New York, Before the
Administration of the holy Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

The 7th of November, 1703.

By George Keith, M. A.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford at the Sign of the Bible in New York,
1704.

AN EPISTLE To all Unprejudiced Readers in these American Parts.
Friendly Readers;
THe two following Sermons preached by me lately at New York, some of the
Hearers of them, of good Note in the Church, having desired me to publish them
for a further Service, I did willingly agree thereunto, and do now publish them
with some enlargements on several heads, as is common in such cases, the usual
time for Sermons not being sufficient to contain the whole matter of them.

My intent and end both in the Preaching them, and now in my publishing them,
being to confirm such who might be thereby profited in the way of the Church of
England, with respect to her Doctrine, Worship, Church Government, Discipline,
and the Administration of the holy Sacraments of Baptism and the Lords Supper,
and the way and manner as they are administered in the said Church; and
especially to establish such of my former Friends (in these American parts) who
are lately come over to the Church, and to lend a helping hand to any others of
them, or any other Dissenters who are well affected to the Church of England,
to bring them to join in full Communion with her, and to vindicate the same in
all these respects abovementioned, from the false and injurious Aspertions
cast upon her by ignorant and prejudiced Dissenters of diverse sorts, and more
especially those called Quakers, and their Teachers, who abound in these
American parts, and who most insolently, in their Assemblies, traduce and
calumniate, villifie and reproach the manner of Worship and Sacraments, as well
as that of Doctrine, in the said Church, with notorious Lies and Falsehoods that
the Quaker Teachers, (in their Preachings throughout these American parts)
belch out against her, and especially in their Meetings on Long Island, as one
of them has lately done, to the truth of which, some who heard him have given
Evidence before two Justices of the Peace. But his practice in this is not
singular; for it is their common way (for want of better matter and argument)
thus to belie and villifie, reproach and calumniate the Church about the Manner
of her Administration of the holy Sacraments, and particularly the Baptism of
Infants, and the use of Godfathers and Godmothers, whom the Church requires
to promise in the Childrens Name, what they ought to perform when they come to
Age, which those false Teachers say (according to the Doctrine of the Church of
England) they do not believe they can perform. Thus not only belying the
Doctrine and Practice of the Church, but putting a false signification on the
words Godfathers and Godmothers, and then charging it to be the sense of the
Church, as if the words Godfathers and Godmothers were understood by the
Church to signify that God needed Godfathers and Godmothers, or that those
Persons were Fathers and Mothers of God, as I have heard some of them Ridicule
those words, thus, What? has God a Father or a Mother, that they call them
Godfathers and Godmothers? As if the Etymology of Godfather were God's
Father, and of God-mother were God's Mother, which is as ridiculous Ignorance
and Nonsense in that ignorant Crew of Quaker-Teachers, as it is a gross and
impudent Lie, wherewith they belie the sense of the Church, as touching the
signification of those two words (and as if the God of the Church of England
was a strange God, (and not the true God) that needed Godfather and Godmother)
The true sense of them, according to the Church, being no other but this, that
they are in vice or place of Fathers and Mothers, to the Children that are to
be baptized, to promise for them to God, what they are bound to peform when
they come to Age, and to be jointly concerned with their natural Parents, to
take care of the Childrens Christian Education, until they be at Age to
undertake for themselves; the warrantableness of which Practice I have
sufficiently proved by Scripture-Argument in my second Sermon, that hereafter
follows. And it is also a most abominable Lie that the said Preacher on
Long Island did utter, in the Quakers Meeting there, against the Church and her
Ministers, That they made Christians for a Groat, by sprinkling a little Water
in their faces; and then cries out, An easy way of making Christians for a
Groat! as if Baptism in the Church of England was bought and sold for Money,
either for little or much, and as if nothing were done in the Administration of
Baptism, but the Ministers sprinkling a little Water on the faces of those they
Baptize, and as if that alone did make them Christians; all which are notorious
Falsehoods and Calumnies. And the like Abuse he is guilty of, when he charge
the use of the Sign of the Cross, after Baptism, to be a piece of Popery; for
it was used in the Church several hundred of years before ever Popery was in
the World. Every thing is not Popery that the Papists hold, otherwise we should
throw away Faith in Jesus Christ, as he dyed on the Cross for our sins, and
rose again and is gone into Heaven, which they profess to hold, though the
Quakers have thrown it away, and in that respect are worse than Papists, for
they set up the Light within to be sufficient to Salvation, without any thing
else, which is a plain excluding the Man Christ without us, from having any
share or necessary concern in our Salvation; as also they deny his real
Existence without us in Heaven, in our Nature, or that he has the same Body
for substance in Heaven, that was crucified on the Cross. And how much like the
Quakers are to the Papists, in many of their erroneous Principles, as namely,
their pretenses to Infallibility and Justification by the Merit of inherent
Righteousness, with diverse others, has been so fully demonstrated by others,
and me, elsewhere, that I need not say any more of it here. Nothing can be
said to be Popery but what is held by Papists, that is forbidden by Gods Word,
and is repugnant thereunto, either directly or consequentially, but so is not
the Sign of the Cross used after Baptism; it is neither commanded in Gods Word
nor forbidden, as neither are diverse other things used generally by
Protestants, and even by Dissenters and Quakers also; but it being a very
ancient Rite in the Church of Christ, and the use of it being judged expedient,
and for Edification, by the Church, what she enjoins, (which is not repugnant
to Gods Word) her Members ought to obey, in that or in other things, according
to the warrant of Gods holy Word, Heb. 13.17.

Surely whatever favor is shown, or whatever Indulgence or Toleration the
Quakers lay claim to, by the Act of Toleration, or by any other Law or Right
whatsoever, they can never, I think, have the Forehead of Brass to plead
Liberty of Conscience thus notoriously to lie, not only against many worthy
Persons, but against the whole Church of England, and the Queens Majesty her
Self, and the generality of the Nobility and Gentry of England, who had their
Baptism in the way of the Church of England, and at their Baptism had
Godfathers ann Godmothers; for by the like Plea they might plead as much for
Liberty of Conscience to Steal, Rob on the Highway, commit Murder and Adultry:
But as the Quaker-Teachers deserve just Censure and Punishment for these
abominable Lies and Calumnies against the Church of England and all her
Ministers, so I hope God will put it into the hearts of such Christian
Governors and Magistrates, in these Countries where the Quakers have their
Meetings, to suffer no such things to be said in them; and if the Quakers will
countenance and allow such Proceedings of their Teachers, that they be duly
censured, and that they be Required, according to Law, to qualify both their
Meetings and Teachers, according to the express Terms of the Act of Toleration,
otherwise they are Unlawful, and more like Conventicles and a Vicious and
Licentious Rout, than a Meeting of Religious Persons.

The Notes of the true Church, Delivered in A SERMON Preached at Trinity-Church
in New York, the 7th of November, 1703.
Acts 2.41, 42. Then they that gladly received his Word were Baptized, and the
same Day there were added unto them about Three Thousand Souls; and they
continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, and in breaking
of Bread, and in Prayers.


WE have in the words of the Text a most perfect Draught and Description of the
Church of Christ, under the New Testament, having all the true Notes and Marks
of the true Church, as it began to be set up by Christ himself, the great
Founder of it, through the powerful and effectual Ministry of his holy Apostles
and Ministers, as distinguished from the Jewish Church, set up under the
Mosaical Dispensation, and freed from the multitude of Ceremonial Observances,
to which the Jewish Church was bound, yet agreeing with the same in substance,
both in Faith and Morals, and in many things also both in manner of Worship and
Discipline.

As likewise, we have in the first Verse of the Text, an account of the great
Success and good Effect and Fruit that St. Peter's Preaching had upon those who
heard him, being his first Sermon after the Miraculous effusion of the holy
Ghost, that about three Thousand Souls were converted, and added unto the
Church, who having gladly received the Word, were straight way Baptized, by
which great Conversion of so many Souls through St. Peter's Ministry, we have a
solemn Instance of the begun Accomplishment of our Saviors Promise to him,
Follow me, and I will make thee a Fisher of Men.

This most perfect Draught of the Church of Christ, which was the first
Christian and Apostolical Church, and which ought to be the Pattern, according
to which the Church in all succeeding Ages ought to be conformable (excepting
what was extraordinary and temporary, or for some time, as the miraculous Gifts
of the holy Spirit, and the Community of Goods in the first Church set up at
Jerusalem, (being only for the present necessity and exigency) is set forth to
us in the Text, in these five Particulars following.

I. They (to wit, the three Thousand who heard St. Peter preach to them*) that
gladly received his Word, were Baptized.

II. They steadfastly continued in the Apostles Doctrine, as well in that of all
the Apostles, as of St. Peter.

III. They continued in Fellowship both with the Apostles and with one another,
without Schism or Separation, being knit together by one Spirit, and serving
God with one Heart and one Way, according to Gods Promise that so it should be,
Jer. 32.39.

IV. They continued in breaking of Bread, i. e. in the constant and frequent
Use of the Lords Supper, as it is generally understood by Expositors on the
Text.

V. They continued together in Prayers, with one Mind and with one Mouth
glorifying God, as St. Paul exhorted the believing Romans, Romans 15.6.

Thus, in short, we have a full Draught and Description of the most ancient and
primitive Church under the New Testament, which had the Word of God purely
preached, and which was received by Faith and Love in the Hearers; in the Faith
and Profession of which they steadfastly continued. And also, we have in the
Text, the two holy Sacraments, the one of Baptism, the other of the Lords
Supper, but we find no more here, or elsewhere in the New Testament, as either
seven (as the Papists hold) or any other but those two; and, lastly (which are
as necessary as the other) Fellowship and Prayers together, jointly and with
one accord.

All which are so necessary to a true Church of Christ, that whatever Society,
(though they call themselves a Church) wants any of the above named, can scarcely
be called a Church, or if wanting, (though in some small part or parts,) of any
of them, must needs be in so far lame and imperfect; and by how much any
Society is nearest to the primitive Pattern, in the abovenamed particulars,
she is the more perfect, and if she come up in full to them all, she is
completely such

I shall not need here to show, how deficient the Church of Rome, (as it now
is, and has long been) is in all these particulars, which has not only added
many Innovasions in Doctrine, repugnant to Apostolical Doctrine, but has
detracted, as well as added, and grossly corrupted her self in all the
abovenamed particulars.

Nor shall I make it any part of my present Work, to show the great
Disconformity and Dissimilitude of other Pretenders (who are not in Communion
with the Church) to be nearest to the primitive Pattern, which yet can very
easily be done.

But, as briefly as I may, I will show the great Conformity that the Church to
which we belong, i. e. The Church of England, as by Law established, has to
the primitive Pattern here delivered in the Text, in the abovenamed
particulars. As,

I. In her steadfast continuance in the Apostles Doctrine, ever since the
Reformation from Popery, her Faith is the same, (without any Addition or
Innovation) both with the Church in the Days of the Apostles, and with the
Church as it has been in Succession from the days of the Apostles, during the
purest Ages of the Church, for several hundreds of years, summarily contained
in the Apostles Creed, which if not composed by the Apostles themselves, yet is
exactly conform to the Faith delivered by them, in the Books of the New
Testament, whereof the Nicine and Athanasian Creeds are only further
Explanations, without the addition of any new Article. Also the Doctrine of
Repentance and Remission of sin, and free Justification by the alone Merits of
Christ, apprehended and applied by a true and lively Faith, that is operative
and productive of good Works, is sincerely taught and steadfastly believed and
professed by all her true Members and Children.

II. She does also well and truly believe and profess the absolute Necessity of
the Grace of God, and of the gracious inward Aids and Assistances,
Inspirations, Illuminations and Operations of the holy Spirit, to all our
Services and Performances in the Worship of God, by Prayer and Thanksgiving, to
render them acceptable to God, and profitable to our Salvation, and to all our
Thoughts, Words and Works of that tendency, and to the begetting and increasing
in us a true and lively Faith, Hope, Love, Repentance, Fear, Humility, and all
other Christian moral Virtues, which she does acknowledge to be the Fruits of
the holy Spirit, wrought and nourished by the same in us, in our due use of the
means of Grace, as particularly mentioned in the Text, such as the Preaching
and Hearing Gods holy Word, both by reading and preaching it, and the holy
Sacraments of Baptism and the Supper, and public (as well as private) Prayers,
and Fellowship with one accord, in the due use of all and every one of the said
Means.

III. She holds Fellowship and Communion with all the Orthodox and Protestant
Churches abroad, though differing from her in some particulars that are not
Fundamental, nor of that sort as give just occasion of Separation, and owneth
them to be parts of the Catholic Church, whereof she owneth her self to be
also a part.

IV. In all our Services toward God, she holds, That both Ministers and People
ought continually to pray to God and depend and wait upon him for the constant
renewed gracious Aids and Assistances of Gods holy Spirit, given, and daily to
be given in and through Jesus Christ, the Head of his Church (who is the Head
thereof in respect of all divine gracious Influence, as both God and Man, yet
one Lord Jesus Christ, as well as in respect of Government of the same) to
enable* and strengthen us in every Performance: and that how well so ever, and
by whatever assistance of Gods Grace and Spirit we are enabled to perform our
respective Duties and Services to God, we are still to beg Gods gracious
Acceptance of them, through our alone Mediator and Advocate Jesus Christ,
together with the confession and asking the forgiveness of our sins, and doing
all that we do to the glory of God, in the Name of Jesus Christ.

V. She does also steadfastly continue in the Apostles Doctrine, in relation to
the Government of the Church, acknowledging our Lord Jesus Christ to be the
only Head of the Catholic and Universal Church, and owning a Distinction of
Pastors and Officers under him, such as the holy Apostles in their writings of
the New Testament, have delivered to us, and has been continued in the Church
in the succeeding Ages, as of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, with their
distinct Offices and Ministrations. The which distinction of Officers, both
superior and inferior, are as necessary for the good government of the Church,
as the distinction of superior and inferior civil Officers is necessary in the
civil State, or of Military Officers in an Army, for the good government of
both, and to both which the Church is compared in Scripture. The Church is a
Kingdom, whose King is our blessed Savior; and shall he have none in his
Kingdom to rule and govern under him, of subordinate Rulers, superior and
inferior (whereas the Jewish Church under the Old Testament had a distinction
of a three fold sort of Officers, by Gods appointment, to which the distinction
of the three sorts of Officers in the Christian Church does answer, as in all
other things (excepting the Ceremonial part of the Types and Figures, and other
judicial Laws, peculiar to the Jewish Nation) the Christian Church did exactly
agree to the Jewish. The Church is also compared to an Army, and an Army must
needs have superior and inferior Officers, for the good government thereof.

VI. And in her public Prayers, she agrees, as with the faithful in the
ancient Jewish Church, (who did all worship God in Spirit and in Truth, (as all
true Christians do) yet did also worship him in set and appointed Forms, where
both Ministers and People prayed vocally together, and praised God with joint
Voices, as well as joint Hearts) so with the Christian Church in the days of
the Apostles, where the People joined in vocal Prayer, with joint Voice as well
as joint Hearts, in prayer to God, as is evident from Acts 4.24. which was the
ancient way of public Prayer in the Jewish Church, as well as of Praising God
with the words of the Psalms of David and of Asaph, 2 Chronicles. 29.28, 29, 30.
many of which were Prayers as well as Praises; and for which compare the
following Texts of Scripture, 1 Chronicles. 16.34, 35, 36. 2 Chronicles. 7.3. Psalm.
107.1. Psalm. 118.1. Psalm. 136. and throughout Ier. 31.7. Ier. 33.11. Joel 2.17.
All which show that there were set Forms of Worship taken out of the Book of
the Psalms, that both the Ministers and the People used in their Devotion; and
though but the first Verse of some of the Psalms is mentioned in 2 Chronicles. 7. and
Chron. 16.34. and Ier. 11. yet it is not to be thought that they used that
Verse only, but rather that they used the entire Psalms, which had that
beginning, as well as many others, and at times all of them, as they had
occasion, as the Church of England uses them all Monthly, in her public
Devotions; and that the People in the Jewish Church both read in the Law, and
confessed their sins vocally, as well as the Ministers, is evident from Nehem.
9. and Isa. 29.^3. and this continued all along to be a Practice in the Jewish
Church, even in our Savior's time, Mat. 15.8. Mark 7.6. in which places their
praying vocally is not reproved for the matter of it, but for their
hypocritical manner of performing it. Also, a set form of blessing the People
was given and enjoined by God to the Priests; and Moses himself used a Form of
Prayer at the removing and resting of the Ark, Numb. 6* 23, 24, 25, 26. and
Numb. 10.35, 36. And surely Moses and the holy Ancients had the Spirit of
Prayer, as well or more than any can now pretend to* And at the offering up of
their first Fruits and Tithe, at the end of every third year, the People were
enjoined Forms of Prayer, by God himself ( Deuteronomy. 26.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc.)
that the most spiritual among them were to use, at the time appointed. Also,
our blessed Savior taught his Disciples a Form of Prayer, which he commanded
them to say, when they prayed, the Matter of which is so excellent and
comprehensive, that it suits with Christians of the highest, as well as the
lowest state, for Devotion: And that the Church uses it in all her Offices of
public Prayer, once, and once after the General Confession, is from Christ's
own Command, When ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. for as in all variety of
Dishes of Meat, Bread and Salt is used to every Dish, to make it the more
healthful, so the Church of God in all Ages, together with her other Prayers,
has used this Prayer, taught us by our Savior, as being the most perfect and
comprehensive, in few words. It is granted, that beside the ordinary Forms of
Prayer used in the Church, in the Apostles days, and for some time after, some
in the Church had an extraordinary Gift of Prayer, by the Spirit immediately
dictating to them the words and matter thereof, which we know none can justly
now pretend unto; and who did at first pretend to it, were Popish Emisaries,
under the disguise of Puritans and Reformers, as is upon sufficient Record in
English History. But let none mistake, as if our Church did not own the Aids of
the holy Spirit in composing good Prayers, in suitable words, as well as in
exciting spiritual and heavenly Affections, but this is not after that
extraordinary way that those Impostors did pretend to, and to which many, as
yet still pretend, but by the holy Spirits ordinary assistance, enabling them,
by deliberate Premeditation and deliberate Consideration, to collect and gather
out of the rich Treasure of the holy Scriptures, what is most suitable to them.
And as private Persons are thus helped, at times, in private to conceive and
compose Prayers for their private use and their Families, so the public
Prayers that are used in the Church, were composed by Persons of greater
spiritual Seize and Abilities in the Church, than are common to private
Persons, such as of those ancient and godly Bishops and Pastors in former Ages,
some of whose Compositions are used in the Church Liturgy at this day, but are
not borrowed from the Papists nor the Mass Book, though some of them are there,
as well as the Lords Prayer and the Ten Commands, which are not therefore to be
rejected; for they were extant and used in the Church long before Popery or the
Popish Mass Book was; and their Spiritual Savor as well as excellent Matter be
speak them to all spiritually minded, to have been made by the help of the holy
Spirit, as well as other parts of the Church Liturgy of later date, by Persons
of latter times. And on every new emergent occasion, spiritual Gifts are not
wanting in the Fathers and Bishops of the Church (praised be God) to frame and
compose suitable Prayers for the present case and opportunity, by the help of
Gods holy Word contained in the holy Scriptures, which teaches us as well what
to Pray, according to the Will of God, as what to Believe and Practice; for the
gift of Faith and all holy Obedience is the fruit of the Spirit as well as the
gift of Prayer; and therefore why should Prayer be thought to be more
immediately given us by the Spirit, than either Faith or Obedience? And seeing
God speaks to us by his holy Spirit in forms of words, containing Commands,
Promises, Threatenings and Doctrines of Faith delivered us in Scriptures, why
may we not speak to him in Forms of Prayer, such as are given us in his holy
Word for our Instruction and Direction, as well what to pray as what to believe
and practice? And why it should be thought more inconsistent with the Spirit to
pray in set Forms, than to sing together in set Forms of Psalms of David, (as
most Dissenters do, who cry out against Forms of Prayer, and yet use Forms in
singing) no impartial man can think, and why they may not pray as well as sing
with the Book.

And whereas some object, That though Forms of divine composure may be used,
such as that of the Lords Prayer (which yet I have known some affirm to be
unlawful) That Forms of men's composing by Study and previous Meditation, are
not to be used, as having too much of humane mixture.

I Answer; Why their extempore Prayers should be wholly divine, and have less
of Man in them, than well premeditated Prayers, is very improbable: But it is
most probable, for the most part, they have much more of Man, and of man's
corrupt Nature, wherein they too often vent and give scope to their sinful
Passions, and Uncharitableness, Pride and vain Glory, which the use of
appointed Forms does limit and restrain, without limiting the true Spirit of
Prayer; and beside, the Prayer that is extempore to the Speaker, is as much a
Form to the Hearers, as any other, and less edifying, because as soon forgot as
heard, for most part.

Sure therefore the Church of England, to which we belong, is so conform to
this primitive Pattern described in the Text, as is above showed, it concerns
weightily two sorts of Persons well and duly to consider how they stand
affected toward her.

First, That it concerns all them who are not in any professed Communion with
her, and yet want not good opportunity so to be, well to consider and examine,
whether they be not exceeding guilty of that heinous sin of Schism, by
withdrawing from a Church that has all the Notes and Marks of a true Church of
Christ, that the first Primitive and Apostolical Church had, founded by our
Lord and his holy Apostles; and which requires nothing of them, in order to
join in Communion with her, that is sinful, or any wise contrary to the Word of
God. Do they continue in fellowship with the Church of Christ, which is one of
the great things mentioned in the Text, who withdraw from her Communion both
in Sacraments and Prayer, as well as hearing the Word? As Fellowship with the
Church is mentioned in the Text, so is it often and very pressingly enjoined in
many other Texts of holy Scripture of the New Testament, as Ephesians. 4.3. Romans
15.5, 6. Romans 16.17. Heb. 10.25. and whatever higher Degrees of Spirituality,
and of having greater Measures of the Spirit, they pretend to, who separate
from the Church, it may be justly suspected that too many of them are but like
them, Jude 19. These be they who separate themselves, sensual (or annimal) not
having the Spirit. So it was in the days of the Apostles, that some on higher
pretenses to Spirituality did separate from the Christian Assemblies gathered
by the Ministry of the holy Apostles, and so did the Donatists of old. So far
as any separate from the Church of Christ, which is his Body, in so far they
separate from Christ, who is the Head of the Body, and from Fellowship with and
in the Spirit of Christ; for the Fellowship of the Members of the Church stands
not only in the outward means of Grace, such as the Word, Prayer and
Sacraments* but by and through them, as Pipes and Conduits, their fellowship is
in the Spirit, and of the Spirit, according to Phil. 2.1, 2. whereby they are
knit together, and are of one heart, and of one Soul, and Mind, and mutually
partake of one another Sufferings and Comforts; and where Brethren dwell
together in Unity, it is like the precious Ointment upon the Head, that ran
down upon the Beard, even Aarons Beard, that went down to the Skirts of his
Garments, as the Dew of Hermon, and as the Dew that descended upon the
Mountains of Sion, for there the Lord commanded the Blessing, even Life forever
more, Psalm. 133. and who are gathered together in his Name, have the Promise of
Christ to be present in the midst of them; and what they agree to ask in his
Name, according to his Will, he has promised that it shall be done for them,
of his Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 18.19, 20. But this gives no
encouragement to such as meet together in separated Societies, not only by
forsaking the public Assemblies of the Church, but by an uncharitable
Alienation of their Minds and Affections from them, upon a pretense that they
find not that inward Comfort and sense of Christ's spiritual Presence in those
Assemblies, not considering that the Cause of this is in themselves, through
some ignorant Prejudice or distate, begot in them by wrong Education or the
deceitful insinuation of false Teachers, which greatly abound; for, God be
praised, such who have no such prejudice against the Church, but are joined
with her in hearty Affection, do find true inward Comfort, and have that true
inward sense of Christ's spiritual Presence, that their Souls desire, which many
that boast so much of their spiritual Seize above others, have not in
reality, but in strong Fancy and Imagination, and in counterfeit Likenesses and
Resemblances, and which are frequently Impostures and Delusions of Satan, but
no true divine Enjoyments, while neither the Faith nor Practice of such high
and proud Boasters are agreeable to the Rule of Gods holy Word delivered to us
in the holy Scriptures, but contrary thereunto; and that of many such high
Pretenders, in the great Fundamentals of the Gospel, their contrariety is
evident both from their Words and Writings. Nevertheless, it is owned, that it
pleases God, at times, to visit such erring Souls with gracious inward
Visitations of his Love, by his good Spirit, that have a sensible comfort and
sweetness in them, which those erring Souls so far mis-apply and mis-construe,
as to take them for Seals of the holy Spirit, given to confirm them in their
way, whereas to the plain contrary it is to reclaim and recover them from their
Error. For whatever Comforts or Enjoyments erroneous Persons pretend to,
whether real or imaginary and delusory, they can be no Seals to confirm or
assure them that they are in the right, suppose they had something of reality
in them, because Thousands of contrary Persuasions, who are extreme hot one
against another, have laid claim to them, and made them Seals to confirm them,
as if their way was the very way of Truth; yea, obstinate Jews and Mahumetans
have laid claim to great divine enjoyments, and applied them as Seals to
confirm them in their Way, and so have some bloody Ravillac's, professing
themselves to be Christians; which ought to be a warning to all, who pretend to
divine Comforts and Enjoyments, well and duly to try and examine whether their
Faith and Practice be according to the sure Rule of Gods holy Word, delivered
by his holy Prophets and Apostles, in the holy Scriptures. He that knows God
hears us, he that is not of God, hears not us, [i. e. hears not our
Doctrine, so as to believe and obey it] hereby know we the Spirit of Truth, and
the Spirit of Error, said the Apostle St. John, chap. 1.4, 6.

As the Church of England has the Preference above all that dissent from her
[so as to withdraw from her Communion] in the several Contents of the Text, so
praised be God, in the Number of hearty and sincere Professors of Christian
Religion, sealed by Holiness and Righteousness of Life, in all godly
Conversation, and in eminency of divine Gifts of Knowledge, both in Teachers
and others, as the many excellent Books of Divinity, published by them, do
prove, which many Dissenters use, and profess to reap benefit by them; also,
she excells them in that most excellent virtue of Charity and charitable Temper
and Judgment toward all other parts of the Catholic Church, whereof she
esteems her self but a part.

It is no ground of Separation from the Church of England, that too many who
profess to be of her Communion, do not walk answerable to that holy Profession;
for what Society or Body of People is there upon Earth, or ever was for any
considerable time, but had too many whose walk and conversation did not agree
to the holy Profession of Christianity: It was so in the very days of the
Apostles, as is evident in many places of the New Testament, and particularly
in the Churches of Corinth, Galatia and Thessalonia, and most of the seven
Churches that St. John writ his seven Epistles unto; and to prevent the scandal
of such, our Savior himself gave warning, That in the visible Church, which he
calls the Kingdom of Heaven, there will be foolish Virgins and wise, Tares and
good Seed until the Harvest, which is the end of the World; and yet neither
Christ nor his Apostles bid them separate from the Church Assemblies, nor gave
them any such Example, but the contrary. Nor did the Prophets separate from the
Jewish Worship, when the matter of their Worship was sound, though the lives of
many that came to worship, were vicious, both of Priests and People.

Besides, many that come frequently to Sermons and to the public Prayers of
the Church* [tho' baptized Persons] are not properly Members of the Church.
Indeed, none can be justly so esteemed but such as are free from all habitual
and scandalous sins, and in full Communion with the Church, and join in
frequent Communion with her, in the participation of the holy Sacrament of the
Lords Supper. One great end and use thereof being to signify their abiding in
the Communion of the Church, who receive it, as also nourish and increase, in
those who duly receive it, all Christian Graces and Virtues, and that in a
special manner and degree; for though Baptism does initiate such as are
baptized into the Church, yet if these baptized Persons, after Baptism,
withdraw from the Communion, their Baptism is no proof that they are still in
the Church, after their withdrawing from her; and though upon their return to
the Church they need not a new Baptism, yet they need a new Repentance, for
their sinful and unwarrantable Separation; and the same is to be said of them
whose Lives are scandalous, though they have been baptized in the Church.

Secondly, The abovementioned Contents in the Text do concern another sort of
men, who profess to be in Communion with the Church, That they well and duly
try and examine themselves, both as to their outward Conversation in the sight
of men, and their inward Conversation in the sight of God, so as to have ( Acts
24.16.) a Conscience void of Offense both toward God and Men; for as the
Psalmist says, If I regard Iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me,
Psalm. 66.18. It is the heart which God chiefly requires and regards in all our
Approaches to him and Performances, whether at the holy Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, or at any other Times.

Our blessed Savior has taught us* in the Parable of the Ten Virgins, that we
must not only have the Lamp of an outward Profession, but we must also have the
inward Oil of Grace in our Lamps and Vessels [ i. e. the divine Vnction] that
our Lamps may burn and shine with light of good Works.

God Almighty complained by his holy Prophet Jeremiah, of Old, against the
People of Israel, whom yet he called his People, being so by Profession, and by
many peculiar Bonds and Ties of his Favor, That they had committed two great
Evils, Ier. 2.13. They have forsaken me the fountain of living Waters, That Is
the first; and the next was, That they had hewed them out Cisterns, broken
Cisterns that can hold no Water. But how does this appear to be two Evils? I
Answer thus; Whoever worship God in any external Forms and ways contrary to his
Revealed Will in holy Scripture, they commit this second great evil, as well as
the first; for all Forms and Ways of Worship, contrary to the revealed Will of
God in holy Scripture, are but broken Cisterns of men's hewing out and framing,
according to their earthly Wisdom, that will hold no Water; and of this the
People of Israel were greatly guilty very often, as well as many are at this
day under a Christian Profession. But with this the Church of England is not
chargeable, however some in their ignorance and prejudice so charge her. Some
few Circumstances and Rites (neither commanded nor forbidden by God Almighty in
Scripture) enjoined by Superiors both in Church and State, (for Order and
Decency, and for Edification) are not broken Cisterns; for such were used both
by the Jewish Church and the Christian, without any Offense to God Almighty;
and the Dissenters from the Church use diverse, that they think useful, though not
commanded; but the changing the Worship of God in any substantial part of it,
or any wise contrary to Gods revealed Will in holy Scripture, is certainly to
make broken Cisterns that will hold no Water. But there are too many under the
Christian Profession, in all Societies of Professors of Christianity, who
though they be not guilty of the second evil, viz. of hewing out or using
broken Cisterns, i. e. false ways and forms of Worship, but hold to the true
Form, yet inwardly and secretly, in heart, depart from God the Fountain of
living Waters, and do not cleave to him with their hearts by a lively faith and
cordial love and affection to him, and to his holy ways; but though they be
free of outward Idolatry, set up secret Idols in their hearts, loving Pleasures
more than God, adoring the Worlds Trinity, The Lust of the Eye, The Lust of the
Flesh, and The Pride of Life; And though such partake of the outward Elements of
the Lords Supper, yet they neither do nor can, while such, partake of the
inward and invisible Graces, which all sincere Christians do partake of, to
whom the Bread that is broken, is the Communion of the Body of Christ, and the
Cup that is drunk, is the Communion of his Blood, with all the spiritual
Blessings thereof; so that as they drink into one outward Cup, they also drink
into one Spirit, according to 1 Cor. 12.13. for as the Idolatrous Heathens, who
sacrificed to Devils, and did eat of the Meat Offerings, and drink of the Drink
Offerings, that they offered to them, had fellowship with Devils, or (according
to the Greek) were Partakers of Devils, i. e. were inspired and influenced by
them, by means of what they did eat and drink of those Sacrifices, as appears
from 1 Cor. 10.20. The things which the Gentiles sacrifice, they sacrifice to
Devils, and not to God; and I would not that ye should have fellowship with
Devils, that is, be inspired and influenced by them, as the Heathens were at
their Idolatrous Feasts. So, (as St. Paul shows) the faithful, who did eat of
the Bread, and drink of the Wine, in the Lords Supper, were partakers, not only
of Christ's Body and Blood, by faith, but were partakers of his Spirit thereby,
more abundantly, as the Jews under the Old Testament, which did eat of the
Sacrifices, were partakers of the Altar, 1 Cor. 10.18. Behold (said St. Paul)
Israel after the Flesh, are not they which eat of the Sacrifices, partakers of
the Altar? And how were they partakers of the Altar, but by receiving the
spiritual Blessings promised of God, conveyed by means of those Sacrifices,
which were offered by a lively faith in him that was signified by those
Sacrifices; and their eating of those Sacrifices being a means of conveying
those spiritual Blessings unto them, which were not only Remission of Sin by
the Body and Blood of Christ (whereof those Sacrifices were the Types) but also
divine inward Communications of the Spirit of Christ, divine Inspirations and
Influences of the same, conveyed by means of what they did eat of those
Sacrifices, as St. Paul does plainly hold forth the parrallel betwixt the Jews
partaking of their Altar under the Old Testament, and the Christians partaking
of a more excellent Altar under the New Testament, in the participation of the
Lords Supper, as is also further illustrated, Heb. 13.10. We (i. e. we
Christians) have an Altar, whereof they have no right to eat, which serve the
Tabernacle. And who were these which had no right to eat, who serve the
Tabernacle, but the unbelieving Jews and Priests, who did keep up the Service
of the Tabernacle, after Christ (the great and only Propitiatory Sacrifice) was
come and offered up, who did put an end to those Typical Sacrifices, which had
their service in their Day and Time.

Thus we plainly see from St. Paul's Doctrine, that as the Heathens Sacrifices
did defile them who did eat of them, and the Jews Sacrifices were a means to
sanctify them, who did eat thereof, and had a lively Faith in Christ Jesus,
whom they did represent in Types and Figures; So the the Bread and Wine in the
Lords Supper, that the faithful eat and drink of* are a means of their
Sanctification, whereby they drink into one Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13. And therefore
the gloss of such who bring an argument against the Spiritual Benefit and
Profitableness of the Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, from our Savior's
words concerning common Meats, That what enters in at the Mouth defiles not
the Man, As the Quaker- Teachers commonly argue both in their Books and
Preachings.
and consequently nothing that enters in at the Mouth does or can be a means
to sanctify him* no, not the Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper, Is a most
perverse wresting of our Saviors words, and a most illogical Consequence to
argue from common Bread and Wine, to the Sacramental, and is evidently
contradictory to St. Paul's discourse in the places abovementioned, 1 Cor.
10.18, 20. and Heb. 13.10. also to 1 Cor. 10.16, 21. and also to our blessed
Savior's words, Luke 22.19, 20. And if nothing that enters in at the Mouth
defiles the Man, in any case, then St. Paul's Assertions were false, That the
Idolatrous Heathens by eating of their idolatrous Sacrifices, had fellowship
with Devils, and were defiled by that eating. Also, when St. Paul said, That
whosoever eats this Bread (viz. in the holy Sacrament) and drinks this Cup
of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord; for
he that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks Damnation [or
Judgment, Gr.] to himself, 1 Cor. 11 27, 29. and to be sure that greatly
hurts him that so does. And here let it be noted, That St. Paul calls it the
Table of the Lord, and The Cup of the Lord, even when Unworthy Persons eat of
that Bread and drink of that Cup unworthily. And it is altogether false, and a
wicked Assertion of those false Teachers, who affirm, That when some vicious
Persons do, at times, presume to come to the Table in the Sacrament (where the
good Discipline according to the Canons of the Church, is not so duly practiced
(and who by the said Discipline ought not to be suffered to come) that
therefore the Table is the Table of Devils, and the Cup is the Cup of Devils;
for though such want of Discipline was in the Church of Corinth, that unworthy
Persons did partake of the Elements as the worthy did, yet St. Paul for all
that calls it The Table of the Lord and The Cup of the Lord. Of which, that we
may all Worthily partake, God Almighty grant for the Merits of Jesus Christ, To
whom, etc.

FINIS.

