The Song of Solomon, chap. 2. v. 10, etc. My Beloved spoke, and said unto me,
Arise up my Love, my fair One, and come away, for lo, the Winter is past, the
Rain is over and gone, the Flowers appear on the Earth, the Time of the Singing
of Birds is come, and the Voice of the Turtle is heard in our Land; The
Fig Tree puts forth her green Figgs, and the Vines with the tender Grapes
give a good smell: Arise my Love, my fair One, and come away.

Matthew. 11. 28. Come unto Me, all ye that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will give you Rest.

A Little OLIVE LEAF Put in the Mouth of that (So Called) Noah's Dove, And sent
Home again to let her Master know That the Waters are abated from off the face
of the Ground, And that for the Sake of JESUS CHRIST, Whose Servant to the End
of my Life I shall Endeavor To Be.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford at the Sign of the Bible in New York,
1704.

Christian Reader;
IN the beginning of this year there came a Dove flying about, made in the form
of an Almanac, and sent (under pretense) from Noah, to see if the waters were
abated from off the face of the ground; which taking in my hand and searching
her body, I found her to be rather a Raven than a Dove, because she had under
the Dove-feathers a very black skin; whereupon the old News was written, sent
forth to bring Christian-people from their freedom in Christ back again under
Bondage of the terrible Law. He the work man of this Dove I. A. S. has taken,
it seems, his advantage and opportunity of the Circumstances and Conditions of
this Country, wherein, as in a Wilderness, most part of the Inhabitants being
simple and ignorant, are soon persuaded this way or that, for want of true and
faithful Guiders and Teachers, as well as necessary Books, especially in this
his business.

His excuse, p. 2. That he under takes not to be positive in any thing, will
not clear him; for is he not positive? how then comes it, that he himself not
only does keep the Jewish Sabbath, but by Discourses, and countenancing that
party, yea, public Writings troubles, as much as in him is, others with the
same? Had he such a tender Conscience, (and since he came into this Country now
suddenly is troubled with Jud^izing thoughts) he should take another Method
for the satisfaction of himself, and all those of the same Notion, to wit, go
first to the old Countries and Universities, where a complete Accademy, (I
mean, Library) and learned men in the old Histories are to be found and
discoursed with, I dare confidently say, if he had done so, or would do so
still, and not here presume upon his own judgment, too much above that which
is meet, in Charity, I am sure, it would produce the same effects in him as
happily it did in T^eophilus Brabourne, one of the strongest Sa^batharians, but
afterward convicted by sounder Doctrine, a constant Churchman, as you will
see in his ^etractation annexed at the end of this my discourse. He (I. A. S.)
obeying St. Hie^ons golden Rule to such purpose, saying; It is a good thing,
and very sa^c (for themselves and others) (...) men of inferior Quality be
guided and instructed by those, wh^ in judgment and Wisdom go before them, and
not to make presumption (which is a perverse guide) their counselor. But if
such a journey seems too tedious, he should in the mean time according to his
word, To have no delight in strife, be quiet and not offend God, distrub his
Church, and disquiet men's Consciences, remembering what St. Paul says, Gal.
5.10. That whosoever he be that troubles Gods Church shall bear his Judgment.

Considering these things, and the ill consequence that would follow, I could
not in Conscience keep silent and let this Counterfeit Dove pass my door, but
by the Grace of that Holy Dove in Christ's Baptism, resolved to send her home
again with an Olive Leaf in her mouth, for a to^n that the Waters are long ago
ab^ted from off the Earth. I ingenously confess that the Loat is not cut out so
well, as a natural English hand could have done it, and a more accute and
judicious Wit framed it, but I hope the Christian Reader will remember, that
all cannot offer Gold, Silver and precious Stones, Scarlet and Shittin Wood to
the Tabernacle; it is enough for some, that have no better (of a willing heart)
to give linnin, yea, Goats hair, Ram-skin and Badgers-skins, Exodus 35. till you
can have a fairer style and a more penetrant Judgment, make use then of this my
discourse, in brotherly love, with prayers to God, to keep his Church together,
and us all, one with another in love and Unity for Christ Jesus his sake, Amen.

By thy glorious Resurrection, good Lord, deliver us, Amen.

. 1. The plainest way for me to go to work in this matter. I have thought, as I
do still think, will be to examine the Author of the Almanac according to his
own method proposed in Observations, to the end, that by all I may the better
be understood, and his Observations (conferred with my Remarks) may give more
light to the Reader. And because the chiefest scope of his matter he aims at,
is to bring in the Jews Sabbath, therefore I will pass by some of his first
Observations, for fear I should be too large; But before my coming to the very
matter, I cannot but con^ess that there is something strangely set down, as in
his Observation 11. there it seems to me as if Time were that Choas whereof the
World in created; I think such an Axiom is against not only the Chiefest
Philosephers, who say that Time and Place were not before the World was
created, but also against Gods Word. because Time could not be before things
were created, much less the very essential nature of every thing.

What succession of Time(if we may improperly so term it) there was and shall
be in the Eternity, we hope to see, but we do not yet know; but to make Time
more ancient then the world, is to plead for the Godhead of Time, in the same
manner as St. John did for our Savior in the first Chap. of his Gospel, for
whatsoever was in the beginning, was before the beginning, and what was before,
was Eternal, and God himself. To make the Time coequal with the World, but
wholly of a different nature from what God made the whole World of, is
nonsense. No Philosepher has yet disowned Time to be an Accident, and
consequently as the Modification of the Substance, inseperably inherent in it.

Hence can but from all these his assertions (which I leave as not worthy any
answer) conclude, that the author has a mind to make the Jewish seventh day of
such a natural Holiness, that the very Time, as the substance, and the Holiness
as a natural perfection and inseparable accident, are concomitant, and never to
be separated, spectatum admissi resumteneat is amics. A new Logic Canon inded!
never heard of before. Why may I not as well argue, The Cloth adorning our
bodies is the substance, the whit Color is its natural perfection and
inseparable accident, Ergo none must wear other color besides White; or if you
will have a sacred instance, the Covenant between God and the earth, Never to
be destroyed by Water, Genesis 9 13. seq. is the nature or substance of the
Rainbow. All what the Sabbatharians can reply and the best argument they can
have, is, That the fourth Commandment is a moral Law, and therefore perpetual.
To give a short answer to it, I say, that we must needs make a distinction
between a natural or simply moral Law, and a positive moral Law.

Natural moral Law is of it self in the nature without any positive Law, or
external Constitution, and therefore imprinted in men's hearts at the very
Creation, is universal to all persons, and their perpetual obligation.

Put positive moral Laws are not imprinted in the heart, neither by Nature or
Grace, are no^ Universal; oblige only People or Nations upon which they are
unposed by the Lawgiver, and so may be dispensed withal. Which a great Bishop
of Ely in England, Dr. Fr. White, in his book, called, A Treatise of the
Sabbath Day, against Sabbatharian-novelty, in this matter very plainly does
declare more at ^arge. Let now the Sabbatharians remonstrate, that the fourth
Commandment concerning the very time of the day is properly, naturally, simply
and perpetually Moral, and that it is equal in that circumstance to the rest in
that Commandment and the other nine; which before they can, let them not
presume so rashly to affirm, that the same is the part, jot or tittle of that
eternal Law, which Christ commanded to be observed in the Christian Church to
the worlds end, Math 5.19.

To worship a God is a natural moral Law, and Universal, but just upon such or
such a day is never natural moral, nether Universal, else should the Turks and
Gentiles agree in it, which we know to the contrary.

Dr. Edward Stillingfleet in his Orig. Sacr. B 11. chapter 7. sect 2. seqq. has a
notable discourse about such Law, where he shows how the Ceremonial Precepts
(making mention among the rest, of distinction of days) do not in themselves
imply an immutable Obligation, because they are not required of God upon their
own account, but in order to some further end, which as soon as it is come, the
Obligation cease; as for example, Prayer Invocation, and such like are
required of God upon their own account, and therefore carry an indispensible
Obligation in them to their performance; but as Circumcision, distinction of
Meats and Days, which are only good because God commands them; They are merely
Positive, whose worth and value arises not from the intrinsic weight of the
things, but from the external impress of divine Authority upon them, as the
inquisitive Reader may see it more at large in that Book of the learne^ man
mentioned, whereupon I shall draw nearer to the Authors Observations beginning
at his 11th Observation.

. 2 In his 11th Observation he begins to fall out upon the Doctors for the
translation of that word one or first, he not understanding them blames them
for what he is himself, pretending he has such Learning, as never has been
found by any, from the time of St. Paul. O poor Europe! O poor Asia, and Africa
too! who never in all your Ages have brought up such skill in the Original
Tongues, as this Dove-maker pretends to have, but happy (I will rather say, and
that truly, unhappy) Thou America! and yet more, Thou Pen^sil^^^^^! where,
among all other plentiful Tares, a new Weed springs up amongst the Wheat! As
for the Translation, some expressing the sense and meaning of it, renders it
First, which is not a guess or incertainty, much less a strange Idolism, as the
Author says, committed ot them, who well understood the property of the Hebr.
Tongue, and the natural sense of it, nay, many of them could speak and write
the Original Tongues (as all their time therein spending) as well as they
understood their own, yes, far better than many now, who pretend to read it in
the book, and understand but a little part, or some few words of it, and ought
therefore not boast of any special knowledge thereof, to degrade them old great
Lights of the World, whose Disciples and Scholars we are. The various
Translation now First, now One, is a further explication and deduction of the
efficay of the H^brew word [Echad]] which comprehends both One and First, the
cardinal and ordinary Number; for it must be observed that the holy Penmen
being themselves Hebrews, did often translate their Mother Tongue (wherein many
words admit of diverse significations) indifterently, putting now one, then
another Greek word contained in the H^brew word, which being observed, gives
us a great light in the interpretation and right understanding of the Holy
Scriptures, as the learned Hammond by several instances makes it clearly to
appear in his An^ot on the New Testament.

3. In his 12th Observation he talks quite against, not only the ancient
writers, but also against the Holy Scripture, which is the chiefest Look to the
Gospel of St. Mark, cap. 16. v. 2. and confer him with v. 9. pray tell me, how
these two verses will otherways be expounded than as the Translation has it,
the First Day of the week, because the 9th verse. does interpret the 2d verse.
for the Women's going to the sepulcher, and Jesus rising, happened the same
morning; from whence, that thereby the First or One Day is, I w^ll not say,
intended, but truly so meant. All the circumstances of Christ's Passion, Death
and Burial and the Women's going, do plainly tell us, that it was the First Day
in the week, and no other. But the Author goes on, to show his wit further in
the following, Observations 13 and 14. which for shortness sake ^^n both at
once be answered to.

4. Observa. 13.14. I grant that it was a Day, and also that it was a Time
called by the Jews the One or First of Sabbaths, as the Author says, but never
in a such sense, as he will have it. The word Sabbath in the Scripture is never
used only for that space of time between Easter and Pentecost, or for the
Jewish Sabbath that seventh day, but often times for an whole week, one after
the other the year round, as Luk 18.12. where the Original Tongue has that
word Sabbath, which no other way, but by Week can be understood, and so
consequently every day in the beginning of the week, is by that reckoning
called the First Day.

Further, we are to observe, that the most Holy Author speaks of the same now
in singular Sabbath, and now again in the plural Sabbaths, as appears in the
Original from Mark 16. verse. 2. and 9. And so likewise did the ancient writers,
as well as the Translators indifferently put Sabbath for Week, et contra,
Sabbaths for Weeks, and contra. So when C^em. Alexander, Beda, or any other
says, that the First Day of Sabbaths or Weeks, is for the Resurrection sake of
Christ, called a Lords Day, they speak no lie, but more establish our Sun-Day,
by declaring and affirming that the First Day (not of one sabbath or week, but)
of Sabbaths or Weeks, that is, every week in the year, is made solemn by the
Resurrection; which is a plain argument for us, and not against us, because
they know very well the reason, why that day every week was from Christ and his
Apostles time taken up in the place of the Old-Testaments Seventh Day, to wit,
to celebrate the First Day in every week, according to the New-Testement, as
they in the Old Testament did celebrare the Last Day in every week, we having
such undeniable reason for the First Day in the New Testament as they in the
Old Testament for their Seventh Day.

Neither can it be proved that the first day of sabbaths is so appointed of God
to be accounted in the respect of the 50th day, but in respect to every week of
them seven; in short, as soon as one time seven was past, they should begin
again another, till they have nu^^bred seven times seven, and then should that
50th day be numbered, L^n 13.16. therefore is that Feast called not a Feast of
Days, but of Weeks, D^^ 15.9, 10. Hereof we can see, that it (...) and
sometimes in the same sense Week, so when the 'Author (...) There was (...)
certain time called Sabbaths, is the same as weeks, ^^ich was used in the whole
year round, the people being at their work that seventh Sabbaths or Weeks time,
as else, Only the chiefest difference is, that they should be more careful in
the reckoning to observe them seven Sabbaths or Weeks for the celebrating of
that 50th day or Pentecost. This is plain of the scripture, where God over and
over again tells them how to number them seven sabbaths or weeks, that they
should not miss that 50th day; see Lev. 23.15, 16. Dut. 16.9. where take
not^ce, that which in the first place, according to the Hebrew Tongue, is set
down Sabbath, is in the other ( Deuteronomy. 16.19.) according to the same Original,
set down Week.

5. Of this now so delivered, the Authors Observation 15. is plain of it self,
why Christ is said to be risen on the First of Sabbaths. (...) upon the the
First Day and First Week of them seven Weeks, which the Jews were so strictly
commanded with care to reckon, and therefore we go to the 16 Observation.

. 6. Observation 16. Concerning this, there can be no question, but that the
day will be changed by the date, I mean, a day of a Feast, which must be
unmovable, cannot but go from one day to the other, and so as to the day of
Wave-offering, ordinarily kept on the 16 of Nican, because it should be
observed the day next the first day of that great feast of unleavened Bread
constantly kept on the 15. of Nican; the date must stand, but the day did alter
every year. Now I will not trouble my self to gainsay the Authors account about
the falling in of such a date upon a Saturday this year 1704. fince Joseph l.
Antiq. c. 5. plainly clears the matter, saying, that the 50. day used to fall
in not upon the 6th day of Sivan, but upon the 7th day of that month, which is
this year ours, and not his or a Jews Sabbath.

But let this be how it will, we know and are assured that the year when Christ
was crucified and rose from the dead, this date tell upon the first day of the
week, and also the Holy Ghost coming down, which through Gods providence was in
all probability, yea, certainty, for the sanctifying of the First Day.

. 7. Observation 17, 18. All wh^^ the Author thereof says in these
Observations is but an unseemly abortion of his own fancy, because all old
Histories, who are concerned in this business, are full of it, that this name
Lords Day, from the Apostels time, has been given not only to that one in the
whole year, but to every First Day in the week; it was so called in the first
Century, until Gos. Traj. his Reign, They had very few Feasts, only three, of
which the Lords Day was the first, their next was Easter, [note, Lords Day and
Easter were not the same] and Penticost, which Orig. against Celsum l. 8. does
prove, That these three were kept, and no more, is found by the true ancient
writers in two hundred years more, until the time of Constable. M. Thereafter begun
the feasts to be more, as Hiron. in Comm. ad c. 4. Epip. ad Gal. And Aug. Ep.
118 shows Clem. Alex. and Beda, produced by the Authors 13th Observatian, are
witnesses enough for us, as is showed. 4.

To satisfy the Author, and not to leave him any hole to creep out, as if that
One or First Day was to be understood only of Easter Day, kept in remembrance
of Christ Resurrection, let him take good notice of what these good old
Christian Fathers say. Tertullian a credible Author, living in the same second
Century, as Clemens Alex. says in his B. de idolol. c. 14. placing this Lords
Day First, and that with such words as the Scripture use it, viz. Every eight
day is for the Christians a public Feast. Cyrill in John lib. 12. c. 38. do
mind (says he) that John does not in a simple way tell us the history, but
with care adds them words [after eight days] and that his disciples were then
again in a Room together, Therefore the eight day must needs be the Lords Day;
for upon one Sabbath the Lords Day be appeared unto them, and likewise the next
eight day thereafter (inclusively, to count the first with the following six)
when Thomas was with the rest, and they saw the Lord again; therefore is the
meeting of the Church rightly upon the eight day. Hitherto Cyr^ll. So plain is
Just. Alartyr at the end of his 2d Apol. saying, Upon the day called Sunday
(this author never using other name upon that day) all within the C^ties or in
the Countries do meet together in same places. One learned man D. Phil. Nicol.
in his book concerning the Pro^agation of Corists Kingdom, tells us in the 1.
b. 1 c. among other things and tokns of the Apostles being in India that the
people there highly esteem the Sunday, and do read the ten Command ments, etc.
And a little below in the same chapter, he says, that many besides are, who
are certain and sure that they have got their Doc^^ine from the Apostle Toomas
(whose Day therefore they kept with a great celebration to his remembrance, as
the History there further telis) having the Holy Scripture in the Syrach
Tongue, very diligent to meet together to Gods worship upon the Sunday,
administering the Lords Supper under Bread and Wine, etc. What will the Author
say to this? The People are not under the Pope, neither was Ap. Thomas, whom
they do follow.

Here especially these two first alleged Authors do take notice (at all, and
chiefly I. A. S. ought to do) that the H. Ghost, and not without reason, has
changed the Number First Day into Number Fight, because Christ rose upon the
same, met with his Apostles, etc. It were strange indeed if Christ did it only
by chance, and without any purpose; but it was to give the Apostles and all
after-Ages, a Rule to leave the Jews Sabbath, and in its place to keep the
first Day. Look the whole Scripture over, and you will never find that Christ,
after his Resurrection, had any meeting with the Apostles upon the Jews
Sabbath; nay, there is more, wortly to be minded, We never find that Christ in
all them forty days had any the least Conversation with the Jews, showing
thereby manifestly, that he had done with them, so far as concerning their
Feasts, Sabbaths, and such others belonging to the Old Testament; neither is it
in vain to observe, that the Jews Pa^^^ver and their Sabbath fell in together
by Christ's burial and laying down in the Sepulcher, as some learned make it
out, Job. 19.31. to signify, That with him an end was made as well of their
Sabbath (a shadow of him) as their Passover, and other Ceremonies, which all at
once were buried with him in the Grave. The Apostles and Disciples knowing all
this, endeavored to bring in that First or Eighth Day, so much without
Offense, as they could do, in the beginning of the Church; we may also see,
Acts 10.7. where it is said, That among the Greeks, where they could do no
Offense to the Jews, upon the first or eight Day the Bread was broken, ^.e. the
Lords Supper distributed, Paul did preach, and the Christians Meeting was kept.
That place. I Cor. 16.1, 2. is as plain as any place can be, if the Author will
but observe the nature of the Original words [Kata mian Sebbaton] which are
thus to be translated, Upon the First Day of every Week. And then next, that
Greek word [Te^auritson] translated, lay in store, shows, that such
Collection, if there should be a store of it, needs to be done more than once
in the year. To prove it, I will produce other Evidences, as Syn^d 2d.
Matisconensy sect. 6. ad fin. c. 4. We do decree, that upon all Lords Days
shall an Altar-Offering be brought of all men and women, etc. Cyprian living in
the middle of the 3d Cent. says ^. de Opere et Eleem, p. 254. N. 14. All
Christians ought to offer all Lords Days, etc. And yet plainer in Quodra.
Quinta, I do exhort you, that you all days, at least all Lords Days do bring
Offering, etc. Antiq. Quens de Oblat. fid. c. 4. sect. 3. N. 1. S. 1 et 4. And
so it is plain, That our Sunday, every first Day, was and must be kept Holy.

The Authors new Revelation about St. John's Revelation, c. 1. 10. making a
strange Interpretation of his being upon the Lords Day in the Spirit, is quite
against what St. John himself tells us. He the Author will make only a bare
sight of this day, as though it had never been in reality, but only by an
inward sight or rapture: We may as well make a sight of the Isle of Patmos,
where he was, and the Person (St. John) himself; but as sure as he was a Man,
we can no more deny him Time than Place for his Revelation, who for the better
assurance of it, tells us not only the Place where he was, but the very Time
also, to wit, the Lords Day. Without doubt he that knew his Masters (Jesus
Christ's) mind so well, was much occupied in celebrating and keeping (as well as
he there could) this Lords Day, our Sunday.

One, without question, most learned Man in the H. Scripture, Archbishop of
Sweedland, Dr. Ericus Bonzelius, faith in his Have. Eccles. N T. Cent. 2. That
the Christians had then betimes in the morning their Meetings, and that upon a
fixed Day, etc. which Day, the Archbishop says, is to be understood of the
Lords Day, as (he further, for proof thereof, says) it is plain from the
Century before, Rev. c. 1. and to this 2d Com. of Just. l. 4. c. 28. from
whence you may gather, that the Church in the first Century (for St. John dyed
the hundredth year after Christ was born) did call our Sunday the Lords Day,
and kept it holy.

Mr. Baxren, p. 47. does produce a Testimony of an Heathen, viz. Pliny, who
lived about St. John's time, showing that his (Plin) Testimony does agree with
all Church Historys. And it is a wonder that this Author will out in question
or deny what some other great and stronger Sabbatharians have owned, as one Dr.
Heyl^n (if I don't mistake) who freely did grants that not only Acts 20.7.3.
Cor. 10 as. is the first Day of the Week, but he himself citing many
Testimonies, proves, That Oblations and Contributions were in the Churches a
usual Lords Days Work, but confesieth, that Rea. 1.10. is meant of the Lords
Day, as by that time grown into reputation, and what more Baxter has.

As for Beda's Testimony, which the Author, as with a strong Pullwark opposes
us; I dare say, if he had a little of St. John's Eyesalve, he should have seen
better the Architecture of venerable Beda's Work, and especially this matter
concerning the Scots, The brags he makes of this Passage, as if he had found
Achile's shield, will but ridicule himself, when we, without prejudice, examine
the words both of Beda and his Quotator Baxter, both which Authors words I will
produce, to let every impartial Reader see the Truth. Br^^a says, That the
Scots (being Christians) knew that the Lords Resurrection (which was on the
first day of the week) was always to be celebrated on the first day of the
week; but being barbarous and rustic, they had not yet learned when that same
first day of the week (which is now called the Lords Day) did come. Hitherto
Beda. Now Baxter (in his Append. c. 1. near the end of it, p. 174, 175.) says,
Here you see that it was past Controversy with them, that the Lords Day must
be celebrated in Memorial of Christ's Resurrection; and the Scots kept not
Easter on any other week day; and that they had not been like Christians, in
they had not owned and kept the Lords Day; only they had not skill enough in
calculating the times, so as to know when the true anniversary Lords Day came
about, but kept Easter on a wrong Lords Day. Thus far Baxter.

Now what Man in the World is there (if he had but one eye, or was quite blind,
and only heard this read) that could not see and feel (what this Author cannot
see with his two Eyes) that the Scots did keep that Lords Day, called, Sunday,
and in keeping of it made no mistake or scruple, as Baxter before in this his
passage shows, but Only that they could not tell upon which Sunday that
anniversary Lords Day (Easter) rightly should fall in, and that for want of
Intelligence from other Churches, as Baxter a little before does affirm.

Therefore the Author's saying, That the Scy^^^ as well as others Rightly
Understood, does but betray his weakness, in gainsaying these two great men,
^ia. ^en. Beda, who says, That they were Barbarians, etc. and Baxter, That
they had not skill enough in calculating, etc. Stulta sapit vnlgus,
vnlr^q^^libet esse Lutherus.

To verify which, I will give a good in stance from these parts, about
Delaware-River, viz. That (as I am informed) some years ago it so happened
concerning this anniversary Lords Day, (which is a Feast, as we know, some
years comes sooner, and some later) that a great part of one side of this River
did keep Easter upon a Lords Day or Sunday eight days before them on the other
side of the River; which was occasioned by their not having skill enough to
calculate the exact time, and had not the opportunity or convenience of having
assistance from other Churches, etc. but for all this they did not miss their
reckoning or keeping of every Sunday. So if an humired years hence, more or
less, (we not having a full account of this matter) any one should bring this
as an argument against keeping our Sunday, vic. That in time past this Day was
not duly kept here in this part of America, etc. will be as much mistaken in
that, as this Author is in the Feast of East. And suppose the Scots have done
so, it does hun very little good in this matter, because if a little spot here
and there in the Christian World, for want of one thing or another belonging to
the matter, could not just presently have understanding of all things
concerning this or that, must it there fore follow that other Churches,
Universities, Kingdoms or Countries do not understand, keep and observe it? Or,
suppose a company of simple and unleirned People (as for example, the Sweeds,
English or Duch that first came into this Country) might not have the
remembrance when such or such a Day was to be kept, and knew not how to
calculate it, must we therefore conclude, that it is unlawful to keep such a
Day, or that all other Christian Countries and Kingdoms were ignorant also in
calculating, keeping and observing the same? Surely nay. And of as little
consequence is his proof for his Assertion of the Lords Day only once in the
year; by People standing in Prayer, etc. because such was not only done that
day, but every such Day until Penticost. Tertullian is plain in his Corona
M^lit. c. 3. We do not keep fasting, neither upon our knees praying, and this
liberty we do enjoy from Easter to the Penticost.

Of all this we can see how basely, without reason, this I. A. S. blames the
modern Writers for their wrong Transtation, as if they did not tenderstand
these things so well as himself. And so I will go to my Seek. S.

S. 8. Obserer. 19. Where he cuts his Threat with his own Sword: If God does
observe strictly the measure of Time, and in all his Works will have Time
strictly observed, then certainly as there was a fullness of Time, when God, in
respect of his Creation would be Worshipped by the Jews, so there is an
appointed Time now for us to Worship him, in respect of our Redemption, we
being obliged (as the Author confesses) to observe Times in all Gods Works,
that the Wise Man's heart has discerned, Eccles. 8.5, 6. confessed S. 4. about
the middle.

S. 9. Observe. 20, 21. He does what he can to stigmatize us with the Mark of
Antichrist: But (good Sir!) be not so hasty to judge: We have the Apostles and
Apostolical men's Authority for us, and they have Christ's; but if they had not
his express Command for it (which yet they might have, for ought we know,
because all that Christ spoke is not written, only what most concerns our
Salvation, whereunto this or that Day does not belong) yet they have, by
Christ's Example, changed the seventh Day into the First or eight Day. The
Apostles being Planters and Settlers of Christ's Church, (typified by the Twelve
Oxen, 1 King. 7.25. and signified through Twelve Foundations, Rev. 21.14.)
ought to be followed, and all unskilful Sectaries accounted Disturbers (as
after Ages, and especially this our unhappy Time produces) ought to be left
and deserted, as B. Lysecus Harm. Evang. c. 1.19. says, We do deny the
Sabbath-change in the Lords Day to have its Original from the Church, but the
Apostles, appointed by Christ in his place, to be Teachers in the whole World,
especiatly for the Gentiles, them we ought to follow, have brought in this
change. One R^bbera, named in Rev. 1. says, We see that in the Apostles time
the celebration of the Sabbath was translated unto the Lords Day, which is
consecrated for the Memorial of Christ's Resurrection. These, and many more,
have it from the Ancients, as from Just. Martyr, who says, That after the
appearing of the Son of God, we have no need to observe the Sabbath Day; the
Gentiles may attain Gods holy Inheritance without observation of the Sabbath
Day. Tertull Jud. c. 4. The Observation of the Sabbath was Temporary, and it
was blotted out like as Circumcision, and other Rites of the Law. Come all ye
Sabbatharians, pray is not this unaccountable Boldness in you, to gainsay
these ancient Fathers, who lived so near the time of. Christ and his Apostles?
Are you not afraid it will befall you what St. August. de spir. et lit. cap. 14
says, Whosoever in the time of the Gospel observes this Day according to the
Letter, is wise according to the flesh, and to be wise according to the flesh,
is Death.

. 10 Observe. 22. There is a parcel of Stuff hall'd together for the erecting
of his Saturday's Sabbath, by twelve Arguments. Concerning his first, 2d and
3d, we have nothing to say against them (at least I have not at present)
because belonging only to the Old Testament, where they ought so to do, during
that time, in order to procure the blessing of God. But now under the
New Testament, we have got a New Example of Christ (our Captain and Leader) to
follow, and which we must observe, if we obtain his Blessing. As for the
Perpetuity of keeping the seventh day, it is only for them under the old
Testament; the Commandment whereof is so plain, that nothing can be plainer,
Fxod, 31.13 ^eq. pray read it over and over, and consider it well, especially
v. 15 and 16. Indeed if the Author will plead for Perpetuity, and insist upon
the Hebraism, I must needs tell him, that he does yet want a good part of Juda
sm, to wit, the observation of the 50 Day after Easter, the 10th day of the 7th
Month, and such others, especially the Circumcision, which (as cannot be
unknown to him) is styled in the sacred Text Beritolam, or a perpetual
Covenant. If he is not willing to submit to that, let him take further Notice
of these words [ Throughout your Generation] (which are annexed only to the 4th
Commandment (concerning the Day) and not to any other of the Nine) as a fair
limitation of the word Perpetuity; and therefore for a while this Author ought
to sit at his Gamali^s's feet to take better Information in the Philology and
Philosophy, and especially in sound Theology.

NB. A Law enacted to continue for a certain time, and imposed upon a certain
State and Government of People (while such a form of Gubernation lasts) will
cease to be in force (and that without an express Revocation of the Lawgiver)
so soon as the time is elapsed, and such form of Government will be changed,
unless it be revived under a new form. Of the like circumstance is the Jews
Sabbath.

We are no more bound to the Jews Sabbath for the remembrance of the Creation
and Gods resting, than as if I will argue thus, They in the Old Testament could
not be saved, except by Faith on Christ (as he was to come) upon condition of
using Circumcision and the Passover: Neither can we under the New Testament be
saved without Faith on the same Christ (as he is come:) Therefore it is
necessary for us too to observe the same Sacraments as under the Old Testament.
An Argument of no Consequence; as, nor is his concerning the Jews Sabbath.

Again, Jerusalem was a Type of Christ's Church Militant and Triumphant, where
to meet; Must we therefore be bound to go thither too? I think not, because
that City, and all its Ceremonies (among which the Sabbath was one) are gone;
but Christ's Church remains still upon the Earth, as militant, and in Heaven
as triumphant. All what is said to bring this matter to a head, is to convince
the Author, that the Jewish Sabbath was bu^ a Ceremony, and a shadow of things
to come, amongst which was the Rest of our Savior in the Grave, as before is
delivered, and the learned Author of the Book, entitled, Die Elve der
drieinigen gottes, from Col. 2.17, 18. does prove. For further confirmation of
it, add the comparison of Christ, Mat. 12.3, etc. his defending of his Apostles
for plucking ears of Corn on the Sabbath; and his own Example of curing many
Diseases on the Sabbath day (which was not allowed under the Law) defending
himself, That he was the Lord of the Sabbath, having power to dispense with
moral positive Precepts, for the use and good of man, as Works of Charity,
which are part of the moral eternal Law.

If the Author asks for an express and distinct Text in the Gospel for Christ's
abrogating the Judaical Sabbath? I answer, with the famous Dr. Hammond, That
there is no more reason to expect it, than there is to expect it for Sacrifices
or Circumcision, or the Judaical Priesthood; for the Substance being come, and
the Temple and that People destroyed, the Ceremonies or Shadows ( Col. 2.16,
17.) as far as they were such, ceased of their own accord, and no further are
they now abrogated, having never been Obligatory to any but that People.

The Rabbis themselves, when in their Books they are discoursing about the
things so strictly commanded in the Old Testament to be observed, as many sorts
of Offerings, difference between Clean and Unclean, Womons Monthly sickness,
^^e confess, That all such should cease by Christ's coming in the flesh,
incerting the Sabbath among them Ceremonies, saying, H^^ that pr^aches Gods
Will and Commandments, can change the Sabbath, Midrash n. 23.

Therefore let us hearken to the Apost^es Exhortation, Gal. 2.4. To be ware of
turning after false Brethren to the weak and beggarly Elements, in observing
Days, etc. and alse his Exhortation to the Collossions, cap, 2 16, 17. To be
constant in Christ, and to let no manj dg^ them in Meat, -- or of the Sabbath
Day, which are a shadow of things to come, but the Body is Christ. In the
Original the word is [Eumeres sabbaton] making this very plain, and that
without much trouble or large discourse, viz. Let no man judge you in respect,
or (as it stands in the Margent of some Bibles) in part of Sabbath Days, i. c.
in any time named with that Title Sabbath. Now we know the seventh day was one
part too called Sabbath, as well as some other Feasts besides. Of which more
here-after to his 8th Argument.

His 4th Argument does but hurt his discourse about the seventh Day. Its true,
that Day had its beginning in the state of Integrity; neither do I deny but
that, if that state had continued, that Day had continued also; but by reason
of the alteration of that blessed state, GOD (in whose sight all Creatures are
manifest, and all things naked and open unto his Eyes, Heb. 4.13. and so are
the Jews and Gentiles too, and all what should happen unto them in Time,
determined in his infinite Wisdom to reduce and save unto himself a peculiar
People, who should enjoy eternal Glory with him) found by his Wisdom, that,
besides other things, this 7th Day appointed for his Worship, (made known to
the Jews for a Token between him and them) should in a certain time after be
altered; the chiefest reason, without doubt, is that great work of the
Resurrection, which is many times greater than the Creation; for what benefit
is it for me, or any others, to be created or born into this World, if by the
Resurrection of Christ I was not assured of my Redemption from Gods Wrath and
the eternal Fire? See. 10.

From what has been said it is plain. That the fourth Commandment concerning
the seventh Day, did only reach the Jews under the Old Testament, and Not Us
under the New Testament; yea, I will say, That the 7th Day, under the Old
Testament, did more ^^ach the Jews than the Gontiles, because that day was a
^^gn only between GOD and the Jews in their Generation, not the Gentiles, nor
any other Nation beside, Psalm. 147.19, 20. which this Author seems to deny.

His 5th Ar ^ment, from James 2.10. as before in his first Leaf, Rev. 12.17.
and at the end of his Dove, Rev. 22.14. do show his willingness to be under
Bendage, and a Slave under the Law, as a child under Tutors and Governors; and
if he was able, would draw others back with him, although redeemed from thence by
the Son of God, as is comfortably discoursed of by St. Paul to the Galatians,
cap. 4.1. etc. But his endeavor is in vain, for in those Seripture-places the
ten Commandments are not at all to be undestood, but that Royal Law, the new
Commandment to love one another, as Christ loves us, Job. 13.34, 35. and cap.
15.12. if we therefore keep us to Christ only, we need no more to be afraid of
Thunder and Lightning, etc. Christ has redeemed us from its Curse, etc. Gal.
3.13. But as many as are of the works of the Law, are under that curse, verse.
10.

His making a Perpetuity of the Saturday, because written in Stones, is a very
poor Reason, not remembering that the first Tables of Stone were broken, and the
next long ago destroyed. The writing in stone represents (chiefly) the hardness
of heart, and not a Perpetuity of every circumstance of the Law to be observed:
Josh^a wrote upon stones also a Rehearsal of the Law of Moses in the presence
of Israel, Jesh. 8.32. but we know a great part of Moses Law was positive and
legally Ceremonial.

The Scriptures which I A.S. brings at the end of his Argument are very true,
and therefore by Christ's coming they are fullfilled, Mat 5 17. and so not one
jot or tittle past away from the Law. Christ said, It shall (...) pass away
till all be fullfilled, because he had not then fully done it, but afterward
by his Death and Resurrection it was done; and therefore now it is fullfilled,
and we freed, all of us having our debts satisfied by him, if we can believe
it: Christ has fulfiled the Law, not by destroying it, but by changing it into
a perfecter being, as the Seed in the Earth etc. Knowledge in a Child, etc. (1
Cor. 13.16.) not that the Child or its Knowledge is destroyed, but perfected
and changed into better, as Mr. Bex^^, more at large plainly enough deduceth
this Argument, if the Author would but have minded it.

His 6th Argument is a weak one, because Christ knowing very well the time of
Jerusalem's destruction, and how within that time such an established old
Polity, as the Judaical was, could not so soon, as to all its circumstances, be
abrogated, but by little and little decay, he exhorts his Disciples (who, after
his Resurrection, should often have occasion to meet with the Jews upon this
their Sabbath) to pray that they might enjoy the same with them, for their
edification among them. The 2d Reason is this, That not only many believing
Jews adhered stiffly to many legal Observations, etc especially to the Law of
the Sabbath, but the unbelieving Jews were most rigid and zealous Observers of
their Elders Traditions, esteeming it an intolerable Profanation to travel,
labor or flee, or to do such like upon their Sabbath Day. Now, if the
Disciples or Christian Believers should have been compelled to flee on the
Sabbath Day (which was no Transgression, in case of necessity, especially
because that Law concerning the Sabbath day, as well as other ceremonial Laws,
ceased at the destruction of Jerusalem) they would have been in danger to be
grievously molested and persecuted by their own superstitious Nation, (see Dr.
Fr. White's Treatise of the Sabbath Day.) And I question not but that Christ (
Mat. 24.20.) did understand the Sabbath of Easter-Time (called by St. John, an
high or great Sabbath Day, cap. 19.31.) for as History tells us, the City was
besieged at the time when many thousands of People from afar off were gathered
thither to celebrate Easter (from which its plain, that forty years after
Christ's Resurrection that ceremony was not left off; which contradicts I. A.
S's assertion, That all Ceremonies were then done away) being his exhortation,
not only to his Disciples, who were present, but by them, to all lovers of
Christ, that they might escape that great Calamity, and I cannot but be
persuaded, that many, by their Prayers, did obtain it ( James 5.16) saving
themselves by flight to another little Town called Pella. In short, Christ
understood the Sabbath Day and Winter to be times very inconvenient,
troublesome, dangerous and difficult to travel in or flee away.

His 7th Argument is weaker, because how could the Women ( Luke 23.56) do
otherwise, Christ being that Sabbath, yet in the Sepul^her? and so by the holy
Ghost commended for nothing more than what th^^ due was that time.

The 8th Argument is no stronger, but rather weaker (see Levit. 23. v. 24, 32,
39. and say then, if you can, that the holy Ghost gives this Name Sabbath to
no other Day, but only to the seventh; be plain, and say this if you can.

His 9th Argument is the weakest of all, because what he talks there of them
in the Old Testament, was no more than what they were bound to do that time.
Christ, during the time of Humiliation, observed duly not only the Sabbath of
the 4th Commandment, but all other legal Rites and Observances, because he was
then under the Law, Gal. 4.4. from whence you will wrongly so conclude, That
because Christ observed the other Laws, as well as the Sabbath, so long as he
was under the Law, therefore we must observe all those Laws and the Sabbath
too. But on the other hand, may we not rather argue thus. That because after
the time of Humiliation Christ never used the Saturday Sabbath (see. 7.) or any
other legal Rites, so neither are we to observe them. As to what he speaks
about the Apostles, every one that that has common Reason, and will not abuse
it, must understand, that it was at the beginning of the Churches settling,
when the Apostles could not get better opportunity to instruct them in the
Christian Faith (but by little and little to teach them concerning the
Ceslation of the old Law) than to be present upon the Judaical Sabbath, which
Dr. Heylin (a great Sabbatharian) does confess, That it was not for the Days
sake. (that the Apostles so met with the Jews) but for the Peoples sake, to do
them good. Nay, this Dove-maker I.A.S. (who stands upon the Sabbatharians side)
will think that himself can hardly find a better convenience to draw or (rather
to) seduce others to come to him, than to come upon our Sundays to the Church,
and make his Preachments? St. Paul did use Circumcision, purified himself,
shaved his head for his vow, etc. But must we do so now? I think not. The
reason why St. Paul so condescended, was, That he might gain some, 1 Cor. 9.20.
and the same reason is sufficient for the Apostles meeting with the Jews upon
Saturday. Besides, it will appear from the Scripture, That as the Apostles did
meet with the Jews upon the 7th Day, so with the Gentiles they did keep the 1st
Day, which we now call Sunday: This is plain from Acts 13.42. That the Apostles
were first with the Jews in their Synagogue upon their Sabbath, but as they
went out the Gentiles there present besought that the same should be preached
to them the next Sabbath; the Greek word is [ Meta^^] i. e. The Sabbath
between, and next following the Jews Sabbath, as some ^^^ge Bibles have it in
the Margent. Now the Jews Sabbath was on Saturday, the Sabbath then next,
between that Saturday past, and the next Saturday to come, was our Sunday; what
can be plainer? And why the Jews did come again to that Meeting is told in v.
44. From all which circumstances it does appear, that this day was not the Jews
Sabbath, but Ours. Concerning Ignatins's words, Pray (Mr. I.A.S.) when you did
read them in ^axter, did you not mind how he does prefer and esteem our Sunda^
above the Jews Sabbath? and if you did not mind it, pray read it over again,
and mind better what you read. And pray let me ask how you read A^hanasi^s's
words which are as plain and run thus, Even as at the first it was commanded,
that the Sabbath should be observed in Memory of the finishing of the World, so
we do celebrate the Lords Day in Commemoration of the beginning of a New
Creation. And again, The Lord transferreth the Sabbath to the Lords Day. It is
pity when a man is blind and cannot see, but it is more pity when he has two
Eyes to see with, and will not see: I am afraid Christ's Judgment will be upon
such, Joh. 9.41. Augustine says, Either let us be Christians and keep Holy the
Lords Day, or else turn Jews and keep the Sabbath, for no Man can serve two
Masters.

Neither is it possible to keep that very seventh Day within one time of twenty
four hours (as the Children of Israel in their Generation could) because the
Christian World [I thank God] is so wide, that if we here could keep that very
Day, others in another Clima^e could not, because they have not the same
Elevation, Latitude and Longitude. E. G. I pray tell me, Sir, how you would
observe this Day in other Latitudes or Places, as Grad. 70. in Fin^ark,
Greenland, Lapland, and in the North of Russia and Ta^t^ria, where one Day
lasts from the 10th of May till July 14. which is sixty five of our Days.
Again; Grad. 75. in the North of Greenland, the Islle of Chery, Nova Zembla,
etc. one Day continues from the 24th of A^^il to the 2d of August, which
contain 102 of our Days, and the like of other Latitudes, as the learned in
Astronomy show us. Now the subject of the 4th Commandment being a Natural Day
of 24 hours, consisting of Morning and Evening by rising (...) setting of the
Sun, Tell me, I say, if you can, how it is possible for any Law, that wants
his proper subject, to be in force?

His 10th Argument is hardly worth any Answer; and if any should be given, I do
say, We keep the Apostles Traditions concerning First Day, and so do not teach
the Assemblies of the Church as the Sabbatharians do, contrary to the Apostles
Admonition, H^b. 10.25. Nor did the Apostle settle the Church in the Je^s
Sabbath, as appears above, in answer to his 9th A^gument. And although History
tells us, that the primitive Church did celebrate both the 7th Day and the
First for several years, yea, a great while after the Apostles time, especially
the Eastern Church. To which I say, That it appears also from History, that
they did not keep the Saturday in such honor as the Sunday, only by preaching,
not sabbatizing Athamas^us says, Tr. de Semente, It is permiteed unto us, and
to all People else, to work and labor on the Sabbath Day, by reason that we in
these days are all a Royal Priesthood. Ignatius, Ambrose and J^s^ine Marty^ do
affirm the same.

His 11th Argument does not want much answer neither; for we remember the 4th
Commandment, so much as belongs to us: And we are careful to avoid Idolatry;
but we do not think the Day to be an essential part in the Worship of God, as
if none could be saved except they kept the very 7th Day: This is contrary to
all Scripture; yea, it is contrary to the love of Christ toward his Church,
and the guiding of the holy Ghost; all which were but Wind, if Gods Church
should have run astray so many hundred years; the thing being of no less
concern than Curse and Damnation. Surely, if the Heart is not good, the Day
will not save us; so it was in the Old Testament, and so it is in the New
Testament.

The Author, it seems, is mindful of the old saying, Calumniare fortiter
aliquid harebit: When nothing else will do, the Popish filthy Abomination in
worshipping the Beast, must be our charge. To answer him in the spirit of
Meekness, let him inform himself better another time, and remember that the
Scripture speaks of Two great Antichrists, one in the West, the other in the
East, or, one within the Church, the other without; one is called Mahomet, or
God and Magog, Ezekiel. 38. Rev. 20. the other is the Pope; each of them has his
Character in the Scripture, whereby to be known; and among the Characters
belonging to Mahomet, one is, Changing of Time, he using Lunar years instead of
Solar, of them called Negire, (...) which is more at large set forth by Phil.
Nicol. in his History concerning the Propagation of Christ's Reign upon the
Earth, l. 1. c. ^. and also Dr. Calov. in his Bibl illustr. ad Dan. c. 7. v. 8.
concerning that little Horn there mentioned, P. M. 616. But this does not
belong to our Sabbath-change, because Mahomet keeps neither the Jews nor our
Sabbath, but the Friday.

Likewise the Author is very bold and proud in his Judgment concerning the
Council of Laodecea, which always was reputed Orthodox, maintaining no other
Doctrine in this matter of the Sabbath than Justin Martyr, Tertullion, Origin,
etc. have in substance delivered concerning the same. Surely they who were then
gathered together so near to Christ's and the Apostles time did know much better
than any of us how the Jews Sabbath was kept, and how this our Sabbath was
kept. The learned Dr. White brings in a Testimony from Just. Martyr his
Dialogue c. Tryph. p. 266. (and he lived about 150 years before this Synod) who
relates that there was a Question made in his time, Whether a Christian which
observed the Sabbath might be admitted to the holy Mysteries, or not? A very
good Proof that the Council of Laodecea did not first of all condemn the
Religious Observance of the old Sabbath. If this I. A S had taken counsel, and
done according to the advice given him in my Preface, (seeing such Old
Histories are scarce to be got here, but easy to be found in the old
Countries) I think he would not so unadvisedly have set his Pen to Paper
against our Sunday. I have seen some of them Canons, but find not that there is
Persecution or Excommunication in any of them, Only that they should prefer
that Day before the seventh. And if that Council had set a Punishment (which
its like they have) upon Transgressors and Disturbers, I am sure they had Power
and Reason so to do, and this Author, if then living, would not have escaped
their Censure.

His 12th and last Argument is of no concern to us; We have now a better Day to
rest upon than ever that 7th was, in Memorial of that most glorious and
fruitful Resurrection. What rest could our poor Souls have only of resting upon
the 7th Day, which is only a remembrance of the Creation, if by the
Resurrection upon the first Day, we were not sure of that eternal Rest in the
World to come?

But some will say, Why might not our Souls have rest now in the New Testament,
as well as they in the Old Testament had rest in the seventh Day?

I Answer; That what was enough for them at that time, is not now enough for
us: Christ was then at that time only Promised to Come, but now He is Come: If
he had not been risen, our grief and trouble had been many fold greater,
because many fearful Doubts would surround us, as, Was he not that Promised
Messiah? Was he not able to rise? Then are we of all men most miserable, 1 Cor.
15.14, etc. but now, because he is risen, and by his Resurrection ours is made
sure, therefore is our Joy much greater, and that Day worthy to be kept by us
(in Commemoration of Victory over Death, Hell and the Grave) rather than the
7th Day.

This the First Day is the Day whereupon was made known the best News that ever
was or can be told; 'twas such News many had a long time waited and longed for.
Its apparent that the Apostles of Christ had no rest in their minds or souls
all that time (during the Jews Sabbath) Christ was dead, but were very
sorrowful, Luke 24. But how glad did this First Day make them, when they had
the certainty of the Resurrection of their dearest Lord and Master! Never was
Noah so glad when the Dove brought the Olive Leaf as a token that the Waters
were abated; But this was still a better Olive Leaf to the Disciples, and us
all, That Christ was Risen, giving them Life and Courage, with a joyful PEACE
BE UNTO YOU: A certain Evidence that the whole Deluge of Gods Anger for our
sins was dried up. It is therefore a shame, an unthankful and undutiful thing
for any to celebrate the Memory of other Peoples Benefits, and neglect and
forget their own, which is infinitely better.

That benefit which the Jews had is nothing to us, but what we have got is much
to them. If David, by the spirit of Prophecy saw the Resurrection of our
Savior, and was glad (as in Psalm. 16.) how much more ought we to rejoice, and
forever to celebrate that blessed Day, who know it now in the very deed to be
done? We have, indeed, our share in the Creation, but that work, by the
Resurrection (which is much greater) is swallowed up, it I may so say; so that
a true Christian, who understands the Resurrection, can never so remember that,
but be will thereby be mindful of the Creation, giving many humble Thanks to
God who has made him, not to be a Stone, Tree, Ox or Horse, etc. but a
reasonable Creature, capable to enjoy the great benefit of the Resurrection.

And because this Author is so much for the 7th Day both here and in his
Inquiries, only for the Remembrance of the Creation, and Gods resting
thereupon, I do kindly desire of him one Scripture out of the New Testament to
show, that we for the remembrance of our Creation are bound to keep the 7th Day
Holy; but this I think he cannot do. But then on the contrary, I will show him
one thing of great Moment for our Sunday, viz. That as they in the Old
Testament were bound to remember the Creation and Gods resting, by keeping the
7th Day Holy; so are we now in the New Testament bound to remember the
Resurrection of Christ by keeping the First Day, because there is nothing in
all the New Testament to be found in any of the Apostles Preachings, that we
are now to remember the Creation and Gods Resting, by keeping a certain Day,
but ALL (I say, All) their Preaching is most upon Christ's Resurrection; All
what they aim at, is to show that Christ is risen: Read and consider Acts 1.22.
One must be ordained to be a Witness with us of his Resurrection; chap. 2.22.
chapter 3.15. c. 4 2, 33. c. 10.41. c. 13.30. c. 26.23. Every place shows, That
they only should be Witnesses unto Christ, chiefly of his Resurrection; see
more 1 Pet. 1.3. a remarkable place is Romans 1.4. and 1 Cor. 15.3, etc. and
especially I need to bring in St. Paul s Exhortation to Timothy, 2d. Epist. chapter
2.8. Remember [Not the Creation or Gods Resting, but] That Jesus Christ the
Seed of David, was raised from the Dead, etc. because Christ has begottet us
again to a lively Hope, etc. 1 Pet. 1.34. and for such a Preaching there could
never have been a Day more convenient than the First Day, and that every week.
If the Remembrance of the Creation was of so great moment to us under the
New Testament, surely Christ and his Apostles would more at large have insisted
upon that matter than is to be found in all their Writings. What St. Paul
speaks of it in his Epistle to the Hebrews you may find enlarged upon in my.
13. Therefore, I pray you (Sir) be not (to your own hurt) guilty of perverting
the Gospel of Christ, Gal. 1 7, 9. Let it also pierce your heart (dear Ser) the
fearful Examples of Gods Judgments upon Sunday-breakers and Prophaners of the
Lords Day; see the Practice of Piety in Meditation on the Sabbath Day; see also
Daun'. lac. lat. l. 525. and a great many horrible Examples more mentioned by
other Divines.

As slow as the Author has been in his T^^^^^ Arguments, so is he in the
remainder of his writing, as T^^^ the (...) b^longeth, as a a^aral property to
Morality; which is contrary to all experience; ^id these our Jndians can give a
good, but sorry instance of.

The Refreshment of Hope he talks of, we can never have more ^omfortably then
by the Resurrection of Christ; and the true worship and fear of God will unite
peoples hearts in observing the day, which the Sabbatharians themselves will
never find, (if they will but speak the truth) to the contrary, but in
observing and living according to the Word of God.

The following three Observations 23, 24, 25. are most about one thing, viz.
That liberly we have by Christ to change this day. Which liberty is of such a
nature, as to choose one of two or more things, E. G. Eccles. 15.16.17. Jer.
21.8. There is liberty to take what a body reasonably likes; but not such a
liberty, as to choose none; which rather is licentiousness and lawlesness, than
liberty. Also, by Christ we have got a choice, as in many other things, so in
days of worshipping God; we may keep the 7th day, we may choose another, which
in reason we think best; one of them seven we must choose, having no liberty to
dispense in it as concerning our homage and duty to God, but what day Precisely
is in the Churches liberty. Now for wighty reasons the first is chosen of
infallible men, whom our duty is to follow, and not out of selfconceit, high
mind or vain glory presume to leave, traduce and accuse, they knowing the
reasons why they did it, far beter than this Dove-maker, or any of us all; And
it is our honor to follow them in simplicity, it being enough for us, if we
had no more reason; for the Apostles did nothing in the Church for her settling
but by a divine authority, and ruled by the true Sprit. But D^. Wnites words
are more then true, p 103. That Christian People were formerly very obsequious
to the Precepts and constitution of the Rulers of the Church. But (says he
further) in our times it is otherwise; for our Disciplinarian Gaides, with
their arguments, ab autoritate Scripuca negative: The holy scripture has
commanded none of these rites and observations in particular; therefore they
are Popish Traditions, Will Worship and superstition -- Now they are reputed
most pure and holy, who with greatest boldness bequarrel and cavil against the
Authority, Government and lawful Precepts and constitutions of the Church, etc.

The Example of the Sun he desires me to take motice of, knocks him in the head
at once, illustrating my discourse very well, and darkning his; for as the Sun
continually is the same shining and illuminating Body, but her time to shine
very variable, so likewise the 4th Commandment is fixed, firm and stable, but
the time of worshipping (according to several respects) vairable and unstable.

. 12. Observation 26. and the last. falls of it self. The practice of the
Apostles being sufficiently proved. so that the Author here in vain does blame
the Pope, or us for him. If the Pope has published any thing concerning the
continuation of this Sunday, he is no more the Author or Institutor of it, than
any body in a certain respect, will or can say, that Hezechiah or Josiah for
proclaiming the Passover, (which before in many years was not kept) was the
Author of it. And therefore it cannot but be high Contempt of the Apostles and
all their successors, yea, in a measure a blasphemy against Christ, to say,
that this day was brought in by Deceits and Triels.

Have a care (Sir) what you say, and consider whether it is not a Deceit and
crafty Trick of the Devil to bring in the Jewish Sabbath, and thereby to debase
our Savior and make him naught, which he may in process of time casily obtain,
if he can now first l^y a good foundation of so Religious an Opinion as the
Judaical 7th Day: But (God be thanked) his head is so bruised by Christ, that
against him and his Church (although now and then he will be contriving
something, and biting at the heel) he shall never prevail more, Mat. 16.18.

. 13. As for his Inquiries added, I will not punctually satisfy his Curiosity,
but declare the main subject. And s^^st, That the Rest of Gods People is set
forth and signified by Gods resting on the 7th Day, although such things do not
appear, Heb. 4.4. where St. Paul having to do with the Jews, to turn them from
the old Testaments Rites, beggarly Elements, Ceremonies and bloody Sacrifices
of the Law, to Christ, figured thereby; from the shadow to the very substance (
v.2. Christ) began with that which was most Old, namely, the 7th Day showing
its imperfection in this World, and that especially in his 3d and 4th Chapter,
where the Apostle, before he goes further to the other Ceremonies (as just now
was said) is expounding the 95th Psalm, how that the Rest there mentioned, was
not Gods resting on the 7th Day, neither was it Gods People coming into Canaan,
but another Rest we ought, by Faith, to strive for, namely, that eternal Rest
in Heaven: In which place we have much more of that comfortable Resurrection
than of the Creation, for the Creation (by which we all come into this World in
this sinful Condition, guilty to the eternal Fire) gives us no great
encouragement to love God more than the Devils, who are also created and
fallen, as we are; but the Resurrection of Christ, by which we are in a sure
hope (positis ponendis) of a gracious God and a joyful Resurrection to Life
Eternal, is the greatest comfort of all, well worthy to be remembered every
First Day, yea, and every day and minute of our Life. St. Peter gives us here
in his own Example, 1 Pet. 1.3. where the Apostle says, Blessed be the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which according to his abundant Mercy has
begotten us again into a lively H^^e [not by Creation, to remember that, but]
by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an Inheritance
incorruptible, etc. Aug. Hom. 15 deverbis Apost. "The "Lords rising did promise
us that everlasting Day. The certainty of this will make us not only to love
God and Men, but constantly to suffer any thing in this World, because by
Christ's Resurrection we are assured of our Resurrection to that heavenly joy,
which by our Creation only we could never be partakers of.

What ground we have for keeping the First Day in the place of the 7th, is, I
hope, made plain enough. If some People in some places of the world have been
sometimes out of the way, or have not rightly understood, that is not to be
imputed to the whole Church of Christ; neither can such Practice be taken up
for a common Law and Rule, so long as the greater and sounder part of the
Church keeps the right way.

So is the matter concerning our Sunday, which from the very Time of Christ and
his Apostles, always the greatest part of the World constantly agreed to keep
and observe: It is therefore an unanswerable Rashness and Presumption to oppose
Christ's Church, as if she had been so many hundred years without a true
Shepherd or a faithful Guide in so weighty a matter, whereon, if we will
believe this Author, no less than eternal Damnation hangs. Leave off therefore,
I pray you (S^r) blaming us for Popery, Idolatry, and I know not what. If the
Pope has abused the Lords D^y, we cannot help it, neither must we, for his
abusing it, throw it away, any more than the Sacraments and Liturgy, which are
now abused by him.

As for his 7th Irquiry; I A^sw. That a Minister with such a good Conscience
reading the 4th Commandment, exhorts the People to rest upon the First Day, and
the People understanding the matter, keep it, and pray God To inoline their
hearts so to do. So likewise with the same good Conscience and right
understanding the Minister can by the 5th Commandment exhort a disobedient
Subject, a stubborn Servant, etc. to honor his Father.

From hence it is casie to resolve his 8th Query, to wit, That we may keep this
day, and exhort People to the same, according to the equity hereof, which is,
To assemble to hear Gods Word, receive the Sacraments, etc. pray God to give us
Grace to observe the spiritual Sabbath prefigured by the legal Sabbath. We
don't pray for to keep the Law according to the special form and circumstance
of Time, commanded in the old Law, but in such a manner as is agreeable to the
state of the Gospel, and in the time of Grace, that is, according to the Rule
of Christian Liberty, whereby Gods People are now, under the Gospel, freed
from the Observation of Days, Months, Times and Years, upon legal and
ceremonial Principles, as Dr. White, following St. Augustine, says. Our Sunday
(now under the New Testament) may as well be called Sabbath Day, for the
worshipping of God, as the 7th Day (under the Old Testament) was so named, for
Gods service; for God himself gave to other sacred Days the same Name, (see
above p. 18. in answer to his 8th Argument) so has this day got the same Name
by Christ and his Apostles: And for the same reason Christ said John the
Baptist was Ellas, Mat. 11.14. and so by the same reason we can now say, that
Sunday is our Sabbath.

. 14. I have now, through the Grace of God, and his Talent bestowed upon me,
examined this Black Raven, sent abroad under the shape of a Dove, if not to the
full satisfaction of speculative and overcurious Critics, I hope 'twill be to
the edification of those that have a harmless mind and upright heart to serve
God, knowing that Christianity does not consist in the Rudiments of the World,
Col. 2.8. and observing of outward things, but in the true sear of God from the
bottom of the heart; for though outward things must not be neglected, but as
convenient help-meets and instigators to more fervency, yet the very Salvation
of our Souls does not depend upon them, but wholly and solely upon Christ, whom
with the Father and the holy Ghost a true lover of the hap^^ Eternity, will
serve and reverence in truth and verity, celebrat^ his Name for the inestimable
Love in the Redemption of t^ World by Jesus Christ, Night and Day and Always,
but especial upon the First Day, in a joyful Remembrance of his glorious
Resurrection and the thereof redounding Assurance.

To Conclude, Thou Christian Reader, Wheever thou art, into whose hands this
shall come, Take hold on St. Paul's Exhortation, Call. 5.1. To stand fast in the
Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be ^ot again entangled with
the Yoke of Bondage; Turring again to the weak and beggarly Elements, cap. 4.9.
always considering that Christ and his Apostles Prophecys cannot but be true
concerning Apostacys, false Brethren and such like; and the nearei the end of
the World is, the worse it will be, and upon this Earth never better, or else
Gods Word is not true (as it is, and ever will) which tells us of Perilous
Times in the last Days, when the Devil, knowing his time to be very short, Rev.
12.12. does strive as much as ever he can to get up his head, to persecute and
trouble the Woman, Rev. 12.13. sometimes by New invented Opinions, sometimes by
stirring in Old Errors, recalling them, etc. and without such they cannot be
made manifest amongst us, who are approved, 1 Cor. 11.19. when he only shall be
saved who endures to the End, ( Mat. 10.22) in the right way. Now therefore we
knowing that Christ's Vineyard or Church here in this Wilderness part of the
World is not only in danger of Ravening Wolves ( Matthew. 8.15.) but Foxes also,
the little Foxes that spoil the Vines too, (as the Song of Solomon has it,
cap. 2.15.) so it is our Duty the more, according to the Exhortation of the
Vineyards chief Master, At all Times and every Where to Watch and Pray, Mark 13
verse. 33, 37. That his Church now at the latter end, as well as before, under
his Protection and Safety may be guided and governed by the true Spirit, in the
Bond of Peace and in Righteousness of Life, till at last she may safe arrive at
the heavenly Port and Kingdom.

By Thy glorious Resurrection We beseech Thee to hear Us, Good Lord!

According to my Promise in the Preface, I here annex Theo. Brabourn's
Recantation.
WHereas I Theophilus Brabourn have been convented in this Honorable Court of
High Commission for Causes Ecclesiastical, for pening and publishing a certain
Book, entitled, A Defense of that Ancient Ordinance of God, The Sabbaeh-Day;
Wherein I have rashly and unadvisedly maintained, That the Saturday of every
Week ought necessarily to be our Christian Sabbath Day now in the Time of the
Gospel, according to the Rule of the Fourth Commandment: I do now (upon further
Trial and better Advisement, being in Co^s^ience convinced of my Error)
Sincerely Confess and Acknowledge that my said Position touching the
Satur^ay-Sabbath, was a Rash and Presumptuous Error: And by these Presents I do
here in all Obedience and Humility make my Humble Submission unto my Holy
Mother, The Church of England, Promising, That I will ever hereafter carry my
self as an Obedient Son in all Peaceable and Dutiful Behavior to my Mother,
The Church, and to the Godly Fathers and Governors thereof.

And as touching the Sunday or LORDS DAT, I do Confess and Acknowledge, That
the same is an Holy Day of the Church, Yea, and a most Ancient Holy Day, and
very Honorable. For St. Ignatius, who lived in the Days of St. John the
Apostle, calls it The Queen and Princess of DAYS: And other of the Primitive
Fathers do give the same Day very Honorable Titles, and did Exhort their
Auditors to Observe it Religiously.

And further, I do Confess and Acknowledge, That This Day is to be Religiously
Observed, and that upon the same Grounds, and in the same Manner as is Directed
by the Canons of our Church and Statutes of the Land.

FINIS.

