Some brief Remarks upon a late Book, entitled, George Keith once more brought
to the Test, etc. having the Name of Caleb Pusey at the end of the Preface, and
C. P. at the end of the Book.
. 1. I Find nothing worthy of an answer in all the said Book, with reference to
any Principles of Doctrine in matters of Faith controverted betwixt any true
Christians and the Quakers in general, or betwixt the Quakers and Me in
particular; nor have I observed so much as six lines in all the said Book, of
any Argument, whether real or merely apparent, to convince the Readers either
of the truth of the Quakers Doctrine, or the falseness of any Principle of
Doctrine maintained either by the Church of England, to which I belong, or by
me in particular. The matter of Contest being chiefly matters of Fact, as,
Whether the Quotations out of the Quakers Books be true, or not?

Now, to what purpose shall this sort of Contest be continued betwixt us, by
this method of printing Book after Book, one against the other, I still
affirming to the fidelity of the Quotations (three or four typographical Errors
of the Press excepted, and which C. P. and the Qrs. require to be excepted in
their own Books) and which in all reason ought to be excepted in all Books,
provided they be really such) and he or they denying the fidelity of said
Quotations? Now most of the Books out of which these Quotations are made, are
very rarely to be found in the hands of any but Quakers, and what of said Books
the Qrs. have they keep close; how then shall this Controversy be decided, but
by coming face to face in public, and producing the Books out of which said
Quotations are made, and comparing said Quotations with the Books? But this the
Qrs. refuse, although they have been invited to it by me at several times and
places since I came last into America; nay, though I have gone to their Meetings,
and offered this fair Trial of comparing their Books with said Quotations (as
particularly I have done at Lynn in New England, at Newport in Rhode Island, at
Flushing in New York Government, at Shrewsbury and Burlington in New-Iersey,
(and at Philadelphia I invited them to a public Meeting:) but at all these
places the Quakers fled, and would neither have the patience to hear me, nor
examine into the fidelity of said Quotations, though requested to do it.

Seeing therefore that the Policy of the Quaker Preachers is such, that they
strive to stifle the truth, and thereby keep their hearers in Ignorance, (who
are willing have it so,) and that they will not come out of their (...) Dens,
and seeing also that I have the Attestation of eight worthy Ministers of the
Church of England to the fidelity of my Quotations out of the Qrs. Books, who
by the appointment of the Bishop of London, did compare said Quotations with
the Qrs. Books before an Auditory of several hundreds of People, (where many of
the Qrs. were present) at Turners Hall in London, as many be seen at large in
my third and fourth Narratives; I do therefore hereby declare, that I think my
self sufficiently clear and free of any further Obligation to lie upon me, or
of any need to print any further Answer, beside this, to the said C. P. or any
of his Associates or party, as touching the abovesaid Books published under his
Name; for, to do it again and again would be a superfluous labor, seeing the
Quakers generally, and in a manner universally are resolved not to believe the
Truth in mattes of fact; and for all others who are not of their Party, or
biased to them, they are generally, and universally (so far as I have had
occasion with them) satisfied fully about the truth and fidelity of the
Quotations, and the gross Prevarication and Dissimulation of the Quakers, and
particularly of him or them that publish their Books to the contrary.

But to come to the matter of his Book; As one instance of my falseness (as C.
P. is pleased to charge it) page 1. of his Preface, he brings a Certificate
from John Mcc Comb, in the following words, viz.

Whereas, G. K. in p. 40. of his Book, entitled, The Spirit of Railing Shimei,
etc. says, Upon application made by William Bradford and John Mcc Comb, to
Governor Fletcher, for enlargement from their Imprisonment, he examined into
the cause of their Commitment and finding it was upon a Religious difference,
discharged them, etc. I do hereby certify, (being one of the Persons
abovenamed, that G. K.'s relation abovesaid, is false; For We the said William
Bradford and John Mc Comb, were both set at Liberty, from the said
imprisonment, before ever Governor Fletcher came into his Government of
Pensilvania And I do Certify, that I never made Application to him, the said
Governor Fletcher, nor any other Person under him, for my Liberty. Witness my
hand,

John Mcc Comb.


When the Book of C. P. (with this printed Certificate) came to my hands, I was
then in East-Iarsey and bound for New York, and when I came there I showed the
said Certificate to W. Bradford (the other Person concerned) who admired not a
little at the falseness of it, and said, he believed that some designing Person
had drawn I. MccComb to sign that Certificate unawares, as (he says) he has
known the Qrs. some times have drawn up Certificates and offered them to
persons to sign, and who sometimes by that means have certified false things,
as J. M. has in this case; and the said W. B. offered to give his Certificate
to the contrary of what J. M. has certified, a Copy of which Certificate
follows at the end of this Book. Also, I writ to Mr. Talbot, who was about that
time at Philadelphia, to go to I. MccComb and enquire of him the case of the
matter, and take his answer before Witnesses, persons of Credit, which
accordingly he did, and is as follows,

MR. Evans, Mr. I. Carpenter, Mr. N. Pea^se, and my self, went to John MccComb,
who as to the particular of his being set at liberty, said, It was before Coll.
Fletcher came into the Province. But the Question being put, Who clea^ed him?
he answer, John White, the Sheriff, bid him go home, and come again when he
called for him; and upon the death of John White, he looked upon himself
discharged, though never acquitted by due course of Law, but only enlarged upon
Paroll Witness our hands this 3d of November. 1703.

Evan Evans, Clerk,
Nicholas Pearse,
Joshua Carpenter,
John Talbot, Clerk.


Now, Reader, pray observe, here is the Certificate of four Persons of good
Credit that John MccComb was not discharged, but only enlarged upon Parol.

2 dly, Observe that this Certificate which C. Pusey or the Quakers have
printed, says, That W. Bradford and J. MccComb were both set at liberty from
their imprisonment before Gov. Fletcher came into the Government of
Pennsilvania. Now, if these words had not come from the Jesuits or Quakers,
who would have thought there had been a mental Reservation in them? Take the
words [ set at liberty] as they lie plain to the understanding of every common
Reader, and you will think these Prisoners were set at liberty by due course of
Law, or by the same Authority they were imprisoned; and then G. K. would be a
Liar, a base man, etc. because he says, they were set at liberty by Governor
Fletcher. But if you observe I.MccComb's own words to the abovenamed four
Persons, they bewray his and C. Puseys falseness and sophestry, and it appears
he had only liberty given him by the Sheriff to go home upon his Parol; as many
Qrs. in England have had liberty given them by the Goalers to go home and
return when called for; and yet the Qrs. have still reckoned them Prisoners,
and have so recorded them in their printed Books. But now to serve a turn and
make G. K. a Liar, they can strain this favor so far, as make the Reader
believe these Prisoners were set at liberty by due course of Law. Indeed, it
appears they think it no evil to belie and slander any one that has left their
society; as lately there was a Quaker in New-Iarsey that reported a slander
against one of these Apostates (as they call them) The Person wronged writes a
Letter to this Qr. expostulating with him why he would raise or report so gross
a slander unless he knew it to be true. This Quaker returns an answer in
writing, That seeing he (this slandered person) was gone from Truth and
Friends, he thought he had done no ill, though the report was not true.

3 dly, This Certificate says, That he J. M. never made application to
Governor Fletcher, nor any other Person under him, for his liberty. For this he
gives no proof but his own authority. But William Bradford declares that he
made application, by his Petition, to Governor Fletcher, (to which John Mcc
Comb was privy,) both for himself and John McComb; and so I testify that I
made application to Gov. Fletcher for them both, and also for Peter Boss who
was then actually in Prison.

Another thing C. P. charge on me to be false, and a contradiction to my
self, That the Quaker Magistrates hired men to fight, as accordingly they did,
and recovered a Sloop, and took some Privateers by force of Arms. But that all
this is true to a tittle, I can produce sufficient evidence, and Peter Boss in
particular, as well as Capt. Holt, both which I have heard assert it, and who
are ready to assert it still to any sober enquirer; and though Peter Boss entered
the Sloop, without either Gun, Sword or Spear, yet armed men with Guns and
Swords, who pursued them in Boats, by force of Arms, made them through fear,
yield to give up the Sloop, and the Privateers fled into the Woods, and were
pursued by armed men (hired by Quaker Magistrates) and taken by them; the which
armed men discharged several of their fire Locks at them, and though none were
killed, yet some were wounded, and blood was shed in struggle with some of
them. This relation I had from the abovenamed Persons, worthy of Credit, and
who were both, in part, concerned.

Again, this Author, page 22. labors to make me guilty of several Falsehoods
in my 9th Query of the printed Appeal, for saying, They ( i. e. the Quakers)
gave a Commission to fight, signed by three Justices of the Peace, whereof one
was a Preacher among them. Whereas (says C. Pusey) it was but a Warrant, in
the Nature of a Hue-and-Cry, to bring the Robbers back to Justice, without any
word of fighting, killing or destroying in it. 2 dly, It was not (says he)
signed by three Justices that were Quakers, neither was any one of them a
Preacher among (...). Another Falsehood was, That the Ministers here had
engrossed the Worldly Government; whereas (says he) there were diverse then
concerned in Government, not Ministers nor Quakers neither.

Answ. All his Metaphysics cannot prove that it was not a Commission, as if a
Commission could not be a Warrant. Again, that he says, It was but a Warrant
in the nature of a Hue-and-Cry. But he does not say, it had the Name of a
Hue-and-Cry either in the Title or Body of it; but by his Philosophy, it had
the Nature of a Hue-and-Cry; and I think, by as good Philosophy, and better, I
may say, it had the Nature of a Commission, much rather, (though whether one or
the other, is not material) for I never understood that a mere Hue-and-Cry,
without having the Nature of a Commission, could be given and directed to three
Captains to raise men with Guns and Swords, to pursue a Company of Pyrate, or
Sea-Robbers. 2 dly, He says, It was not signed by three Justices that were
Quakers. Answ But neither do the words, as quoted by him, say, they were all
Quakers: It is sufficient to clear me of his Charge against me in his Book, if
some, or two of them were Quakers, and this, I think, he has not the Fore head
to deny, because it is so generally known, and can be effectually proved by
Witnesses living* who have seen the very Original; and what will C. P. lay if
they produce it? Will he then own himself justly guilty of that Falsehood he has
unjustly charged upon me? O nay, it was but a small mistake or slip of the Pen!
And yet the least circumstance of a Mistake in G. K. or any whom the Quakers
call Truths Adversaries, (though no wise material to the case, and but an error
of the Press, and though corrected in print, yet it) must be aggravated to a
great Falsehood! So very fair and impartial would the Quakers seem to be, (to
them who do not well know them) that they, forsooth! would not for a world be
guilty of any Partiality! But (says he) neither was any one of them a Preacher
among us. But for this we have but his bare affirmation; and indeed it is in a
manner impossible for any to tell certainly, who is not a Preacher or Speaker
among them; for any one among them (who is owned to be Friend of Truth) has as
great authority to preach among them, at will and pleasure, as the best of
them. 3 dly, Nor is it any Falsehood (as he charge it) That the Quaker
Ministers had then here engrossed the worldly Government; for they have done
the same (in great part) since, as is nortoriously known, in the Province of
Pennsilvania, to all impartial Persons. 4 thly, Nor does his Reason he brings,
invalidate the truth of the Query, or Assertion contained in it, viz. That
there were diverse then concerned in the Government, not Ministers nor Quakers.
I Answ. Suppose there were a few such; what were they but Quaker-Tools, created
on purpose to dance after their Masters infallible Pipe, be it right or wrong,
and which was ofther wrong than right, as has been sufficiently proved? Or if
they were not such Tools, they were, at most, but as so many Ciphers; for the
Quaker party of Justices were sure, by number, to carry any cause as they
pleased; and therefore it may very well be said, that they engrossed the
worldly Government; for they engrossed it so far as to be the major part, yea*
two or four Quaker Magistrates for one that was no Quaker, and by that means
they carried all matters and causes as they pleased; as witness the Private
Sessions at Philadelphia the 25th of August, 1692. where they drew up that most
unjust Proclamation against me, which they caused to be published in the
Marketplace by the common Crier, the Quaker Justices and Magistrates attending
the publication thereof. Now at this private Sessions there were six Quaker
Justices and two that were not Quakers; these two Justices dissented from the
Quaker Justices in the case before them, because they found the matter of the
Accusation against G. K. to be a Religious difference among the Quakers, and
not at all concerning the Government; neither would the Quaker Justices suffer
G. K. to be sent for before them, in order to be convict, but right or wrong
they drew up said Proclamation against him, and published it, as aforesaid, and
posted it up both in Town and Country; and the dissent of these two Justices
signified nothing, for the Quakers out-voted them by their number, and carried
causes which way they pleased, as much as if they had been all and every one
Quakers.

. 2. But it is Comical in this Caleb Pusey, that the Warrant to so many armed
men with Guns and Swords (that came to pursue the Pirates in the Sloop they had
stolen) was without any word of Fightinging, Killing or Destroying in it. But
friend Caleb, do thou think that the words of the Warrant mean, that they
should NOT fight, kill, destroy nor wound any of those Pirates, but bring them
to Justice without the use of any carnal Weapon? And what if these Pirates had
refused to come at their command? Ought these three Captains, with their armed
men (by virtue of that Warrant given by the Quaker-Justices, etc.) to have
returned with their fingers in their Mouths, and done nothing against them,
though these Pirates had offered to wound and kill any that should assault or
lay hands on them? Had the Quakers any ground by Inspiration to think, that
mere words would bring them back, or that they would be so tame to let them lay
hands on them, without any Resistance? If Words without Swords could do it, or
had they faith to believe that words would do it, why then did they send so
many armed Men? could not one or two with a Constables have done it? And (...),
what need had there been for the Quaker-Sheriff of Philadelphia (who was a
great Preacher) to have searched the Town for Guns and Swords to arm these men
with? And what need had there been for that eminent Quaker, Sam. Carpenter to
stand by his Shop Door and invite those that would go recover the said Sloop,
to go into his Shop and supply themselves with Powder and Lead gratis? And if
there had not been danger of Life or Limb in this expedition, why was so much
Money as a hundred Pound promised and paid by the Quakers to these armed men
that fetched back these Pirates? Come, Caleb, if thou have any honesty left,
answer plainly, and tell what need there was of all this Preparation and
Furniture, if nothing of Fighting or use of carnal Weapons were intended? Now,
if nothing was either expressed in words, or intended in the sense of that
Warrant, to warrant and empower these armed men to fight, and to kill rather
than be killed, what a praemunire had the Quakers drawn these armed men into, if
they had killed any of the Pirates in re-taking the Sloop? And if their words
and Warrants are so double faced; who ought to trust them? When thou, or thy
imployers, ( Caleb) print again, pray answer these these things plainly.

But before I conclude this point, let me add, to prevent all future debate
whether the Quakers Principle be not, That it is lawful for them, upon
occasion, to use the Carnal Weapon, as well as for any others, I think Caleb
Pusey has plainly enough resolved it; and I leave it to the intelligent Reader
to judge, whether he has not so done in page 23, of his last Book, where he
says, That Richard Hubberthorn (a great Quaker-Apostle) told King Charles the
second, That such Government (viz. that is for the Punishment of evil Doers,
and praise of them that do well) We (the Quakers) could Assist both in BODY and
ESTATE. Now what means their Assistance in Body as well as Estate, to suppress
evil Doers, when they might happen to rise in Rebellion against the Government?
Is it not to use the carnal Weapon against them? unless their intent be, that
they will expose their naked Bodies to the Guns and Swords of these Rebels, to
be a sort of Bullwark to defend the Bodies of those that think it lawful to
fight?

But C. P. says, p. 23. That G. K. is not fair to leave out the rest, for
which the Authority here was justly offended at him, which was expressly
mentioned in the Proclamation.

Answ. This was about some Names or words they allege I gave Thomas Lloyd, and
some others that were then Quaker-Magistrates. But this, in effect, I did not
leave out, but have sufficiently answered to it, so far as was true (see p. 35.
Spirit of Railing) but diverse of those words he quotes, I altogether deny, as
spoke by me, as that I called T. L Pitiful Governor, which I remember nothing
of, nor are they in said Proclamation; and diverse other words there men-are
falsely charged against me; but whether true or false, I was never legally
convict of any such words; and whatever words I said at any time then, much
harder and more severe Names were given by* W. P. to the Mayor of London, and
Justices at the Sessions in Old Baily; and the like, may be found in G. F 's
Journal, of his giving much more severe and hard words and Names to some
Justices in England. But why does not C. P. insert the much harder Names that
both Quakers and Quaker-Magistrates gave me, whereof there is a list in a
printed Paper, called, An Expostulation? And why does he not distinguish
betwixt what was spoke to them as Quakers, and not as Magistrates? I have many
living evidences that heard T. Lloyd say, he would take no advantage, as a
Magistrate, of words spoke to him in those Religious Controversies; and yet now
to defame me, they charge me with speaking sharp words to them as Magistrates,
which is altogether false.

But what was all this, if it were true, of giving hard Names to some Quaker
Magistrates? was there any shadow or color of Law to make me guilty of
speaking and writing what tended to Sedition and Subversion of the Government?
Had I given them scandalous Names, they might have sued me at Law, and fined
me, as Samuel Ienings did, I think, very unjustly; and if it had possible for
me to have got fair (...) impartial Judge and (...), I might have sued and cast
them at Law for their vile Defamations of me, as well as other great Acts of
Injustice, rare, I think, to be heard of. They did not only proclaim me an
Offender at the Marketplace, and one that had Writ and spoke what had a
Tendency to Sedition and Disturbance of the Peace, as also the Subversion of
the present Government; but they also proclaimed me an Offender for what they
supposed I might dare to do, saying, He that uses such Exorbitancy of Speech
toward the Governor, may be supposed will easily dare to call the Members of
Council and Magistrates Impudent Rascals. Observe, Reader, this is all one as
to pass sentence of Death on a Person, not for a Murder actually committed by
him, but for a Murder that may be supposed he will easily dare to commit. This
is as bad, or rather worse than Abbington Law. And does not their blood thirsty
Spirit herein appear, as well as their exposing me to the fury of a mixed
multitude, which they might think would be so exasperated as the Mob in Holland
were against the two De Wits; and all this without the least calling me before
them to convict me of any thing they allege against me. Just as their 28
unjust Judges served me in their spiritual Court, without the least conviction
or calling me before them, and aggravating my supposed Crimes in the words that
are commonly used in convicting Fellons, viz. That I was a Person as not having
the fear of God before my Eyes. For my part I cannot but with good Conscience
think, that their thus unusual proceedure against me, so contrary to all common
Law and Equity, (as if I had been some Fugative, willful Murderer or Traitor
against both King and Country, to proclaim me thus in the open Marketplace
before a mixed multitude) was to no other end but (had God permitted it) to be a
Sacrifice to the Malice and Blood-thirsty Spirit of my Adversaries. But God
that caused the Earth to help the Woman, did cause the Earth to help me at that
time, though there was no Violence used by any of them to any Quaker Magistrate
or Quaker; yet the friendlyness of the common People (both in Town and Country)
made the Qr. Chariot-wheels go more heavy; that though they put some of my
Friends into Prison, yet they did not put me in Prison, fearing the Multitude
(as was supposed) for that time; though their Fury was not abated, but increased
against me, to that height, that after some time they got a Grand Jury of
Quakers (whereof Alex. Beardsly, that inviduous Quaker, was foreman, to
present me,) for trespassing against that fundamental Law of the Province made
by the Assembly held at New Castle, May, 10 1684, beside some other
Presentiments, as I can prove, they had in readiness against me, yet more
severe, as I have cause to apprehend, especially, that on a Sunday at the Bank
Meeting, two of their Preachers, both Quaker-Magistrates, did positively charge
me, That I had said in that very Meeting, That the King had broke his
Coronation Oath. The falsehood of which Accusation, many then present bore
witness against; [of this see more in my Book, called, Railing Shimei, p. 39.]

But C. P. thinks he has got a mighty matter against me, that after those words
in the Proclamation [ Subversion of the Government] G. K. stops, but the words
following are, [ Or to the Aspersing the Magistracy thereof] By these last
words (says he) its clear they did not positively charge THEM with doing that
which tended to the Subversion of the Government.

Answ. That these last words make it clear they did not charge me positively
with doing what tended to the Subversion of the Government, is a groundless
insinuation and trifling argument, after his usual manner: The word [ Or] both
in Scripture, as well as in other Authors, and even in Quakers Books, is often
synonimous, and of the same signification with what goes before; for, Aspersing
the Magistracy is Aspersing the Government, and that tends to the subversion of
it. And for a clear proof that they charged me positively with what tended to
the Subversion of the Government, in the Mittimus signed by five Quaker
Justices, they call the said Appeal from the 28 Judges, etc. (expressly
mentioned in the Proclamation, and on which it is grounded) A malicious and
seditious Paper, tending to the disturbance of the Peace and subversion of the
present Government; and this without any [ Or] or [ If] or disputative Particle
whatsoever.

Again, he severely charges me with Baseness, as well as ill Logic, p. 25. of
his last Book, for my having said, That I was charged for speaking and writing
what tended to the subversion of the Kings Government, as well as W. P 's; for
(says he) there was no such words as the Kings Government. But I say, as much
every whit as of W. Penn's Government, the words being general* [ The
Subversion of the Government.] And dare C. Pusey say, that Pennsilvania was not
then under the Kings Government, as well as it is now under the Queens
Government? And that they did mean the Kings Government chiefly, and but nextly
W.P 's, their words I cited formerly out of their Proclamation, do plainly
prove; We cannot (say they) without the violation of our Trust to the King and
Governor. What King was this? Was it W. P. or was it any other King but the
King of England? What silly trifling is this in Caleb Pusey!

Beside, it is most evident, that they judged me guilty of doing what tended to
the utter subversion of the Kings Government in Pennsilvania; for in the
printed Trial* p. 34. David Lloyd did infer from the words of the Appeal, Qu.
9. That if the Magistrates must be blamed for their proceedings against those
Rogues that had Pyratically stolen away a Sloop, to the great Terror of the
People, what do you think (said he, to the Jury, upon the Trial of W. Bradford)
will be the consequence thereof, but to encourage all manner of Wickedness. Now
under this universal All Manner of Wickedness is contained that one manner of
Wickedness (with many other sorts) viz. To encourage, comfort and assist the
Indians and French, that are in league together, and by speech or writing to
persuade them, without all fear of danger to invade Philadelphia and all
Pennsilvania, and bring it under the King of France, because the far greatest
number of the Inhabitants in Pennsilvania being Quakers, will not sight with
any carnal Weapons, either in Defense of themselves, or of the Kings
Government: This agrees to the severe Charge that D. Lloyd made against that
Appeal, and consequently against me the Writer of it. And thus by D. Lloyd's
consequence not only William Bradford but G K. and others that signed, were
guilty of High Treason against the Crown of England, which to be sure is a
Capital Crime; see for this Daltons Justice, printed at London, 1697. Tit.
High Treason, p. 328. cap. 140. To succor the Kings Enemies is Treason. And p.
3^8. cap. ibid. To be adherent to the Kings Enemies (aiding them, or giving
them aid or comfort in his Realm, or elsewhere) is High Treason. Thorp. Edit.
3. fol. 429. Again, To stir up any Forreigner with force to invade this Realm,
or any other h^^ Dominions or Countries, [or Countries, Mark that C. P.] under
his Obeisance, and such Compassings, Imaginations, Intentions, or any of them,
that any shall express, utter or declare by any printing, writing, preaching,
or malicious and advised Speeches, being convict thereof, or attainted by
course of Law, is Treason and Forfeiture, as in High Treason incurred thereby,
13 Car. 2. cap. 1.

Now the abovesaid Consequence of David Lloyd was the common discourse and
inference of my Adversaries, the Quaker Magistrates and their party against me
and my Friends, saying, (like to the Jews) If we let him alone, the Romans will
come and take away our place and Nation, Ioh. 11.48. But by the like
Consequence that D. L. made against me and my friends, for blaming the Quaker
Magistrates, for recovering a Sloop by force of Arms, all the Quakers both here
and in England, etc. are equally guilty of High Treason, who profess it to be
their Principle, Not to defend themselves nor the Government by carnal Weapons.

But C. P. thinks me very insincere that I blamed the Qr. Magistrates for their
giving a Commission or Warrant to 3 Captains and their Men to recover the Sloop
by carnal Weapons, and yet some time before that I commended them for the same.
But how did I commend them? Answ. Why, I commended them as they were
Magistrates, believing it was their Duty to do what they did and much more, if
there had been occasion; but as Qrs. I blamed them, as transgressing their
professed Principle, which is no proof of my Insincerity; for I was of that
mind then, as I am now, That if Quakers will be Magistrates, they must resolve
to use the carnal Sword, otherwise they violate and betray their Trust; and if
they use it, they act contrary to their Profession. The only way to extricate
themselves of this Dilemma, is, either not to undertake the Office of a
Magistrate, or if they do, to relinquish their former Principle of its being
unlawful to use the carnal Sword, so much as in Defense: But then down goes
their Infallibility, and they expose themselves to be reproached by the Name of
Apostates* as they have reproached me and others by the like Name, for leaving
their Error in this and other things.

. 3. But whereas C. P. had said in his Proteus, etc. That they had no Law to
make it Capital, viz. my doing what tended to Sedition and subversion of the
Government. To this I answered, first, That it was Capital both according to
the Law of God, and the Law of right Reason, and so it was judged both by Jews
and Romans, and by St. Paul, according to Acts ^^.5, 6. and 25.11. To this C.
P. says nothing. 2 dly, Their Law in the Province* That who by speaking or
writing do or commit any act or deed tending to the Subversion of the present
Government, shall suffer Imprisonment, not exceeding 12 Months, and undergo
such Corporal Punishment as the Quality of the Offender and the nature of the
Offense may require. By which words of their Law it appears, That as to the
corporal Punishment, it is not expressed or limited, either as to Matter and
Manner in special, but wholly left to the arbitrary will and pleasure of the
Judge or Judges, to make it as severe as they will; and such who were to be my
Judges were sufficiently known to have had Will enough to have extended it, not
only to the utmost Rigor of the Letter of the Law, but to exceed it, even to
Death it self, considering how illegal, and contrary to the very Heathens
Justice, their proceedings were against me, in the cases abovementioned, by
making my Queries in the Appeal seditious, and tending to the subversion of the
Government, because I expostulated with them for transgressing their known
Principle against using the carnal Sword, whereby they made themselves equally
guilty; and by passing a severe sentence against me in their Proclamation,
without all Trial or Conviction, or calling of Witnesses to my face.

. 4. As for the Resolution of the Lawyer, I mentioned in my Book, Railing
Shimei, That though they could not hang me by that Law, yet they could, by that
Law, (if it was their Will) Whip me to Death; for if Whipping be the corporal
Punishment intended by the Law, there is no limitation, as to the Number or the
Severity of the Lashes. To this C. P. says, Though that Law did not assign the
number of Stripes, yet there was a Law made at the same Sessions, limiting the
stripes not to exceed twenty one, where they are not otherwise assigned.

Answ. But that Law limiting the number of stripes to 21, has no reference to
the Letter nor Sense of the other Law, where whipping is not so much as
mentioned, but it is left to the arbitrary Will of the Judges (if the sentence
be whipping,) to cause it to be not only 21 stripes, but as many times 21 as
they should please, seeing there is no limitation of Time, no more than there
is of Number of stripes: So that they might cause whip the Person, not only
with 21 stripes for one day, but for as many days (by continual succession,
without intermission of one day) as might infallibly put an end to his life;
which would be more severe than forthwith to hang him. And though this would be
the highest Cruelty, yet what less could I expect from these bloody Men, who
did aggravate things against me to the highest imaginable, calling me Worse
than Profane and Bloody H^man (both which Names Sam. Ienings gave me) and an
encourager of all manner of Wickedness, a Murderer of Souls, a Tiger, a
Monster, etc. And at my first meeting with W. Penn in London, he told me I had
spoiled his Country, which he gathered from the wretched Information of those
my Adversaries who were to be my Judges; and the alteration of the Government
from W. Penn to Coll. Fletcher, was laid to the charge of my Friends and me.
And truly, if I had been such a Monster of Wickedness as they endeavored to
represent me, all that severity abovementioned, would have been my just
desert. But I thank God I was no such Person; and as I showed in my former
Book, I had a public Writing from the Governor, Council and other Magistrates
of Philadelphia, (after the alteration of the Government) wherein they fully
cleared me of all things the Qr. Magistrates laid to my charge, and especially
from being guilty of doing any thing that tended to Sedition or Subversion of
the Government, but that my difference with them was about matters purely
Religious. And as for the sever^ Names they say I gave some of them, for their
Antichristian and Atheistical Principles, They far exceeded me, and the Qr.
Authors, particularly W. Penn, has given far worse to the whole Clergy of the
Church of England, the Bishops not excepted, who are Peers of the Nation. But
if the Qrs. say, he gave them not those Names, as Peers of England, but as
Priests and Teachers. Why then will they not allow me the same liberty? for I
gave not those Names to the Qrs. as they were Magistrates, but as Quakers,
false Teachers, Heathens and Antichrists. Let them remember the Proverb, Sauce
for a Goose is Sauce for a Gander. Indeed the Disparity is great in this, that
what Names W. P. gave to those worthy Persons, were most unjust, but the Names
I gave to my Adversaries were their true Characters generally, though I do not
justify my self in any sinful Passion ^ might be in, on extreme Provocation,
but have often acknowledged it, yet though they have far exceeded me, I never heard
they made any acknowledgment; Nay, these infallible ones are impeccable also.

But again, suppose they had made 21 Lashes to be one part of my punishment,
(which if laid on by an Executioner with as strong a hand, and as vindictive
heart, and strong will to make an end of of my frail Life (as this C. P. seems
to have) would very likely have done it) They might, as another part of my
punishment (if surviving the first part) have put me (for a minute or two) on a
Gibbet, not on any pretense to hang me till dead, but in Waggery, as Caleb
Pusey says, Benj. Waller told me in Waggery That the Quakers were preparing a
Gibbet for me. But had they hanged me on the Gibbet in Waggery, it might
possibly have turned to too great Earnest to themselves, as well as to me. But
Benja* Waller did not signify to me, that it was in Waggery, he so told me,
and I had but too great cause to think, it was in strong Earnest then, however
since they may, or some of them have over-awed him, (he living in a Qrs.
family, and one of my greatest Adversaries) to say now, It was in Waggery. But
whereas C. P. says, p 26. That the Person that told me so was no Quaker. What
can I conclude from this, by true reason, but that either another Person beside
Benj Waller told me so, and so I should have two Witnesses for it, by C. P's
acknowledgment, That the Qrs. were preparing a Gibbet for me, or C. P. is
self-condemned, and has writ this against his Conscience; for all the Qrs.
here-away, that knew Benj. Waller (and they generally knew him, and C. P. to be
sure knew him) did well know, that both then, and diverse years after, he was a
Quaker by Profession.

. 5. But whereas C. P. says, They ( i. e. the Qr. Magistrates) had no Law in
the Province to make what they accused me of to be Capital, to wit, speaking
and writing what tended to Sedition and Subversion of the Government. To which
I say, That though they had no Law in their Provincial Laws, to make me guilty of
any Crime or Trespass, it never having been made any Law among the Qrs. That to
blame the use of the carnal Sword, was of a tendency to Sedition and Subversion
of the Government; for then they would have been all guilty who profess to
blame it still, if any of them should use it, or give a Commission to other to
use it, yet by their straining that Law beyond what the Law says, as they have
often strained in diverse cases, and acted not only beyond Law, but contrary to
it, and to common humanity; and some of them have been known in those days to
say, They had the Law in their own hands, and it was but to use their common
defense, their Spirit of discerning taught them what was the true sense of the
Law, and by that they could judge, without all outward Evidence who was guilty,
as A^thor Cook, one of their Provincial Judges, (in a Meeting of the Ministering
Friends at Burlington, when I called for his Evidences to prove what he had
there, most unjustly, accused me of,) said, Friends, ye have a Spirit of
Discerning to know whether I speak True or False, and what need then is there
of other Evidence? And it can be proved, that Quaker-Jury-men (in these parts)
have found Persons guilty, and given in their Verdict, without all outward
legal Evidence, only from their pretended inward evidence of their Spirit of
Discerning. And at another time, being at the same Arthur Cook's House, I told
him, That I would not plead to my Indictment unless I had a fair Jury; To which
said A. Cook (before Witnesses) replied, Truly George, a Foul one is good
enough for Thee. And indeed I had no other and on that account I refused to
plead; and yet they found me guilty, as in the printed Trial.

But whereas it is objected, That at London no man would own that Trial, as the
Author of it, and that therefore it is not to be credited.

I Answ the Author that had the main hand in that Trial, was not at (...), but
so far as I had any hand in it, I owned it. But why is it not to be credited,
because the Authors Name is not to? Are none of the Qrs. Books to be credited,
that have not the Authors Names to them? Pray what Authors Name is to W. Penn
and W. Mead^ Trial? What Authors Name is to the 2d part called, The Peoples
Ancient and just Liberties asserted? Why did not T. Ellwood put his Name to his
Book, called, The Case of Protestant Dissenters? Why did not G. Whitehead put
his Name to his Book, entitled, A legal Examination of Abuses of Law? Why did
not G Whitehead set his Name to his Trial at Norwich, which is entitled, Due
Order of Law and Justice pleaded, against Irregular and Arbitrary Proceedings?
And why did not G. Whitehead put his Name to his Book, called, The Accuser of
the Brethren? Nay, though W. Rogers sent out a Hue-and-Cry after the Author of
that Book, and though G W. answered that Hue-and-Cry, yet would not own himself
to be the Author? And why did not W. Penn put his Name to the first impression
of his Book, called, A Persuasive to Moderation, presented to the King and his
great Council? several thousands of them were printed and sold before he put
his Name to them. Now, were all these, and many more r. Books, that could be
named, of no credit, because the Authors Names are not them? I suppose C. P.
will answer Nay. But why then must our printed Trial be discredited, only for
want of the Author's Name? And might there not be good reason for the said
Author to conceal his name at that time? It is not unknown how severe they were
upon William Bradford for printing some Books of mine (only about those
Religious Differences at Philadelphia) without putting his Name thereto; and D.
Lloyd and the Quaker Justices urged much upon the Jury to find him guilty by a
statute made in England, although it was very usual for the Quaker Printers at
London to print the Quakers Books without putting the Printers Names to them;
and because the Jury could not agree to find him guilty, the Quaker Justices
dismissed the Jury (absolved them from their Oath) without bringing in any
Verdict, and told W. Bradford, who was then their Prisoner, That they would
have another Jury that should find him guilty; but soon after, by the good
Providence of God, Coll. Fletcher* came (unexpected) with the Queens Commission
and turned these cruel men out of the Government. Now seeing the Quakers were
so severe with the Printer for printing some Books against them concerning
their Religion, ought not the Author of that Trial to be cautious how he
exposed himself to their Fury? Why might not he use a little of that they call
Christian Policy, for once, as well as G. Whitehaed, W. Penn, and other Quaker
Authors and Printers use it at will and pleasure?

And this does very properly lead me to give an effectual Reason, beside what
is above said, That though by the Law of the Province they could not (without
strain) make it Capital, what they accused me of, yet by a Statute in England
they could, as they did most unjustly construe what I had writ in that Appeal,
to be no less than tending to Sedition and Subversion of the Government; from
which they inferred, That I was guilty of encouraging all manner of Wickedness,
and a part of that Wickedness was to encourage, comfort and assist the Indians,
in league with the French, to take away the Government from the King of
England, which (as above) is Treason. And indeed this very consequence though not
expressed in so many words) was the common discourse of my Adversaries against
me, That if Pirates be suffered to take away our Vessels out of our Harbors, we
shall not only loose our Trade, but the French will come in upon us, and
destroy both Property and Government.

And thus, I think, to a Demonstration, I have made the truth of my Assertion
appear, That the Quakers held what they accused me of in the Appeal, to be
Capital, and to be sure they wanted no will to have done it, if Actions can be
deemed the Interpreters of men's Wills and Inclinations. And had divine
Providence permitted them to bring me to a Trial, upon that Presentment above
mentioned, or another they had in readiness, the Issue, in all probability,
would have been Parallel with that of Coll, Bayards Trial at New York.

Friendly Reader, I judge by what Remarks I have made on C. P's Book, I have
given sufficient Proof (and more than was needful) what a Prevaricator he is,
and how dully, and with what dull Sophestry he has labored, in vain, to prove
me what he really is himself. And seeing, as I have above noted, I have not
observed so much as fix lines in all his Book of any Arguments, true or false,
whereby either to prove any of the Quakers Principles to be true, or any
Principles of the Church of England to be false, I shall at present pass the
other parts of his Book, as not worth Noticing; for except the Railings, and
notorious Falsehoods uttered by him in it, which make up the far greatest part
of his Book, there is little behind but a nauseous Repeating, with multiplied
Tautologies* which I have fully answered in my former Book, called, The Spirit
of Railing Shimei.

George Keith.
March 2 d. 1704.
WHereas in a late Book of Caleb Pusey's it is certified that William Bradford
and John Mcc Comb were both discharged from their Imprisonment before Coll.
Fletcher came to Philadelphia with the King and Queens Commission and took the
Government out of the Quakers hands.

These are to Certify all whom it may concern, That John Mcc Comb and my self
being imprisoned by the Quakers, we made application several times to the
Quaker Magistrates for our enlargement, but could not obtain it. Wherefore upon
Governor Fletcher's coming to that Province, George Keith made application to
him for our enlargement, and I my self made application by my Petition to said
Governor Fletcher, (to which I. Mcc Comb was privy) Whereupon the Governor
appointed a Committee of the Council to examine into the cause of our
Imprisonment, who made Report, That it was occasioned by a Religious
Difference, and was not concerning the Government. Then I was sent for before
the Governor and Council, and the Governor asked me several Questions
concerning our Imprisonment. To which having answered, I was ordered to
withdraw. In a little time I was called in again, and Governor Fletcher told
me, That he found our Imprisonment was occasioned by a Religious Difference,
and therefore had ordered that I and my fellow Prisoner should be discharged.
For which I returned him Thanks. I also requested the favor that he would
please to order my Printing Tools to be restored to me, which had been taken
away from me. Whereupon the Governor sent for John White, the Sheriff, and
ordered him to Return my said Tools, which were lodged in Samuel Ienings's
House. From this time we were discharged from our Imprisonment, and not before.
To the Truth of this I can depose upon Oath, if required. Witness my hand this
27th of March, 1704.

William Bradford.

FINIS.

