The Glory of Goodness. THE Goodness of GOD, Celebrated; In Remarkable
Instances and Improvements thereof: And more particularly in the REDEMPTION
Remarkably obtained for the English Captives, Which have been Languishing under
the Tragical, and the Terrible, and the most Barbarous Cruelties of BARBARY.

Psalm. CII 18, 19, 20. This shall be written for the Generation to come; --
-- From Heaven did the Lord behold the Earth.
To hear the Groaning of the Prisoner, to loose those that are appointed to
Death.
Boston, in N. E. Printed by T. Green, for Benjamin Eliot. 1703.

PREFACE.
THE late REDEMPTION of between Two and Three Hundred English-Prisoners, that
were languishing in Barbary under the Bloody Tyrannies of the Emperor of
Morocco, is a Thing that furnishes us with wonderful occasion to Celebrate the
Goodness and Glory of our Great LORD-REDEEMER. And none have herein had more
plentiful Occasion, to Glorify the LORD, than that most considerable proportion
of the English Prisoners, which are now returned unto NEW ENGLAND, the Country
to which they belonged; and the People of God in this place, whose Prayers to
God, for these their Brethren, were so fervent, so constant, so remarkably
prosperous.

A Time for solemn Thanksgiving with and for these our Brethren, was kept by a
Number of Christians at Boston; on 15. d. 1. m. 1703*

And it was that Thanksgiving, that produced the ensuing Meditations* (whereof
indeed a part was also delivered Three Days after, at the more Public
Lecture;) Now Published for a more lasting MONUMENT of Gratitude, for the
Goodness of our Saviou^ 'Twas not fit that so Remarkable a work of Heaven,
should pa^^ without yielding some Revenues of Praise to the Name which is
Exalted (...) above al^ Blessing and Praise!

A Monument of Divine and Glorious GOODNESS^ WITH An HISTORY of what the
Goodness of GOD has done for our Captives, lately Redeemed out of Barbary.
Romans II.4. The Goodness of God leads thee to Repentance.


WHat the Psalmist once made the Beginning of (...) Discourse, we are now to
make the Beginning of Ours; Truly God is Good. All the Nations in the world,
that acknowled^ GOD And what Nations do not? ^ make as Universal an
Acknowledgement of His (...). Whatever Disputes about the other Perfections of
God, have been among the Children of men, His Goodness never could be well
disputed among them. The Greatness of God is no where discovered in Heaven or
on Earth, but the Discoveries of His Goodness do accompany it. Yea, the
Goodness of God, is in His Divine Oracles, called, His Godhead it self. The
Notion of Goodness is inseparable from the Notion of a GOD. We cannot have any
Notion of a GOD, if we have a Notion of any thing Better than Him. The
Expe^ience of all mankind, gloriously confirms this Notion of the Deity. There
is no man, who cannot from his own Experience, bring in a Testimony to the G^
(...)

But it is an Enquiry of general Concernment; What Improvement a man should
make of th^s Experience? And that Enquiry is answered in what is now before us.

The Apostle is fortifying the Church of Rome, against that very Error, which
the Apostate Church of Rome, is now fallen into; The Error of, Justification by
our own Good works. That Error he Refutes, by Demonstrating, That We a^e all
under Sin, and indeed have no Good works at all to boast of. One might now
Cavi^; What? We have Lawgivers, who Judge others for their Sin; certainly, you
will except these at least, from the deep Charge of being under Si^. To this
the Apostle replies; It Is ^rue, There were some who punished S^n in others, but
they every one committed it themselves; and these, if any in the world, might
assure themselves, That the wrath of God would overtake them. Our Apostle (...)
addressing these persons, mentions one signal Exaggeration of all their
wickedness; that is, The Experience which they had of the Divine Goodness unto
them; very particularly in their Advancements, their Preferments, their easy
Circumstances. They did not Know, or Think, the Obligations to Repentance,
which the Goodness of God laid upon them.

We find our selves now Led unto this DOCTRINE.

Men should be Led unto REPENTANCE of all Sin, by the wonderful GOODNESS of
that GOD, who is affronted and offended by their Sin. Behold, the Truths to be
now Asserted:

The First PROPOSITION.
^ere is a REPENTANCE of all Sin, in^umbent on, required of, all that have
sinned. We are advised Act. 17.30. God commands all men every where to
Repent. But as the Conscience of every man Preaches Repentance to him, It is
now a great CASE of Conscience, What is Repentance? Let us bestow some clear
Thoughts upon it.

REPENTANCE, largely taken, does intend and include, the whole Con^ersion of a
sinner, from Sin to God in the Lord Jesus Christ, and the whole Experience and
Behavior of a sinner under the Regenerating Impressions of the Holy Spirit.
But REPENTANCE taken strictly, is thus defined in the Word of God; 2 Cor. 7.10.
A Godly sorrow, wo^k^ng a change of mind, not to be sorrowed for. It is an
Amendment of a sinners Heart and Life, wrought with Godly sorrow for Sin; a
Sorrow issuing in a Joyful Amendment. Or, It is a Grace* whereby a sinner
affected with, and afflicted for, all Sin, Turns from it unto God with a
Reformed Heart and Life.

We are to be Led, [Oh! Holy Spirit lead us!] first unto a Seeing of Sin. W^
must have a sight of it, that we are Charg^eable with the unparalled Sin of
our First Father, with the Big-bellied Sin of our (...) Nature, and with Actual
Sins Innume^^^ble. And we must have a Sight of it, (...) every sin wherewith we
are Chargeabl^ is an Odious, a Dangerous, a Damnab^^ Evil; an Abominable Thing.
Our sight a^ ^ense must be that, 2 Samuel 24.10. I have ^inned, I have done very
foolishly.

We are to be Led herewithal unto a Mourning for Sin. Our Spirit must be a
Contrite spirit because it has been a Faulty one. Our Hearts must be Pierced,
and Rent, and Broke, and filled with Grief at the view of our Foolishness. With
Self-loathing Souls, we must be able to say, as he, Psalm. 38.17, 18. My sorrow
is continually before me, I will be sorry for my sin.

We are to be Led hereupon, unto an Owning of Sin. We must confess before God,
that we have Done what He has Forbidden, and left Undone what He has Commanded
in His Holy, and Just, and Good Laws; and confess, that He not only is
Righteous in all the Miseries that have come upon us, but would be so, if we
should be made infinitely more miserable. And where Men have been Injured by,
or Witnesses of our Transgression, Men should also Hear our Confession. We must
be like him, whose Note was; Psalm. 51.3. I acknowledge my Transgression.

Finally, We are to be Led from Sin; to be ^ed into a Divorce, a Distance, an
Everlasting Separation from Sin* We must Forsake our Sin; Abhor every Sin of
Infirmity* Allow no Sin of Presumption; Pursue the Death of Sin, and value it
above our very Life; and Embrace God, and Christ, and Holines^, as much as we
have done Sin heretofore; and Consent unto the Covenant of Grace, wherein we
engage to be forever for the Lord, and not for another. The perfection of
Repentance, is that; Isa. 55 7. Le^ the Wicked forsake his way, and the
Unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord.

The Second PROPOSITION.
Wonderful, Wonderful is the GOODNESS of that GOD, against whom the Evil of Sin
is committed.. Indeed the Evil and Venom of Sin lies, in its b^ing against so
Good a GOD. In the Titles of our God, Optimus appears as bright and soon unto
us, as Maximus; He is Good as well as Great, and Great in being so very Good.

But let us Enquire; First; What is the Goodness of God?

I will answer; It Is GOD in Hi^ Bounty; Or, His Inclination to deal Bountifully
with His Creatures. It is intimated in that passage, Psalm. 119.63. Thou art
Good, and thou do Good. He is Essentially Good; and He is Relatively Good.
God Wills, tha^ there should be something Besides Himself; but that it should
be All for Himself* And then He Delights in these His Works; and is Bountiful
and Beneficial unto them. This is the Goodness of God! Indeed, the Goodness of
God, in some sort comprehends all His Attributes. It was said, Exodus 33.19. I
w^ll make all my Goodness pass before thee. What was this Goodness, but the
whole Train of the lovely Perfections, and Excellencies in our God? When
Goodness does Contrive our Happiness, then it is W^sdom; When Goodness does
Effect our Happiness, then it is Power; When Goodness does Bestow our
Happiness, without Merit, then it is Grace; When against Merit, then it is
Mercy; When according to Promise, then it is Truth; When with a Respect unto
the Price paid for it, then it is Justice. Indeed, we are told by our Good
Lord, Mar. 10.18. There is none Good but One, and that is God: Originally Good,
Essentially Good, Infinitely Good: Oh, None so Good as He! Goodness is the very
Essence of God. It was not amiss in the Platonists, to call Him, (...) The very
Good, that is Goodness it self, and of it self.

Let us Enquire, Secondly What are the mo^e special Displayes, that God has
given of His Goodness?

I will Answer; They are Numberless. But more particularly, Let there be
fulfilled this Day among us, that word, Psalm. 145.7, 9. Lord, They shall
abundantly utter the the memory of thy great Goodness; The Lord is Good to all.

First The works of Creation, proclaim the Goodness of the God, who has Created
all things, and for whose pleasure they are and were Created. In the close of
the Creation, we find, Genesis 1.31. God saw every thing that He had made, and
behold it was very Good. It is most certain then, That He who made all must be
very Good. Even an Heathen could say, When God first s^t upon the Creation of
the world, He tranform'd Himself into Goodness. The whole World is a Map of
Goodness. As it is said of God, He is Good to all; so it may be said, He is Good
in all. Every Creature is an Herald o^ the Transcendent Goodness, that gave
Being unto it. The Goodness of God, gave a Being to every Creature; and has
put every Creature into that Order and Station, wherein it Best serves the Good
End for which it was Created. By the Goodnes^ of God, everv Creature is well
provided for, and furnished with all that Good, that may help it in the
comfortable service of its Creator. But there is no Creature that has more
cause to Celebrate the Goodness of God, than Man; Man, that has Dominion over
so many other Things; Man that is Beautified with such faculties and
Endowments; Man, that is made Lord of a World, wherein so many Servants attend
him, surround him, and befriend him* Oh! Let not Man forget the Praises of his
Makers Goodness? Man! Unworthy the Name of a Man, if thou art silent, when the
whole world about thee conspires to Praise that matchless Goodness.

Secondly. The works of Redemption, proclaim the Goodness of the God, of whom
the Redeemed of the Lord must say, He is Good, and His Mercy endures for ever.
In the Redemption of the world, the Sum of the matter is that; Luke 2.14. Good
will toward men. But what a Good God must He be, that has manifested this Good
Will! We read of, The Gospel of the Blessed God. How should we Bless GOD, and
His Goodness, for the Good Things that are brought unto us in His Gospel? Oh!
The peerless Goodness of God, in giving His only Bego^ten Son, that whosoever
believes on Him, should not Perish, but have Everlasting Life! It is Goodness
in God the Father, to choose us unto Everlasting Blessedness; It is Goodness in
God the Son, to Buy us unto that Blessedness: It is Goodness in God the Spirit,
to bring us unto that Blessedness. Oh, Look upon the sinful, woeful, horrible
Condition, whereinto we were plunged by our Fall: and say, whether any thing
but unparallellable Goodness could rescue us out of this Condition? Pass^on to
contemplate the whole Covenant of Grace, introduced by our Lord Jesus Christ;
Contemplate the Things engaged in it; They are Grace, and Glory, and every good
Thing: Contemplate the Terms on which they are engaged; They are Good Things
which the Lord our God has required of us. He^e is Goodness, Goodness enough
sure, to to dazzle the Eyes of the Good A^gels themselves!

Thirdly. The works of Providence proclaim the Goodness of the God, the
K^^gdome of whose Providence rules over all. When the operations and
performances of Providence, were going to be Declared, there is this most
agreeable Introduction to the Declaration; Psalm. 107.1. O give Thanks unto the
Lord, for He is Good. There is that care taken for the welfare of all things in
the Providence of God, that it may be said, They are filled with Good. The
Crying Ravens, the Hungry L^ons, the Lowest Worms, are preserved by the
Goodness of God, as well as the Loftiest Cherubims: O Lord, Thou preserve^^ Man
and Beast! There does not a Year pass us, but as the Psalmist speaks, It Is
Crowned with Goodnes^ Who Is, but our Gods^ The Earth is full of Ill men;
Traitors and Rebels against the God of Heaven, fill the Earth. Yet we are truly
told, The Earth is ^u^l of the Goodness of the Lord. The Children of Men, have
peculiar cause to take no^ice of this Goodness. There are inn^^erable Blessings
wherewith every man is favored; God favors us with Blessings in our Spirits;
Blessings in our Bodies; Blessings in our Education; Blessings in our
Em^loyments; Blessings in our Families, Rela^ives, and Fr^ends; Blessings in
the Provision made for our Necessities; Blessings in our Protect^on from
Dangers on every side of us: What are these Blessings? They are as the
Scripture calls them, The Blessings of Goodness. And the Ministry of the Good
Angel^, used in the Providence of God, ( Great Wheels, as one may say, in the
Clock of Providence,) for our Good, surely this is a singular Article of His
goodness! What? Shall Glori^us Angels look after Sorry Man? Mighty Angel look
after Feeble Man? Holy Angels look after Filthy Man? Be astonished, O Man, be
overwhelmed, with the vast loads of this Goodness.

Fourthly, Behold the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and see the Goodness of God! We cannot
apprehend God unto good purpose, but as He has Exhibited Himself, in our Lord
JESUS CHRIST. Our Lord JESUS CHRIST, is, The Face of God: That is a Name often
used for Him, in the Old Testament: Why? Because God is to be most of all seen
in Him. We read, 2 Cor. 4.6. We have the light of the Knowledge of the Glory of
God, in the Face of Jesus Christ. Would we see the Goodnes^ of God? Let us
behold, the Goodness of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. The Name of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, is that, 1 Pet. 3.13. The Good One. And no doubt, our Lord JESUS CHRIST
was meant, in many passages of the Old Testament, where we read about, The Good
Thing, and, The Goodness of the Lord. Our Lord JESUS CHRIST was Full of all
Goodness. He was not miscalled, when He was called* Good Master. All He said,
was Good; All He did, was Good; His goodness communicated it self in Acts of
Kindness to all that were about Him. It is Reported of Him, He went about doing
of Good. And He has Charged every one Else, To Do Good, even unto the worst of
men. He has Damned them for none of His Disciples, who do it not. This Goodness
of our Lord JESUS CHRIST was a Beaming forth of that Goodness which is in GOD
Himself; Our Lord JESUS CHRIST, is, God manifest in Flesh: and ^^e goodness of
that Lord, who was but a Mass of Incarnate Goodness, expressed unto us in
lively Colors, the goodness of God.

The Third PROPOSITION.
The wonderful Goodness of God, should be a wonderful M^t^ve unto us, to REPENT
of all our Sinning against Him. This is the Voice of all the Divine Goodness
unto us; This is the Use we should make of it: Oh! Repent of Sinning against so
good a G^d!

But let us hear this Language, a little more distinctly uttered.

First, The Goodness of God, Leads us to expect the Pardon of our sin, if we do
Return to Him from all our sin. If a man have no Expectation or Encouragement
for a Pardon, he will never come unto Repentance. That which Encourages a
sinner, is, an Hope that God will Pa^don him, if he do Repent. Impenitence will
be the certain Consequence of Desperation. From his Despair, the Arabians call
the Devil by the Name of Ibliso, or, The Desperate One. Despair will turn a
Sinner into a Devil. Well, but This is one great Point, wherein the goodness of
God showe^ it self. Dissolve into Tears of Repentance* O Hearts of Stone, when
you hear of this Mavelous Goodness! Exodus 34.6.7. The Lord God is merciful,
and gracious, and abundant in goodness, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression, and
Sin: And, Mic. 7.18. Who is a God like unto thee, that Pardons Iniquity,
because He delights in Mercy! It Is true, From the mere Goodness of God one could
not gather a Pardon for the Repenting Sinner. For, the Justice of God requires
a Satisfaction for sin; and Repentance is no Satisfact^on. But since we know,
that through the Tender Mercy of our God, the Dayspring from on High has
visited us, and that our Lord Jesus Christ has come to make Satisfaction, and
Expiation for our sin, we may now conclude it; O ye Chief of Sinners, make that
Joyful Conclusion; Certainly, If I Return to so Good a God, after all the Evil
that I have committed against Him, He will Pardon me, He will Accept me, He
will Adopt me. Never shall I Repent of my Repentance: I that am the blackest
Sinner in the world, shall by the goodness of God* be washed in the Blood of
His Dear Son, and He will make me one of His Children, and I shall stand before
Him, as if I had never Sinned against Him, upon my Re^^^ unto Him. How, How can
I go on in Sinning against such Vnmatcheable goodness! Truly, the Natural
Inference to be drawn from this admirable Goodness of God, is That: Isa. 55.7.
Let the wicked Return unto the Lord, and He will have Mercy on him, and unto
our God, for He will abundantly Pardon. One would think, This were enough to
break the Heart of the most obdurate and obstinate Sinner in the World. What?
After all thy horrible Sinfulness, O man, will the Goodness of God, receive thy
Returning Soul into its Embraces? And bestow Everlasting Righteousness and
Blessedness upon thee? Surely, An Heart well-steeped in the Oil of such
goodness will be no longer able to Resist the Calls unto Repentance! When we
are assured, Lam. 3.25. The Lord is good unto the Soul that seeks Him; it
naturally Leads us to Resolve, O my God, I will seek thee, I will seek thee,
and no longer Sin against thee!

Secondly, The Goodness of God Leads us to reckon Sin, the most unreasonable
and abominable Evil. Since God is Goodness it self, what must that be, that is
contrary to God? Certainly, Sin must be very Evil, because it is contrary to
Goodness it self. It Is with good Reason, that Sin is called, Joh. 17 15. The
Evil. But the Goodness of God then pronounces it an unreasonable Thing to Sin
against God; and loudly calls upon us, To abhor that which is Evil: And such
Abhorrence implies Repentance. When we are Tempted unto any sin, how deaf are
we to the most powerful Charms that ever were heard, if we do not now hear the
Goodness of God thus Charming of us, Oh! Do not this abominable Thing, which is
hateful to the Soul of God, and of Goodness!

It was of old said, Ye that Love the Lord, Hate Evil. Oh! Sin, Sin, what an
Evil, and an Hateful Thing will thou appear unto us, when we have the Lovely
Goodness of God before our Eyes! Yea, Inasmuch as God is good, we must believe,
That His Commandment is always Holy and Righteous, and Good. If the Commandment
be good, Say, O Reasonable Soul, whether it be not an Evil Thing to Transgress
the Commandment? It is Repentance to count it so. The more Good we see that GOD
is, the more Vile we shall see that SIN is. The goodness of God, Le^ds us to
loath and leave such a loathsome Vileness; and to say with him, Genesis 39.9. Oh,
How shall I do this Wickedness, and Sin against God? Such, even such are the
Resentments, wherewith Sin is to be considerd. The Good God is of purer Eyes
than to behold Sin: with what Eyes then shall I behold Sin, which is a
Contrad^ction to the purity of God! Why should I by Sin, renounce my Dependence
on God as my Creator and my Governer, and a pitiful Worm, go to control the
Authority of the God, who has Millions of bright Angels to wait upon Him? Why
should I by Sn, violate the Laws of the only Wise GOD, and find fault with that
Will of Heaven, which is nothing but a transcript of the most Exquisite Wisdom?
Why should I flout Omniscience, and slight Omnipotence, and by my bold Sin,
dare Thund^rbolts, and send a Defiance to the Almighty? Sin, It Is a Monster,
whose mouth is always full of the most nefandous Blasphemies. Oh! Why does not
the Goodness of God, stop the mouth of the Monster, and impose upon the
Blasphemer an Eternal silence!

Thirdly, The Goodness of God Leads us to Detest Sin, under the Character of
the Highest Ingratitude unto the most High God. There is nothing more
Detestable than Ingratitude: The Unthankful are the Evil; None so Evil as they!
Now every sin, it is no less than a Denying of God, and a Defying of God, and a
Reproaching of God. It is said of the Sinner, Numb. 15.30. He Reproaches the
Lord. All the wrong that can possibly be done to the Blessed God, SIN does it.
It is not possible to offer any Contempt or Mischief unto the Almighty, but
what is offered by Sin continually. Yea, Sin strikes at the very Life of God
Himself: It fetches an impotent stroke at the very Heart of the Everliving God;
The Aim of Sin is to Ungod the Great God! Horrible to be spoken! And here lies
the Aggravation of the Baseness of Sin: It Is against a GOD, of such mavelous
Goodness. Here, here is the right strain of a Genuine, and Evangelical
Repentance; O my God, I am Troubled, I am Troubled, that I have Sinned against
a God of such infinite Goodness: And how can I find in my Heart any more to Sin
against so Good a God! The Goodness of God, has made us partakers of many and
mighty Favors. Very Good Things, and Great ones, have been done for us, by the
go^dness of God. If we go on in Sin, it is a base Requital of Goodness. The
goodness of God* Expostulates with us, Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do ye thus requite the Lord,
O foolish People and unwise? It made the Heart of Saul to relent, when he saw
the Goodness of David, in sparing him; Then said Saul, I have Sinned, Return,
for I will do thee no more Harm, because my Soul was precious in thine Eyes;
behold, I have played the Fool, and have Erred exceedingly! Every sin of ours
endeavors an Harm to the Good God; Yea, but, Oh man, when thou see the
Goodness of God, sparing thee, saving thee, feeding thee, and helping thee;
methinks it should lead thee, with a Repenting Soul to say; Lord, I have
Sinned; but I will Return unto thee; I will do no more Harm; the welfare of my
Soul, and all my other and lesser Interests has been precious in thine Eyes; I
have played the Fool, and Erred exceedingly, in Sinning against thy Goodness; I
have done iniquity, but, Oh, let me do so no more!

Fourthly, The Goodness of God, Leads us to study, how we may Thankfully Serve
Him, and not Wickedly S^n against Him. The Benefits done for us, by the
Goodness of God, our glorious Benefactor, put us upon Enquiring, like him,
Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render to the Lord, for all His Benefits? And now,
what shall we Render, but our very Selves, and all that we are, and all that we
have? To Render our selves unto the Lord, is to Repent of our sins against the
Lord. Our Consecration of our selves unto God, is the Consummation of
Repentance. The Goodness of God has produced us from Nothing into our present
Existence; and has preserved us in this Existence, from thousands of mischiefs
that would have assaulted us. It is the Goodness of God that supplies all our
wants; It Is Gods Air we breathe, it is Gods Ground we tread, it is Gods Clothes
that cover us. It is the Goodness of God which defends us from a Million of
Deaths, and affords multitudes of convenient Circumstances for our Inward and
our Outward man. What is the Call of all this goodness? But, Oh! Live unto that
good God, from whom, and on whom, it is, that thou lived at all. We are told,
One would even dare to Die for a good Man. And shall any One be loath to Live
unto a Good God? Oh! Let there not be one such among You, my Hearers! After all
the Goodness and Mercy that has followed us all our days, what is the Return
that we are to make unto our good God? We are so directed; Deuteronomy. 10.12. And,
now, what does the Lord ^y God require of thee? But to fear the lord thy God,
and to walk in His ways, ^^d to love Him, and to serve the Lord thy ^od, with
all thy Heart and with all thy ^^ul. Until we abandon our sins, we are
^erpetually Fighting against God; Yea, most horrid! And with weapons of His
own! As David said of Nabal, In vain have I kept, all that this Fellow has!
Thus ^ay the good God, say of the Sinner; All the Effects of my Goodness upon
this wretch, are utterly thrown away; he makes me no suitable Return at all,
for my Benefits. No; The Goodness of God should Lead us to such Devotion, as
that; Romans 12.1. For the Mercies of GOD, present your Bodies a living
Sacrifice, Holy, Acceptable unto GOD, which is your Reasonable Service.

Fifthly, and Finally, The Goodness of God Leads us to an Imitation of such
goodness What is Repentance? It Is by the Prophet thus described, A ceasing to do
Evil, and a learning to do Good. Well, when we see the Goodness of God, always
ways do good, we have an Invitation to an Imitation of it. It is pressed* Mat.
5.45. Do Good to them that Has you, that you may be the Children of your
Father which is in Heaven, for He does so. -- And again, Luke 6.35 D^ Good, and
you shall be the Children of the Highest; for He does so. Sirs, when we see the
adorable goodness of God, Oh why does it not inspire us with a Disposition,
like what we see in our good Father? Why does it not mightily dispose us, to do
good unto all that are about us, to do all the good that eve^ we can? Yea, to
overcome evil with good? A good Heart, and an Heart unspeakably set upon the
doing of good, is a mighty symptom and effort of a most Real Repentance.
Repentance will make a man, become a good man. O Man, If the goodness of God
will not, what can Lead thee unto it?

APPLICATION
I. It Is fit that the Application of these things begin with an Expostulation
addressed unto all that persist Vnrepenta^^ in Ungodliness.

O Man, Despisest thou the Riches of the Goodness of God, while thou art not by
that Goodness, Effectually Led unto Repentance? Yes, Thou verily do so. But,
Behold, O Despiser, and wonder at thy own madness, and Repent, that so thou
may not Perish wonderfully! It was the Expostula^ion of old; Isa. 1.2. Hear,
O Heavens and give Ear, O Earth; for the Lord has spoken; I have nourished and
brought up Children, and they have Rebelled against me. And not unlike to this,
may be our Expostulation with Ungodly men; Hear, O Heavens, and give Ear, O
Earth; The Goodness of God unto these persons has been infinitely beyond the
goodness of any Father in the world; and yet they live in daily Rebellion
against Him. Ah, Sinners, Are you not afraid, that the Lord of Hosts will at
last employ all the Armies both in the Heavens, and on the Earth, to Execute
His Revenges upon such Unrepenting Wretches and Rebels?

To carry on this Expostulation, We will propose to Consideration.

First. That the Goodness of God has plenteously and wondrously looked upon
you, O my Hearers, This is most unquestionable. It was truly said, Psalm 68.10.
Thou, O God, have prepared of thy goodness for the Poor. Oh, There are none of
you so Poor, so Low, so Mean, but the Riches of the Goodness of the most High
God has reached you. There is none of you all, though never so Small, but the
Goodness of God has done Thousands of Great Things for that person. There has
not one day rolled over you, wherein the Goodness of God, has not shone upon
you with Rays far more than those of the Sun in the Firmament. GOODNESS,
GOODNESS, is written every where in Capitals round about us. There is no speech
where its Voice is not heard; and yet, Oh! That the Voice were duly heard! In
short, O man, Art thou not yet out of Hell? This, This is from the most
undeserved Goodness of God!

Secondly; If now, after all this Goodness, your Sin be not Repented of, it is
beyond Question, there is a monstrous D^singenuity, in your sinful Impenitency.
Alas, what has been Your Carriage hitherto, but Theirs? Neh. 9.35. Lord, They
have not served thee in thy great Goodness, which thou gave them, neither
have they turned from their wicked works. Oh! Disingenuous Men; You have not
only Forgotten the Things that have been done for you, by the Goodness of God,
but you have been the Worse for that Goodness. As it was said of them;
According to the goodness of their Land, they made goodly Images: Thus it may
be said of you; According to the goodness of the Lord, you have been the more
Assisted, and Improved, and Emboldened in your sinful Idolatries. Those daily
Refreshments, with which the Goodness of God, Strengthens you to Honor Him,
don't you Abuse them to bring but the more Dishonor to God, and so Turn H^s
Grace into Wantonness. That Abundance of Enjoyments, with which the Goodness of
God is Enriching of you, are you not the more Proud, and Vain, and Carnal, and
Sensual, and Senseless for it? Man, If there be one spark of Reason left in thy
Soul, now let it revive, and shine forth, and speak out, and say; Can any thing
be so unreasonably Disingenuous?

Lastly; Consider, In the Fear of God, Consider, What will be the End of This?
Oh! That you were so wise as to Consider the Latter End! It is the Thunder,
that follows upon the Lightning, which has all this while Entertained us; Not
knowing that the Goodness of God leads thee to Repentance; It follows; After
thy Hardness and Impenitent Heart, thou treasurest up unto thy self Wrath
against the day of Wrath. It has been said of old, Lae^a Pa^ientia Vertitur in
Furo^em: [And why not, Laesa Bonitas] Abused Patience will become Exalted Fury.
Will Abused Goodness End any better? It was a dreadful word: Josh. 24.20. If ye
forsake the Lord, the Lord will turn, and w^ll do you Hurt, and Consume you,
after that He has done you Good. That, That will be the End, of Ungodliness
under the Goodness of God: Man, Thou shall not sin always upon Free-cost. We
are told, Let Favor be shown to the Wicked, he will not learn Righteousness:
But we are also told, The Fire belonging to the Enemies of God shall devour
them. Sirs, By going on in Sin under the Goodness of God, you take a course to
be deprived of all those Good Things which the Goodness of God is doing for
you: Oh! You horribly Forfeit them all! It was said, Hos. ^ 8, 9. She did not
know, that I gave her Corn, and Wine, Therefore will I take away my Corn and
Wine. Thus, when the Enjoyments that are granted us by the Goodness of God,
will not oblige us to forbear sinning against the God, who gives us All things
richly to enjoy, He comes to say, I Will take away these my misplaced Favors!
But Oh! What Calamities, Oh! What Confusions, will ensue upon such a
Confiscation? Yea, Instead of those things, which the Goodness of God has done
for Ungodly men, the Vengeance of God has terrible things to do on them
throughout Eternal Ages. The Impenitent Sinner, under and against the Goodness
of God, is that Unprofitable Servant, of whom we find that Order given, Mat. 25
30. Cast the Unprofitable Se^vant into outer Darkness; there shall be Weeping
and gnashing of Teeth. Unhappy man, If thou fall into that Condemnation, thy
Fate will be that of the Rich man in the Parable, to whom in the place of
Torment, it was said, Remember, that in thy Life-t^me thou did Receive thy
Good Things; but ^ow thou art Tormented. One of the greatest men in the world,
Professed, That he often thought on those words, but he always Trembled as
often as he thought on them.

Come then, My Hearers; Let us Bethink our selves. Are we not at length
determined, what Improvement we shall make of all that Goodness, wherein our
God has been passing before us? A famous Writer speaks of a profane Sinner,
whom nothing would reclaim from his miscarriages, until the Goodness of God
heaped many Blessings upon him; and then he Cried out. V^c^^ti, B^^^gnissime
Domine, inde^atig ^^i B^n^tate; Oh! My most good God, Thy Good^ess has at last
Conquered this Evil Heart of mine; my Conquered Soul resigns it self unto thee,
and I will be thy Servant forever! Even so; Will you now Revolve the Benefits
with which the Goodness of God has been daily Loading of y^u? And will you
Resolve; How shall I Sin any mo^e against such a Father? Father, I have si^ned
against Heaven, and before thee; but I w^ll do so no more! Now, I have
purposed, that I will no more Tra^sgress; but the God who has Blessed me, shall
be my own God for evermore.

[The HISTORY of what the Goodness of God, has done for the CAPTIVES, lately
delivered out of Barbary.]
II. HAving been thus far carried along wi^h a ^ream of more General
Reflections upon the Goodness of God, we are now arrived unto the Falls of our
Discourse, and are easily and pleasantly carried over, into a more particular
Contemplation of the Divine Goodness toward our Friends, with whom we are now
Uniting our THANKSGIVINGS unto our Lord-Redeemer.

We have been so called upon, Psalm. 107.1, 2. O give Thanks unto the Lord, for
He is Good; for His Mercy endures for ever. Let the Redeemed of the Lord say
so, whom He has Redeemed from the Hand of the Enemy. Behold, some that have
been remarkably the Redeemed of the Lord, are at this Day to Say so; and we are
invited now to join with them when they Say so.

These our Brethren, are delivered through the Goodness of God, from the most
horrible Captivity in the world; and, we may observe several Remarkables in
their Deliverance: 'Twill be an agreeable and an acceptable Revenue of Glory
unto our Lord-Redeemer, for us to observe such Remarkables.

I. It is a Remarkable Goodness of God That the Lives of these our Friend, have
been prolonged and preserved under a bit^e^ Servituae, that was enough to have
made them, even wea^y of their ^aves.

Their Way of Living, (or, shall I not rather say, their way of Dying) 'twas
full of astoni^hing Hardships. Many, many Dyed under the Hardships: But these
are this Day declaring, Having obtained Help from God, we continue to this Day.

Their Condition cannot perhaps, be more livelily in a few words painted out,
than in the words, of the Brief, which their late Majesty's, K. WILLIAM and Q.
MARY, granted on their behalf.

A Great Number of Our Good Subjects peaceably following their Employments at
Sea, have been taken by the Turkish Pirates of Algiers, Salley, Barbary, and
other places on the Coast of A^rica, nnd now remain Slaves, in Cruel and
Inhumane Bondage, without any Days of Rest, either on the Turkish Sabbath or
Ours, except Four Days in a Year; being kept to Extreme Labor; from which,
some endeavoring a little Rest, several of them were barbarously Murdered.
Neither is their Diet any more tolerable than their Lab^ur; Great Numbers being
allowed no other Food, than decayed Barley, which stinketh so, that the Beasts
refuse to eat it. And often they are not permitted to go from their Labor, to
fetch Water, which is their only Drink; and sometimes driven about by
Black-a-moors, who are set over them as Taskmasters; and some of them have
been so severely Whipped, that they have dropped down Dead.

One that was a Sufferer, has given us this further Account, of the Barbarian
Cruelty undergone by his Fellow Sufferers.

The poor Christian Captives, that are taken by any of those Hellish Pirates,
belonging to the Emperor of Morocco, are brought up to Macqueness; being kept
at Hard work, from Daylight in the Morning till Night: carrying Earth on their
Heads in great Baskets, driven to and fro, with barbarous Negroes by the
Emperors Order; and when they are drove home by the Negroes at Night, to their
Lodging, which is on the cold Ground, in a Vault or hollow place in the Earth,
laid over with great Beams athwart, and Iron Bars over them; they are told in
there, like Sheep, and out in the Morning; and if any be wanting, he quickly
secures the Negroes, and sends out a parcel of his Guard, to look for them.
Their Food is Bread, made of old rotten Barley; and their Drink, Water, when
they can get it: Many times, when they are hurried unto their work in a
Morning, not knowing, whether they shall be able to undergo their Afflictions
till Night and when they are drove Home, expecting Rest, the Tyrant sends some
of his Negroes, to hurry them again to work, either to hale down Walls, cut
Gates, or the like; keeping them both Day and Night, many times without either
Bread or Water, which is all their Sustenance. When they have done That, the
Negroes dare not drive them home, before he gives Order, lest they be killed
for their so doing. When they have his Order, they drive them home, tell them
over, and so lock them up until Daylight in the Morning. There are Three
Hundred and Forty Englishmen ( says he) in this sore Captivity.

This is the Captivity, that has been Outlived, and now Escaped, by these our
Brethren.

It is much, that their horrid Labor did not Kill them, in a Climate, so hot
at some Times, and so wet at others. One would have said, Their Strength must
have been the Strength of Stones, and their Flesh of Brass. Or their Life could
not have been prolonged under such prodigious Fatigues.

It is much, that their forlorn Diet should not rather Kill them, than Feed
them. So small, and so vile their Al^owance of Bread, that it is plain, They
^^ved not by Bread alone, but by the Word of God.

It is much, that they have Outlived the Sorrows, the Deadly Sorrows, that
must sieze upon their Spirits, when the ^ierce Robbers had siez'd upon them. By
the Sorrows of their Hearts, why were ^ot their Spirits broken, and Killed,
when ^hey saw themselves dragged away from ^ll the Comforts of Life, and felt
themselves fearfully broken in the place of Dra^ons, and were Hopeless of ever
being ^ecovered out of their doleful Circum^^ances? Methinks, I see them Crying
from the Belly of Hell, Lord, The Waters ^ompass me about, even to the Soul,
the Depth closes me round about; the Weeds are ^rapt about my Head; the Earth,
with her ^ars, is about me forever. Oh! My Chil^ren, How did you do Live, in
the midst ^f these Agonies? Truly, The Lord has ^t last Loosed the Prisoners:
'twas He, who ^aised up, those that were thus bowed ^^wn: Some of them for a
whole Pren^ice-ship of Years, and One here even (...) Nineteen Years together.
This pre^ervation of our Friends, has been yet ^ore signalized, where any of
them, en^eavoured a Flight out of the Hands of their Enemies, but were
unhappily Retaken by those bloody Hands. For it was the manner of the Tygre,
whom they call the Emperor, when such Retake^ Prisoners were brought before
him* immediately to run a Lance through the Hearts of them. We have some with
us at this Hour, who once expected the stroke of the Lance, and can ascribe it
unto nothing, but this, That the Heart of the King was in the Hand of the Lord.

Oh! That men would Praise the Lord, for His Goodness, and for these His
wonderful Works unto the Children of men.

II. It is a Remarkable Goodness of God, That these our Friends enjoyed so many
Supports, which Heaven and Earth afforded unto them, under their Insupportable
Calamities.

How, One would wonder How, were their minds kept from Fainting under the
Grievous Things* that continually befell them, while, for many Years together,
their Lives hung in doubt before them, an^ they were in fear day and night, and
bad m^ Assurance of their Life; In the Morning the^ said, Would God it were
Evening, and a^ Evening they said, Would God it were Morning! Doubtless, the
Good Spirit of God often i^ radiated their minds, with such Considerations, as
were their Consolations.

Behold, A Support from the Goodness of God!

If they cannot say, The Barbarous people showed us no little Kindness, yet
some happy Things fell out now and then, to shelter them from some Unkindness
as would else have been offered.

Behold, A Support from the Goodness of God!

It was a mighty Relief unto them* that the English Captives there formed
themselves into a SOCIETY, and in their Slavery enjoyed the Lib^^^y to meet on
the Lords Day Evening, every Week and annually choose a Master and Assistents,
and form a Body of Laws, to prevent and suppress D^sorders among themselves.
The Good Orders of their Society, were a great Reputation, and Preservation
unto them. And it afforded them no small Comforts to delight them, in the
multitude of the Griefs upon them, that at their Meetings they still had one or
other, who by his Prayers, and other Exercises of Religion among them, greatly
Edified them.

Behold, A Support from the Goodness of God!

And God Supported them, with Raising up such as were concerned more ways than
one, to supply them in their deplorable Necessities. There were some (as a
Carver) among themselves, that were able to advise and assist the rest, and
others (as a Balam) at home, were full of Charitable endeavors to send them
Comfortable Assistences. And, a, Pastoral Letter or two, Published, and
Scattered among them, was blessed of God, for their unspeakable Advantage, and
perhaps, had no little Influence, to prepare them for the Salvations which they
have now received.

Oh, That men would Praise the Lord, for His Goodness, and for His wonderful
Works unto the Children of men!

III. It is a Remarkable Goodness of God, That none of these our Friends proved
Apostates, from our Holy Religion, when they were under so many Temptations to
Apostasy.

There was now and then a wretched Christian, who Renounced Christianity and
Em^raced Mahometism. If These our Friends had been left unto themselves, under
their amazing Trials, They, They would have done so too! Sirs* I hope you
readily own, That you did not keep your selves from Falling! Wherefore unto Him
that kept you from Falling, be Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, both now
and forever. Oh: Let us admire Sovereign Grace, and shout, Grace! Grace! upon
it, that though these our Friends, were covered with the shadow of Death, yet
they did not Forget the Name of our God, into which they had been Baptized, nor
deal falsely in their Baptismal Covenant; nor stretch out their Hands unto the
Impostor Mahomet, and his accursed Alcoran!

Our Glorious Lord JESUS CHRIST has now and then had a Martyr, of late, in the
Torrid zone of Africa.

One Story (related by Brooks,) may not unprofitably be now repeated.

An Englishman and a Frenchman were taken, endeavoring an Escape* The next
Day, the Englishman and the Frenchman were carred up to Macqueness in Irons,
before the Emperor, who by the Moors was informed, what was done. The
Emperor, upon Examination, told them, if they did not immediately turn Moors,
he would kill them. The Frenchman yielded; the Emperor then threatened the
Englishman, if he did not turn, he would quickly kill him. He made Answer,
Gods Power was greater than the Devils, and let him do what he would, he should
not make him turn Moor. The Emperor called for his Sword, and immediately fell
to cutting him, threatening him still, to turn* He said, He was brought up in
the Faith of Jesus Christ, and he would not forsake it. Then this inhumane
Wretch in great spleen, Cut him till he fell down, and hacked and hewed him, as
if had been butchering an Ox, and caused the Negro-boyes to run his Body full
of Holes, with Knives, till his Body was as full of Holes as possible it could
be. When he had so done, Bring, said he in his own Language, Four English Dogs
to fetch that Dog away. And as they carried his Body away, the Negro-boyes
stoned them, saying, That should be the end of them, if they did not turn
Moors: But they were glad to go quietly without answering again; if they had
made any Reply, they had certainly been fallen upon by the Negro-boyes. So
their greatest satisfaction was, his Dying in the Christian Faith, and his
counting that more precious than his own Life, holding the same steadfast before
that Cruel Tyrant, while he had Breath in his Body. Then they carried him to
the place, where they lodged under ground; so took off his Irons, and kept
there all Night; and the next Morning carried him where he was to be buried,
the Negroes still stoning of them as they went along. As soon as they had laid
his Body in the ground, they were hurried by the Negroes to work again after
their usual manner.

These our Friends, have not thus Resisted unto Blood. But yet they have not
been without Bloody Temptations. And, O my Hearers, Will you not now Glorify
the Faithfulness of our Lord Jesus Christ, who would not suffer these our
Friends to be Tempted above what they were able, but made even their
Temptations to be their Preservations! One would have thought, that if any
thing should have made them turn Infidels, it would have been their Adversity,
and the Hope of getting thereby some Relaxation of their Adversity. No; It was
remarked, That the Renegado's for the most part, were those who suffered the
least share of Adversity. The Fellows who enjoyed more Prosperity* and lived in
Gentlemen's Houses, with much of Idleness, and Luxury, and Liberty, THESE for
the most part were they that fell into the Snare of the Wicked; when those who
were toiling about Castles or ^rickil^s, continued steadfast in the Faith of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST. It was also a notable thing; That few did ever come to cast
off the Faith of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, until they were first grown very
Vicious in their Morals, and fallen into Vices and Scandals, which made 'em
ashamed of appearing before their better disposed Countre^-men; THEN 'twas that
they grew desperate, and they departed from the Lord with such a total and
final Backsliding, that the Soul of God had no pleasure in them. How Forlorn,
how Undone, how Damned for both Worlds had you been, if you had been given over
to become such vile Deserters? You saw the strange Hand of God, upon Them: You
saw them Hated, Loathed, Scorned, both by the Baptized and the Circumcised: You
saw they got nothing, but were Temporally more abject than they were before,
and Eternally siezed by Chains of Darkness impossible ever to be taken off. You
are Glad, that you have been saved from your Apostasy. Did you save
your-selves? No; We hear you humbly saying this Day before the Lord and His
People; Not unto us, Not unto us, O Lord, but unto thy Name give Glory! And,
Lord, Thou art He who has delivered my Soul from Death, my Eyes from Tears, and
my Feet from Falling.

Wherefore yet once again;

Oh! That men would Praise the Lord for His Goodness, and for His wonderful
Works to the Children of Men.

IV. It is a Remarkable Goodness of God, That now the Deliverance of these our
Friends is accomplished, and in a signal Answer to Prayer accomplished, and
this not without great Obstrctuions to the Accomplishment.

Such was the known Treachery and Perfidy of the False Tyrant, who held these
our Friends in Bondage, that every one despaired of their Deliverance.

For instance;

In the Year, 1680. the English Captives, which were under this fierce Tyrant,
sent over a Petition to the King of England, that something might be done for
them. An English Captain being sent over, came to an Agreement with him, for
their Deliverance, and the Captives were actually put into his Hands. The Shack
of the Jews, who had order to build a Town for this Faithless Monarch, came to
him, telling him that if he would let him have the Christians, to build the
Jews-Town, he would give him as much Money as the English Captain had agreed
with him for. The next Morning, this African Monster sent out his Negroes, to
drive back the Christians, which were hurried again to their old Slavery, in
the Cruellest manner imaginable: And there was an end of the matter! Though the
Vengeance of God quickly pursued that Jew, who not without the Connivance of
the Emperor, had his Brains horribly trod out, by one who purposely Rode over
him.

The Time, the set Time for Favor, was not then come. Now it is; and this with
a Touch from Heaven upon the Heart of a Devil Incarnate compelling him to deal
more truly than he use to do.

The Difficulty of Gathering the Ransom was at last got over; every other
Impediment was removed: And, who art thou, O Mountain, that shall stand in the
way, when Gods Time is come? Who is the Po^sherd of the Earth, that shall
propose to Command the Lord concerning His Children?

To what a sweet Change of their Condition, are these our Friends now arrived!
Instead of Hellish Moors at their pleasure Kicking and Scourging and Plaguing
of them, they are in the Arms of their most agreeable Relatives, and others
whom they daily behold with mutual Delight. Instead of being driven to Servile,
Tedious, Vexing Employments, they are now Employed Easily, and as they would
be. Instead of the Sabbaths which they saw without any Rest in them, they have
now as many Opportunities for the Service of God and their Souls, as they wish
for.

What has brought all this about? Oh! It Is PRAYER, It Is PRAYER, that has done
it all. Give me leave to speak it with all due Humility; This Deliverance never
began thoroughly to operate, until God began to awaken a Spirit of Prayer in
the Churches of poor NEW ENGLAND for it. When the Sons of New England, and of
some very Praying people here, fell into so dire a Captivity, presently a Cry
of PRAYER made a Noise that reached up to Heaven. We did not Sin by ceasing to
Pray for them Thus was the A^m of the Lord awakened for the Deliverance of
these our Sons; and, thou, O Mully Ishmael, with all thy Diabolical Fury, art
no longer able t^ withold from us, the Friends, about whom God gave thee an
Efficacious Order, To let them go.

But, For what, O my Sons, For wha^ are you thus let go from your Servitude bu^
that being Delivered out of the Hand^ of your Enemies, you may serve the Lord
without Fear, in Holiness and Righteousnes^ before Him, all the days of your
Lives? Your Friends, are with Raptures of Lov^ and Joy, beholding your
Deliveranc^ from your Captivity. When we see your Captivity turned, we are like
them wh^ dream; and with astonished Souls, we make that Acclamation, The Lord
has done Great Things for them! Now, as a most proper Expression of the
Affection, wherewith we bid you Welcome unto us we cannot but set before you,
the Desire of our Souls after the Improvement and Perfection of your
Deliverance. If nothing else, yet the Prayers that we have Day and Night been
putting up to Heaven for you, in your Troubles, may bespeak for us the Freedom
of tendering you the Counsels, which you may do well to take, now you have
received the Answer, and the Harvest of those Prayers i^ ^he Period of your
Troubles. Indeed our ^rayers are not answered, until our Coun^^ls be followed;
and the greatest ser^ice now to be done for you, is freely and ^lainly to tell
you, What those Points ^re, for which our Prayers are therefore ^ontinued.

We do in the first place, Pray to the God of all Grace, that you may have the
Grace to be very sensible of the match^ess Favors that God has bestowed upon
you. Look, Oh! Look back, upon your doleful and woeful Circumstances in the
Hands of a Bitter and Hasty Nation. Read the Book of Lamentations, as one of
the Ancients tells us, he did use to do, when he felt Vanity growing upon his
mind; and from thence Revive to your own mind, the Remembrance of your own
Lamentable Miseries. But herewith^l Remember, how much you would once have
given, to be brought out of those miserable Confusions. And acknowledge that
you have Deserved all your Sufferings, from the Hands of a Righteous God,
before whom you must ^ndeed say, Lord, Thou have punished us ^ar less than our
Iniquities have deserved. It is a Surprising Mercy of God, that has rescued you
from the Horrible Pit, into which you were fallen; But that which makes it the
more Surprising, is, that it is a Singular Mercy. In former Years, the Lions
Den, in that part of Barba^^, where you have been cast, had this unhappy
Character upon it, Few or none Returned. That we now see a Return of so many,
who have been a Prey to those Terrible one^, truly, it is a New, a Strange, and
a Great Sight. We may say upon it* This is the Lords Doing, and it is ^arvello^
in our Eyes!

What will you now do, but Sing the High Praises of your Almighty Redeemer?
Don't so regard Second Causes, as to neglect the First and Chief Cause of all
or account Him any other than the First and Chief of all. Methinks, The Hundred
and Sixteenth Psalm, the Hundred and Forty Sixth Psalm, the Second Paragraph of
the Hundred and Seventh Psalm, the Beginning of the Hundred and Third Psalm the
Conclusion of the Fifty Sixth, and Fifty Seventh, and Sixty Sixth Psalms, will
afford some good strokes of Thanksgiving for you, when you come to Sing the
Praise of God. On all fit occasions also, why should you not make a Thank^ul
mention of what you have received! Yea, Mention it not only in Speaking, but
also in Writing thereof, and keep a Record, of, How Great Things the Lord has
done for you.

But what signifies a Thanksgiving, without Thanksliving? Sirs, You are under
infinite Obligations, to keep the Command^andments of that Good God, who has
brought you out of the Land of Barbary, and (...) of the House of Bondage. It
is the most Reasonable, and the most Advise^ble thing imaginable* That you ^ou
should seriously Consider with your selves, and ask Divines and other
Christians, to Assist you in Considering, What Lessons you should learn, by the
Changes that have passed over you? And apply your Cares, to learn those
Lessons, and Live as you have been Less^'d. But in a very particular manner, it
becomes you, to get from under your Slavery unto Satan, and unto Sin, which is
worse than Satan: For that is a Slaver^, a Million times worse, than what you
have seen at Macqueness. Every Unrenewed man* is a S^ave to those Destroyers;
and You will be so, till you have heartily Resigned up your selves unto the
Conduct of the Lord JESUS CHRIST with a lively Faith in Him, to be made
Righteous and Holy: But, When He shall make you Free, you will be F^ee indeed.
Be persuaded now to enter into Covenant with God, and become the Bound Servants
of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, who has brought you out of your dismal Servitude.
Hereupon often think with your selves; What shall I render ^ ^he Lord for all
His Benefits? And, What special thing shall I do for the Honor of Him, to whom
I owe my All? God has Returned you to the Blessings of His Day, and of His
House, whereof you were deprived, when the Filthy Disciples of Mahomet were
Lording it over you: You should now make a better use of Them than ever you
did, and bring forth more of that Fruit, by which your Blessed Redeemer may be
Glorified. Oh! Let the Goodness of God lead you to this Repentance. Truly,
There should now be seen in you, a Remarkable Difference from other Men, that
never were so Remarkably Delivered as You have been; and from what Y^u your
selves were before you were thus Remarkably Delivered. There is one awful
Scripture, which it is pity, but you should have your Eyes more than a Thousand
Times upon: Even That; Ezr. 9.13, 14. After all that is come upon us, for our
Evil Deeds, and thou have given us such Deliverance as This; if we should again
break thy Commandments, would thou not be Angry with us, till thou have
Consumed us?

Finally, Brethren; You see by your own ^appy Experience, what Prayer can do:
Oh! Let it make you in Love with Prayer. If this One Point may be gained, All
will be gained; Prayer, Fervent Prayer, Constant Prayer, Daily Prayer: Oh, Pray
without ceasing, and with every sort of Prayer; and very particularly, for a
Good Effect of all the Divine Dispensations toward you. Resolve with him;
Psalm. 116.2. Because the Lord has inclined His Ear unto me, therefore will I
call upon Him as long as I live.

FINIS.

