Meat out of the Eater. OR, Funeral-Discourses, Occasioned By the DEATH of
several RELATIVES

Work accommodated unto the Service of all that are in any Affliction; but very
particularly such as are afflicted with the loss of their CONSORTS or CHILDREN.

By COTTON MATHER.

2 Cor. 1 3, 4. The God of all comfort Comfort us in all our Tribulation,
that we may be able to Comfort them which are in any Trouble by the Comfort
where with we our selves (...) of God BOSTON: Printed for Benjamin Eliot, at
his Shop under the Town house. 1703.

PREFACE
IT IS fit, that the Reader should know, how and why this little Book arrives
unto him.

Let him then know, That the Author under Calamity, by Morto^^^ lately
befalling him Expressed unto some of his Friends, A Desire, That whatever
Calamity befalls him in this present Evil World, the Lord Jesus Christ may have
some Revenues of Glory and Service out (...) A Desire wherein a most unworthy
(...) has hitherto been sig^ally gratified under his Calamities; A Desire
herein (...) might be always satisfied, it would (...) way, (...) take away
from them (...) of Calamities.

(...) most (...) Calamities (...) has been the Death of (...) which was at
length follow. (...) more grievous Death of his (...) Comfort, the Mother of
them. (...) be^el him, though sometimes they fell out, very near the Lords Day,
he still judged it might some what Glorify the Lord, if he should never for the
sake or grief hereof, Omit any of the usual Offerings of the Lord, on the Lords
Day, in the Assemblies of His People, to whom he has been a Servant. (...) his
Thoughts, after some sort compe^^ed and confined unto the Subjects of
Meditation, which were most likely to rescue him from the Distempers that Flesh
and Blood often indulge on such afflictive occasions, he still apprehended,
that it might not be unedifying unto his Flock, to be Entertained with the same
things that had counseled of comforted him, in the multitude of (...) thoughts
within him.

It was the Opinion approved by some of his Friends, That for (...) the
publication of some Sermons preached in and from the more (...) of his
Afflictions, would be one likely method o^ obtaining the Desire which he had
proposed. (...) Sermons had (...) small (...) Recover (...) of them. The (...)
a Ready Writer taken in Short hand alter him, were therefore transcribed; which
upon a Review he found were plain, and mean enough, and yet not altogether
incapable of being used by the Sovereign Grace of Heaven, for some good, unto
some that may relish things of this importance. And here they are now Exposed.
Had the Author had never so much Liesure and Repose (when he had neither,) for
the Elaborating of these Composures, he must yet have said with Luther, Non ego
is sum, do quo dici possit, Fecit neque is de quo dicere possis, Faciebat. In
abimo consisto ordine qui vix dicere audet, Vol^i facere. Et utinam essem
dignus, (...) hoc ordine ultimo, ultimas esse. Whereas the Hope of Good being
done by these Homely Composures, must be wholly placed in the Blessing of Him,
who can make Pulse and Water afford as good Nourishment, as greater Dainties.

But, O Father of Mercies, what shall render to thee for thy wonderful mercies
to me the chief of Sinners? Will the Lord indeed make use of Sinful me, and not
only of my Labors, but of my Sorrows also, to do some little Good among his
Chosen People, and advance the interests of His Holy Religion among them? If
the Lord will break me and my House to pieces, but make it an occasion to build
his House; If the Lord will Chasten me with, mournful Dispensations, but make
that Chastening, an occasion for others as well as my self to be the more
partakers of His Holiness; what an astonishing Alleviation does this give to
all my Afflictions! Lord, In Faithfulness thou have afflicted me. Bless the
Lord, O my Soul, for all His Benefits.

C. Mather.

A Tried FAITH, Offering an ONLY SON.
Preached, 2d. 2m. 1693. A. M. My (then) only Son having died in the Night
before.
It is written; Heb. XI. 17. By Faith Abraham when he was tried, offered up
Isaac; and he that had received the promises, offered up his only begotten Son.
SOme of the Ancients Report unto us, That beholding sometimes the Picture of
Abraham, going to stab and burn his only Son as a Sacrifice, they never could
behold it without falling into Tears. I was now going to say. Tears, where are
you? But something better I am to call for. There is no concern of our Inward
or Outward man, wherein our Faith is not necessary, serviceable, advantageous.
A good man's Faith, is a good man's Life. It is a Sentence of the Old, often
repeated in the New- Testament: The Just by Faith shall live. How? But by his
Faith. Behold our Inward man: By Faith it is that we are to receive the gift of
Righteousness through Jesus Christ: By Faith it is that we get power to become
the Children of God: By Faith it is that our hearts are purified: By Faith it
is that we have a Victory over the World: And by Faith it is that we come to
the End of our Faith, the Salvation of our Souls. Behold our Outward man! By
Faith it is that we are to bear all that God lays upon us; and by Faith it is
that we are to gain by what we bear. Nothing is to be done without Faith; No
Living without it, nor any Dying without it. Admire not that it is in this
Chapter so very admirably recommended unto us. It was a very true assertion of
a Great Reformer, that the meanest action done in Faith upon the Command, and
in Faith up on the Promise of God, is a more noble thing, than the most
celebrated Victories of an Alexander, or a Caesar. But I am sure then, the
Chapter before us is a narrative of the most noble things in the world; they
are the most Renowned Actions that ever were, and performed by the most
Renowned Persons; In short, what Faith can do is here set before us. What it
can do, is demonstrated, from what it has done already. The Chapter is a
Chronicle of Christian Faith; and an History of the Heroical Acts produced and
performed by such a Faith. After the Apostle had mentioned the Patriarchs in
Common, as famous for their Faith, he comes to instance Abraham in particular.
There were many trials given to the Faith of Abraham; The Tenth (as they use to
fancy of the Waves) was the biggest and hardest of them all; a trial in Isaac
his only Son. There are three things in the Text before us.

1. The Occasion of the Trial. We read Genesis 22. 1. God did tempt Abraham. How
can Temptation be ascribed unto God^ There are two sorts of sit. There is;
Tentatio probationis, and there is, Tentatio perditionis. Indeed it is also
where said, No man is tempted of God, that is as to a Temptation of perdition
God never does dispose or incline or seduce, any man to Sin against his Maker,
or to wound his own Soul. But then there is a Temptation of Probation; a
Temptation wherein God proves what men are, proves whether they are the metal
they seem to be, proves whether they can do what they pretend unto. This is
from God.

The Trial of Abraham was by an Extraordinary Command. There is no Injustice in
it, that the Supreme Law giver of the World, whose Will is the highest Rule o^
what is Right, should give new Laws to m^n as he pleases; and that he should
alter and repeal any former Laws that he has given to them. Abraham understood
well, That the Law giver who does require that we do no Murder, has the
prerogative to Declare also What is Murder. He understood, That the Sovereign
Arbited of Life and Death, may order who among the Children of men shall Die,
and when and how, as it pleases Him. (...) man ask, How Abraham (...) know,
there was no Delusion in this Injunction. I answer, he infallibly knew it; and
suppose I should say, there is a way infallibly to know it, but that no tongue
is able to express it! Until I can hear a man so describe what Light is and
what Fire it, as to make a Blind man apprehend it, I cannot imagine that a man
should in significant and sufficient words distinguish Communion with the
Invisible World: And there is a way plain to the Sense of those that have it.
But, I think, I may give yet a little clearer Account of it, than so. There is
a certain Bright Cloud of Heaven, of quite another consistence than that which
drops our ordinary Rain upon us. That Cloud was filled with the Light and Fire,
where in the Son of God, chose to Lodge as His Covering from the Beginning,
that so He might therein Exhibit Himself with an agreeable Majesty unto His
People. It Is the same that was called, the SHECHINAH; those flaming Angels of
the Lord, which are called, The Angels of His Presence, attended it; and it was
of old seen by the People of God, on (...) great Occasions. That Shechinah now
(...) unto Abraham, as it had formerly (...) And such was the Glory of the Lord
in the Appearance, that it was impossible to be counterfeited. But why must
Abraham thus be tried? One well expresses it. Non ut ipse Hominem invent^at,
sed ut Homo se inveniat; It was not that God might know what was in Abraham,
No, but that Abraham should know what was in himself; and that all the Children
of Abraham also might know, for their future Instruction.

2. We have the Difficulty of the Trial. It was, I suppose, the most Exquisite
one that ever befell a mortal man: will you hear it, Genesis 22 2. Take now thy
Son, thy only Son, Isaac, whom thon love, and get thee into the Land of
Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offering, upon one of the Mountains,
which I will tell thee of. To part with our Children is oftentimes a hard
thing. We read of a Mother when she saw her Son a dying, A Sword passed through
her Soul. Behold here a Thousand Swords making their passes all at once. Every
syllable strikes like a Dagger into the Heart of as Tender a Father as any
under Heaven Take now thy Son! What? will Nothing but a Son do! Well, but a
great while hence? No, Take now thy Son, But, Lord He is All have! Thy only Son
shall go. But, Lord, Thou see how fond I am of him; and that I have abundance
of Reason for my Fondness. Its all one for that, Go take the Son whom thou
Love. Well, but if he must be dispatched, let it be quickly: No; Thou shall
have the time to feel thy Distress, it shall be two or three Days Time ere it
be done; wherefore get thee into the Land of Moriah. Well! If he must then Die,
Lord, take him in the usual way. No, offer him there thy self, with thine own
hand. Nature and Grace would both concur to put in Objections against this.
Nature would plead; What? a Son? and for a Father thus to Exterminate his own
Son; how unnatural is this, how unparalled is this, how Barbarous will all
mankind account me for it? Come to Grace; What? a Son for which I have Believed
so long! if he be lost, there comes no Christ into the World! a Son on whom so
many Families of the Earth depend for a Blessing; must he go down to the pit.
Astonishments, where are you, to see a Friend of God thus called upon! But
after all,

3. We have his Behavior under it. God speaks, and he does it without more
(...) We read, Genesis 22. 3. Abraham rose early, and went about it. There is many
a man, the God of Heaven says to him, Come, and take my Son, that HE may save
thy Soul! but the man puts it off till another Day or Week: whenas Abraham when
God says, Go, let thy Son dye, and suffer thou an horrible wound in thy Soul!
He goes away immediately about it. Abraham offers his Son. The will for the
Deed, was Gods way of trying his People from the beginning. The Thing was
accepted, though prevented. Mark, by the way, that some Hearty and Serious
purposes are performances in the sight of God. On the one side, you that have a
purpose of Sin against God, may to your cost find that very purpose to be the
Sin. Adultery some commit with a thought! there is Murder with a Thought, and
Stealing with a Thought, and Lying with a Thought. The Thought of the
Foolishness may be so managed, as to be the ^illy it self. Thus on the other
side; you that have a purpose to serve the God of Heaven, God may account it as
a performance. When David sat in his house and Thought, What shall I do for the
House of God? God sent that message to him, Well, David, I take it as if really
done; I will build thee an House. Indeed if men only Purpose to Believe and
Repent hereafter, God will never take that for done, for that must be actually
and presently done. But if a man has his Heart sincerely set for God and
Christ, and thereupon he has many a purpose for God working and formed in his
Heart, suppose the Lord may deny that man an Opportunity to do what he
purposed, yet he will reward that Purpose gloriously. If a man sincerely intend
such or such a Service for God, he shall not wholly lose the Reward of that
Service, merely because God has denied him an Opportunity for the prosecution
of it. God Rewards us according to our Inclinations, and Resolutions, and not
according to our Opportunities.

The poor Servant of God, who now addresses you, has this last Night offered
his Isaac unto the Lord, and seen the Death of his only Son. What he has to
offer unto the People of God this Morning, is this,

DOCTRINE.
A True and a Great Faith will make a man Readily, Easily, Cheerfully part with
the dearest enjoyments in the World, when God shall put him upon such a Trial
of his Faith.



An Abraham under a Trial is not like other men; no, an Abraham will be more
Easy, more Cheerful, and more filled with a sweet serenity and Satisfaction of
Soul; and more Victorious over the Rebellions of Carnality. Why so? This is our
Victory, our Faith. I foresee, There will be Five Propositions, to be now
insisted on.

The First Proposition.
Where God has given Faith He will make a Trial of that Faith As there is need
of our having Faith; Necessity is laid on us to get Faith, and woe unto us if we
have it not. So there is need of a Trial for this Faith. We read, 1 pet. 1. 6.
If need be you are in heaviness through many Temptations: for the Trial of your
Faith. God will make a Trial of our Faith. Why so? That we may see how Weak it
is; for which accordingly He would humble us, and ab^^e us. God will also make
a Trial of our Faith because He will have it seen how strong it is; a strong
Faith is a thing pleasing to God, and so is the Trial of a Strong Faith. There
was a woman to whom our Lord said, Great is thy Faith: He gave the Faith. Well,
but He then Tried every stroke of that Faith This Trial of our Faith is ordered
by God, partly for our Comfort We read, Romans 5. 4. It works hope. When a man
has had his Faith well Tried, and it proves what it should be in the Trying
that man may have an Hope in his own Soul (...) and other man; He may Hope that
God is his God; He may Hope, that Christ is his Friend; He may Hope, that
Heaven is his inheritance; And he may Hope, that all the Promises are a partion
to him. God by Trying of our Faith knocks the Vessels of our Souls, that it may
be seen whether we are full, full of Faith, or no; Sirs, We may know (...) was
are full, when we don't make a foolish noise, but under ^o our Calamity
Silently and patiently. Our Faith is a Rose; The Trial of (...) the stilling o^
it, which fetches out the sweetness, that is in it. Our Faith is a Spice; God
Pounds it in a Trial of it, that (...) Odor may come forth. Again, our Faith
is Tried by God, and it is for His Glory. We read, 1 Pet. 1. 7. The Trial of
your Faith being much more precious than that of Gold which perishes might be
found unto Praise and Honor and Glory, at the appearance of Jesus Christ. Then
all the World will be told what our Tried Faith has been. God will then
proclaim it before all mankind, Here is my Servant, Once I Tried the Faith of
this man and he carried it as it became a man of a great Faith to do; He was
made a Spectacle to Angels, in his Trial, and you, O my Angels, can testify
what illustrious Demonstrations, he gave of his Faith under the Trial of it.
Our Submission to God, our Dependence on God, belongs to our Faith; but all
this is highly for the Honor of the most High God. Sometimes our Accuser, the
Devil, charges us that we have no Faith; upon this, our God says, I will make
a Trial of that! and when upon Trial our Faith is found of the right Stamp what
a Lie is now given to the Devil? God says to him then, Begone thou Liar, never
defame that Servant of mine any more. Furthermore, God and His Holy Angels, are
marvellously entertained in the Trial of our Faith. Mark it; God, He stands by,
and the Angels of God are looking on, when we are called unto a Trial of our
Faith, wherein (as the Apostle speaks) we are called to a great Fight: but when
our Faith so Tried acquits it self well in the Fight, then says God the Father,
See what one of my Children can do! God the Son says, This is the Faith which I
have bought for my chosen: God the Spirit says, This is the Faith which I have
wrought in the Redeemed. The Angels, they clap their hands and give Praises to
God, and are glad when they see this, and say before the God that made them,
Lord, these are the things thou do for the poor Children of men. Well then,
look for Trials: don't think strange if God put you upon the Trial of your
Faith. But let our Fear help our Faith Let our F ear foretell Trials, and let
our Faith conquer them.

The Second Proposition.
The greater our Faith is, the greater is it like to be the Trial of our Faith.
Our God in his dealing with the children of Jacob to Try them, does as Jacob
dealt with his Children; Genesis 33. 14. I will lead on softly as the Children are
able to go. While we are Children in Faith, we are lead on softly; we cannot
endure such Trials as afterward, and accordingly we don't suffer such. But
when we come to be grown into some stature and measure of our F aith, then God
will make us know the proportionable Trial of it. God bestows our Faith on us,
and then God adjusts the work of that Faith God gives to one man such a
proportion of Faith and to another such an one, but the Trial bears a
proportion also. We read, 1 Cor. 10. 13 God is faithful, and will not suffer you
to be tempted, or, Tried, above what you are able. When God sees we are able,
(for it is He alone that makes us Able.) to hold out, to resist, to stand fast,
we shall be Tried accordingly. It Is said, Heb 10. 32. After ye were
Illuminated, ye endured a great fight of Affliction. When a man becomes a Paul
in Christianity, such a man shall be Tried more than other men. Our Lord, the
man JESUS Himself had his Faith confirmed with extraordinary manifestations
from Heaven: the next news is, the Devil falls on him with such a Trial of it
as never before. Don't wonder then, if the best men should suffer most, and if
they suffer most when they are best. One says, There are Christians tottering,
staggering, and shaking in their Faith; the Devil will it may be let them
alone, but when he sees men stand more strong in the Faith he then sees on
them. Nothing of this Nature is done (...) the ordering of God, and there is
the Wisdom of God in permitting and ordering of it. The best of men find the
World an Evil World; but never so Evil as when they are just going out of the
World, After they have got more Faith and more Acquaintance with God and
Christ, and their own Hearts, and are more Weaned from the World, after this,
God will Try them, so as never in all their lives before.

The Third Proposition.
In the Trial of our Faith by our God, we are put upon parting with the dearest
Enjoyments we have in the Would. Our Isaacs, God will call us to part with
them: And How?

1. God calls us to part with our dearest Enjoyments by Submission to
Providence When (...) comes (...) God on our dearest Enjoyments then we must
submit unto (...) of God, in all the Deadly strokes of His Hand upon them.
Sometimes a Jacob can say, My Joseph is not, and Simeon is not When it comes to
this, we are to part with all, and make a Free will Offering of it unto the
Lord. How? with Submission say, The Will of the Lord be done* When God laves
losses and crosses on us; when God will deprive us of our Honors our Estates,
our Delights, then be content that God should even do what he will with us. A
Child of David was killed How did he behave himself? We read 2 Samuel 12. 20.
David says, Is the Child Dead? They said, he is Dead. Then he arose and washed
himself, and came into the House of the Lord, and they set bread before him in
his own House and he did eat. (...) was right! says he Psalm. 39 9. (...) was
(...) I opened not my mouth, because thou did (...) I^ seems to refer to the
(...) of (...) This is the (...) etc (...) Behavior (...) in all Adversity!

2. God (...) us upon (...) with our Dearest Enjoyments by (...) unto (...)
with God, unless (...) let them (...) Lu^. 14. 26. If any man come to me, and
hate not his Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren and
Sisters, yea and his own Life also, he cannot be my Disciple. Suppose that
either a man must loose the good will of God or the World; can he slight the
World, with all its good will? and incur all the Anger and Malice, and contempt
of a wicked world, rather than Swim down the Stream of wickedness with the
world. This is to bring an agreeable Offering unto the Lord. We read of some,
that make Ship wreck of Faith and a good Conscience. Either a man must throw
overboard his Respect among his Neighbors, or his way of getting a Living
among his Neighbors; or else he must throw Faith and a good Conscience
overboard. But when we keep this, we do well. It will come to this at last,
God and the world, God and gain, God and ease, God and preferment will go two
ways; we must now cleave to God, and go in His Way So are we to part with our
Dearest Enjoyments for Him.

3. God puts us upon parting with our Dearest Enjoyments, by Mortification of
Corruption We may have a Bosom Lu^t that will be as dear as a very Isaac unto
us. Can we ^ill that Lust? God-will have us to do so, or the Lust will kill our
Souls; for it wars against our Souls. We are told concerning our Lusts, Col. 3
5. They are our Members; Mat. 5 29. They are a Right Eye, a Right Hand unto us
We are every Day to be Cripling of these Members; every Day to be palling out
that Right Eye, to be cutting off that Right Hand; or else we are fighting
against God continually. But by doing these thing* we part with our Dearest
Enjoyments. A Lust is as Dear to a man as his Life. Well then, here is Faith
Tried; now Faith is Tried by all these things. And, I pray, don't measure your
Uprightness by any Lower Trial than this: Whatever God calls for, can you
forego it! Oh be afraid that you shall never call Abraham your Father, any
other (...) than the Lost man in the Place of Torment, if you never come up to
this!

The Fourth Proposition.
When Faith is ^^t upon the Trial it (...) to part with the ^earest Enjoyment,
(...) in the Trial. When God calls for any of our Enjoyments, though out very
Isaacs themselves There most reasonable things are by Faith acknowledged.

1. One Reasonable thing that Faith will see and speak, is this, ^My Dearest
Enjoyments are forfeited Enjoyments. When God calls us to part with the Dearest
Enjoyments, he only takes into his hands that whereof we had made an antecedent
Forfeiture. God might have taken them away long ago. And Faith will say, Lam.
3. 39. Why should a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his Sin?
All that we undergo, when God shall deprive us of any will any complain of
that! We are worthy to be bereaved of all. Says Job. Job 7 20 I have sinned,
What shall I do to thee, O thou preserver of men? God may do what he will with
a Sinner. Why should a Sinner grumble if any thing be taken from him* A
Sentence of Confiscation is justly passed upon all that he has.

2. A Second Reasonable thing, seen and spoken by Faith, is this; My Dearest
Enjoyments are n^ne of mine when God will take them away. We have no Right unto
our Dearest Enjoyments, when God puts in a bar to that Right. We are Tenants at
Will for all our dearest Enjoyments, and God may put us out when he will. All
that we have are all but Loans, and may not the Lender call for them when he
pleases. Jo^ could say, Job 1. 21. The Lord gave, and the Lord takes away,
blessed be the Name of the Lord. Inasmuch as we had them from the Lord, it is
fair the Lord should have them from us again, whenever He sees meet for to
demand them. We may say, Lord, of thy own have we offered unto thee; in
offering our dearest enjoyments unto Him.

3. A Third Reasonable thing seen and spoken by Faith, is this; God and Christ
should be dearer to me than my dearest Enjoyments. We are glad when our Friends
(...) Pleased; but we should be more glad when God the best of all our Friends
is pleased Did it not please God, our dearest Enjoyments would never be taken
away from us. Does it please God? and shall it the^ displease us? But
especially we should be co^^ent that God may in this way (...) pleased;
because, Rom 8. 32. God Spare not his own Son but delivered him up for (...)
all His God offered His own Son for us and shall we quarrel with God when he
goes to take away from us our dearest Enjoyments? Or, shall I think much of
offering my Son unto Him? God forbid!

The fifth Proposition.
Faith in a Trial will do those things for us, that will make it no hard thing
to part with the best thing required in the Trial.

As they;

1. Faith wi^^ show us the meanness of all our Enjoyments here. Says the
Psalmist, Psalm. 119. 56. I have seen an end of all perfection That Sight wa^
from Faith Faith will give us to see that there is nothing here but what must
shortly come to an end. Our Children and other dearest Enjoyments, in point of
length, Faith, will tell us, It wont be long er'e we must part with them; then
why not now? In point of breadth, Faith will (...) us, If we have them, they
will not make us happy but if we hant them, yet we need not be miserable.

2 Faith will show unto us the Greatness of those Enjoyments that should be
dearer to us than these. The Psalmist says, Psalm. 63. 3. Thy Loving kindness
is better than Life. Suppose ou^ Children are taken from us, Faith will tell
us, God has given us his own Son. Suppose our Estate be taken away, Faith tells
us, In Heaven we have a more enduring substance. Suppose our Honor is taken
away, Faith tells us, We have a name written in the Lam'os book of Life, and a
name which is better than of Sons and of Daughters.

3 Faith will show us the Recompense of that Obedience wherein we do renounce
our dearest Enjoyments, for God. We read Mark 10. 29 There is no man, who has
left Children, or other things for my sake, but he shall receive on hundred
fold. God never took away any good thing from any good man, but Faith will tell
him that God has a better thing for him. There is nothing that more glorifies
God, than our cheerful Resignation of our dearest Enjoyments when. He demands
them from us: And this Resignation uses to be followed with a glorious
Compensation. If we have hearts to pa^^ with any thing for God, that is the way
to have it Continued or to have it Renewed The most likely way to have our
Isaac pre^served and restored, is this; Let it be Offered When David buried a
Son, with a^^ agreeable Disposition under such a Dispensation, God gave him
another Son, and he proved a Solomon. Or if we miss of that then the Holy
Spirit of God, will Reward our Piety, with Internal Consolations, an Seal us to
the Day of Redemption, with such a Rapturous Earnest, and Foretast, and
Irradiation of the Heavenly World, as will abundantly compensate all the
Troubles upon Earth. A Servant of God, Resigning his Offspring to the Stroke of
Death, may perhaps have Opportunity to enter this passage among his
Experiences; God now gives to my Resigning Faith, such Rapturous Assurances of
His Love to me, and mine as would richly have made amends for the Death of more
Children, if He had called for them. However, there is in Heaven, what will
make amends for all. Christian, Thy Faith will tell thee such things as these.

APPLICATION.
I am now to recommend the faith of Abraham unto the Emulation and the
Imitation of all that would be called the Children of Abraham As for us, God
never Tried us as He did Abraham. It Is but a little Trial that the most of us
have met withal. It was said, Heb. 12. 4. You have not resisted unto blood. If
it should come to Blood, that we must be tried whether we would offer up our
very Blood, for the Service of our Great Lord; One said, Have. (...) but one
Life to part with for Christ? This were the Temper we should arrive to. But as
for us, all our Trials hitherto are little things, for People that have a great
Faith. Well then, let us under our Trials, whatever they are, be as like
Abraham as ever we can. Here is the first Lesson we all have to Learn; If a man
will be my Disciple be must deny himself. To be sure we are actually to part
with all our sinful Enjoyments; (if any Sinful things may be called
Enjoyments!) It is demanded, Ezekiel. 18. 31. Cast away all your Transgressions,
why will you dye: But we must Habitually part with all our Lawful Enjoyments
too. He that Loves Son or Daughter more than me, is not worthy of me, says our
Lord. If God call for a Son or a Daughter, and we ben't willing they should go
to Heaven before us, we may fear we shall never see Heaven our selves, Cut the
Throat of thy own Son, that is, by Resigning of him to the Wounding Hand of
God. Laetus offer Filium Deo, esto Sacerdos animae Fili^tui. Oh, he such a
Priest-unto God, as to make an offering of thy very Son, when God will have it
so. That man is not worthy to be called a Child of Abraham, that is not willing
to part with his dearest Enjoyments when God calls for them. These things are
particularly to be pressed upon us.

1. Enjoy all as from God and for God, and then you will be ready to part with
all your Enjoyments at the Cal^ of God. It was said, Matthew. 20. 5. May not I do
what I will with my own? Whatever we have, write upon it, This is the Lords
own! Oh that we could say of every thing, This is Gods! And use it as His alone.

2. Delight not overmuch in what you enjoy, and then you will be ready to part
with what you enjoy. We read Jon 4. 6, 7. Jonah was Exceeding glad of the
Gourd; [the Palma Christi:] but God prepared a worm and it smote the gourd that
it withered, and Jonah was Angry for the gourd. Thus it is with our Comforts;
when they are Dead, the gourd is withered; but Jonah was angry for the gourd;
It was a Disturbance unto him to loose a Gourd; why, because he was exceeding
glad of the gourd. When the thing of this World make us, Exceeding glad it is
well if we be not Exceeding mad when those things are taken from us. Let us
then he taken up with better things, Particularly, instead of delighting in our
Children, let us be delighting in the Son of God as infinitely better than Ten
Sons.

3. Be mindful; that you your selves are shortly Dye, and be always ready to
Dye. It Is said, I Cor. 7. 29. The Time is short, therefore let those that have
this and that he as though they had it not. The Time is short! Think, It will
be but a little while that I shall have anything. That will make us willing to
part with it, when God will have it parted withal. A Dying man is a man
Crucified unto the World. Oh, place your selves in the circumstances of a Dying
man, and the world will then be no more to you than to a Dying man It will
produce a moderation both to our value and sorrow for these things, when we
Remember, The Lord is at hand! Oh, look at all evil things then but as the
Inconveniences of our Inn. Suppose our Children Dye, and they Get home before
us, it is the same home we are our selves going to. Let us with the Disposition
of Strangers, and of Sojourners, and of Travelers here, keep going on to the
Rest that remains for the People of God.

But inasmuch as one End of the most Holy Lord, in sending of Afflictive Trials
upon His poor Ministers, is, That the Experience of the Pastors may prove the
Edification of the People* Why should not a man that has seen Affliction by
the Rod of God, newly striking his only Son to Death, now utter unto you his
Thoughts on this more particular Case?

How is Faith more particularly to be Exercised in parting with our Children?

Truly, Syrs, In the multitude of my Thoughts within me, I have these Counsels
to direct my soul; and since my Trial may befall many others, I wish that they
may now hear something for their Direction.

O my Soul, Rely by Faith upon God in Christ, for to be the God of my Children,
according to His Covenant. The Covenant of Grace, is expressed unto Abraham, I
will Establish an Everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee, and unto thy
Seed after thee. Now, I am well assured, That the Blessing of Abraham, and this
Blessed Covenant, is come upon the (...) by Jesus Christ, But, I^ the Great
Cross will be a God unto my Children, Triumph, O my Faith, in a joyful
Assurance That He will Raise them from the Dead, and that He has prepared for
them a Room in his Heavenly City. My Dead Christian are to Live again; They are
only Entered into their Chambers, and Shut up, and Hidden, and for a Little
moment, until the Indignation of God against a wicked world be (...) part. A
(...) God, the Regenerating and Enlivening Spirit of God ^alling like a Dew
upon them (which in their Baptism has been Scaled unto them) shall fetch them
out like Herbs. at the Spring of the (...) That Rational and Immortal Spirit,
which the Inspiration of the Almighty Enkindled in them at their first
Conception, is not annihilated at their Departure from hence. No, it goes to be
with Jesus Christ, where to be, (...) the (...) of all. There is a Glorious
Paradise, in which it is Lodged, until (...) brought from thence at the Second
(...) of the Lord. Then the Children of mine, which now Dwell ^n the (...)
shall Wake and be the Son (...) like (...) shall not I comfort my self with
these words: Lord, Thou have bidden me.

In the mean Time, Let thy Faith persuade thee, O my Soul, That it is the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, who Laid upon thee, such a Cross, as the Death of thy Children.
The little Birds fall not unto the Ground, much less does one of thy Birds fall
into the Ground by mere chance. It Is the Providence, a Wise, a just, a Faithful
Providence of the Lord Jesus Christ, that has Ordered the Death of my Children,
and it is the Lord that has taken them away. Am not (...) Disciple of the
Lord, who for us Dyed upon the Cross! It Is fit, that I should then bear the
Cross; and fit that He alone should choose my Cross. And if the Death of my
Children must be my Cross, O my Faith, will thou not patiently submit unto this
Cross; in hopes that it will at length yield unto me, the peaceable Fruits of
Righteousness. Think, Oh, Think, What Eyes there are upon thee, to take Notice
of thy Behavior under the Cross. God and Christ, and His Holy Angels, observe
thy submission. Wonderful is their satisfaction to (...) thee submitting unto
the Dispensations of the Lord

And can not thou, O my Soul, take a wonderful satisfaction, in the Spiritual
and Eternal Reparation, which the Lord will make unto thee, when He takes away
thy Children from thee? Is thy Son taken away? God has given thee His! Does the
Death of my Child grieve me? God has made me His Child. Is my Child dead?
However my Grace is not. Shall I not be made more Holy, more Prayerful, more
Watchful, more Useful, more Heavenly, and more fit for Heaven, by my Childrens
getting there before me? Let him then be miserable, that can be miserable: For
any part, I can^t What shall I then do? I will mourn for the Sins, that have
had an hand in procuring my Sorrows; I will seek the pardon of those my Sins,
through the Blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God, which cleanses from all Sins I
will do what I can, that the Death of my Children, may promote the Death of my
Sins. And now, Rejoice in the Lord, O my Soul, and again I say, Rejoice.

The Motto, inscribed on the Gravestone.
RESERVED FOR A GLORIOUS RESURRECTION.

My Satisfaction. From Heb. XII 5, 6, 11.
THe Exhortation of the Lord,
With Consolation speaks to us;
As unto His Children, His Good Word,
We must Remember Speaking Thus,
My Child, When God shall Chasten Thee,
His Chastning do thou not contemn:
When thou His just Rebukes do see,
Faint not, Rebuked under them.
The Lord with Fit Afflictions will
Correct the Children of His Love;
He does Himself their Father still,
By His most wise Corrections prove.
Afflictions for the present here
The vexed Flesh will Grievous call;
But Afterward there will appear,
Not Grief, but Peace, the End of all.
The Fear of God, Under TRIALS from The Hand of GOD.
Preached 8 d 8 m. 1693. The day after the Funeral of my Daughter Mary, and the
Day of my Administering the Eucharist.
Genesis XXII. 12. Now I know that thou fear God, seeing thou have not
witheld
A Serious and a through Trial of our selves, is a duty at all Times necessary
for us. It is required with a repeated Admonition, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Examine your
own selves, prove your own selves. We are to Try our selves; But Why so? That
so we may to (...) our selves. We are to Try our selves, least we perish going
astray in the greatness of our Folly; least a deceived Heart may turn us aside,
while we are unable to say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? But the Trial
of our selves is of a special importance in our Preparation for the Table of
the Lord. Thus it is inculcated, I Cor. 11. 28. Let a man Examine himself and
so let him eat of that Bread and drink of that Cup. We are then to Try our
selves with a more peculiar Exactness in our scrutiny. But why so? Lest we be
the Unworthy receivers of the Mysteries; lest we be found without a Wedding
Garment at the Feast of the Immoral King; lest we do but Eat Judgment to our
selves by Sacramental Prophanations. Having thus advanced this point, that Self
Trial is always a needful, and n^w a most needful thing, I am to tell you that
among all the Marks for our Trial of our selves, none are more sensible than
those that are drawn from our behavior under our Trials from the Hand of God.
We are to Try our selves, whether we Fear God, or no; and that will be best
known by our carriage when God is by Afflictions Trying of us. An instance
thereof we have in the words newly read unto us. In the Context, we have the
Story of Abraham offering up his Isaac unto God, at the Call of the Lord. Our
Father Abraham underwent Nine very Famous Trials from the alwise God; But he
was now brought unto a Tenth. We have our Father Abraham here Tried, every vein
of his heart; and it was under the consideration of a Father, that he underwent
the Trial. The Trial ordered for that great man of God, was a most afflictive
Trial. It was that of parting with a Child singularly dear unto him. You shall
hear the demand of God, are hear so many claps of Thunder in every article of
that Command; seven or eight very penetrating stings methinks aculeate it. Cen.
22. 2 Take now thy Son, thine only Son, Isaac, whom thou love, and get thee
into the Land of Moriah, and offer him there for a burnt offering upon one of
the Mountains which I will tell thee of. Here was the demand. There follow in
the Story especially two things.

1. We have the good man's Obedience. This is more largely repeated in this
Chapter; but more briefly in that Chapter on a passage whereof some of you may
remember we discoursed a few Mon his ago. Heb. 11.17 By Faith Abraham when he
was tried offered up Isaac. The Obedience of the Good man was Intended;
Inasmuch as it was intended, therefore though it was prevented, yet it was
accepted, rewarded, celebrated. And therefore let us learn to be full of holy
designs for the Glory and the Service of God. Let us design for the Name of
God, as much as ever we can. It may be God will permit us to accomplish our
designs; yet if he do not, they shall not be lost.

2. We have the Good man's Commendation. And that was from the mouth of an Angel
of God, attending of the Shechinah. The very Angels of God, they take notice
how we do acquit our selves under any of our Trials. It is no matter whether
our Neighbors do see our virtuous Carriage or no; Gods Angels, they see it.
When it is what it should be, they prize it, they praise it, they give Honor
to God for it; and it is an unspeakable satisfaction to those illustrious
Nobles of Heaven But what is the Commendation? It is this; now I know thou
fear God. The Angel brings to Abraham, an assurance of Gods approbation of
him, and of his Acceptance with God. And this is another thing to be remarked,
That God uses to recompense exemplary Patience, with comfortable Assurance.
When we Bury our Children, let us patiently bear those Bereavements, and God
will give us this assurance, Thou have my Son, which is better than Ten Sons: I
have given thee a Name better than of Sons and Daughters: Thou shall go to
them, not they return to thee? Let us be patient under Slanders, and God will
give us that assurance. Thou have a Name written in the Book of Life! Let us be
patient under Losses, and God will give us that assurance, Thou have in Heaven
a better and a lasting Substance! Such assurance is given to a (...) and
resigning Abraham. The Spirit of God does by the Spirits of God oftentimes or
perhaps immediately by himself, take such a time to witness it to the Souls of
(...) People, That God has Loved them with an Everlasting Love, and they shall
be gathered to him with Ever lasting Loving kindness. Let men have their hearts
mightily set upon the Glorifying of God under their Afflictions, which nothing
but the Fear of God will dispose a man to do, and that glorious Advice will
soon come from haven unto them: Now I know thou Fear God! When it is said,
Now I know thou Fear God; the meaning is, Now thou may know it thyself,
and thou have made it known to all that will observe it. And there is an
Emphasis in this, Now: Abraham had chose and shown the F ear of God before; ay,
but when he came to part with a Child that was very dear to him, with such a
Resignation, as nothing but the Grace of God could inspire a man withal, Now I
know it, says the Lord. It is said, Psalm. 25. 12, 13. What man is he that
fears the Lord! his Soul shall dwell at ease, and his seed shall inherit the
earth. Well, if God will not let our Children inherit the earth, yet can our
Souls dwell at (...) because they are gone top Jesus Christ in Heaven, where to
be is by far the best of all? Then it may be said, This man fears the Lord:
^ea, such a^ man fears the Lord exceedingly

The Funeral which I attended Yesterday, leads me this day to Entertain you,
with such Thoughts as appeared peculiarly Monitory to my self, in my own
present bereaved and sorrowful Condition. My Hearers will give me leave to
Preach unto my self, as well as unto them, the Lessons of God, in this

DOCTRINE.
A man may by many Tokens, come to know that he has in him the Fear of God;
but a right Behavior under Afflictive Trials, is a Token that will more
especially, and eminently serve to make it known.



Two Propositions are contained in the Doctrine.

The First Proposition.

That the Afflictions which the Good God sends upon good men are for the Trial
of those men

In this one, we may behold Three Assertions.

1. God men must see much Evil of Afflictions in this present evil World. It Is
said, Psalm 31. 19. Many are the Afflictions of the Righteous: and God is not
unrighteous in ordaining and effecting that it shall be so. Although
Righteousness does deliver from Death, namely from that which alone is worthy
to be called by the name of Death. Yet the Righteous are to dye, and to undergo
the Advancements of Death in the Afflictions of Life. The Children of Abraham
are also the Children of Israel; even of that Israel who says, Genesis 47. 9. Few
and Evil have been the days of the years of my Pilgrimage. Good men are
afflicted every way. Sometimes they are afflicted in Relations. Thus a Jacob
has his Children, some Dead, and some almost worse than Dead, while they Live.
Sometimes they are afflicted, in their Spirits. Thus an Heman cries out. While I
suffer the terrors of God I am distracted, Sometimes they are afflicted in
their Bodies. Thus a Timothy has his often infirmities to be complained of.
Sometimes they are afflicted in their Estates. Thus a Naomi must say, I was
full, but am become empty. Sometimes they are afflicted in their Names. Thus an
Elijah must be called, A Troubler of Israel. Yea, sometimes one good man is
afflicted in all these Instances! a David afflicted in all a Job in all, a Paul
in all; yet they not the worse men for that. It is among the names put upon the
People of God, Isa. 54. 11. O thou afflicted and tossed with Tempests When are
we like to see Rest? Never till we come to the Haven of Heaven: there is the
only Rest that is to be looked for. As for this World, it will prove an Evil,
troublesome, uneasy, World unto us. God will every day mind us, that (...) is
not our Rest We no sooner enter into Christianity, but we enter into
Affliction. When the great Martyr Ignatius was Tormented he said, Now I begin
to be a Disciple of the Lord Jesus Christ. This is the A. B. C. of
Christianity; Matthew. 16 24. If any man will be my Disciple let him take up his
Cross and follow me. We are no sooner put to School unto the Lord Jesus Christ
but here is the first Lesson; Look for Afflictions every way and every day. As
our forerunner, the Lord Jesus Christ: Which way did He get into his Rest? We
read, Luke 24. 45. He must suffer and so enter into his Glory What then? shall
not the Disciple be a^ (...) Lord? We that run after that forerunner into the
Rest of God must run in the (...) bloody Track of Afflictions that he run
before us in. We are warned Joh. 16. 33 In the World ye shall have Tribulation.
We are warned Act. 14. 22 Through much Tribulation we must enter into the
Kingdom of God Foolish are we if we take not so fair Warning.

2. Every Affliction that comes on good men has in it a Trial of those men. Our
Afflictions are our Probations, Indeed all the Providence of God unto the
Children of men are Probations. Our Enjoyments are our Trials. It Is said, Prove.
27. 21. As the fining pet for silver, and the furnace for Gold so is a man to
his praise. I choose to read it this, So the mouth that praises any one is to
try him. When we are praised by our Neighbors, we are Tried in those praises.
And thus, when we are Blessed by our Maker we are tried in those blessings.
Honors from below, they do, Indicare virum, or Try what metal the man is made
of; they Try whether the man can bear Sail without Over seting, and have power
to oppress without growing absolutely mad: So Mercies from above, do the like.
In our Mercies, God deals with us as with the Soldiers of Gideon at the Waters;
as God carried the Soldiers to the Waters, and said, Now I will try them
there; so does our God bring us to the Rivers of plenty, and says, I will Try
them there. By Prosperity our God is trying of us whether we will hear him
speaking to us in our Prosperity: and, whether when we wa^ fat we will grow
wanton and kick against him, or no. Our Afflictions too are our Trials. It Is
said Jer 7 9. Behold, I will melt them, and I will try them. How does he do
that (...) By putting us into melting Afflictions When one Affliction after
another shall melt away those things we have a kindness for, then we are Tried
unto the uttermost. Here is the Trial of our Faith and Patience. Thus we read,
I Pet. 1 6, 7, Ye are in heaviness if need be through manifold Temptations,
that the Trial of your Faith which is much more precious than Gold might be
found unto praise at the appearing of Jesus Christ. Our Afflictions are our
Trials we are thrown into a fiery Furnace when Tried by God with Afflictions. A
Sick bed, a Reproach, a Loss, is a F urnace. In that F urnace it is tried how
much (...) is in us, and how much gold The Afflicted may say, as Psalm. 66. 10.
11 Thou O God, have purged us, Tried us as silver, thou (...) afflictions on
our (...) God is now Trying us whether we will despise the Chastening of the
Lord, or faint when rebuked of him. God is now Trying us whether we will
Glorify him in the Fire, or no.

3. Any man and particularly any Afflicted man, that has the Fear of God, may
upon Trial know that he has that Fear. He that has in him the Grace of God may
come to know that he has it. The Grace of God is a discernible thing. It Is
resembled unto Light: a man may see that Light: unto Fire, a man may feel that
Fire. It is the Precept of our God unto us, 2 Pet. I. 10. Make your Calling and
Election sure. That argues that it may be perceived. A man may come to be sure,
that God has called him to Himself, and that therefore he may call God his own
God. A man may know his Love to God and Christ. Peter did so, when he said,
Joh. 21. 17. Thou know all things, thou know that I Love thee. Surely
then he may know his Fear of God, and Fear of Christ. A man may know the Love
of God and Christ unto him. So Paul did, when he said, Gal 2 20. He has Loved
me and given himself for me. Now we know, that this peculiar Love of the Lord,
is toward one but such as Fear (...) that Lord. A man may come to know (...)
Interest in the New Covenant; and one thing in that Covenant, is, I will put my
Fear in their Hearts, Thus Job could say, I know my Redeemer Lives. But how
shall a man come to know it? Take by the way, this General Direction! Beware of
proceeding by Wrong Rules, in our Self-Examination; else we shall Wrong our
selves. When we Examine, Whether we have the Fear of God or no? We should not
make the mere Opinions or Experience of Other men, the Rules by which we shall
pass an Judgment on our selves. As the Fear of God is not to be Taught, So
neither is it to be Tried by the Precepts of men. The Rules, the Marks, the
Signs, by which we are to Examine our Fear of God, must be Scriptural Ones. And
the whole Scripture is profitable, for our Instruction in this Devotion; to
Instruct us for Self-Examination. And especially the First Epistle of John,
seems to be special portion of Scripture, for Self Examination; That Epistle
may well be our Vade Mecum, when we go to Examine our selves.

Or, that I may approach a Little closer to the point that lies before us.
Would we know, Whether we have the Fear of God, or no? There are many Tokens to
help us in our Trial* but that which is mostly to be pressed on us is, What is
our behavior under Afflictive Trials? There we come to the Case that lies
before us. In all our Afflictions our Flesh is (...) yea but when we encounter
the Cross handsomely, and Christianly, and Piously, that shows that we have
more than Flesh in us. They that are all Flesh cannot bear what contradicts the
Flesh. But when we can patiently have our Flesh crossed by the Hand of God, and
the Love and Sight of God enable us to bear it, there is more than Flesh in
such a man.

The Case is This.

What is that behavior under Afflictive Trials, which may be a comfortable
Argument and Evidence of our having the Fear of God?

For answer, in General,

To show the Fear of God, we must have another sort of Behavior, than what is
in the most of man, when under their Afflictions. Nehemiah spoke at this rate,
Others did so and so, Neh. 5. 15. But so did not I because of the Fear of God
Others in their Afflictions are froward; but, so must not we be because of the
Fear of God. Others under their Afflictions are hopeless; but, so must not we
be because of the Fear of God. Others under their Afflictions got nothing by
them; they that were Ungodly are so still, they that were Carnal, and Worldly,
and Profane do still continue so; but, so must not we because of the Fear of
God. Yea, the Fear of God, under our Afflictions, is to make us do more than
others. Our Lord says to us in our Afflictions, What do you more than others?
Except we do more, we cannot prove that we have the Fear of God. I shall offer a
few Questions in Answer to this Case: Try your selves by those Questions, in
the Fear of God, I beseech you, I entreat you.

Quest. 1. Under our Trials, is the Hand of God very sensible unto us in the
ordering of our Trials? It Is said of the Impious, Isa. 26. 11. Lord, when thy
hand is lifted up they will not see: They charge all on the neglect of men, or
the malice of men, or on the concurrence of second Causes* But what a thing is
this? He that sees nothing of God in his Trials, has nothing of God in his
Heart* ^ow is it with us? Do we not (...) the Creature our Horizon, that our
(...) shall terminate there, for the Original of our Afflictions? When our
possessions are laid in the Dust, or in the Ground, do we think that the
Afflictions came only out of the dust, or out of the ground? Under
Bereavements, Do we say like Job, Job 1. 21. It is the Lord that has taken
away, blessed be his name. Under our Calamities, do we say with David, 2 Samuel
16. 10. It is the Lord that has bidden it Does the First Cause of all take up
all our Thoughts? Do all our Thoughts run in such a strain as that, I have to
do with God in this Thing, I am concerned with God chiefly, yea with God only,
in what is come to pass? now I know that thou fear God.

Quest II. Do our Trials drive us more Heartily, Fervently, Constantly, to seek
the Face of God who sends the Trials? The wicked, they are to Prayer, like the
Childrens Tops, no longer stirring than the ^^ashes are upon them. Indeed they
will Pray in their Afflictions many times. We read, Isa 26 16. in Trouble they
will visit God, and pour out a Prayer. So did Ahab, and so did Magus, of old!
But how? Not from an internal Principle: They have not an affection for Prayer:
They go to it but as driven; and their Prayer is no Prayer. It Is said Job 27. 9,
10 Will God b^^r his cry, when Trouble comes on him? W^^^ he delight himself
in the Almighty? Will be always call upon God? If he call upon God; it is not
with any Delight. How is it with us? The Children of God have a Principle in
them, called A Spirit of Prayer. Is that Spirit now awakened, and move more
Vigorous than ever before? When any thing ails us, do we naturally go to God
about it, as Children to a Father? It may be the Spirit, of God and of Prayer,
was flatted in us before such Afflictions came upon us; but upon the first
assault of our Afflictions, do we fall to Prayer immediately at the old rate
and more than so? Are we like David, who said, Psalm 116 3, 4 I found Trouble
and Sorrow, the sorrows of Death compassed me; Then I called on the Name of the
Lord, O Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my Soul. Are we like Paul who said, 2
Cor. 28 9 I had a Messenger of Satan to buffet m^, but I be (...) Lord thrice.
The more Sorrowful thee more Prayerful? Now I know that thou fear God!

Quest. III. Do we in all our Trials humbly acknowledge and reverence the
Righteousness of God, whereby the Trials are inflicted? Whatever Affliction
come upon us, do we never say, We have an hard Portion? Is it with us as with
them, Lam. 3. 39. Why should a living man complain; a man for the Punishment of
his Sin. In the midst of all our Lamentations, do we think, This is the
punishment of my sin! and then do we say, I will never complain of this! Do we
say as Nehemiah, Chapter 9. 33. Thou art Just in all that is brought on us! Yea, as
Ezra, Chapter 9 13. Thou have punished us far less than our Iniquities have
deserved! Though there come a Sea of Trouble, on us, do we see and say, There Is
not one drop of Injustice in all that Sea? Whatever Affliction we meet withal,
is that still the language of our Souls, This is not Hell! Hell I deserve. If
so, now I know that thou fear God.

Quest. IV. Are we in all our Trials very studious to learn, to mind, to mend,
whatever may be the procuring cause of our Trials? Probably, when afflictions
come, there is a Controversy which the God, who afflicts us, is therein
managing with us. God may say to us, What have I now done? Is there not a
cause? Well then, In Afflictions are we duly inquisitive after the Cause of
all? When a Child was taken away from an Excellent person, she said, O man of
God, sin is now brought unto Remembrance! Accordingly when any Affliction comes
on us, do we set our selves to consider what Sin we can Remember as the Cause
of this? Do we resolve in our Afflictions, Lam. 3 40. Let us search and try our
ways, and turn unto the Lord? In Afflictions do we go to God, Job 10. 22. Oh
show me wherefore thou contendest with me? And, Job 34. 21. I have born
Chastisement, I will not offend any more! Do our Afflictions cause us to set
before our selves all the Commandments of God, and out of these Commandments do
we search and judge, and loath our selves, according to the Cause which we may
there find for our Afflictions! Are we Impartial in our finding wherein we are
guilty, and then studious in our purposes, to Repent and Reform? It Is said of
some, Their Scum remains: When God sets us over that Fire of Affliction, does
our Scum come away or does it remain in us! Are we like the Fool in the mortar?
Or are we more careful to make our Peace with God? to quicken our pace in the
Race set before us? to grow more diligent in working out our own Salvation? now
I know that thou fear God.

Quest. V. When perhaps Unaccountable Trials do overtake us, do we cheerfully
submit unto the Will of the Sovereign God appearing in the Tryals^ Our Gods
will have his own Sovereignty stooped unto: when we are in Afflictions, it is
that we may own that Sovereignty. When Affliction lays us in the Dust, then do
we lay our selves there, and say, We are as Dust, as Clay before the Potter?
That God who may do what he will with his own? One said, I was dumb, I opened
not my mouth, because thou did it. Is this enough to stop our mouths in every
affliction, It' is the doing of God, that God who does all things well, though
we don't know what He does, nor why He does it? Our Lord used that Prayer, Not
my will, but thy will be done! A Pattern for us. And He taught that Prayer; Let
thy Will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven. Do we say Amen unto it! Whenever
any Affliction presses hard upon us, do we say with our selves, This is the
will of God that it should be so; and that will is infinitely wise, and just,
and good, and uncontrollable, and there is infinite reasons that I should never
contradict that withal! Well, what think we? do we thinks our vile will should
give Law to the (...) Will of God, that Will tha^ is it self th^^ Supreme Law
of all, the only measure of Right and Wrong. They said, Act. 21. 14. The will
of the Lord be done! He says I Sam 3 19. It is the Lord, let him do what
seems him good So, whatever comes on us, do we think thus with our selves; It
is the Lord that will have it so, all is well that He will? If it be thus, now
I know that thou fear God.

Quest. VI. Do none of our Trials hinder us from adoring the Goodness where
with we are very much attended, notwithstanding our Trials? It is a strange
Folly in us, that in one Grave we commonly bury all our Comforts. Though God
has given us thousands of Comforts, yet, it we open one Grave to lay one of
them there, we foolishly throw in all the rest. Oh foolish people and unwise!
But instead of that, say we like the Lamenting Church, Lam. 3. 27. It is of the
Lords Mercies, that we are not consumed! We have many Mercies round about us,
under our Afflictions? Do we see them, and own them? or, Do we make fit
Comparisons of our Condition? Do we say, Though it be bad with me, it may be
it is worse with them that are better than I? Though things go bad with me, yet
there are those that never Sinned as I have done, I should be loath to change
with them Says Job, Shall we receive good at the hands of God, and shall we not
receive evil? In our Afflictions do we think, that we receive more good than
evil, and we have more Delights about us than we, have Sorrows? And do we
think, That we don't know when we receive Good and when Evil? Our Lord said to
him of old, What I do thou know not now, but thou shall know hereafter, So,
It may be hereafter I may know that this is best. Jacob egregiously mistook
when he said, Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, all those things are against
me. Instead of saying, all these things are against me, we should say, It may
be God intends them all for my good. If it be thus, now I know that thou
fear God.

Quest. VII. In our Trials what are our Supports, and where do we go to make up
that we have lost in our Trials? The most of men in Afflictions are like Ahaze
Chr. 28, 21, 23. Ahaz goes first to the Kings of Assyria, but they help, him
not, the^ he^ Sacrificed unto the gods of Damascus and Syria, and they were the
ruin of him. So many a man when afflicted will say, I have something left
still! And there is all the Refreshment he has If we are visited with Death
after Death, how do we Support our selves? Is it by thinking, The Lord lives,
and blessed be my Rock! Like David, 2 Samuel 23. 5. Though God break my House,
yet he has made with me an Everlasting Covenant, ordered in all thing, and
sure, This is all my Salvation and all my desire, though he make it not to
grow. Suppose God will not let our Houses grow, Is this the Consolation of our
Soul, that God has made a New Covenant with us? Do we comfort our selves with
this, We have Christ in the New Covenant, where there is Grace and Glory, and
every good Thing? Are the Promises of God our Consolation at our Funerals? can
we say, I had perished in mine affliction, unless I had had the Word of God now
I know that thou fear God.

Qu VIII. Under our Trials, What value have we for the Spiritual and Eternal
Benefits that are to be gained by our Trials? Do we say, Psalm. 119 71. It is
good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes. This
is Good, even to do justice, to love mercy to walk humbly with our God. It Is
Good for us to Draw near to God. It Is Good for Sin to be odious, and Christ
precious, and God glorious to us, and Heaven better affected by us than ever,
and to be weaned from the world and all things below, and our Affections more
set on things above: To bring forth much of that fruit whereby our Heavenly
Father may be glorified. Does the Thought of getting this good by our
Afflictions make them all easy to us? Do we say, It is better for me that I
should be partaker of this Good, than to have my Riches and Children all about
me! and a Soul pining away in Iniquity, or leanness in my Soul? It is better
for me to have the Grace of God, then all the good things of this world about
me. If it be thus, now I know that thou fear God.

Well then, For the Conclusion of all; Oh Let not the Consolation of God be
small unto you that have attained and practiced this right behavior. If under
your afflictive Trials you behave your selves agreeably to the Expectation of
God, what follows but this, I know that thou fear God? Suppose God should
Commission one of His Angels to Speak that unto us, as to Abraham, Now I know
thou Fear God; would not that abundantly make amends for all that we have
undergone, under our Trials?

Oh! Should the blessed God Say to us, Now I know, that thou fear me, what
could we feel after this, either of the Enchantments or the Distresses of this
World? Let me speak the word of the Angel to those that sincerely thus
endeavor; Now I know that thou fear God; and tell you upon it, Now I know
that there is a great Goodness laid up for thee. It Is said, Psalm 31. 19. Oh how
great is thy goodness which thou have laid up for them that fear thee. Yea,
shall we take it home to our selves; Now we know that we fear God: but what
(...) do we know? Now we know, we should be of Good cheer, because our Sins are
forgiven us, as to them that fear Him. Now we know, that God is our Portion,
Christ our Savior, Heaven our inheritance; Death is ours; it shall do us no
harm^^t. Now we know, that all things shall work together for good unto us. God
will give us Grace and Glory, and all the sure Mercies of his Covenant; God
will keep us in Integrity, and Set us before his face for ever; Now we know,
that the Lines are fallen to us in pleasant places, that God will show us the
p^th of Life, and bring us to the fullness of joy and pleasures at his Right
hand forever more And knowing this, we may know, that we are Welcome to the
Table of the Lord. If you have these Marks, they are the Marks of the Lamb; I
may Invite you to the Supper of the Lamb. Oh, come to this Lamb of God at His
Table; That Lamb which takes away the Sin of the World. There all that Goodness
that is laid up for them that Fear God, shall be Sealed unto you, inasmuch as
now you know that you fear God.

But how can I dismiss you, O my Hearers, without an Exhortation, To make
through work in a Self Examination upon that Important point, Whether we have
the Fear of God, or no? Christians, That famous Exercise of Christianity, even,
Self Examination, is to be now pressed upon you, in the fear of God; and, a
Self Examination, whether you have it? It my Hearers will be prevailed upon, to
do something to purpose, at this most Holy, most Useful, most Needful piece of
Devotion, even, Self Examination, our Coming together will be to good purpose.
Alas my Hearers; The Stupidity of the World, so generally neglecting all Self
Examination is as just a ground of Horror, and of Wonder, as any in the World.
It was Complained, Jer. 8 6. I hearkened and heard, and no man Repented saying,
What have I done? May not the Complaint be now made, Ah, Lord, Thou have
Hearkened, and Heard; but how few are there any where Examining themselves, and
saying, What have I been? Oh, how Rare a thing is it, for the Children of men
to call themselves unto a Strict Account, O my Soul, Do thou really fear God?
What is thy State? What is thy Frame? Whither art thou going? And where art
thou like to be lodged throughout Eternal Ages? Men's being so indisposed unto
this Action, I tell you truly, it is an horrible and a wonderful thing!

Sirs, Deny not unto your own Souls, this piece of Duty, of Prudence, and of
Justice. But shall I know describe to you, the Process of the Work, whereto I
Exhort you? Give your Attention, and Hear, how you should proceed, in your Self
Examination First, When you set about it, Oh, Let it be, with very great
Solemnity, with very great Solicitude. It was prescribed, Psalm. 4 4 Commune
with your own Hearts, and stand in Awe. Self Examination is a very Awful
Service of Religion. When you go to Commune with your selves, Whether you have
the Fear of God, you must Consider with your selves, How Easy a thing, and how
fearful a thing it is for you, to Deceive your selves. Oh, Consider this, and
Stand in Awe! When you are Examining your selves, you are about the most
Weighty Undertaking that ever you took in hand. Affect your own Hearts, with
the Weight of the undertaking. The case to be considered is no less than this;
What is like to become of me throughout Eternal Ages? You never had a case of
such moment under Consideration! Consider with your selves, the infinite
concernment of your coming to a True Knowledge of your selves, and of your
coming Truly to know, Whether you have the Fear of God, or no? Consider This;
That I^ you mistake, and conclude your selves in a Bad condition, when you are
in a Good, or conclude, that you do not Fear God when indeed you do; This will
be to Deny the Kindness of God unto you; This will be to deprive your selves of
the Comfort you are to take in the Kindness of God* This will be to (...) it
the Devil who would ^ob you o^ all your Comfort and Grieve the Holy spirit of
God by which you are sealed unto the Day of Redemption Consider This, That if
you mistake, and conclude your selves in a Good (...) when you are in a Bad, or
conclude, that you do Fear God, when indeed, you do not This will be a
Benumming sort of a Poison upon your Souls. This will be to lay your selves
^^leep upon the Top of a Most; This will be to (...) the (...) of Darkness but
the faster upon you: and this will be to rocque your selves (...) a ^lumber,
wherein you will be Seized (...) Damnation that (...) not (...) to Examine you
have (...) above all (...) do wickedly (...) upon you. Be in good Earnest,
place your selves as before the Face of God; and therewithal call in the Help
of God. Supplication should be the first motion of your Self Examination Look
upward before you Look inward. Our own Spirit is that Candle of the Lord, that
is to search us; but we must ask, that our Candle may be Lighted well by the
Spirit of God. As the Psalmist cried out, Psalm. 139 23. Lord Search me and Try
me! Do you with Exceeding Agony of Soul send up such a Cry, Lord, Help me to
search my self and to try my self; and give me not up unto Delusions.

Take then the Notes, by which the Fear of God, is to be distinguished, and
discovered; and press them hand upon your selves. Let not your treacherous and
slippery hears. E^ade the Examination: Renew the Examination frequently,
servently, (...) Repeat it with Importunity. Be not content without a
satisfactory Answer. Stick to the point. Allow no shutsting. A glance or two
upon the state of your Souls, is not enough. Multiply Dem^ods. Be not flighty.
Make a thorough Inquisition. Be able to say, Psalm. 77, 6. I commune with my own
Heart, and my Spirit made diligent search. Yea, Be not satisfied, until you are
come to some clear and plain conclusion. Be not satisfied, until you see
plainly where about you are. Be restless, till you see a Sentences plainly
passed upon you, one way or t'o^^ther, and Entered as it were upon Record, And,
O man, having beheld thy self, be not like a man who beholds his Natural Face
in a glass, and goes his way, and forgets what manner of man he was.

But then, after your Self-Examination, you are to do according to what you
find in your Self Examination.

The fear of God, contains in it,

An Hearty Sense of the Great God, and His Infinite Perfections.

An Hearty Dread of Sin, and of the Divine Displeasure for Sin.

An Hearty Care to please God, in Doing and B^aring of His Will

And an Hearty Flight unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST by Faith, for both
Righteousness and Salvation; and as unto the only Mediator, by whom we may come
to know God, and serve God, and be Restored unto His Favor.

If upon Self Examination, you find, That things are well between God and you,
and that you have the Fear of God; What can you do, but the Thankful and
Watchful? Call upon thy own Soul, O thou most obliged Believer; Bless the Lord,
O my Soul, Bless the Lord, who has brought me out of Darkness into His
mavelous Light! Bless the Lord, who has Espoused me to His Christ! Bless the
Lord, who has pardoned all my Sins! Bless the Lord, who has Established my
goings in His paths, and will guide me by Counsel, till He bring me to Glory!
Oh, Fall down before God; Cast thy Crown at the Foot of Sovereign Grace; Begin
thy Everlasting Hallelujahs to Him; Offer up thy self to Him, in Flames of
Rapturous Love; Let His High praises be in thy mouth continually. But then, be
very circumspect; Walk circumspectly. Keep thy foot from all that may eclipseor
weaken thy Assurance. It Is thy Crown, Hold it fast, Let no Sin take it away;
For if thou indulge thy self in any grosser sin, which is a work of Darkness
The Holy Spirit of God, thereby grieved, will Chastise thee for it, by leaving
thy Soul under Darkness. None O None, are under such Bonds, to walk holily,
exactly, fruitfully, and with an Heavenly Frame as they that are sure of going
to Heaven In the Fear of God, which is the Way to Heaven, art thou going to
Heaven? Oh^ Take not one Your out of the way.

If upon Self Examination you find, Tha^ things are ill between God and you,
and that you have not the Fear of God, O self condemned Sinners, What can you
do but cry to God, that He would Convert you and put His Fear into your Hearts,
that you may no more Depart from (...) Give Thanks to God, (...) convinced man
for His Lise^v^ring of thy (...) unto thy self: It Is a Discovery that may prove
thy Delivery: He has Discovered His mavelous Compassion in it (...) at (...)
and times better (...) for thee to be told that thou art in the (...)
circumstances. (...) Oh, Don't stifle the convictions No, but Cherish them, I
Now them, Hearken to them. The Light that God (...) into thy Soul, be it never
so Dim and ^eak, yet shut not thy Heart against it. Be not senseless under the
Thunders of God. Thunder struck by the voice of God unto Unregenerates, beg of
Him to draw thee unto the Lord Jesus Christ, thy only Savior. Despair not of
thy Acceptance with the Lord Jesus Christ. Hear His gracious Invitations, Look
unto me, and be Saved; and, Come unto me, and have Rest; and, Him that comes
unto me, I will in no wise ^ast out. Reply, Lord, I would Look, Lord I would
come, unto thee, Oh, help me to do it! Behold, all the sure Mercies of the
Covenant, Laid up for thee in the Everlasting Covenant. Behold, all Tendered
unto thee, they shall yet all be (...) if thou take them upon the Tender.
Strive, Oh Strive (...) mighty (...) unto God, that He would being thee Home
unto the Lord Jesus Christ, which will be to bring thee into the Fear of God.

But what shall be done, if upon our Self Examination, things remain Doubtful;
and we can come to no certain conclusion, whether we have the Fear of God; We
are uncertain what we shall conclude about our selves one way or other.

Truly, You must conclude, That (...) thing further is to be done* You (...)
not let things continue at this pass. Now the best Thing to be done, that I
know o^, is, To make Fresh Essays at the Fear of God. If you Fear God, you do
Repent of Sin. If you doubt whether you have done so, put it out of Doubt, by
doing (...) over again. Again Bewayl your Sin; Again Confess your Sin; Again
make you most zealous Petitions to God for the Death of your Sin. If you Fear
God you do Believe on Christ. If you doubt whether you have done so, put it out
of Doubt, by doing it over again. Again commit your perishing Souls into the
Hands of Christ^; Again Consent unto all (...) Offices of (...); Again Receive
all the Kindnesses, (...) Christ offers to do or you (...) Fear God you do then
love God (...) of Doubt, that you (...) be doing it over Again. Again give your
selves up to God, with (...) Desires to be for Him and not for another Again
Consecrate your selves, and all that you are, and all that you have, unto the
Service of Glorifying the Glorious God; Oh, bring your All, under a Dedication
unto the Lord!

And now, my Hearers, how do you stand affected, unto the Self Examination,
which you have heard thus described? It is a Remarkable passage, 2 Cor. 13. 5.
Know ye not your own selves? that Jesus Christ in you, except ye be blame wor^
thy? If you do not so Know your selves, as to Know that Jesus Christ is in you,
there is in you something that is very much to Blame; an Ignorance, and a
Slothfulness, that is very Blameable. Truly, It Is a very Blameable Thing, if
any of you do not know, that you Fear God. But Oh, how Blameble then are they
who never do so much as Ask themselves, whether they do Fear God or no? It
shows, that the Fear of God is much wanting in them. God save my Hearers from
such a fatal and fearful Inadvertency!

The Motto inscribed on the Gravestone, GONE, BUT NOT LOST.

My Resignation. [From Heb 11. 17. with Genesis 22. 12.]
THe Dearest Lord of Heaven gave
Himself an Offering once for me:
The Dearest Thing on Earth I have,
Now, Lord, I Will offer unto Thee.
I see my best Enjoyments here,
Are Loans, and Flowers, and Vanities;
E're well Enjoyed they disappear:
Vain Smoke, they prick and leave our Eyes.
But I Believe, O Glorious Lord,
That when I seem to Lose these Toys,
What Is Lost will fully be Restored
In Glory, with Eternal Joys.
I do Believe, That I and mine,
Shall come to Everlasting Rest;
Because, Blessed Jesus, we are Thine,
And with thy Promises are Blessed.
I do Believe, That every Bird
Of mine, which to the Ground shall fall,
Does fall at thy kind Will and Word;
Nor I, nor It, is hurt at all.
Now my Believing Soul does Hear
This among the Glad Angels told;
I know, thou do thy Maker Fear,
From whom thou nothing do withhold!
Good news FROM A Far Country: For the Solace of them, whose Friends are gone
thither.
Preached, 29 d 12. m. 1695. the Day after the Funeral of my Daughter
Mehetabel. The Text occurring for that Day in a course of Sermons, on the
Angelical Descent, in the Second Chapter of Luke.
Luke 11. 15. Gone away from them into HEAVEN.
HEAVEN! what a grateful Subject for our Meditations are we now fallen upon?
Heaven! It Is the Seat and Sum of our perfect Blessedness; and the only Home of
every Godly man on Earth. Heaven! It Is the Strong Tower, whereto our Devout
Friends do retire, for the Eternal Harvest and Reward of all their Devotions,
when Mortality takes them off. Heaven! It Is the Rendezvous of the Bright Angels,
Attending on the Throne of God, and Beholding of His Face, continually. Yea, A
Better and a Brighter Thing than all of this; Heaven! It Is the place where our
most Glorious Lord JESUS CHRIST, is to be seen in all His Glory. That we may
Hear and Know any thing about Heaven, it is the Wonderful Mercy of our God unto
us. But then, What a Wonder of Mercy is it, that an Offer of this Heaven may be
made unto us, who are as miserable Sinners as any that are out of Hell, and as
Unworthy ones as any that are in it!

In the Paragraph of Sacred Scripture now before us, we may see Heaven opened,
with some remarkable Intimation and Invitation unto us, to hope, that we may be
admitted into it. Our Lord JESUS CHRIST, the Great King of the World, was no
sooner Born, but presently that King must be Proclaimed; and those Nobles of
Heaven, the Angels of God, must be the Heralds of the Proclamation. Such a
Favor of Heaven, as a visible Descent of Angels from thence, was granted unto
the Children of men, on this matchless occasion; and indeed, if the Almighty
God would send His own Son to be manifest in Flesh among the Children of men,
it was but a Lesser, though a wondrous Condescension, to send His Angels; of
none among whom, He had ever said, Thou art my Son! I make no doubt, That the
Glory of the Lord now Shining with its Angelical Attendants over Bethlehem, was
that which the Magicians then in the East, observed as a New Star over Judea,
and repaired thither accordingly, with their Enquiries. But thus was the Birth
of our Great and Good Shepherd, revealed unto the Shepherds of that Country.
First, One Angel declares unto them, who and where, the Savior was, that was
this Night born into the World. And then a Multitude of the Heavenly Host
accompanied that One Angel, in singing the Praises due to the most High God,
for such a Savior, The Angels had once with Grief driven man out of Paradise.
But they now come with Songs, to tell him Tidings of a way made for more than a
Restoration, and Good will toward men. But I have now read unto you, some
Account of what became of these Blessed Spirits, when they had performed the
Errand, which they came down upon. Withdrawing from Humane Sight, They went
away into Heaven. But methinks, I overhear them leaving this Instruction for
us, behind them.

DOCTRINE.
There is a Glorious HEAVEN, whereto heavenly spirits do go away, when then
leave this Earth.



There are Two Enquiries, that now ly before us.

The First Enquiry's;

What is that Glorious HEAVEN, where to Heavenly Spirits, do go away?

Now the First Answer which I have to give you, and the Fit Answer, is, That on
this side of Heaven you must not Expect a Full Answer. The Things of Heaven are
such as are pronounced by one that had been there; a Cor 12.4 Unutterable
Things. Our Notions of Things, while we are on Earth, are marvellously limited
by our Conversation with Earthly Objects. The Nature of Heaven, alas, we cannot
see it, but with Colors and with Glosses fetched from Earth; and you may be
sure, They are gross enough! We must confess, 1 Cor. 2 9 Eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of man, the Things which God has
prepared for them that Love Him. They are, as one well says, Far more above
the highest Ascent of our Thoughts than the Marriage Feast of a King, exceeds
in magnificence, the Imagination of one that has always lived in an obscure
Village, that never saw any ornaments of State, nor tasted wine in his life.
The most Effectual, and the most compendious way, to learn what Heaven is, will
be, by Religion to walk in the way to Heaven. Scies cum Fies. Let us make sure
of Heaven, by the methods plainly enough described in the Word of God, and it
will not be long before we shall have a very comfortable Description of Heaven
made unto us; even in our own Admission to the Comforts of it.

Nevertheless, we do know something about Heaven; and the Sum of what we know,
is thus much.

In general: The principal Character of Heaven to be considered with us, is,
The most intimate and eternal Consummation of that Union, with God, into which
He has pu^p sed from all Eternity, to b^ing all His Chosen There is an
inconceivable Union, and Communion, between the Three Persons in God Blessed
for ever. And such is the inconceivable Grace of God, that He will bring
certain Creatures into the Heavenly Delights of that Union and Communion, as
far as it is possible for Creatures to be made partakers thereof. We have this
astonishing Purpose of God, Revealed unto us, in the words of our Dying Lord,
Job. 17. 20, 21. I pray for all them, who shall Believe on me, that they all
may be one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one
in us. Here, her^ is the utmost End of that Election, wherein God has set
apart certain persons, both men and Angels, for everlasting Happiness. Here is
the Original, Here is the Foundation, Here is the Intention, of all Electing
Love; and in Heaven is its Accomplishment. We magnify the Grace of God in
Adopting us for His Children, in pardoning our Sins, in Rescuing us from the
Flesh, the World, and the Devil; and we desire these Favors of the Lord. We do
well. Oh! but there is an Higher Stroke than all of this, wherein we shall be
highly Favored of the Lord: And that is, A most mavelous UNION with God
Himself. Indeed, the Elect of God shall continue Distinct Beings for ever; They
shall never put off their Individuation. And when they become One with God, it
must not be blasphemously imagined, that they shall become the same with God.
But yet the Elect of God, shall be brought so near to God, that GOD will become
All in All unto them; and they shall be filled with all the Fullness of God,
even so Filled, as a piece of Gold thrown into the glowing Furnace, is Filled
with the Fire; God will penetrate them, God will replenish them, God will
wondrously possess them, and Swallow them up in Thoughts of Him and for Him,
and communicate a Fullness of Joy unto them, and Pleasure for evermore. Oh!
that I could utter unto you, something of the vast Blessedness, that we shall
receive in our Union with God (...) was with some Ex^a^y of Admiration once
cried out, I King 8. 27. Will God (...) dwell on Earth? Behold, the Heaven, and
Heaven of Heavens cannot contain thee! This may we say, Will God indeed fetch
of His Creatures, yea, and from Earth will He fetch many of them, to dwell in
Heaven, yea to dwell in Himself! He will do so. In Heaven it shall be
accomplished.

More particularly;

First; We know, that there is an Heavenly State, whereof some are made
partakers. A State so Desirable it is, that it is called Life; because there is
nothing more Desirable than Life; but yet that State is as the Oracles of God
have told us, Better than Life. Now of that Heavenly State we find some
Description in this Heavenly Book; by which we may apprehend a little of it.

First; There is a State of Rest Enjoyed in Heaven; a Rest, or Freedom and
Safety, from all sorts of Inconveniences About the Inhabitants of Heaven, it is
said, Rev. 14 13 They Rest. Whatever may be Tedious or Irksome to a Rational
Creature, we may be sure, that in Heaven there is nothing of it. There are no
Briars and Thorns growing in the Soil of Heaven. Of Heaven there is one most
significant and comprehensive thing to be spoken; and that is, There us no Sin
there; Sin the most hateful and horrid Evil that can be, Oh, there is none of
That among those who are ascended into that Hill of the Lord, and who Stand in
that Holy place It is therefore said, 1 Pet 1. 4. There is an inheritance
undefiled, reserved in Heaven for you. There is no perpetration of Sin, yea,
there is no Inclination to Sin, among the Freeman of Heaven. There is not so
much as one vain Word ever heard, or one Vain Thought ever formed, in Heaven;
or so much as one Deceitful Heart found there, or one Heart that has any manner
of Disposition, to thwart the will of God. All the Citizens of the Heavenly
Zion, do Walk uprightly, and Work Righteousness, and have nothing but the Truth
in their Hearts. Nor indeed is there any Tempter to Sin, vexing those that are
in Heaven. The Tempter that insinuated himself into the Earthly Paradise, is
for ever shut ^ut of the Heavenly. None of Satan's poisoned Arrows can be Shot
into that City of God. In Heaven there is no molestation from the Wiles of the
Devil; no Devil, nor Instrument of the Devil is there, to seduce us from our
Allegiance unto God. There the Wicked one Ceases from Troubling, and they that
were Weary or Afraid of him, are at Rest. They that go thither, may say to all
their Interior Adversaries, Where I go you cannot come Now if there be no sin
in Heaven, if no Commission of Sin, or Temptation to Sin, it is easy to make a
most gladsome Inference We may easily infer, There is not in Heaven any of that
Affliction, which is the Consequence and Recompense of Sin. It Is said of them
that are got safe to Heaven, Rev.7. 16, 17. They shall Hunger no more, neither
Thirst any more; and God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes; All their
Tears were dropped into Gods Bottel before they came to Gods Heaven! They suffer
no Wants, in that Garden of God; They suffer no Griefs, in that Pleasant Land;
They suffer no Fears in those Regions of Light. In Heaven, you shall not find a
Timothy complaining of Often Infirmities In Heaven, you shall not find a David
complaining of Dying, or Wicked Children. In Heaven, you shall not find a Job
complaining of Enemies Robbing him. You shall not in Heaven, hear an Heman
complaining of Lovers and Friends removed far from him: Nor hear an Elijah
complaining of Impious people seeking to Ruin him. These things are not in
Heaven But, Syrs, We must have more than all of this: We must not be content
with an Heaven made up of Negatives Wherefore,

Secondly; There is Enjoyed in Heaven, a State of Uninterrupted but
Inexpressible Fellowship with God, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Would we be
told, how it is in Heaven? The Old Testament has told us, (Psalm. 17. 15.) We
shall there Behold the Face of God in Righteousness, and be Satisfied with His
Likeness. The New Testament has told us. (1 John 3. 2) We shall there Be like
the Lord Jesus Christ* for we shall see Him as He is. This, This is Heaven! The
Scripture that leads us thither, has given us this Account of it. Let is gaze a
little upon the several Stars that Glitter in this our Scriptural Account of it.

First, In Heaven there is granted a very Immediate Sight of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST. God in His Everlasting Decree, that a Man should be personally, United
unto His own Second Person forever, did also Decree, that certain other men
should be given unto this most Glorious Man, to be with Hi Angels, the
Spectators and partakers of His Glory. Our Lord JESUS CHRIST now mentions
(...), as the main point of Heaven; Joh.17. 24. Father, I will, that they whom
thou have given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my Glory, which
thou have given me.

In Heaven then, they see that Man, who is God as well as man, and in whom
there dwells the Fullness of the Godhead Bodily a They see that Man, who once
appeared in the Form of a Servant, but now is Highly Exalted with a Name about
every Name: They see that Man, who Sits down at the Right Hand of the Majesty
on High, Swaying the Scepter of the Universe. They see Him, with Eternal
Transport! And as it is in the Enjoying of the Light, the Enjoyment that one
man has of it, hinders not, abates not the Enjoyment of another; So in this
Inheritance of the Saints in Light, the Sight of the altogether Lovely Lord
JESUS CHRIST Enjoyed by one Saint, is no Hindrance to the Sight which another
Saint has of Him, or to his Joy in the Sight.

Secondly, In and by the Sight of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, in Heaven, the
Almighty GOD communicates of HIMSELF unto His Chosen, with never-ending
Satisfaction.

The Lord JESUS CHRIST is the Sun of that Heaven, which we are hoping for; It
is said of Him, Mal.4 2. He is the Sun of Righteousness, that has Healing in
His Wings. Now all Heaven is Irradiated with that Sun of Righteousness. The
Rays of that Sun are darted all over the Vast Heavenly Realms of Bliss, and
all the Saints of Heaven, do greedily take in those Rays, with Joy unspeakable
and full of glory. The Name of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, in the Oracles of the
Sacred Scripture, is, (...) Face of God: and in that one Hint, you have a
Golden key, to open a thousand passage, in these Oracles. When we come near to
our Lord JESUS CHRIST in Heaven, we shall in Him see the Face of God; and see
the Face of God shining with a Luster infinitely beyond that on the Face of
Moses: the Face of Moses coming down from the Mount, was a dark Thing in
comparison of it. Hence we read, 2 Cor. 4 6 There is Glory of God, in the Face
of Jesus Christ. No mortal Eye were able to behold a Sight so full of Majesty:
The Disciple who lay next Him at His Table while He was on Earth, after He was
gone to Heaven Swoon'd away at the sight of Him: His Countenance was as the Sum
shining is his meridian. But is this all? N^* In Heaven, they also Hear the
Voice of the Lord JESUS CHRIST; and no Thunder so great, no Music so sweet, as
that Voice: it is the Voice of the Lord God Almighty: When that Voice is
uttered, all Heaven shakes with Glad Astonishments! It carries Life with it,
wherever it reaches. It follows, that in Heaven, they are all filled with the
Grace of the Lord JESUS CHRIT, and He there withal Shows them all things: He
leads them Successively from one Fountain of Life unto another. All that a
Reasonable Soul, can Reasonably wish to know of the Ever blessed God, the Lord
JESUS CHRIST blesses them in Heaven, with the knowledge of it. The Perfections
of GOD, are more Exemplified, and more Illustrated in the Lord JESUS CHRIST,
than in all His Works of the whole Creation beside, which has all received its
Beginning from Him. He is the Express Image thereof; and all the works of God,
meet in Him, with a most Exquisite and Curious Recapitulation of them. Now in
Heaven, they take a view of this Image, with Everlasting Delight: and, Lord In
thy Light, thy CHRIST, we shall see Light! But while they do thus, their
Happiness may be Expressed in those Terms; 2 Cor. 3 18 Beholding, the Glory of
the Lord, we are changed into the same Image from Glory to Glory, as by the
spirit of the Lord. The Understandings of the Glorified, will be mightily
Enlarged and Enlightened. Their Affections will be thoroughly rectified and
purified. The Image of God will be gloriously imprinted on them. The Spirit of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, has a mavelous possession of them that are in Heaven.
He makes them as like unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST, as it is possible. He
Inspires them with an Holy Resolution, to be for Him and (...) for another; He
Quickens them to Love Him, with all their Heart, and Soul and Mind. He Raises
them here withal unto those Privi^edges of Splendour and Vigor, and
Spiritually, and Immortality, and Incorruptibality, which will make them
Resemble Him, Exceedingly, O all that are in Heaven, it may be said, Lord, As
thou art, so are they, each one Resembling the Children of the Eternal King! It
is said, Rom 8. 29. God has predistinated us, to be conformed unto the Image
of His Son. In Heaven (...) brought about! And there, He is perpetually, with
an Eternal Variety* giving them admirable Testimonies of His Good Will to them;
and they, both Receive these Testimonies with Raptures of Joy, and Return
Testimonies of their own Holy Dedication to Him. Thu^ are they in Heaven
Eternally Entertained, with Fullness of Joy in the presence of God, and
pleasures at His Right hand for ever more. This is the Heavenly State*

Secondly; But is there not an Heavenly Place, wherein they are to be made
partakers of this Heavenly State? Yea, such a Place there is. We read, 2 Cor 5.
1. We have an House not made with Hands, Eternal in the Heavens. If there be an
House for us in Heaven, there must needs be a Place for us. There are to be
Bodies in Heaven; Yea, many Bodies are already there. But Bodies require Place.
It is nonsense to say, That Heaven is a State, without a Place. But then,
Where is the Place? I shall at present, say only two or three things concerning
it.

First; The Place of Heaven, is, where our Lord JESUS CHRIST resides, in His
Glorious Manhood, Ah, Lord, Thou will make Heaven, wherever thou come! It is
the periphrasis of Heaven, Joh 12. 26 Where I am* there shall my Servant be;
That is to say, He shall be in Heaven. Our Lord JESUS CHRIST is the very Heaven
of Heaven it self. Let the Sun be on what side of the Globe it will, it will be
Day there. And it will be Heaven, Wherever our Exalted JESUS comes. It is the
Lord JESUS CHRIST, that is the Tree of Life, in the midst of that paradise; as
the famous Tree so called at the Beginning, was, in the midst of the Innocent
stand of Eden: And indeed, wherever He is, His being there, is enough to make
Paradise.

Secondly; Those bright Regions, that are the Place of Heaven, are the very
best Rooms of the whose Creation, though the Upper Stories of is. Heaven for
this cause is called, The Throne of God. We read, Psalm. 11 4. The Lords Throne
is in Heaven. Certainly, The Throne of God must be the most Glorious Place that
can be! Of Canaan it is said, It was the Glory of all Lands, Much more, may it
be said of Heaven. Yea, It Is the Heaven of Heavens, where our Lord JESUS CHRIST
fits upon His Throne that is. The most Excellent Heaven of all Indeed, the
Heaven of the Blessed, contains vast Regions in it: There are many Mansions,
yea, there are many Regions, in the Heavenly Country. The Earth, although it be
above one and twenty Thousand Miles in Circumference, is but a small Point, if
compared unto Heaven; perhaps it would be Invisible to one Station'd there.

Thirdly; The Chosen of God shall enjoy their Heaven, in more than One
Individual Place. For, there will a Time come, when our Heaven shall be within
our Atmosphere, in the Higher parts of this Air, and nor many miles from this
Earth, for at least, a Thousand years together. It will be thus, during the Day
of Judgment; yea, if that Thousand years, (which according to the promise, we
look for!) make but the Morning to the Day of Judgment, we cannot say, How long
we may see Heaven continue within this our Atmosphere. It Is said, 2 Pet. 3. 13.
We look for New Heavens. as well as New Earth; which will evidently be after
the Descent of our Lord. Our Lord JESUS CHRIST, will then with His Holy
Myriads, dispossess the Devils of the high places, which are at present
occupied by the power of the Air. These high places will then be possessed by
our Lord Jesus Christ, having the City of God come down thither with Him, where
the Saints then Living will all be caught up to meet Him Heaven will then be
there, dispensing of Heavenly Influences, to the New World, until the Lord
JESUS CHRIST shall carry His Armies away from thence, Himself marching in the
Head of them* unto His other Heavens.

The Second Enquiry is;

Who are the HEAVENLY SPIRITS, that go away to this Heaven?

It Is to be thus Answered

First, The ANGELS of the Lord Jesus Christ, Revisit Heaven. when they have
dispatched the particular Services which they have to do for Him on Earth. The
Angels are the Natives of Heaven; those Morning Stars have their own Habitation
there; those Sons of God are Lodged in that their Fathers House. Where the
(...) of our Lord JESUS CHRIST is, there His Angels are; Thousands of Thousands
do Minister unto Him, Ten Thousand times Ten Thousand stand before Him. Those
Angels are the Princes of the Caelestial Court; who in all their bright Order
Encompass the Throne of the Lord Jesus Christ, and pay their humblest* Homage
unto Him. We read, Psalm 103 19. 20. The Lord has, prepared His Th^one in the
Heavens; And it follows, O ye Angles, mighty in Strength, you do His
Commandments, hearkening unto the voice of His Word. Those Heavenly Spirits do
come down from Heaven; even from our Lord JESUS CHRIST in Heaven; when H^ (...)
Affairs upon Earth to Employ them in As, when a Message was to be dispatched
from Heaven, unto Daniel, that Lovely man of God: We read, Dan 9 21 The Angel
Gabriel must fly Swift's down unto him* And when those Attain and Errands are
done, these Heavenly Spirits return to their former Stations, where they
always b^ h^ll the Face of God in Heaven. Thus, we read, Z^ch, 1 11 The Angels
appear before God, with this Account, We have walked to and fro through the
Earth, and behold Things are so and so: They make Report, how they have
discharged the Duty, they were sent upon

Secondly; The SOULS of the Faithful among the Children of men, having Finished
the Work, which the Lord Jesus Christ has ordered them to do on Earth, do then
also Ascend into Heaven. There are some among the Children of men, whom the
powerful Spirit of God has overcome, to Believe on the Influences of the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, for their safe Arrival to Heaven at the last. Those that have
thus given themselves unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST, in Believing on Him, have a
Work to do, in gratitude unto their Lord Redeemer, before they come to Heaven.
Such Believers are by the Sanctifying Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, male meet
for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. And when these Holy Believers Die,
the Angels of the Lord carry and convoy away their Spirits to be with Him in
Heaven: They are no sooner Departed but, Phil. 1 23 They are with Christ, where
to be is by far the best of all There were millions of Angels, that upon a
Rebellion against God, were Banished from Heaven.

But when such as are Believers on the Lord Jesus Christ among the Children
among the Children ^ men Expire, their Souls fill up the Room of those Apostate
Angels. And Oh! how gladly do the Angels of God welcome those Regenerate Souls,
with Invitation to join with them in the praises of the Lord Jesus Christ* The
Saints of all Ages, are as one gives us the Resemblance, like a Fleet of
Merchant men, bound for the same Port; some arrive sooner; some later, but how
welcome are they to their Friends at their Arrival! Oh! methinks, I see the
Angels of Heaven, waiting for the Saints that are coming in; When the Soul of
any one gets in, all Heaven is in Music, and there is Joy among the Angels of
God There is a shout for Joy among them, Welcome, O Soul Victorious over all
the Enemies that would have kept thee cut of Heaven! Welcome O Soul that have
escaped Shipwreck in the Waves Where so many have perished. The Spirits of the
Faithful, Die not, and sleep not, at the Death of their Bodies. They Fly away to
Heaven; and certainly they don't Sleep in that Mavelous Light! The Original,
and the Constitution of the Soul, proclaim the Immortality of it. And the
Express word of the Lord JESUS CHRIST assures us, There is no Killing of the
Soul. [See also, Luke 16. 9. and Rom 8 10. The Consent of Souls in all sensible
Nations, unto the Immortality of the Soul, is nothing else, but an Impression
which the Maker of the Soul has made upon it; and it is infallible. And the
presage which the Spirits of men often have of their leaving their Bodies, at
such or such a Time, very punctually and marvellously accomplished, plainly
argues, that they out live the Bodies. Now, the Work of Grace upon a Godly
Soul, bespeaks an Heavenly World for such a Soul, at its Departure. The Grace
wrought in a Godly Soul, shall never Die; No, It abides for ever. But if the
Soul Die, the Work of Grace upon it, would also Die. It is a great principle of
Christianity, That when we are Absent from the Body, we shall be Present with
the Lord. Now, to demonstrate this principle, what a proof does the Apostle
bring? 2 Cor. 5. 5. He that has wrought us for this self same thing, is God. A
Soul, that has a Work of Grace upon it, is, A Vessel prepared for Glory And
shall not this Vessel now be received up to Glory? A Soul having been by the
rare Workmanship of God Created unto good Works, He will not throw by this
Workmanship, into the useless Rubbish of Non Entity, we may be sure of it. And
there is a Convenience in it, that a Godly Soul, should at its Departure, be
taken into an Heavenly World. The Soul; may say to its Clay Tabernacle, at its
going away, as our Lord said unto His Disciples; Joh. 16. 7. It is Expedient
for you, that I go away. It Is convenient, That the Body should be Dissolved,
consumed, utterly taken asunder, and broken to pieces. Why? That so it may be
New molded into such a Frame, as to be fit for the Company and Employment of
Angels. Yea, It may be also convenient. That the Soul should in the mean Time,
take some Turns in the Heavenly World. Our Soul, while it is here, it is not fit
for to be Entrusted, with such a Body, as that of the Resurrection: Such a Body
would be two Heavenly a Thing, for a Soul under such a Feebleness as ours. But
a Soul taken for a while into the Heavenly World, and there used unto the
Se^ing and Serving of God, will be fit for such a Every Charit as the Body will
be at the Resurrection; a Body that shall fly like the Angels, and shine like
the stars for ever and ever. The Spirits of the Faithful do then, at their
Expiration, enter into a Paradise; and an Heavenly Blessedness, though not into
all the Blessedness intended for us. But let us proceed unto our

APPLICATION.
1. There are many Evils and Sorrows on Earth, against which we may Relieve our
selves, by the Thoughts of that Glorious HEAVEN, whereto we are going. Oh! That
such an Heavenly Mind were in us all! Christians, can we say, Our Conversation
is in Heaven! It would very much be so, it we could under every Affliction say,
Our Consolation is in Heaven! How comfortably is it proposed in the Book of our
comfort; N^w for a Season, if need be, you are in Heaviness, through manifold
Temptations* But, ye greatly Rejoice, in that there is an Inheritance reserved
in Heaven for you. And again, Afflictions are accomplished in you, and you
Suffer a while; But, The God of all Grace has called us unto His Eternal Glory
by Christ Jesus. Whatever Difficulty we do on Earth encounter withal, Oh, Let
us relieve our selves with that Consolation; There it none of all this in that
Heaven which I am near unto! These Light Afflictions, they are but for a
moment, and when this moment is past, then comes a far more Exceeding and
Eternal weight of Glory. What says our Apostle? Romans 8. 18. I reckon, that the
Sufferings of this present Time, are not worthy to be compared unto the Glory
that is to be Revealed. The Blind man, and the Lame, as they were led unto
their Martyrdom, thus comforted one another; Brother, I shall need my Guide,
and thou thy Crutch, no more! Do we meet with Impoverishing Losses, which cause
us to sigh, I am poor and Needy! Well, It will not be long, before we are
possessed of, A Better and Lasting substance in Heaven, and before we are,
Heirs of a Kingdom, which God has promised unto them that Love Him. Are we
Derided Despised, Slandered, and ready to sigh, Reproach has broken my Heart!
Well, But we have our Names Written in Heaven; and when we come to Heaven, we
shall find no Shimei to Revile us in that New Jerusalem. Are the Remainders of
Indwelling Sin so Troublesome unto us, that we cry out, O Wretched man, that I
am, who shall deliver me? O Holy man, Heaven shall deliver thee, Thou shall
shortly, by the Death of the Body, be delivered from the Body of Death. Saints
you shall not do all that you do here this Day, when you come into the Land,
that the Lord shall give you.

There is especially one Exercise, which every Day befalls the People of God;
Namely, The Death of desirable Relatives. We are now advised of a Sufficient
and a wonderful Support unto our minds, when we are in Mourning, for the Death
of such as Die in the Lord. Methinks, We can scarce decently keep our Mourning
on, when we are fallen into this Meditation; Our Desirable Relatives are gone
away to a glorious Heaven, when they go away from us. The Pale Horse only came
to fetch them away unto the Heavenly Fathers House. Oh, why don't we Rejoice,
when they say unto us, Let us go up to the House of the Lord! Their Language to
us, is that which their Savior has taught them; If ye Loved me, ye would
Rejoice, because I go to my Father. Its true, the Death of the Righteous, is a
matter of Lamentation, and it would be a vile Stupidity in us, if they who did
Live Desired, should not also Die Lamented, with us. But, Oh! we have a Strong
Consolation under it. Whither are they Gone? Gone, to that Glorious Heaven,
where to be is by far the best of all! Gone, whence as they shall not Return,
so they would not for a thousand such Worlds as ours! Gone, Thither, from
whence they call to us, Weep not for us, who have all Tears wiped from our
Eyes: but Weep for your selves, who are like to Suffer, you know not what your
selves, before your coming to us.

Think thus, O my Distressed Hearers, concerning your Dead Relatives; yea, though
it were a Son of thy Love, or though it were a Lamb that was a Daughter unto
thee! When the Great Luther saw, his Little Daughter Magdalene, whom he dearly
Loved, lying at the point of Death, he Read unto her, some clauses in the
Twenty Sixth Chapter of Isaiah, and at length concluded thus; Well, my
Daughter, Enter thou into thy Chamber with Peace, I shall ere long be with thee
there. On, this, he wept plentifully; but in the Public attended the Hearse
without a Tear. Truly, It will not be long before we are with our Desirable
Relatives in the Heavenly Chambers of Eternal Peace and Life. How can we Weep,
any otherwise than for Joy, when we consider it?

But may this Consolation be applied unto the Death of our Infants? Yes. Why
not? The Lord said of old in His Gracious Covenant; I will be a God unto thee,
and unto thy Children. The Infants of the Faithful, were in the Days of the
Old Testament, the Heirs of the Promise; Hence the Seal of that promise was
then by the Divine Appointment used upon Infants, a Seal that God Accepted them
as Righteous through the Messiah which their Parents believed on. But I argue; If
the Infant. of the Faithful, were in the Covenant of Grace under the Old
Testament, they are so still under the New. For, where, or when, are they Cut
off? Or, have we lost the privileges of the New Covenant, by being under the
New Testament It cannot be imagined. Well then; If God be a God unto our Infant
Children, What will fold low? I tell you, O my Brethren in Adversity, Nothing
less than a Glorious Heaven will follow. Wonder, Oh, wonder at the Grace of
God, Ensured unto them, in those words of His Apostle; Heb. 11. 16. God is not
Ashamed to be called, Their God, for He has prepared for them a City. When
they go from us, they go to that Heavenly City! Is it not Expressly said of our
Infants, They are Holy? We may then be sure, That at their Departure hence,
they go to be among the Holy. And where is that, but in Heaven that High and
Holy Place? Is it no (...) said of our Infants, That they have their Angels in
Heaven? We may then be sure, That at their Departure hence, Their Angels will
carry them (...) to Heaven (...) not our Lord Jesus Christ ex^resly said of
some Infants; of such is (...) Kingdom of Heaven? And no (...), here are more
Spirits of Infants in Heaven, than Saints of any other Age.

Indeed, after what manner the Souls of any Infants are Sanctified it is not
easy for us to Explain; though it is easy for us to suppose that without their
being Sanctified, their Imparities contracted from (...) mixture with the
Spirit which they have derived with their Body from (...) sinful Parents, would
render them unfit for the Heavenly Kingdom. [But if you will not be satisfied
without some Account of it, I shall tender no other at present than that of the
Reverend Poictet. Modus est ineffabilis: Verisimile est, Spiritus S.
Operationem consistere in co, quod abrumpan Unionem quandam moralem cum
corpore, quam acquirit Anima Statim ac naturaliter unitur cum co. Et
quandoquidem bac unio Moralis animoe cum corpore pendet dubio procul, a certis
motibus corporeis Spirituum, Deus permittit ut certi affectus in anima
nascantur, credibile est Spiritum S. bane unionemabrumpere, mutando ab una
part motui Spirituum, vel suspendendo aut coereendo eos motus, et ab altera
alios motus in anima Excitando.] In short; How easily can the Holy Spirit of
Grace imprint a Disposition upon what Soul He pleases? It Is a notable passage,
1 These. 4. 13. Brethren, Concerning them which are asleep, sorrow not as others
that have no Hope. Now, surely, many of our Infants are some of them which are
Asleep; yea, the Most of them. Shall we Sorrow for ours, as the Pagans do, who
have no Hope for theirs? Truly, If they have no share in the Covenant of Grace.
We should have no Hope for them; for we have the other Foundation for our Hope.
Let none of our good Brethren (...) me, That I have just as must Hope (...) the
Welfare of my Departed (...) the most (...) more. Brethren, I would not be of
that Sorrowful Opinion for never so much; I had rather Lose all the Portion I
have on Earth, much rather, than Lose the Hope I have of a Portion laid up for
my Children in Heaven. Pardon me, if I cannot with any patience forego so rich a
Portion. Syrs, I have more Hope than so; I do Hope (and God forbid that I
should easily Cast away the Confidence!) That when my Children are Gone, they
are not Lost; but carried unto the Heavenly Feast with Abraham, whose Blessing
is come upon them through Jesus Christ. How imitable then were the Action of
David; 2 Samuel 12. 20. 23. David perceived that the Child was Dead; Then David
arose from the Earth, and changed his Apparel, and came into the House of the
Lord; then he came into his own House, and they set Bread before him, and he
did Eat; and he said, I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me. I
remember, the Great Chrysostom, Reflecting on the Funeral Solemnities of his
Time, at which the Mourners were nonsensically outrageous in their passions; he
said, Ah, Christian Faith and Religion, that has been Triumphant over thine
Enemies in so many Battles by the Blood and the Death of thy Martyrs! How art
thou now contradicted, by those who in words make profession of thee? Are these
the Expressions of those who believe the Blessed (...) will the Heathens be
induced to believe the promises that Christ has given of a Glorious Kingdom for
His Servants, when those who are called so, behave themselves as if they had no
steadfast Faith in Him!

II. But now, be Exhorted, and be Persuaded, O all ye People, every one of you,
To make sure of this, that you go unto a Glorious Heaven when you leave this
Earth; Or, as the Word of Life Expresses it, 1 Timothy 6. 12. Lay hold on Eternal
Life.

We are informed of a Glorious Heaven; Oh, Let us not be like those
unbelievers, of whom the Psalmist reports, They Despised the Pleasant Land.
HEAVEN, One would think, there should need little to be said, for the
Recommendation of it! Why, It Is the One Thing that is Needful. And yet a little
shall be now said, of the much that might be.

Consider I. You have the Glorious Heaven set Open to you; You may Enter into
that Glorious Heaven, if you do not by Unbelief shut it upon your selves. You
are told from Heaven, 1 Pet. 5. 10. The God of all (...) has called us unto His
Eternal Glory. O matchless Grace indeed! Souls, you have a Call, to come away
to Glory. Will not this Grace even amaze and conquer, that sinful Heart of
thine, O most obstinate Sinner. That after all thy Sinfulness, and
Loathsomeness, and Wretchedness, God should call thee away to Glory! But so He
does. We are made partakers of the Heavenly Calling. The Lord of Heaven from
thence calls unto us, to come unto Him there. Our Illustrious High Priest is
gone into that Holy of Holies, and having Laid it Open for us He calls unto us;
yea, He calls unto the vilest and blackest Sinner in all this Great Assembly,
You may come after me!

Consider II. If you miss of the Glorious Heaven there is an Horrible Hell that
you cannot miss The Disjunction is unal^erable; Mat. 25. 46. Everlasting
Punishment, if not Life Eternal. To Lose Heaven! Oh, what a Loss is That? We
never met with any Loss like to That: The Gain of all this World would not
countervail the prodigious Loss. What a terrible Regret will fill you, Think, O
my Neighbors, if you should see Heaven for ever barred upon you, and all those
doleful Gries, Lord, Lord, Open to me! answered with nothing but those Fiery
Thunders from the Lord Jesus Christ, Be gone Wretch, Be gone from Heaven, and
Hope for ever, I know thee not! For what O egregious Fool, for what will thou
incur this horrid Loss? For what, but a few ga^dy Trifles, and a few nasty
pleasures, which were but for a very little Season? But be it known unto you.
That if you Lose Heaven, you will Find Hell instead thereof. As Moses did set
those two things before his Congregation, saying, I call Heaven and Earth to
record, that, I have set before you Life and Death; Even so, I call Heaven and
Earth to record, that Heaven and Hell have been set before you. And you are now
faithfully, and fervently, and solemnly warned from God, That if you slight
Heaven, you must look to Depart accursed unto Everlasting Fire, with the Devil
and his Angels; If you slight Heaven, you must look to be chased and cast into
the miseries of a Fire that never shall be quenched. Either Embrace the Heaven
offered unto you, or else Resolve to go down unto the Place of Dragons, and the
Torments, whereof the Smoke shall ascend for ever and ever. We may not conceal
from you, this Warning of God; what we declare, The mouth of the Lord has
spoken it.

Consider III. It will very Quickly come to One or to other! We are very prone
to Delay our Necessary Cares, to Accept Heaven, and Escape Hell, and make
provision for Eternity; but our Time Delays no^; and the End of our Time
delays not. It is an Admonition unto us, 1 Cor. 7. 29. The Time is Short. The
Time of Life, what a poor, short Span is it? What is your Life, but a Vapor,
that appears but a Little Time, and then Vanishes away! What you have to do
for the Settlement of your Everlasting Estate, must Quickly be done, or it will
Never be done. And see we not, that All Ages are Subject unto the Stroke of
Death? How happy should I therein reckon my self, if the Death of my Daughter,
might awaken you, my People, to consider Seriously with your selves, May not I
Die too! Am not I that am so much Older, as liable to the Stroke of Death? And
what will become of me, if my Death find me unprovided for what comes after
Death? It Is a Prodigy enough to amaze Heaven and Earth. We see People of all
sorts Dying every Day, and yet People of all Sorts Living, as if they were
never to Die! O ye Flock of the Lord; There are some of you, that will doubtless
be in Heaven, within less than Seven Years. Every Time the Sun Sets, you may
with a Soul rejoicing in the Hope of the Glory of God, say, Well, I am one Day
nearer to my glorious Heaven than I was before. And there may be some of you,
[Oh, Lord, can such a thing be heard without Horror of Soul!] that if you take
no pains to avoid it, you may fear, that within a very Little while, you will
be Turned into Hell, with the Wicked Forgetters of God? As the Doemon said unto
Soul, To Morrow shall thou be with me! Oh, Ungodly Soul, Do thou know where
thou shall be To Morrow? There is nothing then of so much Consequence, as This;
To make sure of Heaven, and make have in doing of it.

But, What shall we do?

In general, The Door of Heaven, will not be Opened, without the Key of
Regeneration. You must be Born Twice before you Die Once, or else you Die
Eternally. It is a dreadful Thing, that I am going to speak, but it is a
certain one; O ye Unregenerates, If One of You were in Heaven, you could not
bear to be there; yea, you would make Hell of it, by your being there.

But more particularly:

First; A CHRIST, A CHRIST, for a Soul in Peril! make sure of Christ, and you
make sure of Heaven. We are thus instructed, 1 John 5. 12. He that has the
Son, has Life: and, Joh. 3. 36. He that Believes on the Son, has Everlasting
Life. Oh, Desire of Christ, and Rely on Christ, for to be conducted unto
Heaven, Heaven is the Purchased Possession. Receive the Christ who has
Purchased it, and you have it. Resign your selves up unto Christ; Consent unto
His Executing all His Offices, of Prophet, and Priest, and King. Renounce all
Dependence on any Righteousness but His. And Submit unto all the Saving
Operations of His Grace upon you. It Is to Secure Heaven!

Secondly; If you do this, there Will be hat Effect of it; you will Endeavor
to Live in Heaven upon Earth; which will be a sure Mark of your going to
Heaven, at your leaving of Earth. Heaven is for none but Heavenly Spirits. The
Order is very Peremptory; it is the Motto upon the Gates of Heaven; Heb. 12 14.
Without Holiness no man shall see the Lord. Where one you must not allow your
selves, in any of those Things, which will keep you out of Heaven; the Things
for which the wrath of God comes upon the Children of Disobedience; the things
whereof His Word has told us, They who do such Things, shall not inherit the
Kingdom of God. You that will do such Things, O Desperate Gam^llers, you
venture a Kingdom, an Heavenly Kingdom at every throw. No, but you should
Anticipate Heaven, what you can, with a Watchful, Fruitful, Heavenly
Conversation; and be always abounding in the Work of the Lord. It was said
unto Cornelius, Thy Prayers and thy Alms are come up. Would we at length our
selves Go up to Heaven? Let us before hand send up as many such things thither,
as ever we can. Yea, Let us be as like to the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and His good
Angels, as every one can; So will our Lord Jesus Christ shortly send some of
those good Angels, for us; and then, for us to Die, will be no more but for us
to Go away into Heaven!

The Motto inscribed on the Grave Stone.
YOUR BONES SHALL FLOURISH LIKE AN HERB.

My Resolution.
Writ and Sung, on this Occasion. Job I. 21. Naked came I out of my Mothers
womb, and Naked shall I return thither The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken a
way; Blessed be the Name of the Lord.
I Stripped of Earthly Comforts am:
Stripped let me duly Mourn:
Naked from Earth at first I came;
And Naked I return.
What, but Gifts from Above were they?
GOD gave them unto me.
And now they Take their Flight away,
Taken by GOD they be.
The Name of my Great GOD, I will
For ever 'then Adore:
HE IS Wise, and Just, and Sovereign still,
And Good for ever more.
Light arising in DARKNESS.
Preached, 9 d. 12 m. 1700. My Son Samuel then Lying Dead in my House, and
carried the Day following to the House appointed for all the Living.
JOB XXXV. 10. GOD, My Master, -- Gives Songs in the Right.
I find a Minister of God long since thus called upon; [Isa. 21 11] Watchman,
What of the Night? Watchman what of the Night? q. d. What Advice have thou to
give us, concerning the Night that is now come upon us? What is our Condition
in this Night of our Calamity? The People of God, though they be the Children of
Light, yet see many a Dark and Sad Night of Affliction. But if any of them now
call upon me, Watchman, What of the Night? Watchman, What of the Night? What
have you to tell us, about the Night which we so often fall into? Truly, Syrs,
I am to tell you, That our Night is not so Dark and Sad, as it seems to be.
There are sweet Songs of Satisfaction and Consolations, which God our Maker has
provided for us. Be the Night never so Black, we are not unfurnished with Songs
of Satisfaction and Consolation, for to sweeten it.

We are advised of them, in the words of Elihu. That Holy Young man takes
Notice, of people Crying in Affliction, and yet not Saved from Affliction. And
he gives the Reason, Why the Great God, will not Remove Affliction, from some
that are mourning and groaning under it. The Reason is, Because their
Affliction does not bring them to Repentance; And that Repentance is thus
described, None says, Where is God my Maker? q. d. They don't Remember, Who
made them, and why He made them, nor consider the Errand which He that made
them, sent them into the World upon; and they don't Return to their Maker from
those ways of Sin, for which they feel Him chastising of them.

There now follows a Clause, that contains in it, a mighty Encouragement unto
Repentance under Affliction; He gives Songs in the Night. By the Night seems
to be meant, A Time of Affliction: And by, the Songs given in this Night, seem
to be meant, Matters of Satisfaction and Consolation, which God has provided.
But for whom are they provided? Even for those that under Affliction, say,
Where is God my Maker? i. e. That Seek Him, and Serve Him, as their Maker, and
seriously Repent of all their Wanderings from Him, wherein men forget the Law of
their Creation. In the Original it is, My Makers; A Notable Intimation of the
Trinity in God E very Person in the Ever Adorable Trinity, concurred in the
Making of man; and man owes Acknowledgments unto Every Person in the Trinity;
yea, we do not Acknowledge our Maker, if the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Spirit, receives not an Homage from us.

The Doctrine which now lies before us, is this.

DOCTRINE.
In the Darkest night of their Affliction, the Children of God are furnished by
him, with Glorious Matters of Satisfaction and Consolation.



Of these things let us now take our Observation.

1. The Holy GOD, the Father of Lights, may bring upon His Children, even upon
His dearest Children, a Night of much Affliction Several points of useful
Meditation, occur in this Proposition.

As now;

First; A Time of Affliction, is very suitably called, A night of Affliction.
The Trouble and the Terror, which the Night brings with it, is but a Shadow of
That which by Affliction comes upon us. When God brings a Time of Affliction
upon men, it is thus Expressed, Job 34. 25. He overturns them in the Night.
When God is addressed with our Devotion in a Time of Affliction, it is thus
Expressed, Isa. 26. 9. With my Soul have I desired thee in the Night. Yea, All
the Bible over, we have the Name of Darkness put upon Affliction; As on the
other side, The Day, and, The Light, are the Metaphors of Prosperity.
Christian, when the Night arrives, as it will still once is Four and Twenty
Hours, t'wil do thee to Harm to think, It will not be long before a succession of
some dark Affliction arrives unto me. Again; When a Night of Affliction
overtakes us, it is by the Providence of the Holy GOD. It was of old said, if
He give Quietness, who can make Trouble? If there be any Trouble upon us, it
could not have come without His Direction. Take it for a Time of Affliction, as
well as more Literally, and still we must say, Psalm. 74 16. Lord, The Day is
thine, the Night also is thine. Relating to a Time of Affliction, it is
challenged by the Great God, Isa. 45. 7. I create Darkness, I create Evil. It
is impossible, that any Affliction should befall us, without the ordering of
that GOD, who made the Son, and orders the Setting as well as the Rising of it.
Christian, Does any Affliction (...) thee? Think Seriously, It Is God that has
brought this Darkness upon me?

Add; But the Holy God may, yea, does bring many a Night of Affliction upon His
Own Children, even upon His Dearest Children. There is a Vicissitude of Day and
Night Experienced by the People of God; and God; in His Dispensations toward
His people, has Set the one over against the (...). The Experience of all the
Faithful, will be a full Evidence to This; That we must have many a Night of
Affliction rolling over us. Yea, Heb. 12 7, 8 If ye Endure Chastening, God
deals with you as with Sons; But if ye be without Chastisement, then are ye
Bastards and not Sons. Tribulation is more than once foretold, unto the
Followers of our Lord Jesus Christ. And our Lord Jesus Christ Himself
Exemplified it unto all (...) that Follow Him. None among all the Children of
God, can be so dear unto Him, as His Only Begotten Son. It Is indeed upon His
Account, that the Adopted Children of God, are at all dear unto Him. And yet
the most Beloved Son of God, (even Col. 1 13. His Dear Son,) was the most
Afflicted One, that ever was in the World; A man of Sorrows and Acquainted with
Griess. Of Him we read, Psalm. 34. 19. Many are the Afflictions of that
Righteous One. An amazing Thing! The Sun of Righteousness. Himself was covered
with Darkness! An horrid Night came upon Him, who is Himself, The Light. He
that is the Day star, and who makes Day wherever He comes, yet ^elt, Luke 22.
53. The Power of Darkness.

We may now Enquire.

First, What Affliction it is, that may make a Night unto the Children of God?

Now, it is plain; That the Withdraw of our Comfortable Enjoyments, is Enough to
make a Night for us. When God brings upon us any Lamentable Bereavements of our
Comfortable Enjoyments, we may say; Lam 3 6 He has set me in dark places. It
was a Night with Jacob, it was a Night with Ephraim, it was a Night with David,
when his Children were taken from him, and it was a Night with Job, when his
Riches as well as his Children were taken from him, and Sickness within, and
Censure abroad, was also hard upon him.

Yea, but it adds unto the Circumstances of the Night with us, when we are
utterly at a Loss, which way to take, what course to steer; when we Grope as in
the Dark, to find the methods of our Safety. It Is a Night with us, when we are
in the Dark, and at a Loss, what we shall do, that we may not Stumble into
Mischief. How full of Night, is that Affliction, wherein a man must say, Job
19. 8. He has fenced up my way that I cannot pass, and He has set Darkness in
my paths!

And the Night is yet more Night some unto us, when we are Surrounded and
Assaulted with cruel Enemies, on every side of us. We read, Psalm. 104 20, 21.
Thou make Darkness, and it is Night, wherein all the Beasts of the Forest do
creep forth; The young Lions roar after their Prey. It is a Night Indeed, when
God lets loose Wild Beasts upon us, to Worry us, with fur^ous and raging
Persecutions. It was a Night of Egyptian Darkness, when Evil Spirits were let
loose, to molest and affright the Objects of their Indignation. What is it,
when men manifestly filled with, and acted by Evil Spirits, are let loose to
buffet us, with all the Effects of a most Venomous Malice against us?

But, finally, That which will make our Night, as Dark as the Shadow of Death
it self, will be, If God withdraw the Light of His Countenance from us, and
withold from us the Influences of His Grace, which are needful to Support and
Quicken us. God is Light; and the Gracious Presence of God, would make Day for
His People at Midnight. But if God hide his Face, then, then Indeed we have a
dismal Night of it. We then truly, Walk in Darkness, and see no Light. Our
Groans may then, if ever, be those; Psalm. 88. 6. 7. Lord, Thou have laid me in
Darkness; Thy wrath lies hard upon me.

We may Enquire,

Next; Why the Holy God, will bring Night of Affliction upon any of His
Children?

In one Word; It is to give us Opportunity for our Songs in the Night. God will
Glorify Himself, in and by, every Night of Affliction that He sends upon us.
And God is never more Glorified, than by having the Graces of His Children
Exercised in their Affliction. But the Graces of good men are Exercised, in
their Singing the Songs that God has given them. This therefore brings us to a
further Entertainment.

II There are glorious Matters of Satisfaction and Consolation, which the
Children of God are to make their Songs in the Night of their Affliction. There
are the Songs of Zion, which are prepared by God for the Sons of Zion; and some
of them are peculiarly calculated for the Night. As it was said, Psalm. 119. 54.
Thy Statutes have been my Songs, in the House of my Pilgrimage: Thus, the
Statutes of God inform us, of matters for our Songs, in the Night of our
Affliction. David's Harp never founded better than in the Night and upon the
Water. More particularly.

First, It is a Song to be Sung in the Night of our Affliction, That the Great
God is the First Cause of our Affliction. This was the Song of that Excellent
man, Job 5. 6. 8. Affliction comes not forth of the Dust, neither does Trouble
spring out of the Ground: I would seek unto God, when it comes. Who is it that
sends upon us all our Darkness? It Is that God, of whom we have that Song, Amos
4. 13. Lo, It Is He that makes the morning Darkness, the LORD, the God of Hosts
is His Name. We are too prone, in the Night of our Affliction, to look upon
Second Causes; and especially if Rational and Injurious Instruments have been
concerned in our Affliction. But it will be a very dark Night indeed with us,
if we cannot see beyond Second Causes. Oh, Let us look through all the Darkness,
unto the Great GOD, as the First Cause of all; And let this be our Song in the
Night: Though Clouds and Darkness be round about Him, yet Righteousness and
Judgment are the Habitation of His Throne. Though Instruments be very deeply
concerned in our Affliction, yet the Song of a Job will be, The Lord has taken
away! the Song of a David will be, The Lord has bidden them! It is an admirably
well tuned Song, that we find with the Sweet singer of Israel: Psalm. 39. 9.
Lord, I was Dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did it.

But now, this is a Song, which has considerable matters of Satisfaction in it.
There are many parts of the Song. We are with particular Descants to Sing upon
the several Glories of our Maker; the maker who has given us our Songs!

The Sovereignty of God, must be our Song in the Night. This was the Song, of
one who had his lovely Children taken away from him; Job 9. 12. Behold, He
takes away; who can hinder Him? Who will say unto Him, what do thou? We
strangely Multiply and Aggravate our Griefs, while we resolve to call Things,
Our own. It Is to make them our Idols; and Idols will be Griefs. In the Night,
let us come to See and Sing, Who is the Absolute, Unlimited, Uncontrourable
Owner of us, and all that we have. Our Song most be This: I am absolutely at
the Dispose of the Sovereign God! I and mine are in His Hands, as Clay before
the Porter: Oh! Let not me, a sorry Potsherd of the Earth, strive with my
Maker, the God of Heaven. Let my Will submit, and be for ever melted and
molded into the Will of God: O my Soul, Be thou in Subjection unto the Father
of Spirits, and Live!

Again; The Righteousness of God, must be our Song in the Night. This was the
Song of an afflicted Prophet, Dan. 9. 14. The Lord has brought the Evil upon
us; the Lord our God is Righteous in all the works which He does; for we have
not obeyed His voice. If a Pharaoh in his Night, could say, The Lord is
Righteous, and I am Wicked; much more will a Christian, who is less Wicked, say
so. We should come to be of a Thoughtful Temper, when God is Chastising of us,
and think, He does it not for nothing! Our Song should now be of this Tenor;
Since the most Righteous One is Laying His Hand upon me, Oh, Let me Search and
Try my ways and Humble my self before Him and obtain the pardon of my Sins,
and Reform all that is amiss! And why should I now complain for the punishment
of my Sins? Lord, my ways are not equal, but thy ways are always equal.

Once more; The Power of God, must be our Song in the Night. This was the Song
of that Great Saint in his Affliction; Job 42. 2. I know, that thou can do
every thing. What can better be Realized in the Night, than the Power of that
Almighty Creator, who first of all divided the Light from the Darkness, and
called the Darkness Night. He that could Raise a Job from a Dunghill; He that
could Raise an Hezekiah from a Sickbed; He that could give unto an Amaziah,
much more than all that he Lost; What cannot He do for us, in the Night that is
come upon us? Our Song should now be of this Purport, That Powerful God, who
has caused my Sun to go down at Noon, can cause it also to Rise at midnight
with me. My God can make me glad, according to the Days wherein He has
afflicted me, and the Years wherein I have seen Evil. Be my Case never so Dark,
the Lord my God can Enlighten my Darkness. Be my Case never so Hard, there is
nothing too Hard for the Lord. Be I brought never so Low, the Lord that Raises
the Dead, can Raise me up.

Once more; the wisdom of God, must be our Song in the Night. You may hear that
Song in the mouth of the afflicted Saint; Psalm. 119 75. I know, O Lord, that
thy Judgments are Right, and that thou in Faithfulness have afflicted me. In
the Night, we are in the Dark, about the Nature, and the Design, and the Issue
of our Troubles. But the Wisdom of God sees all things in a True Light. It is
Wisely contrived, that in the Division of Time, there should be Night as well
as Day. How cheerfully may we refer and resign every thing, to that God, whose
Understanding is Infinite! Our Song then should run much upon such Notes as
these; The All wise God sees, that some Night, and not all Day, is best for me.
O Lord, how manifold are thy works, in thy Dealings with me? In wisdom have
thou done them all. Thou know, when I want Affliction, and what Affliction
is fittest for me. Thou know, When, and How to deliver me out of my
Affliction. And thou know, How and Where to make my Affliction profitable.

Furthermore; The Merry of God should be our Song in the Night. You may hear
that Song, in the mouth of the Afflicted Church; Lam 3. 22. It is of the Lords
mercies that we are not consumed; because His Compassions fail not. In the
Night we are easily Terrified. How apt are we to take up Terrible
Apprehensions, when the Night comes upon us: Has the Lord forgotten to be
gracious? Is His Mercy clean gone? Has He shut up His Tender Mercies in Anger?
But let us not make rash conclusions from our Sharp Corrections. Our Song
should be of such a strain as this; The merciful God punishes me far less than
my Iniquities have deserved; and though He bereave me of some Comforts, yet He
leaves me still a thousand more Comforts than Sorrows. Nor does my Affliction
by God, argue my Rejection from God: No, my Affliction man be rather an
Argument for my Adoptione: For whom the Lord Loves, He Chasteneth, and
Scou^geth every Son Whom He receives. At the last, I shall find, That God is
Good in Afflicting of me, and that it is Good for me to be Afflicted.

Finally; The fullness of God should be our Song in the Night. It was the Song
of the Prophet; Hab. 3. 18. Though the Fields shall yield no meat, yet I will
Rejoice in the Lord, I will Joy in the God of my Salvation. When every thing
else has left us, and by leaving us, has made a Night unto us, Now it is a Time
for us to Sing, The Lord is my Light, The Alsufficiency of God, should be the
Retreat, and the Relief of our Souls, in the Night; when we Lose the Sight of
all Creatures and can see nothing of them except their Insufficiency. Now
strike up for such a Song as this; I know, that my Redeemer Lives; What though I
see a Death upon all Sublunary Enjoyments? The Lord is my Portion, says my
Soul, and I will hope in Him, when all other things do fail me. While I have
God and Christ for my Portion, I have a Goodly Heritage. Whatever be taken away
from me. Here, Here I have a Good part that cannot be taken away! Why should I
be so troubled for the breaking and spilling of my little Earthen Cups! I have
a Living Fountain still to repair unto.

But then, Secondly; It is a Song to be Sung in the Night of our Affliction;
That no little Good will be the Effect of our Affliction. This was the Song of
that Excellent man; Psalm. 119 71. It Is Good for me that I should be Afflicted.
When we are in the Night of our Affliction, we are much in the Dark oftentimes
about the meaning of it. But let no Darkness hinder us from that Construction
of all Affliction; Gen 50. 20. God has meant it unto Good.

Our Lord JESUS CHRIST has brought us into a New Covenant: The New Covenant
has in it very great and precious Promises. These Promises are to be our Songs
in the Night. Is it not promised? The Lord will not suffer us to be Tempted
above what we are Able. Is it not promised? All the paths of the Lord are mercy
and truth; unto such as keep His Covenant, and His Testimonies. Is it not
promised? They that Sow in Tears, shall Reap in Joy; And, Light is sown for the
Righteous, and Joy for the Uprigh in Heart. These, even such as These, are to
be our Songs, all the Night long.

The Good and Gain of our Affliction, is a Song that has considerable matters
of Consolation in it. Let us make a brief Descant upon some of them.

First, We may make it our Song in the Night; That our God Loves us too well,
to burt us in the worst that He shall do unto us. We have such a Song prepared
for us; Heb 12 6. Whom the Lord Loves, He Chasteneth. What are the most
afflicting Dispensations, but Fatherly, but Medicinal? When we can sigh perhaps
with the Psalmist, I am afflicted very much: Yet let us also Sing, In whose
Hands am I all this while? In the Hands of the best Friend that ever I had! In
the Hands of a God, that has Loved me very much; a God that has for me, an
Everlasting Love, and is now but Executing for me the purposes of His Love. Our
Afflictions may be with a Song; Why, Because they are without a Sting. The
Curse and the Sting of all our Afflictions, has fallen upon our Lord Jesus
Christ, in the Day when God laid upon Him the Iniquity of us all, and when He
cried out, I am the man that has seen Affliction by the Rod of His wrath. We
may Sing under (...) our Disgrace; My Lord Jesus Christ we despised and
rejected of men We may Sing under all our Straits; My Lord Jesus Christ had not
an House where to lay His Head. We may Sing under all our Pains; My Lord Jesus
Christ was feeble and sorely broken. Under all our Temptations, We may Sing, My
Lord Jesus Christ was in all points Tempted like unto us; except only in sin.
We may behold our Lord Jesus Christ, as by all these His Expiatory Sufferings,
taking upon Himself the Vengeance of God, which was due to us for our Sins; and
hence it comes to pass that there is not that vengeance now to Embitter our
Sufferings. Our Lord Jesus Christ has Reconciled God unto us; and so none of
His Dispensations are now the Blows of an Enemy and a Revenger. It may then be
our Song; Lord, I will praise thee; for though thou wast Angry with me, thine
Anger is turned away; and this does comfort me, even when thou do Afflict me.
My Lord JESUS CHRIST has given me to stand before God, in His perfect and
spotless Righteousness, and no Evil shall happen to the Righteous.

Again; We may make it our Song in the Night, That the worst that ever happens
unto us, will be for our Good. We have such a Song prepared for us; Rom 8. 28.
All things shall work together for Good, unto them that Love God. See and Sing
the Mystery of Providence!

Most certainly, It Is Good for us to be made Acquainted with the Concerns of
Experimental Religion. Well; Our Night comes, that we may see the bright Stars
of Christianity. Our God will shut us up in the Dark, that He may cure our
Madness. It was the Song; Psalm 94. 12. Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest,
O Lord, and teach him out of thy Law. Accordingly. Let it be Our Song in the
Night; God is now making me a better informed Christian than ever I was in my
Life; God is making me more thoroughly to understand, that Christ is precious,
and Sin is odious, and my Heart is Deceitful, and all things here below are but
Vanities and Vexations.

Most certainly, It Is Good for us to be Restrained from Sin, and have Sin
Destroyed in us. Well; our Night comes upon us, to keep us from the Works of
Darkness. God sends our Night upon us, to make us Children of the Day. It was
the Song; Isa. 27. 9. By this will Iniquity be purged, and all the Fruit is to
take away sin. Accordingly, let it be our Song in the Night; God is now making
my Sin bitter to me; All this Bitterness comes upon me, that so my Sin may be
the more Embittered. God Kills my little Delights; It Is that my Sin may dye, and
that my soul may live.

Most certainly, It Is Good for us to be made more Gracious, and in the acting of
Grace to be made more Fruitful. Well, our Night comes upon us, that so, the
Dowes of Heaven may more fall upon our Souls. God visits us with a Night; but
it is that so He may Awake us out of our Sleep. It was the Song; Heb. 12 10. He
chastens us for our profit, that we might be partakers of His Holiness.
Accordingly, Let it be our Song in the Night; What is my God now a doing? He is
now making my Faith more Assured, my Hope more Lively my Love more Ardent, my
Prayer more Fervent, my Patience more Confirmed, and my whole Obedience more
Exact. God is hewing and squaring of me, to render me a more Serviceable Stone
in His Temple, and throwing me into a Furnace, that I may come out a vessel of
more Honor to Himself.

Finally; The Songs of Deliverance; why should not they be heard with us? We
may make it our Song in the Night, That it will not always be Night; the Night
will not always last. We have such a Song prepared for us; Psalm. 30. 5. Weeping
may Endure for a Night, but Joy comes in the Morning. Be the Night never so
tempestuous, it will not be long before the Day break, and the Dark shadows flee
away. Of Heaven we read, There is no Night in that City of God. In all our
Nights on Earth, we should Solace our selves with the Songs of Heaven. Yea, we
should count it always Night with us, till we come to Heaven. In this passage,
Where is God my Maker, who gives Songs in the Night? some have thought a
special Reference to the Resurrection, which the Dead Saints are with Songs
waiting for. In the Night of our Afflictions, what fitter Songs can we have,
than the Blessedness reserved for us in the Resurrection World! Be our
Afflictions never so long, they are but for a Moment; The Thought of this may
procure it, That be they never so heavy, they shall be but Light Afflictions.
It may then be our Song; O Lord. How long! Yet a little while, and He that
shall come, will come. It will not be long! My God is by my Troubles now fitting
me for the Rest which remains for His People. All the Discipline that my God
uses upon me, is only to ripen me for my Translation to the Heavenly State. In
a little while, I shall pass from the Bread of Adversity, to the Feast in the
Holy Mountain of God; I shall pass from the Water of Adversity, to the River of
Gods pleasure; I shall pass from the Annoyances of Devils, to the
Entertainments of Angels; and from the Shadow of Death, to that Favor of God
which is better than Life.

We will proceed no farther; who can proceed any farther? Let these things
Expire in this

APPLICATION.
I. Where is now the Christian, that will utter Songs in the Night? As it was
demanded; Judge. 5. 12. Awake, Awake, Deborah, Awake, Awake, utter a Song; Even
so are my Hearers in Affliction to be thus called upon; or, at least, give me
leave to call upon my self, Awake, Awake O Afflicted Christian, Awake, Awake,
utter a Song Indeed the Singing of Psalms is to be very particularly
recommended unto us; The Psalms, which are the Songs that God our Maker has
given us; The Songs, which are admirably Suited unto whatever Night our God may
bring upon us. None do so well understand the Psalms, as the Saints that are in
Affliction. And the Saints have often professed, There are some Psalms, they
never did understand, until they came into Affliction. Wherefore, let not that
Injunction, Is any cheerful? Let him Sing Psalms; be Exclusive of this
Instruction; If any are grieved, why should not they also Sing Psalms? Those
Christians, that in their Afflictions, will find out Psalms agreeable to the
Afflictions, and Sing them unto the Lord, will doubtless, find the Harp of
David gloriously chasing away every Evil Spirit, that shall go to Trouble them
with making their Night of Trouble to seem Darker than it is. Yea, and those
Families, that join Psalms unto their Prayers, at Night, in their course of
Devotions, will doubtless bring such Offerings as Heaven is greatly delighted
in.

But be our Night what it will, O my Hearers, have we no Songs for it? It would
be a brave Sight, if Heaven might see us, [For tru^^, Now we are Eminently A
Spectacle to Angels,] and hear us like Paul and Silas, even Singing at
Midnight. Why should we not now Sing, Rejoice not against me, O my Affliction;
Thou art not now mine Enemy; when I fall I shall arise; when I sit in Darkness,
the Lord shall be a Light unto me. Sirs, Let us Adapt our Song to our Night. Is
it with us a Night of Disasters upon our Estates, by Sea or Land? Let it now be
our Song in the Night; What though I am reepled or Threatened with Poverty? I may
be Rich in Faith, and then I am Heir of a Kingdom. What though I suffer the
spoiling of any Goods? I may suffer it Joyfully, as long as I have in the
Heavens laid up a better and a lasting Substance for me. Is it a Night of
Illness with us? Let it now be our Song in the Night; What though I be not in
Health, if my Soul may but prosper? If it may be said unto me, Be of good
cheer, thy Sin is Forgiven thee, it is well enough though I cannot now take up my
Bed and Walk. Is it a Night of Reproach with us? Let it now be our Song in the
Night What though Dirt be cast on my Name, if I have a Name written in Heaven? If
all manner of Evil be spoken falsely of me, it is no matter, so long as I have a
great Reward in Heaven. Is it a Night of Death in our Families? Death indeed
makes a Night: It is called so. When the Torches that Light our Houses are put
out, how Dark is the Night? But have we no Song for such a Night? When the
Child of the Excellent Shunamitess was Dead, yet her Song was 2 King. 4 26. It
is well. And why should it not be ours, [ Oh, my Soul, why not mine?] under the
like Exercise? Let it be our Song; Who knows what is Good for man in this Life?
If God call me to Resign my Children, how can I better Glorify Him, than by the
profoundest Resignation? If my Children must be fetched away to the Heavenly
World before me, it will not be long before I go to Heaven after them.

How much would it set off Christianity, if Ours might always be thus
Melodious!

II. What will become of those Miserables, who are in a Night, but never
penitently, say Where is God my Maker? Indeed, the very Beginning of Religion
is in seriously saying, who is my Maker, and what is the Duty that I owe to my
Maker? And Serious, Real, Hearty Godliness, runs much upon that stroke; The
Great GOD is my Maker; It Is infinitely Reasonable that I should acknowledge my
Relation to Him, and my Dependence on Him, and make it my whole Business to
Glorify Him. It Is God that thus Endowed me with the Faculties of Reason, and
formed my Spirit within me; it is infinitely Reasonable, that with my Spirit
within me. I should Seek Him early. It Is God that has curiously and wondrously
made my Body. It Is infinitely Reasonable, that no Member of my Body should ever
be Employed in Rebellion against Him. It Is thou, O Lord, that art the God of my
Life; and there is all the reason in the world, that my Life should be
absolutely at thy Dispose, and that I should live to thy Glory, as long as I
live in the world. Have such Thoughts as these no power upon thee, O man,
unworthy the name of a man? How can thou stand under the Tremendous Thunder
claps of that word, Psalm 9 17. The Wicked shall be turned into Hell, and all
the Nations that forget God! But alas, This, This is the wretchedness, of all
you Unregenerates. All Unregenerates, even all they that Live Strangers to God
and Christ, have a woeful and a doleful Nights upon them. They Walk in Darkness,
and they are Governed by the Powers of Darkness; and 1 These 5. 5. They are of
the Night, and of the Darkness. And if a Night of Affliction come upon these
Unregenerates, they continue still in their Estrangement from God and Christ;
It cannot be said by them, Lord, with my Soul I have desired thee in the Night;
It may be said of them, 2 Chronicles. 28. 22. In the Time of their Distress, they
Sin yet more against the Lord! But now, What Songs can these desolate Sinners
have? Truly, We can hear nothing but Sighs from them, in their Affliction, or
the poor, mean, vain Language of Creatures darkened with a wonderful Stupidity.
Alas, It Is not Expected of them, that they should Sing; but the Word of God
says unto them, Jam. 5. 1. Weep and Howl for your Miseries that are to come
upon you Miserable Souls; The Night to Death is not far from you: and if you do
not speedily turn from Darkness to Light, (which is the very nature and notion
of Conversion,) you are not far from an Eternal Night. There are Chains of
Everlasting Darkness reserved for the Wicked; and they are hastening to a
State, wherein we are told, Psalm. 49. 19. They shall never see Light. Be
persuaded, O Benighted Sinners; Knowing the Terror of the Lord, be persuaded,
for to make haste into the State wherein you may Sing the Songs of the Lord; Be
persuaded immediately to Hear that Call of the Lord Jesus Christ, Awake thou
that sleep, and arise from the Dead, and Christ shall give thee Light.

III. Why should we not maintain a Distinct Communion with each of the Three
Persons in the Trinity, when we consider our Maker as Giving Songs unto us in
our Night? The Night would be ashonishingly Illustrated, and Shine as the very
Day, if our Songs in the Night might very distinctly apprehend a Trinity of
Persons, in our Maker. But, Oh! Lord, how dark is the Night of thy Wrath upon
the English Nation wherein Arian, Socinian, Deistical Blasphemies of the
Trinity, are uttered so commonly, so openly! Surely, through the Wrath of the
Lord of Hosts, the Land is darkened, in those Heresies and Blasphemies. That
which leads me to this Contemplation, is, The plural Number, wherein we have
the Name of our Maker given us; In the Original it is, My Makers.

My Hearers, I ask for your greatest Attention. In the ONE GOD, who is our
Maker, there are Three Persons, of One Substance, Power, and Eternity; which
Three are called, The Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. [See Matthew. 28. 19
and, 1 John 5. 7.] There is indeed in the Old Testament, as well as in the New,
a very frequent, and no obscure, mention of this Mystery. The Jewish Nation,
rejecting the Belief of the Trinity, at this Day, have therein deserted and
rejected, The Faith of the Fathers, and apostatised from the Faith of the Old
Testament. [Ponder, Deuteronomy 4 37. and Psalm. 33. 6 and Psalm 45 8 and Isa 48 16 and
see whether you cannot see the Trinity there] That very Text which the Jews do
so often bring against the Trinity, is indeed a notable proof of it; for so it is
to be translated, Deuteronomy. 6 4. Hear, O Israel; The Lord our God, the Lord, are
One. What though no Mortal, no, nor any Finite Beings, can fathom this Mystery;
yet it is Revealed unto us, in the Book of Truth; and we may, especially when a
Night of Affliction is upon us, find no small Consolation in the Revelation.
The Mystery of the Trinity is not an unprofitable Speculation. The very Vitals
of the Christian Religion ly in this Mystery. Oh! that we were more affected
with it: Let our Thoughts more distinctly converse with God the FATHER; and let
these be our Songs: Lord, Thou art He, who have Chosen me before the Foundation
of the World, and predestined me to an Inheritance among thy Children, world
without End. Lord, Thou art He who have so Loved the World, as to give thy only
Begotten Son, for the Salvation of them whom thou have Chosen out of it. Lord,
Thou art He, that have Created all things, and for thy pleasure they are and
were Created: Thou art my Maker too, and thou shall be my Father. Let our
Thoughts more distinctly Converse with God the SON; and let these be our Songs:
Lord, Thou art He, who art God manifest in Flesh, and in that Flesh have thou
died for me, and Rison from the Dead, and art Received up to Glory. Lord, Thou
art He, who being the Son of God, and equal with God, have appeared in the Form
of a Servant, and though thou did make the Law, yet thou have for us yielded
Obedience to the Law. Lord, Thou art my Redeemer, who taking upon thy self my
Guiltiness, when thou did know no Sin, have given thy Righteousness to me,
who am nothing but Sin: Thou art able to Save unto the uttermost, and thou
shall be my Savior. Once more; Let our Thoughts more distinctly Converse with
God the SPIRIT; and let our Songs be these Lord. Thou art He who helpest me to
know the Things freely given to me of God. Lord, Thou art He, who do Res^ne
me from the paths of Death and Unite me to my Lord Jesus Christ and Renew His
Image upon me. Lord Thou art He, who do Support me in all my Weakness,
Direct me in all my Darkness, Guide me by Counsel, and bring me to Glory, and
fetch me out of the Grave by thy mighty power unto Caelestial Circumstances at
the last.

Make the Experiment, O Christians What inexpressible Irradiations may comfort
your minds, in the darkest and the Deadliest of all your Nights, from such
Contemplations of the Incomprehensible Trinity. Try, Oh, Try, whether you may
not arise [ Wonderful! That the wretched Worms of the Dust may do so!] unto a
sort of Correspondence with the Immanent Acts of the Ever adorable Trinity, in
your Communion with it. God beholding His own Image, is God the Father; God
beheld in His own Image, is God the Son; God with infinite Love and Joy taking
Satisfaction in Himself, is God the Spirit. Methinks, We may be a little rapt
up into this Communion! How? Thus: Let us behold the Image and Brightness of
God, in our Lord Jesus Christ; and let us be filled with Love and Joy and
Satisfaction in Him. Lord, Let me behold thy Face in Righteousness, and be
satisfied with thy Likeness! This, This will bring us to a near Communion with
God the Father, the Son, and the Spirit. O afflicted Saint; If these be thy
Songs to thy Makers, in the Night, it will soon cease to be Night: Arise, and
Shine, for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is Risen upon thee.

The Motto inscribed on the Grave stone.
NOT AS THEY THAT HAVE NO HOPE.

Songs in such a Night.
Psalm. 42 5. 11.
Oppressed with Loads of Grief, Art thou
My Soul, O why dejected so?
Why do thy Grievous passions now
Into a Restless Tumult grow!
In God thy Hope Rejoicing place;
My God He is by Covenant;
I Will praise Him still: Joy to my Face
The Help of His will surely grant.
1 Samuel 1. 15, 18.
My Spirit is, how Sorrowful!
But Lord, I do pour out before
Thy Grace the Sorrows of my Soul;
And now I will be Sad no more.
1 Pet. 1. 8.
The CHRIST I see not, yet I know,
I Trust and Love; Through CHRIST there is given
A Joy unutterable to
My Faith, a Joy that is full of Heaven.
Appendix. THE Living Redeemer,In the Balance against a Dying Relation.
Preached, when my SON Lay a Dying, and within a few Hours did actually Die.
Job XIX. 25. I know that my Redeemer Lives.
WHen the famous Luther, was under great Sorrows, he wrote once upon his Table
in Great Letters, that word, VIVIT, or, HE LIVES. A Friend, that saw the word,
Enquired, Who? and he so answered the Enquiry, CHRIST LIVES! And if He did
not, I should not my self one minute longer desire to Live. Well thought, and
like a Christian! It is a Thought which I am this Day to manage among you; and
if some Dying Circumstances in my own Family do Quicken me to manage it, with a
more Lively Inculcation, 'twill be some Ease to me, that my Sorrow proves in
any measure a Service unto others, and that my Ministry receives any Advantage
by my Affliction.

An unknown Penman has in a curious Poem, drawn up for us, a Real and Famous
History, of the unusual Calamities, and amazing Deliverances, that befell an
Excellent Person in Arabia, some Thousands of years ago. Some Conferences
between this Renowned person, and some of his Friends that gave him a Friendly
Visit, in his Calamities, are in this Book related. Their unkind Censures of
him, and bitter Speeches to him, were not the least part of his Calamities; but
in this Chapter we have something of his Vindication. One thing in their Charge
upon him, was, That he knew not God: and now, to vindicate himself against so
unjust a Charge, he declares his Belief, not only in GOD, but also in His
promised Messiah, by whom he Expected a Resurrection from the Dead.

The Words now before us, are accordingly a short and sweet Confession of
Faith, whereto I am sure, you will all Subscribe, O Faithful people of God! It
was wished concerning them, O that they were Printed in a Book! They are so,
and blessed be our Great Lord Redeemer, that they are so!

Indeed, there are some Interpreters, not only Jewish, but also Christian, who,
to their shame we may speak it, are sometimes as bad as the Jewish, that go to
fix a Signification of mere Temporal Benefits, on that Expectation of Job,
which we are here Entertained withal. But it is from Ignorance of Antiquity, to
say no worse of it, that such Interpreters, go to rob us, of the Evangelical
Mysteries, in these ancient Oracles of God. And we know they do directly
contradict the plain Expressions of Job. whom we find every where utterly
Despairing of ever being Restored unto to the Temporal Benefits of his Family
in this world any more. They would Rob our Job, it seems, of his Faith too;
worse Robbers then the Sabaeans and Chaldaeans, who only plundered him of his
Cattle. No, It was long ago, the just Admiration of Jerome, That Job long before
the coming of the Messiah, spoke as clearly of Him, as they that Lived after
His Coming. Holy Job was no Stranger to that Illustrious promise, Genesis 3. 15.
The Seed of the Woman shall break the Serpents Head. And he understood, That
God would one Day be Manifest in Flesh, for the Redemption, of Sinful man, from
the wretchedness that Sin had brought upon him. Of this Redeemer, well might he
say, He Lives! Our Lord-Messiah, as He was God, was Then Living, and is the
Ever-living; The Eternal God head of our Lord-Redeemer is asserted in saying,
He Lives! and when in the Fullness of Time, He should become Incarnate, the Life
He was then to have, might on many accounts be long before mentioned in the
present Tense. Yea, it may be rendered, He is Life. An Intimation, He bestows
Life upon us, and a Resurrection from the Dead unto Everlasting Life, in His
Redeeming of us. A Sense of this, is here proclaimed by our Job, not only to
clear himself under Aspersion, but also to cheer himself under Affliction. And
now Let us have it, while we hear this.

DOCTRINE.
We have a Glorious Redeemer, and whatever be our Deadly Circumstances, we may
with wonderful Satisfaction and Consolation know That this Redeemer Lives.



There are Two Wells of Salvation, to be now Set open before you, from whence,
O ye Faithful, you may now Draw with Joy; yea, With joy unspeakable, and full
of Glory!

1. We may undoubtedly Know, That our Lord JESUS CHRIST is the Redeemer of His
people. At the Nativity of our Lord, these were the Good Tidings of Great Joy,
which the Angels of the Heavenly Host, brought unto us, Luk 2. 10. (...) you
there is born a Savior. So (...) is (...) Greek word used there; that (...)
Ancient Romans, thought it could not be sufficiently translated into another
Language. It a magnum ut Latino uno verbo Exprimi nonpossit, says Tully
himself. Perhaps the word, Sospitator, may do. But no Humane Language, nor
indeed the Tongue of Angels can fully Express, what a Savior we have in our
Lord Jesus Christ. The Title, and Office, which is in the Sacred Oracles
assigned unto our Lord Jesus Christ, is as that of The Savior, so that of a
like Importance, The Redeemer; Isa. 59. 20. The Redeemer shall come to Zion.

But the Notions of, A Redeemer, implied in the Hebrew Name here used by the
Holy Spirit, have a peculiar Elegancy in them. The Name of Goel, is here
assigned unto our Lord, and that Name signifies a Kinsman as well as a
Redeemer; and one who Redeems both an Estate from Forfeiture, and a Person from
Destruction, being obliged as a Kinsman to that act of Redemption; and One,
that as a Kinsman pleads the Cause of another against his Enemies. We read,
Lev. 25. 26. One of a poor man's Kindred* shall Redeem the Possession which he
has Sold And we read, Numb. 35. 19. The Revenger of Blood shall slay the
Murderer of his Kinsman. Behold, the Intention of a Goel. Illustrious Mysteries
of the Gospel are propounded unto us, when this Name is put upon our
LordRedeemer.

Know it, O ye Redeemed of the Lord; Know, first: That our Lord JESUS CHRIST is
our near Kinsman: And in that Capacity indeed, it belongs unto Him, to recover
our forfeited Inheritance. It was the Rule of old, Lev. 8. 7. Thou shall not
hide thy self from thy own Flesh. Truly, our Lord Jesus Christ, in being Born
of a Woman, is become one of our own Flesh; and upon this Account, He shows
peculiar Kindness unto us. In our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God is become
the Son of Man; It now belongs unto Him, to be a Redeemer for us; It belongs
unto Him, not only, Jure proprietatis, but also, Jure propinquitatis; Not only
by virtue of the Interest He has in us, but also by virtue of the Relation We
hear to Him. No Stranger, no Angel could (...) us as our Lord JESUS CHRIST.
(...) one of our own Family, does (...) said, Heb. 2. 11. (...) they that are
Sanctified, are (...) it may be said, He that Redeemeth, and they that are
Redeemed, are all of one. The Lord JESUS CHRIST looks upon every Believer, even
the poorest and meanest Believer in the world; and says, as Laban to his Nephew
Jacob, Genesis 29. 14 Surely, Thou art my Bone, and my Flesh. Yea, as Joseph said
once unto his Brethren, I am Joseph your Brother, God has Employed me to
preserve you: thus does our Lord say unto us, I am Jesus, your Elder Brother,
and God has appointed me to Redeem you. O Nature of man! How highly art thou
dignified, in that the Son of the most High God has in thee become our Kinsman!
Christians, What a mavelous Encouragement have we in this Thing, That we have
a Kinsman who is the Son of God! A man who Lies in the bosom of God! A man who
is dearer to God than all the works of His Hands! A man who is one person with
the Eternal Son of God! And this Man, a Kinsman to us Worms of the Dust! O our
Glorious Kinsman, can thou find in thy heart to see us wretched, and not look
down for our Succou^! Certainly, Our Kinsman cannot see us Miserable, but He
will do what He can, and what can He not do? to rescue us from our Miseries!

Know, Next; That our Lord JESUS CHRIST has paid the price of our Redemption,
from the Enemies of our Souls. We had all of us made our selves Prisoners;
Prisoners we were too in an horrible Gaol that was on a light Fire over us. The
Doom which we were continually waiting for, was that, Ezekiel. 18. 4. The Soul
that Sins, it shall Die. The dreadful Justice of God, had put us over into the
Hands of terrible Destroyers; a Destruction from God, which might justly be a
Terror unto unto us, was going to be inflicted on us, by their Hands. There
was no way for us to escape it, but by Laying down a price, which might make a
Compensation for the wrong done by our Sin unto the Infinite GOD There needed a
price, to buy off our Obligations, to suffer the vengeance of Heaven, and to
repair those Apprehensions of a Righteous and Holy God Engraved on the minds of
men, which we had gone to deface. Now we are informed, I Cor. 6. 20. We are
bought with a price. But, what and whose was the price of Redemption thus paid
for us? We are informed, I Pet. 1. 18. Ye are Redeemed with the precious Blood
of the Lord Jesus Christ. And we are informed, Tit. 2. 14. Jesus Christ gave
Himself for us, that He might Redeem us.

Know Thirdly; That our Lord JESUS CHRIST, by His Mighty Power does prosecute,
and accomplish our Redemption from the reach of those Enemies. Not only the
Merit, of our Lord, is tendered for our Redemption, but the Spirit, the Virtue,
the Power of our Lord, is used, for the Application of the Redemption. We read,
Col. 2. 15. He has spoiled Powers. Our Lord Redeemer, has, like an
Illustrious Conqueror, come into the black Territories, where the Powers of
Darkness held us in Chains of Darkness; Whereupon there follows, A Liberty, a
Liberty for the Captives, an Opening of the Prison doors for them that were
bound. By the powerful Influences of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Fetters of Sin,
upon the Wills of the Elect are taken off; they are brought out of the
Unbelief, wherein they were Shut up: there (...) Faith wrought in their Hearts,
by which they are made the actual partakers of Redemption; and so they are
turned from Darkness to Light, and from Satan to God, By the Conversion of
Sinners, in the Day of our Lords Power Exerted for them, there comes to pass
that astonishing Things Isa 49. 24 The prey is taken from the mighty, and the
lawful Captive is delivered. The Power of our Lord Jesus Christ, is put forth,
to bring the Redeemed, out of their forlorn Estate, their thraldom in Sin,
their Bondage to Satan, their Lying under the Curse; it is done. in Converting
them to God.

Know, Fourthly, That our Lord JESUS CHRIST, accomplishing of our Redemption,
does also Revenge our Cause upon our Enemies. Our Lord most Emphatically does
the part of a Redeemer for us, in Revenging the mischiefs, which have been done
to our Souls, by our mischievous Adversaries. Have our Souls been murdered by
Sin? O Sin, our Lord Jesus Christ will take a thorough Revenge upon thee. Sin
that has been our Death, does it self undergo Death, by the Blood and Grace of
our Lord Redeemer. We read this; Rom 6. 6. Knowing this, that the Old man is
Crucified with Him, that the Body of Sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we
should not serve Sin. And shall Satan escape? Satan, who has deceived us,
enslaved us, ruined us! No. Satan, thou shall not escape the Revenge of our
Great Lord Redeemer. We read this: Heb 2. 14. He has destroyed him that had
the power of Death, that is the Devil; and delivered us. O (...) Faithful, who
graciously and generously Forgive all your other Enemies, why do we hear you
crying with no more Fervency unto your Glorious Kinsman, Revenge. Revenge! O my
Redeemer! Take a Revenge on the Enemies that have shed the Blood of my Soul!

Know Fifthly; That at and by a Blessed Resurrection from the Dead, our Lord
JESUS CHRIST will bestow upon us a full Redemption from all Evils and Enemies.
What means our Job, when he says, I know my Redeemer? He means, I know, that
the Messiah will Raise me from the Dead at the latter Day, though my Reins be
consumed within me, and I know, that at the Resurrection. I shall be fully
Redeemed from all that may be grievous to me Indeed, a considerable Degree of
Redemption is gained by the Saint at his Death. A Redemption from a world of
Evil, is received by the immortal Soul of the Saint, at its leaving of the
world. Hence we read concerning the Separate Soul of the Saint, at the Time
when his Heirs are dividing his Earthly Possessions among them; Psalm. 25. 13
His Soul shall lodge with the Good One [even with the Living Redeemer,] while
his Seed shall inherit the Earth. But yet we come not unto our Full Redemption,
until Soul and Body be Reunited at the Resurrection from the Dead. This we
know, That the Resurrection is peculiarly called, [Eph. 4. 30. and Romans 8. 23.
and Luke 21. 28.] The Redemption. Accordingly,

At the Resurrection from the Dead, our Lord Jesus Christ will Redeem us, from
all Sin for ever. Sin, Ah, Sin, It Is the worst Pit that ever we fell into. We
are now Redeemed from the Guilt of Sin. It Is said, Ephesians. 1. 7. We have
Redemption through His Blood, the Forgiveness of Sins. We no sooner Believe on
the Lord Jesus Christ, but we are completely Redeemed from the Sentence of
Death, which had been passed upon us; and there (...) no Condemnation unto us.
But alas, (...) are still Remainders of Sin cleaving unto us: After our Sin is
pardoned, we are yet still so attended with Sin, as to distress us, and abase
us, and the Body of Death, makes us even weary of our Life. No men are so Full
of Sin, as they that boast themselves to be Free from Sin. At the Resurrection
of the Body, we shall receive a perfect Redemption, from all Corruption. There
will be no Sin to Reign in our mortal Body, when our Body shall be, as then it
shall, Immortalized. We shall then stand, not only without Guilt, but also
without Fault, before the Throne of God; and we shall be presented Faultless
before the presence of His Glory with exceeding Joy. All our Lusts which now
war against our Souls; all the Seeds of Sin in us; All our sinful Dispositions
and Inclinations, will then be utterly extirpated out of our Souls.

And at the Resurrection from the Dead, our Lord Jesus Christ will Redeem us
from all Temptations, from all Afflictions, from all that may be Uneasy to us.
We are now, drowned in Tears, on many. Mournful Occasions; but we shall then
Enjoy a Redemption, wherein, Rev. 7. 16. God shall wipe away all Tears from our
Eyes. The Devils are now Annoying and Buffeting of us, with all sorts of
Temptations: but Satan will be bound, when our Lord Redeemer shall Descend and
Return unto us. The Devils of Hell will never be found in that City of God,
that shall then come down from Heaven. And we shall then be out of reach unto
all their Instruments. Nor will any Afflictions then betide us; there will be
no Briars and Thorns in the World of our Lord Redeemer, the Second Adam. We
shall suffer no Poverty, but we shall Inhabit a City, whereof the Streets are
pure Gold. We shall suffer no Malady, but we shall have the Sun of
Righteousness full shining upon us, with Healing in His Wings. We shall not
walk in any Darkness, but we shall be lodged where there shall be no Night, nor
shall they need the Light of the Sun, for the Lord God gives them light.
Indeed, in this World, we meet with Numberless and continual Troubles; and the
nearer our life i^ to the Grave, the fuller our Souls are of Troubles. Even,
Man that is born of a Woman, or the better sort of men, who are the Seed of the
Woman, opposed unto the Seed of the Serpent; They that lay hold on the great
Promise unto the First Woman, about Him, who is most eminently, The Seed of the
Woman, and that imitate the Faith of that famous and holy Woman: These are full
of Trouble, in their few days. But then, we shall never have any thing to
Trouble us, World without end.

Finally; At the Resurrection from the Dead, our Lord Jesus Christ, will fully
Redeem us from the Grave, and from the Dominion of Death over us in the Grave.
Our Song may be that; Psalm. 49. 15. God will Redeem my Soul, from the power of
the Grave. Death is an horrible Devourer. Sin has betrayed all mankind into the
Hands of that horrible Devourer. The Grave is the Den, where the Devourer lays
up his prey. This Devourer is our Last Enemy. But we have a Redeemer, who will
rescue us from the Hands of the Devouring Enemy. He will do it, at the
Resurrection from the Dead. In that notable Day of God, we shall be fetched out
of the Chambers of Death, and no longer ly in the Jaws of the Dragon, which
keeps men all their Life time in Bondage, for fear of him. We shall shake off
all the Fetters of Death and mount up with Eagles Wings; and no longer ly
Captives in the Country of Moles, and Worms, and Pismires: and where the Sun
shines not. We shall be Redeemed from the Hand of the Enemy, and gathered out
of the Lands on all points of the Compass, and carried into a City of
Habitation. Oh, Let men praise the Lord for that Goodness, and for such
wonderful works to the Children of men. We will do it; Join with me, my
Brethren. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, who Redeems thy Life thus from
Destruction, in the Day when thy Youth shall be Renewed, and thou shall become
like unto the Eagles.

Christians, We are to Know all this when we say, I know that there is a
Redeemer.

II. We may infallibly Know, That this our Lord Redeemer Lives

There are Two Natures in the Person of our Lord Redeemer; and with Respect
unto both of them, we may say, He Lives.

First; Our Lord Jesus Christ is GOD; and thus, it is one of His Attributes, He
Lives for ever and ever. Immortality is one of His Perfections: He is from
Everlasting to Everlasting. The Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ, is the Belief
of every True Believer. That man is at best but a Bastard Christian, who denies
the Deity of our Lord Jesus Christ. Our Lord were no Sufficient Redeemer for
us, i^ He were not very GOD. None but a GOD, can Redeem a Soul, or Give to God
a Ransom for it. The Name of JEHOVAH is given to our Lord JESUS CHRIST, all the
Bible over; A Name Incommunicable to any but GOD* and a Name which implies,
That He is the Everliving God, the Ever Being one. The Doxology of Him, was
that, Romans 9. 5. He is over all, God Blessed for ever. We may so carry it on;
We have a Redeemer, who is over all, God Living for ever.

Secondly; Our Lord Jesus Christ is MAN. Indeed this man was Crucified and
Murdered; and He was in Hades or the State of the Dead, for part of Three Days
and Nights. But what is He, and where is He now? He Lives. If we now look for
our great Redeemer in His Grave, we shall soon be advised, as they were, Luk
24. 6. He is not here, He is Rison Yea, our Lord, being Received up into Glory,
Writes a Letter from Heaven to His Church on Earth, with this Advice; Rev. 1.
18 I am He that Lives; though I was Dead, behold, I am Alive now for ever more.
It Is a remarkable passage, that fellows upon our Text: He (...) stand at the
last upon the Earth An horrible Ba^^el between the Messiah, and the Serpent, is
foretold in the Third Chapter of Genesis. The Earth was to be the Field of this
Battle. In the Battle, the Messiah has His Heel bruised, or His Humanity, that
of Him which was next unto the Earth, became obnoxious to the stroke of
Mortality. But the Serpent is overcome; the Messiah over-comes him, and stands
at the last upon the Earth, with Satan bruised under His Feet. That standing of
our Lord-Redeemer at the last upon the Earth, is fulfilled in H is Rising from
the Dead. Holy Job, Did thou then Expect, like thy Messiah to be at the last
victorious? The Hint is very curious. But,

The Resurrection of our L ord Redeemer is a thing acknowledged by us, when we
say, My Redeemer Lives. And the Life of Christianity it self mightily turns
upon this Acknowledgment. There can be nothing more Serviceable to
Christianity, than to see, The Resurrection (and so, the Life,) of Jesus
Christ, on whom we rely to be unto us, The Resurrection and Life, thoroughly
demonstrated Shall we then endeavor the Demonstration of it? The Case before
us is, How do we know that our Redeemer Lives? That man is no Christian, who
cannot prove it unto his own Satisfaction, and therein Give a Reason of the Hope
that i^ in him. Give Attention, O ye Professors of the Christian Religion, Give
Attention to the chief, but brief, Heads of the proof, That our Redeemer Lives.

First, The Disciples of our L ord Redeemer were Witnesses, and they are very
credible and sufficient Witnesses, of His Resurrection to Life. Our Lord having
foretold. That in Three Days after His Death, He would Rise from the Dead,
this was a thing that stuck in the Stomachs of His Murderers. For this cause we
find, Mat. 27 65, 66. Pilate said unto them, ye have a Watch, go your way, make
the Sepulcher as sure as you can. So they went, and made the Sepulcher sure,
^^aling the Stone, and setting a Watch, Now, we are very certain, That the
Disciples of our Lord came, and found the Stone rolled away from His Grave, and
His Grave without any thing but His Linen remaining in it This was a Matter of
^^ct, so notorious, th^^ the Evangelists would never have written it if it
could have been capable of meeting with any contradiction. Indeed, the Rulers
of the Jews hired the Watch to say, His Disciples came by Night, and Stole Him
away while we Slept. But is that Story credible? Is it credible, that the men
who had been such Cowards as to Desert their Dying Master, would have the
Courage to attempt an armed and zealous Watch placed upon Him, when He was
Dead? Is it credible, That a Great Sons could be rolled away, and the Watch
about it not be waked? Why was not the Watch punished for their Negligence in a
business of this vast Importance, if their Superiors were not now conscious of
a Forgery with them? It is credible, That if the Disciples had Stole away the
Body of our Lord, they would have staid carefully and handsomely to leave His
Linen behind them? Finally, Let this Idle Tale of the Watch be defended, if it
can, from the Dilemma, that Austin put upon it; Either they said False, when
they said, They Slept; and then, who would believe such Liars in the rest of
what they said? Or else it was True, that they Slept; and then, how could they
tell the rest of what they said? Stulta Insania! Si vigilabas, quare
permisisti? Si dormiebas, unde Scisti? No, No; Our Lord being Risen out of His
Grave, He appeared unto His disciples, Who were witnesses chosen before of God,
and did Eat and Drink with Him, after He Rose from the Dead. An unholy World
was now altogether unfit for the Sight of Him! In these Apparitions, our Lord
Exhibited Himself unto His Disciples, no less than Ten several Times, and unto
no less than Five Hundred at one Time. In these Apparitions, they Saw Him, they
Heard Him, they Felt Him; and they convinced all their Senses, that it was not
a Spectre which now imposed on them. They had, Acts 1. 3. Many infallible
proofs! This Thing, these Disciples testified unto all the World; and the World
had Arguments enough to make their Testimony credible. The Disciples could not
be Deceived; for God had endued them with so much Capacity, that it puzzled and
Nonplust the greatest Wit^s in their Nation to Encounter them. And the
Disciples would not be Deceivers. If they had found themselves cheated by the
Promises which our Lord had given them of His Rising again, would they have
Preached Him any more? No, they would have Hated Him, as an Imposter, with a
most inexpressible Indignation. Had they been Deceivers, they had been the
worst men that ever brea^hed; yea, rather Devils than Men. But you will find,
that they were Eminent Saints of God. They could not be the Servants of the
Devil: for the Devils Kingdom suffered more from these men, than ever from any
men under Heaven. The Devil could never have put it into the Hearts of those
men, to oppose and confound and ruin all his Interests among the Children of
men. Had the Disciples been Deceivers, they must have propounded some likely
Benefit unto themselves; A Sum of Money was given to Numerius Atticus, for
Swearing that he saw the Deceased Augustus fly up into Heaven. But what Benefit
could these men propound, Except Reproach, Wants, Fears, and horrible Torments,
and all the Horrors of a bloody Death, be a Benefit! It was impossible for the
Disciples to go forth publishing the Resurrection of our Lord* Redeemer,
without a great Faith in God, for the Success of their Ministry. But the Hearts
of Deceivers could never have had such a Faith!

Secondly; And yet we have a far greater Witness than any of the Disciples*
unto our Lords Resurrection to Life; The Spirit of the most High God, has most
incontestably Witnessed it.

The Disciples that were the Witnesses of our Lords Resurrection, had those
wonderful Favors of Heaven vouchsafed unto them in and for their being so,
which could proceed from none but the Holy Spirit of God. Extraordinary Gifts
were bestowed on the Witnesses of our Lords Resurrection. They were mostly
Illiterate men; but they were suddenly Endued with such Qualifications, as
could be had from none but that God, who is the Father of Lights. They could
speak Languages which they had never Learnt before. And they were able to
manage their Sacred Cause of a Risen and Living Redeemer, with such wisdom,
that the most Rational men Living were amazed at it. Extraordinary Works were
performed by them. They did most Surprising Miracles, even to the Raising of
the Dead; and they did them all in the Name of a Risen and Living Redeemer.
Their Success could be from none but God. The World was debauched with all
possible Enmity against their Doctrine. They were contemned Jews, and contemned
and maligned by none more than the Jews. They used no Artifice, but the plain
Preaching of a Risen, and Living Redeemer. Yet they carried the World before
them. Chr^^ostom says well; It was as if Twelve Naked, Feeble, Unskilful Men,
should set upon an huge Army of Tall and Strong Men, with all the accoutrements
of War upon them, and in the midst of this Army, deal their blows about them,
till they had vanquished it. This was the Finger of God! But most of all; The
Sanctifying Effect, with the Faith of our Living Redeemer has upon the Hearts
and Lives of all that heartily believe it; this can proceed from none but the
Holy Spirit of God; and therefore we know it can be no Error to believe it. A
True Faith in our Living Redeemer; Oh, it marvellously raises men from their
Satanick Darkness and Madness; it gives a new Nature, a right biass to their
Wills; it makes the Sin which was once their Delight, become their heaviest
burden, and it makes their chief Delight now to Glorify God with all
Obedience: it recovers their Souls to an excellent order; it makes them Good,
it makes them Love to Do Good; it inclines them to all the things that are
Holy, and Just, and Good. None but the Spirit of God could be the Author of
such a Change on the vitiated minds of men. It Is by the Faith of our Living
Redeemer, that He thus Changes us from Glory to Glory Hence, it is no Lie, to
say, My Redeemer Lives.

But it is time for us, to make a practical Improvement of these Things. A
Double Exhortation, that it now to speak unto us, may teach us to Improve them.

APPLICATION.
1. Seek, O my Hearers, very diligently Seek, the Satisfaction and Consolation
of being able to say, I know that the Lord Jesus Christ is my Redeemer. Oh!
make sure of an Interest in the Lord Redeemer. Yea, Give not Sleep to your
Eyes, nor Slumber to your Eyelids, till you have some Joyful Assurance of your
Interest in Him.

Hearken to our Expostulations.

First; Most certainly, you want a Redeemer: Though none more than they that
least feel it, or think it! By our Fall from God, we are fallen into the Hands
of Divine Justice; even into those Hands of the Living God, which it is a
Fearful Thing to fall into Starting from our Obedience to the Law of our
Creation, we are fallen under the Curse of the Law. We are Dead in Law, on and
for our Transgression of it. We are Children of Death, and by the voice of the
Law, nothing but a dreadful Death belongs unto us. And now, whither will thou
flee, poor Sinner, from the Hands of Divine Justice; where will thou flee from
the presence of the Lord, and from the power of His Justice? No Mountains can
hide thee; no Rocks can cover thee. Oh! It Is impossible for us to Redeem our
selves from the Bonds of Death which Ly upon us. Yea, Sin and Lust also hold us
Captives; we are under the oppressing and enslaving, and captivating influences
of our Sins; our Lusts are so many Cords of Hell upon our Souls. A principle of
Corruption and Concupiscence has seized us; we are held in Captivity to
Corruption. Our Sinful Disposition to Sin has got the upper-hand of us. And
God, being provoked at us, for our putting our selves under the Dominion of
such a Disposition, has with a most u^^ported Holiness, doomed us to be
confirmed in this Captivity. It is impossible for an Unregenerate man to Redeem
himself out of this Vassalage, or to grapple with the Sin, that holds him in
the Bond of Iniquity. The violated Law of God says of the Sinner, Take him, O
Sin, bind him hand and foot, rule over him, and make him grind for thee, as
long as he Lives! Oh! Better be a Slave in Barbary, than be a Slave to
Iniquity; And we are Captives of Satan too. Man, If the Lord Jesus Christ be
not thy Redeemer, the Devil is thy God. The Lord Redeemer has told us, [for the
words are His, and thus they are to be read,] Psalm. 49. 12] Adam in Excellency
did not continue a Night, he fell under Bondage, as the Beasts that perish.
Bondage! unto whom? unto the Devil. Thus among his Offspring; A Sinner is taken
in the Devils Pit falls; and he becomes a Bond slave to the Devil that has
taken him; He is Led Captive by the Devil, to do his Will. Oh, Look upon thy
wretchedness, O deplorable Soul, and suitably deplore thy own wretchedness
Can thou dance to the Music of thy own Fetters? A Sinner cannot be merry, but
he does that wonderful and horrible Thing! Methinks, the Iron should Enter into
thy Soul! How is it that thou do not rejoice to hear of a Redeemer, as much
as any poor Israelite, sweating among the Brickilns of Egypt?

Secondly; You have an Offer of a Redeemer: Horrible your madness, if you
slight it! The Lord Jesus Christ is infinitely willing and ready to say unto
the vilest, the most forlorn and undone Creature among us all, I am thy R
edeemer. It was said, Psalm. 130. 7. With the Lord there is mercy, and with Him
is plenteous Redemption. The Redeemer makes to every one of us, a proffer of a
part in that R edemption. After all our monstrous unworthiness, and though we
have nothing but wickedness and filthiness, and worthlessness, to recommend us
unto the mercies of the Lord; yet He mercifully makes an offer of R edemption
unto us. It is proclaimed in His Name, the Silver-Trumpets of His Glorious
Gospel utter the Proclamation; Liberty, Liberty for the Captives of Hell, and R
edemption for them that are bound! The Heartbreaking offer of the Lord Jesus
Christ unto us, is that; Jer 15. 21. I will Redeem thee out of the Hand of the
Terrible. Perishing Soul, How can thou reject such a charming offer? When the
Lord Redeemer says to the Guilty Soul, I will R edeem thee from the wrath of
Heaven! To the Ignorant Soul, I will Redeem thee (...) Darkness? To the
Depraved Soul, I will R edeem thee from all thy Sickness! To the Soul Dead in
Trespasses and Sins, I will Redeem thee from Death! even from Eternal Death.
Oh, R eceive not this Grace of God in vain.

Thirdly; If you have not the Lord Jesus Christ for a R edeemer, what will
become of you? It is a Question, which I wish, you would all take into
consideration; but neither you, nor all the Angels in Heaven can answer it! It
is that; Heb. 2. 3. How shall we escape, if we neglect so great S alvation?
Truly, As the Cloudy Pillar, wherein our Lord R edeemer of old Exhibited
Himself, gave Light unto the Israelites, but gave Darkness to the Egyptians:
Thus, while our Lord Jesus Christ is a R edeemer to them that Embrace Him, He
will be a R evenger, a Punisher, a Destroyer to them who Refuse Him, and will
not have Him to R eign over them. Woe to us, Inconceivable and Interminable will
be our Wo^s, if the R edeemer, become our Enemy: And verily, He will do so, if
we despise His R edemption. All the plagues written in the Book of God, will be
the portion of the man, whom the Lord Jesus Christ shall not R edeem from those
tremendous plagues. Ponder, O Souls in Peril, ponder the Distresses, the
Agonies, the prodigious Confusions, which our Lord Jesus Christ Himself
underwent, when He was working out R edemption for us. Oh! such will be the
Confusions, that you must undergo, if you miss of His R edemption! In short,
Impenitent Sinners will find the Lord Jesus Christ such a R edeemer, as that,
Isa. 63. 3. A Savior, One Mighty to Save; but One that will tread them in His
Anger, and trample them in His Fury, when the year of His R edeemed is come.

Fourthly; You may not only Have, but also come to Know, that you have, the
Lord Jesus Christ for your own Redeemer. O Precious and Peerless Happiness! We
may come to call the Lord Jesus Christ, not only, A Redeemer; but also, My
Redeemer. With an Appropriating Faith and Joy, as Thomas of old said, My Lord,
and My God! So may we say, My Redeemer (...) It is a Principle of our
Protestant Religion, That Assurance of Salvation is in this Life atta^eable.
This little Pronoun, My, it is worth ten thousand World, when a man can prefix it
unto Redeemer; To say, My Redeemer How does the Holy Psalmist boast of it! Psalm
18. 2 The Lord, is my Rock, and my God, and my Deliverer! and, Psalm 49. 15. God
will Redeem my Soul. We may come to a Soul Refreshing Persuasion and Assurance
of it, in our own Souls, My Lord Jesus Christ has Love me, and given Himself
for me, and will give me a Particular share in the Redemption of the purchased
possession throughout Eternal Ages.

And now, What shall we do? Oh! that this were most Seriously asked, by every
one among us all. To Ask That, is indeed the First Thing you have to do. But
then, I will tell you what further is to be done.

Repair, O lost Souls, Repair to the Lord Jesus Christ, as your only
Lord-Redeemer. Child of Wrath; Make thy Supplications to the Lord JESUS CHRIST.
Let the Lord Jesus Christ, hear from thee in those Terms; Psalm 69 18 Oh, Draw
nigh unto my Soul, and Redeem it. And make thy Resignations to the Lord JESUS
CHRIST. Let the Lord Jesus Christ hear from thee also in those Terms; Psalm. 31.
5. Into thy Hand I commit my Spirit, thou have Redeemed me, O Lord God of
Truth. In short; Accept the Redemption of the Lord Jesus Christ; and Humbly
Declare thy Acceptance of it. Would you come at the Blessedness, of calling, My
Redeemer? why, the way is to call Him so. Do but Receive a Redeemer willing to
be thine, and thou shall Enjoy Him. Say, with a conquered Heart, Lord, I
perish, if thou be not my Redeemer; I cry to thee, I hope in thee, for all the
Redemption, which a miserable Sinner does want! Let thy voice to the Lord Jesus
Christ, be that; Psalm 26. 11 Lord, Redeem me, and be merciful unto me. Then,
Then the voice of the Lord Jesus Christ unto thee, will be that; Isa. 43. 1.
Fear not, for I have Redeemed thee.

II. And, O ye Redeemed of the Lord, now Take the Satisfaction and Consolation,
of being able to say, I Know that my Redeemer Lives! It was better than a
Thousand Cordials unto our Father Jacob when that Intelligence was brought unto
him; Genesis 45. 26. Joseph is yet alive, and he is Governor over all the Land of
Egypt. Good News then, Good News, for you O ve Redeemed of the Lord; JESUS
CHRIST is yet Alive, and He is yet your Lord R edeemer!

Christians, Come taste some Honey out of the Rock; and make some agreeable
Conclusions.

Conclude, first; I know that my Redeemer Lives; and I Know that the Glorious
Gospel of my Redeemer, is the Scripture of Truth. Truly, The Life of the R
edeemer, is a most Lively proof of the Truth in all that His Gospel has
Revealed unto us. About one signal point of the Gospel, we read, Act. 17 31.
God has given Assurance of it, in that He has Raised Jesus Christ from the
Dead. This may be said about all the Mysteries, and all the Commandments, and
all the Promises of the Gospel; We have Assurance of these things, from the
Life of our Lord R edeemer, Our Lord Jesus Christ has laid before us, a most
Excellent Body of Divinity in the Gospel. Well; How shall we know that the
Gospel contains none but the True Sayings of God? Our Lord R edeemer Himself
thus answered that Enquiry; If you see that I R ise again within two or three
Days after I am Dead, then say, that I have delivered unto you, none but the
True Sayings of God; and Believe my Faithful Sayings. Christians, we now See
it; Oh, Let us Believe: Believe that our Lord-Redeemer was no Deceiver in any
thing, that ever He bid us Believe.

Conclude, Secondly; I know that my Redeemer Lives; and I Know that the God of
Heaven has accepted the R ansome which was paid for me by my R edeemer Does the
R edeemer Live? Then the R edeemed shall never Die. He has said, Joh. 6 57. As
I Live by the Father, so he that believes in me shall Live by me. In the L ife
of our L ord R edeemer, we see God the Father, giving our Surety an Acquittance
for all the Debts, wherewith He stood charged on our Account. Lo, Our Surety is
L iving, and let out of Prison, in being Restored unto L ife. Our Omnipotent
Creditor sent His Angels to open the Door, (to roll away the Stone,) and let
Him out of Prison. It is said, The God of Peace has brought again from the
Dead our L ord Jesus Christ. If God had not been at Peace, and if the Death of
our Lord had not made a full Atonement, He would not have brought Him again
from the Dead. When we say, My R edeemer L ives, God says, By the R
ighteousness of that R edeemer I am well pleased. If one farthing demanded for
the R ansome of Souls had been Left unpaid, our L ord-Redeemer had still had
His Grave Clothes upon Him: whereas now, O L ord, I will praise thee; for though
thou wast Angry with me, thine Anger is turned away.

Conclude, Thirdly; I know, that my Redeemer Lives; And I Know, that I have the
Intercession of my R edeemer Employed for me before the Throne of God. Our L
ord. R edeemer L ives; But what for? We are told Heb 7. 25. He ever L ives to
make intercession for us. It is as our High Priest, that our Lord works out R
edemption for us. Having dispatched the first part of His Priest hood in making
Satisfaction for us, He passes unto the other part of it; and in the Holy of
Holies, in the Heaven of Heavens, He makes Intercession for us. There He
represents before the Eternal God, what He has done to make Expiation for our
Sins. There He Sollicits, that what has been Purchased for us, may be Bestowed
on us. Our Prayers are all of them Sorry Chatt'rings: we are prone to Suspect,
That they signify nothing. But now Remember, My R edeemer L ives, and He is
concerned for me in the Court of Heaven, and now surely, the God and Father of
my R edeemer, will give me Grace, and give me Glory, and withold no good thing
from me. Have we a L iving R edeemer? we have then a L iving Advocate, And, Oh,
how Powerfully, how Livelily does He plead our cause!

Conclude, Fourthly; I know that my Redemer Lives: And I know that my R edeemer
will at last, and e're long bring me to Live with Him. Does our R edeemer Live?
True; But His Character is also that of our F orerunner. We are taught, Heb. 6.
20 He is a Forerunner for us, Entered within the Vail. He L ives; and it is,
that He may prepare Mansions, blessed Chambers and Lodgings for us, in the
Temple of His God. He Lives; and it is, that He might fetch us up to that L
ife, and L ight, in which He L ives. He L ives; Hence Learn, Ye R edeemed, and
Know, That shortly you are to L ive with Him, and be for ever with the Lord.
When Death arrives unto us, we may without any Terrors, cheerfully Entertain
the King of Terrors, and say, My R edeemer Lives, and my Life is bid with God
in Him, and I am now going unto Him.

Conclude, Fifthly, and finally; I know that my Redeemer Lives; And I know,
that when my Earthly Comforts Die, I have enough still to comfort me, in my L
iving R edeemer. It is remarkable, that after Job is got so far as to take this
comfort, I know that my R edeemer L ives; he was never any more so Impatient as
he was before. Behold, O my Brethren, a most admirable Cure for our Impatience!
When David had particularly his Children taken from him, it is said, He
encouraged himself in the L ord His God. Why should not you and I, my Hearers,
on such Occasions, Encourage our selves in our L iving R edeemer? While we have
a R edeemer Alive, Oh, Let that make amends to us, for the Death of all our
Sublunary Enjoyments. What though we can say concerning every thing else, It is
Dead? This may still suffice us, and support us, and comfort us, My Redeemer L
ives! Our Lord said Joh. 14. 19. Because I L ive, ye shall L ive also, Truly,
our Hopes may L ive, our Joys may L ive, our Hearts may L ive, as long as our
L ord R edeemer does L ive, Are we lamenting over Withered Guords, and
Chastised with the Death of any Desirable R elative? Oh, Think, I have an
infinitely more desirable R edeemer yet alive. And let the C omforts hereof
Delight our Souls, in the Multitude of our Thoughts within us.

My Text Paraphrased, and Faith Exhibited.
GODS Son Incarnate, now Akin
To miserable me,
From, all the Miseries of Sin
Sets me at Liberty.
B y His full P rice to Justice paid,
my Bonds of Death are Eased,
B y His Great Power thereon displayed,
Deaths Prisoner is Released.
That the Almighty JESUS is
My own R edeemer now.
B y my Consenting to (...) His,
On Terms of Grace, I kn^w,
I Know that my Redeemer L ives;
His Grave detained Him not;
Enthroned, from His (...) Throne He gives,
What in His Grave He bought.
And now, I know that all He said,
must be for ever True;
His being R isen from the Dead
His glorious Truth does show.
I Know, when I or Mine shall Die,
We shall to Heaven go;
Since our Forerunner L ives on High
concerned for us below.
The Incomparable Sir. Richard Blackmores Paraphrase upon Jobs Confession of
Faith. Chap. 19. 25.
I Solemnly Pronounce, That I Believe*
That my Redeemer does for ever Live.
When future Ages shall their Circuit End,
And Bankrupt Time shall its last Minutes spend,
Then He from Heaven in Triumph shall descend.
He on the Surface of the Earth shall stand,
And from the Grave His Captived Saints demand,
The Slumbring Dead shall waken at His call,
And from their Limbs, their Leaden chains shall fall.
Victorious Life at His Command shall flee,
To vanquish Death, and set her Prisoners free.
It shall new warmth, and Vital vigor spread
Through all the Cold apartments of the Dead.
It shall in Triumph march through shades beneath,
Through all the Dusty Galleries of Death.
The Invading Conqueror shall Sack the Grave,
Force every Tomb, and rescue every Slave.
Destructions Empire shall no longer last,
Death from her sad Dominions shall be chas't,
And Desolation laid for ever wast.
From Opening Tombs th'enlivened Dead shall rise
And to Enjoy the Light, lift up their wondering eyes.
Though Worms and Putrefaction shall consume,
This Mortal Body in the Silent Tomb;
I shall Revive, and from the Grave arise,
And see my God with these Corporeal Eyes,
I for my self shall see the blessed Sight,
For my own Profit, and my vast Delight.
He shall my virtue from your Slanders clear,
Assert my cause, and Job pronounce Sincere,
This is the unshaken Pillar of my Hope,
This does my Soul, oppressed with Sorrow, prop;
That though, as I have said, the rav'ning Worm
Shall Eat my Flesh, and break this mortal Form,
My Reuni^ed parts I shall assume,
When my Redeemer does to Judgment come,
For ever to be cleared by an Impartial Doom.
An house of Mourning. The DEATH OF Desirable Relatives, Lamented and
Improved, IN A SERMON Occasioned By the DEATH of Mrs. Abigail Mather.

Prove. XXXI. 28. Her HUSBAND also, and HE Praises her. Aspice, Domine JESU,
Viduitatis (...) ^rbitatis meae Lacrymas. Aug. Medit. BOSTON: Printed for
Benjamin Eliot, 1703.

Preface,
BEhold, How his Calamities grow upon him! L ord, How are the Things increased
which Trouble me?

But God in His Free and Rich Grace, makes the Calamities of the Sinful man,
who is now Writing, to be Subservient unto the Interests of Religion, among
those to whom what he Writes, may be in any measure acceptable.

The Sudden Death of his First born, produced a Discourse about Fourteen Years
ago, Printed at L ondon, under the Title (...), Right Thoughts in Sad hours.
Four more of his Olive Plants have been since Withered; The Fruits yet produced
by those Occasions, are Collected and Exposed, in the Book now before the
Reader. A more Trying Death by far than all the former is at length inflicted
on him. Their Lovely Mother must be at last Laid in a Tomb, where they must now
together Sleep with her. A Sermon uttered just after the saddest Funeral that
ever he saw, and composed under the most grievous Desolations of his Mind, as
well as of his House, that ever were upon him, is now added unto the rest. He
hopes to say, as the Incomparable Duplessis of his Dead Wife; She had formerly
helped him in L iving well, and should hereafter in Dying well, But he would
have others to share with him in the Benefit. It would be some Consolation to
him, if Goodness may be promoted in other Families, by Sorrow befalling of his;
and if his L oss of her whom he so highly valued may render what he Speaks,
effectual for the obliging other Consorts to set a due value upon one another.
But since Heaven will have it so,

GO then, my Dove, but now no longer Mine!
Leave Earth, and now in Heavenly Glory Shine.
Bright for thy Wisdom, Goodness, Beauty here;
Now Brighter in a more Angelick Sphoere.
JESUS, with whom thy Soul did long to be,
Into His Ark, and Arms, has taken thee.
Dear Friends with whom thou did so dearly Live
Feel Thy one Death to Them a Thousand give.
Thy Prayers are done; thy Alms are spent; thy Pains
Are Ended now in Endless Joys and Gains
The Torch that gave my House its pleasant Light,
Extinguished leaves it in how dark a Night!
I saint, till thy last words to mind (...) call;
Rich Words! Heaven, Heaven will make amends for all.
C. M.

A Consolatory POEM Dedicated unto MR. COTTON MATHER;
Soon after the Decease of his Excellent and Virtuous WIFE, that
well-accomplished Gentlewoman, Mrs. Abigail Mather, Who Changed Earth for
Heaven, Dec. 1. 1702. In the Thirty Third year of her Age.

SIR, After you have wiped the Eyes
Of Thousands in their Miseries,
And often condol'd the heavy Fates
Of those that have Survived their Mates
Its come at length to your own Turn,
To be One half within an Urn.
(Your Christ would have it so be done!)
Your other Self's torn off, and Gone.
Gone! Said I. Yes, and that is the worst:
Your Wife's but gone to Heaven first.
You do run fast, but she out run,
Has Made her self, not you Undone;
Pray, let her Wear what she has Won!
Grudge not her Happiness above;
You Live by Faith, and she by Love
To Live is Christ; to Die is Gain;
Betwixt you both, you have the Twain.
She was prepared for her Release;
And so prepared Departs in P^ace
And who would Live, that God makes fit
To Die, and then gives a Permit?
And' who would choose a World of Fears,
Ready to fall about their Ears,
That might get up above the Spheres?
And leave the Region of dread Thunder
To them that Love the World that is under:
Where Cankered Breasts with Envy broyle,
And Smooth Tongues are but dipped in Oil;
And Cains Club only does ly by,
For want of Opportunity.
Yea, who would Live among Catarrhes,
Contagions, Pains, and Strifes, and Wars?
That might go up above the Stars;
And Live in Health, and Peace,and Bliss,
Had in that World; but Wished in this?
Disturb not then her precious Dust,
With Threnedies that are unjust.
Let not crossed Nature now repine;
Sir, Grace has taught you to resign
To Christ, what Nature called, Mine!
To call for Mourners I came not;
There are too many on the Sport,
Already all the Neighborhood
Have Wept as much as Weepings good,
Nor to Embalm her Memory;
She did That, e're she came to die;
It Is done to long Eternity!
This Phoenix built her Nest of Spice,
Like to the Birds of Paradise;
Which when a Fiavour set on Fire,
Her Soul took Wing, and soared higher;
But left choice Ashes here behind,
Christ will for Resurrection find.
My Muse, pass by her Out Side Grave;
Say nothing of a Comely Face;
Nor what most Lovely pleasan^^es
Dwelt Chastely on her Charming Eyes;
These and such Lilly-Glories fade,
Absconded all in Deaths dark shade.
Yet these again shall Rise and Shine,
Ten Thousand times more bright and fine,
Say little of her Inside Grace;
For this World is a Spiteful place;
And takes it self for Injured
If Saints are Praised Alive or Dead:
And they for Wits are in E'teem,
That Heavens Dwellers do b'a pheme.
I hate their Humor, I profess,
It Smells of such rank Wickedness
Yet this Saint shall not go her ways,
Without a Sprig or two of Bays;
Who well deserved far greater Praise.
Her Maiden Virtues rendered her,
A Meet-Help for a Minister,
For the best Women, the just Jews
( You know) this proper phrase would use;
A Woman worthy for to be
Wife to a Priest: And such was She.
Good; Studying that her Husband too
Nothing but Good might always do,
How Frugal, yet how Generous!
How Modest, yet how Courteous!
How Silent, yet how Affable!
How Wise, how Pure, how Peaceable,
As Child, her Parents Joy; As Wife,
Her Husbands Crown, and Heart, and Life.
As Mother She, a Fruitful Vine,
Her Offspring of an Holy Lin^,
By Holy Nurture made them Shine.
More might be said: But left I vex
And stir the Envy of her Sex,
I Will not proceed in Commendation,
But leave her to their Imitation;
Who having her bright virtue kept
In Luster; Thus at length She slepts
A Sickness full of Masteries,
With Violence did on her Sieze.
She Thirty Weeks felt Deaths Attack,
But Fervent Prayer still kept her back.
Her Faith and Patience it was to Try,
And Learn Us how to Live and Die
At Last, all Thoughts of Life were nuli'd;
For Earth by Heaven was ou'pull'd
And She straight way must thither go,
Whether her good Friends would or no.
So with the Wings of Faith and Love,
And Feathers of an Holy Dove,
She hid this Wretched World adi^u,
And Swiftly up to Heaven flew;
Yet as She flew, let this Word fall,
Heaven, Heaven will make amends for all!
NICHOLAS NOYES.

The Loss of a Desirable Relative, Lamented and Improved.
Preached 6 d. 10. m. 1702 the Lord's Day after the Death of my Lovely Consort.
Ezekiel. XXIV. 16. Son of Man, Behold I take away the Desire of thine Epes, with
a Stroke.
I Am this Day my self a sad Commentary upon my Text. The Holy God has, in my
Deadly Calamity, given you its Lively Commentary. Your Eyes do behold, What it
is for the God of Heaven, to take away from a Son of Man the Desire of his Eyes
with a Stroks.

That one of so little Use or Worth as I am, and one who-hath so much deserved
the Displeasure of Heaven, should feel such a Stroke from God, no body may
wonder at it. But why must such an Eminent Man of God, as the Prophet Ezekiel,
be thus dealt withal? The Blessed God would not only Try the virtue of His Holy
Servant, but also make the Trial of the Prophet, a thing Prophetical of what
was to come upon all the People. It is often so, that the things befalling of
one Considerable person, who has been much concerned for the Welfare of a
people, are Ominous of what is to befall all the people for whom he has been
concerned. The Case of David, in the Fifty first Psalm; the Fate of Miriam, in
her Leprosy and Exclusion; and many more such Things, were Types of what was to
befall the Israelitish Nation. The Angels of the Seven Churches, had in their
Condition, that of their Churches. Though this Minister of God, our Ezekiel, was
a most unsported Liver, and a most excellent Preacher, and his Hearers would
also confess him to be so, yet he had Enemies among them: Heaven took Notice of
it, with much offense at it. Son of Man, The Children of thy people are still
talking against thee. It may be, some of these would be so malignant, as to
Rejoice in the Affliction that now befell him. Rejoice not against me, O mine
Enemies, (might our Prophet now say;) for the Affliction upon my Family, is but
a sign of a greater Confusion to come upon the Public When God was going to
cast off a people, whom He had once Espoused and Married unto Himself, He does
by Death cut off the happy Marriage, which there had been between His Prophet
and a Daughter of Israel. When God was going to deprive the people of the Dear
Enjoyments, which their Hearts were most of all set upon. He takes away from
His Prophet the Dearest Thing he had in the world. And, because the Judgments
coming upon that people, would be such, that they should not have liberty to
Mourn with due Compassion and Solemnity for one another, therefore the Lord
forbids now unto His Prophet, the solemn Rites of Mourning, which else on this
mournful Occasion had been proper for him. Thus Ezekiel, is unto you a Sign,
says the Lord.

We have in the words before us, the preparation for this grievous (...)

There is, First, A Commination to the Prophet. The Thing threatened unto him
is, A Death; and as distressing a Death as could have come upon him; his own
Death would not have been more uneasy.

The Subject of the Death here threatened, is, The Desire of his Eyes; That is
to say, His Wife; who it seems, was a very Lovely person, and a person whom he
Loved very much to Look upon: His Eyes, He thought, could not be charmed with a
more Desirable Creature.

The manner of the Death here threatened is, With a Stroke; That is to say, very
suddenly. She did not Ly Languishing for many months; he had not opportunity by
long Languishments upon her, to fortify his mind against the Loss that was now
to befall him Some quick Disaster snatched away from him, the brightest Jewel he
had in his House; (...) had but Short warning of the sore Trouble that was now
coming upon him: She Died that very Night. A (...) indeed! But unto him, rather
than her.

But, then, there is a Compellation of the Prophet. Son of M^n A Title rear one
hundred times over addressed unto him. For a, Son of Man, to have the amiable
Companion of his Life torn from him, Oh! It Is a Sorrowful Thing! He must be more
than a man, (or, worse than a Bruit!) who feels not more than ordinary Sorrows
upon it. He, and his rare contemporary Daniel, were admitted unto an
astonishing Familiarity with the Angels of God: The Angels of Heaven flew down
to them in their Studies, and ravished them with Sensible and most Heavenly
Communications. Now, Lest they should forget themselves to be Feeble men, and
that they might not forget to be Humble Men, the Angels that favored them with
their Visits, would still use that Style, Son of Man! Son of Man! Accordingly,
we find them at the very mention of that word, sometimes falling down into the
Dust, before the glorious Angels of the Lord. The Angels of God would have this
brave man feel, That he was but a Son of Man; And surely, there would soon
arrive Mortifications enough in that one point, I take away the Desire of thine
Eyes with a Stroke, to convince him of his being so.

But Heaven does now call me to Treat upon this uneasy.

DOCTRINE.
When the Desire of our Eyes or a Relative that was very (...) in our Eyes, is
taken away from us: it is GOD that has taken it, and stricken us by Taking it.



These things are now to be observed

I. The Children of men are sometimes Blessed with such Desirable Relatives, as
may be very justly called, The Desire of their Eyes. The Blessed God makes a
various Distribution of His Blessings among the Children of men. But not the
least of those Blessings are Enwrapped in the Relations which the Children of
men bear to one another. Inasmuch as we are the Children of men, we are in
diverse respects Related unto one another; and the All wise Maker and Ruler of
the World has made a manifold provision for our mutual Comfort, in those
Relations.

Now, it is a Special Favor of God, granted unto some, among the Children of
men, that Relatives can take much Delight in one another. Indeed sometimes it is
other wise; and it is a fearful Curse upon the Children of men when it is
otherwise. Relatives there are, who have no Desire, but rather a Distaste of
one another; so little do they Desire, that they cannot Endure one another.
Their Persons their Tempers, their Manners make them so Disagreeable to one
another, that they do not Love, but Loath each other. It is not altogether
unusual in this (...) world, that Relatives are not only Weary of each other,
but also make each other weary of the World Thus the Lady of old, made that
complaint about her Daughters in Law; Gen 27 46. I am weary of my Life because
of them. Nevertheless, there are many Instances of that Compassion in our Good
God upon the un worthy Children of men; That Relatives are made highly
Desirable and Agreeable to one another.

And it is especially thus in the Conjugal Relation. The God of Love sometimes
Disposes them, whom He has made Consorts in the Conjugal Relation, greatly to
love and prize one another. The Consorts are to each other, the Desire of their
Eyes; and they so Love each other, that they Love to be as much as may be in
the Sight of each other. About the one of these Relatives, it is said, Prove. 18.
22. He that finds it, finds a Good Thing, and obtains Favor of the Lord.
And that is the opinion which both of them have of each other: This is a Good
and a Great Gift of God unto me! Highly favored of God was I, in His Giving of
it. It may be, before they were first Acquainted, they humbly Cried unto God,
that He would Choose for them, what (...) they should Live withal; and God so
answers those prayers and cries, that every Day afterward, as long as they
Live together, they give Thanks unto God for giving them to Live together. They
Live together, like Abraham and Sarah; Like Isaac and Rebeckah; like Jacob and
(...) They Live together in (...) Happiness, that they could freely Die for one
another; and when either of them does Die, it gives a thousand Deaths to the
Surviver. They set a mighty value upon one another; the Satisfaction which they
take in one another is inexpressible. The Husband is of great Esteem in the
Eyes of his Wife. She loves to See him, and much more, loves to please him.
Such a Covering of the Eyes he is unto her, that all the men upon Earth, are
nothing in her Eyes, in comparison of him. And she will no more look upon
another, than the Wise of Tigranes, who after the Wedding of Cyrus, whom every
one did commer^d as the rarest person in the Company, being asked by her
Husband, What she thought of him! answered, In truth, I looked at no body
there, but you, my Husband. But her Esteem for him, is like that in the Wife of
Phocion. who, when a Lady had shown her Treasures and Jewels unto her, by way
of Requital only showed her Phocion, saying, All my Treasures and Jewels are in
him! The Wife is of as great Esteem in the Eyes of her Husband. He Loves her,
and her Love; and rejoices in his Loving Hind and his pleasant Roe He had
rather lose all his Possessions, than suffer the loss of One whom God had thus
Enriched him withal. He can scarce relish any thing, if his Eyes have not her
also before him. If by Death she Leave him, he can it may be say, as one once
of his Lady Crescentia, She never grieved me but once, and that was by her
Death! And he is ready to write upon all his other Entertainments, the Motto
writt'n upon one of his, by a Worthy man among our selves, when he became a
Widower; In Lugenda Compare, vitoe spacium complete Orbus.

And the Affection which these Relatives have to each other, Sometimes is
Raised unto the more of Rapture, upon the most Religious and Honorable
Principles. When it is thus, I may use the Exclamation, which Tertullian of old,
writing to his Consort, used about a Christian Marriage; Unde Suffician^ ad
Enarrandam foelicitatem Ejas Matri^onij! who can declare the Happiness of such
a Marriage! Our Ezekiel was a Prophet as well as a Priest, and a man full of
God and Christ and Heaven; a man of a most Holy and Heavenly Character. He had
the Glory of the Lord, and the Presence of His Angels, in his Eyes; And yet his
Consort was, The Desire of his Eyes. And yet! Said I? Nay, rather let me say,
Therefore she was so. Breeding will do very much to. Endear Consorts unto one
another; But Virtue will do more. The Filthy Papists decry the Married State,
as if it were a very Polluted State, and inconsistent with the most Consummate
Sanctity. But the Bible calls them, Dogs for it; and it is well known that
Insandous Abominations at the same time are continually perpetrated by those
Impious Dogs. The Nazarites that were, Purer than Snow, whiter than Milk, and
brighter than Pearl, by their Vow of Holiness did not become Defiled by being
Married. The Married Society was well called by Paph^^^tius of old, An Holy
Chastity. The Holy Martyr Bradford, whom they have sometimes well styled, An
Angel of God, when there was talk of hope that he might be delivered out of
Prison, being asked, what he would do upon his Deliverance, answered, He would
Marry. What an Heavenly man was Enoch the Seventh from Adam? A man so full of
Heaven, that God would never let him Die, but would fetch him away to Heaven
both Body and Spirit, without putting him to the Trouble of undergoing a
Separation of Body and Spirit. And yet this Walker of God was a Married man,
and had both Sons and Daughters. It may be, there never were two men, more full
of Grace and Heaven, than Moses and Isaiah: They both of them were taken into
Heaven before they dyed; and Saw the Son of God with His Angels about Him, in
His Glory there. And yet these were Married men. The Solace of the Married
State, is mightily advanced by the Christian Religion. The more of Christianity
there is in any man, the more of Honor and Value he is ready to put upon the
Desire of his Eyes, and the more will he Desire to render himself on all
accounts a Blessing unto her. So far is the Married State from hurting of an
Heavenly Mind, that the more Heavenly Mind there is in any a man, the more
Tenderness he has for her that is the Disire of his Eyes. The Thoughts of such
a man are, My Lord JESUS CHRIST has hidden me to Love this dear Creature with
all possible Tenderness; and the more I Love her, the more shall I exhibit the
Kindness which the Lord Jesus Christ has for his Church. By well treating her,
who is to be the Desire of my Eyes, I shall adorn the Doctrine of God my
Savior, and make His Religion appear the more. Lovely in the Eyes of my
Neighbors. Such Thoughts do Ennoble the Married Conversation of them that
would Eminently approve themselves the Children of God, as well as the Children
of men. And the Beastly Satyrs against Marriage which affront the Sober part of
mankind, in many Printed Pamphlets, have a most noble Confutation in that
Conversation.

But I am now called off, to a more Melancholy Proposition.

II. Very Desirable Relatives may be, yea, shall be, taken away from one
another; And the more they have been the Desire of our Eyes, perhaps the sooner
they must be taken from us. What are Earthly Comforts? Truly, very Short Lived
Comforts. We read, 1 Chronicles. 29. 15. Our Days on the Earth are as a Shadow, and
there is none abiding. Relatives that would gladly Live together, and unto whom
it is a Death to think of Parting must in a Little while be p^rted by Death Let
Relatives be never so strongly Engaged unto one another, it will not be long
before Death brings a terrible Dissolution upon all their Engagements. Their
Love may be Strong as Death; yet Strong Death will Dissolve all the Ties of it.
Are there any Relatives, which are unto us, The Desire of our Eyes? It will not be
long before they take that long Farewell of us; Job 7. 8 The Eye of him that
has seen me, shall see me no more. A Time will come, when one shall say with
her, 2 King. 4 1. My Husband is Dead. A Time will come, when another shall say
with him, Genesis 23. 4. I must bury my Dead, out of my Sight.

Our Ezekiel was doubtless, very much a Favorite of God; and, no doubt, he
made the most fervent Intercessions to God, for the Sparing of the Dearly
Beloved of his Soul: But it might not he granted. That Servant of God, had his
Heart exceedingly set upon the Glorifying of the Lord. He had already Glorified
God, first in a Single State, and then in a Married (...) and now the Lord must
be Glorified by him, in an holy Widowhood.

Sometimes when a Sentence of Death is passed upon our Desirable Relatives, we
may by Prayer and Faith obtain a short Reprieve. The Relatives may be Prayer
and Faith, be rescued from the Jaws of Death, one time after another; until the
Lord shall say unto us; Now be content; I have granted as long as I see
convenient: Say no more: Be willing to take up with Spiritual and Eternal
Blessings, and with what I shall order for thee: what I do, thou know not
now, but thou shall know hereafter. And when our Hearts are perhaps thus fitted
for it, Son of man, Behold, the Lord now takes away the Desire of thine Eyes
with a Stroke. Though we bring the Desire of our Eyes unto the Lord, with never
such a Fountain of Tears in our Eyes, and spread the Desire of our Souls with
never such Importunity before Him, for the continuance of it; yet it must, when
God sees meet, be taken away, Death will first or last, accomplish that
Lamentable Thing; (...) 2 4. He slow all the Desirable of the Eye, in the
Tabernacle of the Daughter of Zion.

Yea, Sometimes Desirable Relatives must be taken from us, for this very
reason; Because we too much make them, The Desire of our Eyes. When our Hearts
are inordinately set upon any thing, we pay for our Inordinateness, by our
having that Thing Taken from us. It is many ways necessary and profitable, for
the Disciples of Him who dyed upon the Cross, to be often under the Cross. And
a man may make a shroud Guess, What Cross he is most likely to meet withal,
from this Token; What is the point which is most of all Desirable in the Eyes
of the man, and which be is most lot be to be crossed in? There There, most
probably, must the man be most severely Afflicted. Thus, when a man loses the
Desire of His Eyes, or any very Desirable Relative, he may often say with him:
Job 3. 25. The Thing which I greatly feared is come upon me and that which I
was afraid of, is come unto me.

But whence comes it? Let a Third Proposition answer That.

III. When Desirable Relatives are taken away from us, it is God that has taken
them. We must have the Providence of God in our Eyes, when the Desire of our
Eyes is taken away from us. Our Eyes must not be so put out, by our having the
Desire of our Eyes taken away, that we shall not see the Hand of God in all
that befalls us. There is the Providence of God, ordering and inflicting all
the Afflictions, that befall the Children of men. As it was said, Amos 3. 6
Shall there be Evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? So we may say,
Shall there be Evil in a Family, and it not be the Lords doing? To have
Desirable Relatives taken away, is an Affliction of so much Consequence, that
we had need think seriously, What Hand is it that Lays this Affliction upon
us? Oh, Let us awfully think with our selves, I have to do with God, in this
Dispensation. There is nothing to be ascribed unto Hap, and Chance, and
Fortune; It Is blind Paganism, to see no further than such a blind Original, for
the loss of Desirable Relatives. Nor must we consider Diseases, or Accidents,
as being in any higher Form, than that of Second Causes. God the Great GOD, is
to be considered, as the First Cause of all. When any of our Desirable
Relatives are taken away, we must say with him, Job 1. 21. The Lord gave, and
the Lord has taken away. It is a vile Stupidity and Profanity, to be
insensible of a Divine Hand, Ordering, Disposing, Directing our loss of
Desirable Relatives, when it comes upon us. When our Families are wounded, by
having Desirable Relatives taken out of them, if we Regard not the works of
the Lord, not the Operation of His Hands, we may fear, that He will go on in
wounding of us; yea, that He will destroy us, and not build us up.

IV. And now, a Fourth Proposition comes to challenge a Share in my Discourse;
which would have been, That when Desirable Relatives are taken away, there is
a dreadful Stroke of God upon us, in the Taking of them. But my best way of
Speaking to this Proposition, will be only to lay, That I am not at present
well able to Speak to it; I do not yet know, all the Evil that is to be spoken
to it. [Only I know what Pread in the Twelfth of Job, and the Fourteenth!] We
will proceed therefore unto the

APPLICATION.

I. Are the Children of men sometimes blessed with Desirable Relatives? It Is
then a Lamentable Thing, when Relatives do not Study to render themselves
Desirable. When Relatives have no Desire, no Respect, no Honor for one
another, they are very unhappy in one another. The Yoking of such Relatives, is
almost as great an unhappiness, as ^he Torment invented by the Tyran, who
fastened a Dead Body to a Living One, Relatives there are, who are not the
Desire of the Eyes to those, unto whom they stand Related; But, the Terror of
their Eyes, or, The contempt of their Eyes; a very Smoke in their Eyes, and an
abominable Eye sore; or, as ^is Expressed, 1 Samuel 2 33. To consume their Eyes,
and Grieve their Hearts. A most Lamentable Thing! When Relatives are so Little
Desired, that they are taken away from each other, without being much Lamented.
We read of such an one; 2 Chro. 21. 20. He departed, without being Desired.

It is a Lamentable Thing, When Parents are so fierce, and harsh, or foolish,
that the Children can have no Desire to appear in their presence. And it is a
Lamentable Thing, when Children are so graceless and wicked, that the Parents
have no Desire to have them appear before them.

It is a Lamentable Thing, when Brethren and Sisters, are of such Ill
Qualities, that they don't care to see one another.

It is a Lamentable Thing, when Rulers are not such as People can Desire; but
such Roaring Lions and Ranging Bears, that they would rejoice to be (...) of
them. And it is a Lamentable Thing, when People are so unreasonably hard to
please, that the Rulers, or any man of sense, would say, They had rathar have
the Government of Wild Creatures committed unto them.

We read concerning a Renowned Minister of God; Dan. 9. 23. He was a man of
Desires; a very Desirable man. It is a Lamentable Thing, when Ministers are so
Ignorant, or so Negligent, or so Criminal, that their Hearers have no Cause to
Desire their Ministry; but wish, they would Lay down. And it is a Lamentable
Thing, when Hearers are so Captious, or so ungrateful that the Ministers have
no cause to Desire to have any thing to do with them.

It is most of all to be Lamented, when Consorts cannot make a Consort, but
cease to be Desirable unto one another. Let all such Relatives, the most nearly
Related of any under Heaven, beware of every thing that may reader them
unacceptable unto one another; and beware of all Tendencies or Temptations to
weariness of one another. It is required. Ephesians. 5. 23 Let every one of you in
particular, so Love his Wife even at himself, and the Wife see that she
Reverence her Husband. Let the Fear of God cause you, to oblige one another,
with all suitable Expressions of Goodness and Kindness; and set the Fear of God
fill you with Love to one another. Oh, let there be nothing in your Conduct,
but what shall be an Emblem of the Goodness and Kindness, that passes between
the Lord Jesus Christ and His Church.

II. Must very Desirable Relatives be Taken from one another? It becomes
Relatives then, to Live together, as not being Always to Live together. When we
have any Desire of our Eyes before us, Let us hear that Admonition from Heaven
unto us; Prove. 23. 5. Will thou set thine Eyes upon that which is not! For
these things certainly make themselves wings they fly away as an Eagle toward
Heaven. The Desirable Relatives, whose Conversation with us, is the very Salt
of our Lives, and without whom Life it self is hardly to be Desired. Let us
Remember, That e're Long, either we shall be Taken from them, or They be Taken
from us. In the midst of all our Entertainments, with our Desirable Relatives,
Oh, Remember the Days of Darkness, and think, Shortly we must part. It would
not have been the Ancient Custom, to introduce a Deaths Head at a Wedding
Feast, if such Thoughts were at all Impertinent or unprofitable, Oh, Let us
Take heed of too violent Affections toward each other, lest we Hasten the
parting Time upon us, and lest when the parting Time comes, we make it a Bitter
one. Christians, Fortify your selves with a Spirit of Self Denial and
Resignation, Mortify your Passions, that you may be ready for that which
Mortality has to do upon you. Wholesome is that Advice; 1 Cor. 7. 29. This I
say, Brethren, The Time is Short; It remains, that both they that have Wives,
be as though they had none; and they that weep (suppose, at the Death of their
Wives,) as though they wept not.

And, O my Hearers, Let this Meditation awaken you, so faithfully to discharge
your Duty to each other, that at the Parting Time you may with Joy Reflect upon
your Faithfulness. Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, and all others,
howsoever you be Related; call to mind, I beseech you, It Is but a Little Time
that you have to be together; Oh, Improve this Little Time, to the best
Advantage for Eternity, It is urged, Eccl. 9. 10. Whatsoever thy Hand finds to
do, do it with thy might, for there is no work... in the Grave, whither thou
go. Have you nothing to do for the Souls of each other? Oh, Do it as well as
you can, and as fast as you can; that so, a Little while hence, when you can do
no more, you may make this Joyful Reflection, I have left nothing undone, that
was to be done, for the Good of the Friend, that is now to be taken away.

But most of all, may all Consorts attend this Lesson of Wisdom. Take heed of
Grieving one another. A Sad Parting Time is at hand: but, I do assure you, it
will very much abate the Sadness of it, if you may then say, I have Lovingly,
Honestly, and unfaintingly done all the Service that I could, for the Relative
that is now taken away. In a peculiar manner, we owe very much of Service, to
the Souls of each other. It was said, 1 Cor. 7. 16 What know thou, O Wife,
whether thou shall save thy Husband? Or how know thou, O man, whether thou
shall save thy Wife? Thus, O Wife, have thou nothing to do for the Salvation of
thy Husband? or, O Man, for the Salvation of thy Wife? Oh, Do it out of Hand.
Pray with one another, as well as for one another. Propound unto each other the
Articles of the Covenant of Grace, and Assist each other in a Consent unto
those Articles Forward each other in the Exercises or Piety, and Assist each
other in your Endeavors at those Exercises. As it is in general, a true and a
good observation. They that would have the comfort of Relations, must be
careful to do the Duty of them So, more particularly, I will freely say This
unto my Hearers; It will be an unspeakable Consolation unto a man, who has the
Desire of his Eyes going from him, to hear his Desirable Relative saying unto
him; I Bless God, that ever He gave me to you: It Is my acquaintance with you,
and with your Prayerful and Watchful and Holy Example, that has been the
Salvation of my Soul. Oh! Live together here, as the Heirs of Everlasting Life;
and Resolving, if you can, to help each other unto that Inheritance. Live
together, as those that would meet each other shortly in Heaven, and there be
able to say unto each other, It was You that helped me hither!

III. Is it God, who takes away from us out Desirable Relatives? O Realize and
Reverence the Hand of God, in such Bereavements.

It Is a Season, wherein Desirable Relatives are taken away, from very many of
our Neighbors. Many Eyes are Weeping, because the Desire of those Eyes is
taken away. But he that is tasting of the Cup given to the Prophet Ezekiel, has
peculiar cause and call to attend unto the Admonitions of God.

First; It is the Hand of God, which takes away our Desirable Relatives; Oh,
Patiently Resign them into that Hand. When the Prophet had the Desire of his
Eyes Extinguished, he received this order to Signalize his Patience; Thou shall
neither Mourn, nor Weep neither shall thy Tears run down. And that Holy and
Patient Servant of God could say, My Wife dyed, and I did (...) I was
commanded. Whatever Evil we sustain in losing the Desire of our Eyes, yet
considering what Hand it is, that sends that Evil upon us, it becomes us say,
Job 2. 10. Shall we receive Good at the Hand of God (such a Good as we had in
the Desire of our Eyes:) And shall we not Receive Evil? (such an Evil, as the
loss of that Good.) Those that were the Desire of our Eyes, and as the very
Apple of our Eyes. It Is God that has taken then. ^ Say then with him, Psalm. 39.
9. I was Dumb, I opened not my mouth, because thou did. (...) We never do
more Honor the Blessed God, than by a Patient and Profound Submission unto His
Will, in our Adversity. Behold, a Stroke of Adversity, wherein to be Submissive
unto the will of God, Honors Him it may be more than all our Active Obedience!
When a Servant of God sees the Desire of his Eyes taking Wing; for him then to
kneel down by her, and take into his Hands that Hand which has been dearer to
him than all the World beside, and there with all possible Solemnity Resign
unto the Lord, the Friend, for whole Life he would freely have given all he had
in the World as a Ransom; and to hear her thereupon Saying to him, whom she
preferred above the whole world, Sir, I Sign and Seal your Act of Resignation!
Methinks, I see my Ezekiel doing so, in the black Day, when the great God said
unto him, Son of man, Behold, I take away the Desire of thine Eyes with a
Stroke. Certainly, It Is no Dishonorable Testimony to the Glories of
Christianity!

Remember, O Christians; our God is a Sovereign God. Were the Desire of our
Eyes never so bright a Thing, it was but a bright piece of Clay, and absolutely
at the Dispose of the Eternal Potter. Our God is a Righteous God. When the
Desire of our Eyes is ravished from us, Rivers of Tears may (...) down our Eyes
for the Sins by which we forfeited it. Our God is an (...) God. Our Creator,
our Savior, Your comforter is Infinite, and (...) Enjoy Him, when the finest
Creature dies. Though a Lovely Creature be Snatched from us, have we not a Lovely
Jesus lest us for our Consolation? When the Desire of our Eyes is gone, we may
still converse with Him, who should be the Desire of all Nations. Why say we
not now with him, Psalm. 73 25. Lord, There is none upon Earth, that I desire
besides thee? When David had lost the Desire of his Eyes, we read, He
Encouraged himself in the Lord his God. Oh, Let this Encouragement make us very
Patient; we still have the Lord for our God! In the Marian Persecution, there
was a Woman brought before the bloody Bishop of London, on the Score of the
Gospel. He threatened her to take away her Husband from her; said the, Christ
is my Husband. He threatened her to take away her Child from her; said she,
Christ is better to me than ten Sons. He said, He would Strip her, of all her
outward Comforts; Her answer was, But Christ is mine, and you cannot Strip me
of Him. Admirably Spoken! Let my Sex too, learn of that admirable Woman, how to
Encourage our selves under the worst of our Bereavements.

Secondly; It is the Hand of God which takes away our Desirable Relatives: But
let us Hear the Voice of God, in that work of His Hand. Oh, Hear the Rod; for
there is a Voice in it.

The Voice of God unto us, in taking away the Desire of our Eyes is, Humble thy
self under the mighty Hand of God. It is now, if ever, a Seaton for that
Practice; Lam 3 40. Let us Search and Try our ways, and Turn again unto the
Lord. Let us now, Search and Try, whether the Just God have (...) Controversy
with us. Now Search and Try, what may be the Sins, by which the Desire of our
Eyes has been Confiscated. Search and Try, whether we did carry toward the
Desire of our Eyes as we ought to do. Let this our Self Examination issue in a
deep Abhorrence of our selves, and a True Repentance of our Sins That, That is
the Right Mourning, which is a Sorrowing to Repentance, and a being Sorry after
a Godly manner. But now, by fresh Applications with Faith, to the Blood of the
Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, which cleanses from all Sin obtain the
Pardon of all the Sins, whereof we do thus Repent. And, Oh, be very cautious of
again calling into the Sins, or being like that man, of whom it is said, In the
Time of His Distress, He Trespassed yet more against the Lord.

Another Voice of God unto us, is, Bestrongly convinced of Humane Weakness and
Frailty We read it in the Divine Oracle, Psalm. 103 15, 16. As for man, his Days
are as Grass, as a Flower of the Field, so he flourishes: For the wind passes
over it, and it is gone, and the place thereof shall know it no more. Do we not
now read it in our own Experience? When we see Beauty turned into Ashes,
Loveliness become Loathsomeness, the Greatest Charms become a prey to Worms,
and the Desire of our Eyes become the Horror of our Eyes, how can we forbear
crying out Lord, What Fading Flowers are these that we most of all dote upon!
Lord When thou do correct us with thy Rebukes, thou do make our Beauty
consume away like a moth, surely we are vanity.

A Third Voice of God unto us, is, Prepare to Follow. When the Desire of our
Eyes is taken away, the Language of it is, that; Mat. 24 44 Be ye also Ready.
They that are gone from us, were a part of our selves, and it may be not so Old
as our selves. How inexcusable are we, if we do not say with our selves, I
shall not be long after them? 'Twas the manner of old, for 'em to Lay and Leave
their Friends in their Graves, with these words, Vale, Vale, nos te sequemur:
farewell, farewell, we shall quickly follow! What? Is one Half of us already in
a C^ssin? Surely it becomes us to expect that the Rest of us will soon be
there. They that are gone from us, are gone but a very little before us.

Oh! That we might now to Day hear the voice of God, and not harden our Hearts.

Thirdly; It is the Hand of God, which takes away our Desirable Relatives: Well
then, watch very much against all the Temptations of Satan, which may be likely
to assault us under this Hand of God. Is the Desire of our Eyes taken away? It
may now be said unto us; Luke 22 31. Behold, Satan has desired to have you,
that he may Sift you as Wheat. All New Conditions have some New Temptations.
When any Irksome Thing befalls us, and especially when we are deprived of the
Desire of our Eyes, than which, what can be more I^ is some? We may be sure,
Satan will take advantage from it. For to have the Desire of our Eyes taken
away, brings a Dark Time upon us. The Powers of Darkness may e're we are aware,
hurry us on to unaccountable Inconveniences. Now more than ever is that
Counsel seasonable; Mat. 26. 41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into
Temptation. If God by taking away the Desire of our Eyes, being us particularly
into a State of Widowhood, Oh! how sollicitous ought we to be, of an Holy
Widowhood! But that, it may be so, it should be a very Prayerful one. The very
First Thing we are to do, as soon as we can Look about us, methinks it should
be to Pray, and Fast, and Weep in secret places before the Lord, and beg of
God, that He would pardon all our miscarriages in our Former Condition, and
preserve us from all further miscarriages in the New, and Sad Condition that is
now come upon us. Alas, what wrong steps, what foolish ones, and what satal
ones, are commonly taken in that State; by them who being Desolate, Continue
not in Supplications and Prayers night and day! And they are never more
unhappily taken, man in precipitated proceedings, unto Second Marriages. For
though it were an indefensible Severity in many of the Ancients, absolutely to
forbid them, nevertheless, it is a Dishonorable Levity to make too much Haste
unto them, and especially for those Aged men, to whom a Jerome would say, Cogita
te quotidie moriturum, et de Secundie Nuptiis nunquam Cogitabis: It were fitter
for thee to think of Dying than of Wedding. The Duchess of Millain, being made
a Widow, Stamped that Motto on her Coin, Sola facta, Solum Deum Sequor; Being
Left alone, I Converse with God alone. It becomes both Sexes, when the State of
Widowhood is come upon them, to Converse with God, more than ever they did in
their Lives before.

Lastly. It is the Hand of God, which takes away our Desirable Relatives: But
let it be a very rich Anodyne and Cordial unto us, to think unto whom and what
He has taken them. Were the Relatives rendered principally by the Fear and Grace
of God, the Desire of our Eyes? The God, who has taken them away, has then
Taken them to Himself. Were they In Christ? They are now With Christ where to
be is by far the best of all: And as well as they Loved us, they would be loath
to return from Him unto us. They were the Desire of our Eyes; but will it have
no pacifying Influence upon us to think. They are gone, Where all Tears are
wiped from their Eyes? The Relation between them and us is Lost, but the
Remembrance of the Relation may continue more with them than with us. And when
we meet them again in the Heavenly World, there will doubtless be some
Rapturous Expressions of Gladness agreeable to the Heavenly State, upon the
meeting of such as have been Instrumental to being each other unto it.

In fine; We Encounter many Grievances in this present Evil World. Our
Desirable Relatives have got the Start of us, to the Blessedness of a Better
World! We shall shortly see the Period of all our Grievances, as well as they,
and in the Society of them, that are got before us. And give me leave, to
Conclude my Sermon, with the Words, wherewith the Desire of my Eyes, has newly
Concluded her Life; Words, which I Pray God, help me to make the Solace of
Mine: Heaven, Heaven will make Amends for all.

FINIS.

