AN ANSWER TO Mr. Samuel Willard (One of the Ministers at Boston in
New England) HIS REPLY To my Printed Sheet, called, A Dangerous and hurtful
Opinion maintained by him, viz.

That the Fall of Adam, and all the sins of M^n necessarily come to pass by
virtue of Gods Decree, and his Determining both of the Will of Adam, and of all
other Men to sin.

By George Keith, M. A.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford at the Sign of the Bible in New York,
1704.

To His Excellency Edward Viscount Cornbury Captain General and Governor in
Chief in and over Her Majesty's Provides of New York, New-J^rsey; and the
Territories thereunto belonging, and Vice Admiral of the same.
YOur Lordships Zeal and Industry to Promote the true Interest of the Church of
England (of which you are a true Son, by your Pious and Generous Education) not
only in the Governments under your Excellency's more immediate Ministration,
but in those adjacent, and the Favors your Lordship has on all occasions shown
to the Clergy in those parts, and particularly to my self, do induce me to
present to your Excellency the following little Treatise, being upon a Subject,
that, I must own, requires an abler Pen.

Your Lordships great Abilities render you a competent Judge of the Present
Controversy, which, I hope, I have managed according to the Rule of Gods holy
Word, and the Orthodox Doctrine of the Catholic Church, of which the Church of
England is a most Noble part.

I pray your Lordships Acceptance of it, as a Tender of my most humble and
cordial Respects with which I shall join my Prayers to Almighty God to bless
both you and yours, and to continue to those Countries the Advantages they now
enjoy under your Excellency's Pious and Prudent Direction.

Your LORDSHIPS Most Humble Servant, George Keith
New York, December. 6. 1703.
An Answer to Mr. Samuel Willard, etc.
SECT. I.
Page 1. ad ^^em. He says, He chose rather to bear the Calumnies in it ( viz.
my printed Sheet) than to stir in a Wasps Nest.

Answ. Upon a serious perusal of his Reply, I do not find that he has shown
wherein I have been guilty of one Calumny against him; and for what I have
charged him with, he not only in substance and effect, takes with the Charge,
but does much more charge himself there with, than I have done, throughout his
Reply; and particularly this does appear from what he has said in p 50. of his
Reply, where he has expressly these following words, [in answer to what I drew
you only by way of Consequence, upon his Opinion; and I did not charge it
directly upon him, hoping he would have denied the consequence, but He readily
grants it] thus, Nor (says he) shall I part with mine Opinion, viz. That the
Origin and Cause of the necessity of the first sin is more to be derived from
God, than from Man himself; nay, farther, (says he) that the whole cause of
the futurity o^ it is owing to the divine Decree, though still the whole sin
and blame of it is due to Adam, for that in the accomplishing of his A^pstacy
he abused his own free Will, and voluntarily transgressed the Command. Let the
intelligent and impartial Reader judge whether in these words he has not only
confirmed my Charge, but has exceeded what I charged him with in his granting
my Consequence, which I did not positively and directly load him with, as
neither did I with any other of my Consequences, ^s that by his (...) on it
would follow, that God was the Author of (...): This I only inferred by
consequence, taking it for ^ran^ed, that he would not allow such a consequence
to follow from his Opinion; and that therefore by fair Dispute he was obliged
to depart from his Opinion, from which (...) consequence ^id ^^nu^nely follow.
Its true, he still deny^ that God is the Author of sin, in express words; but
what difference is there in reality betwixt Gods being the Author of sin, And
That the Origin and Cause of the necessity of the first sin is more to be
derived from God (...) from Man himself; nay, that the whole cause of the
futurity of it is owing to the divine Decree, I perceive not; For though Author
(...) Cause in the English Language are two different words, yet as they have
but one signification in English, in respect o^ Efficiency, (...) one Greek
word, both in the New Testament ( Heb. 5.9.) and in other Greek Authors, is
expressive of both, viz. the word [aitois] Again, his words above quoted by me
at large out of his page 50 carry in them a plain inconsistency, viz. That the
whole cause of the futurity of Adams sin is owing to the divine Decree; and
yet, the whole sin and blame of it is due to Adam. But that the whole sin and
blame of it was due to Adam, and yet God the whole cause of the futurity of it,
and that it is owing to the divine Decree, is such an inconsistency, that, I
think, none ca^ deny, but such who are resolved to deny the first Principles o^
humane Understanding; and all dispute with such is but lo^ labor, for Contra
negantem Principia non est D^sputandum, we ough^ not to dispute with men who
deny the first Principles; as if on^ should say, The whole cause of V^^a^'s
Death was owing to David, yet the whole sin and blame of it was due to him or
them that immediately killed him, and David was altogether innocent* for as
inconsistent as this assertion is, and repugnant to the first Principles of
humane Understanding, so is that other of Mr. Willard, I think, in the judgment
of all intelligent Persons, wh^ are not biased with his Opinion.

The like injustice he has used to me, in his second page, in his charging me,
That I had so foully represented the matter, that he was prevailed on to give
the world a fair account of it; He adds, That he might, were it worth the
while, complain of the dis-ingenuity of the man, but all that have to do with
him in a way of Controversy, are well acquainted with that.

Answ. All this is only said, but without the least shadow of Proof, and
therefore that Matchiavelian Rule, Fort ter Cal^^ni^^e, etc. which he would
charge upon me, rebounds wholly on himself, but his affirmation, That all that
have to do with me in a way of Controversy, are well acquainted with my
dis-ingenuity, is such a Calumny and ^^^orious Falsehood, that few, I think, of
his own Gang in New England will assent to; and Thousands who are acquainted
with the late printed Controversies I have been engaged in, which has been
altogether against the Quakers, (except in two single Ski^mishes, one with him,
and another with Mr. Increase Mather) will affirm the contrary; and I think, I
can almost appeal to Mr. Increase Mather himself, and most of their way in
New England, in my printed Controversies against the Quakers, whether Mr.
Willard has not charged me very unjustly. Indeed he has in this his Charge
not a little gratified the Quakers, but he has in this his so doing as much
disobliged all true Christian Professors, who have read my Books of
Controversies against the Quakers, who have generally commended my sincerity in
what I have done in way of Controversy against them, for above these ten years
past, and which is more than all, that I have the Testimony of a good
Conscience within me, to my sincerity. Therefore what Mr. Willard has charged
me in this, seems to be in prejudice against me, for my former engagement in
Controversy against him, and some of his Brethren at Boston, when I was under
the Profession of a Quaker; and though as I have freely acknowledged, and do
now acknowledge, in diverse points of my Controversy then with the Boston
Ministers, I was blame worthy, and in error, yet I erred through ignorance, and
not wilfully, and having obtained Mercy and forgiveness of God, through Faith
and Repentance, it would be very dis-ingenuous and unchristian in Mr. Willard
to object that against me.

Pa^. 2. He says, "My Narrative ( viz. that contained in my printed Sheet) "is
not a Disputation, but a Remonstrance against "something that (...) him with

Answ. That it is a Remonstrance against him, I grant, but that it is not also
a Disputation, he has not shown; for most part of that sheet is Argumentative,
and contains such Arguments against his Opinion, that he has given no sollid
Reply unto, but either Evasions or such Concessions that sink him deeper in the
mire.

To my calling it A dangerous and hurtful Opinion maintained by him, he Replys,
That a thing may be dangerous per se, and per (...), and that if there be any
danger in this, it is only in the latter sense, shall be endeavored to be made
appear an^n.

Answ. Whether his performance be according to his promised endeavor, shall be
lest to the judicious and impartial* Read^rs. But whereas he seems to disown
that he maintained any such Opinion as the Title of my printed sheet bears;
and that this was neither asserted by him, T^tidem verbis, i. e. in so many
words, nor that which was said, insisted on, etc. is a poor evasion, and a very
unjust ground to fix a Calumny upon me; for I was so far from asserting he did
so affirm, to all I charged on him, totidem ^erbis, that in page 2. of my
printed sheet, I said, I did not hear them ( viz. either the Students or Mr.
Willard) affirm that all sinful Actions of the Creature are determined of God,
so that they act them necessarily, so as by any explicit Speech to as^^rt it,
but their manner of answering and arguing does clearly ^^oug^ prove it was
their Opinion. The Calumny therefore that he charge on me lies at his own
door; for though I charged not the Opinion in full upon him, tot dom Verbis, as I
expressed it sufficiently, I did not yet the equivalent of it, in other words,
(...) did charge upon him, and I do still charge upon him, and (as I have
shown) he has charged himself yet more than I had do^^, as in the above
Quotation given by me, out of his page 50. does plainly appear.

Page 4. He never yet professed himself to be^^ Independent, not yet a
Presbyterian, believing there may be mistakes in both parties.

Answ. And a little, I think, he has professed himself to be of any other
Profession commonly known in Christ^n (...), wherein he seemed to be very
singular. But why does he not ^^^fess himself to be an Independent? for both
the Name and Reason (...) seems to belong to him These called Independent are
so called because they acknowledge no Superior over them in the Church, under
Christ, appointed by him, so as to have any Ecclesiastical Rule or Authority
over them; the which Definition of an (...), seems to agree as fully to M.
Willard as to any professed Independents, seeing he neither owns E^iscopacy nor
Presby^^^ to be superior to him; and if he own the People to be his
Superiors, he is Independent still.

SECT II.
Page 7, 8. He charges it on me, That I seem to make it (...) Novelty, and a
thing of prejudice to the better part of good men, that the Decree of God is
immutable, and that man has a free Will, and that it is not impeded in its
proper Liberty by this Decree, which is maintained by the greatest Protestant
Divines.

Answ. In this Mr. Willard has very unfairly and dis-ingenuously represented
me, as if I had denied the Decree of God about Adam's sin, or the sins of his
Posterity, or that Gods Decree is immutable; neither of which I did deny in my
printed sheet, but on the coutrary I expressly and positively said, page 3. That
the Thesis it self, taken in a sound sense, I grant most willingly to be true,
viz. That the Immutability of Gods Decree does not take away the liberty of the
Creature; for it was not the T^esis tha^ I would have impugned, taken in a
sound sense, but the Consectaries inferred from the Thesis, that I would have
impugned, and did impugn in my printed Sheet, which Mr. Willard did allow to
follow, and which I judged, and still judge, he ought not to have allowed.
Also, in my page 2. I did say, I willingly grant, that there is frequently a
divine Determination of the Will both of Men and Angels in good Actions, and
that the said Determination can well consist with the liberty of the Will. But
why Mr. Willard has taken so little notice of this, that he charge the
Contradictory on me, I leave to impartial Readers, whether it be not without
all ground, to render me very erroneous and heter^dox, and contrary to the
greatest Protestant Divines.

But for my further Vindication, well agreeing with what is said in my printed
Sheet, I affirm,

First, That all Gods Decrees are immutable.

2dly, That the Decrees of God about the sin of Adam, and all other sins of
men, do not take away the liberty or free will of the Creatures, whether Men or
Devils.

3dly, That Gods Decree about the sin of Adam, and all other sins of Men and
Devils, is permissive, and yet not barely permissive, but ^ffective, in a most
powerful manner; yet not so, as that the Cause of the Futurity of the sin of
Adam, or of other Men and Devils, is owing to the same, but upon the infallible
Foreknowledge of the Futurition of their sins, through Gods permission, in a
most wi^^ and powerful manner, setting bounds and limits to them, and
powerfully disposing and ordering the^ to his Glory, and the good of his
Chosen, even all the Heirs of Salvation.

4thly, That though the Decree of God about the sins of Adam, and other men, is
not Subjectively, or with respect to God, Conditional, yet Objectively, and
with respect to second Causes, and the connection of the Means and the End, is
Conditional, according to that noted saying of Aq^^nas, well approved by (...)
Authors, Deu^ (...) hac p^pter hoc, et hoc propter hoc, sed (...) ho^ ^on (...)
hoc; and to this Mr. Willard seems to agree, when he says, It is a Truth,
That God has decreed Hypotheses, but (...) hypothetically.

(...). But by these Propositions laid down by me, wherein (as (...) judge) I
agree with all sound Protestant Divines, as well as with the Church of England,
it does not follow, that either Adam or other men sinned necessarily, either by
Gods Decree, or by determining their Wills necessarily to sin, by the actual
execution of his Decree in time.

In the First and Second of these Propositions Mr. Willard seems to agree with
me, as also in the Fourth, but in the Third and Fifth lies a great difference
betwixt us, especially in that part of the Third, where I say, The cause of the
futurity of the sin of Adam, or of other men and Devils, is not owing to the
divine Decree, and also in the Fifth, throughout, we greatly differ.

Page 9. Whereas he says, I do not, totidem verb^^, professedly deny the Truth
of the The^^s defended by the Respontent, though it is manifest in the whole,
that my Pick was against that.

Answ. In this he greatly wrongs me, and that most dis-ingenuously, for I was
so far from denying the Truth of the Thesis, professedly totidem verbis, that
professedly totidem verbis, I did grant it, in a sound sense, to be true, viz.
That the immutability of the Decree does not take away the liberty of the
Creature.

Page 9. He charge me afresh with another thing, which he calls a mere
Calumny, viz. That according to him, the Fall of Adam, according to Gods
Decree, was necessary. And a little after he says, They deny evermore the
Decree to be any Cause of sin; for the Decree is an immanent Act, whereas the
divine Act which is causal of any thing out of himself, is a transient Act.

Answ. In this he wrongs me several ways, as well as he contradicts himself;
for, first, I did not charge him to hold, that the fall of Adam was necessary,
simply and only by virtue of Gods Decree; for beside the Decree, which is an
immanent Act in God, I did add both in my Title and Explanation, Gods
Determination both o^ the Will of Adam, and of all other men to sin; Which
Determination of God, if any such were, that did cause men necessarily to sin,
was a transient act. But, 2dly, It no wise follows, that because Gods Decree
is an immanent Act, that therefore it is not any Cause of sin, if such a Decree
were, decreeing, That Adam was necessarily to sin. This is very false
Philosophy, as well as no true Divinity in Mr. Willard, as if an immanent act
in God could be no cause of any thing, adextra, or without him; for though it
be not the next and immediate Cause, yet it is the first and remote Cause of
the transient Act, and of all Gods Works, ad extra. For I ask Mr. Willard, Was
not his Will and Purpose to write his Book, called, A Peply, etc. an immanent
Act in him? and yet I suppose he will not deny but it was the remote Cause of
it, though his Hand and ^en were the m^re in mediate and next Causes of it* ^ut
as I have find, as in this ^e wrongs me, so he contradicts himself, in having
said, page 5^. That the whole cause of the infallible Futurity of the first
sin, is owing to the divine Decree. But how can it be owing to the divine
Decree, if the divine D^^^^ (...) cause of it, not so much as remotely, let me
put him in mi^^ of the (...) Causa Causa est Causa C^^suti, which (...) come
afterward further to be discoursed of. And will Mr (...) deny that Gods love
is the Fountain and original Cause of all the good that God gives as,
according to that in Jer. 31.3. I have loved thee (...), therefore with loving
Hudness have I drawn thee; Which points both at the Cause and Effect; the
Cause, Gods Everlasting Love, which is an immanent Act, and the Effect follows,
Therefore with loving kindness have I drawn thee.

Page 10. After some Distinctions about the Terms Necessity and Necessary, which
were not very needful, but to swell his B^^^k, as he does often, else where,
multiply words to little other purpose, for he might have given the whole
substance of his Answer in less than one Sheet, which he has (...) to above
four; He grants my Charge against (...) to be true, in a right sense, and he
does not how wherein I give it a wrong sense, (...). That every free Act of the
reasonable Creature is decermined by God, so that whatever the Creature acts
freely, it acts the same necessarily.

Page 12. He says, This we do not assert, nor assent, that God determines m^n
to sin, though he does determine those Actions in which they do sin.

A^sw. But how is it, that forgetting himself, he says, page 52. ((...) times
noted) That the origin and (...) of the necessity of the first sin, is more to
be derived from God, th^^ from (...) himself. He (...) not say, of the Act
(...) which (...) sin, is it of the necessity of the first ^in. Therefore
(...), in charging n^ to fix (...), what ^e does not own. And for his
distinction (...) the Act^on, and the sin of to. Action, it is a groundness
(...), for every (...) Gods Commands, is sin, as Theft, M^^^^^ A^^aitery, etc.
which very actions are sins.

SECT. III.
Page 13. To my saving, That there is frequently a divine De^^^^^n^ti^n of the
Will, both of Men and Angels in good Actions, and that this may consist with
the ^^erty of the Will, he infers, That if I intend a Ph^sical Determination, I
can (...) reconcile this to my Notion of the Liberty of the Will, etc.

A^^. By his ^eave, this is Gratis dictur^, with ut proof, and be mistakes my
Notion of Free Will, as it consisted (...) all absolute indifference, that I
assign to the Will; it be mean it with an indifference to do evil, as well as
good. I mean no such indifference absolutely nor universally; for God, and
Christ, and all holy Angels and glorified Saints, have a most free Will, but
only to do good, and not to do any evil; and as the Schools speak, they have
the Liberty of acting this, or not acting it according to the exigence of Time
and Place, and other Circumstances, called commonly, L^^ertas indiv^ductions,
or Contradictiones, but they, (...) God, Christ, holy Angels and glorified
Saints, (...) that called Libertas Specification's or Contra^e^^^^, i.e to do
both good and evil. And though men in a mortal state have this liberty, and
Adam had it in his first estate, yet had God determined him to stand, and not
permitted his Fall, it should not have taken away his liberty, but rather
increased and enlarged it, as holy Angels and glorified Saints, and the
glorified Manhood of our Savior have more perfect liberty of Will than we
have, yea, indeed most perfect liberty, and yet without the indifferency to
sin. The best freedom is from sin, and not to sin, J^^. 8.36.

Page 13. But (says he) if he designs it only in a (...), he does but
paralogize, and impo^^ a S^phism on his (...) Reader. And a little after he
says, This Determination does not respect the moral goodness of the Action,
but the Entity of it.

Ans^. I designed it both in a Physical sense at sometimes, and in a moral
sense at other (...), and when understood (...) mortal sense, it is not to
paralogize, nor to impose a Sop^^^^ on the Reader, as he affirms, (...) does
not prove. And he but Magisterially says, without proof, That the
Determination in this case does not respect the (...) of the Action, but the
entity of it. I judge, most true Christians will contradict him in this; for
when God by some powerful influence mores our Wills, and determines them to
love and obey him, as well as morally to persuade us by excellent Reasons and
Motives, is not God to be praised for this? and therefore that Determination
does respect the moral goodness of those Actions, and not the meet Entity of
them.

Page 14. He expostulates with me, That seeing I granted the Thesis, and only
would have impugned the Consectaries, why I would not give them a better Scheme
or this affair?

Answ. It was time enough to have given him a better Scheme of this Affair,
when he is convinced that his own Scheme of it is not good; for it is not
common for men to embrace a Truth until they be willing to forsake the Error
that is Contradictory to it.

Page 14, 15, 16. After he has discoursed in many words concerning the
indifferency of the Will (to no great purpose to the present Controversy) he
concludes, as it were, with some great Philosophical Mystery, I think denied by
none, that are not Mad and beside themselves, That the Will has no
indifference in actu secundo, which is to say, When it is determined, it is not
indifferent, but does necessarily act, when it acts, as Whatever is, where it
is, necessarily is; So whatever acts, when it acts, it necessarily acts: Is not
this (Reader) profound Philosophy of Mr. Wi and President of the College of
Cambridge in (...)-England! Or was this any part of the Dispute betwixt us, or
having any tendency to bring it to a fair issue? He grants I did not insist
upon it, neither (says he) shall he but as I did not insist upon it, so nor
did I touch upon it; though I still b^ame his Notion of liberty of Will, that
it consists only in the ^^ubency o^ (...) of the Will to act, primar^^ (...)
maliter; for at this rate Children before they have the free exercise of the
liberty of Will, and Madmen, are free Agents, and act freely; nor does his
^ubenti^ Pationis help him; for if he mean the reasonable Faculty, Children and
Madmen have it; if he mean true Reason in a^^^ secund, then no man when he
sins acts freely, all sin being contrary to true Reason. Beside, if the Notion
of the Liberty of the Will consist only in a Lubentia, i. e. Tubency or
Spontaneity of the Will, Prima^io et formaliter, as he asserts, then Mr.
Willard Notion of Free Will will consist not only with the fatal Stoic
Necessity, but with the Necessity that ^^trologiers impose upon human Actions,
from the Planets and Stats.

Page 16 He thinks to infer a Contradiction upon me, from my saying, That God
who is the first Cause of all created Beings, does not determine the Will of
Man, so that he necessarily produces any sinful action, unless I will deny
some actions as actions, to proceed from God, as the first Cause of them, and
so supposes that there is some real Entity, whereof God is not the first
Cause; the absurdity that I say, not Blasphemy whereof, is intolerable, he
says.

Answ. Here Mr. Willard is warm to purpose, but to no purpose of true Reason;
for, first, though God be the true, and I think, the only cause of all created
Beings, such as all Substances are, whether Spirits or Bodies, yet, he (...),
many Philosophers say, That Actions of created Beings, are not properly Beings,
but Modes of Beings, which I never heard called an intolerable Absurdity, not
to say Blasphemy. But not to contend with him about this, whether Actions of
created (...) are Beings, or only Modes of Beings, let it be granted (...) that
they are a sort of Being, does it therefore follow, that God is so the cause of
them, that he does determine the Will of Man, so that he necessarily produces
any sinful Action? How proves he this Consequence? surely no ways at all, but
dictates Magisterially, pro more s^o, after his old manner. Admit that God is
what is called Causa fine q^a no^, because without Gods general influence, that
gives the ability to the Creature to act, (even in sinful actions, for in him
we live, and move, and have our Being) no Creature can do any sinful Action; it
does not therefore follow, that God does so determine the Will of man, (...) of
any Creature necessarily to produce any sinful Action; for as to Gods general
influence or concourse with Creatures, however so immediate, it no more
necessitates the Creatures to produce sinful actions, than the general
immediate influence of the Sun by its heat or warmth upon Mankind (without
which no man could act) does necessitate a man to commit Murder or Adultery;
for the praise or dispraise of humane actions we d^ not attribute to the
general influence of general Causes, but to what is special, as when by the
general influence of the Sun and the Earth, and the Rain, in one spot of ground
good fruit is produced, and in another Hemloc^, or other poy^^nous things, the
proper Causes of these are referred to their specifical Seeds and Principles,
and not to their more general and universal Chooses. Shall we say, that because
Adam begat Cain, and Cain killed his Brother Abel, that therefore Adam was the
Cause of Cain's murdering his Brother, or that therefore Cain did necessarily
commit that Murder? By no means.

SECT. IV.
PAge 17. But he thinks to overthrow my Position, by his instancing. That the
best Actions of the best of men in this Life, have sinful defect cleaving to
them.

Answ. But this instance is quite remote from the purpose and case in hand,
which was only concerning sinful Actions, that are wholly and altogether
sinful, and which are such per se, and not per accidens, such as the good
Actions of good men, which have sinful de^ect cleaving to them per accidens,
and not per ^e, as he himself distinguishes in another place, though
misapplyed in that place by him.

Page 17. He alleges, I produce nothing new, but (...) has been so often
urged by Pelagians, (...) and ^e^^monstrants, and has been as often answer^^ by
such as have (...) the defense of the same Conclusions, which I charge upon
(...).

Answ. Herein again he is very unfair and disingenuous, as if (...) ver^e
betw^^ him and the was any part of prope^ Controversy betwixt ^elagians,
J^su^, (...) and the Remons^^ants on the one hand, and Orthodox Protestant
Divines on the other hand; which is utterly false; for many hundred Divines,
all sound Protestants, who are neither chargeable with being Pelagians, nor
Jesuits, nor Socinians, nor Remonstrant^, are his A^ta^^^sts in this
Controversy, as well as I; nor did I ever know, (...) it was ever any part of
the Pelagian Controversy, though ^ suppose I have read as much upon that
Controversy, and perhap^ more than be has done; nor are they chargeable with
being Jesu^ts, Socinians and ^^monstrants, who hold some things in common with
them: E. G. They all deny that God is the Author o^ (...), but does it
therefore follow, that to deny God to be the Author of sin, is any Jesuitical
or Socinian Error, or (...) o^, Pelagian Error? May I not more justly
recriminate, That to say, Adam and all men do neces^arily sin, is Hobb s^? for
indeed it is the express Doctrine of H^bbs, which he defends with the like
Arguments, and very near the same words, with ^^ose the Mr. W^kard, as appears
in a large Dispute betwi^t the learne^ Bishop Bramhall and T. Hobbs in print
(the Book was printed at London, A^no 1655.) And suppose I have produced
nothing New, I am sure he has produced as little New to defend his Opinion,
though I think some of his Assertions are more absurd and gross than are commonly
deli^ered by his Assoc^^tes, and in that respect may be called New. And though
neither the Controvers^, nor the mannagement of it (...) N^w to many, yet ^
think it is new (...) in these America^ parts, yea, so new, that to my certain
knowledge, diverse, both Presbyterians and others could not be persuaded that
Mr. Willard or any Preacher in New England did ever hold such an Opinion, until
their reading his Book has fully convinced them, with which they are not a
little surprised.

P^g. 18, 19, 20, 21. After many Wranglings, Twistings and Turnings, like a
Fish in the Net, in answer to my first Argu^^^. That if God does so determine
the Will of Man, that he necessarily produces any sinful Action, it will
follow, that God is the Author of sin. I proved my Consequence thus, That if
the Cause of a Cause is the Cause of the caused Thing, as God is the Cause of
the Determination of man's Will to that sinful Action; so that Determination is
the Cause of the same. To this he answers, (...) restrain the Maxim to Causes
that are essentially subordinated, and assure us, that it is false in things
that are only by (...), or contingently (...).

Answ. He does not fairly represent what Logicians say in the case; for the
Maxi^^ holds not in Causes essentially subordinate, unless when the subordinate
Cause is necessarily determined by the superior Cause. For all good Divines,
as well as good Philosophers, hold. That all Creatores are essentially
subordinated to God Almighty in their Beings and Actions, and yet he is not
that Author of their sinful Actions. And if Mr. Willard does (...) own the
essential Subordination of Creatures to Almighty God, but only by accident and
contingently subordinated, it is a great Error; for it impugnes the great
dependency that all Creatures have upon God Almighty, and renders the Creatures
a sort of Independents one way, as Mr. Willard himself is another way. But, if
Creatures be only by accident and contingently subordinated to God, then it may
happen, that they may act without any dependence on him, and consequently they
may act without any Determination of God, so as necessarily to produce any
sinful Action. But though the affirming of the essential Subordination of
Creatures to God Almighty, does not infer his determining them necessarily to
produce sinful actions, yet the denial of such essential Subordination of
Creatures to God in their Actions, will plainly infer, that they are not under
the accessity of any Determination to sinful Actions.

Again, the abovesaid Maxim holds good in Causes not essentially subordinated,
as when the Devil tempted Eve to sin, and Eve tempted Adam, both the Devil and
Eve were moral causes of Adam's sin, and both culpable; and yet neither was
Adam essentially subordinated to Eve, nor Eve to the Devil; nor was there any
Subordination in the case at all, of our first Parents to the Devil, in their
primitive state of Creation.

SECT V.
^^g. Whereas I argued against the Distinction used by the Asserters of Mr.
Willards Opinion, That God is the Physical Cause of the Action, but not the
Moral Cause, and that God determines the Will only in the (...) of the Action,
but not to the Formale, by my (...), first, That in many sinful Actions, there
is no distinction between the Materiale and the Formale of the Action, as in
all acts or Hatred against God and our Neighbors. To this be Replys, Th^^ this
(...) very Chimerical Action, that has neither Matter nor Form distinguishable.

Answ. Here again he speaks Dictator-like, without all (...) of Reason; for,
morally speaking, what real distinction can we make betwixt the inward act of
the Mind, which is a (...) of God and our Neighbor, and the sinfulness of it?
for, are (...) some sinful Action, such as Hatred of God and our Neighbors,
intrinsecally and essentially evil and sinful? Whether the sinfulness of them
be rather a Deficiency than an Efficiency, is not material in the present
Controversy; for Actions, as (...) as Things may be essentially deficient, as
(...) are essentially (negatively at least) deficient of the Perfections of
Man, though they have no moral Deficiency. And all Divines, as well as moral
Philosophers, distinguish be wi^t Actions that are intrinsecally (...) and
sinful; and others that are extrinsecally such; as also betwixt Actions
intrinsecally good, as the Love of God and our Neighbor, and acts of Veracity,
Sobriety, Humility, Justice, and other Actions that are good extrinsecally,
only because they are commanded by some positive Precepts of God Almighty, such
as many Precepts of Moses Law were, as that of Circumcision and the Sacrifices,
and Observation of the Jewish Festivals.

Page 22. He Rambles again from the purpose, when he (...) us, That there are
no Actions done by sinful men, but have sin inseperably accompanying them, as
in the best Actions of the best of men; for it is one thing, what sin cleaves
to good Actions of good Men, per accidens, and the sin that cleaves to the evil
Actions of evil men (...) s^, i. e. by themselves.

Page 23, 24. Whereas I argued, secondly, Te^^ (...) of the sinful Action is
necessarily connected with the (...) of it, and i^ the next immediate and
necessary effect (...), Therefore, according to the abovementioned (...), God,
who is the cause of the sinful Action, according to the (...) of it, is also
the cause of it, according to the (...).

Page 24. He says, The (...) of this (...) respecting (...) mentioned Axions)
(...) overthrown.

Answ. That this is but a Brag, I have above shown, and proved the solidity of
it, beyond exception, which I need not (...) again (...).

Page 25. He (...), The (...) of a sinful Action, as in that of (...), is (...)
the Action, and that the Action, and (...) (...) of (...) things is (...).

Answ. (...), first, That the Exorbitancy of a sinful ^ction, (...) (...), is a
sinful Action, implies a Contradiction; (...) than (...) might be both sinful
and not sinful at once.

Again, (...), Suppose a Distinction, yet seeing the Exorbitancy is the
necessary effect of the Action, if God be the Cause and Author of the Action,
(...) is the Cause and Author of the sinfully (...) of it.

Page 26. He says, It is a common received Doctrine in (...) of our (...)
Churches, and Accademies, that God concur^ (...) every operation of second
Causes, so as immediately (...) by himself to influence upon every Action of
the Creature.

Answ. But all this proves nothing, that all sinful Actions of men necessarily
come to pass by Gods determining men's Will necessarily to produce any sinful
Actions.

Page 27. He adds, And that there is not only a (...) but also a previous (...)
of God (...) acknowledged.

Answ. That he says, this previous Con^^^se, or rather (...) of God, to sinful
Actions, is the commonly received Doctrine i^ the most of our Protestant
Churches and Accademi^s, is in him (...), as well as a (...) Assertion, and
without all proof; however, (...) a place case, that it is his Opinion, and
therefore the more un^^^ (...) in him to blame me for charging it upon him.

SECT. VI.
(...). He proceeds to argue, That God cannot be under such (...) a Law as
makes it unjust in him to determine the sinful actions of men, by several
Mediums and Arguments.

Answ. But he states not the Ques;tion fairly. (...). God is not, (...) cannot
be under a Law, though his own essential Justice, Truth and Goodness is a Law
to him (...), It is not against the essential Justice, Truth and Goodness of
God, so to determine the sinful Actions of men, upon his foreknowledge of
their ^^turity, as to overruled them to his Glory, bound and limit them by his
Power and Wisdom, as he does bound the proud Waves of the Sea, and determines
or confines them within their Banks. And in this sense, according to Scripture
style ( Acts 2.23. chap. 4.28) I own Gods determining the sinful Actions of
men; but not so as thereby men are necessitated to produce them, which is his
corrupt sense and gloss upon the word Determin^^ on and Determinate, which has
an innocent sense, according to Scripture style, as above given by me; whereas
his sense of it is most absurd, being repugnant to Gods essential Truth,
Justice and Goodness, and other his essential Perfections.

Page 27. His first Argument. is from Gods All-difficiency.

Answ. But allowing, in a sound sense, Gods All-efficiency, ^en so far, as that
God has an actual (...), and all their operations, yet all this proves not
that this allsufficiency of God, or his actual influence upon men, and their
operations does so determine them, that they necessarily produce their sinful
actions, no more, than because the Sun with his beat or warmth, has an actual
immediate influence on all men, to enable their Bodies to act both good and
evil, as well as it has on Vegetables and Brutes, that therefore men are
necessarily determined by the Sun to produce their actions, whether good or
evil; for the influence of the Sun, however immediate upon men, leaves them to
an indifference to act, or not to (...), until by the free election and motion
or their (...). They determine themselves; and no less does the general (...)
of God Almighty leave men to an indifference, as to all sinful actions, at
least to act, or not to act, at they determine themselves accordingly; but with
this difference, that the Sun is but a secondary general Cause of humane
actions; whereas God Almighty (...) first and supreme Cause over all, but no
Proper immediate Cause of the sinful action, being in the case not the
necessitating Cause, but what Schoolmen call Cause fine qua non. God indeed is
the cause of the immediate ability whereby man produces a sinful action, and
the immediate Cause of that immediate Ability, but not of the sinful action of
man it self, because, when man sineth, he abuses that power and ability which
God gives him to act, and the abuse of that ability is not of God, but of Man
himself; and therefore I judge it ought not to be said not thought, that God is
properly a cause of any sinful actions; for seeing God has, by his revealed
Will, commanded men not to commit any sinful action, it cannot be thought, that
by his secret Will, he wills men to produce it, and to produce it
necessarily, as Mr. Willard has affirmed. And seeing God has decreed men to
produce sinful actions, by Mr. Willards Opinion, as in page 50. of his Book,
That the Origin and Cause of the Necessity of the first sin is more to be
derived from God than from Man himself: This his Opinion necessarily infers Two
Wills in God, contradictory the one to the other; for by his Decree, which is
his secret Will, he wills men to commit all the sinful actions which they do
commit, and by his Revealed Will he does not will them to commit them, but
forbids them; which at it is a plain Contradiction, so it is contrary to
that Veracity, Truth. Justice and Goodness, that is essentially in God, by a
secret Will to will one thing, and by his Revealed Will to will the quite
Contradictory; as this is repugnant to the Veracity and Sincerity of a good
earthly King, to will secretly that his Subjects to ^^^it such actions as
trespass against his Laws, which at his revealed Will, so it is no less, but
rather much more repugnant to God essential Veracity, Sincerity, Justice,
Goodness, and other (...) Perfections.

SECT. VII.
AS for the Comparison Mr. Willard brings, page 25. to show the distinction
betwixt the Action that is sinful, and the sinfulness of it T^is (says he) is
frequently illustrated by a Man's riding a lame Horse, he puts forward the Horse
to go, but his going laws is not (...) the Rider, (...) Lameness.

Answ. This Comparison is same in diverse respects. For, first, one main part of
the Controversy betwixt us, was about the Cause and Necessity of (...), that
first sin of all committed by him. Now before (...) was not lame, but sound.
But if God Almighty (...) so determine the sound Will of Adam, that he (...)
necessarily produce that sinful Action of eating the fobidden Fruit, he was the
Physical Cause of that Action, and consequently the Moral; even as when a man,
suppose a Smith, (...) a Horse, pricketh him, both knowingly and willingly in
one of his sect, the Horse indeed is lame, but the cause of this lameness is
the Smith, both the Physical and Moral Cause; for because he did it both
knowingly and willingly, therefore the Smith is very blame worthy, and
consequently the Moral Cause of that Lameness; and by the like necessary
Consequence, by Mr. Willard's Opinion, God is not only the Physical, but the
Moral Cause of Adam's sin and lameness; which is must afford and blasphemous.
But th^^ (...) not directly on M. (...) Opinion, but to be the necessary and
(...) Opinion, which therefore I would have (...) very dangerous and hurt^^^*
Again (...) Horse forward, with a Will (...) strowed with Iron Nails and
Pricks, that he knows will lame his Horse, or any other way use his Horse, to
cause him go lame, so as to be the Physical cause of his Lameness, he is
thereby blame worthy, and consequently the Moral Cause of his Lameness. And
indeed, in so for the similitude quadrates, that as the Rider puts forth his
Horse to go, who brought him forth sound out of the Stable, yet out of his meet
Will, he either pricks him in the foot, or some other way causes him to go
(...), both knowingly and of set purpose, the Horseman (...) Rider is not only
the Physical, but the Moral Cause of the Horses Lameness, and the man is only
Morally blameworthy, but (...) the Horse. So if God determined the Will of
Adam, so as necessarily to produce that sinful Action of eating the forbidden
fruit, as he was the Physical Cause of it, he was no less the Moral Cause
thereof, seeing whatever God does, he does both knowingly and willingly. And,
lastly, He that rides upon a lame Horse, suppose he is not the cause of his
lameness at first, yet if he put him on to ride a a Journey, he will be the
cause of his being more lame (as i^ known by common experience) and not only
the Physical but the Moral Cause thereof. And by the like Consequence, if God
Almighty determine the Wills of sinful men, so as to necessitate them to
produce sinful actions, as thereby they become the more sinful, so he is more
the cause thereof, both Physical and Moral. Thus I think Mr. Willard had better
spared his Comparison of a lame Horse, which has the more exposed and
disadvantaged his Cause, as I appeal to the judicious and impartial Reader.

Page 29. His second Medium, to prove his Opinion, is from the Nature of Gods
universal Government over all Creatures, and their Actions: The substance of
which Argument is comprehended in th^se words of his page 29. Nothing (says
he) is more notorious than that God not only uses the Instrumentality of
sinful men, but even of their sinful actions, in the great Affairs of the
World, whereby he accomplisheth his purposes of his Praise.

Answ. All this, in a sound sense, is readily granted; but that it does
therefore follow, That God does so decree or determine the Wills of men to
produce their sinful Actions, and that necessarily, is no ways apparent, more
than that it will follow, that because a Carpenter or Joyner uses some crooked
Iron Instruments to work by, that therefore he made them; or that because a
good and wise King uses some of his Subjects wicked actions to be an
instrumental occasion to make good Laws, for the Reforming his Subjects, by the
severe Punishments provided by those Laws against wicked actions, that it
therefore follows, that the said King did determine any of his Subjects to
commit those wicked Actions, so as they are necessitated to commit them.

SECT. VIII.
HIs third Medium, to prove his Opinion, is from Gods Willing, (as he words it)
that sin should be in the world, and from his foreknowledge of it.

Answ. That the Will of God about sin, and sinful Actions of Men and Devils, is
permissive, and not only barely permissive, but effective, in the sound sense
above given by me, so as in a most powerful and effective manner to bound and
limit, and dispose of men's sins to his praise, by his Sovereign overruling
Arm, i^ granted; and that he has a most perfect and infallible foreknowledge
of all men's sins, that ever were to come to pass in time; but still, Mr Willard
begs the Consequence, That therefore by Gods Decree, and his Determination of
men's Wills, they necessarily produce all their sinful Actions; which, I say, is
no true nor proper Conclusion, and for which he gives no shadow of proof.

Page 30 His fourth Medium is from the Divine Prediction of future things,
which, he says, is an evidence of the certain futurity of them. New whence
(says he) should this Futurity proceed? neither from his simple Intelligence,
nor from his Omnipotency, and consequently he infers, ^t must be entirely
determined by his Will; for which he quotes Ephesians. 1.11. That God works all
things after the Counsel of his own Will.

Answ. That all the Works of God are wrought by him, after the Counsel of his
own Will, is granted; but that the sins and evil that Men or Devils work, are
the work of God, or to be attributed to him, as to their proper Cause, is
denied; for then he would be the Author of them; for of whatever Work any Agent
is the proper Cause, of the same he is the Author. Sin and Evil and Wickedness
are said in Scripture to be the works of sinful Men and Devils, but all the
Works of God are good, Psalm. 111.7. The Works of his hands are Verity and
Judgment, and Ps. 33.^. All his works are done in Truth. Nor does the divine
Prediction of future things prove his Opinion. And in answer to his Question,
we must first distinguish of the several sorts of future things; for some of
them were Substances, and of these, some Sestets some Bodies, and some
Comp^^ded of Bo^^, as Men. Again, some are Actions proceeding from Substances,
as their proper Cause, some whereof are necessary Agents, and not free, as the
actions of Beasts, Fowls and Fishes; others are free, as the Actions of Men.
Now to answer directly to his Question, The Futurity of all created Substances,
is entirely from God, both from his Power and Will, and also from his Wisdom
and Goodness. And the Futurity of the Actions of necessary Agents, is from the
Futurity of the Agents themselves. And the Futurity of the Actions of
free-Agents, that are sinful (or generally indifferent) is from the Futurity of
the free Agents themselves, such as Men and Angels are; for as the Branches,
Leaves and Fruit of a Tree lie hidden in the Seed or Root of it, so all
Actions, whether of necessary or of free Agents, lie in the Agents themselves,
as in their Seeds and Roots or Principles, before they be brought forth into
act or effect. And as it does not surpass Man's knowledge to know what Actions
will proceed from necessary Agents, and that by certain knowledge, in great
part, so nor does it surpass Gods knowledge, to know most certainly and
infallibly what Actions will proceed from free Agents, such as Men and Angels,
for this far surpassing knowledge, or fore knowledge of God concerning the
actions of free Agents, must needs be granted to God, who is infinite in
Knowledge, as well as in all other Perfections* otherwise wherein should be, in
this case, excel the finite Understandings of Men, who can foretell the
actions of necessary Agents, in great part, and that certainly? But to say that
God foreknows the futurity of the sinful actions of free Agents, because be has
decreed them to come to pass, (after which Decree they become as necessary as
the actions of any necessary Agents) is to give to God Almighty a very
imperfect kind of Knowledge, little above that of Men and Angels. Beside that,
such a Notion does impugn the perfection of Gods Holiness, as well as of his
Knowledge.

Thus, I think, I have given a more perfect Scheme of the matter, than Mr.
Willard has done, and so far satisfied his Demand, if he will be reasonably
satisfied.

SECT. IX.
FRom page 32. to page 40. Mr. Willard is so nauseously tendious about the
Distinction of the Materiale and the Formale of finful actions, (which I have
so fully above showed,) makes nothing for the defense of his Opinion, that for
me to enlarge upon it, by noticing his Impertinencies, would render me equally
tedious and guilty of Tautologizing with him. Only I cannot omit to take notice
of some of his Impertinencies upon this Head.

To my Arguments in my printed Sheet, repeated by him, page 33. What a just and
good man forbids another to do, he cannot, or at least he ought not to persuade
him to do, otherwise he would do unjustly, therefore what God forbids a man to
do, it is repugnant to his Justice to determine that man to do.

This be quarrels with, as loosely formed, and as savouring of a Quaker. But he
is held so fast in the Net by it, that in vain he seeks to get out. It is the
ordinary Policy of weak Disputants, to cry out against the weakness of their
Opponents Arguments, though ever so strong. But how does he answer?

First, He tells his Reader, That a just Man and good, during his state of
Imperfection, may so^b^d a man to do his Duty. But what is to the purpose? My
Argument was not what a good or just Man might happen to do through humane
imperfection, but that be cannot, in point of Justice, persuade him to do, what
he forbids him; and therefore I carefully added, [ Or at least ought not to
persuade him to do.

Secondly, He says, To argue from the Creature to God, in point of Justice,
bath already been detested of Folly. But he merely says it without all real
proof. Nor do I find any thing like a proof of it, but in page 30. of his Book,
where he says, God is not eyed to the same Laws that man is, who cannot
purposely suffer another to sin, when he can prevent it, without involving
himself in Guilt; so that thor^ is no injustice in God to suffer that, which if
man should suffer, he should be unjust. And what he again says, page 3^. That
God has a dispensing Power, at least in regard of some of his Laws, as in the
case of the Israelites borrowing the Egyptians Jewels, and Abraham's offering
up his Son.

A^sw. Although there are certain positive Laws, to which God has tied men,
that be has not tied himself to, as in disposing the Estates or Lives of men,
according to his good pleasure, which is always according to excellent Wisdom
and Justice, he being the g^ent Proprietary of all things both in Heaven and
Earth, yet whatever assential Laws of Truth, Justice and Goodness be has bound
us to, in all these he is a Law to himself, so that be cannot lie nor deceive,
being contrary to his essential Truth, Jussice and Condness; and as contrary it
is to the same, to command and will one thing by his revealed Will, and will
the quite contradictory by his secr^^ Will. And that God permits men to fin, is
no wise contrary to his essential Truth, Goodness and Justice, because he can
bring good out of it, which we cannot do. But to determine men to sin
necessarily, and yet not only blame them, but punish them so severely for it,
is evidently against his essential Truth, Justice and Goodness, according to
that above quoted place, Genesis 18.23, 25. which he merely evades, but does not
fairly answer.

Page 34. Here Mr. Willard does greatly wrong me, by falsely quoting the words
of my Argument, and then upon his ^alse Foundation charging me with proving
idem per idem, a mere Tautology; for thus he quotes me, If it be unjust, then
it is unjust, and much more so in God. But these were not my words, nor way of
arguing, but thus, page 4. of my printed Sheet, ad sin. If to persuade or
advise a man to do what is forbidden him, be unjust, therefore for God to
determine the Will of Man to what is forbidden by God, is unjust, or rather
much more unjust. Here it is evident the Argument is not idem per idem; for
both the Antecedent and Consequent are different Propositions; and the stress
or my Argument lies not merely upon what is just or unjust by positive written
Precept, with which God can dispense, but upon essential Justice, both in God
and Men, that he cannot dispense with.

Page 36. He puts another Wrong upon me, That by the Materiale of the sinful
Action, I must intend an action which is sinful, as it is an Action; and so he
charge me with a Contradiction in the Expression. And thus I know not how often
he uses the Distinction of an action Qua sinful, and of an action Qua action,
as in page 38. Again, in page 24 he says, The sinfulness of the action does
not arise from the nature of the action, as it is an action, but from the moral
Deficiency of the Agent.

Answ. His thus distinguishing betwixt an action Qua sinful and Qua action, is
nothing to his purpose; for though an action is not sinful, as an action,
otherwise all men's actions would be sinful per^se, yet every finful action is
finful, as it is such an action in specie, and also in individuo, though not in
genere, barely considered as an action. As every wicked Man is a wicked Man,
not as a Man, yet as [such] a Man, having committed such Wickedness. And though
we may distinguish betwixt the finfulness of an action, and the action, as it
is an action, mentally, yet there is no real distinction, ex part rei, betwixt
the finfulness of the action, and the action it self considered in specie, as
well as individually, under all due Circumstances.

SECT. X.
IN page 36. he has another great impertinency, b^ way of Objection, against
my former Argument, That (...) only does God advise, but command all men to
pray, and yet the Prayer of the Wicked is an abomination.

Answ. I have already, I know not how often, answered to such Impertinencies,
that we ought to distinguish betwixt what is sinful per se, and what per
accidens. The matter of the Prayer that God commands to wicked men, is not
finful, but the mann^^ how wicked Men perform it, as in Hypocrisy and bar^?
Formality, which God never commanded. But dare Mr. Willard say. That God
commands the matter or Material^ of sinful actions, as Murder, Rapine,
Adultery? does he not expressly forbid it? And yet to decree and determine the
Wills of men to commit these actions, which he has forbid, is to reflect most
reproachfully on Gods essential Truth, Justice and Goodness.

Page 40. Here again Mr. Willard most unjustly charge me to hold a Principle
which I do no wise hold, and which I never gave him any just ground to think, I
hold; as where he says, Nor does Mr. Keith acknowledge Gods Determination in
our sense, any more to a good than to an evil Action; for he supposes that it
would destroy the Deity of that little Idol Free Will, which he cannot endure;
and therefore all the Determination which he will allow in either, is only
Moral, and that is but Metaphorical, if not Catechrestical.

Answ. I have expressly, as he knows in his Conscience, owned Gods
Determination of the Wills of Men and Angels frequently in good Actions, and
that the said divine Determination can well consist with the liberty of the
Will, to wit, that called Libertas Individuation^s, and I did really mean it in
a Physical fence, and not in a Moral only, though not excluding the Moral in
good actions, as nor does Mr. Willard. But if Free Will be such an Idol in his
sense, why is he so earnest to reconcile Gods immutable Decree about men^sin^,
with the free Will of the Greature? had he not much more easily throw away wh^^
he calls the Not of Free Will, and then no need of any Essay to reconcile those
two Parties; as indeed by the true Consequence of hi^ Opinion, he has loft
nothing but the bare Name and shadow of it, and what is that but an Idol?

And beside all this, according to Mr. Willards definition of Free Will, it
will agree to God Almighty; for thus be de^^n^^ the Liberty of the Will, p. 14.
(...) formaliter libertas sit a est, i. e. Liberty (v^^. of the Will) is
primarily, and formally placed in the Lubency of Reason. An^ page 1^ he says,
That in a free Agent (...) away, but as long as he still acts spontaneously, be
acts freely. Which Definition would agree to God Almighty, though he were
conceived to be a most necessary Agent, both in the Creation of the World, and
in his Decree to create it, according to Mr. Willards Notion of Free Will. And
how Mr. Willard will free himself from this Consequence, and from Se^i^^^
Necessity, that consequentially he imposes upon God Almighty himself, I desire
him well to consider.

Page 51. Nor is he less injurious to me, in making me acknowledge, the failing
of my Memory in many points, in my printed sheet, which he, good man, does
easily forgive in me. But I made no such acknowledgment, as that my Memory
failed me in many points. I only say, In some points, for shortness of Memory,
I may not have brought forth their Arguments so rightly. But upon my due
comparing his printed Book of four sheets with my printed sheet, I find not
that be has charged me with (...) failure of Memory justly in any one thing.

Page 44. To my Argument, That on the suppo^^tion of Adam^^ Fall being
necessary, and also the fall of Angels* that then they must have excuse. His
answer, in substance, is, p. 45. That which takes away all excuse from men,
when they sin, is, that they sin voluntarily. But to this I have above
^^swered; for at this rate both Stoical Fate; and that of A^^^olog^^^, who
hold, that the stars, by their influence (...) men ^^^^^larily to all their
finful actions, is as consistent with Mr. Willards Notion of Free Will, as that
of Gods Decree, and actual determining men's Wills necessarily to sin; for
neither the Stoics nor Astrologers think that men sin by any co-action or
compulsion of Will, but that still they sin voluntarily. As when Zeno, the Sect
Master of the Stoics, beat his Slave for stealing, and the Slave excused the
fact, That he was Necessitated to do it. And said the Master, I am Necessitated
to beat thee for it; yet both of them did voluntarily what they did, according
to Mr. Willards Notion. But as Bishop Bramhall well observes in his dispute
with Mr H^bbs, if the ^^^ve had forced the Rod out of his Masters hand, and
continued beating him severely, until his Master had owned he was under no
necessity of beating him, he had, in fact, confuted him.

As for the rest of his Book, as indeed the far greatest part of the whole,
being mere Banter and Satyr, with bitter Reflections and idle Impertinencies, I
shall not spend either time or Paper to make much answer thereto, having
sufficiently answered to all that seemed material; and what of matter in the
latter part, (particularly from page 45. to page 51) is contained, is fully
answered, in substance, in the foregoing Sections of this Book. And I
conclude, as before, That I wish from my heart, such (...) dangerous and
hurtful Opinion may be exploded from the College of Cambridge in New England,
which is so per se, and not ger accidens, and therefore to be avoided.

SECT. XI.
AS for Mr. Willards Appendix at the end of his Book, from page 60. to p. 66.
wherein his gives Quotations out of the 17th Article of the Church of England,
and the Convocation at Dublin in Ireland, Auno 1615. and some other Doctors of
Divinity and Bishops formerly in the Church of England, to prove the
Immutability of Gods Decree, about the sinful actions of men, and its agreement
with the liberty of the Will, and the distinction of the Materiale and Formale,
as to sinful actions, by what the Schoolmen call Distiuctio Rationis, which
yet is no real distinction, ex parts re^ and extra entellecbum, he might have
^spred his pains, for all this is granted, in a found fence, by me; and none of
all this is any real part of the Controversy betwixt Mr. Willard and me, as to
substance of Doctrine, but mostly in Circumstance of Phrase, at most, if so
much. And as to that Passage of the Convocation at Dubline in Ireland, quoted
by him, God from all Eternity did, by his unchangeable Counsel, ordain
whatsoever comes to pass, yet so as thereby no Violence is offered to the Wills
of the reasonable Creatures, nor the contingency of second Ca^^^s is taken
away, but rather established, ought to be explained by that other Passage,
quoted by Mr. Willard out of Bishop Davenant his answer to H^^^^d, where the
Bishop says, The divine Decree moves no man, much less ^rress (...)
determines him to these wicked Actions. This, I think, is point blank
Contradictory to Mr. Willards Opinion; for if God determines not men to sinful
actions irresistibly, then those sinful actions do not necessarily follow from
either Gods Decree or Determination of them. And as to the signification of the
word [to Ordain] it is taken two ways, one way in a fase sense, as signifying
not any necessary determining them to come to pass, but upon Gods intallible
fore-fight of their coming to pass, through his permission, his ordering and
disposing them, and overruling them to his glory. The other way, in a wrong
sense, as to sign^^^ God determining them necessarily to come to pass, which I
cannot approve. And for the Term [Necessary] when understood with respect to
sinful actions, by necessity of Logical Consequence, but not Physical
Consequence, as the conclu^ion of a Sy^ingism, That is also granted; but that
does no ways prove nor ^^vour Mr. Willard's Opinion. Nor do I find in all the
Quotations made by him, any Passage that so much as seems to favor that most
scandalous assertion of Mr. Willard, That the Or^gine and Cause of the
Necessity of the first fin is m^re to be derived from God, than from Man
himself. And to be sure there is nothing in the Articles of the Church of
England, that favors it in the least, not in her Liturgy, or Homilies. And,
la^^^, if any thing could be found in any particular Authors or Writers in the
Church of England, (...) ^^em to favor Mr. Willards Notions, it does not
affect the Church, so as thereby to fix the same upon her. Nor was it proper
for Mr. Willard to bring into the Controversy betwixt him and me, the notions
of particular Writers in the Church of England, about Reprobation; for that was
no proper part of the Controversy betwix^ us; for in all my printe^ Sheet
there is nothing said or disouted about Gods Decrees either of Election. or
Reprobation And as conc^^ning Predestination to everlasting Life, of all that
shall be savod, as I have signed to it with my Hand, (as contained in the 17th
Article of the Church of England) as to all tho Thirty Nine, so I believe it,
and all the other with my Heart.

But how unwary and inconsiderate has Mr. Willard been, to quote in his Book,
(...) 63. two Passages out of Bishop Dav^^^^, in answer to Howard, as making
for him, which evidently make against him. The first is this;

The immutability of Gods ^^^rnal Decree, is a thing unquestionable, but that
God has made any Decree of Reprobation, whereby Reprobates are NECESSITATED or
CAUSED to live and dye in for, is utterly false.

The other is this;

Neither does he overruled, by any Decree of his, the Wills of Reprobate and
Wicked Men's that their Liberty is extinguished, or a Necessary of committing
this or that particular sin i^ imposed on them.

Note here, Reader, the words Necessary and Necess^ated to sin, so much in
reality pleaded for by Mr. Willard, in sensu Composite, and (...) part Dei,
and his Physical determining men necessarily to sin or sinful actions, plainly
exploded by Bishop Davenant. What think ye, good Readers, was not Mr. Willard
napping when he quoted those Passages, which fulfills that Proverb, A^^q^ande
(...).

And whereas I had once in my Printed Sheet used the word, [ya mo^e] which I
explained this, i. e. to determine them to do evil; and once again in another
place I used the word [M^ved] which I there explained thus, or determined them
so to do, (...). to sin, Mr. Willard very unfairly charge me with a fallacy,
for using the word Moved (as (...) in signification with ^^^cermined) page 54.
of his Book. And to render me impertinent, he puts a false sense upon the word
Moved, far other than I intended, as if by moving and determining I intended
Gods persuading men to sin, whereas I really intended it in a Physical sense.
But still I affirm, that it reflects as much on the esten^ial Justice of God,
Physrcally to determine men, so as necessarily to sin, as to persuade them by
any moral Swasion, and does as much excuse the sinner, and render sin, yea, the
greatest sins light as a feather, and the whole mass or aggregate of them; for
as I did argue in my printed Sheet, If men sin necessarily, they might have
excuse, for Necessity has no Law. Upon which Axio^^ he puts this odd gloss,
That it ONLY intends, that when Men are in extreme need they will regard no
Laws. But that it ONLY intends that sense of his, or chiefly, is said without
all proof; The genuine sense of it is, That what men are necessitated to do, it
can be against no Law of God, nor just Law of men to do, unless men have
brought that Necessity upon themselves.

But whereas he says, What if he should invert is, and say, All Necessity has
a Law, for Necessity is in some sense a Laws it self.

Answ. Here Mr. Willard has well enforced my Argument against himself; for if
Necessity be a Law to it self, and that all Necessity has a Law, then seeing,
(according to his Opinion) God does Determine men to commit all the sins they
do commit, and that they commit them of Necessity, as well as Adams first sin
was of Necessity, and owing to the divine Decree, as he has affirmed; then
s^eing this Necessity is of God, and is a Law, it is a Law of God, and
consequently all sin is a fulfilling of a Law of God, and so it is sin, and no
sin, by a genuine Cons^quence from his Opinion, which how scandalous it is to
assert, I leave to all intelligent and impartial Readers to judge, and even to
Mr. Willard himself, when he is a wakoned out of his Nap.

SECT. XII.
THough Mr. Willard near the beginning of his Book seemed to make his Opinion
he defended at the Commencement in Cambridge in New England, July 1, Auno.
1702. to be but a matter of no greater Moment than (page 7 and 8 of his Book) A
Logical Notion, and ^ot a Matter of Faith, so as not to think those who agree
not with him and his Brethren therein, to be condemned by them as Inorthodox,
who use other measures to explicate and confirm the same Truth, viz. 1. That
the divine Decree is Immtit^ble. 2. That the reasonable Creature enjoys a
liberty which is not destroyed by this. To which I have all along ^^^onted, and
do still assent, and therefore by Mr. Willards Charity, [though I use other
Measures to explicate and confirm the same Truths, as I think I have fairly
done, particularly in Sect. 2, 7 and 8.] ^e ought not to condemn me as
Inorthodox. Yet as forgetting all this, in page 52. for my saying, It were more
commendable and profitable to the College of Cambridge in New England, and the
Students thereof, that they do not hear the aforesaid Doctrine about Gods
determining Creatures to sinful actions, or having heard it, to be taught
earnestly to abhor and avoid it is Hereupon he thus assaults me, viz. Here
(says he) is a notable Engine offered to subvert the Truth, and betray our
People [viz. them of New-England] to become an easy Prey to those that
disseminate Pelagianism, Soclnianism and Jesuitism. Judge Reader, how greatly
inconsistent is this (as false as it is an uncharitable) Censure of me, with
his former pretended Modesty and Charity. So that what then was but a Logical
Notion, and no matter of Faith, nor any ju^t cause to render a man Inorthodox,
who agree not with him and his Brethren in their explicating and confirming the
Doctrine of Gods immutable Detree, and its consistency with the Free Will of
the Creature, is now a subverting the Truth, and betraying the People of
New England to become an easy prey to those that disseminate Pelagianism,
Socinianism and Jesuitism. But in this he either bewrays his great Ignorance,
or some what much worse; for the denial of Gods Determining Creatures to sinful
actions, is no part of Pelagianism, Socinia^ism or Jesuitism, nor was ever so
judged by learned Orthodox Divines. However, Mr. Willard in page 54. of his
Book, m^kes that Doctrine that asserts Gods determining Creatures to commit
necessarily sinful actions, to be his Crown and Glory.

I hope, after these plain Quotations out of Mr. Willards Book, he will not
again charge me with so f^^lly representing him, and printing Calumnies against
him, seeing he has given forth to the World in print all that I have charged
him with, and what is much worse, as by the several Quotations faithfully given
by me out of his Book, does plainly appear.

What again he charge against me in page 56. for my saying, That the
aforesaid Doctrine of Gods determining men to sinful actions, drove me from the
Society of the Presbyterians, and prepared my way for turning to Quakerism, it
fully as severe and uncharitable, as well as falfe as the former, viz. as for
that reason [of the Presbyterian Doctrine that teaches Gods determining men to
sinful actions] to renounce Christianity and Reason it self also, and to herd
with a People who are a sink of Heresies old and new, etc. for though the
abovesaid Presbyterian Doctrine, drove me from many of them, who held it and
taught it, and prepared my way for turning to Quakerism, yet I say it, to Gods
praise, who wonderfully, in mercy, preserved me, I was never so far desiled
with their Errors, as to renounce Christianity, or so much as one Fundamental
Article of the Christian Faith, as I have sufficiently proved out of my Books,
writ by me when under the Profession of a Quaker; Nor did I renounce my Reason,
but through Gods mercy, retained it in good measure, as well as true
Christianity in the main, though in too many other things belonging to the
superstructure, I was, through humane fraity, corrupted and darkened in my
understanding by them; and I thank God, who has, in his great mercy, by his
Grace recovered me.

And because I said in my printed sheet, That occasion hereby will be give^ to
men who love their su^^, to excuse themselves by this Doctrine, viz. of G^^s
determining men to sinful Actions, ^e exclaimeth, What pitiful (...) edling
serts of arguings are these? He ^echons that if any, by this Doctrine of his,
and his Brethren, love their sin^; and take occasion thereby to excuse
themselves in their sins, it would be the abuse of the Doctrine, and not the
true and proper use of it, and consequently that it is dangerous only per
accidens, and not per se, if there be any danger in it, (...) be faith, page
3.4. But lot the intelligent and impartial Readers diligently compare what is
writ pre and contera on both fides, in our two Books, and I doubt not but they
will find that the said Doctrine of Gods determining men to sinful Actions, so
no thereby they do necessarily commit them, is dangerous per se, as many other
are, and therefore to be avoided.

SECT. XIII.
NOr is he less underitable to class my Undertaking against ^^s ^^^d Doctrine,
with the Policy of Julian the Apostate, to shut up the Schools of Learning from
the Christians, lest they should otherwise furnish themselves with Weapons
against the Paga^ Idolatry, which be sought to restore to the World. If Mr.
Keith, (says he) could obtain this, what Tri^mph would be and his Friends make?

Answ. Whether by the obtaining [This] he means the shutting up all Christian
Schools, as was the Policy of Julian the Aposta^e, (which I think few will
believe of me, and I hope none; for I p^^y God pres^^^e and bless all true
Christian Schools, and water them with the Daw of his heavenly Benediction,
th^^ they may grow and multiply, and bring forth many who may be Instruments of
his glory both in Church and State) or whether (...) mean, That I and my
Friends of the Church of England would have the College of Cambridge in
New England shut up, I am not very imputificate. But if he mean this last, I
(...) him and his Brethren plainly, I would not have it shut up, but reformed,
and the Masters of it also, from some of their hurtful Principles, if any such
Masters be there, beside Mr. Willard himself, such as the abovesaid Principle
is, of Gods Determining Men to all the sinful Actions they commit, so that they
Necessarily commit them, after God Almighty has so decreed them to commit them,
and his Decree is Eternal, or from Eternity; and therefore the Necessity of
committing them is not Hypothetical and Conditional, as he some where seems to
insinuate, to deceive his Reader, but Absolute and Positive, as the Decree it
self is. But if they do not Reform, if so be they are of Mr. Willards Opinion,
in this and other hurtful Notions, very prejudicial to Youth, that they may, in
Gods due time, be purged out, and other men of better Principles, as well as of
more Christian Charity and Temper, put in their room. Nor am I ashamed to
profess, that this is my desire, as well as it is my hope, that in due time it
will come to pass (though I wish no violence nor harm to any of them) that
Cambridge in New England, for true Christian Learning and Piety, both in
Masters and Scholars, may resemble Cambridge in Old England, as near as a wise
and virtuous Daughter resembles a wise and virtuous Mother, and New England it
self, in the like Gifts and Enduments may resemble her Mother Church, the
Church of England, as it is by Law established.

His Surmize against me, page 58. of his Book, That there was a Mystery in it,
my turning to the Quakers, and some that have known more of my Circumstances,
than he can pretend to, do ^ive another account of the reason of what he calls
my former Apostasy, viz. as if it had been on some worldly account, or
disappointment of some worldly Preserment, as some have in Corners whispered
and muttered against me, first indeed some Presbyterians, and after I left the
Quakers, they also have whispered the like against me, but which none of them
did ever dare to offer to prove; and now at last Mr W^^^ard has licked up their
Vomit, to spew it forth thus upon me, which I reject as a most false and
impious ^l^nder, both in them and him. And it is a sufficient Demonstration of
the Unchristian Spirit and Tem^^^ of Mr. W^llard thus slyly, in print to se^k
to defame and shoot his Arrows, against me in the dark; but I am armed against
him and them, and put them to D^siance, if they dare and can to prove what they
thus suggest, otherwise let them be clothed with Shame.

SECT. XIV.
IN my Re-view of Mr. Willard Book, among his many unfair and unjust
Insinuations against me; as well as positive Abuses, I find in page 41. he very
unjustly sospects me, whether I hold That God in^nseth Grace into the faithful,
whereby he has a Principle of gracious Operation given ^^in, which whether or
no (says he) my Antagonist will acknowledge, is to be suspected. But to case
him of his Suspicion, I tell him, I do cordially believe, as well as
acknowledge, which at its first infusion is as a grain of Mustard Seed, but
afterward, by the blessing of God, and the operation of his holy Spirit, in
the diligent use of the Means of Gods appointment, by them who have it given
them, it grows up, by degrees, to be a Tree of the greatest of all Herbs.

Again, I find in page 48. he says, Adams Fall, before it came to pass, was
future, how else should God know it to be so^ And if he did not know it, how
was it that he laid in a Remedy against the fatal Consequents of it, in some,
before it was in act.

Answ. That Adams Fall, before it came to pass, was certainly future, and that
God most certainly and infallibly had a foreknowledge of it, and therefore by
his eternal Counsel and Purpose laid in a Remedy against the fatal Consequents
of it, is granted, but that from thence it does follow, that God did
Necessitate Adam, or any man fince, to commit any sinful Action, or that God
had decreed the futurity either of Adams sin, or did, in time, determine their
Wills necessarily to sinful Actions, does no ways follow. Therefore Mr. Willard
might have spared his Consequence that he draws upon the ^upposal, That God did
not know the Futurity of Adam. sin, viz. That (upon that Supposal) if Adam had
pleased he might have defeated the whole Com(...) of Man's Redemption: I gave
him not the least ground to make any such Supposal, That God did not certainly
and infallibly fore-kno^^to^t Alan^ would sin; therefore here, as often
elsewhere, (as the Proverb is) Mr. Willard makes to himself a man ^o Straw,
and then fights against it, and so unprofitably wastes both Time and Paper, and
puts me to this Labor, which is not altogether in vain to me, were it but to
detect his impertinency, and his unschollar-like way of arguing against what
his Opponent does not deny, but affirm as well as he No^ does it follow what
certainly is future, is necessarily future by any Antecedent Necessity to its
futurition; for Certainty is one thing, and Necessity is another.

But let Mr. Willard answer me a Question or two, 1. Could not God, if he had
pleased, decreed to have preserved Adam from falling? for I hope he will not
say, that God did necessarily decree him to fall, although it is conustent
enough with his Principle, That freedom o^ Will, and Necessity, to act both
immanently and transiently, do well agree together; for (...) that God did
necessarily decree Adam to fall, yet by Mr. Willards Principle, he did
voluntarily and freely decree it, or to use his phrase in another case, he did
decree it Lubenter, or cum Lu^ent^d, i. e. with a Lubency of Will.

2. If God had pleased by his Decree, to preserve Man from falling, Man would
certainly have stood, and not have fallen, and Man had stood, willingly,
without any constraint or compulsion of his Will; but does it therefore follow,
that either God having decreed to keep Man from falling, or A^an being made
willing, and well pleased to stand, would have deceated the whole Contrivance
of Man's Redemption? How could th^^ be defeated, which, on the Supposition of
God's having (...) Adam to stand, and not to fall, would never have been
d^^^^^; nor would there have been any need o^ any such Decree, if Adam had
stood; for the whole needs not the Physician, and it Adam had stood, he had
needed no Physician n^r Red^^^^^? But yet upon the certain Futurity of A^^^^^
(...) tain and infal^^ose Foreknowledge of it, it pl^a^ed God, (...) eternal
Council and Purpose to provide a Savior and Redeemer for him and his lost
Posterity; and seeing God has, according to the Riches of his Grace, so
^^^posed the contrivance of mane Redemption, it could not have been de^^ated.

And thus, I hope, I have sufficiently showed, both the Futurity of Men's sinful
Actions, and Gods certain and infallible Foreknowledge or them, in another
Glass than that of Gods Decree absolutely determining the Necessity of them,
without either establishing a Stoical ^ate, or the Jesuits Scientia Media, one
of which he would by Consequence inter on me, but without all ground. And as to
Stoical Necessity, or what is equally absurd, I think I have above proved Mr.
Willards Notion of Free Will is sufficiently consistent with it.

But that God has Not necessitated or determined men necessarily to commit
such sinful Actions, or decreed them to commit them by any secret Will or
Decree, which had he done, would be contrary to his revealed Will he has spoke
by his holy Prophets, and commanded in the holy Scriptures, appears very
evidently from many places of Scripture, particularly Jer. 19.5. They have
built also the high Places of Baal, to burn their Sons with fire, for burnt
Offerings unto Baal, which I commanded not (says the Lord) nor sp^ke it
[consequently not according to his revealed Will] neither came it unto my Mind
[consequently nor did he decree, purpose or will it, that they should be
necessitated to any such wicked Action] see the Parallel places, Jer. 7.31. and
Chap. 32. v. 35. in the Old Testament, and in the New Testament, James 1.13, 14
Let no man say when he is Tempted, I am Tempted of God, for God cannot be
Tempted with Evil, neither Temp^eth ^e my man; but every man is Tempted when he
is drawn away of his own Lust, and enticed. By the words [Tempted of God] I
think cannot well be understood any moral Swasion or Command of God, to sin;
for such a Supposition I never heard the worst of Heretics or Blasphemers
charged with; but a sort of People there were in England about forty years ago,
called, Ranters, some Relics whereof are yet extent, who (like some Gnesticks
in St. James's time) did hold, That God did inwardly move or ^^citement (...)
to all the sinful act^^^^ they commit, so that they did comm^^ them
necessarily, one of which, of that Gang, did within these sew years print a
Book at London, which he called, Clavis A^re^, or The Golden Key, which I have
read, (and for which he was put into Prison by the Magistrates there) wh^^ in
he asserted such an Opinion, which I think differs nothing from Mr. Willard.
Notion, except that he readily did acknowledge it to be a necessary Consequence
from his Opinion, That God was the Author of all sinful Actions, as well as of
all good; wherein he seems to have been more ingenuous, in granting that
Consequence, than. Mr Willard, who, though he grants the Antecedent, yet denis
the Consequence: that (...) only l, but Thousands of as rational and learned
men as Mr. Willard is, do think does necessarily and genuinely follow that
absurd Opinion.

SECT. XV.
BEcause Mr. Willard does positively assert in his Book, That most of our
Protestant Churches are of his Opinion, the Church of England not excepted, for
which he has, as y^^, produced no Authority but that of his own Devising, I
intend here in the close to re^^^e some few Passages out of a learned Author,
as well as pious, a true Member and Son of the Church of England, to wit,
Bishop Bramhall, who was Bishop of Lo^don-Derry in Ireland, who maintains the
contrary Perswas^on, in his Book, called, A Defense of true Liberty, from
Anteredent and Extrinsical Necessity, in answer to a Book of Mr. Thomas Hobbs
of Malmsbury, entitled, A Treatase of Liberty and Necessity, wherein the said
Mr. Hobbs does as much agree with Mr. Willard as one Egg can be like another,
and I suppose Bishop Bramhall knew the Doctrine of the Church of England, as of
other Protestant Churches, as well, and much better than Mr. Willard does. He
writes thus in his Book against Mr. Hobbs, viz.

Page 60. He (to wit, Mr. H^bbs) makes Adam to have had no Liberty from
Necessity before his fall, yea, he proceeds so far, as to affirm. That all
humane Wills, his and ours, and each propension of our Wills, even during our
Deliberation, are as much Necessitated as any thing else whatsoever, that we
have no more Power to forbear those Actions which we do, than the fire has not
power to burn. [Note, How like this of Mr. Hobbs is to that of Mr. Willard in
his Reply to me, see his page 43.]

I confess (says Bishop Bramhall) I hate this Doctrine from my heart, and I
believe both I have Reason so to do, and all others who shall seriously ponder
the Horrible Consequences which flow from it. It destroys Liberty, and
dishonours the Nature of Man. It makes the second Causes and outward Objects to
be the Rackets, and Men to be the Tennis-Balls of Destiny. It makes the first
Cause to be the Introducer of all Evil and Sin into the World, as much as Man,
yea, more than Man, by as much as the Motion of the Watch is more from the
Artificer, who did make it, and wind it up, than either from the Spring, or the
Wheels, or the Thread, if God by his Special Influences into the second Causes,
did Necessitate them to operate, as they did. And if they, being thus
determined, did Necessitate Adam inevitably, irresistibly, not by an
Accidental, but by an Essential Subordination of Causes to whatsoever he did;
then one of these two Absurdities must needs follow, either that Adam did not
sin, and that there is no such thing as sin in the World, because it proceeds
naturally, necessarily and essentially from God, or that God is more guilty of
it, and more the cause of Evil than Man, because Man is extrinsically,
inevitably determined, but so is not God. And in Causes essentially subordinate
[ viz. as I have above noted, when the subordinate Cause is determined
necessarily by the superior Cause] the cause of the Cause is always the Cause
of the Effect. What Tyrant did ever impose Laws that were impossible for those
to keep, upon whom they were imposed, and punish them for breaking those Laws
which he himself had necessitated them to break, which it was no more in their
power nor to break, than it is in the power of the fire not to burn. Excuse me,
[saith Bp. Bramhall] if I hate this Doctrine with a perfect Hatred, which is so
dishonorable both to God and Man, which makes men to Blaspheme of Necessity,
to Steal of Necessity, to be Hanged of Necessity, and to be Damned of
Necessity; and therefore I must say, and say again, Qu^rquid ostendes mihi sic
incredulus odi, It were bett^r to be an Atheist, to believe no God, or to be a
Man^chee, to believe two Gods a God of good, and a God of evil, or with the
Heathens, to believe thirty thousand Gods, than thus to charge the true God to
be the proper Cause and the true Author of all the Sins and Evils which are in
the World. And page 91. He who denis all Liberty from Necessitations, should be
scourged until he becomes an humble Supplicant to him who whips him, and
confess that he has power either to strike, or to hold his hand. Cum multis
al^is.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 1. line to dele you. P. 21. 9. f. a^to^s r. (...) p. 3. l. 33 f. sollid.
r. ^^lid. p. 9. 1. indi^uduati^nts. p. 11. l. 9 r. (...) p. 11. l. 32. f. s^o.
r. sao. p. 27. f. sit a r. sita in on word. p. 2^. l. 27. f. his. r. h^. p. 33.
l 34. r. (...). p. ^5. (...) and l. 39. 40. dele the turned Comma's on the
Ma^^^^.


