Faithful Warnings to prevent Fearful Judgments.

Uttered in a brief DISCOURSE, Occasioned, by a Tragical Spectacle, in a Number
of Miserables Under a Sentence of Death for PIRACY.

BOSTON in N. E. Jun. 22. 1704

Deuteronomy. XIII. 11. All Israel shall hear, and fear, and shall do no more any such
wickedness as this is among you. Occultam culpam sequitur aperta percussio.
Cassiodor. Boston, Printed and Sold by Timothy Green, at the North End of the
Town. 1704.

Faithful WARNINGS to prevent Fearful JUDGMENTS. BOSTON-LECTURE. 22. d. 4. m.
1704.
Prove. XIII. 21. Evil Pursues Sinners.
WHOSE Voice is this? It Is the Noise of the Voice of GOD, and a Sound that goes
out of His Mouth. A more than Flinty Hardness is upon our Hearts, if we cannot
say, A^ this our Hearts tremble, and are moved out of their place.

It is an Ancient Observation, That the Wisdom of any Nation is very much to be
observed in the Proverbs of the Nation. Of the Israelitish Nation then it might
we be said, Surely this Great Nation is a Wi^^ and Understanding People! For
the Proverb of that Nation were of a Divine Original. But through the Singular
and Sovereign Favor of God, the Proverbs (...) Israel are now become Ours as
well (...) Isreal's, and are derived with other Blessings of Abraham, unto the
Gentiles. The Proverbs are called by a Name, that signifies, Ruling Sentences;
Intimating, that our Affairs and Motions, are to be Overruled, by the maxims
of Wisdom (...) these Holy Proverbs. Oh! That the Proverb now in our Hands may
have such an Authority, such an Efficacy with it, o^ our Lives, as may
Overruled our Disposition to those things which will bring all manner of Evil
upon us.

It is a memorable passage, Psalm. 125. 3. The Rod of the Wicked, shall not rest
upon the Lot of the Righteous. There is in that passage, an Allusion, to the
method used for the Dividing of Lands among the Jews of old. A Rod, or a Staff,
was used in the Dividing of Lands by Lot, and (...) assigning to any one, what
portion and Lands was to fall unto him. The meaning is not, That the Wicked
shall not Sc^urge the Righteous; as from the mee^ sound of the word, we
sometimes do carry it; But the meaning is, That the Portion of the Wicked shall
not be the Portion of the Righteous; they shall not in their Condition be
Confounded with one another.

Behold, the Different Lot of the Wicked and of the Righteous! In the Verse we
have a Distinction of men; Even the very same that now distinguishes this
Congregation. Will every man seriously Enquire, To which of these do I belong?
The Wicked and the Righteous, are the several parties. Of the Wicked, we have
before us, two most awful Admonitions. First, We are told* what they (...).
They are Sinners. Their Name implies, that they go out of the way. For what?
But that they may pursue that which is Evil. And then, We are told, what they
find. I may rather say, what finds them. Evil does pursue them. And will it not
come at them too? Most certainly! Most certainly!

We have now this Doctrine and Warning from Heaven to insist upon.

Sinners that Pursue Evil, are Pursuant of Evil. That the terrible Truth now
before us, may be (...) apprehended, we may so order certain P^^positions, that
they shall discharge Answers and Thunders, unto all the several Points, of
Enquiry that we should have our Discourse to hear upon.

I. Who are the Sinners, whom Evil pursues? Who, but such as Pursue Sin and
Evil? It is the Description of Ungodly Sinners, Prove. 11. 19. He that pursues
Evil, does it unto his own Death. Indeed, all men are Sinners, in some Degree,
in a very sad Degree. The most confirmed and unhappy Sinner^ in the world, are
the Generation so (...) in their own Eyes, as to count themselves without Sin.
We read in the Scripture. 1 King 8. 46. There as no man that sins not. Alas,
There is no need of going to the Scripture for the proof of it. But Evil does
not (...) all men. Some are Penitent Sinners and Pardoned Sinners. Evil will
not Pursue such Sinners. Evil! No, but God will surely do them Good. Their
Joyful Song may be, Goodness and Mercy shall follow me all my Days. But there
are Sinners, who follow the Courses of Sin. It is said of them, 2 Pet. 2. 2.
They follow their Pernicious ways. Truly, Sin is E^il^: We sin greatly, if we
don't count Sin the greatest Evil. There are Sinners who Desire, and Study, and
Labor to do that Evil. Some there are who can say with him, Psalm. 38. 20. I
follow that which is Good. And that which is Good will doubtless follow them.
Yea, but there are those, who Follow that which is Evil. We read of some, Prove.
1. 16. Their F^et run to Evil. (...) Way, and their Walk, and their Work, lies
in the Courses of Sin. They make a Trade of Sin. Sin is their Business and
their Delight. The Principles of Sin, are those which they continually act
upon. They are upon the Designs and the Courses of Sin; and they never were
Turned from those Courses. No, They hold on in the Pursuit of Evil: and as the
Apostle speaks, They work it with Greediness: As the Prophet speaks, They Sin
as with a Cart-rope; they Sin till they are Weary, but yet they are never weary
of Sin. These are the Sinners! And what will become of them?

There is in the Book of God, an Open Roll of Curses, denouncing the Doom of
such miserable Sinners. I am now to stand for a while, as upon Mount Ebal; and
Exhibit that Flying Roll before them. Be afraid, O Sinner, let Fearfulness now
Surprise you, O pursuers of Evil. Hear how the Thunder of the Wrath of God, is
Cursing them that set themselves in a way that is not Good.

II. Evil will Pursue the Sinners that pursue Evil. What Evil? What less than
All sorts of Evil. Sin and Evil, are indeed, the Mother and the Daughter. It Is a
Scriptural Comparison; Jam. 1. 15 Sin brings forth Death. Or shall we bring
another Comparison sometimes used among the Ancients? Flagit^^m et Flagellum,
ut acus et Filum; This is to say, Sin and Evil, are the Needle and the Thread;
The One infallibly draws on the Other. But let us return to the Language of the
Scripture; In that, we read, Romans 6, 2^. The wages of Sin is Death* Death, It Is
a Term that includes all the Evil, that can be imagined: More Evil than any man
Alive can imagine!

Accordingly;

First, There is a Temporal Evil, which P^^sues the Sinner. Ten Piagues pursued
the Sinners of Egypt. We had in Pagan Antiquities, that the Egyptians, did for
many hundreds of Years, with mourning, and howling, and lighted Candles, keep
up an Anniversary Commemoration of them. So great, a much greater Variety of
Pursues there is in the E^il that Pursues Sinners. Unto Sinners, that is the
Voice of God; Jer. 18. 11. Thus says the Lord, Behold, I frame Evil against
you. And will you see, how agreeably it is Framed? Men indulge their Souls in
Sinful and Sickly Appetites: The Evil of Sickness therefore does pursue the
Sinners. Men do by Sin Dishonor the Name of God; The Evil of a Dishonored
Name does therefore pursue the Sinners. Men are not Rich toward God; The Evil
of Poverty, and the loss of Riches does therefore pursue the Sinners. Men
Idolize their Friends, or else they do not faithfully attend their Duty to and
for their Friends. And so that Evil, the Death of their Friend does pursue the
Sinners. Men are Unthankful, and Unfruitful under their Enjoyments; And so this
Evil does pursue the Sinners, To be Deprived of their Enjoyments. Men do not
Acknowledge God in their Undertakings; And the Sinners are Pursued with that
Evil. To be Blasted in their Undertakings. If a Jonas depart from God, wonder
not, O Jonas, that the Lord sends out a Tempest after thee. A Tempest of some
Evil or other, will Pursue them that Forsake the Lord. Under every such Evil as
this, the Sinners may make that Confession; Dan. 9. 14. Therefore has the Lord
watched upon the Evil, and brought it upon us; For we Obeyed not His Voice.

But, the Voice of the Trumpet now Sounding, the longer it Sounds, it must wax
louder and louder.

For,

Secondly, There is a Spiritual E vil which Pursues the Sinner. A Resolved
^nner is pursued with evil indeed, when ^e holy God gives him up to commit ^ore
evil. Sin, Sin, is it self the most woeful E vil, as well as the woeful Fountain
of all other Evil. When Sin is ^^nished with Sin, or when for Sin men are left
unto more Sin, Then, The^ does ^vil pursue Sinners, with the most horri^le
Vengeance of God. I find, some In^erpreters give this as the sense of the
^entence here passed upon Sinners; Evil ^ursueth Sinners; That is to say,
Sin^ers will have their Sinful and Evil Habits follow them, till they do
Eternally ^erish in them. A Lust is an Evil. Never, Never does Evil more
terribly pur^ue a Sinner, than when he is given up ^o the Lust of his own
Heart. But such oftentimes is the Dreadful Wrath of ^he Holy and Jealous God
against a Sinner, as to leave him, to be Enslaved by a raging Lust as long as
he lives. Thus we read, Psalm. 81. 11. They would (...) hearken to my Voice; So
I gave them ^p to the Lust of their own Heart. A sinner is given up to the
power of Lust; A Lust of intemperance, a Lust of Unchastity, a Lust of
Covetousness and Earthly-mindedness. This Lust will now Pursue him all his
Days; Though his Condition be changed, Though his Relation be changed, yet his
Lust continue^ the same, and Pursues him in all his New Conditions and
Relations: He goes perhaps to get rid of his Lust, by some Devotionary methods,
but they signify no more than the Green Wythes about Sampson, for the
Restraining of it; While he remains an Unregenerate Sinner, and a stranger to
Faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, it will Pursue him all his Days. And hence it
comes to pass, that an astonishing Blindness and Hardness comes upon the mind
of a Sinner, and a lamentable Indisposition to Repentance. Oh! We have s^^n, we
have seen prodigious Instances! I have read of a Malefactor, one that had been
Condemned to Die for Stealing and Murder; That even in the very Hours of his
Execution, he Proclaimed his Impenitence: His Fellow-sufferer could say to him,
Luke 23. 40. Do th^^ not Fear God, seeing thou art under Condemnation? But I
say unto you, Sinners cannot be Pursued with a greater Evil, than (...) Soul
insensible of the Evil, that Sin is bringing upon them! There have been Sinners
actually ^iezed by a Law of Death, for Capital Crimes; These Criminals in their
very Chains, have been so stupefied, as to flatter themselves that there was no
Danger near unto them; They have ^t may be spent their Time in Drinking, ^n
Gaming, in Profane Frolicks, when every Jingle of their Chains would have ^ung
that Peal in their Ears, Wretch, Thy Damnation slumbers not. And at last, when
the Sword of Justice, has been just lifted up, to Cut them off, the marks of
their Late Repentance have been how Strained, how Forced, and how wretchedly
Defective! It Is because E vil pursues the Sinners; They have so provoked the
Spirit of God, that He lets that worst of all Evils, Pursue them to the last; A
Soul that cannot by Repentance be recovered out of the Snare of the Devil.

But then there succeeds another Evil. Horror of Conscience is an Evil that
pursues Sinners; A most horrid Evil. An (...) Conscience, is an Evil with a
witness. (...) Sinners, by being and by doing Evil, (...) b^ing upon themselves
that Comprehensible Evil; Heb. 10. 22. An Evil Conscience. A Guilty Conscience,
does pursue the Sinners, with direful Intimations (...) the Divine Displeasure
against them with fearful Expectations of a fiery Indignation to devour them.
Sinners carry about, a wonderful Faculty in their Soul which will pass a
Judgment on them (...) under the Judgment of God. GOD the Judge of all, has so
Inwrought and (...) said this Faculty into the Souls of Sinners that though they
use all the Arts imaginable, to Sear it, or Doze it, or Smother it, it will
never be Extinguished. When Sin is perpetrated, a Guilt comes to (...) upon the
Conscience; the Conscience (...) feel, and own, and roar the Obligations now
lying upon the Sinner, to undergo the amazing Revenges of God. This Evil
pursues Sinners; and some Expositors take this to be the Special Evil
intended, in that Oracle now speaking unto us. A Sinner needs no other Pursuers
^^iamsi nullus alius accedat, vel Index, (...) Judex; It was said, Prove. 28. 1.
The ^icked flee, when no man pursues. A wick^d man has in his own Conscience a
Thousand Pursuers: His own Conscience will ^og him, as an Officer Commissioned
by the God of Heaven, and will take him, and hold him, and ^^ale him, before
the Tribunal of God. Of the Sinner we ^ad, Job 15. 21. A dreadful Sound is in
his Ears. A Guilty Conscience makes a Dreadful Sound in the Ears of the Sinner;
(...) Cries, it Shri^ks, it Thunders; The ^^finite God is Angry with thee, thou
impious ^reature; and thou shall be made a miserable Sacrifice to the Burning
Anger of Heaven, in the Bottom of Hell, for thy (...)! I will show my Young
People, where they shall have this Dreadful Sound most Articulately uttered; It
is in those ^^emendous Words of God, unto Young Sinners; Eccl. 11. 9. Know
thou, That (...) all these things, God will bring thee into Judgment.

But, the Evil that pursues Sinners, methinks, I see it on a Pale Horse;

For,

Lastly, Hell follows. There is an E ternal Evil which Pursues the Sinner. An
Everlasting Banishment from God* the Chief Good, must needs be very Evil. When
Sinners are fallen into a Damnation and Banishment, from the the Gracious
Presence of God, it must be said, Ezekiel. 7. 5. An Evil, an only Evil, Behold, it
is come. But this formidable Evil is Pursuing of you, O Unwary and Foolhardy
Sinners. Men do now say unto the Almighty, Depart from us, we desire not the
Knowledge of thy ways: Therefore this Evil does Pursue the Sinners; That the
Lord Jesus Christ will say unto them, Depart from me, I know ye not, ye workers
of Iniquity. Men do now Refuse to come unto the Lord Jesus Christ, for His
Blessing; This Evil does Pursue the Sinners, The Lord Jesus Christ will
pronounce this Doom upon them, Depart ye Cursed. Men are now as hot as Fire, in
Thirsting and in Driving after the Pleasures (...) Sin; This Evil does Pursue
the Sinners; They shall be cast into an Intolerable Fire and there Cry out* I
am Tormented in this Flame! Men do now Despise the pleasant Lord, and Kick
against Heaven, and all the Glories, and the Offers of it; This Evil does
Pursue the Sinners; They shall be cast into an Hell, where the Smoke of their
Torment shall ascend for ever and ever. Men do now hearken to the Devil, and
Prefer and Obey his Commands, doing the works of Darkness; This Evil does
Pursue the Sinners; They shall be Imprisoned in Utter Darkness, with the Devil
and his Angels. Oh! Matchless Evil! To ly under Eternal Impressions and
Vexations, from the wrath of an Infinite God! Sinner, How can thou bear the
Thought of such an Evil! Secure Sinners will ask, How can the Minister prove,
That there is in another World an Evil Pursuing of them? Prove it! Ah, Sinners,
you your selves afford a Proof of it. You see, That Sinners often Oppress and
Harass Innocent men, with Tortures that cannot be Painted out. Sinners have
Racked, and Booted the Servants of God, and Burned them alive, and Broke them
on the Wheel, and Bastinado'd them to Death. Now, if there be a Just God, which
the very Devils Believe and Tre^b^e! These Bloody Sinners must themselves
Endure as Grievous things as ever they inflicted on the Servants of God. In
this world, they do not Endure those things; they swim in all the Delights of
the Louvre; they Live, they become Old, yea, they are mighty in Power; Their
Offspring also is Established before their Eyes. It follows then undeniably,
That there is another World, wherein there is laid up for Sinners an Evil, more
Hideous and Exqisite, than can be Expressed by the Tongue of any Mortal.

This, This is the Evil that Pursues Sinners; This is the Heritage appointed
unto them of God

III. How does Evil pursue Sinners? We shall find something Observable in its
Pursuing of them. The Notion of a Pursuit in the Case, is f^ll of Instruction.

First, Evil Pursues Sinners; It argues, that Evil does by Law belong to
Sinners. To pursue Sinners, is to Prosecute them at Law. Sinners have broken
the Law of God. By the Law of God, there is a Misery most justly belonging unto
them. That Misery is the Evil pursuing of them. Hence we are told, Joh. 3. 18
They are Condemned already. Sinners are obnoxious to Evil, by that Law, that is
always Holy and Just and Good; by that Law, that God will never balk, but
forever Magnify it, and make it Honorable. How comes Evil to pursue Sinners?
Truly, Sinners are Condemned unto Evil, by the Law of that God, of whom it is
Acknowledged; Hab. 1. 13. Thou art of purer Eyes than to behold Evil. There
will be a most spotless Justice in all the Evil, that shall come upon Sinners;
They cannot justly Complain of any Evil that shall come upon them: Why should a
Sinful man Complain? A Sinner for the punishment of his Sin? Think, O Sinners,
Think with your selves; O wretched man that I am; The Law of the Righteous God
has Condemned me to Die.

Secondly. Evil Pursues Sinners; And what are Sinners then, but Runawayes, but
Malefactors! Pursued Folks are supposed such. It seems, that Sinners have an
Hue-in-Cry after them! Sinners are bound unto the Service of God: They are in
most indispensable Bonds to be the Servants of the Lord Jesus Christ. But what?
They come to that vile Resolution; Psalm. 2. 3. Let us cast the Cords* from us.
They refuse to serve the Lord; They will serve the World, the Flesh, the Devil;
The Lord Jesus Christ is too good a Master for them. The Fugitives when they
leave that Master, they fall into Ten Thousand Iniquities; They turn Robbers;
They Rob the Great God of His Dues; They are Murderers, Traitors, Rebels; They
break out into open Rebellion against the Great King of Heaven and Earth. It Is
for these things, that the Hue-in-Cry is gone out after them, and Evil is
Pursuing of them. We read of some, Job. 30. 5. They Cried after them, as after
a Thief. Sinner, so, Even so, art thou Cried after; The Destroying Judgments of
God are Crying after thee.

Thirdly. Evil Pursues Sinners; It shows, That though Sinners cannot always
escape Evil, yet they do for a while escape it; and they dream that they shall
always escape it. Evil is for a while, it seems only upon the Pursuit of
Sinners; it has not yet Overtaken them. We read, Eccl. 8. 11 Sentence against
an Evil work, is not Executed ^^eedily. And wi^le Sinners are yet only Pursued
of Evil, Oh! the Security of the Silly ones! They fondly and vainly fancy, that
Evil shall never overtake them. A most unreasonable Fancy! Delay is no Payment.
Sinners, it must be said unto you, as it was said unto them of old; Number. 32.
23. Behold, ye have sinned against the Lord; and be sure your sin will find you
out. Your Sin; that is to say, the Punishment of your Sin: This is like a
Blood-hound upon the Scent, swiftly pursuing of you; 'Twill come up with you,
Be Sure of it! Be Sure of it! Sometimes a Remarkable Evil does Overtake the
Sinner before he Dies. There are some Sins, that seldom go unpunished in this
Life. Gross Wrongs to our Neighbors, are in this Life usually paid home unto
us. Cheaters find it so; Robbers find it so; Oppressors find it so; and so do
Relatives that carry it unkindly to one another. And, I wish, that People,
whose Conversation is full of Reproaches, or Invectives against other People
would consider of it. Abusive People are not only Chastised, by strange
Accidents, that bring all their base Talk to the Ears of the Innocent persons,
whom they have abused, but also the Hand of God so orders it, that they shall
be overtaken and overwhelmed, with as heavy loads of Obloquy. Consider this, O
ye Tongues, whom she Fear of God bridles not; and be afraid of Sinning as you
use to* do! Again, There are atrocious Crimes, the Crimes which the Bible
calls, The Crying ones; those Crimes do in this Life usually meet with the
Vengeance of God. Men that are Wicked overmuch, what becomes of them?
Oftentimes, they don't live out half their Days; oftentimes God brands them
with marks of His Vengeauce while they Live. The Barbarians themselves could
expect it concerning Barbarous Murderers, That Vengeance would not suffer them
to live. But be sure, At his Death, Then, Then a Sinner shall be overtaken with
E vil unto the uttermost. Then will the Sinner feel the fulfillment of that
word; Job 27. 22. God shall cast Plagues upon him, and not spare; though he would
sain flee out of His Hand. Oh! what would the Sinner then give, that he could
flee from the dreadful Hand of God! But, Sinner, The threatened Evil is now
come, it is now come! There is no Fleeing from it! The Rocks cannot hide thee;
The Mountains cannot cover thee from the Wrath of God; Though they di^ into Hall,
thence my Hand shall take them; though they climb up to Heaven, thence! will
bring them down; though they hide themselves from my sight in the Bottom of the
Sea! [Have not our Pirates found it so? wherever they hide themselves, I will
search and sieze them, ^aith the Lord.

Finally. Evil Pursues Sinners; It is hinted, That it shall be a Retaliating
Evil. A Sinner being one that pursues Moral E vil, it is but a Retaliation, that
he should be pursued of E vil: And there is oftentimes a most Notable
Retaliation in the very Kind of the E vil. The hint is further given in the
next Clause; To the Righteous, Good shall be repaid. Even so, In the Evil that
pursues th^^ Sinner, there shall be a Repaiment; Th^^ Sinner shall be Repaid in
his own Co^^. They that would have thrown Daniel to the Lions, are themselves
thrown to the Lions. They that cast the Israelites into the River, are
themselves cast into the Sea. Human is hanged on the very Gallows, that he
prepared for Mordecai. E l^ and David indulge their Children in Sin; and their
Hearts are broken by their Sinful Children. The Field is large; I must not now
Expatiate. A sinner shall see some surprising Circumstance, either in the Sort,
or in the Place, or in the Time, or in the I^strument of his Punishment, that
shall make him with Surprise and Horror Cry out, like him; Judge. 1. 7. A^ I
have done, so God has Requited me. Briefly, When Evil falls upon the Sinner,
it shall be with such Victorious Demonstrations of Equity in the Glorious God,
that all Heaven and Earth shall say, The Sinner is fairly dealt withal (...)*
The Sinner himself shall Cry out, a^ the Emperor Mauritius did, when h^ saw
himself stripped of all, and saw his family lying in Blood before his Eyes;
Righteous art thou, O Lord, and most Righteous are all thy Judgments.

But let us Apply these Faithful and Awful sayings.

APPLICATION.
And,

I. Who are most nearly concerned in the Application of these things, but
Sinners? Let Sinners then be in the first place Examined and Characterized.
When we see such a black and a dense Cloud, charged with hot Thunderbolts,
gathering ^ver our Heads in this Word of God, Evil Pursues Sinners; methinks,
we should all stand trembling before the Lord, and Crying out with him, Joh.
13. 15. Lord, Who is it? Lord, Am I one of the Sinners? There is a Proclamation
issued forth, from the Great GOD, for every Sinner to be taken up, and brought
in, that the Justice of Heaven may proceed against him; Evil is thus Pursuing
of the Sinner. Now it is of the Extremest Consequence, to know, what are the Ma^^
of the Sinner in the Proclamation; How (...) the Sinner described there?
Sinner, (...) not thy heart ache, to hear thy self described.

Sirs, If you meet with one who (...) never yet felt Sin as the Greatest Evil,
and priz^d Salvation frrom Sin as the Greatest Good; If you meet with one, who
can Sin in Gr^sser Miscarriages, without Reluctance, and can go on in Sin
without Repentance; If you meet with one who never yet by Faith carried a Soul
distressed with Sin, unto the Lord Jesus Christ, for Deliverance out of its
Distresses; This This is a Sinner! Ah! Lord, We mourn, we mourn, to see how
many of our Young People, have the black spots of the Sinner upon them!

Yet more particularly. Is there one whose Head has Vain Thoughts Lodging in
it? One whose Eyes are full of Adultery? One whose Ears are more delighted with
Scurrility tha^ with Spirituality? Or, (If he Speak, you may know him:) Has he
a Mo^th full of Rotten Communication? Or, does he not care to li^^ up his Hands
in Prayer to God: Or, (Mind how he goes:) Does he Stumble every step of his
walk, and fall into any Slough of Wickedness, as often as he comes a'near (...)
Or, (Mind, whom he Consorts withal:) Does he choose to sit with Vain Persons?
This is the Sinner, whom Evil does Pursue. If you meet with one that ^as these
Marks upon him, you may so address him; 2 Samuel 12. 9. Thou art the Man! O
Conscience, Thou Officer of God; I Charge thee, That i^ thou find such an One
in thy search, thou do in the Name of the Great GOD lay an Arrest upon him:
Arrest him for a Sinner: Evil, Evil, is Pursuing^ of him!

But now,

II. What is the most pertinent Application to be made unto Pursued Sinners? It
may pertinently enough turn upon (...) very pungent Questions.

The First Question.
Sinners, What are you doing? Alas, you are bringing of Evil, much Evil, sad
Evil, upon your selves. It may be said unto the Sinner, as Hab. 2. 10. Thou
have sinned against thy own Soul. And it may be said, Thou art by Sin bringing
Evil upon all thy Interests. Oh! Take the Warning of God!

First; Be assured, O Sinners, you (...) not find any Good in Sin. Sin, It Is
nothing but Evil. Sin. It will bring all Evil. The works of Sin, they are
Unfruitful works. It Is an Appeal we may make to all the Sinners in the world
Romans 6. 22. What fruit have you had? All Deceived Sinner, Do thou please thy
self, as if thou were it Pursuing of Good* Those Pleasures are not Good; They
debauch, they betray thy Soul into interminable Torments. All this while, Evil
is Pursuing of thee. What, what is the whole Employment of the Sinner? Oh
Dismal Account, that must be given of it! It is a continual ^loughing and
Sowing, to produce an Harvest of Eternal, Evil. Or, to take an Account of it
from the Scripture of Truth; It Is a treasuring up of Wrath, against a Day of
wrath! Oh, Wretched Employment! An Employment for none but a Madman!

And then, Serondly; Be assured O Sinners, you have no Reason to be Merry, or
Easy, or Sleepy, in a state of Sin. You behave your selves, as if nothing were
Amiss. What? When there is Evil pursuing of you! It was among the sighs which a
poor man once poured out before the Lord; Job 13. 26, 27. Thou writest bitter
things against me; Thou look narrowly to all my Paths; Thou set a Print
upon the Heels of my Feet. Even of such Bitter Things may a Sinner make a
Soliloquy unto his own Soul.

Oh! There is an Order from the Justice of God, for Evil to take me up. God has
looked narrowly to all my Paths; God follows the Track of the Heels of my
Feet: EVIL, Evil will be upon me, for ought I know, before to morrow morning.
Oh! Why, should I go on securely in any way of Wickedness? God be Merciful to
me a sinner.

Oh! That the Sinner would thus Bethink himself! To deal plainly; Suppose a
Warrant were out, for the Apprehending of one, whose Transgressions had rendered
him worthy to Die. Would it not be an Unparalled Phrensy, for such an one, to
be Singing, Dancing, and Carousing; or, to be Sleeping on both Ears, as if no
Hazard were near unto him? This, This is thy Phrensy, O Merry Sinner! A
Terrible Evil will presently be upon thee, with a Warrant from God; and thou
art insensible of thy Terrible Hazard.

Thirdly; Be assured, O Sinners, That some Sinners are ordinarily Pursued with
Evil in more than ordinary Circumstances. There are such things commonly done
upon some Sinners, that compel every man to say, Verily, There is a God who
Judges in the Earth!

My Hearers, I will presently point you to certain Sinners, that you shall see
hung up in Chains before your Eyes, by the stupendous Judgments of God; and
then write upon them, Evil Pursues Sinners. That, That shall be the Motto for
them.

Shall we begin, with the mention of that, which is the usual Beginning of all
Wickedness? That is to say, Sabbath-breaking. Have you not seen Evil Pursuing
of Sabbath Breakers? Yes, By breaking the Fourth Commandment they come to the
vilest Breaches of all the rest: Evil has often Pursued them to the very
Gallows. One that was Executed a while ago in London, Earnestly Cried out, O
Young People, Don't mispend the Lords Day, Don't mispend the Lords Day; It was
that which led me to all my Wickedness. And the Minister that Published the
Narrative, has this passage; I do not know (says he,) that ever I observed any
Repentance in a Condemned Malefactor, who did not bitterly Lament his Neglect
of his Duty to God on His Holy Sabbath. I think, I have my self observed very
much to this purpose.

Oh! that Notorious Drunkards would come to themselves, and Soberly lay to
heart the Evil that is Pursuing of them! They Drown themselves, in a world of
Iniquity and Calamity, while they Live; [If one that is Dead-Drunk, may be
said, to Live!] And when they Die, it is usually before their Time; they Die
Tragically; They come to Tragical Ends, and Grievous Deaths. There is hardly a
Town in the Country, but what has had frightful Exemples! A Noted Minister in
Frie^land some few Years ago, Published an Attested History, of a Drunkard, who
had a very strange thing befalling him; The Devil burned him alive. Ah
Drunkard, Thou art but Inflaming thy self; and preparing to be a Companion for
Devils, in Flames that never shall be quenched; and Reeling and Staggering, and
Tumbling down into a fiery Pit. One Mr. Abbot; a Worthy Minister has written
the Story of one Mr. Rogers, a Young Gentleman, whom that Minister had
frequently, but fruitlesly, Rebuked for his Drunkenness. God struck him not
only with Sickness of Body, but also with Terror of Mind; he kept Crying out, I
have been a fearful Drunkard, and now, Oh! How much rather had I burn in that
Fire on the Hearth, then go burn in the Fire of Hell, for my Drunkenness! Be
Warned by me, (said, he,) I have cast off Christ, and now Christ has cast off
me; and I must away to Hell, and ly in an hot Furnace for Millions of Millions
of Ages!

And will the Sinners that are given to Swearing and Cursing, a little
Recollect themselves! O Tongues, that are set on Fire of Hell; Don't you think,
That there is Evil Pursuing of you? An Evil, for Tongues that have not been
kept from Evil! Such Tongues, one cannot but with wonder ^^hold, how much they
are under a most sensible and palpable P^ssession (...) the Devil. Can they
miss of Evil, whose Communication so comes of the Evil One? The Owners of such
Tongues, (for they have said, Our Tongues are our own!) must one Day (...)
their Tongues for Anguish, (...) Cry out, Oh! For a drop of Water to (...) my
Tongue! Wretch, Do thou call to the Almighty to Damn thee? This is ^o out-sin
the Devil himself; The Devil himself Cries out, O Torment me not! Well, The
Damnation is Pursuing of thee; Oh! but thou will not be able to bear it! Some
^^leful Creatures, as they have been pouring out whole Volleys of Heaven-daring
Blasphemies, have been struck. Dumb in the very moment, yea, and struck Dead
with Thunder and Lightning. I can tell you, whose Eyes have seen, what I am
going to tell you. An horrid Fellow aboard a Ship, was belching out his
Affronts to Heaven, and Swearing and Cursing at a most hideous rate. God struck
the Wretch Dead with a Flash of Lightning, in the midst of his Blasphemies But
when they came to Examine what Wound^^ he had about him, they could not find
(...) but this, That his Tongue (...) pierced by the Lightning, Exactly as it
had been ^^red with an (...) Iron. most proper Evil, for a Blasphemer be
Pursued withal!

There is at this very time a Pirate the Prison, who some Years ago, as (...)
was, wickedly Swearing and Cursing; (...) immediately struck Dumb, in the mid^^
of his Outrages; he continued so, an astonishing Spectacle unto all the
Neighbors, for diverse Days together. (...) appeared ^enitent, he wrote for
the Prayers of Good men; he made his (...) of Reformation. God Restored him he
Sinned yet mere; and now, thing, is come unto him.

And shall not Adulterers too be Pursued of Evil? Judge you, when you have read
the Handwriting against them; Heb. 13. 4. ^^ore mangers and Adulterers God
will Judge. Oh! That the Adulterous Generation, would make their due and wise
Remarks, upon what they (...) befalling of them, who by, Adulteries destroy
themselves! And let them Remark this one thing among the (...) Holy Perkins,
who took much care (...) Condemned Prisoners, did Remark it; that they who Dyed
on the Gallows for ^^aling, often Confessed unto him, that ^^ey had been also
Guilty of Adulteries.

Disorders in families, Oh! how much Evil does Pursue such Evil Orders! When
(...) do not Instruct, and Restrain their Children, but Indulge them in all the
(...) which their Folly shall ask for; It Is often so, when it is an Only Child:
This Evil Pursues those Unhappy Parents; Thy Children shall make themselves
Vale! All the (...) shall talk of them as vile Persons! And (...) shall grieve
thy Heart, and the increase (...) thy House shall Die in the flower of their
Age! When Children carry it Undutifully to their Parents, what will become of
them? The Gibbets in all Nations have Groaned under the weight of the Monsters.
All Ages have rung, with the Evil that has Pursued those Children. A most
Exemplary Wrath of God still comes upon those Children of Disobedience: Though
^^ey have worn Crowns upon their Heads their very Crowns have not been able to
shelter them.

There is another sort of Sinner^^ Namely, Th^^^^s. By Thieves, I mean all that
go to feather a Nest, by any Dishonest Practices: Be it by Gaming; Be (...) by
Fraudulence; Be it by Extortion; Be (...) by Bribery; Be it by Purloining, or
be (...) by Piracy; Or be it by seeing a Thee^, (...) Consenting with him: They
are all Thieves in the Reckoning of God, and of His Eighth Commandment. But
what will be the Fate of the Sinners? We are told, God is an Avenger on all
such! I Remember. That not very long ago, I had occasion to Preach a Sermon at
the Prison, upon those words, Jer. 17. 11. He that get Riches* and not by
Right, shall leave them in the midst of his Days, and at his End he shall be a
Fool. A Great Number of the Sinners then present, had that Commination of God,
soon Executed upon them at the Gallows; The English Nation did with Amazement
behold the Evil so pursuing of them! Oh, The (...) Displeasure of God! That now
a Greater Number of such Sinners have arisen (...) arrived among us. Will our
Merciful God, at last Sanctify these Displayes of (...) Vengeauce; That never
any more of them that see or hear these things, may after this, go to get
Riches and not by Right. Let all People Hear and Fear, and never do thus
wickedly any more! Yea, Since the ^rivateering Stroke, so easily degenerates
into the Piratical; and the Privateering Trade, is usually carried on with ^o
Unchristian a Temper, and proves an ^^let unto so much Debauchery, and
Iniquity, and Confusion, I believe, I shall have Good men Concur with me, in
wishing, That Privateering may no more (...) practiced, except there may appear
more hopeful Circumstances to Encourage it.

Are these the only P athes of the Destroyer, wherein Sinners have Evil
pursuing of them? No, There are many, many more. But there is Especially One
that leads into all the rest; One that has proved signally Fatal to the poor
Sinners that are now going to Die for Piracy. Alas, They have Ruined one
another; The Sinners Enticed one another; They said, (...) with us, Let us lurk
privily for the Innocent without a Cause. We shall find all precious Substance.
You see what Evil it has brought them to. My Son, walk (...) thou in the way
with them. Oh! The Snares of Death, which are laid in Wicked Company! Evil
Company, To choose That, and use That, and love That; This is the way to be
Pursued of Evil. Though we don't look for a Coherence, between the Proverbs of
Solomon* yet the Holy Spirit has invited us, to take Notice of some Coherence
here. It had just been said, A Companion of Fools shall be Destroyed: And the
very next words are, Evil Pursues Sinners. To be a Companion of Fools, is to
lay ones self open to all the Evil that can be. He that will delightfully
Embrace the Society of the Wicked, will soon have cause to Cry out with him,
Prove. 5. 14 I was almost in all Evil. Oh! that All People, and particularly.
Young People, would Beware of Evil Company. Beware, O my Tempted Child, beware,
lost the Evil which Pursues those Extravagant Sinners, do strike them, while
thou art in their Company, and strike thee for being in their Company. Beware,
lest thy Bad Company draw thee into all Evil* and lest thou get a Snare to thy
Soul.

Don't slight these Warnings of God. Let the Evil that Pursues the Atheist,
make you afraid of abandoning your selves to Irreligion and Profanity. The Holy
Greenham, in his works tells a Story of a man, I suppose known to him, who
became a wicked Atheist. The man derided a God, an Heaven, an Hell, and all
Religion. He became guilty of Stealing, and was Condemned to Die for his Felony.
The Godly Ministers could not Recover him from his Atheism. His Atheism
accompanied him to the very Gallows. But just as he was turning off, he Cried
out, For Christ's sake, stay a little. They staid until he spoke these words;
Oh! Let the world say what they will, Now I know, There is a GOD; And this God
will be forever Just unto His Enemies, but He will forever show Mercy unto His
Children! And upon those words, he was turned over, to appear before that
Infinite GOD. I will say but this; If any of my Hearers, will not Adore a GOD,
and not Receive with all possible Reverence the Cautions and Counsels of His
Word, there is that Evil Pursuing of them, which will shortly make them Know
that there is a GOD, and that with God there is terrible Majesty.

And what is a Deist better than an Atheist? I wish the most Conspicuous
Revenges of God, upon the most famous Professors and Promoters of Deism, in
leaving them to Murder themselves, were more Considered in the English Nation.
Self-Murder is rarely Committed by any but those who are first fallen into a
proper P^ssession of the Devil. Behold, how Evil, does Pursue the Sinners! They
that have Refused and Reviled the Savior of the world, must be Exemplarily
given into the Hands of the Destroyer!

I will di^mi^s my Remark and Rebuke of Atheism, with minding you, of an
Exemple well known to all the People. Here was a while ago a Person in our
Prison, who was the Son of a Reverend and an Eminent Minister, who Dyed for his
Religion. This Graceless Fellow said unto some in this place, while he was
following his Lewd way of Living, That he would* never be such a Fool, as to be
Hanged for Religion, as his Father was. He was as bad as his word! He was not
Hanged for Religion; he was Hanged for Piracy, and for Murder! He was Twice
Hanged, before his Execution could be accomplished; and he was Hanged a Third
time, in Chains, where Thousands daily behold the Spectacle.

The Sinners Pursued of Evil, may Laugh and Scoff at these things; and perhaps
the Preacher may be derided for his Telling Stories in the Pulpit. Sinners, I
wish that you don't prove some of the Stories. I am Credibly informed, That a
principal Person among the Pirates now going to Die, upon the Gallows, was in
one of his former Voyages, Flouting and Railing against a Minister in this
place, who had never deserved it. And a more considerate man then present,
Rebuked him for it; but in his Rebuke Expressed his Thought, how it would be
when he should have occasion for that very Minister to speak with him. You
shall however be told one more, and I will at present have done with you. The
Famous Hemingiu^ in his Exposition upon John reports* That a Lewd Fellow who
was a great Mocker at Religion, hearing a Sermon at which all the rest were
deeply affected, showed so much Contempt, that the Minister took Notice of it;
the Minister said nothing* but with a sorrowful Sigh from his heart silently
lifted up his Complaint unto God. The wretch goes out of the Church; and as he
went out, a Tyle fell from the house that Killed him on the spot. Alas, (...)
worse Evil will Pursue, them that mock a^ the Warnings of God.

These Faithful Warnings against Sin, how can I better terminate them, than
with the Dying words of a Malefactor, who Dyed a very Memorable and Exemplary
Penitent! His words were to this purpose. Oh! That all People would be warned
to beware of the Beginnings of Sin. When I was first Enticed into Evil, I was
Tender and Fearful of it; but I did not hearken diligently to the Word of God,
nor to the Voice of Conscience that checked me; I went on; By degrees I was
Emboldened in Sin; At last, it became as familiar as my daily Food. Oh! As you
love your Souls, Take heed of the Beginnings of Sin. Oh That I could prevail
with Young Persons, to cast away Sin Betimes, and Check it is the first
Beginnings of it!

The Second Question.
Sinners, What will you do? Evil is Pursuing of you, even of as many of you, as
are yet in your Unregeneracy. And,

First; You cannot Avoid the Evil. Which way, I marvel, which way can you
propose to Avoid it? Will you Abscond? No; That cannot be done. You are
advised; Psalm. 139. 7. Lord, whither shall I flee from thy presence? Will you
Resist? No; That cannot be done. You are advised; Ezekiel. 22. 14. Can thine Heart
endure, or can thy Hands be strong, in the Day that I shall deal with thee,
says the Lord. Or, will you Run so fast, that the Pursuer cannot come up with
you? No, No; He has told you, Mal. 3. 5. I will be a swift Witness against
them, that fear not me, says the Lord of Hosts.

And then, Secondly; You cannot Endure the Evil: It Is Intolerable! It Is
Intolerable! It is Cried out, Prove. 18. 14. A wounded spirit, who can bear?
When a few Drops of that Evil, which is impending over you, has fallen on a
Soul, a Wounded Spirit has been the Effect of it. But that Wounded Spirit has
made the Miserables Cry out with Cain, My Punishment is greater than I can
bear! We have known some Languishing under a wounded Spirit among our selves;
and they have kept Shrieking out, Oh! I am all on Fire under the Wrath of God!
I am on a light Fire under the Wrath of God. And then, they have actually made
Choice of Strangling rather than Life. What then will i^ be, to Ly among the
Damned in the place of Dragons? Full of Consternation is that Advice; Heb. 10.
31. It is a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of the Living God! One that
lay under the Terrors of God upon his Wounded Spirit, heard some Talk, about
the Fire, and about being Roasted in the Fire, and he fearfully Roared out; Oh!
All of this is but a Metaphor, to what I do feel! Sinner, will thou venture on?
Thou art falling down into an Evil, to which the most Fiery Tortures, are but a
Metaphor! It was Exclamed of old; Psalm 76. 7. O God, who may stand in thy
sight, when once thou art Angry?

Come then; There is this to be done, O Sinners, That the Evil which Pursues
^o^ may not come at you. Fly, O Fly, unto the City of Refuge. [See Heb. 6. ^8.]
It is the Lord JESUS CHRIST, who is the Only Refuge for a Soul Pursued of Evil.
Oh! Let a Pursued Soul makes its Flight into Him, and unto the Mercy of God in
Him.

As it was said, Josh. 2. 16. Get you to the Mountain, lest the Pursuers meet
you. Even so, I say, Get you to the Lord JESUS CHRIST, that so the Pursuers may
not come at you. Repair by Faith, unto that Hiding place; Repair Immediately; O
Delay not, O Dally not; I must hasten you, as the Angel did Lot; Arise, Make
have, lest thou be Consumed.

The Great Thing to be demanded of you is, That you give the Consent of your
Souls, to be found in the Lord JESUS CHRIST; Or, Consent, most Willingly,
Heartily, Joyfully, to be the Lords. How, How shall this Point be gained? When
the Spirit of God came upon Amas^i, 1 Chronicles. 12. 18.] he Cried out, Thine are
we, O David, and on thy side, thou Son of Jesse. Might the Spirit of God come
upon our Hearers, we should so^^ have that Cry going up to Heaven from them,
Thine are we, O Jesus, and for the^ Thou Son of God. Oh! That the Spirit of
God; and of Grace, would th^^ Operate upon us! Then, Then, (...) should be no
longer Pursued of Evil.

To Conclude;

It may justly be Expected, That we should all Endeavor to Improve wha^ we
behold of Evil Pursuing Sinners in the surprising Instances, which by the
Providence of God, are newly fallen out among our selves.

There has been a Time, when some have come and Seduced and Enchanted several
of our Young Men, to Piratical Courses; and there were some Unhappy Advantages,
which the Sinners took, to shelter themselves in the Prosecution of their
Piracies. But the Government of New England will by a severe Procedure of
Justice, forever make it an Unjust thing, to Reflect on the Country, as if
such dangerous Criminals might hope ever to be safely Nested here.

All the Serious and Sensible People in (...) Land, have a great Horror upon
^^eir minds, That when they see a Thief, ^ere may be no Consenting one way
(...) another with him.

And I have hitherto Preached so Historically that I will even keep to that
^rain, in offering the Advice proper on ^his Occasion.

In the Year 1657, there was Executed in London a Young man, for Theft and
Murder. The History was Published under this Title, The Penitent Murderer; and
at the End of it, there was an Excellent Paper, which Eighteen of the Principal
Ministers in the City, Published as their Advice to the City, and Nation ^n
that occasion. The Sum of it, was;

That men should be very Thankful to God, for Restraining Grace.

That men would greatly lay to Heart the Crying Sins to be found in a place
where the Gospel shone so Gloriously; and Admire the Patience of God!

That men would Bless God, for living in a place where wholesome Laws are
Executed.

That Magistrates, would have the^ Zeal heightened for the Suppression (...)
Wickedness, and of Wicked Houses.

That Ministers would be Excite^ more vigorously to Deter men from Sin, than
ever.

That Governors of Families, would more Conscientiously Discharge the^^ Duties
to and in their Families, let^ their Perishing Children and Servant rise up in
Judgment against them; and Especially maintain the Worship of God in their
Families, and have the Lords Day strictly observed in them.

And that Young People, would greatly take heed of lesser Sins, which make way*
for Greater ones; and be careful of their Company; and Read the Scriptures,
(but Shun Play-books;) and Entertain High Thoughts of Holiness and Holy men;
and keep the Sabbath, and spend some time daily in Secret-prayer; and Love them
that go to Curb them in the ways of Sin; and E^ter betimes in the ways of God.

And now, What need of saying any more?

FINIS.

