The Rebuker REBUKED In a Brief ANSWER To Caleb Pusey his Scurrilous Pamphet,
ENTITLED, A Rebuke to Daniel Leeds, etc.

Wherein William Penn his Sandy Foundation is fairly quoted, showing that he
calls Christ, The Finite Impotent Creature.

By Daniel Leeds.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford at the Bible in New York, 1703.

To the READER.
IT having been my lot to fall in among the Quakers whom I always observed in
their Preachings to Extol themselves, telling what God had done for them, and
that he had blessed them above all other People and Professions, whom they
called The People of the world, but themselves. The People of God, The peculiar
People of the Lord, etc. which made me think my self happy in being among them,
and did not much enquire after the Principles and Doctrines of Christianity
professed and Believed by the Church of England and other Christian
Professions, thinking my self well enough; but about the year 1691. when G.
Keith began to Preach Zealously the Faith of Christ Crucified among the
Quakers, and finding them to oppose him therein, I set my self to Examine the
Quakers Books, and compare them with the holy Scriptures, and finding them
Inconsistent therewith, and many of them Contradictory one to the other, I
thought it my Duty to let others know the same, that were ignorant, wherefore I
collected many of their Unsound and Erroneous Doctrines and Principles
contained in their printed Books and published them in a Book, Entitled, News
of a Trumpet Sounded in the Wilderness, which had good acceptance in America,
and also in England, where it was Reprinted, and in Holland it was Translated
and printed in Dutch. About a year and half after it was published there comes
out a pretended answer, Entitled, Satan's Harbinger, signed by one Caleb Pusey,
a Miller in Pennsilvania. No sooner had I began to read his answer but I found
several Lies, Perversions, etc. therein, and particularly I found that he
charged me Several times with belying and abusing W. Penn, for quoting his
Sandy Foundation, where he calls Christ the finite Impotent Creature, Whereupon
I writ a Challenge to this C. P. to meet him at Philadelphia or Burlington, and
to choose four or six persons (not Quakers) to judge Whether or no W. P. called
Christ the finite Impotent Creature? proposing that if I had belyed or abused
W. P. therein, I would print and publish a Paper of Condemnation, as C. Pusey
should order me but if I had truly quoted W. P. then C. Pusey should print and
publish such a paper of Condemnation, as I should order him, for abusing me.
Now this paper lay a Considerable time in the Printers hands before it was
printed, and when it came to Philadelphia I was removed from my Plantation at
Burlington to Egg-harbour, which is near Eighty Miles, and C. P. get the said
paper before me, and took he advantage to pull a Trick upon me, by sending me a
Letter dated the 6 of October, to meet him within ten days after the date of
that Letter, and seven of the said ten days being expired before I received his
Letter, it was almost impossible for me to prepare my self and come near 80
miles and end the business, and all in three days time; or else he had some
base Design upon me. Therefore in my Almanac for the Year 1701. I Renewed my
Challenge to him, and appointed the 12th day of May to meet him at Burlington
to refer the matter to some judicious mien (not Quakers) Whether or no W. P.
calls the Manhood of Christ the finite Impotent Creature? Accordingly I came to
Burlington the said 12th day of May, to meet this Champion C. P. but instead of
coming himself he sends a Printed Pamphlet, wherein he pretends to quote W. P's
words, but deceitfully leaves out that Paragraph where the words Son of God,
Christ as man, etc. was, and tells that W. P. means it of as sinners, and not
of Christ. And therefore I have quoted W. P's words as they stand in his book,
called, Sandy Foundation, p. 20 21. that people may judge whether I have
wronged W. P. or not. Which is as follows.

W. P.'s Sandy Foundation, p. 16. begins thus; The vulgar Doctrine of
Satisfaction being dependent on the second Person of the imagined Trinity,
Refuted, etc.
The Doctrine:
THat Man having transgressed the Righteous Law of God and so exposed to the
penalty of eternal Wrath, it is altogether impossible for God to remit or
forgive without a Plenary Satisfaction; and that there was no other way by
which God could obtain Satisfaction, or save men, than by inflicting the
penalty of infinite wrath and vengeance on Jesus Christ the Second Person of
the Trinity, who for sins past, present, and to come, has wholly born and paid
it, (whether for all or but some) to the offended infinite justice of his
Father.

[ Note, I do not quote W. P's Scripture Proofs that he brings to Refute this
Doctrine, the Point in Controversy between C. Pusey and D. Leeds not being
whether the Doctrine be true or false, but whether W. P. calls Christ Finite,
Impotent, etc. which I bring the following Quotations to Determine.]

Page 20, 21. The Absurdities that unavoidably follow the Comparison of this
Doctrine, with the sense of Scripture.
1. THat God is gracious to forgive, and yet impossible for him, unless the
Debt be fully satisfied.

2. That the Finite and Impotent Creature, is more capable of extending Mercy
and Forgiveness, than the Infinite and Omnipotent Creator.

3. That God so loved the World, he gave his only Son to save it; and yet that
God stood off in high displeasure, and Christ gave himself to God as a complete
satisfaction to his offended Justice; with many more such like gross
Consequences that might be drawn.

Refuted from right Reason.
But if we should grant a Scripture silence as to the necessity of Christ's
satisfying his Fathers Justice, yet so manifest would be the Contradictions,
and foul the Repugnances to right Reason, that who had not veiled his
understanding with the dark suggestions of unwarrantable Tradition, or
contracted his Judgment to the implicit apprehensions of some over-valued
acquaintance, might with great facility discriminate to a full resolve in this
point; for admitting God to be a Creditor, or he to whom the Debt should be
paid, and Christ he that satisfies or pays it on the behalf of man, the
Debtor, this question will arise, Whether he paid that Debt, as God, Man, or
both (to use their own terms.)

Not as God.
1. In that it divides the Unity of the Godhead by two distinct Acts, of being
Offended, and not Offended; of condemning Justice, and redeeming Mercy of
requiring a satisfaction, and then paying of it.

2. Because if Christ pays the Debt as God, then the Father and the Spirit
being God, they also pay the Debt.

3. Since God is to be satisfied, and that Christ is God, he consequently is to
be satisfied; and who shall satisfy his infinite Justice?

4. But if Christ has satisfied God the Father, Christ being also God, 'twill
follow then that he has satisfied himself, (which cannot be.)

5. But since God the Father was once to be satisfied, and that it is impossible
he should do it himself, nor yet the Son or Spirit, because the same God; it
naturally follows that the Debt remains unpaid, and these Satisfactionists thus
far are still at a loss.

Not as Man.
6. The Justice offended, being Infinite his Satisfaction ought to bear a
proportion therewith, which Jesus Christ, as Man, could never pay, he being
FINITE, and from a Finite cause could not proceed an infinite effect; for so
man may be said to bring forth God, since nothing below the Divinity it self
can rightly be styled Infinite.

Not as God and Man.
7. For where two mediums, or middle Propositions, are singly inconsistent with
the nature of the end for which they were at first propounded, their
conjunction rather does augment than lessen the difficulty of its
accomplishment; and this I am persuaded must be obvious to every unbyas'd
understanding. Thus far W. P.

Now here you see in his 6th Paragraph he (in express words) says, Christ, as
Man, was FINITE; and if Finite, consequently Weak and Impotent in making
satisfaction for men's sin, which is the only thing W. P. here is Refuting. But
Caleb Pusey in his Pamphlet did not quote this, This did not suit his turn, No,
This would have discovered his Knavery under his Cloak, and laid him too open;
he thought it his safest way to leave the explaining part out, and quote only
that passage where Finite Impotent Creature is named, and not the words, Son of
God, or Christ as Man, that he might make weak People believe, by his puzeling
Nonsense, that W. P. meant some other things: He also tells a deceitful story
of three distinct Heads, p. 19. as if W. P. wanted this Millers help to draw
his matter into Heads and Tails. A thing never done nor intended by W. P. for
all who have Eyes may see, it is only three Absurdities that W. P. draws up
against the Doctrine of Christ's satisfying the Offended Justice of God.

Now I doubt not but by this time all understanding men, except Quakers,
plainly see that W. P's only subject there is to refute the doctrine of
satisfaction made by the secon person in the Trinity. Nay, Quakers too see it
as plain as the Nose of a man's face, who do but lay aside their Religion, and
take up Right Reason for one minuites time.

And though I could never believe C. Pusey would accept my Challenge, yet I
presented my self at Burlington the 12th of May last, where he sent his
Pamphlet instead of appearing in person, so that it is apparent that his Letter
to me at Egg-harbour, to accept my Challenge, was only a cowardly sham, at
best; for else, why could he not as well have allowed me three Weeks time as
three days? and why cannot he meet me now in six Months time, that I gave him,
as well as in three days then, if his design had been honest? Nay, he makes it
appear in his Pamphlet, that his intentions were deceitful, and only to mock
me, for in p 17. he lets me know, that his design was to choose Quakers, which
is contrary to the Terms of my Challenge: This he kept hid from me in his blind
Letter, where he tells me, he accepts my Challenge; yet now he lets me know he
never intended to accept it.

But this was only to kidnap me, for they had provided a better argument for
me, if they could have got me thither while W. P. was amongst them, even a
Prison, their best argument of all; for at a Caball of them at the house of S
Carpenter, where W. P. dwelt, one of their Justices, ( viz. S. Richardson by
name) was heard to say, He would lay this Leeds in Goal for his Scribbling if
he could meet him there ( viz. at Philadelphia) and doubtless W. P's influence
would have extended this argument to Burlington too; and this, a Friend gave me
notice of, not long before, who heard this S. R. speak those words: I Will not be
ungrateful to name the person at present, to expose my evidence to the Rage
and Fury of the Quakers; there is a time for all things.

And thus far is the baseness of C P's design discovered; and let him laugh it
out for vexations, if he please. -- Mean time, I think it as lawful for me to
shun the Malice of the Quakers, as that Paul fled from the Malice of the Jews.

But let me a little examine his Pamphlet, as to the point in Controversy; for
I design to be brief, Therefore I think to pass by the rest of his stuff; yet I
will engage to prove, when need requires, that every page, (in answer to me, is
stuffed with Perversions, Lies, Abuses or Slanders. And in the case about the
Estate of T. Cross he is deceitful, and base in writing that I exposed him in
print before I demanded it of him, whom as I demanded it by R. Tongue, my Wifes
Father, who brought me his answer, and is ready to testify it to the face of
him. But he writes like a Quaker, therefore it does not much move me.

But as to the point in hand, I perceive he is in pain about it; for he labors
hard, and as the Maxim is, Who so labors to prove a thing to another, himself
distrusts it? And at last I find it so, for he falls a few Coggs lower, even to
a confession of my Charge; for though he denies that W. P. held Christ as Man
to be a Finite Impotent Creature, yet in P. 25 he in effect confesses it, as if
he were Mumbling of (...). And because he had called it a blasphemous Charge in
me, so to affirm of W. P. therefore he blunders at it, and will needs thrust in
the Priests along with W P. as holding the same, Both the Priests and W. P. did
own (says he) that Christ as man was Finite. Nay, in P. 26. he brings G. Keith
in too, as holding Christ as Man to be a Creature, and then he adds, surely
nothing created can be either Infinite or Omnipotent. Here now he grants, that
if Christ, as Man be Created, he must needs be a Finite Impotent Creature; yea,
he is very willing we should know, that if it be false Doctrine, that G. K. and
the Priests are of that faith, but loath he is that W. Penn should be said to
hold so But alas! this is a shameful begging of the Question; for I never
denied or disputed this point; I know Persons of several Societies of Christans
(as well as W. P.) hold Christ, as Man, to be Finite and Impotent, but as God,
Infinite and Omnipotent, and I dare not call it Blasphemy so to affirm, as he
has ignorantly and rashly done; it is a point beyond my capacity to determine,
whether it be Orthodox or not. The point between Caleb Pusey and me, is not
whether the Doctrine be True or false, but Whether W. P. holds so or not; nor
did I ever bring it against W. P. as false Doctrine, but as Contradictory to
other of his and his Brethrens Books.

Hence now may be seen what sort of stuff the rest of his Book is; for I
proposed this as the Rule and Touchstone of Trial between us, to try the rest
of his Book by, This being by him reputed a Capital, or the Chief Article or
Crime against me, which now he dare not show his head to vindicate, but on the
contrary has at last (with a blundering unwillingness) confessed it, as by me
charged; and now I expect he must again open his Muster-Rool of Rattles and
Nonsense and compose another Book in answer to this, that when his Neighbors
tell him of this, he may stop their voices, by saying, he has or will answer it.

Lastly, Whereas he insinuates, p. 17. That I would take men of my own party to
judge of the case, but ty him from Choosing of his Party. But this is a false
insinuation, I never designed to take men of my own Party, nor can any such
thing be gathered from any words in my Challenge; so that this is a Quibbling
Evasion, like the rest.

I observe he tells, p. 12. That W. P. says, it is a horrid Abuse put on him;
but if W. P. says so, it is evident that he speaks it not as a Man or a
Gentleman, but as a Quaker, and his Religion obliges him to say it. For Why?
the Quakers say the same in their answer to G. K's broad Sheet of about Fifty
Quotations out of their Books, which though eight Ministers have attested to
the truth of them and my self by comparing the Quotations have certain
knowledge they are true, yet they boldly call them horrid Lies: So that what
Truth is it that in such cases they will not call horrid Lies? Hence I appeal
to all Christendom, Whether such men are fit judges in their own cases? and
whether by these sore of Writings, Sayings and Unsayings, etc. of the Quakers,
they do not make the whole body of Christians look Black and Odious (to use C.
P's Terms) in the eyes of Runigadoes, Julian Apostates, Scavengers, Atheists,
Infidels, Turks and Jews? Though indeed these are the terms that C. P. in his
Pamphlet, from his modest Quaker Property bestows on me, and on those who have
been so kind to him (it seems) as to answer his Call, in showing him and his
(pretended Perfect) Brethren their Sin and Imperfection. But enough of this,
least I move him to call for the Names of more of his Unclean Tribe, next time
he Prints.

Daniel Leeds.
Little-Egg-Harbour, June 1st, 1702.
FINIS

