The Nets of Salvation. A Brief ESSAY upon the Glorious Designs and Methods of
Winning the Minds of Men unto (...) RELIGION.

Eorum qui impios Convertunt Nomina, ab Angelis (...) Judaei. Grot. in Luc. 10.
(...). Matthew. IV. 19. I will make you Fishers of MEN. Boston, in N. E. Printed
and Sold by Timothy Green, at the North End of the Town. 1704.

The Words of a (...).
SIvita est Optanda sapient, profecto nullam ob aliam causam vivere Optarem,
quam ut aliquid Efficiam, quod vita dignum sit, et quod Ulitate^ Iegentibus,
(...) non ad Eloquentiam, quia tenuis in nobis Facundiae Rivus est, ad vivendum
^amen afferat, quod est maxim necessarium. Quo perfecto, satis me vixisse
arbitror, et Officium Hominis implesse, si Labor meus aliquos Homines ab
Erroribus Liberatos, ad ^ter Caeleste direxerit.

The Nets of Salvation.
BOSTON-LECTURE. 25. d. 3. m. 1704.
Prove. XI. 30, He that Wins Souls, is Wise.
MAY the Merciful Redeemer of Souls, cause this Word of His this Day to be
fulfilled before our Eyes!

What man that has any sense of a God, or Soul, can behold a great Assembly of
Souls* without some ardour of Soul, for the Winning of them? That your Souls, O
my Hearers, may be Wun, unto the Fear of God, and ^he Love of Christ, and unto
the Good Things that accompany Salvation, you shall hear something of what is
to be spoken, of, as well as ^or, the Winning of Souls.

I am offering to you a Delicate Fruit, gathered from the Tree of Life. Indeed,
a Righ^eous man, is in the Proverb that affords the Sentence now before us,
compared unto the Tree of Life; And this, because of the Blessed Fruit which is
to be gathered from such a man; because of the Blessed Life, which is
Communicated in and with his Fruit. Plutarch reports, That the Babylonians
fetched more than Three Hundred Commodities out of that One Tree, the
Palm Tree; for which, it was a Tree highly and justly honored among them. A
Righteous man desires nothing so much, as to be a Fruitful Man. He counts it
the greatest Glory imaginable, to Glorify God by bringing Forth (...) Fruit.
But then, what is it, that ^e aims at in bringing forth his Fruit? What; but
the Winning of Souls. The Winning of Souls, is now commended unto us, as the
Desire and Study of a Just man; and it is with an Intimation, that he will be a
Wise man, who will be such a Just man.

Behold, the Maxim, which I hope, we shall all agree to take up; What man is
there, who knows not that it is fallen down from Heaven unto us? I am sure, It Is
a thing that cannot be spoken against.

That the Wisdom of Men is greatly to to be. E^press'd and Employed, in the the
Winning of Souls.

We shall try to come to what we would be at, by these Advances.

1. There is One Thing to be laid in the Foundation of all that we have to say
or to do; It Is a most granted Preliminary, That ^here are Souls, Even Rational
and Immortal Souls, in the Children of men: Souls, the Eternal welfare whereof,
is the First Thing ^o be Consulted by the Children of Men. That man is indeed
not worthy the Name of a Man, who doubts whether he has a Soul distinct from
his Body. His very Doubt is a Confutation of his Doubt; For, mere Body should
never form a Doubt. All Dubitation is (...) peculiar Prerogative of
Intellectual Mind. We find this Anatomy of man, at his Compo^tion; Genesis 2. 7.
The Dust of the Ground, and, (...) Living Soul. We find this Division of man,
at ^^is Dissolution; Eccl. 12. 7. The Dust returns (...) the Earth, and, The
Spirit returns to God. Thy Body, O man, though it be Curiously and Wonderfully
made, yet it is but the Cabinet of a far more Curious, and Wonderful, and
Valuable (...). A Soul, a Soul, with which if the Body ^e laid in the Balance,
verily, the Body, with all the Interests of it, will be found more light ^han
the Dust of the Balance. Man is not all Body, though in our English Language, a
Person is called, a Body. No, There is a spirit in man. There is Lodged in our
Body, and Vitally United unto it, a more spiritual Substance, Endued with the
Faculties of Thinking, and Knowing, and Willing, and Affecting an Umon with an
Humane Body. The Oracles of God, Evidently distinguish between our Spirit and
our Flesh; The Father of One, is not the Father of the Other; The one may be
out of the other, and without the other; nor is the Fate of the one, the Fate
of the other. When the Body Expires, the Soul yet Survives. The strange presage
which the Soul often has, of its leaving the Body within such or such a Time,
and this Presage with a strange Exactness accomplished; This one thing, if
there were no more, is an Ungainsayable, an Irrefragable Demonstration, That
the Soul out-lives the Body. But more than this, The Creator and Redeemer of
the Soul, has given us to understand, Mat. 10. 28. That the Soul cannot be
Killed.

No; But He did not say, That the Soul cannot be Damned. The Danger which the
Soul is in, Oh, so terrible is the Danger, that it cannot without Surprise, and
Horror, and Amazement of Soul be thought upon. Certainly, our People will
quickly be Wun unto this point; They will all quickly grant, That the Welfare
of the Soul, is the First, and Chief, and Main Thing, to be by every man
provided for. We read of such an admirable Thing as that; 3 John 2. The
Prosperity o^ the Soul. That man, who does think the Prosperity of the Soul, is
not the best Prosperity, (...) there can be any Prosperity without the
Prosperity of the Soul, such a man horribly Rebels against the Light of that
Reason, that makes him a Man. It was most Reasonably said of old, The Soul is
the Man. When I see a man Thoughtless about the Welfare of his own Soul, I
wonder that I don't see a thing driven from among Men, Eating the Grass like an
Ox, with a Body wet from the Dew of Heaven, and Hairs grown like Eagles
Feathers, and Nails like the Claws of Birds. Alas, Alas, why are we so Deaf
unto the Cry of our Souls!

Truly, Sirs, While we are Feeding our Body, our Soul Cries unto us, Oh! It Is of
more Concernment, that I be fed with the Knowledge of Him, who is the Bread of
Life! While we are Clothing our Body, our Soul Cries unto us, Oh! It Is of more
Concernment, that I be Clothed with that Righteousness, which is the Garment
of Salvation! While we are providing an House, wherein our Body, which is but
the Clay-house of the Soul, may be accommodated, our Soul pleads with us; Oh!
Make sure of an House for me to inhabit, when the Earthly House of this
Tabernacle shall be Dissolved, even an House Eternal in the Heavens. If the
Soul be Holy and Happy* it must at last go well with the Body. For this Mortal
Body shall then be at last Raised from the Dead, unto a Blessed Immortality;
and it shall be the Fiery, Flying, Everlasting Chariot of the Soul, in the
Heavenly Enjoyments of God If we look after nothing but the Body, we miss of
our End about the Body it self; 'twill be impossible for us to keep the Body
long from falling to pieces; but our Soul horribly perishes under the Eternal
Wrath of God, whereinto our Sin has cast our Soul, for want of looking after.
It stands to Reason, That the welfare of the Soul is the main Chance that every
man has to mind. Man, If thou will not mind thy Soul, claim no longer the Name
of, A man!

II. Men should not only Save their own Souls, but also labor to win the Souls
of others, by Engaging them in those things, that will issue in Salvation.

There are diverse Admonitions about this weighty and awful matter, to be
i^culcated upon us: Oh! Hear them that your Souls may ^ive!

First, A Soul is Wun, when it is brought (...) the doing of those things which
must be (...) that it may be Saved. Or, say so; A (...) is Wun, when it is
brought unto the Fear (...). There is a Winning of Souls unto (...) selves,
when we gain their good Opinion (...) us, and their good Affection to us. But,
(...) is not the princip^^ Winning of Souls ^herein so much Wisdom is called
for. It is (...) Winning of Souls to Wisdom, that is to be (...) principal
Display of our Wisdom; and that (...) the Winning and bringing of them unto the
(...) of God, which is the principal Wisdom. The winning of a Soul, is
Excellently described (...) us, in the words of one, that was a great ^rtist at
it; ^am. 5. 20. He which (...) Sinner from the Error of his way, shall save a
Soul from Death. The Winning of the Soul the Taking of the Soul. The Hebrew
word (...) signifies as much as this comes to. There (...) the Snares of
Destruction. Sins, all Sinful practices, are those Destroying Snares. A Soul
taken in them, is a Lost Soul. But there are the Snares of Salvation too. In
the ways ^f Religion, there ly those Lovely, Useful, ^aving Snares. A Soul is
wun, when it is taken here, and Enticed and Allured into the Right w^^es of the
Lord. We read of one, Act. 26. 2^. Almost persuaded to be a Christian. There
was a Soul almost wun! But when a Soul is Altogether Persuaded unto Real
Christianity, and unto those things that will be for the Everlasting Peace of
it; There, There is the winning of the Soul. A Soul is wun, when it is engaged
and Persuaded unto Serious Religion. Satan would make a Prize of every Soul.
When the Soul is brought back unto God, by Serious Religion, it is then wun
from Satan. The winning of the Soul, is the bringing of the Soul to Repent of
Sin: Repentance is unto the Salvation of the Soul. The winning of the Soul, is
the bringing of the Soul, to Believe on Christ; The End of Earth is the
Salvation of the Soul. To win the Soul, is to bring the Soul, to Call on God,
and Walk with God; He that Calls on the Name of the Lord shall be saved. We
are here told, He that Wins Souls, is Wise. You shall have an Angel from
Heaven, to be an Expositor upon it; Dan. 12. 3. The wise are they, who Turn
many to Righteousness. That, even That is the winning of the Soul; It Is, a
bringing of the Soul into the Righteousness of God, by closing with the Lord
Jesus Christ; and a bringing of the Soul, to love, and like, and choose the
Paths of Righteousness in Evangelical Obedience.

Secondly, Men owe this unto the Souls of ^ne another, to do what they can,
that they may win the Souls of others. No less than Six of the Ten Commandments
uttered by the mouth (...) God unto His People from the Flaming Mountain, all
turn upon Love to our Neighbors(...) Lovely Law, which requires nothing but
Love! O Hateful Sin that shakes off such a (...)! We read, Romans 13. 8. Owe no
man anything, but to Love one another; set he that Love^^ ^^other, has
fulfilled the Law. There is a Debt (...) Love, which we always owe to our
Neighbors. Our Love to our Neighbors must appear in our Help to them. Our
Help to our Neighbors must be used in all their Interests. Our Neighbors have
no Interests, that are (...) great as those of their Souls. We are to (...) our
Neighbors, what good we can in regard of their Place, their Life, their
Health, their Wealth, their Name. Yea, but the Souls, (...) Souls of our
Neighbors, are of infinitely (...) Account than all those things. We ^^charge
not our Duties to our Neighbors, except we do for their Souls, all the Good
what ever we can. It was required, Exodus 2^ (...) If thou (...) thine En^^ies
Ox, or his As^ going astray, thou shall surely bring it back to him again. How
much more, O Christian, if thou see the Soul of thy Neighbor going astray,
should thou do all that may be done to Wun him, and Save him? It was the
speech of Cain, and a Speech fit for the mouth of none but a Cain, a Child of
the wicked One Genesis 4. 9. Am I my Brothers Keeper? Yes O man, Thou art under
all the Bonds imaginable, to the Soul of thy Brother. Such is our Condition,
that we need the mutual Assistences of one another, for our Souls, as much as
in any of all our Concerns. And if we have any Charity for one another, it will
be discovered in Assistences to the Souls of those about us, that call for it.
Very positive is the Command of God; Heb. 3. 13. Exhort one another daily. Is
this all? Hear more; Lev. 19. 17. Thou shall in any wise Rebuke thy Neighbor,
and not suffer sin upon him. Is this all Hear more; 1 These. 4. 18. Comfort one
another. There is the winning of Souls to be propounded in all these Operations.

And if the winning of Souls must be Endeavored by all Christians, how much
more must it be the Endeavor, the Vigorous and Exquisite Endeavor of them,
who by a peculiar Office, have the Care of Souls lying upon them But, my
Fathers and Brethren, As touching your Obligations to the winning of Souls, ye
need not, that I speak unto you; For ye your selves are ^aught of God, that the
Winning of Souls, is the ^^ly thing you have to mind in the world.

Thirdly; The winning of Souls, does Declare and will Require, the Wisdom of
the Souls, that are concerned in it.

We will speak Distinctly.

First. A Wise man will be Desirous to Do that he can for the Winning of Souls.
There (...) no wise man, but what has had his own Soul ^un unto the Service of
the Lord Jesus Christ. And it is the property of every such man, to be
sollicitous for the Winning of others. There is no man, who has any true (...)
in his own Soul, but what has an unbreakable Thirst in him to see Grace in
every Soul about him. No man can have a Soul ^^^cerely Renewed and Alive unto
God, but that longs to see the like Life, in every Soul (...) whom he is at all
Related. The Language (...) every Godly Soul is nothing less than that, (...)
Psalm. 67. 3, 5. Let the People Praise thee, (...) God, let all the People
Praise thee. Every wise man has a great Value for Souls, a great kindness for
Souls. And a wise man does ^^sely lay to heart, the Consequences that will
follow upon the Winning of Souls, or the not Winning of them.

On the one side, He sees, That if he do Win any Souls, an astonishing Reward,
a delicious Comforts will be the Issue of it. There is no Pleasure under Heaven
comparable to that, The Doing of Good: It is Heaven Anticipated; It is a most
Heavenly Pleasure; (...) is its own Recompense; Every wise man is of that
Judgment. But no Good is ever done, comparable to that which is done, in the
winning of Souls. To Win a Soul, is to bring that Soul unto the Fruition of the
Chief Good and it is to settle a New Fund of Services and Hallelujahs, and
Adorations to the Great GOD that never, never shall be Exhausted through out
Eternal Ages. More than this; He that wins a Soul, has a share in all the
Felicity (...) that Soul. It Is a vast Honor, that the Lord puts upon a wise
man, when He makes that man, the Instrument of winning a Soul to Everlasting
Felicity; and he makes the man (...) Partaker of the Felicity. It will be so,
when that Servant of God, shall behold the Saved Soul, Glorify God with such
Acknowledgements, Oh! Blessed be God, for the Labors of such a man. Blessed be
God, that ever I saw the Face, that ever I heard the Voice, that ever (...) the
Books, of such a Man! There will be a diadem of matchless Glory, set upon the
head of that wise man, that is a winner of Souls. Of such men it is promised,
They shall (...) as the Brightness of the Firmament, even as (...) Stars for
Ever and Ever. The winners of Souls, will be the Stars, whom God will call
Names, when the Holy City shall come down, the Outcasts of Israel shall be
gathered. There will be Mansions of a peculiar Dignity in the Holy City of God,
for the winners of Souls. They shall Ride in Triumph through the streets of
that City, and it shall be Proclaimed ^^fore them, These are the Men whom the
(...) of Heaven delights to Honor. It is a ^ishing passage, which our Apostle
has to (...) Thessalonians; Their Souls had been wun (...) his Ministry; and
now, says he; I These. ^ 19. What is our Hope, or Joy, or Crown of joycing? Are
not even ye, in the Presence of (...) Lord Jesus Christ at His Coming? Sirs, At
(...) Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, we shall ^eet with such as have had
their Souls wun by (...) means unto the Service of the Lord Jesus Christ. But
Oh! What a Rapturous Greeting will there be between us; To have it said (...)
the one part, O my Friend, I thank God, I thank God, that ever I had your
Counsils; what a Glory have they brought me to! To have it said on the other
part, O my Child, I am glad you are here: what shall we now do together for the
Glory of our Lord!

It was a Savoury Speech uttered by a Great Personage, who sometimes was a
Preacher of the Gospel, but came to be one of the most Eminent Statesmen in
Europe; Said he, (...) have passed through many places of Honor and of Trust,
both in Church and State more than any of my Order in England for Seventy Years
before. But were assured, that by my Preaching I had Converted but one Soul to
God, I should there (...) take more Comfort, than in all the Honors and
Offices that ever have been bestowed upon me. Great WILLIAMS, (...) do not
wonder at thee!

On the other side; He sees, That if he do not what he can, for the winning of
Souls, he may come to have the Ruin of Souls lying upon him. There is no fight
so grievous and so fearful, unto a wise man, as the Desolation of (...) a SOUL.
For a Soul to ly under the Guilt of Sin, and the Wrath of God, and become a
Prey to Devils; Oh! It Is the most Heartbreaking sight, unto every Good man, that
ever he looked upon. But then, the Blood (...) a Ruined Soul, to have it lying
upon him if; such a man had rather Die upon the ^heel, than be so miserable. It
is a tremendous word; Ezekiel. 33. 8. If thou do not speak warn the Wicked from
his way, that wicked (...) shall Die in his Iniquity, but his Blood will require
at thine Hand. All men that can do (...) thing for the Souls of others, may be
more less concerned in this word. Man, if thou nothing to Warn and Win the
Wicked Folks but thee, they may Die in their Iniquity, but (...) Blood may God
require of thy Souls there is nothing, Oh! Nothing more terrify, (...) to a
wise man, than the Blood of Souls. There no Wise man, but what had rather be
thrown (...) a M^^stone into the midst of the Sea, than the Cause of any man
being Drowned in (...); or have the Judge of the world (...) to him, The Blood
of Souls is found in thy (...). He trembles, he trembles at it, as much (...)
Belshazzar did at a, M^ne T^kal

Secondly, He had need be a wise man, that all do any thing to purpose for the
Winning (...) Souls. We read Prove. 16. 20. He that endless (...) matter wisely
shall find Good. Even (...), He must handle a matter wisely, that will do
(...). None but a wise man will be likely to handle a matter for the winning of
Souls. To win a Soul unto any thing, there is occasion for Wit and Skill: But
there is occasion for more than ordinary Wisdom in the winning of Souls to
Piety. For the Souls of men are Naturally most averse to Piety; and Satan tries
with all the Art and Force of his Temptations, and by more than Ten Thousand
Wiles to keep them Impious. Hence we have that Advice given unto us, Col. 4. ^.
Walk in wisdom toward them that are without. He that would win Souls, must
know, what are the Things that God requires of Souls; he must know, what
Arguments are to be used for the pressing of those things, he must know what
Artifices, what Contrivances, what Methods, are the most proper for the Taking
of Souls. He must know, -- Alas, I so little know the Needful Things
themselves, that scarce (...) know how to tell what are the Needful Things.
Lord, (...) our want of wisdom. So many Things are to be Known, and to be Done,
for the winning of Souls, that we must say, Who may be sufficient for those
things? We read of one, Act. 11. 24. He was a Good man, and much People were
Added unto the Lord. So, He had need be a wise man, by whose means, the Souls
of any People are to be added unto the Lord. (...). But we will proceed unto
some Articles.

APPLICATION.
I. There is great Wisdom in the winning of Souls: what Folly it is then, to be
Active in the winning of Souls? There are many Agents of (...) Devil in the
world, who are such Unhappy ^^retches, as to debauch the Souls of others, to
the same Damnation with their own. That can be the Fate of such Fools, but a
(...) Damnation, and a Damnation that (...) is not! It is the Character of
Seducers, that (...) People into Damnable Heresies. They are (...) Busy about
the winning of Souls, over (...) their Heresies. Alas, That winning of Souls
the Damning of them. Of the Souls that we wun by them, it is said, 2 Timothy 2. 26.
They are in the Snare of the Devil. Should any of the Seducers profess
themselves to be recovered unto Repentance, one would think, that they would
walk softly in the Bitterness of their Souls (...) their Days, when they
reflect, how many Souls have been Damned under their Conduct should such a man
speak Lightly and Vainly and without unspeakable Remorse upon his mind, of the
Souls formerly misled by him, (...) were a black mark of his being an Impostor,
that never had any true Repentance at all doubt, the Churches of New England
have known such a man! But how many ways have all Vicious Companions, to
destroy the Souls of them that keep them Company! (...) Companions do strangely
win upon the Souls of one another; and so they Draw one another into the Paths
of the Destroyer. Woeful Creature; The man is himself, it may be Delivered up
unto Satan; and now, he strives to Win as many for Satan as he can. It may be,
there are some that by sitting with such (...) as he, have been flouted out of
all Serious Dispositions; There are some, who have been carried away to Hard
Drinking, and Gaming, and Lewdness, by the Enchantments of that Fellows
Conversation: Or, It may be, some have been Unrighteously and Uncureably
Prejudiced against the winners of Souls, by the Malice of such or such a man.
Sometimes miserable Relatives thus poison one another. The Souls of their
Friends might have been wun unto God, by such Dispensers of the Gospel, if they
had not hindered it. Oh! That they, who make it their Business, to carry away
the Souls of others, from a Devout Respect unto all the Commandments of God,
would be think themselves of their Folly. To associate (...) with such, is to
be, as the Wise man tells (...), Prove. 13. 20. The Companion of Fools. (...)
wretches, what are you doing to one ^^other? You are dragging one another down
(...) the state of the Damned, in this greatness (...) your Folly. Down they
are going; they (...) gone, they are gone; Except thou, O Lord, (...) them
wonderfully. But let us now go forth, to look upon the Souls of the men, that
have thus transgressed against the Lord; Their Worm does not, and their Fire is
not Quenched, (...) they are an A^horring to one another, and (...) Endless
Execrations they gnash upon (...) another, and say, Cursed be the Day that
(...) I knew thee; Thou, Thou art the wretch, (...) has brought me to this
place of horrible ^^ment!

II. Is there wisdom in the winning of Souls? (...) it is Wisdom for Souls to be
Wun, and (...) to and comply with, such as would (...) them to that which is
Good. O that all (...) People, would be so wise, as to understand (...), and
Consider, what would be their Latter (...), if their Souls were once Wun unto
the (...) of God! But, because our Young People, (...) of all the most likely
and easy to be Wun, (...) you, O Young People, reckon your selves peculiarly
concerned in these Admonitions (...) the Lord.

It may be, there cannot a more Winning Thing be spoken, to move men unto
Religion than to show them, that it will be their Wisdom. For man is ambitious
of nothing for much as to be esteemed wise. The very first Sin and Fall of man,
was introduced by that Ambition. We use the most powerful Motive with a man
that can be, if we Convince him, that it will be his wisdom to do what we would
have.

We must prosecute this matter with our Hearers. There are those who would
(...) Win your Souls; God knows, There are so When Moses would win his People
to the which is Good, he so urged it upon them Deuteronomy. 4. 6. This is your wisdom.
Truly, this is what we would urge upon our Hearers that they may be wun unto
Religion; O (...) People, It will be your wisdom, if the Winners (...) Souls,
may prevail upon your Souls. For,

First; The Things from which you should be Wun, are such, as it cannot but be
your wisdom to be Wun from them. To Repentance is, to grow wise again. An
ungodly man always playing the Fool. To be wun from the ways of Sin, is to be
wun from what we make work for Repentance. If there be wisdom in Repentance,
there is no wisdom (...) those things that will Damn a man without Repentance.
The Things are those, whereof (...) are so Expostulated withal; Romans 6. 21.
That Fruit had you of those things, whereof ye (...) now Ashamed? For the End
of those things (...) Death. If any of you are still going on in the Courses of
Ungodliness. Oh, be Wun, and (...) Weaned from those (...); For the wrath (...)
God comes upon the Children of Disobedience, or such things; and it cannot be
any man's wisdom to Expose himself unto that wrath. (...) it be your wisdom to
Forget God! When God says, They that Forget God shall be turned (...) Hell. Can
it be your wisdom, to walk (...) the Flesh? When God says, If ye walk (...)
the Flesh, ye shall Die. Can it be your wisdom, to mind Earthly things? When you
(...) told by God, That a dreadful Destruction all be the End of them that mind
Earthly things. Oh! That your Souls might be wun (...) the Sins, by which you
wrong your own Souls. Why, why will you love Death? It Is Madness, with which you
go to the Dead.

Secondly; The Things To which you should be wun, are such as it cannot but be
your wisdom to be wun to them. About every one of the things, I may say; Deuteronomy.
32. 47. It is (...) a vain Thing for you, it is your Life.

One Thing whereto we would Win your Soul, is, A vast Regard, a strong Pity for
your own Souls. Oh! That you would be wun to some Care about your Souls. Twill
be your wisdom, O ye Souls in Peril, to be wun unto some Thoughts about your
own state before the Lord. It cannot but be wisdom as long as that word stands
in the Bible Mat. 16. 26. What is a man profited, if he gain the whole world,
and lose his own Soul? It was reckoned a Golden saying of the Heathen Reverence
thy self, Honor thy self. A Christian cannot hear a saying of more Importance
than this; Reverence thy Soul, Honor thy Soul O be not one of those Monsters
of whom there is this Description, Prove. 15. 32. (...) Despises his own Soul. I
will say this unto you; Behold, O Despisers, and wonder, and no more Despise,
that you may not Perish A Soul, that is the Miracle of the Creation. All the
Stars in Heaven are not so illustrious as a Soul! The Image of the Great GOD,
is no where so much to be seen throughout the whole visible Universe as upon a
Soul! A Soul, which the Son of God Himself set such a rate upon, that He was
willing to shed every drop of His Precious Blood for the purchase of it. A
Soul, for which every (...) of the (...) God! A Soul, (...) the Highest and the
bright (...) would with all their Hearts, befriend (...) their kindest (...)! A
Soul, A Soul, (...) is (...) for Eternity (...) O Soul, (...) Endure, and of
thy (...) there shall be (...) For (...) Oh that you would be (...) to take
some (...), before it be too late. (...) with your selves, what (...) I (...)
what, what (...) become of (...) I (...) for it (...) You would (...) to be
(...): And there is not the (...) of wisdom in you, till you come to This.
(...)! That you were all (...) at least unto as much; To (...) down before God,
and (...) out with him; (...)

Another Thing whereto we would Wun our Souls, (...), The Consent of your Souls
(...) (...) of Great, and unto all the (...) proposals of it. O (...), your
Souls (...) Love: There is proposed unto us all, (...) of first More is for
(...). By the Consent of our Souls thereunto, we are brought (...) the
Covenant, (...) have a (...) to all (...) If a man may, have the Infini^^ GOD
for (...) and the Lord JESUS CHRIST for a Prophet, and his (...), and his King;
and the very Great of (...) Promises of the (...) Covenants for his Portion;
All This, (...) This, only upon an Heart, Consent, for (...) have these things,
Oh! would it not be (...) Wisdom to give his Consent? I say then; (...), O all
ye People, (...) one of you! Be (...) thus Wise and you are wise man Salvation.
(...) the winning of the Soul, for it once to be made a willing Soul. The
People are (...), when one they become, Psalm. 110. 3. 4 willing people Soul,
Can there, be no winning of thee? Oh Be willing to have God the Father for thy
Father, Be willing to have God, the Son for the Savior; Be willing to have God
the (...) for thy Leader: And, be willing to have the Kingdom of God for thy
Inheritance; and the word of God for thy Rule to come a^ (...) Certainly, This
would be thy Wisdom; For if thou art but willing to it, it shall be so believe,
the Angels of God stand looking upon us, with an Astonishment. There (...) unto
us all and even unto the (...) and wretched Sinner among us all (...) a Tender
as (...) The Great GOD, is willing to be thy God, and the Christ of God is
willing thy Righteousness and thy Salvation, if the^ it Accept of Him. Would it
not be our wisdom, with a Conquered Soul, full of (...) to declare immediately
Lord, I Accept and I Accept! Lord, Help me to Accept! (...) of us have not so
much Wisdom as this comes to, I am sure, You are Astonished at this, (...)
Heaven, and ye are horribly Afraid, because you see we are so Besotted, and
shall be (...) Desolate (...) Briefly, To sum up all; We would W^n our Souls to
the whole Exercise of all God^ess; to the Practice of Serious Religion; to
every thing that is Holy, and Just, and Good, (...)! That you would be wun to a
free. (...) of your selves (...) the Service of God, and a firm Resolution to
serve Him, (...) the ways of Holiness and Righteousness (...) Him all the
days of your lives. I can (...) unto you, That it would be your wisdom to
become Seriously Religious. (...), There can be no standing before this
demonstration; The Laws of the Only wise God, must needs be Rules of the most
Exalted wisdom. It cannot but be our wisdom i^ Conform our selves unto the Laws
of the Only wise God. Oh, Why then will you not become Seriously Religious? Why
not be (...) to abound in the Demotions of Christianity and ^atch over (...)
Hearts and Lives that there may be (...) allowed (...) them. It was most
incontestably Determined. ^sal. 111. 10. The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning
of wisdom, (...) have (...) who (...) things And thence is this thing so
strengthen the Demonstrations, You (...) have no manner of Objection to make
against the Piety required of you. You cannot Object, that it is (...)
Disconsolate thing, to be Seriously Religious (...) The ways of wisdom are
pleasant ways; No Sensual Pleasures (...) comparable to those of Communion
with God. It can (...) Wisdom to take such pleasant ways. You cannot Object,
that it is Dishonorable. What? Can it be a Blemish, to become a Child of the
Almighty King of Heaven and Earth, or to (...) the (...) of what Lord whom all
the Angels in Heaven adore for evermore? You cannot Object, That it is
Unprofitable. What? Can you be a loser by that which will bring you to the
Unsearchable (...) of Christ (...) Surely, To gain the Knowledge of God, and
the Favor of God, is better than to gain the finest Gold. Oh! why should not
our People be Wun, unto those things, that will Delight them, Adorn them,
Enrich them inexpressibly! Is it not a man's wisdom, to do what is for his
Interest? Then 'twill be your wisdom to become Seriously Religious! I appeal to
the Conscience of every man alive, whether the Greatest Interest of every man
in the world, be not his Everlasting Happiness in the world to come. Every man
Living will readily grant it: That thing has even put off the Character of a
Man, and should be Condemned and Confined unto All Four, who will not readily
grant it. Grant this, and the Point is wun; For there is no man who can
Seriously think, That there is any coming to Everlasting Happiness without
being Seriously Religious. But, O man, Thy Heart not yet wun unto it!

Well; I will put the Demonstration then beyond all Contradiction. There is not
one of us all, but what will within a very little while come to the
Acknowledgment of it. That Serious Religion is the greatest, the truest, the
only Wisdom. It would be a Real wisdom in every man, to Live under the power of
such Apprehensions, as he will have, when he becomes to Die. Men generally
Entertain ^iser Apprehensions of things, when they are under the awful
Apprehensions of being fetched away by Death, to appear before God the Judge of
all, and give an Account how they have Lived, than they had while they lived
(...) Health and Ease and a Thousand (...). Now, When, when did you ever (...)
Dying man, but what Confessed his Apprehensions, That it would have been his
wisdom, to have lived Religiously? One of the most Renowned Scholars and
Statesmen upon the ^^ace of the Earth, Namely, Gr^tius; when he drew near his
Death, he professed, That he would gladly now give all his Learning, and all
his Honor, for the Religion of a poor (...) in his Neighborhood; an honest
man, that lived (...), but very Religiously. And when some asked him, Sir, Will
you please to Oblige us now, with be ^^st Couns^^ that we may Expect from a
Person of your Great (...) and Experiences? His only Answer was, be Serious, Be
Serious. And a Person little, if an all, inferior to him, Namely, the
admirable Seldom, when he was in his last Sickness declared, The Five (...)
Verses, in the Second Chapter to Tirus, are now of more value (...) me th^n all
my Library. Oh, Our Beloved People; Why will you not be wun to that Religion,
of which you will very shortly wish, (...) that I had been so wise as to be wun
unto (...)

How, How shall I set on this Thought with a proper pungency? I will bring my
(...) as near to take, as I can for my Life. In our most Quiet and Healthy
Times, take one Year with another, there Dies out of this Town in one Year,
above One Hundred and Fifty People; which I take up be about a Fortieth Part of
the People. Accordingly, to all probability, there are at least One Hundred and
Fifty People now living in this Town, that before (...) Year come about, will
be carried before be Judgment (...) of God. And there is not so much as One of
all you, my Hearers, but for ought he can tell, he may make one of this Number.
Ah, Lord, why should not I be One of them! Now there will not be One of this
Number, but if they have the Age, and the Sense, to speak Reasonably in their
Dying Hours, I can certainly foretell thus much concerning them. Come to them in
those Dying Hearts, when their Breath is Failing, their Throat is R^^ling,
their Eyes have a Cloud, and their Hands a Damp upon them; and their Soul,
their Soul, is going; and, Then! Ask them, Whether they do not judge it the
Highest wisdom it (...) to Fear God, and Love Christ, and Hate Sin, and Slight
the World and be (...) abounding in the Duties of Serious Religion? They will
most certainly bear a lively Testimony to it, Oh! There is no wisdom comparable
to that of Serious Religion. They will choose, they will wish, Oh! Let me Die
the Death of the Righteous, and let my Last End be like his! And why then, will
not our People be W^n unto this wisdom? Why should any Souls, under the Gospel
that should win our Souls, continue like the Deaf Adder, which will not (...)
Voice of Charmers, that Charm (...) Wisely? Let them not wonder, if we tell
(...) That this (...) way is their Folly. The Sinner is in the Divine Oracles
very often called, A (...) He will a Thousand times of^ner call himself, A
Fool. He will regret, and reproach his own Folly, more than Ten Thousand Ages.
O solicited Soul; There are Two that more thee, to make thee their own. The
Savior, He Wooes thee, My Son, Give me thy Heart; Be thou mine, and I will
(...) a spectator and a partaker of my Glory (...). The Destroyer, he Wooes
thee, (...) Follow the Pleasures of Sin for a Season; Gratify my Temptations,
and run the venture of a share in my Everlasting Miseries. But which of these
now, shall Win that solicited Soul? Certainly, (...) will be thy wisdom for
thy Soul, to be wun by thy Savior; O Child of (...) Do not bring thy self, to
that Condition; Prove. 5. 11, 12 Thou shall mourn at the Last, and say, How have
I hated Instruction!

III. In the winning of Souls is there Wisdom? Let us Get the wisdom; and Use
the wisdom.

Indeed, There is one particular winning of Souls, that some have thought more
particularly intended, in that Proverb of Israel, which is now instructing of
us; and it were well, if there were more of that wisdom found among us. That is
to say, The Winning of People under Animosities against one another, to lay
aside their Animosities: To win Souls, is to Reconcile the minds of People,
that are at Variance, and Conquer and Subdue the Prejudices, that are in their
Souls against one another. Good men do Lose one another, and Lose that Good
which they might have by one another, when they are Embroiled in Contentions.
Tale-bearers are therefore Diametrically Opposite unto winners of Souls. To win
Souls, is to bring Divided Spirits over unto one another; and it is Wisdom to
do such Thing; It Is that wisdom which is from above, (...) be so Peaceable. They
are wise men, who (...) in the methods of true Wisdom, affect and merit that
Motto, Mat. 5. 9. Blessed are the Peacemakers. Sometimes the sincere Servants
of God, may like Paul and Barnab^ have their Paroxysms. Uncomfortable
Al^^nations may happen between those that and Men of God, because they may have
too much of the Old Man in them, and Satan may not a little Damnify the Cause
and Work of God by these Infirmities. It would be a wisdom to Unite the Jarring
Servants of God. The Garland of wisdom shall be placed on the Heart of him that
brings them into an Union with one another. And the Attempt is here more
hopeful, than when you have to do with soul as are themselves destitute of
wisdom. The Children of God, tho, they may have then Froward and Fretful Pangs,
yet they will not be those Thorns, which cannot be taken wide bands. A wise Man
will not count himself so sent with Iron and the staff of a Spear, as to (...)
where he can hope for nothing but --

But there is a more General winning of Soul to which we are more Generally now
to be invited; And that is, The bringing of soul unto Serious Religion.

I remember, that brave Old Man, Father Laty^er, having occasion to Rebuke and
Unbraid, the Sloth of some, who by their Profession should have been the
Winners of Soul be stung them with a passage of this Purport (...) will not Learn
of God, and Christ, and Good (...), Sirs, then Learn of the Devil! The Devil
does all he can for the Winning of (...) he goes about seeking whom he may Win,
unto his Devouring Jaws. Why do we no more to W^n, and Save Souls, from those
Devouring Jaws? This I will say; our Lord sometimes complained, Luke 16. 8. The
Children (...) this World are for their Generation Wiser than the Children of
Light. With shame truly may we make the Complaint. The Children of a (...)
Religion, are Wise and Warmer, in their Zeal for the Winning of Souls into
their, Paths of Darkness, than we are for the Winning of Souls, to walk in the
Light of the Religion of God. The Mahometans outdo us; The Quakers outdo us;
The Socinians outdo (...): The Papists make us Ashamed. With what a Zeal do
their Missionaries compass Sea (...) Land, that they may gain Proselytes, and
win the Souls of men over unto the Popish Idolatry? What Hazardous Travels,
what Mavelous Fatigues, do their Zealots undergo, that they may Win the Souls
of men, only to change the Old Chains of Death for New ones? They will bear the
Loathsome and Irksome Wigwams of the Indians in an howling Wilderness, if they
may but Win over the Salvages to their Superstitions. I blush, I faint, when I
read, the vast Pains which those Bigots take for the winning of Souls! No less
than Six Hundred Clergymen, in that one Order of the Jesuits did within a few
Years, Embarque themselves at several times, for China, that they might Win
over that mighty Nation unto their Bastard-Christianity. No less than Five
Hundred of them lost their Lives, in the Difficulties of their Enterprise; and
yet the Survivers go on with it, Expressing a sort of Trouble, that it (...)
not unto their share to make a Sacrifice (...) their Lives, in Enterprising the
Propagation of Religion. I am astonished. I am astonished! No man shall hinder
me from spreading out my Hands unto the Lord, and Crying out, with him of old;
Ezr. 9. 6. O my God, I ashamed, and blush to (...) up my Face unto thee, my
God. How can a Servant of God forbear sallying forth into the most inflamed and
confirmed Resolutions* Well; I am sure, I owe more unto the Glorious Lord Jesus
Christ, than any man in the world can owe unto Antichrist. I am sure, Our Holy,
and Noble, and Glorious Religion, is more worthy to be Propagated, than any of
the Romish Abominations. Let me then Triumph over all the Discouragements that
can be offered by a Slothful, and an Envious, and a Flouting Generation of men.
I will be wholly swallowed up in the Raptures of a Zeal to Do Good; And if this
be to be Vile, I will be yet more Vile; For, Lord, it will be impossible for me
ever to do Enough, in the Serving of thee, and in the winning of Souls to serve
thee!

But, whither am I carried?

The Case, which I am now to speak to is;

What may be done for the Winning of Souls? What will be done if there be
Wisdom in us?

Now truly, The very Propounding of the Case, is the First, and almost the
Chief thing to be done, in the Answering of the Case. My meaning is; That we
should all of us, very often make that Enquiry; What may be done for the
Winning of Souls? We all of us have our various Opportunities to do something
in this Lovely work of God. Neither (...), nor any man, can specify all the
several Opportunities, to win Souls, wherein every man is betrusted with the
Talents of the Lord. But therefore let every man Retire and Ponder with
himself, What is there that I may do for the winning of Souls? Entreat of God,
the Father of Lights, That He would by His good Spirit, suggest into your
minds, What you may do for Him, and for Souls? And then, Think, and Think
again! Thinking for Souls is a great step to the winning of Souls. It may be,
thy Soul, O Servant of God, will not be so Barren of Good Thoughts, but that
thou will Think of something to be done Oh! That our Souls were smitten with
the Charm of that word, Prove. 14. 12. Mercy and Truth shall be to them that
Devise Good. Sirs, Would you be often Devising, and Studying, and Contriving,
what Good you may do for the Souls of them that are about you, who, who can
tell what surprising Things, the Mercy and Truth of God may do for you!

But, What may be done? I will mention a Second Thing: which being joined unto
the First, will render it the more Significant and Effectual. It Is This: That we
may win Souls, we must set a right Estimate upon the worth of Souls. A SOUL, a
SOUL; Oh, Let the Sound of it, with us, be so big, as to drown the Sound of a
whole World. A SOUL, It Is a mighty Thing! What is the Body, in comparison of the
Soul? The Body, it is Wormsmeat; yea, it is a worm. The Soul, It Is the offspring of
God, the Image of God. What can the Body do, without the Soul? What becomes of
the Body, when the Soul is fled? The Soul, It Is an Angel in Flesh; or, at least,
by Sanctity it may be made one. How stupendous are the Capacities of the Soul!
It Is capable of Conversing with the God of Heaven, and Enjoying of Him. A SOUL;
The Blood of the Son of God Himself, He did not look upon it as thrown away,
when it was paid and shed as a Ransom for Souls! The Soul, if it be Converted
unto God, it will come to be with Christ, in Fullness of Joys and Pleasures for
evermore. But if that Soul go Christless, and Graceless out of the world, it
sinks down into such Miseries, that thy Heart is all Stone, O man, if thou art
not struck with horror at them; if thou Cry not out, O Lord, my Flesh Trembles,
I am Afraid of thy Judgments! Christian, Can thou make such Reflections,
without longing to be, A winner of Souls? Methinks, were we under the Influence
of such Thoughts, our Compassion for Souls, would make us with some Anguish to
groan after the winning of Souls. We should be loath any Soul in the world,
should miscarry; and every Soul within our own Reach we should stick at no
pains, to prevent the miscarriage of it.

But still; What may be done? Thirdly, and I might have said, Firstly; There is
this to be done. Praying for Souls is a main stroke is the winning of Souls. If
once the Spirit of Grace be poured out upon a Soul, that Soul is wun
immediately; and never any Soul is (...) till then. Prayer, Prayer, to the God
of the Grace, This is the way to obtain the Spirit of Grace. The Enmity in the
Souls of men, against God and Christ, will never be Conquered merely by Moral
Suasions. It Is the Spirit of Grace, that is the grand winner of Souls. Oh! If He
will but come in! -- Our way must be this; When we have pitched upon a Soul,
that we should win, we must fall down before the Lord, with weeping
Supplications; O my God, Give me the Soul! Give me that Soul! It may be, the
Lord will say to us, as once to Abraham: [Gen. 17. 20.] As for that Soul, I
have heard thee; Thou have wun it; Behold, I have Blessed it, and it shall be
Fruitful before me. All that would be successful at winning of Souls, must by
Prayer, go to that God, who forms the spirit of man within him; that God, who
Opens the Heart as He pleases, who Turns (...) Heart which way He pleases:
First win the Soul in Heaven, and you will Win that Soul (...) Earth, and win
that Soul to Heaven.

Would not our Churches gladly see the Rising Generation among us, wun over to
serve (...) God of our Fathers with a perfect Heart and (...) Mind? There has
been a Proposal made, That Solemn Da^es of Prayer with (...), might be
Celebrated in our Churches; Even successively in their several Vicinities, ^n
purpose, to ask for Effusions of the Spirit (...) Grace on the Rising
Generation. It has been Proposed by our most Aged Pastors; It has been Proposed
by Assemblies of our Pastors; it has been Proposed by the whole General
Assembly of the Province: The Proposal would, no doubt, be of a vast
Consequences for the winning of Souls* But, alas, of later Years, in how few
Churches has it ever yet been Practiced? O Sleepy Churches; Why? are you so
Cruel, and even like the Ostriches (...) the Wilderness! Why do you leave your
Offspring in the Earth, and forget that the Foot of (...) is there Crushing of
them? Why are (...) Hardened against your Young Ones, as if they (...) yours,
and as if you had no Feat of (...) in their Sins? Why should it (...) said,
that God has deprived you of the wisdom so requisite unto the winning of their
Souls, and not imparted unto you Understanding?

Yea, who can tell, how far the Prayers of the Saints, and of a few Saints, may
prevail with Heaven to obtain that Grace, that shall win whole People and
Kingdoms to serve the Lord? A New Heart shall one Day be given to the
Israelitisle Nation; The Spirit of Grace, will Win their Souls, to the Belief
of the Messiah. There never yet shone upon the world, so bright a Day, as that
wherein the Israelites, will be wun, and be turned unto the Lord, and their
Light shall come, and the Glory of the Lord shall (...) ^isen upon them. Now,
What shall be done to bring on this Notable Day of the Lord? We are told; Ezekiel.
36. 37. Thus faith the Lord God, I will yet be sought unto, on the behalf of
the House of Israel to do it for them.

It may be, the Nations of the world, would quickly be wun from the Idolatries
of Paganism, and the Impostures of Mahomet, if a Spirit of Prayer, were at work
among the People of God, with this Petition; Lord, Let thy Way be known upon
Earth, and thy Salvation to all Nations.

It may be, the Greek Churches would quickly be wun from their woeful
Superstitions, if a Spirit of Prayer were at work for them, and this Petition
often presented for them; Lord, Let the Dry Bones that ly buried in the Grave
of the Eastern Oppression and Corruption be raised unto Life.

It may be, God would raise up Reformers, in the Nations of Europe; that would
be the Illustrious winners of Souls; Men that would be filled with the Spirit
of God, and fly like Angels of the Lord about the world, with the Everlasting
Gospel in their Hands: It might be so, if the Spirit of Prayer, would make a
greater Cry to Heaven for such a Revolution. The Prayers of the Saints, being
offered upon the Golden Altar, they may be followed with a Revolution, that
shall remove the Butchers of Souls out of their Usurped Stations, and advance
the Winners of Souls unto precious Opportunities; There may follow Voices, and
Thundrings, and Lightnings, and Earthquakes.

Even they that can do little else bu^ Pray, may be great winners of Souls, if
they will Pray, and Weep, and Beg before the Lord* That the Souls of men may
not Perish, but come unto Repentance. The Famous Melancton had an Hope, That
God would carry on the Reformation in Germany, because he understood, That
there were certain Obscure Godly People, and even poor Women, that would meet
and Pray together, for the smile of Heaven upon the Reformation. Even the poor
Handmaids of the Lord, by their Praying to God for the winning of Souls, may
prove Mothers in Israel. And, O you, my Fathers, That in your Old Age, retire
from the Business and the Trouble of the world How, How do you spend your Time?
In Prayer, I hope; In Abundance of Prayer. Now, Try whether you cannot by your
Prayer pull down the Grace of Heaven for the winning of Souls unto the Lord.

Yea, I will say unto you, The Prayers of One man, that is very Dear to Heaven
may fetch down from thence, the Showers of Grace, for which the Souls of the
Elect (...) God may fare the better, from one End (...) the Land unto the
other. I don't know but whole Nations, may have mercies for Souls, hastened
unto them, upon the Prayers of some (...) One Man, that shall be continually
therefore lying in the Dust before the Lord, With Tears, with Sighs, with
Agonies. O Man of God, and mighty man of Prayer; The Lord is with thee. See,
see, what the Lord will do for thee.

But there is yet more than this to be done for the Winning of Souls. For,
Fourthly; A Good Conversation in Christ, may do much toward the winning of
Souls for Christ. [See, Mat. 5. 16.] If we would win the Souls of others, to
what we p^ofess, we must by our Good Conversation, bring a Credit unto our
Profession. By being Exemplary in our Good Conversation, we shall Adorn the
Doctrine of God our Savior; if we Adorn it, we shall Win over others unto it.
They that by Scandalous walking in the ways of Sin, do Scandalize others
against the ways of God and His Churches. Are they the winners of Souls? No,
They are the Cutthroats of Souls. Would we win Souls! Let us then Abbor that
which is Evil, and even Abstain from all appearance of Evil. Be very Heavenly;
Be very Humble; Be very Patient; Be very Ready to Forgive Injuries; very Ready
to do all Good Offices; very Mortified unto all Things here below. And
Especially, let our Carriage in our several Relations be very Exemplary. Oh!
Make it Evident, That Christianity makes us carry better to one another than we
could have done without it. This, This will Win others to a liking of Religion!
It will Win a Prize of Souls for our Excellent Religion, when it shall be said,
Those consorts do Excel others in their Kindness to one another. Those Parents
Excel in their Carefulness of their Children; and those Children Excel in their
Dutifulness to their Parents; Those Masters Excel in their Tenderness to their
Servants; and those Servants Excel in their Faithfulness to their Masters.
Those Pastors Excel in their Watchfulness to their People; and those People
Excel in their Affection to their Pastors. Those Rulers Excel in their
Compassion for their Subjects; and those Subjects Excel in their Loyalty to
their Rulers. But what makes them to Excel? Oh! It Is the Religious that is more
Excellent than his Neighbor! Methinks, It should (...) upon the Neighborhood.
I love to Read the boast of Tertulltan; Saves he to this Effect; The Heathens,
they Hare one another; but upon us Christians they set it as a Mark and a
Brand, See how they Love one another! The Heathens, one can hardly keep them
from Killing one another; but of Christians, they say, See how ready they are
to Die for one another!

Briefly; We are advised, Phil. 4. 8. Whatsoever Things are True, whatsoever
Things are Honest, whatsoever Things are Just, whatsoever Things are Pure,
whatsoever Things are Lovely, Whatsoever Things are of Good Report; Think in
these Things. Oh! What a winning Thing will it be, if we can Compel the
Consciences of the Beholders, to bear this Testimony for us; This it is to be a
Christian! It Is to do nothing, but what is True, is Honest, is Just, is Pure, is
Lovely, is of Good Report.

But is there not something more to be done? Yes; Fifthly; Our Address to Souls
may be so managed, as to do much for the winning of Souls. In the winning of
Souls, there is a special Improvement for, The Fruit of the Righteous. And what
is the Fruit of the Righteous? His Talk is his Fruit. Let us wisely take all
fit Occasions, to Talk such Things unto those about us, as may be for the
winning of Souls; and may, Ephesians. 4. 29. Minister Grace unto the Hearers. By
Brohterly Counsel, and by Brotherly Reproof, we may win the Soul of a Brother.
And it may (...) often worth our while, when we are in the Company of our
Friend, ingeniously to think, (...) there no word that I may let fall, which
may be of some advantage to the Soul of my Friend?

Perhaps, We cannot speak to so much advantage as we would. There is another way
^hen to be taken; Present agreeable BOOKS unto our Friends. Who can tell, what
God ^ay do for their Souls, by the Books which we put into their Hands? Who can
tell, but the Expense of less than a Shilling this way may have proved the
Winning of the Soul, for whom it was Expended? The Publishing, the Dispersing,
the Presenting of Books, that may Cherish the Intentions of Piety in the Souls
of men; It Is a Rare method for the winning of Souls. There are many now before
the Lord, in this House, who have often done Considerable Things, in this way
of sprinkling the Salt of Religion about the world. I can see more than two or
three Lovers of Souls, at this very Time in this House, who have each of them,
with their own Charitable Hands, given away many Hundreds of Books, for the
Winning of Souls. O Dear Servants of God, what you have done, has been, Ret^a
Sal^tis Pandere, To spread the Nets of Salvation for the winning of Souls;
Doubtless, Many, Many Souls have been taken in your Nets, whereof you shall
know more, when you meet them with unspeakable Joy in the Kingdom of God.

What more shall we say? This, Lastly; In Winning of Souls, the Winning of
those, who are more Immediately under our own Charge, is in the First Place to
be Labored for. This Charity must Begin at home!

Shall I say then? O CONSORTS, Can you do nothing to win the Souls of your
Consorts? To speak more Scripturally, What know thou, O Man, but thou may it
win thy Wife? What know thou, O Woman, but thou may win thy Husband? There
is a memorable Direction; 1 Pet. 3. 1. That the Husbands may be wun by the
Conversation of the Wives. Alas, The Task lies oftnest and hardest on that
side; The Husband is to be Wun by the Wife unto the ways of God. Oh, Use all
the Artifice, all the Patience, and all the Obliging Perswasives, that ever you
can, ye Handmaids of the Lord, that your Consorts may be Engaged unto Serious
Religion. There is this one thing to be mentioned: It may be some of you have
Husbands who don't Pray in their Families, I am afraid, left You, even You, may
be something to blame. It will be much, if you can do nothing, upon them, to
bring them unto something of Devotion. Oh! Importune them, till you have done
it! Their (...) Souls will Bless God for you, throughout Eternal Ages.

O PARENTS, May you be so Wise, as to win the Souls of your Children. Often,
often set before then, their Baptismal Covenant, and bespeak their Compliance
with it, with every Article in it, left their Baptism aggravate their
Condemnation. Often, often tell them of their Sinfulness and Wretchedness by
Nature, and show them how they must close with the Lord Jesus Christ for
Deliverance from their Sinful and Wretched Circumstances. Often, often observe
the Things which most Endanger their Souls, and Warn them, and Charge them,
with all possible fervency, to avoid those dangerous things.

O MASTERS, May you be so Wise, as to win the Souls of your Servants.
Wherefore, ^each them the Will of God and Christ, and help them to the
Knowledge of the Things, which to know, is Life Eternal. Hire them to learn the
Truths of God; and let them have certain Encouragements, and Recompenses, if
they will make such a Progress in Reading and Learning the Things of their
Everlasting Peace. Require them to Pray without Ceasing; Restrain them from
Evil Company; Allow them some time for meetings with Better Company. Argue with
them, till they Resolve to be the Lords.

Let Parents and Masters, mightily inculcate upon their Young Folks, the Things
that are pressed in the Public Ministry of the Word. Perhaps, to Repeat the
Public Sermons, in the way of Dialogue, and Conference, with your Young Folks,
would Win them to a very great Attention. Having your Children and Servants
about (...), thus go over the main Heads of the Public Sermons. Is not such,
or such a thing, a ^rath of God? And, Must we not Believe such, and such a
Truth? And, Has not the Word of God said so, and so (...) Add then; Must not
you then be careful that and so to order your Conversation? Do you desire the
Help of the Grace of God, that you may do thus and so? Well: Be sure, you
Remember this. Christians, who can tell, but the Sanctifying Spirit of God, may
marvellously fall down upon the Souls of your Young folks, while you are in
this Winning way treating of them!

And how many other ways, may those that have the Tuition of Scholars, invent
for the instilling and infusing of Good Principles into their Scholars, and
Winning of their Young Souls over to a sense of Religion! I have somewhere met
with this passage among the customs of a certain Tutor; That in every
Recitation ordinarily, he would from something or other occurring in it, make
an occasion, to let fall some Sentence which might have a Tendency to promote
the Fear of God in the Hearts of his, Pupils.

Above all; Will Not you Pray for them? As the Man came to our Lord, saying, Lord,
Have Mercy on my Son, for he is s^re vexed, and (...) falls into the Fire, and
into the Water! As the Woman came to our Lord, saying, Have Mercy on me, O
Lord, my Daughter is grievously vexed with Devil* As the Centurion came to our
Lord, saying, Lord, My Servant lies grievously Fermented! So, Let us lift up
our Cries to God, for our Children, and our Servants* Lord, My Child, will fall
(...) Eternal Fine (...) thou do not save him! Lord, My Child will be a Slave
and a Prey to the Devil if thou do not save her! Lord, My Servant is grievously
out of Order, and will Perish if thou do not win him to be thy Servant! Oh!
Don't leave off till you have your Samuels, and your Naph^hali's.

And, You, O Men of God, and (...) Ministers of (...) which do His Pleasure,
and Preach His Gospel; Doubtless, you will be always watching to fulfill your
Ministry, for the winning of Souls, Will you not Study, what Souls are to be
Wun? Will you not Study, what you may do, that the Soul, may be Wun? Will you
not rarely let any Souls in your Flocks come anear you, without letting fall
some word upon them, that may have a Tendency to the winning of Souls! O the
wondrous Effects, which there have been of the words, but occasionally let
fall, by men of God, upon the Souls of such as have perhaps but accidentally
come in their way. It is not proper for me to relate the wondrous Effects
thereof, which have been known even among our selves. I will add; Will you not
both in your Public Sermons, and in your Private Visits, Endeavor to come at
the Souls, for which you are to give an Account?

But in the midst of these your Holy Cares, doubtless, you will set an Example
of Gravity, of Purity, of Goodness. You will, be able to Challenge all the
world, and be able to make that Challenge.

Produce with (...) any one Instance wherein I have ^rought any man or done any
thing misbecoming a man whole Business (...) is to do Good unto all and I will
submit unto the (...) Censure my wor^ (...) impose upon me.

Well, but though you should be thus Innocent, yet, if the world be not mended
since the days of (...) you shall hear the defaming of many. Suppose it be so,
yet if you are set upon the Winning of Souls, you will take little Notice of
the Defamations; You will remember the Three words, by our Blessed Eliot often
insisted on, Bear, forbear, forgive. You will Concoct abundance of wrongs; You
will abhor to lose your Time,and your Calm in the managing of Controversies;
You will, when there is any thing for to be done for the Souls of the
Injurious, do it, as if they had never done you any Injury a^ all: Say as Paul
to the humour-some Galatians, Ye have done me no Injury!

But above all; Doubtless, You will be men of Prayer: If you be not so, you
will never be men of God. It has been a Remarkable Thing, in the Churches of
the Lord; Ministers that are men of Prayer, will do more at winning of Souls,
than those who Preach better than they, but Pray less than they! Oh! Let us
Pray over our Sermons, before we Preach them, and get them Sprinkled with the
Blood of Jesus Christ, that so when they are Preached they may be prospered.
Yea, Let us give our selves up to Praying, and Fasting, and Watching before the
Lord. And even, while our people are Sleeping, let us be Praying and Weeping in
secret places for them, that so we may save our own souls and the souls of them
that Hear us.

I will say but this, Dexterius loquentur cum hominibus, qui priuscum Dea, t^^a
mente sunt collecuti.

The Language of a SOUL taken in, The Nets of Salvation.
Grace Irresistible subdues me, Lord,
And I no longer can Resist thy Word.
My SOUL too long lies in its Grave forgot;
Whose price bright Pearls, yea, whole Worlds Equal not:
A SOUL whereto GOD such Respect has had;
And which Repenting, would make Angels glad.
I Loathe and Leave now all the Paths of SIN,
And Mourn that I have strayed so long therein.
The Paths of True Religion I prefer,
As what most just and Good and Lovely are.
O Great JEHOVAH, Thou my God shall be;
And I my ALL surrender unto thee.
My Life is in thy Favor; Let me live
In That, and to thy Name all Glory give.
Be Thou my father, O, Thou (...) in One,
My (...) Thou alone.
Oh! May I know, and love, and serve my God,
And ^ill'd with (...) in Hi^ (...) my Abode.
(...) Believe who the Destroyer says,
Nor will I walk in his Destructive ways.
Thee O my SAVIOR with a Lively Faith,
I ask to Save me from Eternal (...)
Me ^ow Resigned to thy most Glorious Hands,
Free by thy Merits, Rule by thy Commands.
O Wisdom, open thou my Sinful Eyes;
And with a Light from Heaven make me wise.
O Righteous One, (...) thy Obedience paid.
To Got for me, my Righteousness be made.
O Holy One, my Heart (...) with Zeal,
In Flights of Holiness to do thy Will.
O Strong (...) Help a wretched Slave,
And from (...) me Redemption have.
Lord, Me to thy C^lestial City bring,
Where thy dear Saint the hold no grievous thing
There let me See, and with the (...), possess
My JESUS, if Comp^eat and Endless (...)
I Hope of that Rich Bills, I will despise
This Vain World, and its Lying (...)
FINIS.

