THE POWER Of THE GOSPEL, IN THE CONVERSION of SINNERS IN A SERMON PREACHED AT
ANNAPOLIS In MARYLAND, By GEORGE KEITH M. A.

July the 4 th

Printed and are to be Sold by Thomas Reading, at the Sign of the George Anno
Domini MDCCIII.

A SERMON PREACHED At ANNAPOLIS July the 4th 1703. By GEORGE KEITH M.A.
I. THESE. 1, 5. For our Gospel came ^^t unto you in Word only, but also in
(...) and in the Holy Ghost, and in much Assurance etc.


THE Words of the Text give us an account both of the Reason and Ways and means
whereby the great work of Conversion was wrought upon these Thessa^onians, so
as to be turned from their Infidelity, and Idolatry, unto GOD as it is in Verse
the 9 th, That they were turned to GOD from Idols to serve the Living and True
GOD, and to wait for his SO N from Heaven V. 10. which as they did then, (though
there are now passed since that time above Sixteen Hundred Years until now*) so
do all the Faithful now alive, still wait for the same; even for the outward
and visible appearance o^ our Lord Jesus Christ, in his Glorified Body; having
the true and entire Nature of Man most highly glorified to judge both the quick
and the dead, at the great Day of Judgment: This all True Christians wait for,
and have all along wasted for, with a Fresh and Lively Hope, in all ages of
Christianity past, and will so do, (...) ^^mes, with as (...) and ^^v^ly
Expectation, as if it were nigh at Hand.

AND not only were these Thessalonians Converted from their (...) and (...) to
GOD, but at their Conversion* they were indeed with Heavenly Graces and
Virtues, mentioned V. 3 d. of this Chapter, such as the work of Faith, the
labor of Love, and patience of Hope; i^ which, and in all other Godly Virtues,
they became Followers of the Lord, and of his Holy Apostles; and were (...) to
all the Faithful of the Neighboring Churches, as in Ver. 6 and 7.

(...)* and Wa^* and Means whereby this good and happy Change was wrought on
them, as above mentioned, was by the (...) which was preached unto 'em by St.
Paul, and other his Fellow Labourours* as (...) and Timotheus mentioned in the
beginning of the Epistle.

THE Gospel has this singular Excellency in it above the Moral Philosophy
taught by the be^^ of the H^^then Philosophers, and also above the Law of Moses
singly and abstractly considered, that a converting power goes along with it
to such to whom it is preached in the truth and sincerity of it is Doctrine; and
on this account it is called by St. Paul, the power of God to Salvation to
every one that believes, Romans 1 16. Whereas the same Apostle St. Paul says of
the Law, that it was weak (Romans 8* 3. through the flesh, and that neither
Justification nor Life could be had by it; Gal. 2 21. and 3 21. which is not to
be so understood, as if either before the Law, or in the time of the Law, many
Sinners were not converted unto God* but whoever were converted, either before
the Law or in the time of the Law, their conversion was wrought not by the Law,
but by the Gospel, that was both before it, and in the time of it: for as the
Scripture says, the Gospel was preached to Abraham, and not only was it
preached to Abraham, but to Adam and Eve (^n that primitive Promise given after
the Fall, concerning the seed of the Woman which should bruise the head of the
Serpent, and to all the Faithful in all ages) Gen.3 15.

BUT it pleased God, that the preaching of the Gospel, in the most ample and
clear manner, and with the greatest Power and Extent, so as not only to extend
to the Nation of the Jews, but to the Gentile Nations* should be reserved to
the coming of the Messiah in the flesh, and his Death and Pa^ss^on Resurrection
and Ascension and that for the greater Honor of our Blessed Savior, who by
his Death abolished Death, (and him who had the power of it) i. e, the Devil,
and by the Gospel; as it began more especially, after his Passion to be
Preached by the Holy Apostles, and others, has brought life and immortality
(more abundantly) to light. 2 Timothy 1. 9 On the words of the Text, more
particularly I purpose (God assisting me) to speak to these four things
following.

I. What St. Paul here means by the Gospel.

II. Why, and how he calls it our Gospel.

III. How, and after what way it wrought the conversion of those (...), and
daily works the conversion of Sinners to whom it is preached in the sincerity
of its doctrine.

IV. And Lastly, how that assurance was wrought in them mentioned in the Text,
both with respect to their being assured of the truth of it* and also of their
conversion by it.

AND not to insist much on the latter part of the Text, as ye know what manner
of Men we were among you for your sake, and as it is Chap* 2 10. Ye are
witnesses and God also, how holyly, justly and (...) we behaved our selves
among ye that believe, they afford us this profitable observation.

THAT where the Preachers of the Gospel are of Exemplary Lives and
Conversations, in all Godlyness and Virrue, the preaching of it will have the
greater Effect upon the hearens, which yet is not to suspend the Efficacy of it
upon the Holiness of the Minister, for he who lives according to the Gospel
which he preaches, he builds up, both with his Doctrine and Life; but he who
preaches Sound Doctrine, and his manner of Life and Conversation is contrary,
he as it were throws down with the one hand, what he builds up with the other.

To begin then with the first,

I. What St. Paul here means by the Gospel.

IT might be thought a needless labor in a Christian Congregation and Countty,
such as this by Profession is, to resolve such a question, seeing every Sincere
Professor of Christianity does know what the Gospel is; but yet considering the
false notion of the Gospel that false Teachers, who swarm in diverse party of
Christendom, and do too much abound in these American parts, as elsewhere, have
vented, and continue to vent, and ^ro^ch, to the great hurt of Souls, to the
begetting in their Hearers a false Faith, and to the overthrowing the true
Faith, where they can prevail; I hope it will be acceptable to this Auditory,
to hear me give you a description of the true Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,
according to Holy Scripture, which I shall God willing do, after I have showed
you the false notion of the Gospel, which these false Teachers publish as if it
were the true, which is another Gospel, not true but false; for there is but
one true Gospel: And so by preaching this false Gospel to their Hearers, they
bung themselves under the Curse Gal. 1 8;

THE false Gospel which these false Teachers do teach to these Hearers is this,
that the eight within every Man and Woman that comes into the World, that
reproves some common sins, and instructs them in some common duties of general
Piety toward God as Creator, and of common morality, of temperance, and
justice etc. among Men, is the Gospel yea the whole Gospel, and that there is
nothing beside or beyond that; that is the Gospel. And this light within, every
Man and Woman they say is sufficient to Salvation without any thing else, as
some of their chief Authors affirm; and as others say, is a sufficient guide to
Salvation, even without the Holy Scriptures, though they generally confess, that
this light within them, without the Holy Scriptures teaches them nothing of
Christ without them, as he is both God and Man, as he was miraculously
conceived by the Holy Ghost in the Womb of the Virgin, and born of Her, as he
suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, dead and buried, rose and
ascended etc. nor indeed does it teach them any one entire Article of the
Apostles Creed, from whence it evidently appears that the whole Creed, and
every one of the Articles of that Creed, is excluded by ^them to be any part of
their Gospel.

THE utmost extent of their Gospel reaches no further, but to the Principles
and Precepts of Natural Religion, and excludes all the peculiar Doctrines,
Precepts, Promises and Threatenings which God delivered by Special Revelation to
his Holy Prophets and Apostles, and which were by them committed to Writing,
and (...) delivered us in the Holy Scriptures from being any part of that
Gospel.

NOW though the Principles of Natural Religion which are the Results of our
enlightened Reason, enlightened by the Father of Lights, and by that True Light
which lights every Man that comes into the World, Jam. 1 17. John 1 9. are
all good and necessary in their place, and are all and every one of them
Recorded in the Holy Scripture, and particularly in the Books of the Holy
Evangelists, and the Epistles of the Holy Apostles; and in that respect, as so
delivered, may be said, and ought to be ^^teemed, to belong to the Gospel in a
general way, as common both to Revealed and Natural Religion; as the genius or
kind of Animal or living Creature belongs both to Man and Beast, yet as Men and
Beasts are distinguished in specie by this specifical difference, that Man is
an intelligent rational Being, capable to know God and to enjoy him, and
capable of a great deal of knowledge, in the Creation, which Beasts are not
capable of, so no less Revealed Religion, with the Principles and Precepts
thereof etc. differs specifically from Natural, with respect to what is
specifical and peculiar to the same; in fine, as all the true Principles of
Natural Religion, directed by the Light within, generally common to all
Mankind, and which all Mankind have, or at least may have without Special
Revealation, are contained within Revealed Religion: so the Revealed Religion,
by which I mean the Christian Religion, does contain a great many more
Principles, which are the Fundamentals thereof; as also diverse positive
Precepts, and precious Promises, as well as severe Threatenings, together with
most Excellent Examples of holy Life, and other most useful Historical
Instructions, that Natural Religion does nothing reach unto.

* Note, that Natural Religion is so called from the subject Recipient, which
is the very nature of Man, whereas the Author of it, and principal Efficient is
God, as truly as he is of Revealed Religion.

For Example, It is a Principle of Natural Religion, that God is, and that he
made the World, that he is True and Faithful, Good, Just and Wise, that he
cannot deceive nor be deceived, that he is to be Loved, Feared, Worshipped and
Praised by all Mankind; and that Men should be just, sober and m^ck, and do to
all Men, as they would have all Men do to them: And as Natural Religion
dictates all this without the Lines of Holy Scripture, and without all special
Revealation, so special Revelation given to the Prophets under the Old
Testament, and enlarged to the Apostles under the New contains all this, and
Christ himself did utter that Golden Rule, whatsoever ye would that Men should
do to you, do ye the same to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets; which
in substance is also a Principle or Precept of Natural Religion.

BUT He did not say it is all which the Law and Prophets contain, as necessary
to be believed and practiced in order to Salvation; and consqeuently neither
that, nor all the other Principles, and Precepts of Natural Religion, are the
whole contents of the Gospel, nay, nor are they either the greatest or most
excellent parts, but these are the most excellent parts of the Gospel, which
deliver to us those most Sublime Doctrines, Precepts and Promises concerning
Gods Love to us in Christ, and that High and Holy Calling, he has called us
with unto Holiness and Righteousness, as the means, and eternal Life and
Happiness as the end, which no Light of Natural Religion does lead us unto,
alone and by it self considered.

AND though sincere obedience to all the Precepts of Natural Religion is most
necessary to every Christian in order to Salvation, yet the peculiar Principles
of Christianity, such as Revealed Religion is, does afford us far more noble
Motives to excite us to obedience, as well as far greater inward Aids and
Assistances: to wit, those of Gods special Grace, are given us through the
Gospel; so that which St. Paul said of the Law writ in Stone given of God to
the Jews, that it was weak and could not make perfect; the same may be said of
Natural Religion, and the Laws and Precepts thereof, commonly called the Law of
Nature, whereof Nature i^ the subject Recipient, but God is the great Author
and Efficient.

Having thus showed you what that false Gospel is, of false teachers that are
come into these parts of the World, and have (...) Disciples and Followers here
away, as well as elsewhere. I proceed now to show you out of the Holy
Scriptures, what St. Paul (...) by the Gospel here, and what is meant generally
by it in the Holy Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament; for though the
word or term Gospel is more frequent in the New Testament, yet it is to be
found more than once in the Old Testament, as Isa. 61 1. and that quoted in
Romans 10 15. out of Isa. 52 7.

The greek word that is translated Gospel signifies glad tidings, or a good
and joyful message, and according to this, the true definition of the Gospel
is, that it is a doctrine of such glad tidings to Sinners, as holds forth to
them the promises of eternal Life and Salvation through ^aith in Jesus Christ,
and obedience to his commands delivered us by his Holy Evangeli^^s, Prophets
and Apostles in the Holy Scriptures, containing certain high and sublime, and
yet most necessary Articles and Principles of Faith, that are the fundamentals
of the Christian Religion; such as the doctrine of the H. Trinity, the
Incarnation of the Son, and how that he is both God and Man, yet one Lord Jesus
Christ; how (...) is our Prophet, Priest and King, our Prophet to teach us
outwardly by his Word, and inwardly by his Spirit; our Priest, as he offered up
himself a Sacrifice without ^^ot to God, well pleasing and acceptable to him,
upon the Cross; who made there (by his own oblation of himself once offered) a
full, perfect and sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfaction for the sins
of the whole World. A King, to command, guide and govern us by his holy Laws,
delivered us in the H. Scriptures, as well of the Old Testament (excepting the
Ceremonial parts, and some positive judicial Laws peculiar to the Jewish
Nation) as of the New, and to protect and defend us here in this World, and to
crown us with the reward of an eternal Inheritance in the World to come, who
has promised to write these his laws in our hearts, and to give us his holy
Spirit to ^^able and incline us to perform sincere obedience to him, from his
shedding abroad his Love in our Hearts, which is the great motive of all
sincere Christian Obedience, and indeed the doctrine of the Holy Trinity, as
well as of the incarnation of the Son, are such fundamental doctrins of
Christianity (as well as th^se other contained in the Apostles Creed* whereof
the Nic^n^ and Athanasian ^reeds are the explanations) that the removal or
denial of them, is a denial of the Christian Religion, for without the doctrine
of the Holy Trinity, which those false Teachers make no part o^ their Gospel,
and which many of them (...) and argue against, not only there being (...) but
against there being three, otherwise than n^ three Manifestations or
Operations, (which was the old (...)) and that i^ they be three, they are
either three substances, and word^ (...) three Gods, or three Nothings, and so
they are three Nothings as they conclude.

[So has W. P. argued in his sandy foundation]

NOW without the doctrine of the Holy Trinity, how can we understand that Saying
of our Blessed Savior? That God so loved the World, that he gave his only
beloved Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life John 1 16.

And as God the Father gave us his dear Son to die for us, so as the Scripture
testifies. Jesus Christ the Son gave himself for us, to redeem us from all
iniquity, Titus 2 14. He died for our Sins, that we might die to Sin, and live
to him who died for us. He suffered most grievous pains and dolours both of
Body and Soul to expiate our Sins, and reconcile us to God. And though his
bodily sufferings were great, yet the sufferings of his Soul were far greater,
in so much that he said, his Soul was exceeding sorrowful, even unto death, he
poured forth his Soul unto death, yet his Soul did not die; but had his Soul
been capable of death, the sufferings of his Soul were so great as might have
slain it, but being immortal it could not die*

These are the great motives which the Gospel furnishes us with, to constrain
us to love God and Christ, and yield ready obedience to their Commands.

Thus he who was God, equal and one in Essence with the Father became Man, and
humbled himself to the shameful, painful and cursed Death of the Cross, to make
us, the Sons of God. And forasmuch as the Children were partakers of Flesh and
Blood, he took part of the same (as well as a true reasonable Soul of Man)
therefore he is not ashamed to call us Brethren, Heb. 2 1^. H^ took not on him
the nature of Angels, but the seed of Abraham, and because ^e took not the
nature of Angels, therefore he was no Sacrifice for Sins for the fallen Angels,
but for the Sins of the whole World, of Mankind, and had been there ever so
many worlds, his Sacrifice had been sufficient for them all that descended of
Adam. And though the Holy Angels than stood, had him not to propitiate for them,
yet he is become their Head, and they own their standing and perseverance to
him who is their Head, Lord and King.

BUT in Reverse to all this, those false Teachers, as they preach a false
Notion of the Gospel, as if it were nothing but the light within them, as it
dictates those common principles of Moral Piety, Justice and Temperance, so
they teach a false Notion of Christ within, his being their Priest within, and
offering himself a Sacrifice within them to appease the wrath of God, and
because without shedding of blood as the Scripture says, there is no remission
of Sins, they have a false Notion of Christ's Blood shed within them, denying
his Blood that was outwardly shed on the Tree of the Cross to be the Blood of
the Covenant, for the remission of Sin, arguing that the Covenant is inward and
Spiritual, and that So is the Blood of it; and because that Blood is called the
Blood of God in Scripture, that therefore it was not the Blood of Christ's
Humanity, but of Christ as he was God; affirming that the Blood is the Life,
and the Life is the Light, and the Light is within.

[All this is proved in my printed Narratives.]

BUT now let us hear what account the Holy Scripture gives us of the Gospel,
what it is, and what it teaches, as any natural Science is best defined by
what it teaches, as we best define Geometry, Navigation and Astronomy by what
they teach, so to define the Gospel is to ^how what the Gospel teaches, and
especially the peculiar Doctrins, Precepts and Promises o^ it.

THUS the Angel that preached our Saviors Birth to the Shepherds, said to
them Luke 2 10. Behold I bring you the Gospel, or good Tidings of great Joy,
which shall ^e to all People, as being one great Fundamental of the Gospel;
(...) St. Paul defines the Gospel which he was sent to preach, Romans 1 3. by
what it taught concerning Jesus Christ, made of the Seed of David according to
the flesh, and (...) to ^e the Son of God with power ^y his Resurrection from
the dead, and generally in his Epistles, and way of preaching, he showed him to
be both God and Man yet one Lord Jesus Christ.

AND that he dyed for our Sins 1 (or. 15 3. according to the Scriptures, S.
Paul makes it to be one of the first things he preached to the C^rinthians
belonging to the Gospel according to the Scriptures, and that he was buried and
rose again the third day according to the Scriptures, and as he preached it as
one of the first peculiar doctrins of the Gospel, that Christ died for our Sins
and rose again, so he held it forth as a standing doctrine necessary to be
remembered by the most grown Christians, and to be meditated upon, which was his
own practice 2 Cor. 5 14. and which he recommended to Tim^thy, 2 ^im. 28.
Remember that Jesus Christ of the seed of David (...) from the dead according
to my Gospel.

THIS refutes that vile Error of such o^ those false Teachers, that say the
Death and Resurrection of Christ is not to be remembered nor preached, most
grossly perverting the Gospel, or as others ^ay, it is not needful to be minded
by them that are spiritual, and know Christ in them, the doctrine of Christ
without, as he suffered death in the flesh and rose again, being in their
account but as a Primmer of Horn book, that is, not to be minded by them that
are grown up to maturity, but surely S. Paul and holy Timothy were beyond them
all, and yet we see S. Paul did recommend this Subject to him, to remember and
meditate upon. And should we not be most ungrateful to our dear Lord, not to
remember him continually, who as ^e once dyed for us, so he ever lives to make
intercession for us, and continually presses to his Father in Heaven the merit
of his Passion, for the forgiveness of our Sins. And though his Priestly Office
upon Earth for us was finished on the Cross, yet in Heaven he is a Priest for
ever to render God propitious to us, Psalm 110 V. 4.

II. The Second Thing I proposed to speak to was why and how S. Paul calls it
our Gospel.

THIS I shall answer briefly, because it was his and his Brethrens
instrumentally and ministerially, as it was Gods and Christ's Gospel principally
and chiefly, being the great Authors of it; even as the Doctrine which the
Apostles preached, is called the Apostles Doctrine; and this affords us a worthy
observation, that the Gospel is not mere Power, or Spirit, or Light within,
without all words or form of doctrine outwardly delivered by the ministry of
Men, but it is a ministry of words by Men, as well as it has an inward ministry
of Power, and of the Holy Ghost, that does accompany it. It comes not to Men,
in Power and in the Holy Ghost without words and doctrine, nor in word only,
without the power of the Holy Ghost, where it is made instrumental to convert
Sinners to God, but it comes both in words and power of the Holy Ghost to such
who are converted by it, and though it work not irresistably, nor without Men's
concurrance who are converted by it, yet it works so effectually, and also so
gently and gradually, that it obtains its end, in all the Heirs of Salvation,
that in due time, it works a through Conversion in them and upon them; though
the beginning of the work of conversion be as a seed, the least of all seeds,
yet it takes Root in the good Ground, and b^ings ^orth in season the hundred,
sixty, or thirty ^old.

III. To the Third, how and after what way and manner, and by what helps, the
Gospel wrought Conversion upon those Thessalo^ians, and daily works the
conversion of Sinners to whom it is preached, and who are converted by it.

TO this I answer,, though the doctrine of the Gospel has most excellent Reasons,
and Arguments to move and persuade Sinners to turn to God by Faith, and
Repentance, yet it is not effectual of and by it self, to turn any to God; but
it is made effectual, as it comes to the Consciences and Hearts of Sinners in
Power, and in the Holy Ghost, according to the words of the Text, our Gospel
(said Paul) came unto you not in word only; but also in power, and in the Holy
Ghost, for unconverted persons are dead in Sins and Trespasses, are spiritually
blind and deaf, and altogether lame and impotent and under the power of Satan,
and held in captivity to him as his slaves, therefore it must be a stronger
power, than the power o^ Satan that must convert a Sinner, and that is the
mighty power of God, and of the Holy Ghost, to quicken the dead Soul, to open
the Eyes of the Mind, and to unstop the Ears of the Soul and to heal the
spiritual lameness and impotency of it.

AND thus the Power of the Holy Ghost, which is also the power of God the
Father and of his Son, works by and with the Word, to wit the external Word; to
illuminate the Understanding with a saving knowledge of the truths of the
Gospel, working also conviction of Sin, and contrition of Heart for ^in, and
deep Humiliation and Repentance, and also the same power works upon the Will
and Affections to turn them from the love of Sin, and Vice to the love of God
and of Christ, and to all Holiness, Righteousness and Virtue, gradually
destroying in them Sin and Vice, and planting and raising up in them all
Christian Virtues and fruits of the Spirit, and all this gradually, as we are
workers together with God, and by his help, for as it is God who works in us
to will and to do of his good pleasure, so he commands us, from this noble
encouragement, to work out our salvation, ( i. e. the Terms and Conditions of
it) with fear and trembling: So that we must not be merely passive in our
Conversion, as so many Stocks and Stones, but as Reasonable Creatures, working
together with him; and following after him as he gently leads and draws us.

THE Power mentioned here in the Text, and which ordinarily wrought the
Conversion of Sinners in the Apostles Days, was not altogether the Power of
Miracles, but the sanctifying Power, and Grace of the Holy Ghost; whereby many
were converted, who never saw a Miracle wrought, though they heard of that
Miraculous Power; as we also have heard of it, from many more witnesses, to
wit, the constant testimony of many thousands of all these past ages since the
days of the Apostles, the bare (...) of Miracles never converted any, without
the inward power of saving and sanctifying Grace, but the power of saving and
sanctifying Grace has converted many thousands, and still does, without the
power of Miracles. The Church of God has been in all ages, and a Ministry, and
converting Power attending it, but the Church has been o^t without having the
power of Miracles; and may be, and is well enough with it. And as for the
Miraculous Gifts of Tongues, and other extraordinary Inspirations of the Spirit
^. Paul said, that they should cease, when Faith Hope and Charity (all which
are more excellent and most necessary) should remain. ^ Cor. 138. 13.

BUT because the Church of England and other Protestant Churches lay not claim
to the Power of working Miracles, and extraordinary inspirations, such as the
Papists, and some of the Quakers lay claim to, by their ^ained Miracles.

* As Geo: Fox the Quakers great Apostle has done, as is to be seen in diverse
places of his printed Journal.

* Therefore those false Teachers, falsely charge the Church of England with
denying all inward operations and inspirations of the Holy Spirit in the Hearts
of the faithful, which are of a sanctifying nature; and thus by their Lies and
Falsehoods those false Teachers have prevailed to draw away many Proseli^es
after them, both here away and else where. But that the Church of England does
own the inward sactifying Inspirations of the Holy Spirit, and the necessity of
them, for our sanctification, and to enable us to perform all Christian Duties
acceptably to God, is evident from the daily public Prayers in the public
Offices, where ^he prays for the Catholic Church, that God would inspire her
continually with the spirit of Truth Unity and Concord, and in the Collect
before the Ten Commandments she prays thus, Clea^se the thoughts of our
Hearts by the inspiration of thy Holy Spirit, that we may perfectly love thee
and worthily magnify thy holy Name through Jesus Christ our Lord. Is i^ not
therefore a sad Victory which those false Teachers boast over the Church of
England* whose foundation is laid in notorious lying and falsehoods, as well as
in Antichristian Principles.

THIS serves also to confute the false pretense of the manner of Conversion,
among the Quakers, by a mere inward power, without the ministry of the written
word, and without all doctrine, which may well be called (as some have called
it) a dumb Gospel, and on this pretext they ground their ^^^ent meetings, and
two of their noted Preachers I could name, who have owned in Print their
conversion ^o Quakerism by the power that seized on them in the Quakers ^il^nt
meetings. But surely this manner of conversion is ^orreign to the Holy
Scriptures, S. Paul indeed was miraculously converted, ^ut not without all
words and doctri^, all the holy Prophets were converted and saved by means of
the doctrine of salvation, as well as by inward operation of the Holy Spirit,
though some of them were converted without all Ministry of Men,

THOUGH the Church of God had not always the word and doctrine committed to
writing, yet she had the same word and doctrine for substance, in the breasts
and mouths of the faithful, as well before it was committed to writing as
since, and never in any age of the World did God Almighty convert any Nation,
City or ^amily without the Word and Doctrine, nor ever did he convert any one
person without all Doctrine, nor indeed without the Doctrine of Salvation by
Jesus Christ, so (...) as we can read in the Holy Scripture, for the Word, to
wit the doctrinal Word, is the incorruptable Seed of which all the Children of
God are born, and in Gods ordinary way, it was by an external Word; and if in
an extraordinary way, it was by such an internal Word, that it directed and led
the Minds of such who were so extraordinarily converted to Faith in Jesus
Christ for remission of sin, for to him gave all the Prophets witness that
through his Name, whosoever believes in him shall have remission of sins, Acts
10 4^. we read of no such conversion any where in Scripture, that any were
converted by their merely turning into any light within them that taught them
nothing of Faith in the promised Messiah.

S. Paul puts the believing Romans in mind how they were converted Romans 6 17.
ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered unto
you, or as it may be translated, and as some Bibles have it in the Margin, into
which ye were delivered, as to ^ay molded, as when Metal of Copper or any
other Metal. after it is melted by the heat of the fire is poured into a
mould, and thereby has the form of the mould into which it is cast, even so our
hard Hearts needed the operation of the Spirit of God inwardly to melt them,
and ^o to mould and frame them to be con^formable to the image of Christ, by
mean^ of the form of doctrine which was delivered to us, or unto which we were
delivered. But those false Teachers will allow no other Word but the light
within, and deny the Word contained in the holy Scriptures to be the Word of
God, and have dared all their Adversaries to prove any such Phrase in
Scripture, as ^he written Word, whereas it is expressly found in John 15 25. and
such of them who understand but a little of Greek, may ^inde the same greek
wo^d that is in John 15 25. in 1 Cor. 15 54. and generally when it is
translated saying. when a noun substantive, in the English translation, it is
in the greek l^g^s, i* e. the Word. as 1 Timothy 4^. and 2 Timothy 2 ii. and
elsewhere, they say to call words the Word is a ^ye, and thus they charge a
L^oupon the Holy Ghost, who inspired S. Luke to call the whole History of his
Gospel, called the Gospel according S. Luke t^n pr^ton L^gon, i: e. the first
word, tho* it be in the English Translation the former Treatise, and dare they
say that Scripture lied, when he said Acts 11 16* then remembered ^ the word of
the Lord, (...) that he said John indeed baptized with water, but ye shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost, thus he called a sentence containing fourteen
words as in our English Translation, the word of the Lord. And the like we have
Luke 22 61. where some words of Christ to (...) are called the word of the
Lord, also the written lines of the Prophets are called the word of the Lord,
Isa. 28 13 There is no dispute in the case, whether Christ is not called the
Word, at times in the Scripture, for, that is readily granted, but that nothing
else is called the Word of God or the word of the Lord, or the Word, is a
manifest (...), or that the Light within as it I^ common to all Mankind is ever
called in Scripture the Word, those false Teachers can never prove that in Romans
10* 8. which they bring for them is manifestly against them. For that Word in
the believing Romans, which they were first taught out wardly, did teach them
to confess with (...) Mouths and believe in their Hearts, that God had raised
Christ from the dead* as in V. 9. but this the Ligh^ within as it is common to
all Mankind does no^ teach, not ever did, and yet they are express terms of
salvation.

IV. To the Fourth, How that a (...) was wrought in them mentioned in the Text,
both in respect to the truth of the Gospel, and also of their conversion by it.

TO this I answer, this assurance was wrought in them, and the like assurance
is wrought in all the faithful, not by the external Word alone without the Holy
Spirit, nor by the Holy Spirit without the Word, but by both jointly, by the
Holy Spirit, as the principal Agent and Cause, and by Gods Holy Word as the
subordinate and instrumental, the Word being the Organ and Instrument of the
Holy Spirit, whereby he enlightens and convinces them, and also converts them,
and he begets in them an assurance of the truth of the Word, how that it is not
the word of Man but the word of God (as it is in truth.) which effectually
works in them that believe, as it did in those The^^alo^^ans ^ Thessalonians. 2 13.
and the very Text gives a plain destinction betwixt the Word and the Power
which did accompany it, and wrought by it instrumentally. Our Gospel come (...)
unto you an word only, for had it come only so, it had not converted them. But
the false notion of those Men, that will have nothing to be the Word, but
Christ (which sometimes they call the ^ight within, and sometimes the Power,
and the Spirit) renders the words of the Text plain Nonsense, as if S. Paul,
had meant it i^ their way, as thus, Our Gospel came to you not in power only
but in power, which is a plain Tautol^gy and Nonsense, and the way and manner
how this assurance was wrought in them to the truth of the Word, and is daily
so wrought in the Hearts of the faithful, is by the Holy Spirit, his
enlightening the Eyes of their Minds ^o see such characters of Gods Wisdom,
^ewer, Goodness, Truth, Mercy and justice displayed in the Word, that does as
clearly and fully prove and demonstrate it to be the word of God, as the
Heavens and the Earth and all the Creatures contained in them, prove that they
are the Workmanship of God, who has stamped on them the characters of Divine
Wisdom, Power and Goodness etc to be seen and read of all Men, for if the works
of the visible Creation demonstrate their Author to be God Almighty, as much,
and more clearly does the Word demonstrate him to be the Author of it, and that
it is the Word of God in truth, according to that in the Psalm, thou have
magnified thy Word, thy Name above all. (even all the visible works of God.)
Psalm. 138 2.

THAT the Power and Spirit of God should accompany the word and words (...)
God, as they should be preached by the ministry of Men, both to Jews and
Gentiles was promised and foretold in the Old Testament, in diverse places as
I^a* 59. 20 21. Psalm. 110 1 2 and Psalm. 68 33. which is well and truly
translated out of the Hebrew, in the vulgar Latin Bible, Ecce dabit in v^c^
sua, vocem virtutis, i: e. Behold he shall give in his voice, the voice of
virtue, the Divine Virtue and Power whereby God Almighty does work both in the
production of natural and supernatural Effects, being metaphorically called his
word and voice Psalm. 14^ 15 18. but the words in the Text are well qualified,
by adding in power, and in the Holy Ghost, for a false conversion is (...)
wrought in Men, by a Power that is not a Divine Power, but either a strong
power of ^andy and imagination, or by Satan's power, making use of an exalted
power of imagination, as His Organ and Instrument, and that power which has
turned so many to vile (...) he no other, whereas all true conversion of Men to
God, is by or in (...) a power that it is in the Holy Ghost, working in and by
means of the Word, as it is contained in the Holy Scriptures.

THE greek wo^^ ^^nslated much assurance in the Text viz. ^l^r^ph^ria, is a
(...) taken from a (...) bree^e ^^gale of wind, ^^lling the sails of a Ship
that ^^rric^^ her to her desired Port, the sails answering to (...) affections,
the wind to the divine influences, aids and assistances of the Spirit, blowing
and breathing upon our affections. But as in the common Navigation, the Ship
needs not only sails and wind, but compass and ^a^ds, with anchor and other
necessaries, as well as that (...) ship be tight and ^ound, so in the course of
our Christian Life through the Tempestious Sea of this World; as we need
heavenly affections and Gods Holy Spirit to breath upon them, so we must take
Hope for our Anchor and the word of God, even that contained in the Holy
Scriptures, for our Compass, and the noble Examples of the Holy Lives of the
Holy Apostles and Evangelists, and other holy* Persons recorded in Scripture,
and above all, the most holy Example of our Blessed Savior for out Cards and
Mapps, which those deceived followers of false Teachers have not done, and for
not doing, have made Shipwreck of Faith and good Conscience, some of them
Indeed more than others, but all of them in great part, having rejected the
Commands of our Savior as touching Baptism with water, and the Lords Supper,
in the use of those ext^rual memorialls of Bread and Wine: [And in place of
them setting up the commands of Men, particularly their Founder G: F. as is to
be seen in his Canons that he has enjoined to 'em, which are commonly read in
their quarterly meetings, though they never read a Chapter of the Holy
Scriptures in any of them, a plain demonstration that they have ^et up their
own Traditions to throw down the Commands of Christ, and making their own
^raditions and inventions to be the Commands of Christ, as their (...) to swear
in any case, and all self defense against Rapine, Robbery and Mur her, by
putting their perverse glo^^^s on our Saviors Words, contrary to his plain
Intent and Sense.

AND in their way of preaching, they pretend they are only and altogether
furnished by the (...) without the Holy Scriptures, charging all Protestant
Ministers to be Theives for preaching what they have learned out of the Holy
Scriptures, beasting to their hearers, that they come not to them with other
Men's Lines made ready to their hands, grossly perverting that Text^ Cor. 10 16.
as if S. Paul and meant it of Scripture Lines, whereas it is plain to any
impartial Understanding who reads and considers them, that it is not Scripture
Words and Lines that S. Paul speaks of, put the Line of the Bounds or Preeinct
of Places and Regions that fell to him by appointment wherein to preach the
Gospel, for S. Paul as well as the other Apostles made use of the Prophets
(...), and proved their Doctrine out of the written Lines of the Old Testament,
and so did Christ himself.

TO conclude by way of application, seeing all t^^e Conversion to God is
wrought in Men not by the word only, but also by the power of God that does
accompany it, (...) every one of us examine our selves impartially whither the
Gospel ha^ come to us thus, not only in word, but in power, and in the Holy
Ghost, which if it be so come to us, and that we have so received it, we have
felt a great change wrought in us both inward and outward, not only a change of
the outward conversation i^ our words and actions that were since, but of our
hearts and thoughts and affections, which change is not so difficult to be
observed, for it may be felt and perceived, and the truth of it known to us, by
our setting before the Eyes of our Minds, the Looking-Glass of Gods Holy Word,
and measuring our States both inward and outward, by the same, as the most
certain and sure Rule, praying to God, so to enlighten and inspire our Minds,
that we may not make a wrong application in our Examintion.

AGAIN, let none sit down upon a bare profession of Christianity, having a form
of Godlyness but without the Power, (...) will not profit to Salvation, it was
the great work of the Ministry in the Apostles Days, to turn Men from
Heathe^ism (...) Judaism to Christianity.

BUT it is to be lamented that many under a Christian Profession need a new
Conversion, viz. from a bare outside form (...) profession of Christianity, to
true real and substantial Christianity, which has both Power and Form, which
Thanks be to G^^many Thousands have in the Church of England, and none (...) to
withdraw from her Communion under the pr^text of the false Teachers who say,
there is no life n^r form of Godlyness (...) be found in Her, or in her Doctrine
and Worship, which is (...) uncharitable and false, as the experience of
Thousands do (...), and indeed such only are the true Sons of the Church, (...)
her true Children as they are the true Sons and Children of (...) who receive
the Gospel not in Word only, but also in Power, (...) in the Holy Ghost, the
which that we may all know and witness God Almighty grant us of his great
Mercy, for his dear Son Jesus Christ his Sake. Now to God the Father, the Son,
and the Holy Ghost, one only True God be all Glory, Honor and Praise (...)
ever and ever Amen.

FINIS.

