THE Right Method of SAFETY OR The Just CONCERN OF THE People of GOD, TO Join a
Due TRUST in HIM, with a Diligent Use of MEANS. As it was Propounded in a
SERMON Preached at Boston to the Artillery Company, of the Massachusetts Bay in
N. E. on the 5 th. of June 1704. being the Day for their Election of OFFICERS.

By HENRY GIBBS, Pastor of a Church in Watertown.

Nehem. IV. 14. Remember the LORD which is Great and Terrible, and fight for
your Brethren, etc. Boston: Printed by B. Green. 1704.

THE Right Method of SAFETY.
Psalm XLIV. 6. For I will not trust in my Bow: neither shall my Sword save me.
THE Perfection and Extensive Usefulness of the Word of God, are eminently and
admirably conspicuous in this, that the Duties of every Station are therein
Propounded and adjusted, from thence to be discovered and learned. Superiors
as well as Inferiors are here Counseled, Instructed, and Commanded: and those
who stand upon a Level, are likewise advised of their mutual Obligations.
However distinguished Persons are, as to their Particular Posts or Provinces,
the several Duties are herein made known and prescribed, that belong thereunto;
they are from hence certifyed, how they should manage themselves, so as to
Adorn the Doctrine of God their Savior, be accepted of, and Walk with Him, and
at length be recompensed as Good and Faithful Servants. In this Directory,
those of the Military Order are not overlooked, nor left Undisciplined: there
are hints in it, not a few nor obscure, concerning the Religious conduct, that
all such are to be Solicitous about, and Exemplary in; how in the Name of the
Lord, they are to lift up their Banners, and proceed in all their Enterprises.
I shall Essay to Recommend, one Branch of their Duty, who belong to this Order,
as it is held forth in the Words now offered to consideration; accounting a
Reflection thereon, not altogether unsuitable to the Occasion of the present
Day and Assembly.

This Psalm before us was composed, either when the Israel of God, was under
eminent distress and danger, by reason of Potent and Prevailing Enemies, or
with respect unto, and under the prospect of such a Time. The Spirit and
carriage that became such a day, are here discovered and exemplified; and that,
for Instruction to the Church of God in all the following Ages of it. In the
first beginning of the Psalm, the Mercies of God in Planting or Settling the
Children of Israel, according to his Promise unto their Forefathers in the
Land of Canaan, and in Extirpating their Enemies from thence, are thankfully
commemorated. That the Memory of the Great Works of God, be transmitted unto,
and preserved among their Posterity, has been the Pious and Sedulous care of
his People; and indeed his Glory is greatly concerned in it, a foundation being
thus laid, of Praises to him in after Generations. The Reports handed down from
Ancient times, are here Reflected on with due resentments. We have heard with
our Ears, O God, our Fathers have told us, what work thou did in their days,
in the times of old; thus the Psalm begins. Which Words relate, to the
Victories gained, in Moses's and Joshua's times; and these are acknowledged to
be the Effects of Divine Power, and the Result of Divine Favor, as in the 2 d.
and 3 d. verses, How thou did drive out the Heathen, and Plantedst them, how
thou did afflict the people and cast them out, or rather, did cause them to
shoot forth: For they got not the Land in Possession by their own Sword,
neither did their own arm save them; but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the
light of thy countenance, because thou had a favor unto them. Which
consideration was presented, and inculcated, by Joshua himself, as we may see
in Josh. 24. 12. and in Chap. 23. 3. Hereupon subjection to God, and dependence
on him, are solemnly professed, and Deliverance implored, as in the 4 th. verse,
Thou art my King, O God: command deliverance for Jacob. Having made this
Profession, they further express their hope in God, that, as he had appeared
and wrought wonderfully for their Progenitors, he would not be wanting to
rescue and deliver them, from their eminent dangers: as in the 5 th. v. The
profession of their dependence upon God, is amplifyed by their disclaiming
other dependencies; as in the Words of our Text, For I will not trust in my
bow: neither shall my sword save me.

These Words are spoken in the Name of Gods Israel, with respect unto their
Preparations made, and Forces employed, against their common Enemies. The
singular number is used, to denote the concurrence of the whole Body of the
People, in this Profession, that they joined in it with one consent. The Terms
in our Text, are not difficult, neither is the Sense of the Words Clouded, or
perplexed with different Readings; a brief gloss may therefore suffice for the
Explanation of them. By Bow and Sword are intended, all Military Weapons and
Instruments, whether Offensive or Defensive; these being put for all others of
whatever kind, because they were most commonly improved, at that time, when
this Sacred Writing was Penned: all Skill, Strength, and Courage, to employ
these, or such like, and all Warlike furniture, aids, and succors are also
signified hereby. I will not trust in my Bow, it is not said, that they would
not use or employ their Bow, or that they esteemed it an indifferent matter
whether they did or no, but that they would not trust, or confide in it.
Neither shall my Sword Save me, they did not propose to lay it aside, as
unnecessary, or unprofitable; they did not allot upon safety and deliverance,
did not expect that their Enemies should be defeated and subdued, without any
means used, to guard against and resist them. Those Expressions in the
preceding verse, of Pushing down their Enemies, and treading them under,
intimate their activity and endeavors in order to conquest. Not trusting in
these, not being Saved by them, do therefore imply, that although they were to be
employed, and their best to be done in that way, yet their trust should be
placed elsewhere for Safety; and where they should place it, the Verses
foregoing and following plainly inform us, Viz. In the Name of the Lord, in
his Right hand, and in the Light of his Countenance, or in his Power and
Favor: there they apprehend sufficient ground of Trusting, and Boasting. The
sense and import of the Words being thus determined, the Doctrine lying before
us is this, Soil.

DOCTRINE.
The People of GOD, when called to Employ their Arms against their Enemies,
should be careful not to Trust in them, but in GOD for Salvation.

This Doctrine comprizeth several things, and perhaps not improper for our
Meditation at present.

1. The People of God are often Assaulted by, and greatly Exposed to the Rage
and Violence of outward Enemies. There would be no need of Sword or Bow, where
there no Enemies to encounter; and had not Sin entered the World, there would
not have been any. Perfect amity continued, until Sin made a Rupture. Man by
his Revolt from God, lost that Sovereignty over the Creatures, which was at
first granted to, or vested in him, so that instead of yielding Service and
Subjection unto him, they often make head against, and spoil upon him. But
furthermore, an unnatural Enmity of mankind against each other is the woeful
fruit of the Apostasy. The Lusts of men produce in them more Savage
dispositions, and oftimes engage them in more Barbarous practices, then the
greatest Rage or Fierceness of bruit Creatures ever bewrayed. They pursue each
others destruction with an implacable hatred, insatiably thirsting after blood,
and delighting to imbrew their hands therein. The bloody Wars that have been
carried on, from the first Ages of the World, are an Undeniable Proof, of the
deep corruption of man's Nature: for who can imagine, that man was at first
framed, by a Being of infinite Goodness, with any such qualities, as are then
manifested? And it is a clear evidence of the dreadful Wrath of God, against a
Sinful World, that men should be the Executioners of each other, with a worse
then ferocious cruelty. What a prodigious and frightful carriage, do some
furious Battles and Sieges produce? Things could not possibly have been at this
pass, if man had continued in friendship with his Maker. But the People of God,
are of all others, most obnoxious to the fury of Enemies; not that they give
more occasion for it, but because of the Enmity that is fixed, between the Seed
of the Woman and the Seed of the Serpent. The Little Flook of Christ, is hemmed
round with devouring Wolves, who are always spiteing of it, gnashing their
teeth upon it, and ofttimes actually making a prey thereof. From the days of
Abel, and throughout the Successive Ages of the World, the faithful Servants of
God have been maligned, and maliciously treated, by those who were acted with
the Spirit of Cain. Thus it has fared, not only with particular Persons, but
with Communities, yea with the Body of those who have professed the Name of
God, his truths, and ways. The Church has always had Enemies combining and
conspiring for its Ruin, and those not mean and contemptible, but mighty, and
formidable. Her Adversaries are the chief, her Enemies prosper, Lam. 1. 5. How
frequently were the Neighboring Nations confederated, to root out the Name and
Remembrance of Israel from the Earth? From the infancy of the Christian Church,
and wherever it has made any figure, all manner of hostile methods, have been
Employed to destroy it. When all the Earth has been still, and all quiet, yet
then has Zion been comfortless, and Judah scattered, through the restless
malice, and tyranny of their Adversaries. There have been but few such Pauses
and intrivals, whereof it might be said, Then had the Churches Rest. The Wrath
of the Dragon, against those which keep the Commandments of God, and the
Testimony of Jesus Christ, has never been long concealed and dissembled. The
most virulent and inveterate of Enemies, have been hitherto harrassing the
People of God; and as it has been thus, it is likely to be so, until those calm
and peaceful days commence, whereof we find those comfortable Predictions, in
Isa. 60. 18. Violence shall no more be heard in thy Land, wasting nor
destruction within thy Borders. And Chap. 65. 25. They shall not hurt, nor
destroy in all my Holy Mountain says the Lord. Also in Hos. 2. 18. I will
break the Bow, and the Sword, and the Battle out of the Earth, and will make
them to lie down Safely.

2. It is no ways unbecoming the Profession of the People of God, to resist or
oppose their Enemies, with force of Arms: Or, it is lawful, warrantable, and a
duty for the People of God, to employ Military Weapons, in order to their own
safety. Their Enemies being so many, and malicious, it concerns them to use or
improve all suitable means, for their own defense and security; among which
their Sword and Bow are to be numbered. Prayers of Faith are fitly enough styled
the Saints Artillery, but these are not inconsistent, with the use of Outward
Weapons; Joshua must choose out men, and fight with Amalek, while Moses is
lifting up his hands in the Mount, Exodus 17. 9, 10, 11.

We may easily concede, that War is not for it self desirable, or eligible:
that the devouring Sword is not to be drawn upon every slight occasion; such a
severe Remedy is only proper in a desperate case. To delight in War is
mentioned as a bad Character, Psalm. 68. 30. as arguing a base mercenary Spirit,
a barbarous blood-thirsty disposition, or an insatiable ambitious humor. It Is
notorious, that the principles upon which the most undertake in War, are
unjustifyable, yea very hateful and abominable; and that the most of Wars, are
as to their rise, source, and original extremely evil. The Wars of Sovereign
Princes, and of free States, what are they for the most part better than a more
plausible and powerful Sort of Piracies? being designed to remove the bounds of
the People, to rob their treasures, and put down the Inhabitant, as was spoken
of the Assyrians incursions and conquests; Isa. 10. 7, 13. Although these
things be readily granted, yet the unlawfulness of War in all cases, may not
from thence be concluded.

I shall not now dispute, nor undertake to determine what considerations, will
Legitimate a War; but only observe, that neither the Law of Nature, nor the
Revelation of the Mind and Will of God in his Word, interdict the Use of Arms,
but it is countenanced, and warranted by both. This is consonant to the
impressions and dictates of the Law of Nature, one principal branch whereof, is
Self-defence, or preservation. Most evident is it, that a Government has no
security, against the Seditious, or insurrections of Male Contents, nor against
the Hostilities, Encroachments, and Usurpations of Foreigners; that there can
be no good Order maintained, nor Justice have its free course; that all Civil
and Sacred Liberty would soon be ravished by Unreasonable men; that Violence,
Oppressions and Rapine would universally and unavoidably prevail; that Humane
Societies (as things now are) must disband, without the improvement of Military
Weapons. Now if the insults and Outrages of Enemies, cannot ordinarily be
prevented or represt without this, it may well be esteemed a just and lawful
method.

And there is nothing repugnant hereunto in the Holy Scriptures: for however
sparingly the Sacred Oracles may speak in this matter, because the corrupt
natures of men are apt to exceed and over-do herein, yet there are sufficient
mediums to confirm our Assertion obvious in both Testaments. We find Directions
given by God himself, to his People of old, about the manner wherein they
should manage their Wars, Numb. 10. 9. Deuteronomy. 20. 2, 3, 10, etc. We find it
threatened as a sore Judgment, a presage of ruin and desolation: That the Lord
will take away from Jerusalem, and from Judah, the Mighty man, and the Man of
War, Isa. 3. 2, 8. We find a promise as a blessing, that accompanies the
greatest of blessings, even, that the Lord of Hosts would be for Strength to
those that turn the Battle in the Gate. We find that some of the most Eminent
Saints, whose Names and Acts are Enrolled in the Sacred Pages, have been famous
for Military Achievements: And we also find instances of some in our Saviors
days, and of his Apostles, who were Soldiers by profession, who had received
and held their Commissions from Heathen Rulers, and yet their faith is highly
celebrated. And we find also Predictions in the Apocalypse, about the Wars of
the Church with Antichrist, which are propounded with manifest approbation. And
Authentic History informs us, that many of the Primitive Christians, Served
the Roman Emperors in their Wars, and were justly reputed the best or bravest
of their Soldiers: those who apologized for them against their Persecutors,
insisted on this instance of their Loyalty and Usefulness, viz. their readiness
to bear Arms, and expertness to use them for the Public Good: The Christian
Legion was the wonder of the Empire, and the terror of its Enemies.

There have indeed been many Arguments advanced, to prove the work of a
Soldier, and so the use of Arms unlawful, both by persons of an Enthusiastic
Spirit, and by some who have pretended to judge, more than others, by Reason in
matters of Religion: but all their pretensions are ill-grounded, and of
dangerous consequence. It is observable, that the Arguments insisted on by
such, have a direct tendence to subvert or undermine the foundations of Civil
Government; they bear hard upon the Magistrates Office, who is by God himself
entrusted with the Sword, and who if he would not bear it in vain, must
sometimes unsheath and weild it against those who do evil. Whereas it is
pleaded, that to use the Sword, is directly contrary to the design of the
Gospel, and to those Lessons of Humility, Meekness, Patience, and Love that are
therein given; the invalidity of the plea, may easily be demonstrated. It Is
true, Christ came not to destroy men's lives; but to save them, Luke 9. 56. and
therefore a cruel sanguinary Spirit, ill becomes the profession of Discipleship
to such a Savior: but that the profession of Soldiers, does not necessarily
imply such a Spirit, is most certain. The preservation, and not the destruction
of men's lives, is the primary end of that profession; the destruction of none,
any further than it is necessary, and conducive to the Public Weal is to be
pursued thereby. As for those Directions given to Christians, of not resisting
evil, of doing good to them that hate them, of recompencing to none evil for
evil, of not avenging themselves, but giving place to wrath, they are grossly
strained and wrested, if not understood and interpreted with respect to private
Retaliations. That these are not intended, to bind the hands of the Magistrate,
from taking due revenges on those who disturb or endanger the Commonwealth,
who would root out Religion, enslave or destroy the People, is manifest from
what is expressed, in Romans 13. 4. He is the Minister of God, a Revenger to
execute wrath. It Is certain, that the Sword was not ordained to Convert the
Nations from infidelity, but the Preaching of the Everlasting Gospel: As where
the Gospel is aright entertained, there is a meek and lowly Spirit, so to
promote and propagate the interest thereof, agreeable methods should be used:
but this hinders not, but that the People of God, may with their Swords
endeavor to defend themselves, confront their Enemies, and recover their own
just rights.

I shall further add here, that although God needs not instruments to do his
work, yet ordinarily he improves, them; and it is to (...) his Power for any to
expect help from him, while secure and careless. When the Divine Majesty had
his Pavilion, and (...) among the (...) of Israel, protecting and conducting
them, by a Pillar of Cloud and Fire, yet then the use of Warlike Instruments
was called for. When Israel w^^ to Enter and Possess Canaan, they must
encounter their Enemies with force of Arms; although God gave them the Land,
yet their Enemies were dispossessed thereof in a Warlike manner. And afterward,
when any notable deliverance was given to Israel from the Oppressions and
Ravages of their Enemies, some certain Persons were raised up, who signalized
themselves with a Martial Spirit, to be their Saviors: the Valor and Power of
the Judges were from the Spirit of the Lord moving in and resting upon them.
And of later days, the Salvations afforded to the People of God, have been
wrought out, or effected for them in this way. Conclude we then, that the
People of God may, yea it is their Duty, to employ their Arms against their
Enemies, when Environed and molested by them; that vigilance and diligence are
to be expressed for this purpose; and those who thus employ them in a rightful
cause, do as truly fight the Battles of the Lord, as those of old did.

3. In the Use of their Arms, or of Military skill and force, the People of God
should be cautious, not to trust therein. Although it well enough becomes their
Profession to improve these, and they are often called thereto, yet it is no
ways allowable for them to place their confidence therein; though they are to
express, all prudent, and sedulous care hereabouts, yet they must not promise
themselves, allot upon, or confidently expect safety hereby. How peremptorily
is such a trust disclaimed, or renounced in our Text? I will not trust in my
Bow, my Sword shall not save me. The Vanity, Sinfulness and danger of such a
trust may be here considered, as the ground and reasons why it should be
avoided.

1. Such a trust is very vain and unreasonable. And it may appear to be so, by
considering the weak and insufficiency of all Means and Instruments respected
as in themselves, together with all the determining Counsel, and overruling
Providence of God. It is not in man that walks to direct his own steps, Jer.
10. 23. He is not able by all his contrivance and precaution, by greatest
diligence and application to accomplish what he designs or desires: He cannot
foresee, and provide against future accidents, and therefore oftimes rusheth
into ruin when he thinks to choose for the best. But the Counsel of the Lord
stands for ever, and the thoughts of his heart to all Generations, Ps. 33.II.
That the affairs of mankind, are managed and ordered, by a secret and powerful
hand; sometimes besides, and sometimes contrary to the intentions and
expectations of those, who are the principal actors, is most observable. How
Instruments and means, are governed by Providence, and other issues produced,
than the Nature and Connection of Second Causes do promise, was an observation
made by Solomon, and recommended to the regard of all, in Eccl. 9. 11. I
returned, and saw under the Sun, that the race is not to the swift, nor the
battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the wife, nor yet riches to men of
understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill; but time and chance happens to
them all. How often are the most profound Politics baffled? The choicest and
likeliest, instruments, and the most probable means blasted? How suddenly, and
unaccountably, is the Scale of Humane affairs oftimes turned? whereby those who
enjoyed a current of Prosperity, are oftimes brought under the greatest
disadvantages. The plots or projections that men have a long while labored in,
are often unhinged by an invisible hand, when seemingly ripe for Execution: the
Methods they take to raise themselves are the things that lower and confound
them. Those who are of the greatest Capacities, and of the highest Zeal, can
sometimes effect nothing; when those who are of mean and contemptible
appearance shall do wonders. Mighty powers shall crumble to nothing, when a
small party shall with speed and facility prevail. The greatest Revolutions in
the World, have been accomplished with weak and inconsiderable Forces; the most
numerous, and best provided Armies have been signally frustrated, and put to
the rout. Many instances of these kinds, may be found in Scripture Records, and
the Annals of our own Nation afford to us, and to all mankind, very memorable
Relations to this Purpose. So many things may intercept, the most probable
designs, so often are the Preparations and actions of men overruled unto
contrary Events, than were looked for; such uncertainties attend the course of
War; that repeated and almost daily experience shows, how vain it is for any to
trust in their Sword and Bow; that those who put on their Armor, should not
boast, themselves, when doing of it. Vain is the help of man, Psalm. 108. 12.
and therefore vain is it, to trust in man for help.

2. This Confidence is Sinful. The Evil hereof may be argued from the nature
and tendency of it, as well as from the Reproofs in Scripture that concern it.
God himself, challenges the trust and dependence of men's Souls, and forbids
the placing or exercising of it, upon other Objects: He is then owned to be
God, when means are used as subordinate to his determination, and Efficiency;
but he is forsaken or disowned, when an Arm of flesh is relied on; hence it is
said, Jer. 17. 5. Who trusts in man, and makes flesh his Arm, and whose
heart departs from the Lord. To trust in the Creature, is derogatory to the
Glory of the Creator, it is a denial of God who is above, it is a reflection on
his Majesty, Sovereignty, and Greatness: to trust in means when improved, is to
exalt them into the place and stead of him, upon whom their Virtue and Efficacy
entirely depends. Confidence in Arms and Forces prevents the due attendance on
the Duty of Prayer, and other Religious exercises: these are wholly shut out,
or but slightly, remissly, and formally attended where that prevails; and thus
to do, is to contemn or renounce the divine favor. They do not Set their
hearts aright, their spirits are not steadfast with God, they are inclined to
follow indirect courses, who are thus confident. God, by the Prophet Isaiah,
rebuked his People, for that, upon an invasion of their Enemies, they were so
intensly concerned to improve their own power and wisdom, in fortifying of
themselves, but neglected him the mean while, Isa. 22. 8. -- 11. And thou did
look in that day, to the Armor of the House of the forest. -- Ye made also a
Ditch between the two Walls; but ye have not looked to the maker thereof,
neither had respect to him that fashioned it long ago. And they are also
sharply reproved, because in their Endeavors to strengthen themselves against
their Enemies, they did not take Counsel from God, nor ask at his mouth, Isa.
30. 1, 2. A trust in Second Causes, is contrary to the Profession of Gods
People, and when truly penitent, they professed against it; Hos. 14. 3. Ashur
shall not save us, we will not ride upon Horses; whereby all Foreign Succors,
and Domestical Preparations are intended.

3. It Is very dangerous, as well as irregular and groundless. They are in
danger, not only of miscarrying in what they enterprise, but also of incurring
divine Anger, who thus fix their trust. There is a grievous Woe and Curse
denounced against such, Jer. 17. 5. Cursed be the man that trusts in man,
Isa. 31. 1. Woe unto them that stay upon Horses, and trust in Chariots, but they
look not to the Holy one of Israel, neither seek the Lord. No wonder we read
such comminations, for if God is neglected he is justly offended. What a Series
of troubles and disasters, was entailed upon the Reign of Asa, on this account!
See 2 Chronicles. 16. 7, 9. Because thou have not relied on the Lord thy God, herein
thou have done foolishly, therefore from henceforth thou shall have Wars. Gods
Honor engages him, to disappoint the confidence of those, who thus desert him;
and by giving their Enemies advantages against them; he lays matter of
Conviction before them about, and constrains them to a sense of their Error and
Guilt. Such are left to take wrong steps or measures, to follow misguided
counsel, whereby they become involved under further mischiefs and calamities:
their endeavors to extricate themselves from their difficulties, do but
further entangle and embroil them therein. And indeed, having no sure nor
sollid foundation for their trust, they are at every push and turn wavering in
their Resolutions, uncertain in all their paces or motions; they are filled
with vexatious cares, fears and griefs under every ill Omen or aspect; which
naturally tend to their hurt or damage. God may rightly forsake those, who in
this respect forget their Duty, and transgress against him; and then their
spirits will shrink up, their projects be carried headlong, all will go to
wreck. (...) confidence frequently proves (...) doing. It Is remarkable what we
find to this passage, in Isa. 30.15,16. Thus says the Lord, the holy one of
Israel, in returning and rest shall ye be saved: but ye said no, for we will
flee upon Horses; what was the effect of this! Therefore shall ye flee; and we
will ride upon the swift, therefore shall they that pursue you be swift. By
these reflections we may perceive, of what importance it is, that the People of
God, don't misplace their trust, when they are to be active, against their
Enemies.

4. The fourth and last thing contained in the Doctrine is, that the People of
God should be careful, to place their trust in him for Salvation, when called
to employ their Arms against their Enemies. This was their professed resolution
and care, Psalm. 20. 8. Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, but we will
remember the Name of the Lord our God.

Trusting in God is the constant Duty of a Christians Life: Considered in
general, it implies for the foundation of it, a belief of the Being, Attributes
and Providence of God, and also of the truth of his Co^^^ant-promises; it
implies in the nature of it, a resignation to the Will of God, of an
expectation of good from him, in his own way and time.

As it relates to those who are called to Military Employments, it intends a
dependence upon God, for all needful conduct, and for a good issue of what is
before them. Hereunto are requisite a sincere and upright intention in what
they undertake, good assurance of the equity of the Cause they engage for, and
the justice of their Call thus to be engaging, with a studious and diligent
conformity to what is prescribed in the Word of God, for the rule of their
lives. And indeed, they have no warrant to expect direction, assistance, and a
blessing from God, who are not excited with a concern for his Glory, and the
public interests of his People, who matter not whether the Cause be good, or
Call be clear; who are regardless of what is pleasing to God, or will abandon
themselves, to dissolute or licentious courses.

A trust in God, qualifyed as has been mentioned, should be exercised by his
people, when using means for their own safety, against their Enemies. To
animate them to this trust, the Priests of Old were to direct, encourage, and
bless the Armies of Israel, when marching forth, Deuteronomy. 20. 2, 3, 4 The Priest
shall approach, and speak to the people, saying Hear O Israel, you approach
this Day to Battle against your Enemies: Let not your hearts faint, fear not,
do not tremble, neither be ye terrified because of them: For the Lord your God
is he that goes with you, to fight for you against your Enemy to save you. It
was by their faith, which certainly includes in it a trust in God, that those
Worthies of whom we find such Encomiums in Sacred Writ, Encountered and put to
flight Armies of Aliens. And of later times, the Armies of Christians have
engaged their Enemies accordingly: the Devices in their Banners, their Signals
to Battle, have been an indication of their just sense hereof. Upon what
accounts the People of God should be thus careful, may be evidenced in a few
particulars.

I. All Salvation is from God, and he is a fit object, for trust or dependence
at all times. He is often styled the God of Salvation. Whoever are the
instrument, and whatever the method, whereby a people obtain safety and
victory, God is the principal Author thereof; hence said Solomon, Prove. 21. 31.
The Horse is prepared against the Day of Battle, but safety is of the Lord. The
influence, efficacy, casuality of all secondary Beings, are applied, excited,
restrained as he sees fit. All Hosts in Heaven and Earth are his, and at his
Command; they move according to his Orders. The Mighty Angels, whose agency in
the fate of Armies, and issues of Wars is undeniable, receive their Commission
from him for all they do, Isa. 37. 36. Dan. 10. 20. He is a God near at hand,
and afar off also, Jer. 23. 23. He is the God of the Hills, and also of the
Vallyes; and therefore he is in every place and straight, at every juncture,
under all emergencies a suitable object for trust. His Wisdom is sufficient to
defeat all plots, and intriegues; oftimes therefore by unexpected means, in an
unthought of, and surprising manner, he delivers and saves his People. His
power is sufficient to sustain and support against all Oppositions, to rescue
from all dangers, and overturn all contrary interests, 2 Chronicles. 25. 8. He has
power to help, and also to cast down. He is styled the Rock, the Strength, the
Keeper of Israel; He can Command deliverance for Jacob, and his Word of Command
will certainly effect it, when ever he pleases.

2. By trusting in God his Glory is promoted and secured. God is jealous of his
Glory, he will not allow that it should be given to any other; and his People
are obliged to be very tender of it. The Wise man must not glory in his Wisdom,
the Mighty man in his Might, nor the Rich man in his Riches, but he that
glories must glory in the Lord, Jer. 9. 23, 24. What men place their principal
confidence in, that they Deify and Glorify: while therefore the People of God
use means for their own safety against their Enemies, it concerns them in order
to their glorifying of him, to be Exercising their trust upon him. Two things
may here be Suggested, viz.

1. The Divine Perfections, and the All-disposing Providence of God are
directly acknowledged hereby: the respect owing to him upon the account thereof
is then yielded. It Is a very reasonable, and comprehensive injunction, Prove. 3.
6. In all thy ways acknowledge him. Because God is the first Cause, the Supreme
Ruler and Moves of all Beings, and Affairs, because His Eyes run to and fro
throughout the Earth; and all wheels are exactly moved according to his
pleasure; even the most minute circumstances and incidences, fall under his
cognizance and direction, therefore a deference is due to him, in all
undertakings, because of and through him are all things, therefore should all
be for him, Romans 11. ult. But unless he is trusted in he is not duly
acknowledged; the glory due to his Name is otherwise withheld: As to the
Success or issues of War, these are most certainly under his disposal: He
umpires and arbitrates in all Engagements; He is styled the God of Armies, and
his hand gives the victory. He raises the spirits of men, or dispirits them:
He inclines them to prosperous methods, or infatuates their Counsels: He
strengthens or enfeebles them: and innumerable are the ways, whereby he does
such things. The Lord of Hosts mustreth the Host of the Battle, Isa. 13. 4 And
when he pleases to make an Army successful, the Inhabitants shall be of small
power, greatly dismayed and confounded, advantages shall be hidden from them,
and even their own amused minds, and frightful fancies shall precipitate them
into disasters: the breaking of the Bow, the Shield, and the Battle are
ascribed unto God, at his Rebuke, both the Chariot and the Horse are cast into
a dead sleep, etc.

Now it is by trusting in God, that his Supremacy, Omnipotence, Wisdom,
Goodness and Faithfulness are confessed by his People; and his Government or
influx as to all such concomitants: hereby they acknowledge that he is their
King and Savior, that no Rock is like their Rock. Such an acknowledgment did
King Hezekiah make, when he exercised his trust in God, for protection from the
Arms of proud Sennacherih, Isa. 37. 16. O Lord of Hosts, God of Israel, that
dwells between the Cherubims, thou art the God, even thou alone, of all the
Kingdoms of the Earth, and have made Heaven and Earth. And such a Confession
was also made by King Jehosaphat, when the Children of Moab, Ammon and Mount
Seir were bandyed against him, and invaded him, 2 Chronicles. 20. 6, 7, 12. Thus to
be expressing a respect unto God in these their weighty affairs, are his people
by virtue of their profession indispensably obliged.

2. Hereby the Glory of God is secured for the future. Those who are careful to
trust in God for Salvation, will be most ready to offer praise unto him, when
Salvation is obtained: Where men place dependence, there they render homage
when their designs are compassed, or their enterprises speed according to their
minds: they that trust to their own Net and Dragg, will burn incense to these:
but those who trust in the Lord, and commit their way to him, will bring their
Spoils to his Altar: when their desires are accomplished, they will readily
say, as in, Psalm. 115. 1. Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name
give glory: they will boast in God all the day long, as it is expressed in our
Context. David who was an instance of a settled trust in God, how full do we
find him in his acknowledgments unto God for all he obtained; Psalm, 18. 32, 33,
34. It is God that girdeth me with strength, and makes my way perfect; he
makes my feet like Hinds feet, and sets me upon my high places; He teaches
my hands to War, etc. Trust in God is ever accompanied with Humility; now the
more humble any are, the more concerned will they be to ascribe all praise unto
God. Such Confessions are uttered by those when delivered or prospered, whose
confidence has been aright exercised, as we find in, Psalm. 118. 15. The Right
hand of the Lord has done valiantly? Psa. 98. 1. His Right hand, and his holy
Arm has gotten him the victory. God will by no means allow his people to be
puffed up with success, or to vaunt themselves; hence it is said, Jud. 7. 2.
Lest Israel vaunt themselves against me; saying, my own hand has saved me:
those who aright trust in God will be shy of this. And may I not add here, that
such will, when things appear doubtful, or go most cross to their desires, make
a due construction thereof, and acknowledge his Name therein? When the People
of God are careful in this regard, their Spirits are molded to a submissive
temper, unto a due acquiescence under all Divine Disposals.

3. This is the most successful course. And verily it is to a right
acknowledgment of God, the promise is made in the forementioned, Prove. 3. 6.
He shall direct thy paths, or succeed and prosper thy undertakings. We are
assured, Psalm. 118. 8. that it is better to trust in the Lord, than to put
confidence in man. What influence this trust has unto success may be
considered under two Heads.

I. A trust rightly placed in God, will inspire with true Fortitude and
Magnanimity. It Is naturally productive hereof. Nothing can more whet the
courage of men, or prompt and animate them to great undertakings than this.
Such who can trust in God need not flag nor be appaled, when the greatest
difficulties appear: their Spirits will remain unbroken and undaunted, even
when all foundations are out of course, Psalm. 46. 1, 2. God is our refuge and
strength: a very present help in trouble. Therefore will not we fear, though
the Earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the
Sea. And to the same purpose was it declared by David as to his own case, Psalm.
27. 1,2. The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom shall I fear! the strength
of my life, of whom shall I be afraid? He who is sensible, that the cause he
undertakes in is better than his life, and who commit himself unto God in
managing of it, will set his face as a flint, will not faint or flinch when
hazards surround him; such a person will proceed obstinately, and without dread
or dismay. They that hope in the Power, Mercy and Providence of God, will be
steady under all Changes: their hearts will be fixed, evil things will not
shake them. Trust in God will produce calmness or composure in the spirit of
men, under the most threatening circumstances; will cause them to undertake the
hardest Services, and to undergo the greatest hardships; hereby the People of
God have waxed valiant in fight, and prevailed.

2. This affiance in God engages his favor and blessing. Hereby he becomes
obliged to grant his merciful conduct, and a good issue, Psalm. 33. 18. Behold
the Eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that hope in his
mercy. Those are doubtless safe and unconquerable, whom the Eternal God engages
to be a Refuge unto: They cannot be overmatched, or overborn, who have the God
of Jesurun for their help, their Enemies shall be found liars unto them: He is
ever watchful for their defense, and present when they need; by his conduct
safety will be experienced in the most hazardous adventures, and success
notwithstanding all obstacles; but this is the privilege of those who aright
repose their trust in him. He is their help and their shield, Psalm. 115. 9. See
the different effects of trusting in God, and of trusting elsewhere set forth
in, Psalm. 20. 8. they are brought down and fallen, but we are risen, and stand
upright* That God will not forsake or abandon those who trust in him, we are
certified by famous instances on Scripture Record; 1 Chronicles. 5. 20. They cried
unto God in the Battle, and he was entreated of them, because they put their
trust in him, 2 Chronicles. 13. 18. The Children of Judah prevailed, because they
relied upon the Lord God of their Fathers. King Asa made this his plea for help
against his Enemies; 1 Chronicles. 14.11. Help us, O Lord our God, for we rest on
thee, and in thy Name go forth. A peculiar regard will God express to those who
keep in the line of Duty, and confide in him for Salvation; the Lord is good, a
strong hold in the day of trouble; he knows them that trust in him, Nahum.
1.7. He approves of and is well pleased with all such.

Having thus considered the Contents of the Doctrine, and the grounds thereof:
Let us proceed to make some Remarks thereon by way of Application.

USE 1.
We may from the premises infer, That those who are truly and strictly
Religious, are best qualified for Service in a Military Station: I mean (
caeteris paribus) their other Endowments of Body and Mind being equal. This
Inference is natural and obvious, for such, can aright exercise a trust in God,
and are disposed to do it in all their Affairs. In the way of his Commandments
is God to be trusted, Psalm. 119. 166. Lord, I have hoped for thy Salvation, and
done thy Commandments. Those who are conscientiously observant of approving
themselves unto God, by avoiding whatever is offensive to him, and by
discharging all the duties incumbent on them, may Encourage themselves in the
Lord, or be steadfastly trusting in him: and who so fit as these to stand in
that Order wherein dangers are to be expected and waited for? who so likely to
be employed therein to advantage? The people that do know their God, shall be
strong and do exploits, Dan. 11. 32. Now, they that know his Name do trust in
him As for those who are at Enmity with Heaven, who are continually affronting
and defying the Great God, as profane and debauched persons are, how can they
trust in him? or what reason have they to hope that he will stand by them? The
boldness of such is the effect of a senseless or stupid spirit, of a desperate
phrenzy? they may at sometimes brave it out in the face of Death, but it is
because they are not aware, or don't bethink themselves of the consequents
thereof: let the Consciences of such be but alarmed and roused, their
Resolutions will suddenly cool, and their Spirits recoil, the terrors of the
Lord will make them afraid, they will tremble at the tidings and approaches of
their Enemies, as of the Executioners of Divine Revenges. Surely then, they are
best fitted to speak with the Enemy in the Gate, whose Reverence of God, and
dutiful behavior toward him, incourages and warrants their trust in him. True
Piety is a main qualification for good Soldiery; it not only graces or
beautifies those who make profession thereof, but will render them more useful
and successful in their several Capacities. The more devout, the better
Soldiers; such only who are truly Religious, can value a good Cause, they are
most likely to approve themselves faithful and steady in their respective
Charges, and the Courage of such is owing to sure and unshaken principles. The
profession of Soldiers, and the profession of Christianity are so far from
being at odds, that nothing more accomplisheth for the former, than such a
belief of Christian Principles as does produce an agreeable practice.

USE II.
It is the great interest of a People, when exposed by Enemies, to get into
good terms with God, that so they may trust in him for Salvation. Those who are
called to jeopard their lives in the high places of the Field, should approve
themselves such, as may aright exercise a trust in God; and verily, it concerns
a people in general, for the Service of whom Military Forces are levied and
employed, to be thus also approving themselves. What can expert and valiant
Warriors do in behalf of a people, whom God is in Honor engaged to contend
with, and bring low? Naked and Defenseless are they, from whom God is departed,
although their Borders should be lined and covered with the most valourous
Soldiers. If God will punish his Jerusalem, a few wounded and feeble Chaldeans
shall be too many and too strong for them; but if he will protect it, huge
Hosts shall instantly be Discomfited and Scattered. It Is then of principal
concernment, unto the Professing People of God, when the Grievousness of War is
upon them, to enquire wisely and seriously, whether they may on good grounds
place their hope and trust in him for Salvation. They who can say as that
Church in this Psalm did, their trust in God will be well grounded. See v. 17,
18, 20. All this is come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have
we dealt falsely in thy Covenant; our heart is not turned back, neither are our
steps declined from his ways, etc. But to apply this consideration to our Case,
if we cannot thus plead, we should bethink our selves wherein we have forgotten
God, and prevaricated in his Covenant: be humbling our selves for, and turning
from what has been matter of provocation to him; and thus be in good earnest,
seeking Reconciliation with him: then may we get him engaged for us who is the
God of Armies, then may we trust that our Arms shall be prospered, that our Bow
and our Sword should not return empty. Were we a Righteous and Holy People, we
might boast in God, be confident that his Face would be toward us, and his Arm
employed for us; if we hearken to him, and walk in his ways, we might allot
upon it, that he would soon subdue our enemies, and turn his hand against our
Adversaries, Psalm. 81. 13, 14 But if his Holy Mountain is forsaken, if his
Covenant is neglected, if we are false, deceitful, and unsteady in our dealings
with him, we must justify God though he cast us off, and put us to shame, and go
not forth with our Armies, and suffer those that hate us to spoil for
themselves. When Israel turns their backs, and fall before their Enemies, we
are told the cause in, Josh. 7. 13. There is an accursed thing in the midst of
thee, O Israel; Would we make God our trust, and enjoy his Salvation, we must
search out the accursed thing, we must amend our ways and our doings. Were this
our sincere aim and pursuit, then should we be Fenced and Hedged about with
Divine Protection, the Weapons formed against us should not prosper; then
should we be privileged, and might triumph, as in Psalm. 46. 7. The Lord of
Hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is our Refuge, Selah.

USE III.
We are hence instructed, With what design and frame of spirit, Military Skill
is to be sought, and Military Preparations to be made. These are to be
considered as means under God of the public safety, and accordingly to be
pursued; but an entire Resignation should be made to him, and a due trust
exercised in him as to the success thereof.

It Is very commendable to be seeking after skill in Military Science or
Faculty, and the attainment thereof is a valuable Talent. However this is from
God, and is his Gift; yet it is not to be expected from him immediately, but by
his blessing upon the industrious use of proper means. Abraham took care that
his Household Servants should be tutored to the use of Warlike Weapons, Genesis 14.
14. When David assumed the Government upon Saul's Defeat and Death, one of the
principal things, wherein he manifested his care of the Commonwealth, was
that, 2 Samuel 1. 18. He bade them teach the Children of Judah the use of the
Bow. There is an honorable mention made of such in the Scripture Record, who
were skilful is War, able to bear Sword and Buckler, and to shoot with Bows, 1 Chronicles. 5. 18. And in chapter 12. 18. Men of War fitted for the Battle, who could
handle Shield and Buckler. They may well be accounted some of the most useful
persons in a Commonwealth, who excel in such like skill and endowments, and
who are promoters thereof. What will Stores and Magazines signify, without men
of Skill and Spirit to apply and manage them? But to seek after Military
Accomplishments only as an Ornament, or piece of Gallantry, is vain: and yet
less justifyable is it, to attend Military Exercises as a sport or piece of
pastime: if due references are not made herein, that time expended about them
is but lost. It is acceptable to God, when proficiency in the Art Military is
endeavored, with a design of Service to him and his Church; those who don't
thus regard it, do but trifle in their pretenses about it.

All due Preparations both to withstand and offend an Enemy, are proper and
incumbent, especially in times of danger. It Is inexcusable folly to be
negligent in this regard, for indeed none can aright trust in God, who are
slack as to the use of means ordained and afforded. Persons of a Military Order
and Spirit, are therefore to be encouraged; those who bear Arms for the Service
of the Public, should be well provided for, and rewarded: all needful Supplies
of every kind procured and in a readiness: but whatever care is used in these
things, it must be with an eye to God, resigning and commending all to his
blessing. In Nehemiah's time, when a sudden Onset was expected, from those who
were malignant against the interests of the People, and of the Worship of God,
we have an account of his exemplary method, Neh. 4. 13, 14. I set the people
after their Families, with their Swords, their Spears, and their Bows: and said
to the Nobles, to the Rulers, and unto the rest of the People, be not ye
afraid: Remember the Lord which is Great and Terrible, and fight for your
Brethren, your Sons and your Daughters, your Wives, and your Houses. The
prudence and Religion of Hezekiah, when a potent and victorious Adversary was
approaching to the Gates of Jerusalem, we find recorded, 2 Chronicles. 32. 1 -- 8.
So then when the Bow and Sword are prepared, when skill or dexterity for the
due improvement of these is endeavored after, a Service for God and his People
should be intended; but moreover there should be a rest, relyance or dependence
upon God, in order thereto.

All I shall here add is this, that it is justly to be accounted a mark of
Divine Desertion, when there is a general failure among a People of Persons
Spirited for Military Service; and when the pursuit of qualifications for it,
is looked upon as a little, impertinent, inconsiderable thing; and also, when a
secure Laish-like Spirit prevails: but yet when the utmost is done, that can be
done by a People as to the things mentioned, God must be acknowledged as God,
by being entirely, absolutely confided in.

USE. IV.
This Respect unto God or trust in him, in all our endeavors for safety, under
our present circumstances, is now to be Recommended. If we believe a
Providence, we cannot but acknowledge that this is incumbent; as we would not be
wanting in our Duty to God, nor incur his Displeasure, as we would not be
blasted in our undertakings, but obtain an Expected end, we must practice
accordingly.

The tendency hereof, is not to nourish security, but to take off from a false,
foolish, and dangerous confidence. There is a great difference between
neglecting and not confiding in means. To be carefully using of them, and yet
to consider or regard 'em in their proper place, is a point of great
concernment, and not a little caution is needful hereunto. There are two
Extremes, and there is danger on either side, viz. Trusting in means while
neglecting of God, and trusting in God while neglecting or careless of means.
We are especially incident to the former, in what concerns outward or secular
matters; and therefore it is, that if at any time our Endeavors are crowned
with success, we are ready to allot upon it for the future, forgetful of God,
and our dependence on him: but if our Enterprises miscarry, we are ready to
droop or despond, as if no help could be obtained: there is therefore abundant
reason why the Duty propounded should be pressed, and urged upon us. For which
End, both former Experiences, and our present circumstances, may justly be
reflected and deliberated upon by us.

That it is beneficial for us to trust in God, has been formerly experienced;
and therefore are we Obliged still to be trusting in his Name. By a Chain of
Memorable Providence has the Divine favor been manifested in the
Preservation and Establishment of our Civil and Religious Liberties,
notwithstanding the Malice, and Molestation, whereto we have been obnoxious.
Many a time may this Israel say, if it had not been the Lord who was on our
side, when men rose up against us, then they had swallowed us up quick, when
their wrath was kindled against us. The use of our Sword and Bow, has been
several times called for, and by a trust in God rendered succesful. The former
works of God, should be improved unto the Settling our Hope in him, Psalm. 78. 4,
7.

Our present Circumstances proclaim, how (...) is to trust in our Bow and Sword
for Salvation. Very awful and tragical are the things, that by Divine
permission have been acted in our Land, by a Contemptible and Barbarous Nation:
and very Remarkable (...) have attended our Enterprises, when formed with the
best care and caution, when pursued with the greatest Labor and Diligence. We
have had abundant conviction, of the insignificancy of Military skill and
prowess in our actions against an insidious Enemy: That vain is the help of Man
without the help of God, has been very sensibly proclaimed unto us: In that
our Confidences have been so much rejected, our Successive and Expensive
Expeditions, so much blasted, we should be Cautious where we put our trust, it
highly concerns us to be so. God designs to make us thoroughly sensible, of our
absolute dependence upon himself, that we are hopeless unless he undertake for
us. The apprehensions of our weakness and danger at present, should cause us to
be more in Looking upward; to be acting more agreeably to the Profession we
make in our Solemn Supplications, unto God for his guidance and blessing in all
our great affairs; far better would it be with us, did we more Eye God in all;
if though a Poor and afflicted People, we trust in his Name, we should enjoy
his defense, he would arise and Save us.

IT Remains, that I now direct my self to the Honorable Company, who have
engaged me in their Service at this time.

Gentlemen, The truth presented to your Consideration, is not improper upon any
such occasions as this day are attended by you, but at the present juncture,
under the Rebukes we at present Labor and Languish, it is, what peculiarly
requires your thoughts. I presume that what has been offered is agreeable to
your own Sentiments, and the desires you have Expressed to have a Blessing asked
from Heaven upon your Essays; and I am sure your Learning and Practicing the
Lesson you have heard is of great behoof. Trusting in God is a Duty, you are
to be regardful of, in every Capacity, and it greatly concerns you in that
Capacity wherein this day you appear: it supposes, and has a necessary
connection with all other Duties thereto belonging, or incumbent therein.

The subject handled, has not the least tendency, to divert or discourage you
from your laudable AEmulation, of high degrees in Military accomplishments; but
it tends to further you in such an use of your Arms, in Exercising and
Employing them with such a design and disposition, as may render you accepted
of God, and the happy instruments in his hand of good unto his People.

If the drift and tendency of my Discourse, has principally referred unto what
concerns Soldiers, when called forth to real Service, in faceing and
encountering of their Enemies; the consideration of the State of Affairs abroad
in the World, and among our selves, may, (I Suppose) be a sufficient Apology
for it. A General Summons to War, seems to be now Served among the Nations, and
an hot Service are they like to be called unto, who can bear Arms. To the help
of the Lord against the Mighty, all who would be accounted Cordial to the Weal
of Israel, may be glad to appear; as for those who refuse to afford their Help
in such a Crisis, the bitter Curse of Meroz is like to take place upon them.
The tidings brought us from abroad may cause us to reflect on those words of
the Prophet, Jer. 46. 10. For this is the day of the Lord God of Hosts, a day
of Vengeance; the Sword shall devour and be satiate, it shall be made drunk
with blood. And when are we like to see a Period of our Calamities and
Disasters? Verily, as yet a Sound of Battle is in the Land, and of great
Destruction; to use the Words of the same Prophet, Jer. 50. 22. Ruins and
Desolations have been in our Borders; Garments rolled in Blood, the confused
noise of insulting Enemies, mingled, with the groans of the Wounded, and
Wailings of Captives, have been there seen and heard. And we have ground for
very solemn and awful apprehensions, as to what may be behind, of being further
and more grievously affected with the Wars of Europe, before the Conclusion of
them. If ever learning War was seasonable, now it is; and now if ever, should
those who attend Preparatory Exercises for learning of it, have very close
thoughts about, and a serious regard to Real Service; and a Trust in God is now
Eminently called for.

Be Excited then, to a proceedure in your Endeavors after further seize
in Military skill, and accomplishments for Military Work and Service. Let
Conscience of Duty influence your performances on such days as this is; and
consider that you must acknowledge God in Seeking, what you desire and reach
after; it is he can Teach your hands to War, and your fingers to Fight. Labor
after the Exercise of a right hope and trust in God, as to all you are, or may
be called unto; entire your selves to it: watchfully avoid what is inconsistent
with it: Let the requisites hereunto be carefully pursued, viz. A right
knowledge of God, and an hearty subjection to his Will. And let the interest of
CHRIST ever lie near your hearts: if Heathens could act from such a principle,
that it would not be worth their Living to see the Destruction of their Country
and of their Religion; surely Christians, may and should be much rather swayed
thereby. Esteem it truly glorious, and worthy of your Ambition, to be
Instruments under God of his Peoples safety, or of preserving, restoring,
prolonging their tranquillity.

I shall have done when I have said, that there is a Spiritual Warfare, whereto
all Christians are Obliged, and it is most pernicious or dangerous to be
Self-Confident in the management thereof. We must all yield our selves to the
Lord Jesus Christ, to fight under his Banner, and to be followers of him,
wheresoever he shall call us: We must see that we want none of the Armor he
has provided for us, and in his Word recommended to us: We must Watch always;
Fight and not flourish only: the World must not be inordinately either loved
or feared by us, but overcome: Sin, indwelling Sin must be not only Maimed;
Wounded, or Suppressed, but Mortified; Principalities, Powers and Spiritual
Wickednesses, must be wrestled with and Vanquished. But how shall we do this?
We are told how, in Ephesians. 6. 10. Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his
might. Our trust, the trust of our Souls, must be placed and fixed on our
Glorious Redeemer: to Him we must repair, in his Name engage, else we shall be
Foiled, Worsted, Enslaved; but observing his Orders, and relying on his Grace,
we shall come off more than Conquerours. To sit down with the Lord Jesus Christ
in his Throne, is verily such a Triumph, that the Tongues of Men and Angels,
cannot Express the (...) sense and Emphasis of it: to this are we reserved,
thither shall we Arrive if imploring, and depending on his Assistance and
Conduct, we approve our selves Faithful unto the Death; AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. line 30. dele first. p. 6. l. 12. for, where r. were. p. 7. l. 15. f.
carriage, r. Carnage. l. 24. f. Flook r. Flock. p. 8. l. 21. f. intrivals, r.
intervals. p. 10. l. 2. r. insatiably. l. 12. r. Inhabitants. p. 11. l. 27, 28.
for, find a Promise as a blessing, r. find it Promised as a blessing. p. 15. l.
8. f. power, r. prowess. p. 16. l. 5. r. grounds. l. 8. r. weakness. l. 10. f.
all the, r. the all. p. 21. l. 12. f. passage, r. purpose. p. 22. l. 6. f. of,
r. and. p. 25. l. 22. r. incidencies. p. 26 l. 23. f. concomitants, r.
concernments. p. 29. l. 24. f. who commit, r. who can commit.


