George Keith ONCE MORE BROUGHT TO THE TEST, And proved A PREVARICATOR,
Containing something of an Answer to his Book called THE SPIRIT OF RAILING
SHIMEI, etc.

And showing, that George Keith in his attempting, to prove the Spirit of
Railing Shimei, etc. to be entered into Caleb Pusey; has there by more
manifested, that not only the Spirit of Railing, and Envy; but also of
Confusion, about Doctrin's and Principles of Religion, is entered in to himself.

For where envying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work,

James ^.6. That we henceforth be no more Children tossed to and fro, and
carried about with every wind of Doctrine etc.

Ephe. 4:14. Printed at Philadelphia by REINIER JANSEN.

THE PREFACE.
Friendly and Impartial Reader.
I Hope upon thy deliberate consideration and reflection, upon the Series of
things in these parts, within these Eleven or Twelve years past; relating to
the difference, between our Friends and George Keith; thou may easily discern,
that we in and through it all, have not affected controversies for
Controversies sake, being still in the defensive part, casting off those Darts
and Arrows, and wiping away those Calumnies and Reproaches, that he and his
Abettor D. L. from time to time, have cast upon our Christian Profession; both
by Print and other ways, he and some Joining with him, having printed here at
least Eight or Ten books, papers and Pamphlets against us, before we Printed
one line against Him.

In his title page, he compares me to Shimei the Railer, and in page 29 says, I
am a continual Wrangler; which as it is false, so if true, would be very
unfitly charged by him, who by the same manner of speech, as continually
Railing and Wrangling.

As for his comparing me with Baals four hundred lying Prophets: Let but the
candid Reader observe both our books, (...) may soon see, how proof^^^ss he
has been, in his attempts to prove m^ such, though for a Proof of his own
falseness, take here one instance from the following Certificate.

WHEREAS, G K. in p. 40. of his book Entitled, the Spirit of Railing Shimei
etc. says, Upon application made by WILLIAM BRADFORD and JOHN M. COMB to
GOVENOUR FLETCHER, for enlargement from their Imprisonment, he ex^mined into
the cause of their Commitment, and (...) it was upon a Relig^^^^ difference
discharged the^ etc.

I do hereby certify, (being (...) of the Persons above named that G. K 's
relation abovesaid is, (...): For (...) the said WILLIAM BRADFORD and JOHN M
COMB were both set at liberty from the said Imprisonment, before ever the said
Governor FLETCHER came into his Government of PENSILVANIA.

And I do Certify, that I never made Application to him, the said Governor
FLETCHER, nor any other Person under (...), for my Liberty:

Witnes^ my hand; JOHN M' COMB.

And now for a taste, of G. K's Railing, take these few things as part of the
many more that might (...) brought; (viz.) in his Title ^age, the Spirit of
Railing Shimei* and of Baals four hundred Lying Prophets entered into Caleb
Pusey. pa. 2. the open Heathenism* and infidility of this C. P. pa. 3. seems
almost as void of good sense and reason as his Millstones pa. 4. the Impud^^^
of this C. P. pa. 14. Dull Fa^lacy pa. 17. his Dull Sophistry pa. 42. ^f this
C. P. be not as fast ^^ld in the N^w^ as if he had a ^hief in his Mil^: with
much more ^^o tedious here to repeat.

As for the Noise he has made from pa. 47 to 51 about the Relation given in
Proteus of his behavior, in dis^^b^^g our Meetings on ^h^^d ^sl^nd etc. giving
(...) the Lie in diverse particulars, he know^ (...) g^ve that but as a
relation. (...) Rhoad-Island. And (...) we had such Relation G. K. ^o^h not so
much as question the Truth of; and that upon occasion relations; though about
matters of fact, from one Friend to another may be publish^d, if he be
consistant with himself; cannot deny, having ^u^ in his Quakers Politics
published, passages ex^ract^d out of several Letters of R. B. to himself;
wherein ^s several Friends refl^cted on by name; and this without any pre^ence
of having any other knowledge of the said matters, then from the said R. B.
relation: however, notwithstanding what G. K. has said to the contrary of the
Road-Island rel^tion, I have no ^^ason to question the Truth at least, as to
the substance of it; First, because it came from a credible hand there:
Secondly ^^^^use of the lame defense G. K. has made in his own V^ndication; as
to instance two or three Particulars: First, ^hereas the relation says he
being in a Turbulent (...) called to the Governor in a Comm^nding way, that ^e
might be heard: To which G. K. says, it was in moderation and due Respect, that
he desired the Governor to command them, to give him a hearing etc.

Now, what he may call in self defense, a desire with (...) Respect etc.
indifferent person that heard it, may possibly (...), a commanding wa^;
however, he owns, he would then have had our Friends been Commanded by the
Governor, to have heard him.

In page 50. he cites from Proteus thus. That I disturbed the Quakers Meetings,
in all the other places in New England and Long Island, into which I come; and
then says, all is false: for what disturbance was made, was wholly made by them
and never by me.

A^s. I^ seems then, that his coming into our peaceable Meetings, from place to
place, and imposing upon us, though in the midst of our Horship, his reflecting
discourses upon our Principles or Persons; and we but desiring to enjoy our
Meetings peaceably; and pleading the right, we have so to do, or the like, is
counted by him a disturbance, made by us, but not by him; which the impartial
will surely censure him for.

Again, because I said, he came not to Shrowsberry Meeting himself; but sent a
rash Precipitant Person etc. G. K. to excuse it, says, the said Person came
Voluntarily without his sending, for he had no Power to send him.

Ans. That it is to be understood, by what I said, that he sent him by a
compelling Power; I suppose none are so weak ^o imagine: And observe, he
himself says in the same Paragraph, that We sent, Mark [SENT] him a Scurrilous
Answer: Now, if the one be fa^^e, so is the other; for the Person that carried
that, which he calls Our Scurrilous Answer, went as Voluntarily in that
business, as George Keith's friend could do in hi^: but this is like the rest
of his shifting and quibling. -- As for the mistake about the day of the week,
it must be, either by the Transcriber or Printer, for it is said the Fifth-day
in the Original relation, according to G. K's Observation.

Note Reader, that as much of G. K's Book (to wave direct Answers to mine)
consist's of diverse cita^ions from other Friends Writings, and p^^verted to
what sense he pleases; so they having been (...), if not most of them. Answered
over and over by our Friends* I have taken G. K's own method in his ^reface, to
draw u^ what I thought fit to speak to; being what I think is Necessary at this
time. One thing more I cannot but take notice of, (viz.) how poor, pittyfull
and mean Spirited it is in this G. K. to take part as he does, with D. L. in
his so manifestly abusing W. P. by saying, that in pa. 20. of Sandy Foundation,
he called the Man Christ, the Finite Impotent Creature; and says in pa. 61.
that it is vain and Idle in me, to clear W. P. of that horrid assertion.

Ans. Certain it is vain and idle in G. K. with his vain and nonsenceable
consequences, drawn from some expressions, in other books of W. P's, that have
no reference to the said passage, so to charge W. P. for he may as soon prove a
thing to be, which is not, as to prove that W. P. there called the Man Christ,
the Finite Impotent Creature.

Again, Admit the Quakers were unsound, as he would render them to be: Yet
surely, he is a person very unfit to charge them with it* Or to charge them
with false doctrine, who is so confused about his own Doctrine, as in Proteus,
and in this book is shown.

Again, observe in his Preface to his Retractations, he says he has not
renounced any one assertion, contained in any of his former books, that ever
was judged by him an Article of Faith; and whereas, I have in Proteus shown
him, both books and pages, wherein he in diverse respects, had called several
Doctrines, Fundamental Principles etc. and also showed, that he has now
renounced those principles, and though he would put it off with saying, I no
where remember, or I do not remember, that I called them Fundamentals; or if I
did call them so, it does not follow, that they are so, or the like: I say,
though he thus puts it off, and does not, not in truth cannot deny, but that he
did acknowledge them to be Fundamentals: yet in his ^^^^face we ^ind; that he
very confidently says, I falsely charge on him, that they are acknowledged by
himself to be Fundamentals, O the confusion of the Man!

Again, as to his being, an Apostate; we well know, how he has called upon W.
P. to give him an opportunity, to prove him an Apostate: As also in his
challenge to our Friends at Rhoad-Island, He did the like. We^l, upon the term
Apostate, hear him in his page 35. what he says; (viz.) If I have departed
from Principles of Quakers, which either they or I held to be Fundamentals, but
were no real Fundamentals of Christianity; but Dross and Rubish, built on the
true Foundation, this will not prove me an Apostate from Christianity, but only
from the Dross and Dregs of Quakerism, or what is worse: And let them call me
so if they will, in that sense; for we find in Scripture, the word Apostate,
according to the Greek, used in a good sense: Whoever names the name of Christ,
let them d^^^^rt from Iniquity, (the Greek here is Apostate) i.e. let him
Apo^^^t^ from Iniquity: thus far G. K. All which puts me in mind. First, how he
told his Auditory, before he went last to England, that if they heard, that he
put on the Canonical Robe, and turned to the Church of England that then they
might call G. K. an Apostate: Secondly, how he termed some Presbyterians,
Apostates; for so doing: Thirdly, notwithstanding which, in his exact Narrative
pa. 15. he is turned, and says, if we prove him not to have changed in any
Fundamental Principle, he ought not to be charged as an Apostate; but now it
seems, he is turned again, and allows us to call him an Apostate, though he
will not own he is changed in any Fundamental Principle; though but 4 pages
before he says: he who cannot prove him varied in any one Fundamental of true
Christianity, cannot prove him an Apostate. And besides Observe, if the word
DEPART, and the word Apostate, be of the same signification, why then has he
been so long uneasy under our terming him an Apostate, since he owns he has
DEPARTED from Principles of Quakers? But this is but to show his confusion; as
also further, to show from his own Mouth, that we had ground enough to term him
an Apostate.

Observe again, I having fully proved, that he has DEPARTED from Principles,
acknowledged by himself to be Fundamentals, to excuse it as above; he says, if
I have departed from Principles of Quakers, which either they or I held
Fundamentals, but were not so, but Dross, Rubish and Dregs etc. this will not
prove me an Apostate from Christianity.

Ans. Surely to hold Dross, Rubish and Dregs to ^o Fundamentals of Christanity;
is to err Fundamentally: And yet in page 18. he says, that ^ver he had any of
their Fundamental Errors, he utterly de^ys* as if to hold Dross, Rubish and
Dregs for Fundamentals, was not to have Fundamental Errors, and as if that,
though he so held; yet he was always sound in Fundamentals, as he has so long
^oasted of.

Again, though he used so much to boast, that in his books, he did not
contradict himself, and affirmed, we could never prove he did; but (says he)
on the contrary; I can prove a good consistancy of my present Doctrine with all
my former and latter books; notwithstanding, the insinuation of some to the
contrary. s^ some Fundamentals pa. 13. Appeal pa. 5. but now in pa. 31. he
says, that contradictions may be found in some of my former books, it is
probable etc but whether there be any consistancy, betwixt a good consistancy
of his p^es^nt Doctrine, with all his former and later books and contradictions
in his books; men of consistant sense and reason will soon determine* to
conclude after all his noise; about Our and the Presbyterians, being un^ound in
Fundamentals, as in Proteus pa. 49. I hinted; he ^ells us, in pa. 34. that it is
generally agreed amongst all true Christians, that the Apostles Creed, for the
Simpliciter Credenda, contains all the Fundamentals of Faith; and in pa. 31. he
says, it is not what men think to be Fundamental, that is always so; but what
men think so from the certain knowledge, that they have, that they are so by
warrant from the Holy Scriptures?

Ans. Very well; then this I know, that whatsoever warrant we have from the
Holy Scriptures, concerning any or every Article of the said Creed; we hold our
selves oblidged, as much as any faithfully, to believe; and we do accordingly
believe them; and therefore by G. K's own confession, we are found in all the
Fundamentals of Faith; and as to the said Creed, we do believe it to be (in the
main) a good Christian Confession; to which our desire is, there may be daily
added a good life, and Christian conversation; and that by the assistance,
guidance and directance of the Holy Spirit, we may all be enabled so to walk,
as through the merits of our ^lessed Savior, to receive the end of our Faith;
even the Salvation of our Souls.

CALEB PUSEY.

GEORGE KEITH once more brought to the TEST.
FROM my affirming that the difference beween G. K. and our Friends begun by
him* about 11 or 12 years ago; was chiefly, about the Universal Necessity of
the Faith and knowledge of Christ's Outward Death and Sufferings, in order to
Salvation; He call's a manifest Falsehood, and referr's not only to nameless*
Manuscripts on our side, but also to Nameless Printed Books, and nameless
Persons on his side. R. She^^^ page 1.

Answer. I did not only say it, but in page 5 quoted 3 of his own books to
prove it, to none of which do I find, that he has made one word of an Answer;
but says: The first and chiefest Controversy was, whether to Preach Faith in
Christ without us, as both God and Man, and also Christ within us as (...) the
Eternal Word, was to Preach two Christ's, which William Stockdal one of their
chief Prachers did accuse me of; and which they could never be drawn to Condemn.

This he Assigns, as the first part of the chief Controversy.

Ans. As he has Produced* Proof, that this was part of the chiefest
Controversy; so his own books (...) the contrary: And as for W. Stockd^l^;
there might (...) some mistake in the Persons hearing (...): ^or ^o ^y ^^^tain
k^^wledge he denied that eve^ he (...) ^. K. of ^reach (...) Christ's; for I
being much concerned, when I heard he had so spoken; and meeting with him in
the Street, desired him to tell me how the thing was, we both went into a
house, and sat us down, where he very concernedly spoke to me after this
manner: Caleb, what would G. K. have me to do? I could lay my self under his
Feet, to do him Good; But as for those words, which he accuses me of, I never
spoke them; only (said he) as we were speaking about G. K. how he so of^e^ of
late in his Preaching Rep^a^ed these words; Christ ^ithin and Christ without,
which might make some People think he Preached two Christ's: But not that he did
Preach two Christ's: And how this could be a main matter of Controversy; seeing
themselves then owned, that our Friends at a Meeting at the Yearly-Meeting-time
declared that G. K's. Doctrine concerning Christ within and Christ without to
be one Lord Jesus Christ was True. Some Reasons and Causes pa: 14.

And though they might have several Meetings before it was done; yet our
Friend's Judgment published by themselves, shows that the cause of it is delay
was, G. K's. Unruly behavior, and Extreme Passion; which occasioned their
Abruptly breaking up; And which Judgment also showed, that we denied the words
so charged by G. K. True Copy. page 2. So that it behoved our Friends, surely,
not to be too hasty in giving Judgment in such a case: And this I also know,
that at a great public Meeting at the Bank in Philadelphia, among a
Promis^uous Multitude of them and us; one of G. K's Company asked us, as he
stood in the Gallery; whether to Preach Faith in Christ within and Christ
without was Preaching two Christ's? He was readily Answered on our behalf by a
Ancient Ministering Friend of ours, NO, it is not: How then could that be the
Main or any part of the Controversy, when both ^ides owned one and the same
Doctrine to be true, as well as that the Person accused denied the charge, (as
I have heard) to his Dying day?

And, as for the Business, of the Light, it is being Sufficient without
something else: That never came up to the above main matter of Controversy; for
we then owned that the Faith o^ Christ's Outward Sufferings etc. was
Indispensibly Necessary to OUR Salvation; and to all to whom it was made known
and Revealed, as will be shown here after: So that the Question about the Light
which G. K. expressly said, was God and Christ. Heres^ and H^tred p. 14. Was,
what the Light was Sufficient to d^e; not what was our duty to believe,
concerning our Blessed Savior's Sufferings and Death, in the outward; in order
to Our Salvation; to whom it is made known and Revealed; for that he was told
by one of our Ministering Friends, at the bank public Meeting when they would
be Introduceing discourses about those things, that That Faith was
Indispensibly Necessary to all such, which was also consistant with our Ancient
Friends Testimony: Se Rob. Barcklay's. Apol. 141. 4t^. Edition.

But, that it may appear G. K. received this acknowledgment as insufficient;
see his Truth and Innocence then Printed page 7. where he takes us up thus: And
to say, this Faith is necessary to such to whom it is Preached to make them
Christians etc. But not to such Pious Gentiles, to whom it is ^ot Preached; as
if they could be perfectly Christians etc. without i^: Th^^ most evidently does
contradict the Scripture. Again in Heresy and Hatred pa. 14. G. K. owns, that
John Dellavall acknowledged that Faith in Christ, without as well as within,
was necessary to all such, to whom it is Preached, or declared for their
eternal Salvation.

Now, does not this clearly show, that the Question betwixt G. K. and our
Friends, was not whether Faith in Christ (...) was necessary to Our Salvation
to whom it is made known; But whether it was Universally Necessary to all
Mankind* as ^n page 10. of his Truth and Innocence he affirmed, and as he
affirmed in a very pressing manner at the Yearly Meeting 1691. Where he told
our (...) Friend Thomas L^yd in Anthony M^rris's Chamber, when he was
pers^ading with him after this manner; Ge^^^e, wh^ ^osr ^^ou (...) thus against
i^ about the Faith of Christ without us? For we firmly be^^eve all that is
written in the Holy Scriptures; of Christ's Sufferings D^^th etc. in the
outward: To which G. K. presently Replied. Ay^; but is it Vniv^rsally Necessary
to Salvation to Believe it; and because he did not close with him in that, G.
K. said, unl^ss he would own and acknowledge the Universal Necess^^y of that
Faith, he could not own him as his Ch^^st^^n brother; but said, he may be a
devout Heathen. And at that Meeting, he in a great Fury told our Friends, he
would expose them, he would Print them all over America, if not over Europe,
from all which I peceiv'd having, then took i^ i^ wri^^ing that according to
G. K. it was us not Sufficient to believe in all that our Savior Christ did,
and suffered for us in the Outward, as written in the Holy Scripture; and the
end for which he came both Inwardly and Outwardly; to wirt, to make an end of
Sin, and finish Transgression etc. And also, that by his one Offering; He has
for ever perfected those that are Sanctified; and that he gave himself for us
that he might Redeem us from all Iniquity etc. and which Offering the Lord was
Pleased to Accept of, on our account: And that by his Spirit and Power, it is
made Effectual for the Reconciliation of all those, that Repent of their Sins,
and truly believe in his Name; and that God does not Save any without Respect
to that great Offerings; as we all Grant and truly Believe: The Lord having
ordained it so to be, as G. K. says, Light of Truth page 6. But this we found,
would not do with him, unless we would make it an Article of Faith, to
believe: that God would not Save any of Mankind, whether Pious Heathens or
Infants, without the Faith of what Christ did, and Suffered for us in the
Outward.

As for his Scripture (...) in page 2 to Prove that none can be Sound without
that Knowledge of Chirst's outward Suffering and Death in the outward. I have
Examined them all* and does not find one of them make^out, that none are Saved
without that knowledge; however in such cases, Doubtless as the Scripture says,
whatsoever the Law says, i^ ^aith to them that are under the Law; So also
whatsoever the Gospel Outwardly says, it says to them that are under the
Outward Administration thereof: And have heard of it* even as we see when
Christ had on the M^unt Preached to the People: many Peculiar Gospell-Precepts
he ended with saying, Every one that hears these sayings of mine, and do them
not, shall be ^^^ned ^o a Foolish M^n etc. Where Mark, Christ does not say, he
is like a Foolish man who has not heard; But he who having ^eard; yet has
not Obeyed.

But in Page 3 he seems to Restrict the Necessity of that Faith, to such as are
Capable of Actual Faith, which Infants are not: And that it is according to a
good Rule in Law and Divinity; That words are to be taken according to the
Subject matter:

Answer. Very we^^^ the Subject Matter of this Difference then: was that of the
Universal Necessity of the Faith in Christ in the Outward etc. ^he Pleading
That so hard to us, and also had Printed, that the Gospel was to be Preached to
all Mankind, that Ever lived in the World, one time or other, before the End of
the World: Pretended Antidote pa. 105. And if to all Mankind, then to Infants;
for the Infants are not Men; yet they are part of Mankind: But Pray observe,
since according to G. K. himself, Infants many of which Dye such, and being
part of mankind, and not capable of Actual Faith in Christ Crucified, and that
the Gospel is to be preached to all Mankind in order that all may have that
Faith, where and when must they who Dye Infants have it Preached to them, if
they come not again in order hereto? It cannot according to his Good Rule be
after Death; because the Subject in such cases is, how we shall be fitted for
Heaven before Death.

Again in pa. 3. he says, Note the Dullness of this Caleb Pusey, who seems to
be as avoid of Good sense, and Reason, as his Millstones; As if the
Salvability of the Virtuous Heathen, could not consist with the Universal
Neccesity of Faith, in Christ Crucified, but by the Notion of the 12.
Revolutions, etc.

Ans. As Dull as he Renders me, I can easily enough see he is expert in Abusing
me, by leaving out the last part of those words or Sentence in my Preface,
which showed that G. K. had also Printed of such Virtuous Heathen, that they
could not Perish, though they Died in that State: And as I then laid down, 3 of
his own Assertions, one of which as above he very runningly left out, so I
shall show them Briefly over again* and let him try his skill to Reconcile them
if he can. The first is that Faith in Christ's Suffering and Death, in the
outward, is Universaly Necessary in order to Man's Salvation and Perfection.

The Second is, that Virtuous Heathen cannot miss of Salvation.

The Third is, that such Virtuous Heathen cannot Perish, although they Dye in that
state: Refutation pa. 40. Now consider, if Virtuous Heathens cannot Perish,
though they dye in a state without that Knowledge, and yet that Knowledge is
Indispensibly Necessary; for them to have in order to their Perfection, where
shall they have that knowledge: If he say that in order to their being made
Perfect, they shall have it after Death in Heaven; that would be ^^atly
opposite to what he offer's in p. ^4. of his 4th. Narrative, where discoursing
of Perfection he ^aith; it must be at the instant of Death; and that is (^aith
he) neither before, nor after Death: Now I say, let him. Try his Skill to
Reconcile these without the Revolutions; For if such Virtuous Heathen cannot
Perish, though they Dye without that knowledge, and without which they cannot be
Perfect, and that the Instant of Death is the time of being made Perfect; How
is it then that they cannot Perish, though they Dye in a state of not being made
Perfect: Again, what, will now become of his saying round again, in his Shimei
pa. 19. That in Heaven after this Life is M^n's Salvation Perfected* and not
till then* perhaps if I should venture to call these things Contradictions; I
might be called by him, Dull Sophister, or somewhat else; however, I shall
Venture to Appeal to the Candid Reader, whether they be not great
Inconsist^nces and Confusions; neither did I as he, in pa. 2. Insinuates
against me, make it an Error in him; (nor any else) to Preach Christ Crucified
without us etc. I have been often much Comforted and Edified, when in the Power
and Demonstration of Truth, I have (in our Meetings) heard Christ as in the
outward Preached and Declared of.

In page 3. He says: If C. P. had but Common Discretion, he might know, that I
had fully Answered that about the 12. Revolutions in my former books.

Answer. He should have told what Books; for I know of no book formerly of his,
(though I have seen many) wherein he has Denied that Doctrine.

But in page 13. of Shemei, he Implicitly owns he held it as an Hypothesys, and
then says; Will a Change of mind in that Respect prove me to be varied in a
Fundamental etc?

Ans. Mere stuff; where did I ever Charge it upon him as a Fundamental? The
Reader may see Proteus page 8. where I called it his Whimsical Imagination; but
no where a Fundamental that I know of.

In page 3. he says, I can tell my Voucher told me that ^e (G. K.) never made
it an Article of his ^aith.

Answer. Yes he did so but in the same sentence, also showed, that it was but a
thift by G. Ks. won confession which was thus, When speaking that some things
most hinge on the Revolutions, said he; We need not be so blunt, for when they
tax me with it, I can sh^ft and say, it is Rational; for I never made it an
Article of my Faith: So here by his own confession, it was but a shift to say
he never made it an Article of faith; but that he did not therefore believe it
to be ^ound doctrine; it surely no way's follows; for he once believed that the
Baptism mentione'd Matthew the 28.18. was the Baptism of the Spirit, and not
with Water; but now, he has renounced that belief, and yet says he has not
renounced any one Assertion, that ever was Judged by him an Article of Faith;
so that what he may calf Articles of Faith to serve a turn who can tell.

in page 4, of Truth and Innocence where he was also shifting, about the
Revolutions, he seems to own it is a probable Opinion, though now he says does
not own it, as such, and the Reason he renders is for that it is Inconsistant
with the Resurrection of the Body, pa. 13.

Answer. Well Remembered at last, I say at last, because in the very Revolution
Book, they had found a way as they Imagined to solve that difficulty, also it
is in Q^ery 12^ thus: Does not that Soul when it receiv's it is first beginning
of his body (...) womb by a Magne^ical or Attractive Virtue draw into it self
(...) articles of it is own former Body; whatsoever Scattered in the while
Universe etc? Well, if he Disclaim these Whymzies now, (as possibly kind of
Necessity has driven him to do, that and other things h^ld by him) I say if he
disclaim them, I hope to have done with them ^oo unless h^ or some for him give
(...) occasion, however, by these kind of things the Cand^^ R^^d^ may perceive,
what work in them days we must needs have with him, when he was so shifting to
and again about these and his other notions, for which see his Truth Advanced,
where he may see plenty of them.

Well, back again to page 1, where he seek's occasion to tell how Samuel
Jennings told the Auditory, the Question was not who was the best Christian,
but who was the best Quaker.

Ans. But he hides the particular occasion for his so saying, which was,
because G. K. at that time, to gain the more upon those he had Drawn aside,
valued himself high, as that he was a Primitive Quaker, and that he was one
with all Faithful Friends and Brethren, and that he was consistent with all
his former Books, and we but Revolters or Heathens; and told how Friends
Letters from England, had lately then come over, and Confirmed his Doctrine in
every particular, then in difference betwixt him and us, see Plea Innocent pa.
17. Well, things being thus, and we began to tell him of the Inconsistency of
his former and lat^er Books, as well as with other Friends Books, and that he
could not prove so by us: then to shift and wave that, he would be t^lling us,
what it was to be the best Christian, which might have been exceeding well in
it is p^^ce; or had he then denied the Quakers Doctrine to be Christian, it
would have occasioned that to be the direct Question: But at that time, for the
above reason, it did not seem so, though it was consequently, who was the best
Christian; and indeed the Question at that time, was not at all, whether a
Quaker was a Christian or not; that being granted on both sides; but it was
whether G. K. or we, had m^st Reserved the Quakers Principles; and Consequently
which had Retained best the Christians: For the Quakers Religion was owned by
him to be no other, but r^all Christianity* as he confessed in his Pref^^e to
Serious Appeal.

As for his Accusing me, in his pa. 4. of a Notorious Falsehood, about our
difference about eleven years ago, it is fully detected above.

Well, I having accused both D. L. the Eight Ministers and G. K. of Attesting,
and Publishing very false things: First, for my saying in Postscript, there is
no such thing as D. Leeds, the Eight Ministers and G. K. had Alle^g^d against
G. F. in page 28. of Great My^tery, which they quoted against him, nor in any
other part of that book, that I know of whereupon G. K. ask's, will this that I
know of, excuse him?

Ans. I needed not those word to excuse me, for they were more then I was
oblidged to have said but what I said, was true both in saying so (and I have
searched diverse other, places) and also in saying it was not in the place cited
in the margent, though G. K. had said in that very broad sheet, that they did
exactly agree as cited in the margent; and as for page 28. being put for 47.
what was that to me. I knew not the least of it.

Well, he further says, Malice it self cannot fix it on the Eight Ministers.

Ans. No, how came D. L. and he to do it then? For it was from them I had it,
neither will that help him out to say, he said, Most of those Quotations are
Attested with near 800 more in the 3d. and 4th. Narrative.

Ans. What is that to the purpose? For what could be understood by the words
(those Quotations) but those in that Sheet he said they had Attested? So let it
be where or when it will, yet it was these in that Sheet that G. K. said they
had Attested, and it could be understood no otherwise: But if Malice it self
cannot fix a wrong Quotation on them, yet Truth it self can in the behalf of
which I do tell him, that they have Attested to that, in that very page 47. of
Great Mystery, for G. F's. words, which are not his but his Adversary's words,
and then G. K's and the Eight Ministor's Sense (by way of Consequence) put upon
G. Fox's words; which is not fair; especially since G. K. would make the World
believe, that the Quotations do exactly agree with the Books out of which they
are taken, and offers to Prove it to our Faces; but what heed is to be taken of
what such a Lavish man says, he can Prove? for, though he has cited his 4th
Narrative, (the third I never saw) and five of the Eight Ministers have
Attested to the Truth of them; yet I find in that very book, they have Quoted
W. P. again wrong, and that Materially; for, as he did, in the Serious Call,
Render W. Penn: to say Christ's Outward Manifestation is a Deadly Poison etc.
So has he, and five of the Eight Ministers who Attested it, rendered him also
there wrong, for W. P. truly Quoted, though not fully, is, Faith in the History
of Christ's Outward Manifestation etc. So that they have all left out again the
Words [the History of.]

Again, I find, that in Page 22, of the fourth Narrative, as also in G. K's
Serious Appeal (as Corrected) they have also Attested to a False Quotation out
of G. Fox's Great Mystery page 302. where they Cite him thus, And the
Scriptures, which signifies Writings, are not Infallible nor Divine, but Humane.

But G. Fox's words truly Cited is, And the Scriptures, which signifies
Writings, as you say, outward Writings, Paper and I^k, is not Infallible, nor
is not Divine, but is Humane. Here we see that all of them, left out those
words [As you say outward Writings, Paper and Ink] and yet have Attested it to
be exactly done. And for a further proof, that they have all made false
Citations in the said 4th. Narrative; see John Whiting's book called Judas and
the Chief Priests etc. who has de^ected them of diverse more false Citations.

Nay, in the very Serious Call, where it is pretended to be Corrected; he has
more wrong Quotations; First, Steven Crisps works pa. 160. where he has added
to the word Light, the words [In us] which, are not S. C's words.

Next, on Edward Burrows works Pa. 205. whose words truly quoted are: And you
are in the w^tchcraft, as they were ( Gal: 3) who take on things in your own
wills, who observe Commands from without, from the Letter; whereas they have
left out [As they were Gal: 3 who take on things in your own wills.]

As for what he says page 7. of my saying the word Anity, should be next after
the word Manifestation; and is so Corrected in the Marg^nt, I do really own,
that was a mistake, for though the Word Christianity was Corrected; yet the
particle [S.] was too much, which I since saw, after it was too late.

Again, I observe he says, page 11. If that Faith* meaning the Faith of Christ
's Outward Sufferings* be only necessary to any, beacause it is Preached or
Declared in the Scripture; it would follow, that of Men left alone the
Preaching of it etc. They sold does a kindness to their Children, by Preaching
only ^aith, and Obedience to the Light within them for their Salvation. How
does G. K's way mend it? for by the same Rule, where he says, as above is
shown, that i^ such who are Obedient to the Light within, though they Dye
without that Faith, they cannot miss of Salvation; well, add however, what
necessity is there to Preach any thing to our Children, but Obedience to the
Light within for Salvation? according to G. K's Doctrine: besides, is G. K.
wiser then the Scripture, which says: The Ingrafted word is able to save the
Soul. And that d^ers of the Law speaking of the Gentiles) shall be Justified;
and yet, the Apostle says, That the Jew that had the Scripture, had the
Advantage of them, much every way, chiefly because to them were commended the
Oracles of God, see James the 1.21. Romans the 3d. 1.2.

As for what he Quotes in page the 8. and 9. about the Scripture; and of this
speaking, of their being a secondary and subordinate cause; and means, or
^nstrument* and about our believing them etc: I never denied either; meaning by
believing in the Scripture, to believe the matters and things contained
therein, to be certain Truth; and that they are able to make the man of God
wise unto Salvation, through Faith in Christ Jesus. Mark [^^rough Faith in
Christ Jesus] It is not said through Faith in the History, but Faith in Christ
Jesus.

As for what he says in page 13. about Taxing D. L. with a m^^quoted page; I
have reviewed the place well, and the nearest ^ can make of it, is (as I said)
pa. 40. But it being some thing blotted, makes me think it was Marred in the
Printing* and though I mentioned it to D. L. yet I did not Render that as a
Material ^^uit in him. But as to the Substance of the Charge, which I said upon
him and D. L. for wrong Citation, that I stand by, though it was bu^ for leaving
out the word [And*] now G K. to excuse it, says, the word [And] in that place,
seems Super^^uo^s See how he can take away a word, and pervert the meaning, to
serve a turn; for that word, is also left out in the Corrected Copy of his
Serious Call: and yet how he censures G. W. for but saying in defense of G. F.
where he says, as it there stands. He that has the same Spirit that Raised up
Jesus Christ is Equal with God; now says G. W. the word [He that hath] should
be left out, as contrary to our sense and Principle: this G. K. censures, as
not being Proved; and also cry's out and says at this rate not only both
Atheism and H^r^sie, but the highest Blasphemy may be Defended.

Ans. How! what Atheism and Blasphemy defended by our denying of it to be
according to our Principle! and therefore say, it should be left out, and
possibly a Typographical Error; Would G. K. be so Censured, for Correcting an
Error of his own book? which he calls Typographical viz. [ are not, that
Prophets] to [ are not those Prophets.] See his Retr^^tation Book pa. 7. Also
he tells, that there are diverse Typographicall Errors to be found in many or
most of his former Books; Now would G. K. take it well, that any should accuse
him, for excusing those Errors, and call it excusing Bl^sphemy, and put him to
prove that they are Typographicall.

Next, as to what in Page 16. G. K. calls C. P's D^ll and Fallacious way of
Defending W. P's saying, That the OUTWARD PERSON was Properly the SON of GOD,
We utterly deny it, has been so often Answered, that I think it needless to
say more of it, than to desire the Reader to compare notes with William Penn
and him, about Christ's Outward Person, from G. K's Book, Refutation, pa. 37.
not retract, thus, if Christ be only and wholly restricted, to Christ's
Outward Person, as he came into Flesh, then there was no Christ nor Savior,
nor Mediator, before Mary: But this is express Contrary to Scripture, in many
places; which says: By Jesus Christ all things was Created etc. And surely all
the Faithful in all Ages were partakers of Christ, and he lived in them, as
well as in Paul; observe, surely the outward Person was not in them, nor in
Paul neither.

I come now to examine a little, how he says to clear himself, (though in vain)
of being varied about the Nine Fundamentalls, which I taxed him to be Varied
about.

In page 19. he says: Observe Reader, how he endeavors to Convict me of
Contradiction for saying, the Express Knowledge and Faith of Christ as he
Outwardly Suffered, is Necessary to the Perfecting of Men's Salvation, who have
it not before Death.

Ans. Mere prevaricating (...), where did I ever go about, to fasten a
Contradiction on him, for any such thing? What I charged on him, as a
Contradiction, was? for saying in the year 1670. he denied the Express
Knowledge of Christ without etc. to be Necessary, save to whom it is Revealed,
But in the year 1689. Indispensably Necessary to the perfecting men's.

Again, in the year 1692. the express knowledge was not Necessary, save to whom
was Revealed.

Again, that in the year 1690. the distinct knowledge was Necessary to all.

But again, in the year 92. the distinct knowledge was not Necessary to all;
see Proteus page 7. 8. 9. However it seems, whether before or after Death, he
is now turned again, and holds the Express knowledge to be Universally
Necessary some time, ^et the Per^^cting men's Salvation: But in his
R^tra^^ing-book pa. 17 he tells us; he still said, the Express knowledge, is
not Universally Necessary. Nay, in pa. 43. he says; If any such thing can be
found in his former books, he does Retract and Renounce it; bu^ ^ow it seems as
if he has Retracted that in page 2. (...) now seems in compliance with the
Church of England, to restrict the Universal Necessity, of the knowledge and
Faith of Christ's Death etc. to adult Persons, (viz.) such as are capable to
receive it, which (says he) Infants and Idiots are not; yet in his further
discovery writ against Samuel Jennings, who told G. K. that his then Doctrine
of the Faith in Christ without, it is being Necessary to all Mankind, would
affect Infants, Deaf and Dumb Persons etc. to which G. K. Answered: I freely
own it, that I have so affirmed, and do still affirm, see pa: 14.

Now is he not here Varied in Doctrine also. Well* in his page 19 he proceeds
and says; That such who have had an Implic^t Faith in Christ, here in this
World, and not an Express, for (...) of an Opportunity to have it Revealed,
they shall have it in Heaven, after this Life; for then is men's Salvation
Perfected, and not till then.

Ans. What does he mean by, for want of an opportunity of having it Revealed,
does he not say in page 14. of Heresy and Hatred, that the Light within, being
God and Christ, is abundantly Sufficient to the knowledge of Christ, both as he
(...) ^od and ^an, and as he Dyed or our Sins, Rose again etc And that either
with or without means. Also in his F^rther Discovery Pa. 17. writ against
Samuel Jennings, he affirms that the Light within being God, the Word and
Spirit) is able to give the Knowledge and Faith of Christ^s Death. But now, it
seems, according to George Keith, that God and Christ want an Opportunity to
reveal it Expressly, what strange work is here. Again, observe as love, he now
says, M^ns SALVATION is not perfected till after (...): But in his 4th
N^rrative, not above 3 years ago, he says, ^hey are not Perfected after Death,
but at the Instant of Death. Well, I can Source forbear to Call these things,
Contradictions; but having not (...) the ^rt of Logic, I shall content my felt
to call them (as above) inconsistenc^e^ and Confusions, though it may be he will
call me (as he has done) Dull S^ph^ster, Supine Ignorant, Miller Philosopher,
or what not, for my p^ins.

In his pa: 19, he says, in opposition to me, That to say Co^ne^^us had no
Express faith of Christ, before St. Peter preached it to him, will not prove,
that either in his former estate he had, or had not any Implicits of Christ
etc. This is still mere stuff, and stu^^le, he knows it was not I that said
Cornelius had, or had not an Implicit says, only as, Ad^ominem. Which in pa:
32 he tells me, binds my adversary, but not me. Which is very True: And a good
use I may make of it against him, in this Case; for, though Cornelius might not,
before Peter preached to him, have any Faith at all in Christ Crucified; yet G.
K. was Oblidged to believe, he had, because he said, he had not an Express
knowledge of it: 2dly because he also said, that the Term Express) Employed the
Term [Implicit] see Proteus pa: 12, All which he ^nswers, with his Logical
terms, by mere shuffling. As to the 2 Fundamentals in pa: 20 G. K's But is the
den^a^ of the term humanity or humane, a Fundamental Error in Christianity.

Ans. I Charged, and Proved, that he spoke against the words Humane ^^esh,
which he is now obliged to hold as a Fundamental; because the Athan^sius's
Creed ^ays, unless a men faithfuly be^ieve that (...) other things therein, he
cannot be saved; therefore is G K varied in this Fundamental; because he now
believes that Christ has Humane flesh, which he did not believe before. The 2d
Fundamental, Is the Light within: he begins in pa: 21. and makes a long
needless ^a^^a^gue about it; but as he there denies it, not to be Fundamental;
so my business here is to make it Appear, that he has varied about this
Fundamental, and that from his Own way of arguing ^^id th^s. (...) and E. B:
That the Light within every man, Is Sufficient without any thing else; which
was never (...) Faith or P^eswasion: and Challenge any Man to prove against me.

Ans. I take him upon his Challenge; and prove it against him: consequently, by
his own Argument, prove him to have (...) Fundamentally, in his Light of Truth
p 8. Robert Gorden speaking against the Spirit (as he words it that publishes,
that the Light that Enlighteneth every man, that comes into the World, is the
true Christ, our only Savior, Mediator and Redeemer; and that there is not
another: And, that Man is to) heed, and to be joined to this Light, as That,
which Condemns him; so, is able of it ^ell. Mark [of it self] to Save* and
Redeem him, as he becomes Obedient thereunto etc. To which G. K immediately
Answers thus; Here with open Mouth, thou speak against our Principle, (Mark)
[our Principle] even Jesus Christ, the True Light, that Enlighteneth every Man
that comes into the World, that all through him might believe. Observe, here G.
K. assumes it as his Principle; that the Light, which Condemns Man, is able of
it felt, to Save and Redeem Man, as he becomes Obedient thereunto, and if of
it is self* then surely, without any thing else.

Again, as above, he calls the Light Within, GOD, CHRIST, the WORD and the
Spirit; all which is surely sufficient, without any thing else. However,
notwithstanding which, as G. K. in pa 1^. Ibid. ^was that Christ's Outward
coming, has a real influence and Service in its place, in and upon all who
are Saved, so he knows we own too.

As to his rendering Richard Claridge and me Contradicting each other, about G.
K's setting God's Omnipotency and Wisdom at Variance; I say it really seems to
me, as well as Richard Claridge, that G. K. does so, for to say, the Light
within is God and Christ, (as G. K does) and yet to say, it is not Sufficient
without something else; because of what he is pleased to do, according to the
method that his Divine Wisdom had appointed, seems like setting God's
Omnipotency and Wisdom at Variance; which in short seems to be to say, that God
by his Omnipotency cannot do, what he could have done, had not his Wisdom took
another Method, and his Divine Providence afforded other helps etc.

Again, p. 22. from Christ's words; Think th^^ that I cannot. Pray to my
Father, and he shall presently give me more than 12 ^^gions of Angels But how
then shall the Scripture ^e fulfilled that thus it must be? H^^e says G. K.
it is plain, that both God and Christ, could have done (...).

Ans. Very true; and that is what we say, as well as ^e; but then Christ did
not say, God and Christ; is not sufficient, without something else.

And whereas G. K. in p. 25. says, My Labor is in vain, to prove him, and the
Norfolk Minitters at Variance about the Light within.

Ans. It Is surely in vain, for G. K. to say ^o, for do not they vary, when G.
K. says, the Light within is God and Christ; the Word, and the Spirit; and
those Ministers say of it, that it is Humane understanding and Natural
Conscience? see the Pricip^es Pa. 4: 5 N^w dares G* K. say, that God and
Christ is Humane Understanding, and Natural Conscience? Again, the N^^^^^k
Ministers say; the Light in (...) is made; and to say i^ is not made, is
Blasphemy (...) Pa. 4. 5. But G* K. says (...) above that it is God and Christ*
the Word and the Spirit also; that it is the Object of the Faith of the Gospel;
that it has its Perfections answerable, to those in God, of the Divine Nature;
that those that believe in it, believe in Christ; and that it is the Inward
Nature, Virt^^, and Power that saves: See Universal Free Grace P: ^5: 7* 29 and
^0. Now areth G: K say That any thing Made is the Object of the Faith of the
Gospel? or that any thing that is Made, is of the Divine Nature? or that to
believe in any thing Made, is to believe in Christ? Now i^ G. K and the N^rfolk
Ministers be not at Variance, then it is Consistent with G. K and ^ound Doctrine
to say, God and Christ, the Word and Spirit were made, and that which is made
is Divine; and that to believe in something made, is to believe in Christ etc.
Lastly, since he owns (...) Light to be a fundementall is a Whim^i^all "Witness
Fetched from T^rra Incognita, a fundamental of Christianity, behold the Unity of
(...) men see pa: ^7. of the Principles etc. Well, the 4th Fundamental is that
of Perfection, he says in P: 24 ^e no were remembers that ever ^e called it a
Fundamental of Christian Doctrine: Query: what Fundamental Doctrine then? But I
cannot help his M^^n^ry; I quoted him book and page, for it; Well, but says
he) if I did call it a Fundamental, it will not follow that it is One.

Ans. That Is very true; but is he did call in One, he judged it then to be
True, or else he was a Great Hypocrite; and he Judging it then to be a
Fundamental, and since Renounces it, Let him Reconcile it if he can, with his
Preface, to his Recantation book, where he says; He has not Renounced any one
assertion, in any of his former books, that ever was judged by him an ^rticle
of Faith; for this of Perfection, he has not only called it an Article of
Faith; but in Express words, calls it a Fundamental Truth and Principle of
Christianty: Some Fundamentals pa. 10. And indeed, at this rate, he may (...)
away any acknowledged Fundamental, and yet say, he is always ^ound, and ^ver
varied (...) any Fundamentals.

Again, (...)* whereas he says; It Is certain, that many of their Friends have
Dyed, and have not attained this Sinless Perfection.

Ans. How does he know that, since (as above he says, that it is attained at the
I^st^nt of Death; however, it follows not then, but some have attained it, and
the Ministerial G^^ts, was given for the Protection of the Saints etc.

Again, his fifth Fundamental concerning Prayer, he mearly Prevaricates what I
changed him with, which was, that he had owned Prayer to be a Fundamental, and
that it was not according to the will of God, that (...) ^o^me^ of Prayer
should be used in the Church, as a common (...), and therefore, he was varied
about it, by using such a way of Prayer (...) that was not according to the
will of God.

As to the 6th. and 7th Fundamentals about Swearing, and ^^^ing of (...) (says
he I did not call them Fundamentals, as he Suggests, because they were
mentioned in that book, called some Fundamentals etc.

Ans. I suggested no such thing, but because he expressly owned them, as also
that of Prayer, to be Fundamental to the People called Quakers; and he at that
time professed himself to be one of them: But since he is now of another mind,
is it not clear that he is Varied and Changed in Fundamentals? [acknowledged by
himself to be such] as (...) pr^mised in the Title page, Proteus.

The 8th. Fundamental about Three Persons in the Trinity, he says; This i^ ^s
Dull Sophistry, as any of the former, and tells, that he never Disputed, nor
opposed any of the substantial Doctrines concerning the Holy Trinity; but only
bogled at the term, three Persons etc.

Ans. How is it not substantial? Doctrine, to believe that the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, are three Persons? how is it then that the Athana^^^n (...), that
whosoever will be Saved, must thus think of the Trinity? Therefore according to
that Creed, it must surely he a Fundamental; and therefore G. K. is Varied also
in this acknowledged Fundamental, and what he here has said to the contrary,
is (I will not say Duli S^phistry, but) expe^t ^a^lacy..

As ^or the ad^ he has made in pa. 27. of setting W. P's Syllogism in due
^^rm, may be, as Expert a L^gician as himself; may tell him, as he has ^^tt
it, it wants due form still: however, as he would not have the Sh^^make^ go
beyond his ^^st, nor the Miller beyond his (...); so it would doubtless he
never the worse for him not (...) Apostle says: Not many Wise Men after the
flesh are called; but God has chosen the Foolish things of this World, to
confound the Wise* where then (says he) is the Wise? where is the Disputer of
this World? 1. Cor. 1.19.26, 27.

Well the Ninth and last Fundamental, is about the Resurrection; concerning
which, I charged him with having Varied, by being joined to those who hold
their Carnal conceptions of it, which he once denied. He says, this proves no
Change in the Fundamental of it; for he who believes it to be the same body for
substance, though he hold it Gro^^y and Carnally, cannot be said to Err in the
Fundamental.

Ans. What is that to the purpose? The Question is, whether those Priests, and
the Church of England too, (for I never heard but they generally agreed about
that Doctrine, in matter and manner) do not in G. K's then sense differ so
much, as that they that have those carnal C^nceptions, and G K. with his
Whimsical Imaginations, (...) do not hold one and the same Body to Ri^e: For
they say in their Confession, the Body of man retains to ^ust* and sees
Corruption; and that the Souls of the Righteous wait for the Redemption of them.

Well, but G. K says, Of that which Dissolves into Earth and Ashes, that is no
proper part of man's Body; and therefore does not Rise: they say; their Body's
(which their Souls wait for the Redemption of) see Corruption. G. K. says
"that That, which is to be Rais^d, neither consumes nor Corrupts.

Again, he says in Truth Advanced pa. 21. Though God made man, of the Dust of
the Ground; yet that dust was not common Dust, but much more Pure and Refined
then that of which the Bodies since the fall are made up of, and in pa. 117
Tells us, "as the Body of man at first was made up of such Excellent Dust, so
it shall be made up of the same again.

Observe, it seems, according to this great Correction of Errors, men have not
the same bodies now, that man had (...) the Fa^l: But made of anothee sort of
Dust, and that such Dust they shall be made up of again at the Resurrection;
these it is like, are the N^tions, by which he differs from those who hold the
Carnal conceptions, as above. Well, as far as I see; for all this, if they do
but both sides say, it shall be the same for matter and substance, they own
both sides the Fundamental of the Resurrection, though the one says, it is the
Body that turns to Dust, and sees Corruption, that is to Rise; and the (...)
Body; and the other, says it is not: Though the one says, It shall be this (...)
Body that returns to this common Dust, and that it is It, from whence it was
taken^ the other says, it is not; but that it shall be such a Body, (...)
before the Fall, which was made of another Dust, then such as are the Bodies of
Men, since the Fall etc. Well however, as above* ^t seems according to G. K. if
both sides do but say, it shall be the same for matter and substance, they may
be said to hold the Fundamental of not the Resurrection [MONSTRUM HORRENDUM^]
and although G. K. produces, that of Paul 1. Cor. 15* his bringing the
Si^^^^tude of a Grain of Corn, in his discourse of the Resurrection; yet Paul
does not say, that the true Body of man Corrupts not: for the same ^postle
says* that David Slept with his Fathers, and saw Corruption* surely G. K. will
not say, that was Wrote in Respect to David's Soul* but then it must be in
respect to his Body. As for what he says in his Antichrist and Sadduce, writ
against me four years ago, My Friend L. P. presently replied to that in his
book called Keith against Keith, to which I refer the Reader.

Well, he says in pa. 29. From his saying, Many etc. had (...) Outward and
Visible Sepulcher, that I Query, whether he can (...) clear o^ the Notion of No
Resurrection, But what is within Men.

Ans. I find to the said Query, he has given no direct Answer^ however, if he
has another Notion, as Notional, as that comes to (...) seems still but misty
Mistical and has not made (as I see) the least (...) to satisfy People, what
that inward Grave or Sepulcher is* that the Saints purchased with those 400
Virtues; but brings comparison of Metals and Millstones, whose Bodies, he
says, lie, within in respect to the Dross etc. (though I think the Dross lies as
much within as without) however, he makes no application, in order to convince
any, that therefore the Bodies of the Saints must have an inward Grave o^
Sepulcher: but quickly concludes, saying; I beg my Readers leave, for Tempting
his Patience, to read such Ignorant Objections Answered; Observe, after he has
Tempted his Readers Patience, then he begs leave to do it; had the Miller made
such a Blunder, it is like he would have called it Sottish Ignorance, and as
void of sense as his Millstones, or the like. Well, it seems he soon had done
with my long ci^^tion from his book, about the Resurrection; and possibly, he
might think it high time for him too: For when he speaks to it to the purpose,
it will be expected, that he prove.

1st. Treat the Saint^ have an Inward Grave o^ Sepulcher.

2dly. That it is Purchased, and that with no less the^ 400 Virtu^^^ 3dly. That*
where the Saints shall be raised, (...) an Inward Land of Israel, of which the
outward was but a Figure.

4thly. That men commonly have two Gra^es.

5thly. that the Body, that man was first made of, was not of this Visible
Earth; but that it was of Golden Dust, though Metophorically understood.

6thly. Where the Scripture is his Rule, for these Notions?

Lastly, wether the Church, which he is now a Member of, be one with him about
this Fundamental of the Resurrection.

Well in pa. 30 He has framed a Syllogism, to Prove that he is not an Apostate
etc.

Ans. My P^oving an Apostate, was from his own Definitions, Reason^ and
Arguments* see the Title page and that he is not so, I do not ^ind he has so
much as attempted to Prove: and therefore, his long Harangue from pa. 32* to 34
is a mere Go by, and Derogation from the point. I come to his 5th. Section,
about what he calls Persecution, in his pa. 35 and 36. the matter and ground of
offense, as (...) in the Querys out of their Appeal, he unfairly recites; for
as he has recited it, it says they hired Men to Fight, and reco^ered a Sloop
by force of Arms, and gave a Commission so to do: but the Query truly cited
says; they hired Men to Fight, as accordingly they did, and Recovered a Sloop,
and took some Privateers by force of Arms: which clause, to wit, and
[accordingly they did, (Fight) and recovered a sloop etc.] was cunningly done
by G. K. to leave out (it is like) calling to mind how, true citing it would,
Contradict, what he had writ formerly [viz.] That it was Peter Boss, and one or
two more with him, that in a little boat, took the Sloop, having neither Gun,
Sword nor Spear: see Antichrist and Saduce pa. 6. Observe, their Query says,
they did Fight, and recover a Sloop; whereas G. K. said, as above, it was took
by two or three, without Gun, Sword or Spear.

Again, his said 9th* Query says, that they gave a Commission to Right, signed
by three Justices of the Peace whereof one was a Preacher among them; whereas
it was ^ut a Warrant, in the nature of a Hue and Cry, to bring the Robbers Back
to Justice, without any word of Fighting, Killing or Destroying in it: Secondly
it was not Signed by three Justices that were Quakers; neither was any one of
them a Preacher among us. another Falsehood was, that the Ministers her^, had
engrossed the Worldly Government; whereas there were diverse (...) concerned in
Government, not Ministers, nor Quakers neither Now, though Men may well enough
publish Queries, about Religious (...); yet they should not speak untruths o^
men, and especially those ^n Authority, by so Querying.

Again, G K. is not fair to leave out the rest for which the Authority here was
fastly offended with him, which was expressly mentioned in the Proclam^tion, as
he calls it, herein after mentioned, [viz] not only his calling a Magistra^e,
Impudent Rascal; but also calling the Deputy Governor (who was well known to
be a Sober Judi^^^us man Impudent Man; and at another time, telling him, that
his name would Stink, and that he was not fit to be a Governor, with many
other S^g^^ting Abusive expressions, both to him and the Magistrates etc.
besides what he said to the Deputy Governor in public Meeting, as cited in
state of the case page 55. (viz.) Thou art a Pitiful Governor; why do thou
not send me to Prison, or order me to be Whiped? my Back Itches for a whipping;
and has Long Icht for (...).

Well, but in page 37. he says it was a matter of Religion to us at that time,
in no case to use a Carnal Weapon.

Ans. O! what Mighty matter of Religion it was to him, never to proceed in any
Christian way, either by way of Rebuke or Exhortation to them, that were
concerned in taking the said Sloop; but rather commend them for what they had
done, no no! all was well, and the Friends concerned, his dear Friends and
Brethren for about eight Months after that, and till for his ungovernable and
Turbulent behavior, and Separation etc. our Friends saw a necessity, of
disowning him as a Minister of the Peaceable Gospel amongst us: then it was,
and not till then, that he was Animated to accuse those, for doing that, for
which before he had commended them.

Now, to Conclude, this, as it has been the Quakers Principle from the
beginning, to Cease from War; so it has been always as much their Principle,
that Government is an Ordinance of God, and that it ought to be ^et up in all
Countries; for the Punishment of Evil Doers, and the Praise of them that do
Well: se Edward Burro^s works pa. 754. and as Richard Huberthorn told KING
CHARLES the Second, in Discourse with Him, that such Government we could
Assist, ^oth in B^^y and Estate.

As to the noise he has made from pa. 37. to 44. about another Presentment,
then what I mentioned and Recited in my book, I have this to say in sincerity
and Truth, that I never knew, nor so much as ever heard of any other, to the
utmost of my Remembrance; neither has G. K. produced any Proof; that there was
another* neither do ^ understand that there is any such thing upon the Court
Records, ^^sides what Presentment I spoke of, was taken from our own book of
the Trial, giving an account what they called in it Persecution here, and which
was published by them in the year 1693. but G. K. says, that Presentment
against him, for which he says, they would have found him Guilty of Death, was
in the year 92. see account Quakers Politics pa. 28.

Well, how was it likely then, I should expect there was another Presentment,
and such a Severe one too, when their own book of their Trials, published the
next year, mentioned nothing of it? no, nor in any other book; as ever I heard
of, was it ever published: but since G. K. does so positively affirm there was
another, I shall not be positive against it; but as he has produced no other,
so I dare say, he never will be able to prove his charge in any other; viz.
That they would have found him Guilty of Death, if the Government had not been
changed, so that as to the substance of his complaint, I still say, a more
Wicked, Malicious, and False assertion, could hardly have been Invented,
against those then in Government.

Well, in pa. 41. he cries out; Now observe the Logic of this Caleb Pusey* the
Presentment was Prosecuted and Tried; therefore, there was no other Presentment.

Ans. He states the matter too short, which should be rather thus: The
Presentment in the 10th. Month 92. was Prosecuted etc. therefore (as G. K. says
in pa. 41. the other being not until several Months after that of the 10th.
Month 92.) there was no other Presentment in the year 92. But that of the 10th.
Month 1692. and let him but prove, if he can, that there was any other
Presentment in that year.

Well, however he says, he has proved another, therefore, his proofs I shall
examine: but first take notice, in pa. 36. how unfairly he mispresents the
Magistrates Proclamation, as he there calls it, for the ^ Querys. He says,
they gave out, as is said, their Proclamation against him* and charged him and
others with a seditious paper* tending to the subversion of the Government etc.
Now after those words, [Subversion of the Government] G: K: stops, but the
words following are [or to the Aspersing the Magistracy thereof.] Now this
shows G. K.'s cunning (I will not say dull) Sophistry: for by those Last words
it is clear, they did not positively Charge them with doing that, which Tended
to the subversion of the Government. Now if G: K. had put in those last words,
his charge against them would not have appeared so high by Far. Well as above,
this g^e^t Logician calls out; (...) says in page 41, he has given sufficient
Evidence, that there was another Presentment etc. But what is the Evidence?
why, that (...) seems the Magistrates Charged him in a Proclamation in the 6th.
mt* 92. (for then it was) And gave a hint of what they then intended against
him, and others, in its proper place, for Publishing the above Paper; therefore
there was another Presentment several months after the 10th. Mth. 1692. Well,
in his pa. 42 hear him again thus: Judge, n^w Reader if this C. P. be not as
fast held in the Net as if he had a Thief in his Mill: But how so pray? Why, I
had said* he was not accused in the Presentment, for Endeavoring to alter the
Government; Yet it seems in the Proclamation, there were such words. Now again;
behold G. K's Logic: He was accused of it in a Proclamation in the 6. Mth 92.
therefore it was in the present Mth. several Mths after the 10: Mth. 92. take
notice, as above, there was not such a Positive charge in the said Proclamation
neither.

Well, in p 42. he says, they wanted no will to have made him Guilty of Death,
and That he had sufficiently proved by their severe Accusations against him, of
speaking and w^^^ing what tended to the Subversion of the Kings Government as
well as W. P's, which he took to be a capital Crime, and that such a Crime
deserved Death etc.

Now Pray, observe his Logic again, as well as his baseness* he says
sufficiently proved (he says) they wanted no will, to have made him Guilty of
Death, because he himself has said, without any Proof, that he was charged for
Speaking and Writing, what tended to the subversion of the Kings Government, as
well as W. P's* But his putting in the Kings Government, is very base, and sign
to Agravate his charge against the then Magistrates, as well as to clear
himself of Abusing them; for there was no such words, as the Kings Government,
in the Prolamation; neither has he attempted to make any Proof, that he was
charged any other where, For speaking what tended to the subversion of the
Kings Government.

Well I n^w come to examine his proo^^ess proofs, that they would have found
him Guilty of Death, he recites from the Law made 1684* these words; That who
by speaking, or writing, do commit any act or d^ed, tending to the subversion
of the present Government* shall Suffer Imprisonment for any time, not
exceeding twelve Months and undergo such Corporal Punishment, as the Quality of
the O^^ender, and nature of the Offense may require.

Now says G. K. pa. 43. that they had a mind to make it Capital, is evident.

Ans. Now is it Evident? Nay, then he had done something; but Pray where is his
Evidence? why, hear his following words, viz. One of their own Profession, who
knew their design, told me, they were preparing a Gibbet for me; this I can
Attest upon Oath.

Ans. Pretty Logic again! G. K. says himself, in his own case, that one of our
own Profession told him, they were preparing a Gibbet for him; therefore they
would have made his crime Capital, viz. such as deserves Death, as he himself
construes it, Ibid: when possibly, if the Truth of the matter were known, the
Person that told him so, was no Quaker; but a great favourer of him: and that
Person only told him so in Waggery, being Ben Waller, now of Burlington; for so
I have been informed it was.

Well he proceeds, and tells pa. 43. 44. how he has enquired at the ablest
Lawyers here, (viz.) those recommended to him as the Ablest whether the
Corporal Punishment in the said Act, might not by the Letter of the Law be
construed, to extend to Death, seeing Death was but a Corporal Punishment? etc.
and, says he, the said Lawyers have Unanimously Answered me, that though they
could not Hang me by Law, yet they could, if it was their will, cause to Whip
me to Death: for it Whipping be the Corporal Punishment intended by the Law,
there is no Limitation, as to the Number, or the severity of Lashes.

Ans. Whether this relation he gives, of the ablest Lawyers, be true or no, I
kn^w not: but if true, I must tell him, I am with submission to better
Judgments of another opinion: for though that Law did not assign the number of
stripes, yet there was a Law made at the same Sessions, limiting the Stripes
not to exceed twenty one, where they are not otherways assigned. Besides, I
don't in the least question, but, if a Person was upon Trial of his Life, upon
that Law, the ablest of these Lawyers, for a small Fee, would undertake to
prove that a man could not be put to Death by any such Law; and that so to do,
would not be a doing of it by that Law; but by grossly perver^ing that Law.

Again He says, That One of the Gentlemen Lawyers, that was Reckoned one of the
Ablest in the Province, told him by that very Law, the Quaker Magistrates might
have Oarified him (viz) as is said, was intended against Dr. Oats in England,
(viz) Cause to Whip You with an intention, to Whip You till you Dyed.

Answ. a Severe Whipping! But I dare pass for it, upon an occasion that might
happen about the like Law, wherein that Able Lawyer (...) mihgt be appl^ed to,
by any Client, Especially, if he were b^t weighty in his application, he would
soon show a Retrogate opinion, upon that Law, to that above mentioned; Now
suppose all this be true that he tells, the Lawyers said in the case, how does
this prove G. K.'s charge, that they would have found him guilty of Death, if
the Government had not been changed? why no way, but by his usual sort of
Logic, (viz.) the Lawyers said, by that Law they might have put him to Death;
therefore they would have found him Guilty of Death. O^e, reckoned one of the
ablest Lawyers said, they might by that Law have Oatified him; therefore they
would have found him Guilty (...) Death. For after all this, noise no greater
Proof do I find he has given, in all his rooks, then those proofless ones,
above mentioned either that there was another Presentment, by which they
intended to find him. Guilty of Death; or that they wanted not will so to have
done; or that in other way they would have found him guilty or Death.

Well he says, Coll Markham, then Deputy Governor, Andrew Robinson, and other,
Justice, signed a public Writing, wherein they fully cleared him of all things
the Quaker Magistrates said to his charge.

Ans. How did they clear him? from calling the Governor an Impudent Man? and
telling him he was not fit to be a Governor? and that his Name should Stink?
or from calling a Magistrate Impudent Rascal? or did they clear him from
misrepresenting the Magistrates in their Printed Appeal? or did they clear him
from his abusing another Magistrate, by falsely accusing him, for putting his
hand under Women's Pety Coats: Bid him go home to his Whores? If they did
pretend to clear him of these things, it was not well done to be sure.

Well, in pa. 46. he will not own, that it would be any Persecution, for the
Civil Magistrate, to Punish us, and use some outward Coercioth and Restraint,
by hindering our Preaching in public Assembly's etc.

Ans. Therefore I think soon to end this Head; for it plainly appears, he is
full Ripe for Persecution; (though under the pretense of Persecutors common
charge (viz.) Vile Heresy) though the name, now, is so Odious amongst most
English men, that he chooses rather it seems, to call it Punishing, then
Persecuting.

Well in his Postscript, I find few or, no Citations, that are Material in
themselves to be spoken do, but what have been Answered by our Friends, so
often over and over, that I think it needless to spend much time, or Paper
about them; yet I shall give a touch of some ^^s^^ges in it, as First, his
s^^rt at Infallibility upon my (...) (...), he concludes, as if I came under G.
F's Curse etc.

Ans. what G. F. said, was because the Priests Queried, whether it did not
u^ing the Quakers under the Curse, their saying: They Writ from the Spirit of
the Lord, immediately and infa^^ibly etc. And if to say, they writ from the
Spirit of the Lord etc. ^e to bring under the Curse, what will they make of the
Holy Men of old, who wrote as they were moved by the Spirit of the Lord; and as
says the Apostle, if any man speak, let him speak as the Oracle o^ God; and
though G. F. sp^ke so of such, as got only the Words, and other men's Lines, made
ready to their hands, as he there charged them, and de^yed the Teachings of the
Spirit of the Lord etc. And so were not so much as in the Faith of it; yet it
follows not, that he meant People were under the Curse, for every Mistake.

As for what he says aginst W. P. about Christ in us, offering up himself a
Living Sacrifice to God for us, by which the wrath of God is appeased to us.

Ans. I am satisfied, it was neither intended to deny or less^n the great
Sacrifice of Christ on the Cross without us, any more then G. K. did when he
said thus, even at man's fall, the ^eed of the Woman was given not only ^o
bruise the Serpents head, but also to be a Lamb or Sacr^fice to atone and
pacify the Wrath of God toward Men, and this is the Lamb that was slain from
the foundation of the World; The way to the City of God, not Retracted pa. 125.
besides it was a living Sacrifice, etc. not a Sacrifice to Death, on the Cross,
as W. P. spoke of; and as I believe G. K. did not intend to lessen o^ render it
inconsistant with Christ's offering up himself for the Sins of the World
outwardly, no more I am satisfied, did W. P. As for that, about Robert
Barclay's speaking against unlawful Games, and super^^uity in Apparel; it is
^^if^ing therefore I shall say no more of it, then to tell them that the
Subject Robert Barclay treated of, was not about some men's wearing better
clothes then others; But about mere needless, costly and Super^^^^^^
Cloathings: nor about Children's playing in the Streets as he speaks (...): But
rather that when come to men, they should put away Childish things.

Well in pa. 58. he thinks to call Christ as man, Impotent, is very
^^^arrantable, if not Blasphemous.

Ans. But I never found that W. P. ever termed Christ as man Impotent.

(...) pa. 57. (...) me saying to D. L. did I ever take, or go about (...) only*

Ans. That was because D. L. had so often charged W. P. for calling Christ as
Man, a (...) and Impotent Creature: But as one that was Concerned, he could not
make it ^ear as he charged him from p. 20. for there is no such thing, so he
^lipt over to pa. 2^. where with leaving out the word Creature, and ^endring
the word Finite in that page, to signify also Impotent, he cunningly strove
though against the ^^^eam to make good his charge there, by Consequence, for
which I detected him, by using that word [only]

In p. 64. he says; he never though or said that He (Christ) was Impotent, or a
F^nite Impotent Creature; most unjust it is therefore, for C. P. to lay this at
my door.

Ans. I remember not, that ever I charged him with terming Christ as Man
Impotent, but by way of ad homin^m to D. L. who would fallen it as above upon
W. P. because he termed Christ as Man, to be Finite* therefore in making
satisfaction etc he was Impotent: see Rebuke^ Rebuked in pa. 7. well consistant
with which the Mill^r without any further pretense to the Logical art, frames
this Syllog^sm: He that owns Christ as man to be Finite; Owns Christ as man to
be Impotent: but G. K. owns Christ as man to be Finite: Ergo. Now if the Major
proposition, nor conclusion pleases him not let him lay that at his great
Friend D. L's door; for it is his, and not mine: And therefore, it behooves them
to be ^econciled between themselves, before they seek such a continual.
Wrangling with us* for G. K. says, Christ as Man is Finite, but not Impotent:
D. L. says, if Christ as a Man is Finite, Consequently Impotent: And also says,
that persion of several Societies of Christians hold so too; and for his part,
he dare not call it Blasphemy so to affirm, see ibid. p 9. 10. though in his
Trumpet etc. he calls it Blasphemy in W. P. so to affirm.

As for what he says in his Preface about meeting him, and that the Truth can
never be so well found out, as by having the Author books openly produced, and
(...) read.

Ans. To read them ones self; and take some necessary time to read the
Cort^^^^*^ as well as the Text^ and to see that we take a right the subject
treated on, in order to consider more certain the sense of the (...), that we
may not miss the Truth nor wrong our Nighbour: Surely every free and impartial
mind will say, this is the most sure way to find whether the things, so changed
against our Friends be so or not. And therefore his saying we cannot be so
ease^y detected in writ; I ^ay otherwise for the above reasons. And surely
people cannot be so easily deceived, when like the noble Berrheans, they are
willing to weigh and deli^^^ matters as charged against us, and with an
impartial E^e, where truly cited, compare them with the Holy Scriptures, as
they may, when they only hear them brokenly read, and to as much disadvantage
at all times, as they that read them think good. And as for his saying, Paper
will not blush, what is that to the purpose? For the Innocent need not blush,
neither is ^lushing always a sign o^ Guilt, I know ^y Experience; neither is
Confidence always a sign of Innocence: which, if G. K would speak as it is, I
believe He might say, He knows that by LARGE EXPERIENCE also.

And whereas in his page 49. he says, that at a Meeting with the Quakers by
ag^eement, our Friends read the book called ONE WONDER MORE; where he says,
it is falsely charged on him, that he took the Scotch League and Covenant: To
which I say, it is falsely so said by him; for there is no such Words in that
book, that says he took it: But thus; that his Education, Judgment and
Affection, in his Youth so dipped him in the Scotch Solemn League and Covenant,
that he Glories in it; and says, that by it prelacy was declared a Limb of
Antichrist, the horrible thing set up in the land, and that he had V^w^d to
the Most High God against it, and had kept his V^w etc. and quoted G. K.'s pa.
28. 39 of Help in time of Need, for what he said; but no such words is in that
Wonder, as that he had took the Scotch League and Covenant; and therefore, his
blunder in proving he was incapable of taxing it, saying in pa. 50 that the
Covenant was taken in the year 1643 and 1644. when he was but five years old,
might have been spared.

C. P.

POSTSCRIPT
SINCE the Preface to this, was in part Printed, I have had the opportunity to
speak with some Friends, about G. K.'s behavior in our Friends Meeting on
Rhoad Island, as mentioned in the said Preface, and denied by G. K. in his
Railing Shimei; concerning which the said Friends give this following
Testimony: (viz.)

WHEREAS our Friend CALEB PUSEY has published in pa. 45. of his book called
Proteus etc* And a relation from a Friend at (...) is accused for coming to our
Meeting there; and in Meeting time being in a Turbulent Frame, called to the
Governor in a Commanding way, that he might be heard, and that the Auditory
might be compelled to stay, and hear him, or else he would Complain to the
QUEEN; and that he called to the Justices, that they might Compel the People,
and that the Meeting was disturbed by him; and that he said he had power from
the Bishop of London, to speak in our Meetings: All which we find G. K. to deny
in his Railing Shimei: But we being all present at the said Meeting, do
Testify the said Relation of our Friend to be true; and to the full Truth of
which we subscribe our Nat^^^s.

Philadelphia the 22d: of the 7th. Month 1703. JACOB MOTT, JOANNA MOTT,
JEDIDIAH ALLEN.


AND lastly, concerning the Disturbance, G. K. and his Companion, made at our
Yearly Meeting; and concerning, which they have taken several depositions. The
substance of that matter was on this wi^e: On the 21st. of the 7th. Month 1703.
John Talbot, a protest Minister of the Church of England, G. K.'s Traveling
Companion, came to our New Meeting house at Philadelphia, and in Meeting time,
standing on the Threshold of the Door, begun to read a Paper, being (as himself
has deposed on Oath) some observations, made upon the Solemn declaration of
Samuel Jennings, Franc^s Devenport and George Deacon, Members of the QUEENS
Council, the 19th. of August 1703, at Burlington, before Lord CORNBURY, and
several Members of the Council etc. upon the reading of which, there was some
disturbance at the door, whereupon several of our Friends, who were ^itting
peaceably waiting upon God, stood up, and earnestly cautioned all Friends not
to move; but to be still and quiet: But many people coming in and about the
door about him; he it seems was thrust of the said threshold, where he finished
reading the said paper, (...) one of them upon Oath deposed after which G K.
came into the Meeting, and standing upon a bench, began to read the ^^me ^aper,
which occasioned a fresh Disturbance, and many crouding about him, all W R as
is said, took the paper out of his hand, and G K am^^g the cro^d, was some way
presently moved of his standing; but (...) deposition upon Oath, does not to
much as pretend he was any ways (...): and indeed what was d^^e to either of
them, was (...) more then might be expected among^^ such a pr^miscuous and
(...) (...) of people, which was then occasioned to be so by them. And however,
though we were much troubled at that disturbance, occasioned by them as above,
and also when we heard the paper was taken out of G. K.'s han^: Yet we never
looked upon ou^ selves so far obliged as always to hear (without Interrupting)
any common disturbers of our Peaceable Meetings, whether it be, by their
Speaking, or by their Reading their Papers of Strife and Contention therein.

C. P.

ERRATA.
Preface last leaf line 15: for books read former books, page 2. line 10. for
which read ^: l. 2^. f. were, W, S. p. 4. l. 31. f. as were. we. p. 6. l. 5. f.
hereto r. thereto p. 9. l. 28. f. Reserved r. retained. p. 10. l. 12. f. have
r. had. l. 2^. f. 800. r. 200. p. 11. l. 17. f. Appeal r. Call. p. 12. l. 8. f.
anity r. Christianity. l. 22. f. add however r. therefore. l. 27. f. Apostle r.
same Apostle. l. 29. f. commended r. committed. l. 32. f. this r. his. p. 14.
l. 12. f. retract r. retracted. l. 1^. f. into ^ in the. l. 21. f. says r:
essays. l. 33. after 1689. r. it was. p. 15. l. 14. f. that ^ that again. Well.
l. 23. after 14. r. 16. l. 33. after to r. reveal. p. 16. l. 17. after Implicit
r. says. l. 28. f. G. K. r. G. K. says. pa. 20. l. 14. after much r. from
him. l. 31. ^. Correction r. Corrector. pa. 25. l. 13. after present r. meant.
f. Mths r. Months. p. 26. l. 19. f. Law r. that Law. p. 27. l. 12. f. books r.
book. ^ 26. f. bid r. biding. p. 28. l. 29. f. them r.

THE END. 1703.

