MILES CHRISTIANUS. OR CHRISTIANS Treated in the Quality OF Soldiers. As it
was delivered in a SERMON Preached to, and at the Request of the Honorable
Artillery Company of the Massachusetts, At Boston in New England, On June 7 th.
1703. Being the Day for their Election of Officers.

By Mr. Grindal Rawson, Pastor of the Church in Mendon.

1 Cor. 9.26. So fight I.

2 Timothy 2.4, 5. No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this
life; that he may please him who has chosen him to be a Soldier. And if a Man
strive for masteries, yet is he not crowned except he strive Lawfully.

Boston, Printed by B. Green, and J. Allen, for S. Phillips at the Brick Shop.
1703.

Christians Treated in the Quality OF Soldiers.
Ephesians VI. 11. (...)ut on the whole armor of God, that ye may be able to
stand against the wiles of the Devil.


THE Life of man, both as man, and as Christian, is a continual Warfare.
Changes and War are against him. Formida(...)e Armies of Opposition are daily
be(...)guering all those who (like the Isra(...) of God of old) are Marching
out of (...)e Spiritual Egypt of Sin, through the Wilderness of a tempting and
Ensnaring World, unto, the heavenly Canaan. And as Israel went harnassed out of
Egypt, so is it the duty and interest of Christians to be at all times well
appointed; and in a Warlike posture, that so they may be able to fight their
way through the Hellish Troops, and Infernal Regiments which endeavor to beat
them off from, and hinder them in all those holy and resolute attempts they are
making to secure to themselves, through the Assistance of Grace, an open
entrance and passage in^^ ^he Glories of the better Country. There is a good
fight of Faith which every Christian must fight, or he will never lay hold on
that Eternal Life unto which he is called. And as there are many things which
if seriously pondered by Christians, will serve to animate them unto, and make
them circumspect in their Christian Warfare, so there are two especially which
I may not omit the mention of.

1. They have a Complete armor of Proof provided for them, which duly put on,
and skilfully managed; will indubitably render them impregnable, and secure to
them signal and assured Victories over all their Enemies.

2. The Enemies they are to engage and combat with are not only strong and
powerful; but marvellously politic, subtle and crafty, excellently skilled, and
wonderfully improved in the Art of War.

Both these Considerations are in the Words of our Text very pertinently
recommended to our notice, by the great Apostle of the Gentiles; and an
affectionate exhortation to the patting on of the former, is grounded upon the
latter, as a reason of very great and undeniable Cogency.

In the Words then we may observe two things: 1. An Exhortation. 2. The Ground
or Reason of it.


1. An Exhortation: Put on the whole armor of God. And in this there are three
things to be considered.

1. The subject matter which the Exhortation has a respect unto, the (...). the
Panoply, or whole Armor of God. Two things are employed here.

1. That the Armor, the Spiritual Combatant is to be furnished with, is not of
his own providing: No, It is the Armor of God. Kings have their Royal
Arsenals, where all their Stores of War are carefully preserved, from hence
their Armies are supplied with Weapons of all sorts, and put into a Warlike
Equipage fit for the field. The King of Kings and Lord of Lords has his royal
Arsenal also, from hence Christians receive all that royal furniture which is
necessary to equip them for, and Arm them to the Spiritual Warfare.

2. That the Armor, the Spiritual Combatant is to put on is not carnal, but
Spiritual: The Graces of Gods Spirit, are the Armor here intended. The Apostle
Expresses himself in Military terms, and clothes his exhortation in a
Souldier-like garb. The expression is Metaphorical, Here Is an excellent
allusion to the several sorts of Warlike Weapons, and Armor, which Soldiers
are furnished with when they go out to War. This Metaphor the Apostle more
largely insists upon in the Subsequent context, where he runs the Analogy, and
discovers the particular use and serviceableness of the Graces of Gods Spirit,
from the respect they bear unto the several pieces and parts of proper armor
there mentioned.

2. We may consider the Act which the Spiritual Combatant is advised to, or
that which the Spiritual Soldier is to do with this armor: He must put it on.
The Apostle here alludes to the Custom of Soldiers, making ready to engage
their enemies. They repair to their Arms, buckle on their armor, not omitting
any one piece of it, which may serve either to defend themselves, or annoy
their enemies. They think it not enough to put on their headpiece, and neglect
their breast-plates, Shields and Swords; No, they will be Armed Cap-a-pee from
Head to Foot. It is not enough that the Soldier is well provided with armor;
He must have it on, and be in a readiness for the battle. Thus Christians must
get themselves furnished with Grace, all the Graces of Gods Spirit, and live in
the constant exercise and improvement of them. They must be completely Armed to
the Combat, with the whole Spiritual Armor, no piece of it must be wanting,
lest being in any part naked, and void of suitable defense, they become unable
to make good their ground against the formidable insults of their hellish
adversaries.

3. We may consider the Subject Persons concerned in the exhortation. All true
Christians, All Orders, Ranks and Degrees of Christians, in all Ages and
Generations. Although the Ephesians to whom the Epistle is inscribed were firstly
concerned in it, yet all Christians are secondarily concerned. The Apostolical
Epistles were never designed to be of private, but common concernment. To put
on the whole armor of God is the duty of all Christians, whatever Station they
hold, or Relation they sustain. This particular is excellently illustrated from
the special quality those are treated in who are the Subjects of the duty here
propounded. The Spirit of God treats them in the quality of Soldiers, or of
Persons engaged in a Warfare. The Word of Command in our Text is perfectly
Military, Put on the whole Armor of God. It is as if the Apostle had said,
Remember Christians, that in a Spiritual sense you are Soldiers, and therefore
see to it, that you be complete in Arms and Ammunition; see to it, that you
stand furnished with the whole of the glorious Armor, God has provided you
with, that you may be able to encounter with, hew your way through and put your
Enemies to a rout, and confusion.

2. The Reason or Ground of the Exhortation; the reason why Christians should
thus Arm themselves with, or put on the whole armor of God, viz. That they may
be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil. And here we have three things.

1. The grand Enemy of the Spiritual Combatant detected, the Devil: That ye may
be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil. The Devil is the true
Christians principal Enemy. The Apostle expresses himself here in the singular
number, and that with a peculiar emphasis; but yet by an usual Synecdoche, he
intends all those vast, and (as to us) numberless Troops of evil spirits, who
are under the conduct of the Prince of the Powers of the Air: And thus he
explains himself in the 12 th. verse. The General (as is frequent) is here put
for the whole Army under his conduct. There may be a farther notion in the
expression. God would hereby let us know, that the Powers of Darkness are
strongly leagued, and banded together; and do all join as one in prosecuting
the designs of Hell against the Children of God. And whilst Christians reflect
upon the vast, and hideous numbers of Devils, who are with a united force
continually engageing them, how necessary is the Spiritual Armor to defend
them against their wiles! How proper is that exclamation of the Psalmist, Lord,
how many are they that rise up against me! Psalm. 3.1.

2. We have the way the Devil takes in managing his War with the Spiritual
Combatant discovered. His War is managed with Wiles, Policies and Stratagems.
He observes a Method in fighting: Thus in our Text. That ye may be able to
stand against (...). i. e. The Methods of the Devil. A method is the artificial
or orderly disposition of the several parts of a matter or subject treated
upon. And because a good judgment and contrivance are necessary to dispose our
thoughts, and meditations upon whatsoever subject into an orderly consistence,
or agreeable frame; therefore the Subtilties, Policies and Stratagems improved
by Satan in contriving, fore-laying, and managing his desperate designs against
the Children of God, are styled his Methods. Satan's greatest strength lies in
the crafty wiles, and politic stratagems he makes use of; and by his
extraordinary dexterity in finding out, and performing his hellish stratagems,
we are in greatest hazard to be ensnared, and circumvented by him.

3. We have the great Serviceableness of the Spiritual Armor demonstrated. By
putting on and managing of this aright, the Spiritual Combatant shall be able
to Stand, that is, he shall not only make good his ground, but obtain a signal
assured, and complete Victory over all his Spiritual enemies. The Devil by many
crafty artifices, and cunning stratagems seeks to decoy Christians into the
toils he has secretly disposed on purpose to ensnare and trapan them: But let
them put on this armor of God, and resist him steadfastly in the Faith, he
shall flee from them, they shall stand, and be Victorious over him.

Many useful and profitable Doctrines might be offered from the Words: I shall
present you with one not altogether unsuitable to, or improper for the present
Occasion. From the Words then, this is the

DOCTRINE. That God in his Word, does treat Christians in the quality of
Soldiers; Or as Persons engaged in a Warfare.
The true Christian is the Person concerned in the exhortation proposed in our
Text; and his being treated in the quality of a Soldier, is that which
recommends the Word of Command to him with a more graceful and becoming
properness. The Spirit of God in addressing Christians, does make use of a
Military style, and clothes his expressions in a Souldier-like Dialect: And his
doing so sufficiently discovers to us the quality he treats them in.

In speaking further unto this Doctrine I shall give you,

1. The Demonstration of it, by an induction of various Instances. 2. The
Reasons of it. 3. Conclude with a few suitable Counsels, or Directions.
1. For the Demonstration of the Doctrine, these Subsequent considerations will
put it past dispute.

1. The Church Militant is compared to an Army. Of the Church Militant it is
said; Thou art beautiful O my Love, as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, terrible as
an Army with Banners, Cant. 6.4. The whole Body of the Spiritual Soldiery is
styled an Host, Dan. 8.10. And it waxed great (i. e. Antiochus Epiphanes, the
little horn mentioned v. 9 th.) even to the host of Heaven, and it cast down
some of the Host. We have the Spiritual Army introduced as taking the Field,
Beating a challenge to her Enemies; and managing her self with an heroic
resolution, after a combat. The Psalmist gives us a mavelous entertaining
sight of this Army, taking the Field with a Martial Bravery, Marching to the
deadly conflict, with Ensigns Flying, and the loftiest expression of a noble
courage, and unconquerable Resolution; enough to strike an intimidating damp
into the hearts of her Enemies, Psalm. 20.5. We will rejoice in thy Salvation,
in the Name of our God we will set up our Banners. Nor is it a less pleasing
prospect, the Prophet gives us, when he introduces this Army terrible with
Banners, with a stately Gallantry, Beating a challenge to her Enemies, and
sounding forth the amazing Triumphs, and terrifying Shouts of a daring Faith in
such lofty Expressions as these; Associate your selves, O ye People, and ye
shall be broken in pieces, and give ear all ye of far Countries: Gird your
selves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; Gird your selves, and ye shall be
broken in pieces. Take counsel together, and it shall come to naught, speak the
word and it shall not stand; for God is with us, Isa. 8.9, 10. Her Enemies
indeed are sometimes represented as pressing hard upon her, and as gaining no
small advantage against her; but yet we are told, this will not sink her into a
Cowardly dejection, nor dispossess her of a divine fortitude; No, she remains
undaunted still, and is confident notwithstanding to win the Field. Let us hear
some of her triumphant shouts of her unshaken confidence uttered upon such an
occasion: Rejoice not against me O my Enemy: when I fall I shall arise, when I
sit in darkness (She speaks like a Prisoner of War) the Lord shall be a light
unto me. I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against
him, until he plead my cause, and execute Judgment for me. He will bring me
forth to the light (as a Captive out of the dark Dungeon) and I shall behold
his righteousness. Then she that is mine enemy shall see it, and shame shall
cover her which said unto me, where is the Lord thy God; mine eyes shall behold
her; now shall she be trodden down as mire in the street, Mich. 7.8, 9, 10. And
because the Church Militant is represented as acting in all points like an
Army, the Spirit of God has influenced particular Saints, who are a part of,
and help to compose this Army, to observe the decorum, and to speak of
themselves and fellow Saints, as of men at Arms. The Apostle Paul represents
himself as an expert Commander, exercising his Soldiers in their several
postures, and teaching them by his own example to handle their Arms, 1 Cor.
9.26. So fight I. thus and so I manage the Spiritual Weapons, and so must you
if you would be Victorious. It is in the quality of a Soldier, he treats his
Timothy, 1 Timothy 6.12.

2. The Church Militant is represented as having most puissant and mighty
Commanders. God himself disdains not to be styled and accounted their General.
He wears the Title of the Lord of Hosts, The God of the Armies of Israel. 1 Samuel 17.45. It is worthy observation, that those titles, The Lord of Hosts, The
God of Hosts, The Lord God of Hosts, are more than an hundred times put upon
him in the Scripture. And although it must be acknowledged, that he is so
styled, because all Creatures are subject to his power, and stand ready pressed
as Soldiers under the Command of a General, to execute his will and pleasure:
yet it cannot be denied, but that God has assumed this title in a peculiar
manner with respect to his Church and People, as an argument to encourage them
unto resolution and hope of victory in all their Conflicts with their Enemies,
considering themselves to be Listed under the Command and Conduct of an
All-wise, and Almighty Commander. The Lord Jesus Christ has Military Titles
put upon him: He is the Prince of that Host whereof God is Commander. Dan.
8.11. He is Captain of the Lords Hosts. Josh. 5.14, 15. He is Captain of
Salvation to Believers, Heb. 2.10. The Spirit of God represents him as standing
at the Head of his glorious Troops, fighting with, and actually engaging the
old Dragon and his Angels. Rev. 12.7. He is introduced as Sitting upon his
white Horse making War in Righteousness, having Eyes like a flame of fire, his
Vesture dip't in Blood, a sharp Sword issuing out of his mouth, and all the
Armies of Heaven following him, submitting to his Conduct; acknowledging him to
be their Glorious Leader. Rev. 19.11. ad. 16.

3. The Holy Angels are Appointed by God for the defense and protection of his
Children; and sustain the quality of the Confederate Allies of the Church
Militant; They are styled an Host, Luke 2.13. And suddenly there was with the
Angel, a multitude of the Heavenly Host. The Services the Holy Angels perform
for the Saints of God, whilst managing their Spiritual Warfare, are very great,
and they are expressed in the language of the Camp. Psalm. 34.11. The Angel of
the Lord (the singular number for the plural) encampeth round about them that
fear him, and delivers them. It was a glorious appearance the Angels made unto
Jacob, when afraid of his Brother Esau; But behold the form they appear in, was
that of two potent Armies, Flanking him on each Wing, to assure him that God
would take care of him, and secure him from all the dangers he supposed himself
exposed to. Genesis 32.1, 2. When the Army of Syrians had compassed about the City
Dothan with a design to surprise the Prophet Elisha, the invisible Troops, and
Guards of Heaven surround him; and the form they are represented in is that of
a formidable Army: 2 King. 6.17. And behold the Mountain was full of Horses,
and Chariots of fire, round about Elisha.

4. The Church Militant, and all the Members of it, are represented to us as
strongly fortified and entrenched. They are said to have a strong Tower of
safety to repair unto in a time of need. Prove. 18.10. The name of the Lord is a
strong Tower, the righteous runs into it and is safe. They have a place of
refuge to betake themselves unto when the Battle grows too strong for them.
Deuteronomy. 33.27. The Eternal God is thy refuge. Concerning Gods Jerusalem it is
said, God is known in her palaces for a refuge. Psalm. 48.3. They have an hiding
place to repair unto, and secure themselves in, when chased and pursued by
their Enemies. Thus the Psalmist expresses himself, Thou art my hiding place,
thou shall preserve me from trouble. Psalm. 32.7. David makes his boast of this,
Psalm. 27.5. In the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion: in the
secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me; He shall set me upon a Rock, and now
shall mine head be lifted up above mine enemies round about me. And hence it is
the Children of God are called hidden ones. Psalm. 83.3. They have taken crafty
counsel against thy People, and consulted against thy hidden ones.

5. They have weapons of war provided for them, by the help of which they may
manage their Warfare to good advantage. Each Grace of the Spirit is represented
by a several piece of Armor; Sincerity is the Christians Belt, or Military
Girdle, Righteousness his Breast Plate, Faith his Shield, Hope his Helmet; The
Word of God his Sword, far exceeding the Sword of Goliath, there is none like
it. Ephesians. 6.14, 16, 17. The Censures of the Church regularly administered, are
weapons mighty through God, to the pulling down of strong holds. 2 Cor. 10.4.

6. Many of the commands and directions given to Christians, are delivered in a
Martial Dialect. Are Soldiers commanded to Stand to their Arms? So are
Christians; It is the Apostles language, Forasmuch then as Christ has suffered
for us in the flesh, arm your selves likewise with the same mind. 1 Pet. 4.1.
Are Soldiers commanded to observe an exact Order in their March, to Even their
Ranks, and Streighten their Files? So are Christians. Phil. 3.16. Nevertheless
whereunto we have already attained, let us walk by the same Rule. Critics
observe the Original word here translated Walk, to be a Military word,
importing such an orderly, regular, and graceful walking as Soldiers observe
in their Marches, and Exercises. Is it expected that Soldiers should Watch and
Ward, lest they be surprised by their Enemies at unawares? So is it of
Christians; It Is the Command of their Glorious Leader, Watch ye, 1 Cor. 16.13.
This word of Command is of universal concernment. Mark 13.37. I say unto all
Watch. Are Soldiers told, they must endure hardness? So are Christians; Let us
hear the advice, 2 Timothy 2 3. Thou, therefore endure hardness as a good Soldier
of Jesus Christ. Are Soldiers commanded to follow their Leaders? So are
Christians; It Is the Command of their Glorious Captain, If any man will be my
Disciple, let him take up his Cross and Follow me. Are Soldiers addressing
themselves to the Combat, encouraged to behave themselves courageously, to
fight with an undaunted resolution, rather to dye on the Spot than to give
ground, or to lose the Battle? So are Christians; It is the Apostles
Exhortation, Quit ye like men, be strong. 1 Cor. 16.13. Fight the good fight of
Faith, lay hold on Eternal Life, 1 Timothy 6.12.

7. They are heartned to the Combat with the encouraging assurances of
protection, assistance, victory and glorious rewards; And all this in the
language of the Camp. Do their Enemies at any time appear so strong and
powerful as to surprise them with fear, and cause them to dread the Combat;
they are encouraged to stand their ground, from a sense of the Divine
protection. Psalm. 91.4. He shall cover thee with his Feathers, and under his
wings shall thou trust, his truth shall be thy shield and Buckler. They have
the Assurance of Divine Assistance. Isa. 41.10. Fear thou not for I am with
thee, be not dismayed, for I am thy God; I will Strengthen thee, yea I will
help thee, yea I will uphold thee, with the right hand of my righteousness.
However it may fall in some particular Skirmishes, yet the Victory at last
shall go on their side. The Apostle speaks of, and triumphs in this as a ruled
case. 1 Cor. 15.57. Thanks be to God which gives us the victory through our
Lord Jesus Christ. Whatever oppositions lie in their way, they are assured to
win the Field, and to be more than Conquerors. Romans 8.35, 37. Who shall
separate us from the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? Nay in all these
things we are more than conquerours through him that loved us. And although it
may cost them many a sore conflict, and terrible shock to manage their
Conflicts unto victory, yet the toils and labors, watchings and fightings they
undergo, shall at last be well rewarded; And with a prospect, and promise of
this they are encouraged to maintain the fight. Rev. 2.10. Fear none of these
things which thou shall suffer: be thou faithful unto death, and I will give
thee a Crown of life. Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes will I grant to sit
with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father
in his Throne.

This may suffice for the Demonstration of the Doctrine. The Reasons of it
follow. I shall take notice but of Two.

1. God treats Christians in his Word, in the quality of Soldiers, that he may
instruct them more fully, in those things he would inform them about. The
Information of men is one great end the Scripture scopes at. It is in this
respect, the Commandment is a lamp, and the Law a light. Prove. 6.23. Men are
very dull, and slow of understanding in things of a spiritual nature; and
therefore God is pleased to call in the help of apt similitudes, and curious
metaphorical allusions to assist their understandings in the pursuit of Duty.
These have a singular aptitude to convey the knowledge of truth more fully to
our Understandings, and to set them before us in a clearer light. It is a
gracious effect of the Infinite Condescendency of God, that he attempers his
phrase to our Capacities and Apprehensions; and illustrates Spiritual Truths to
us, by similitudes and allusions, that are plain, and obvious to us. God
himself puts us in mind of the favor he does us in this respect. Hos. 12.10. I
have multiplied Visions, and used Similitudes by the Ministry of the Prophets.

2. God in his Word treats Christians in the Quality of Soldiers, as a means
to fasten Instructions more powerfully upon them. Scripture Allusions and
Similitudes have a double advantage to effect this.

For,

1. They exceedingly delight men, and engage their affections, and so make the
deeper impressions upon their Memories. That which the Psalmist affirms
concerning the Word and Law of God in general, is true concerning the
metaphorical allusions contained in it. They are sweeter than the Honey and the
Honeycomb. Psalm. 19.10. The Souls of men are surprizingly transported with
ravishing delight, whilst they are digging and delving after the precious Oar
of Divine Instructions, that lie hid in the rich and inexhaustible Mines of
Scripture Allusions; and the deep impressions upon their engaged affections,
give advantage to their being more faithfully secured, and treasured up in
their Memories. The more men love and admire any thing, the better they
remember it.

2. The Objects the Spirit of God makes use of as a Stock to graff Spiritual
Instructions on, are for the most part in our daily view; and by the sight of
them we are assisted unto a fresh remembrance of, and fruitful reflections upon
those instructions they readily afford us. We cannot look either upward or
downward, on our right hand, or left, but some object or other comes in view
which God has set apart to do the office of a Monitor, or faithful
remembrancer, to assist our reflections on Spiritual things. To forbear the
mention of other Instances; The very sight of a Soldier in Arms is enough to
Muster up an entire Regiment of holy thoughts, and profitable meditations in
the Soul of a Christian. If he looks upon the dazzling brightness of his
glittering armor, behold! here is a monitor to put him in mind of the
out-shining Splendor of those glorious Robes of Righteousness, which every
Saint is Arrayed with. Each piece of his Armor represents to him a several
Grace of Gods Holy Spirit. Whilst he sees with what a stately grandeur he
Marches after his Leader, disdaining to cast an eye upon the little trifling
diversions that lie in his way; will not this tell him that he must be a
follower of the Lamb whithersoever he goes? That he must press toward the mark,
for the prize of the high calling in Christ Jesus? Does he observe the
remarkable Silence of the Soldier, whilst he awaits the Orders of his
Commander, and will not this engage him to entertain the Psalmists resolution,
I will hear what God the Lord will speak, Psalm. 85.8. Will not this dispose him
to take notice of the wise man's advice, Eccl. 5.1. Be more ready to hear than
to offer the Sacrifice of fools. But I forbear to insist further on this Head,
and pass to the Application.

The short time allotted for this Discourse will not allow me an Opportunity to
Charge through the vast Field of Meditations this Doctrine has laid open before
us* I shall therefore briefly Select some few of those many Councels or
Directions I might offer to you, and put a close to the present Exercise.

I USE.
Yield Constant Obedience then to the Commands, and Directions of your Great
and Glorious Commander. To be Subject to Command is the Duty and Glory of a
Soldier. The Law of the Camp enjoins the Soldier to be perfectly at the
Command of his General. He must obey, and not dispute the Command of his
Officers, and go at their bidding, though it be upon the Mouth of the roaring
Canon. He must not decline the greatest Perils and Dangers, if Commanded to
encounter them: Nothing must be attempted by the Soldier without particular
Order; he neither advances, nor retires without direction. Soldiery therefore
is well defined to be, Obedientia quaedam fortis, et invicti animi arbitrio
carente suo: The Obediences of a stout and resolute person, out of his own
dispose. The Spiritual Soldier must be a man of the same Character; He must be
able to say with the Psalmist, I have inclined my Heart to perform thy Statutes
always, Psalm. 119.12. God's treating of Christians in the Quality of Soldiers
tells them, what a just and reasonable thing it is, they should pay an
universal deference to the holy and righteous Commands of the Lord of Hosts.
Obedience to the Commands and Directions of Heaven, is both the Property, and
the Glory of the Spiritual Soldier. And disobedience to any of them, does not
only reflect a dishonor upon those who have Listed themselves under the
Glorious Banner of the Captain of Salvation; but will (without Repentance)
assuredly issue in the utter Destruction of those who are guilty of it. Readiness
disobedience to Gods Command cost him his Kingdom, and Life also. Thus we read,
1 Chronicles. 10.13. So Saul died for his Transgression against the word of the
Lord. Was it Motive enough to Absoloms Servants, to kill Amnon, that their
Master had said, When I say unto you Smite Amnon, then kill him; Will you not?
Since I have Commanded you? 2 Samuel 13.28. And shall not the Command of God, who
is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, have a more powerful and determining
Influence upon all Christians to dispose them to a ready compliance with his
Will and Pleasure?

II USE.
This Doctrine assures Christians that a Noble Courage, and Fortitude of Soul
should animate them unto an undountedness of Resolution in their Spiritual
Warfare, whatever Oppositions, Dangers, or Deaths may lie in their way of Duty.
A Soldier must be able to look dangers and difficulties in the face. He must
rather choose an Honorable and Glorious Death, than be willing to Save his Life
by an Ignominious and Cowardly flight. Such was the Invincible courage of our
Richard the First, that he acquired the Surname of Coeur-de-Lion, or
Lyon's-Heart. And it is no small part of the true Christians commendation, that
he is as bold as a Lion, Prove. 28.1. The Righteous are bold as a Lion. How well
does it become those, who are under the Conduct of him, that is the Lion of the
Tribe of Judah, to be bold as a Lion! The Spiritual Soldier must not be of
such an Hare-hearted Temper as to be frighted from a pursuit of Duty, by the
most menacing threats, and vigorous Oppositions of his boldest Adversaries. It
is one of the Commands the Spiritual Soldiery is entertained with, In nothing
be terrified by your Adversaries, Phil. 1.28. There is nothing the Spiritual
Combatant can reflect upon, but it has a Tendency to increase his Courage and
Resolution. If he look to his Cause, is it possible to engage in a better? He
is unworthy the Name of a Christian, that will not say with Luther, Mallem
ruere cum Christo, quam regnare cum Caesare. I had rather perish with Christ
than reign with Caesar. Or with the glorious Martyr, If all the hairs of my
head were men, they should all suffer in the cause of Christ. Is not his Call
clear? Are not the rewards proposed for his encouragement great? Must he not
either fight or dye? Is it possible to come off upon other terms? are there not
more for him than against him? cannot God Save by few as well as many? Is he
not well provided for the Battle? and shall not Victory await his Valor? Have
not his Fellow Soldiers ennobled themselves by their Heroic Achievements,
and led him along in the path of eternal Honor and Renown? The three Children
Scorned the Insulting and terrible threats of an Enraged Monarch; Paul
accounted not his Life dear to him; Chrysostom when menaced by the Empress
Eudoxia, feared nothing but Sin. Luther when Summoned by the Emperor Charles
the Fifth to give an account of his Faith, notwithstanding all discouragements,
fearlesly resolves to go to Worms though there were as many Devils there as
Tyles on the Houses. What shall I more say? For the time would fail me to
relate the notable instances of the Saints Resolution in all Ages! Let us look
off then unto Jesus; our Glorious Captain has left us an Unparalled instance
of matchless resolution. The cross he endured, the Shame of it, he despised,
and having conquered, and triumphed over all the powers of hell and darkness,
sat down at the right hand of the Throne of God, and from the lofty Battelments
of Heaven looks down upon and Commands the Spiritual Combatants, to consider
him that endured such contradiction of Sinners against himself, lest they be
weary and faint in their minds, he encourages them to the Combat, commands
them to be fearless, promises to reward their unwearied Services, Rev. 2.10.
Fear none of those things which thou shall suffer; be thou faithful unto Death,
and I will give thee a Crown of Life. O what a charming influence should these
things have upon Christians to dispose them to courage and resolution? What
though they encounter death, and seem to fall, the bloody victims of the wrath
and rage of their accursed enemies, will not Heaven and Happiness pay for all?
Is it not a truth beyond exception, If we suffer, we shall also reign with him,
2 Timothy 2.12.

III USE.
Christians, Does God treat you in the Quality of Soldiers? Bring not then a
stain upon your own Honor and Reputation, or the Honor and Reputation of
Religion, by any little, low, base or unworthy action. The Honor of a Soldier
is dearer to him than his life. He will readily expose his life to hazard, for
the maintenance and support of it. The Spiritual Soldier should be a man of
like temper, whilst he considers the Quality he is treated in; it should
quicken him to an accuracy of critical circumspection in all his Conversation;
And teach him a compliance with that Apostolical Advice, Only let your
Conversation be, as it becomes the Gospel of Christ, Phil. 1.27. The Wise man
has told him, A Good name is better than precious ointment, Eccl. 7.1. David,
that Martial Hero was of this opinion, and therefore put his Life and Honor
into the same Scale. Psalm. 7.5. Let the Enemy persecute my soul and take it,
yea, let him tread down my life upon the Earth, and lay my Honor in the Dust.
His Honor you see brings up the Rear in this gradation, as Jacob ranked Rachel
and Joseph, to testify his greater regards to them. How very careful then
should Christians be, that they do not expose their own Honor, or the
Reputation of Religion, by a careless, uncircumspect, unagreeable Life and
Conversation? How happy would it be there were no just reason to take up the
complaint of Tertulian. O (...) nos qui Christiani h^c (...), Gentes agimus sub
nomine Christi. O miserable ones that we are, who at this time are called
Christians, we act the part of Heathen under the name of Christ. The lax and
loose lives of those who make a profession of Religion, their sinful and
shameful compliances with the irreligious, Heaven-offending, and daring
practices of the times we live in, what disgrace do they bring to Professors
themselves, how greatly do they disserve, and expose Religion? Whilst the true
Spiritual Soldier reflects on such things as these, Rivers of tears will run
down his Eyes, and with a generous resentment, he will command his Soul, (in the
words of dying Jacob) O my Soul come not thou into their Secrets, unto their
Assembly, mine honor, be not thou united, Genesis 49.6. The consideration of
this, will powerfully dispose him to be more serious, holy, careful and
circumspect in his whole Conversation; for this he knows shall exalt his born
in honor, this will give to his Head an ornament of grace, and compass him
about with a crown of Glory, Prove. 4.9.

IV USE.
Stand upon your Guard, and be always upon your Watch. Watching and Warding
are Services, that Soldiers are constantly put upon. The neglect of this would
be of destructive consequence to an Army. A culpable remissness in point of
holy Watchfulness, puts many an opportunity into the hands of our Spiritual
Adversaries to do us a mischief. The great Reason why Christians do so
frequently fall into temptation, is because they are not so watchful over, and
do not set so strict a Guard upon themselves as they ought. Our Glorious
Commander knew very well by what means temptations might be best warded off. It
is his Command therefore, Watch and Pray that ye enter not into temptation.
Mat. 26.41. It is his charge, Be watchful, Rev. 3.2. Had David been upon his
Watch, he had never fallen into those horrible sins of Adultery and Murder.
Careful Watching is an excellent help unto a sure standing. Hence the Advice
runs thus, Watch ye, stand fast in the truth. 1 Cor. 16.13. Two things amongst
many others may serve to put an edge upon this Direction.

1. Remember Christian, Thou art in thine Enemies Country. The Soldier has
need of watching at all times, but more especially when he is in his Enemies
Country, environed on all sides with mortal foes who watch all opportunities of
setting upon him, and doing him a mischief. Christian, Art thou not in thine
Enemies Country, surrounded with innumerable Troops of subtle and malicious
Adversaries, who are watching opportunities to ruin, and destroy thee? And will
not this quicken thee to watchfulness? Shake off then all carnal Security,
entrench thy self strongly, double thy Guards, and keep out wakeful Espials,
lest at unawares thou give advantage to him who goes about like a roaring
Lion, seeking whom he may devour.

2. Thine Enemies (Christian) are not Tyro's and Novices in the School of War;
No, they are old, cunning and veterane Commanders, perfectly acquainted with
all the crafty devices, and politic stratagems of War. And hereby they have
great advantage over incautelous, and foolhardy Sinners, who are therefore said
to be taken Captive by Satan at his will. 2 Timothy 2.26. Such are with ease
trepan'd and decoyed into his ensnaring ambushments; should not this then
influence Christians to care and watchfulness in their Christian Warfare, and
awaken them to stand always upon their Guard? The Simple indeed pass on and are
punished, but as for the prudent he foreseeth the evil, and hides himself,
Prove. 22.3. But when all is said and done, our own watchfulness will not serve
the Turn, we must call in the assistance of Grace, and shroud our selves under
the protection of him, who is the keeper of Israel, assuredly knowing that
security from, and victory over the cunning Artifices of Hell, are designed to
be, the peculiar Triumphs of sovereign and free Grace. The consideration of
this should doubtless sway our hearts unto earnestness of prayer for divine
protection, and dispose them unto such thankful acknowledgments as we find the
Church enlarging her self upon. Psalm. 124.6, 7, 8. Blessed be the Lord, who
has not given us as a prey to their teeth; Our Soul is escaped as a bird out
of the snare of the flowlers; the snare is broken, and we are escaped. Our help
is in the name of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth.

V USE.
Be Expert in the use of your Spiritual Armor. It Is the Soldiers commendation
and glory to be exactly practiced, and dexterous in the use of his Weapons. God
has provided the Spiritual Soldier with an approved Artillery, and it is his
duty and interest to know how to improve and manage it to the best advantage.
Two things will contribute much toward this.

1. An unwearied study of Gods Word. This is the Magizine of all Spiritual
Instruction. The Soldier has his Books to instruct him how to manage his
Weapons well, and so has the Spiritual Soldier. But whatever direction the
Word of God affords him in this affair, let him take care to apply unto God for
the teaching and assistances of his Spirit, without which whatever of the
Theory he may attain to, he will prove but a bungler in the practick part. It is
God alone can teach his hands to war, and his fingers to fight, Psalm. 144.1.

2. A daily practice and exercise of the Spiritual Armor. Use makes perfect.
It is the Soldiers daily practice of Arms that makes him expert in the use of
them. The daily improvement of Grace, which is the Christian Armor, will
render the Spiritual Soldier exquisitely dexterous in the use of the Spiritual
Tacticks.

VI USE.
Expect to Conflict with many dangers, and great oppositions in your Warfaring
State. The Life of a Soldier is a Life of continual hazard and danger; he
always carries his Life in his Hand; and there is many times but a step
between him and death. His Enemies are always dogging him at the heels, seeking
an opportunity to surprise and destroy him. God would hereby awaken Christians
to see, that so they might be sensible of the dangers they lie open to in their
March unto Glory. The Soldiers danger hears a proportion to the numbers and
strength of his Enemies. And thus the Case stands with the Spiritual Soldier:
He may exclaim with David, How are they increased that trouble me! Psalm. 3.1.
Consider mine enemies for they are many, and they hate me with an hatred of
violence. Psalm. 25.19. Numberless Troops of infernal Spirits are perpetually
making their Batteries against him. The World with all its ensnaring vanities,
charming allurements, and cruel oppositions, increases the number of his sworn
Adversaries. He has a Corrupt Heart, a Body of Sin and Death to wage War with.
The consideration of this alone made the great Apostle in a distressing agony
to cry out with a bitter cry, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from the body of this death! Romans 7.24. And that which aggravates the danger
is, that his Internal Foes are in league with, and are upon every occasion
ready to betray him into the hands of his external Adversaries. His outward
senses make head against him, are Traitors to him, and conspire his
destruction. The Sentinels posted at the Cinque Ports of his Soul which should
carefully spy and give notice of danger, are either overcome with a culpable
slumber, or open their Windows to let in sinful objects. His Ears set open
their Door to the bitterest enemies of his Soul. His Smelling, Touch and Taste,
are up in rebellion against him; by Intelligence with these, his Adversaries
are advantaged in every Attack they make upon him, and how is it possible
(amidst so many dangers) he should escape unless God in a way of Sovereign
Grace strengthen him with strength in his Soul; and make him strong in the
power of his might.

VII USE.
Make good your particular Posts, and Quit you like men. Every Officer and
private Sentinel in an Army, in a time of actual Service in the Field, have
proper Post assigned them, and it is expected they should make it good and
defend it. The Great and Glorious Commander of the Spiritual Army has
distinguished it into various Orders, Ranks and Degrees; some are in places of
greater, others in places of lesser Command; and some are but private
Sentinels, yet every one has his proper Post to make good, and defend against
the Common Enemy. This Word of Command therefore Charge through, and through
the Spiritual Army. It is expected by the Captain of our Salvation, that
Christians in their respective Capacities, and Relations should do all they can
to promote the Kingdom of God, and destroy the Kingdom of Satan. Some indeed
have greater Advantages, and Opportunities to Subserve the Interest of
Holiness, and to suppress Sin than others have: Yet there is no Christian but
may be able to do something toward this; and it is expected from all that they Do
what they can.

God has put great Advantages who are in places of Command in the Spiritual
Army, (that is Civil and Religious Rulers) of doing great Service for him in
their Generations. It should be their Care to pursue those Advantages to the
uttermost. As for those who are persons of such a Figure amongst our selves, I
shall take the Liberty of saying, That New England never yet saw the Time
wherein those at the Helm of Civil or Sacred Rule, had greater Reason to
bestir, and Quit themselves like men. Do not Sins of all sorts abound? Are not
provocations multiplied in the midst of us? Have not Astonishing Inundations of
Profaneness, Sensuality, and Debauchery, broken in upon us? Is not Religion
under Bleeding, Gasping, Dying Circumstances? Are not men generally fallen into
an unaccountable drousiness, and sleepiness? Do not the Heavens put on an angry
Countenance, and gather Blackness? Are not the Judgments of God upon us
Incontestible evidences of our being in ill Terms with Heaven? Have not all
Essays toward Reformation been very feeble, languid, and fruitless? And if
such as are the Healers of this People shall not Now signalize their skill,
courage, and care in making good their Post, it is easy to foresee, without a
spirit of Prophesy, that they have a Ruin under their hands. Deus avertat Omen!

The private Sentinels in the Spiritual Army, (Heads of Families, and private
Christians I mean,) have their proper Posts too, and they must endeavor to
make good. Such have great Opportunities and Advantages in their hands to
promote Holiness, and suppress Sin, by an holy, exemplary, inoffensive Walk, by
Charging, Curbing and Restraining all under their Care. If Heads of Families in
New England would but generally take up Joshua's Resolution, that, They and
their Families should Serve the Lord, This would be an hopeful Symptom that
God would not leave our House desolate, nor give us up to perish in those
transgressions which sorely threaten us with an hastening Ruin.

VIII USE.
Take not up your Rest in, set not your Affections on this World. This will
prove an unhappy Snare to you, and tempt you to forsake the Service of your
Glorious Commander. Soldiers are frequently upon their March, from one place
to another, they seldom tarry long in a place, but soon dislodge and draw off.
Christians, this World is but thy Camp, Thou have here no continuing City. Let
others dig and delve, borough, and for themselves here, Do thou always remember
thou art a Soldier. Truss up thy Baggage therefore, and be ready to dislodge
at an Hours Warning. The Apostle describes a Soldier to be a person that
Intangleth not himself with the Affairs of this Life, that he may please him
who has chosen him to be a Soldier, 2 Timothy 2.4. And it is the Express Command
of thy Glorious Captain, Set your Affections on things above, not on things on
the Earth, Colos. 3.2. Disobedience to this Command is of very dangerous
Consequence. It was this that tripped up the heels of Demas, once a forward
Officer in the Spiritual Army, 2 Timothy 4.10. Demas has forsaken me, having
loved this present World. Take heed therefore lest this prove an unhappy
Occasion of thy relinquishing that glorious Service thou have listed thy self
into; and cause thee to make a woeful Shipwreck of thy Faith, and dispoil thee
of the glorious Rewards those shall be sharers in who embrace the Promises,
confess themselves Strangers and Pilgrims here on earth, and declare plainly
they look for a City which has foundations whose builder and maker is God,
Heb. 11.10, 13, 14.

IX USE.
Raise no Contentions, Feuds or Discords in the Army. This will be of fatal
Consequence. Peace in an Army is an Absolutely necessary mean to the
preservation of it, and will render it at once both Formidable and Victorious.
As a Kingdom so an Army divided against it self cannot stand. Christians
therefore are Commanded to promote Peace to the outside of their Abilities.
Romans 12.18. If it be possible, as much as lies in you, live peaceably with all
men. The Contentions of those who are in places of Command in the Spiritual
Army (the Civil Rulers, and Sacred Guides of a People) will have a ruining
aspect upon every thing wherein the best Interests of a People are concerned.
No good Success will ever attend the Counsels of those who should with one
Heart, and Shoulder prosecute all Affairs of common Concernment. Where a spirit
of Division has rendered them Jealous of, suspected by, and disaffected to each
other. The Case of a People must needs be sad, when a perverse Spirit is
mingled amongst those who are the Stay of the Tribes of it. What lost the
English acquisitions in France but by the unhappy Variances of those who bare
chief Command over the Victorious Armies designed to maintain them? The Chinks
and Chaps in a Council board may do more disservice to an Army, and more
terribly boade its destruction, than an Army of an Hundred Thousand men. Let
not any think that this Article of Advice, can be too pressingly enforced upon
us, or that we are but little concerned in it. Doubtless we have had our
Massah's, and our Meribahs (O tell it not in Gath, publish it not in the
streets of Askelon.) And if no other inconveniences have derived to us from
hence but this only, that many persons who in more respects than one, have
deserved well at our hands, have met with undue and* undeserved treatments from
us, (from whence has arisen too much contempt and wrath) it will suggest to us
an argument sufficient to dispose us* unto a being peaceable in our Israel; and
to prepare us unto a ready Compliance with the Apostolical Counsel, Let all
bitterness and wrath, and Anger, and Clamor, and evil speaking be put away
from you, with all malice. And be ye kind one to another, tender hearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you, Ephesians.
4.31, 32.

The Variances of those who are but Private Sentinels in the Spiritual Army,
may do a World of Mischief; and are frequently attended with destructive
Consequences. Hereby the Spirits of Christians are ruffled with unsanctified
Passions, their Charity one toward another miserably enfeebled; unreasonable
Suspicions fomented, Unwarrantable (...) increased: their Pride (...), their
Communion with Heaven shamefully obstructed; their Souls put into such
intolerable Paroxysms, and Fermentations, as do many times throw Families,
Towns, and Churches, into terrible Convulsions, and miserable Confusions. And
how melodious are the interlacings of such discords amongst Christians to the
Infernal Spirits? This fills the Territories of Hell and Darkness with Mirth
and Triumphs, and these doubtless are some of the Shouts they make upon it,
Aha! so would we have it. Will not these things influence us to dread the fatal
Consequences of Division and Discord? The Apostle has told us what may be
expected from it, Gal. 5.15. But if ye bite and devour (...) another, take heed
ye be not (...) one of another.

X USE.
Thankfully accept of, and he exceedingly Comforted from the happy Tidings this
Doctrine brings you the Infallible Assurances of. But three things here, and I
have done.

1. You may expect Assistance from God in all your Spiritual conflects. Take
Heart then, and hope assuredly for Victory; though your Enemies are never so
high, subtle and powerful, and have perhaps in some particular Combats proved
too hard for you. Whatever Service the Soldier is sent upon, he expects to be
assisted, and relieved by his Commander. It is the Policy of a General to keep
fresh supplies in Reserve, on purpose to strengthen any part of the engaged
Army that may (...) open to be overlaid by the Enemy. Take Courage, Christian,
from hence, Thou art a Soldier, and do into thy Glorious Commander will
Retire from thee, and leave thee engaged without relief? No, No, He has
promised he will never leave thee nor forsake thee, Heb. 13.5. Art thou ready
to faint in time of Battle? Do thou at any time say with him, I shall one day
perish by the hand of Saul? Here Is an Effectual Cordial to revive thy drooping,
and fainting Soul. The Almighty himself calls to thee, Fear not, for I am with
thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God: I will strengthen thee, yea I will
help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the right hand of my Righteousness, Isa.
41.10. He assures thee, that it is He gives power to the faint; and to them
that have no might, He increases strength. And withal has promised, That they
that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength: They shall mount up with
Wings as Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not
faint, Isa. 40.29, 31. This thou may safely lot upon, (thou have the word of
him who is faithful and true for it,) that thou shall never be tempted above
that thou art able to bear, and with the Temptation a way of Escape shall be
made, 1 Cor. 10.13.

2. Plentiful Provision shall be made for you, whilst you are kept in the
Field, managing your Warfare. When Armies are drawn into the Field, there is
sufficient care taken to Victual the Camp, and Furnish it with necessaries. The
Soldier is disengaged from all care about such things, and is wholly
maintained at the Charge of those that employ him. This may assure the
Spiritual Soldier, that God will take care of, and make sufficient Provision
for him, whilst he continues in the Field of War. Nothing shall be lacking to
him, that is necessary for him in his Warfaring State and Condition; he shall
want no good thing, Psalm. 34.9, 10. He need not to disquiet himself with any
discomposing solicitude: whateever his cares may be, let him cast them upon
the Lord, and rest assured he shall be cared for. This is according to the
Apostolical advice. 2 Pet. 5.7. Casting all your care upon him, for he cares
for you. To what end should the Spiritual Soldier then vex himself with those
perplexing enquiries, What shall I Eat? What shall I Drink? Where withal shall
I be Clothed? His Heavenly Commander knows he has need of these things, and
will therefore take care they be added to him, Mat. 6.31, 32, 33.

3. The Time draws on space when you shall be disbanded, and receive the
Glorious Recompense of all your Hot and Hard Services in the Field. When the
War is at an End, the Soldier is disbanded, and paid off* E're long,
Christian, thou shall hear the joyful Tidings the Prophet was commanded to
comfort Jerusalem with: It shall be cried to thee, Thy Warfare is accomplished,
Isa. 40.2. Hold out a little longer, resolutely continue the Conflict; It will
not be long but thou shall hear thy Glorious Captain Command you to Lay down
and Quit thy Arms: And then he will call thee home to reap the glorious rewards
which he recompenceth those with, who fight the good fight of Faith, and lay
hold on Eternal Life. E're long an Eternal Victory shall be given thee over all
thine Enemies, Sin, Satan and the World, yea, and Death it self the last Enemy
shall prove an happy Pedestal from whence thou shall mount up into thy Chariot
of Triumph, in which the Glorious Guards, and Convoys of Heaven shall transport
thee through the Conquered Territories, and broken Troops of thy vanquished
Foes, into the Mansions of Eternal Glory; where the Crowns of Righteousness
shall be put upon thy Head, and Garlands of Eternal Honor Wreath thy Brows:
And now to thy Eternal Joy thou shall experience, that the light Afflictions
thou did grapple with whilst managing thy Warfare in a Sinful and Troublesome
World, have wrought out for thee a far more Exceeding and Eternal Weight of
Glory.

FINIS.

