The great Necessity and Use OF THE Holy Sacraments OF Baptism and the Lords
Supper, Delivered In A SERMON PREACHED AT Trinity-Church in New York, The 28th
of November, 1703.

By George Keith, M. A.

Printed and Sold by William Bradford at the Sign of the Bible in New York,
1704.

A SERMON Preached At Trinity Church in N. York The 28th of November, 1703.
1 Cor. 12.13. For by One Spirit are we all Baptized into One Body, whether we
be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be Bond or Free, and have been all made to
drink into One Spirit.


SAint Paul, in the foregoing Verses of this Chapter, is holding forth the
Variety of the Gifts and Graces of the holy Spirit, bestowed of God, through
Jesus Christ, upon the Church, some whereof were peculiar to some Members of
the Church, and extraordinary, and others were common and universal; also, he
does hold forth the several and peculiar Offices and Services that some Members
of the Church had, which were not common to all: All which variety of Gifts and
Offices and Officers, did not make a plurality of Bodies, but still the Body of
the Church is but One consisting of many Members. The which Oneness of the Body
he proves in the words of the Text, first, from the One holy Sacrament of
Baptism, wherewith all the Members ae baptized; secondly, from the One holy
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, whereof all are made partakers, expressed in the
Text synecdochically by drinking into One Spirit, as elsewhere it is
synecdochicallye (...) by breaking of Bread, Acts 2*4^. That both the
Sacraments are here understood, is the concurring sense of Expositors upon this
Text, and does evidently appear so to be* from St. Paul's using the same way
and method of Argument elsewhere, as Ephesians. 4.5. from the One Baptism, as well
as One Lord, One Faith, One God and Father, One Body, One Spirit, and One Hope
of their Calling, he proves the Unity of the Members; and 1 Cor. 10.17. from
the One Bread in the Lords Supper, whereof all are Partakers, he proves the
like Unity of the Members; For (says he) we being many, are one Bread, and one
Body; for we are all partakers of that one Bread.

But that which is further to be observed in the Text, is the (...) visible
Grace of the holy Spirit, I conveyed by and through the means and conduits of
the external Signs or Symbols in both the Sacraments, whence a Sacrament is
rightly defined to be An outward and visible Sign of an inward and spiritual
Grace given unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive
the same inward and spiritual Grace, and a Pledge to assure us thereof, and
also it is a proper means and Memorial to preserve the Doctrine and Faith of
Christ's Death and Passion, and the benefits thereof among us. And so the
Church in her Catechism defines a Sacrament, and affirms, That there are two
parts in each Sacrament, the one, the outward visible Sign, the other, the
inward spiritual Grace; the which inward and spiritual Grace in Baptism is a
Death unto Sin, (...) a new birth unto Righteousness, as well as Remission of
sin, by the Body and Blood of Christ applied to us by a lively Faith; in all
which the holy Spirit is the principal Author and Agent. And as in the Lords
Supper the Body and Blood of Christ is received by Faith, so together with his
Body and Blood, there is an increase of the sanctifying Grace and Gift of the
holy Spirit, formerly given at Baptism, and also at the hearing and believing
the Word preached by adult Persons.

This serves to detect the gross Falsehood, Lies and Calumnies cast upon the
Church by certain false Teachers, who not only reject those holy Sacraments,
and teach their Hearers to vilify and contemn them, as well as to reject the
use of them, to their great hurt and sin, but do give a false Representation of
the Doctrine and Practice of the Church, as if, according to her Doctrine, the
Sacraments were nothing else but Signs, and empty Signs too, as some of them
have affirmed, and much worse. And as if, by her Doctrine, the bare external
action of the Minister, in the administration of Baptism, by pouring or
sprinkling a little Water upon the face of a Person, whether infant or adult,
did entirely constitute that person a Christian, which, ye see, from what is
said in her Catechism, is not the Doctrine of the Church.

But the general Objection made, even by many others, who approve of the
Practice of Baptism, both to Infants and Adult Persons, is, That the
sanctifying Grace of the holy Spirit is not given universally to all baptized
persons, either Infants or adult, for that in many baptized persons no certain
signs or fruits of the sanctifying Grace of the holy Spirit does appear in
them. Beside that, Simon Magus was baptized, and yet was no sanctified Person.

To this I Answer; That if in adult persons no real signs of the sanctifying
Grace of the holy Spirit appear in them after Baptism, it is because they have
not received it with a sincere Faith, which is a necessary Requisite in all
adult persons, in order to receive the inward and invisible Grace signified by
the external Sign; for as Unbelief is an obstruction to the holy Spirits
operation, in hearing the Word preached, so it is no less to the same, either
in Baptism or the Lords Supper. Next, as to Infants, if after they are become
Adult, no real signs of the sanctifying Grace of the holy Spirit appear in
them, the like reason may be given, that by their actual Unbelief and
Unfaithfulness when they become adult, they have quenched and resisted the
same; and yet it must be owned, that such is the goodness of God, that his holy
Spirit, though often quenched and resisted in his gracious motions, does strive
with those who are within the Pale of the visible Church, by Baptism, to
convert and turn them to God, more especially than with those who are without
in the Heathen parts of the World. Even as God did strive, by his holy Spirit,
to reclaim the People of Israel, so that his holy Spirit did not forsake them,
but did wone and entreat them, as by his Prophets outwardly, so by his inward
Calls and Motions to turn unto God, though they rebelled and vexed his holy
Spirit, as it is said, Isa. 60.10. and this with respect that they were a
People in covenant with him, by the Sacrament of Circumcision, and other
external Observances of his appointment, according to Psalm. 50.5. Gather my
Saints together unto me, those that have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice;
And indeed the word Saint, derived from the Latin verb Santio, signifies one
in Covenant with God; and according to this, by virtue of the Covenant ratified
by Circumcision, (the Seal of it) God did call them, as well inwardly by his
Spirit, as outwardly by his Prophets, to turn to him, Ier. 3.14. Turn, O
backsliding Children! for I am Married unto you; compare this with verse. 1, 2.
And no less favor have baptized Persons, by their Baptism, than the People of
Israel by Circumcision, though the external Symbols cannot save without the
internal Grace signified thereby.

But the Adversaries of the holy Sacrament of Baptism, object, That St. Paul
says, there is One Baptism, and consequently* Baptism with Water is ceased,
being that of John, to give place to the Baptism of Christ, which is not with
Water* but with the holy Ghost and with Fire.

I Answ. There is but One only Baptism for Remission of Sin, consisting of two
parts, the external Water and the internal Grace of Christ, and of the holy
Ghost; but that Baptism with the holy Ghost and with Fire, which Christ
promised, and John did foretell, being Miraculous, and not given, or intended
to be given universally, is not that One Baptism common to all the faithful,
and which is one of the Bonds of their Unity, as appears both from the words of
the Text, and Ephesians. 4.5. but That Baptism with Water was only John's, is plain
contrary to the holy Scripture; for Christ also baptized with Water, though not
with his own hands, but by the hands of his Disciples, as plainly appears from
John 3.26. compared with Ioh. 4.1, 2. And had not his Disciples at his Command
and by his Authority baptized with Water, he could not be said to have
baptized; for what they did by his command and authority, was his, and is said
to be done by him. And though John also baptized with Water, and that our
Savior did so honor his Baptism, that he did receive it, yet it does not
follow, that John's Baptism with Water, and that which Christ commanded to his
Disciples, (either before or after his Resurrection) was the same; for though the
Element of Water was one in both, and the general end and intent in both was
the same, to wit, Remission of Sin and Salvation, yet the different manner how
Christ was set forth, as the Object of Faith, in that of John's Baptism, and
that of Christ's Disciples, makes a plain difference; for John did teach his
Disciples, that they should believe in him the promised Messiah (or Christ)
that was to come, and baptized them in that Faith, but Christ's Disciples and
Apostles baptized in the Faith of him that was come, beside diverse other
considerable Differences betwixt them. And in Acts 19.2, 3, 4, 5. we find, that
St. Paul baptized certain persons who had before received John's Baptism.

Nor has it any weight against Baptism with Water, that St. Paul said, He
thanked God he baptized but a few of the Corinthians, and that he was not sent
to baptize, but to preach the Gospel; for the first, he said to take away all
occasion from any of them, that, by reason of the Division that was among them,
might say, That they were of Paul; for it plainly appears that all the
Corinthians were baptized, from Acts 18.8. and 1 Cor. 1.13. even as many as
believed; and his main and principal work, as an Apostle, was not to baptize
with his own hands, as neither was it of the other Apostles, that Office being
generally to be performed by inferior Ministers, whereas the Apostles main work
was to preach the Gospel, they were, by their preaching, to lay the Foundation,
and others to build on it the Superstructure, whereof even Baptism was a part.

The two holy Sacraments of the New Testament, to wit, Baptism and the Supper,
were figured forth under the Old Testament, as that of Baptism by the Baptism
of the Children of Israel, together with their Wives and infant Children, unto
Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea, which St. Paul takes special Notice of, 1
Cor. 10. as also of the Manna they did eat, and Water of the Rock that they
drank of, in the Wilderness, prefiguring the Lords Supper. And he makes his
Discourse upon them an introduction to what he did afterward deliver in the
same Epistle, concerning the two Christian Sacraments of Baptism and the
Supper. As also, St. Peter declares, That Noah being saved by Water in the Ark,
our Christian Baptism does answer, to the like Figure, which does now save us,
not the putting away the filth of the flesh, [for that is not the end of it, to
wash away natural filth of Dirt or Clay from the flesh] but the answer of a
good Conscience, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ; thereby referring to the
answer that Persons to be baptized, were to give to the Questions to be asked
them, before Baptism, with respect to their Faith, and professed and promised
Subjection and Obedience to the Commands of Christ. Of both which the Church
takes notice in the Office of Baptism of Infants, in the first Prayer. See now,
how in that Baptism of the twelve Tribes of Israel, the Infant Children, as
well as the Men and Women, were baptized unto Moses in the Cloud and in the
Sea, without being plunged into Water, and yet being a true Baptism, was with
Water, but not by Immersion.

That Holy Sacraments ((...) ^ell as the Word and Prayer) are necessary to the
Constitution of the visible Church, appears, That no Church ever was without
them, either under the Old Testament or under the New* The Jewish Church had
their Sacraments appointed of God under the Old Testament, viz. Circumcision
and the Passover: By the first, all Jews and Proselites of the Jews Religion,
were initiated and incorporated into the Jewish Church, together with their
Infant Children, being eight days old, such Proselites being called Proselites
of the Covenant; and by the second, viz. the Passover, and other external
Observances enjoined unto them by Almighty God, they professed their
continuance in Communion with the Jewish Church; and especially Circumcision
and the Passover, were unto them special means of Grace and Seals of the
Covenant of Grace betwixt God and them; even as Baptism and the Lords Supper
are the like means of Grace, and Seals of his Covenant of Grace, now more
clearly and amply exhibited and extended to Believers under the New Testament;
and as Circumcision is called by St. Paul, Romans 4.11. A Seal of the
Righteousness of Faith, i. e. of the Covenant of Grace, to Abraham and to his
Seed, under the Old Testament, so no less is Baptism to Believers under the
New Testament, and to their Seed [even their Infant Seed.] Which does
effectually evince and prove, that Baptism does as really belong to Believers,
and their Infant Children, under the Gospel, as Circumcision did belong to them
under the Law, according to Acts 2.38, 39. And that the Lords Supper is a Seal
of the Covenant of Grace, both signifying and sealing to all baptized Persons,
who are faithful, their interest in Christ, in his precious Body and Blood,
with all the spiritual benefits and blessings thereof, is evident from the
words of our blessed Savior to his Disciples, at the Institution, This Cup is
the New Testament in my Blood, which is shed for you, as in St. Luke 22.22. By
the like Figure the Sacramental Cup is called by him, The New-Testamant or New
Covenant, etc. being the Seal of it, as Circumcision is called The Covenant of
God, Genesis 17.13. being the Seal of it to Abraham and to his Seed.

It has been the way and method of God toward his Church, in all Ages from the
beginning of the World, according to his great Goodness and Wisdom, to transact
and deal with the same, and every Member thereof, by way of Covenant, Exodus
19.15. Deuteronomy. 7 6. and chap. 14.2.26.18. Psalm. 135.4.
by which they became a peculiar People to him, in distinction from the Heathen
part of Mankind. The Nature of which Covenant always had, and always has, and
ought to have these Three Properties, VIZ.

I. A mutual Promising of both parties to perform to one another certain
Conditions of the Covenant.

II. A Solemn doing of this before such Witnesses especially as come under the
same Covenant.

III. That the said mutual promising and engaging of each party, the one to the
other, be ratified and established by some external and visible Action,
commonly called the Federal Rite, such as Circumcision was to the Covenant of
Grace among the Jews, and such as Baptism is among Christians.

Hence, as God Almighty did take the Infant Children of believing Jews into
Covenant with himself, (as is clear from Deuteronomy. 29.11, 12. and other Texts of
Scripture) he did require a Promise of them at their Entry into his said
Covenant, which they not being able to do by their own Mouths, they were to do
it by the Mouths of some others under the same Covenant, and which others
under the same Covenant could do, as well as their Parents, and of which an
exact Record was to be kept, according to Isa. 1.12. Even so the Christian
Baptism of Infant Children of believing Parents, being a Seal of the Covenant
of Grace under the New Testament, does oblige those Infant Children, at their
Baptism, to enter into Covenant with God, and thereby to become Members of the
Church of Christ, and be incorporated into the same Body, according to 1 Cor.
12.13. the which seeing they cannot do by their own Mouths, they are to do by
the Mouths of others, which can be done as well by other Christians as by the
Childrens own Parents; and what others do, does in no respect lessen what the
Parents ought to do in taking care of their Childrens Christian Education,
which they are bound to do, without any such Promise.

Hence, by a clear Inference from what is above said, it folows,

I. That as none among the Jews were in Covenant with God, but persons
circumcised, and that none others were Members of the Jewish Church ( Genesis
17.14.) but such; even so none are in Covenant with God now under the
New Testament, or Members of the Christian Church, Duly and Regularly,
according to Gods appointment, but such who are baptized John 3.5. By the
Kingdom of God there, is meant the visible Church, as elsewhere, Mat. 25. in
the Parable of the ten Virgins.
, the nature of the Covenant into which we are taken by Baptism, requiring both
our Promise (by our selves, or others for us when Infants) and also our
receiving the Federal Rite or Seal, which is Christian Baptism.

II. That the Administration of Baptism to Infants of professed Believers, (as
is in use among many Dissenters) wants a necessary and material part, where
neither the Parents nor any others do promise in the Name of the Children to be
baptized, what the Nature of the Covenant requires, viz. To perform the Terms
and Conditions required by Almighty God, in the Baptismal Covenant, viz. That
the Child to be baptized Shall renounce the Devil and all his Works, the vain
Pomp and Glory of the World, with all the covetous Desires of the same, so that
he will not follow nor be led by them: 2dly, To believe all the Articles of the
Christian Faith, summarily contained in the Apostles Creed: 3dly, To keep Gods
holy Will and Commandments, and to walk in the same all the days of his Life.
All that their Ministers require of him or them that present the Child to be
baptized, and all that he or they promise, is, To take care that the Child have
a Christian Education, according to the Word of God; and as very commonly has
been used, they require them to promise to give the Child an Education or
Instruction according to the Confession, and larger and shorter Catechisms of
the Westminster Assembly, or some one or other of that called by them their
Church Covenant, which is an Innovation and undue Imposition, without all
warrant of holy Scripture, to require or give such a Promise: But forasmuch as
it is not made in the Child's Name, it does not oblige him. And thus their
manner of administering Baptism to Infants, as it is deficient in one material
and necessary part, so it is redundant and guilty of an imposed Innovation in
another, as before mentioned.

III. That a great multitude of Persons, both in England, and these American
parts, who pretend to be the Church of God above all others, and to be the only
Church, are no true Church of God at all, but a confused and disorderly heap
and mixture, not only for their not having the holy Sacraments practiced among
them, which they vilify and contemn, calling them Worldly Elements and
Beggarly Elements, but that what they call their Church wants not only the
solemn Federal Rite of holy Baptism, but all the other necessary Properties of
a Covenant betwixt God and Men, by which a true Church is constituted, ( Tit.
2.14. 1 Pet. 2.9^) and is bound to him and one to another, by those three
peculiar Properties of a Covenant abovementioned; all which the Jewish Church
had, by Gods appointment, under the Old Testament, and the Christian Church
has still had, and still is to have under the New, to the end of the World. At
their entrance and admission into what they call their Church, neither the
Adult by themselves, nor their Infant Children by any others, make any Promise
to be the Lords, and to be faithful and obedient to him, nor give they any
declaration before Witnesses, what they believe or profess, in order to
Salvation. And as they have no Trying or manner of Initiating Persons into
their Society, so nor have they any manner of trying those they call their
Ministers, whether duly qualified and enabled to teach the Principles commonly
professed by themselves. And that One Principle of theirs, viz. That not the
Scriptures, but the Light within them, and which is the same in kind and nature
in all Mankind, as well as in them, is the primary Rule of all their Faith and
Practice, makes not only all the Articles of the Apostles Creed, but all other
the peculiar and positive Precepts of the Gospel not only unnecessary to them,
but such as neither ought nor should be believed or practiced by them, because
their primary Rule, (as they call the Light within them (which they say does
sufficiently teach them, without the Scripture, all that is necessary to
Salvation) and their only Foundation) dictates nothing to them of these matters.

But this sort of Persons, and especially the Preachers among them, do often in
their Assemblies most profanely and ignorantly, as well as contemptuously
exclaim against the manner of the holy Ordinance of Baptism, appointed by Jesus
Christ, as it is practiced in the Church of England, as if what these who
present the Children to holy Baptism, commonly called Godfathers and
Godmothers, did promise in the name and on the behalf of those Children, what
they do not believe either they or the Children (in whose Name they promise)
can perform at any time during this mortal life; and then they cry out, What
confusion is here! Thus not only ridiculing Gods holy Ordinance, but vilely and
wretchedly lying against the Church of England and her Christian Practice, as
some of them have lately done in diverse places of these American parts
Particularly one Tho. Story, a Quaker of Philadelphia, in his late Preachings
in several Quaker-Meetings in Maryland, and other places there-away; and one
Sam. Bounas in a Quakers Meeting at Hempstead on Long Island the 11 th of Nov.
1703.
; for it is the professed Faith and Belief of all the true Members and Sons and
Daughters of the Church of England, that by the Grace of God, even during this
mortal life, they can, according to their Promise in Baptism, whether made by
themselves, or by others for them, sincerely believe all the Articles of the
Christian Faith, and faithfully and sincerely keep and obey all Gods holy
Commandments, denying all the pomps, vanities and sinful Lusts of this wicked
World, and manfully fight under Christ's Banner against the Devil, the World
and the Flesh. And though the Law of God under the New Testament, as well as
under the Old (as it is the Rule of Life) requires a Sinless Obedience to all
and every one of his Commands, Yet the Covenant of Grace requires not of us,
absolutely, a sinless Obedience, but a Sincere Obedience to Gods Law; and
therefore in our Baptismal Covenant we promise not to perform an absolutely
sinless, but a sincere Obedience thereunto, though accompanied with some sinful
Defects and Imperfections. And such is the great Grace and Mercy of God, and
his gracious condescension to all thus in covenant with him, That he has
promised to forgive, not only unto his People in covenant with him, their
sinful Defects and Imperfections, Psalm. 103.17, 18. Exodus 34.6, 7, 10. 1 John
22.1, 2. Acts 2.38.
upon their renewed Repentance, but other great sins, which through humane
Frailty and Unwatchfulness they may happen to fall into, so that they rise
again by true Repentance and sincere Reformation and amendment of Life; the
which Promise unbaptized Persons (who reject and vilify Baptism) cannot lay
claim unto.

The Law of all Nations, Heathen as well as Christian [as if it were an
instinct in the very nature of Mankind] requires some Federal Rite to be used,
in all Covenants betwixt Man and Man, Ad futuram rei Memoriam, i. e. For the
better preserving the Memory thereof. And in compassion to men's weakness, and
for the more strengthening their Faith in his Word and Promises, as well as to
cause it to take a more deep impression in their Minds and Affections, it has
pleased God thus to confirm the truth of his Covenant and Promises to us by
sensible things, such as the Water is in Baptism, and the Bread and Wine in the
Lords Supper; even as the Word it self comes to our Minds by the sensible
impression of Hearing and Reading it, which it makes upon our outward Senses of
Hearing and Seeing, it being the way and method that God Almighty has
appointed, in his love and wisdom, that as he has given us sensible and
material Bodies, as well as immaterial and immortal Minds, so the Benefit as
well as the Knowledge of many things, both natural and supernatural, should be
conveyed to us by the help of outward and sensible things and objects, passing
through our outward Senses to our Minds and Spirits. For even these very
Persons forgetting their own Arguments against the use of Signs, do yet use
diverse, as not only kneeling and Men's uncovering the Head in Prayer, but the
Man's joining Hands with the Woman at the solemnizing their Marriages. And thus
also their impertinency is answered, in objecting against the Elements of Bread
and Wine in the Lords Supper, That what goes in at the Mouth defiles not the
Man, So did the said S. Bownas argue against (...) Bread and Wine (...) Supper.
and consequently nor does it cleanse* for it is not any inherent virtue either
in the Water of Baptism* (...) in the Elements of Bread and Wine in the Supper,
that has the sanctifying Virtue in it, but it is of the Grace of God, and the
working of his holy (...), who is pleased to work with (...) Grace (...). And,
lastly, they argue as impertinently* That (...) Children in Infancy know not
what is done to them at their Baptism, or the present benefit they have by it,
that therefore it is of no use to them; for this no more follows, than that
Circumcision was unprofitable to the Infant Children of the Jews, because they
as little knew the present use and benefit of it to them, which yet was so
great, that thereby, as by a Seal, God testified he received them into his
Covenant and special Protection; and by the Seal of Baptism to Infant Children
of believing Parents, he does the same now under the New Testament. Nor did
those little Children whom our Savior embraced in his Arms know what he did
unto them, and yet he said, Of such is the Kingdom of God; and further said,
Suffer little Children to come to Me, and forbid them not, Mat. 19.13, 14. And
concerning the Infant Children of believing Gentiles that should be brought
into the Church under tbe New Testament, the Prophet Isaiah did very plainly
and clearly prophecy, Isa. 49.22. Thus says the Lord God, Behold, I will lift
up my Hand to the Gentiles, and set up my Standard to the People, and they
shall bring thy Sons in their Arms, and thy Daughters shall be carried upon
their Shoulders. This Prophecy is directed to the Church, and the believing
Gentiles Children are called her Sons and her Daughters, because together with
their Parents they were to be incorporated in to her by Baptism; for what else
can be signified by the Gentiles bringing them in their Arms and upon their
Shoulders to the Church, but in order to receive Christian Baptism in their
Infancy, being then incapable of Instruction by hearing the Word preached, or
of having any other means of Grace applied to them in Infancy, but that of
Baptism? for as touching the Parents praying for them, they could do that at
home, and also might receive the benefit of the public Prayers of the Church,
without having them brought to the Church in the Arms of their Parents, or
being carried on their Shoulders.

And they grossly scandalize the Ministers of the Church of England, as if they
did pretend to make Christians simply by the external Action of Water Baptism:
Whereas they but baptize with Water, and give the external Christian Name to
the Person baptized, but they do not assume the part of God or of Christ, as
these blasphemously do, who presume and pretend That they baptize with the Holy
Ghost, which none of the Apostles were ever said to do, or presumed to do, it
being the alone proper work of God and of Christ; for thus these men, contrary
to all Antiquity, and the constant Sense of the Church of Christ in all Ages,
as well as contrary to all true Reason, do impose their false gloss upon these
words, Mat. 28.20, 21. as if Christ had commanded them Not to baptize with
Water, but with the holy Ghost, whenas the Baptism with the holy Ghost in that
miraculous way, as both Christ did promise it, and John the Baptist did
foretell it, was never given, nor intended to be given to all the faithful,
but to some Persons, as God was pleased to bestow it, and therefore could not
be commanded to be given to all Believers; and to be sure, notwithstanding
their false pretenses, they have it no more than others. It ought to suffice
us, and for which we ought to be thankful to Almighty God, that together with
his Son, he has given us his Word and Sacraments, and together with the same,
his holy Spirit, to be our Sanctifier, though we have not these miraculous
Gifts.

To conclude, Let none of us who have listed our selves under Christ's Banner,
by our Baptismal Vow and Covenant, rest or rely upon the external Signs or
Symbols of either of the holy Sacraments, but be earnest with God in Prayer, so
to enable us by his holy Spirit to perform that part of our solemn Promise we
made to God in our Baptism, to dye daily more and more unto sin, and to live
unto Righteousness, that as we have put on Christ by Profession, we may walk in
him, being baptized into his Death, and buried with him in Baptism, that the
old Man may not only be dead, but be buried in us, so as never to rise again;
but that the New Man may be more and more raised up in us, to fit us for that
future state of Happiness after Death, and blessed Resurrection of our Bodies
to eternal Life; and that the most excellent part promised of God to us, in
both the Sacraments, may be increased and renewed to us by our gracious God, to
repair and recover whatsoever of any spiritual Grace or Virtue at first given
us, either at our Baptism, or under any other means of Grace, through human
frailty, has been impaired or weakened in us; and let us grow daily more and
more in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; Let
us add to our Faith Virtue, and to Virtue, 2 Pet. 3.18. and 1.5.
Knowledge, and to Knowledge, Temperance, Patience, Godliness, Brotherly
Kindness and Charity; the which things, if they be in us, and abound, they
shall make us, that we shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge
of our Lord Jesus Christ. To whom, with the Father, and the holy Ghost be all
Honor and Glory forever and ever, Amen.

An Appendix.
ALthough in the foregoing Sermon, I hope, I have answered the most material
Objections against Baptism, yet I find that diverse of those false Teachers,
when they think they cannot prevail to reject all Baptism with Water, they fall
in with the Anabaptists, and cry out against the Manner of sprinkling Water on
the face of the Person to be baptized, as if it were no Baptism, and call for
Scripture-Example, where any were baptized by Sprinkling, or pouring Water on
them But I ask them for Scripture Example, where any were baptized by Immersion
or plunging the whole Body under Water? This we find no where expressly in
Scripture, nor can (I think) it be inferred by any just consequence from
Scripture; for though John baptized at Jordan, yet it is not said he plunged
their whole Bodies under water; and tho it is said, Mat. 3.16. and Mark 1 10
That Jesus came up straightway out of the Water, the Greek word [ Apo] is
properly translated [ from] the water, and not [ out] of the Water, and so
Arias Montanus in the Latin version renders it de Aqua, and not extra Aquam,
i. e. from the Water, and not out of the Water. And the like is to be said
concerning the Eunuchs Baptism, Acts 8.38, 39. When they were come up out of
the Water, the Greek word there is ( Ek) which is properly translated [ of or
from] and Arias Montanus's Latin Verson is as the other de Aqua. But suppose
they did go into the Water, yet that proves not that Phillip plunged his whole
Body under the Water, as no more it proves, that Phillips whole Body was under
the Water. And that it is said, They both went down into the Water, the Greek
word in that place is ( Eis) which is as well translated Unto as Into; nor does
the English word Into signify a going within or under the Water, no more than
that Jesus is said, Mat. 5.1. That he went up Into a Mountain, that he went
within it, or under it. When Saul was baptized, Acts 9.18. and the Jailer was
baptized, Act 16.33. and all his House, we do not read that they went to any
River to be baptized, or that any River was near the places where they were
baptized; and it is most probable that the Jailer was baptized either in the
Prison, or in his own House; nor is it likely that St. Paul (having many
stripes laid on him a little before) was in a condition, in the night time, to
go to some River, no body knows where, or how far off, to baptize the Jailer
and those of his house. Again, that it is said, John 3.23. That John was
baptizing at Enon, because there was much Water there; according to the Greek,
and as Arias Montanus translates it, there were many Waters, i. e. not many
Rivers, but many small Runs or streams of Water, which they who have given the
Geography of the place, say, had not depth enough of Water to plunge the whole
Body under the water; but John baptizing so many Thousands as he did, there was
need of much Water for the doing it, though he had used but a little to every
one. Beside, we do not find that any of the Baptisms used among the Jews, under
the Law, was by a total immersion or plunging the whole Body under the Water.
That the Jews had several sorts of Baptisms under the Law, is evident, and that
they were so called, Heb. 9.10. the Greek word, there translated Washings, is
Baptismois, i. e. Baptisms, and so does Arias Montanus translate it, and so is
it rendered on the Margin in diverse English Bibles, and particularly in a large
Octavo Bible printed at London, by H. H^lls and John Field, 1660 some of which
Baptisms, if not most of them, were by sprinkling Water on the Persons, for
their purifying, as plainly appears from Numb. 8.7. Sprinkle Water of Purifying
upon them; and Numb. 19.13, 19. compared with Heb. 9.10, 19. And because in all
Signs, the Sign and the thing signified thereby, does answer by way of Analogy,
hence as we are said to be washed by the Blood of Christ, so the heart of the
Believer is said to be sprinkled by that Blood, ( i. e. by the merit, virtue
and efficacy of it, applied by a true and lively faith) 1 Pet. 1.2. compared
with Heb. 10.22. And by the like Analogy, Ezekiel* 36.25. God promised, That he
would sprinkle clean Water upon his People (under the New Testament) and they
should be clean, which diverse of the Ancients understood of the Water of
Baptism, as well as that Heb. 10.22. Your Bodies washed with pure Water, pure
Water being a Hebraisme referring to the Water of purifying under the Law,
Numb. 8.7. and 19.13, 19.

But their last Refuge is from the proper signification of the word Baptize,
which, they say, some learned men, even of the Church of England, have
affirmed, signifies, to plunge the whole Body under Water, from the Greek word
Baptizo. Answ. But that any of the Church of England have affirmed that to be
the only, or yet the most proper and frequent signification of it, I do not
remember that I have read. But supposing it were so, other men as learned, or
perhaps more learned, have affirmed, and do affirm, that to plunge the whole
Body under Water, is neither the only, nor the most proper signification of it;
for it coming from the Greek word Baptizo, which is a derivative from the word
Bapto, it loses the force of the primitive word in its signification, as is
usual in the like cases, as in the Latin, senesco, ditesco. Nor ought we to
give trust to any learned man, if what he says contradict the holy Scripture.
But in the holy Scripture we find, that to wash the hands, or to have the hands
washed, is to be baptized, Luke 11.38. where it is in our English Translation,
he marvelled that he had not first washed, the Greek has it Ebaptisthe, i. e.
was not baptized: And the like in Mark 7.4. except they be baptized, according
to the Greek, Baptizontas, and so it is in the English Bible abovementioned,
in those other two places last mentioned; and we are not to question it, for
both St. Luke and St. Mark knew what was proper Greek, and how to write it, as
well and much better than any learned man now in the World.

There are some few others, that being convinced of the Quakers vilest and
grossest Errors, in the Province of Pennsilvania have left their Meetings, and
have set up a Meeting by themselves, and as yet continue to hold it up in two
or three places, some of whose Speakers have with great rashness and
presumption, without all shadow of warrant from holy Scripture, taken upon them
Authority or Power to baptize, upon the pretense of the inward Call of the holy
Spirit, with whom I have had some Conference, they having been formerly joined
with me against the Quakers vilest Errors, I put them close to it, to give any
proof either of Precept or Example in Scripture, where any baptized, who had
not an outward Call and Ordination, by laying on of hands, by some that were
their spiritual Superiors in the Church? And as concerning Phillips baptizing
those of Samaria, Acts 8.12. and the Eunuch, Acts 8 38. it is evident, that he
was one of the seven Deacons who had Ordination by the laying on of the hands
of the Apostles, Acts 6.5, 6. But to this they confessed, that they could give
no Proof, by either Precept or Example in Scripture. And as to that pretense of
their inward Call by the Spirit, I told them, That was not sufficient to
convince others, or satisfy them they had such an inward Call that did suffice
without the outward Call, unless they could demonstrate their inward Call,
either by Miracles, or some other way equivolent; for though John the Baptist
wrought no Miracle, and his Baptism was from Heaven, yet he was a Prophet, and
had diverse concurring Demonstrations to prove his Doctrine and Baptism, that
they were of God, and particularly our Saviors Testimony concerning him, and
his Father Zachariah's prophecy of him. I further told them, they might by the
like pretense (...), they had an inward Call or Commission to be Mayor or other
Magistrate in the Town of Philadelphia, which few, if any, would believe,
though they should pretend to it, which I thought their Modesty would not
suffer them to use any such Pretense. I also told them, that it was to be
observed by them, that though our blessed Savior was filled with the holy Spirit
above measure, yet he had an outward Call by an outward audible Voice from
Heaven, by his Father,; and the Apostles had their outward Call from our
Savior, by audible words, and his laying his hands on them; and the Apostles
did lay hands on others whom they ordained; and They were to do it on others
who should suceed them, to keep up outward Order in the Church. And I asked
them, whether outward Order in the Church was not as necessary as outward Order
in the civil State, to prevent confusion? They answered* It was, when there
were many; and when they became (...), they would likewise have it: But upon
the supposition that they should become many (which they are not like to be)
how could they hinder others which might rise up among themselves, and lay
equal claim to the inward Call of the Spirit, as any of them?

The Church of England not only approves of the inward Call, or moving of the
holy Spirit to the Ministerial Function, but the first Question that the Bishop
asks of any that is to be ordained a Deacon, is, Whether he is moved of the
holy Ghost to undertake the same? and if he should say, Nay, the Bishop would
not ordain him

Their last evasion is, They had none to whom they could apply for Ordination;
for as to the Church of England (one of them said) their Bishops had their
Ordination from the Pope. [But this is a common Objection of other Dissenters,
as well as of those abovementioned.] I told him, it was a Mistake; He said, he
had it of them whom he had cause to believe, more than to believe me [But he
did not tell his Authors] I replied, That of whomsoever he had it (whether of
me formerly, for I confess, I was (when under the Profession of a Quaker) in
the same mistake; but now, I thank God, I am better informed) it was a great
mistake and abuse; for there were Bishops in England before either Popery or
Pope was in the World, and there has been a continued Succession of Bishops in
England ever since the first planting of the Christian Faith in England. And
though as well before the immediate Reformation from Errors, both in Doctrine and
Practice, as for some Ages antecedent, the Church of England was too much
corrupted with the Errors of the Church of Rome, yet that corruption prevailed
rather in a Faction than in the whole Body of the Church; and whatever Power
the Popes of Rome claimed over the Church of England, before the Reformation*
it was but an Usurpation, and was never generally consented to by the whole
Church. Beside, we are to distinguish betwixt the Church of Rome her self and
the Papacy, as betwixt a diseased Person or Leper, and the Leprosy that
cleaves to him, who is the same Man still when Leprous, and when cured of his
Leprosy, by some Miracle. The Church of England, (as other Protestant
Churches) became reformed, and was not to have a new Foundation. And as she was
not to throw away the Scriptures, nor Sacraments, nor many other Doctrines of
Christianity, because held with great mixtures of Corruption among them, but
retain the good, and reject all that was evil; so nor was she to reject
Church Government and Ordination, and distinction of Church Officers, well
warranted by holy Scripture. The Scripture foretold, That Antichrist was to
sit in the Temple of God, and That God was to have a People in Mystical
Babylon, which is no argument that the Church was not the Temple of God still,
and his People in Babylon, were not his People.

G. K.

FINIS.

