Some of the many false, scandalous, blasphemous and self-contradictory
Assertions of William Davis, faithfully collected out of his Book, printed Anno
1700. entitled, Jesus the Crucified Man, the Eternal Son of God, etc. in exact
Quotations word for word, without adding or diminishing.
I. page 1. colum. 2. EVen that outward and visible Person of our Lord Jesus
Christ (before he was thus conceived, seen and crucified) was in Heaven, and
came down from thence into the Virgins Womb. etc.

II. p. 3 see also p. 49. That we cannot distinguish betwixt the two Natures in
Christ, no more than we can divide them.

Page 6. If the Father and the Son (as they affirm) are one individed Essence,
it will follow, that they are but one individed Person, and consequently either
the Son must be the Father, and then the Father has a Body and Soul, or else
they must deny the Son to have such, or else there is no Father at all,
according to this absurd Opinion.

III. P. 8. Prodigious Principle of their own, viz. That God is every where
present alike.

Gods chief abode and residence, with respect to his glorious Personal being,
is no where else but in Heaven, quoting Eccles. 5.2. 1 King. 18.20. Isa. 66.1.
Mat. 6.9. 1 King. 19.11, 12.

Page 9. Nay further (says W. Davis) this would destroy the very being of God,
according to the saying of the Rhodian Poet, Quisquis ubique habitat maxim
nusquam habitat, i. e. He that every where can be, in no place never found is
he. For if God be every where alike, then either every thing is God, (...) then
every thing must be worshipped, or else nothing is God. If we grant the first,
that promotes Idolatry in the highest degree of it; if the second, it
introduces Atheism in the utmost extreme of it; what a mad piece of absurd and
jumbled Divinity would this be? but that God is every where present by his
sacred Attributes, is in no wise denied by us, quoting Psalm. 139.7, 8, 10. and
147.5.

IV. Page 13. He has been visible before he was made flesh, quoting Genesis 18.1.
cap. 22 25. From which it appears he was also tangible, Ios. 5.13. Dan. 3.2^:
Exodus 24.10. Isa. 6 5. From all which it appears (says he) he was both visible
and tangible before he was made flesh; and these respect our outward Senses of
seeing and feeling, quoting also for proof 1 st St. John 1.1.

V. p. 28. I may safely, truly and properly say, That that visible Body, viz.
the Lord Jesus Christ came down from Heaven, and not thereby intend at all that
Christ brought a Body of flesh from Heaven (which indeed I never believed) for
there is a great difference betwixt saying, That visible Body came down from
Heaven, and, That visible Body came down from Heaven a body of flesh.

P. 30. He charge Mr. Clayton, a Minister of the Church of England, and
others who opposed his assertions, not only to blaspheme, but also to deny the
Son of God.

P. 50. Now then, seeing it is impossible to discern or distinguish in a Child
the substance of Father and Mother, distinct or abstract, but that it is
counted the Child of such honest Parents to whom it does belong, consisting of
the substance both of Father and Mother, conjunct or concrete, so likewise must
we conceive of Christ, that he is not a complete or perfect Savior in the
abstract, but in the concrete, viz. the Natures consubstantiate, but not
transubstantiate, two Natures being made one substance, without any change in
either of the Natures into another substance.

[ Note, How this can be, he gives the same account as Papists do about
Transubstantiation, that thing which is impossible with Men, is notwithstanding
possible with God.]

VI. He was equal to his Father in respect of Honor and Worship, as well as of
Nature, therefore he says, I and my Father are one, John 10.30. to wit, one in
Nature and kind of being, though two distinct Persons, John 8.17, 18.

P. 66, (...)] He condemns the Heresy of Apillinarius, that Christ had no
humane Soul, but his divine Nature did supply the room thereof; and yet in all
his Book it will not be found that he holds that Christ, as man, had any other
Soul but what was (as he says aftewards, page 86.) of prae-existant matter and
substance, which was divine and eternal.

VII. p 65. In answer to John Wats, an Anabaptist, Object. 2. Tho he which laid
down his Life for us was God, yet he did not lay down his Life as God. He
says, Grant to an Atheist liberty to argue according to this Rule, and he will
easily prove by Scripture that there is no God at all.

P. 61. In the Title of his 7th Chapter he says, Chap. 7. containing twelve
Objections against the former Doctrine of Christ's dying, as he was God, as
truly as Man.

P 66. Note, Though he affirms that Christ suffered and dyed as he was God, yet
(he says, I readily grant, viz. that when a man dies his soul does not dye
with his Body, but surviveth it, so in like manner the soul of our Savior did
survive his body, and went into Paradise with the soul of the Thief, that day
when he hung on the Cross.

VIII. In answer to Object. 8. which is, This Doctrine of Christ's dying as God,
does necessarily conclude two Gods, etc. He says, Its true, this Doctrine of
two Gods is not only carpt at, but denied almost by all; albeit all almost but
Quakers confess in words, there are three Persons which are each of them a God,
but yet they believe it not.

IX. Having quoted 1 John 5.7. There is three that bear Record in Heaven, the
Father, the Word and the Spirit, and these three are one, he says, One in
regard they are of one Nature and kind of being, and so must be worshipped
equally as one, Three in regard they are three particular Persons, and each of
these three Persons is a God; so in a Personal sense we may truly and properly
say, there are three Gods, viz. God the Father, God the Son and God the holy
Ghost; but in a reverential and objective sense, there is but one God.

Page 39. When he says, I came down from Heaven, he means, his outward Person
did as properly and as literally descend by a local Motion of his Princely
Residence, as when a man, being on the top of some famous stupendous Fabric,
he must descend to come down and go to the Earth.

P. 40. His humane Nature added nothing to him, which made him either more or
less visible and outward, but a nature or quality to his outward Person, which
his outward Person had not before.

X. P. 86^ In answer to Object. 11. from Heb. 10.5. he says, The holy ghost
does not intend by this phrase, A Body have thou prepared me, that therefore
nothing of the substance of that Body was divine and from Eternity. For although
the Son of God did really take a substance of the Virgin Mary, which he had not
from Eternity, which after his assumption or incarnation was essential to his
Body, as well as Soul, by which means he was made flesh; yet notwithstanding
his Body and Soul did consist of prae-existant matter and substance, which was
divine and eternal.

XI. Object. 12. How is it possible that an outward and visible Person, of such
dimensions and bigness could be in a Virgins womb? In short (says he in
answer) all things are possible with God; They may as well say, it was
impossible for Christ to come in amongst the Disciples, the Door being shut;
and yet this is a truth; but we cannot demonstrate how it was done.

Page 91. That one Person, who was both God and Man, suffered and dyed
conjunctly in both Natures.

XII. P. 98. He reckons it one of John Wats's abominable and vile Heresies,
That the Father and the Son are one single and individed Essence.

Page 117. He charge it on John Wats the Anabaptist, That he agrees with
Sabellius and Muggleton, that the Father, Son and holy Ghost are one individed
Essence.

Note, P. 94. He says, The Father has not been manifested visibly, and seen
in the presence of any Mortal, quoting Ioh. 1.18. and Ioh. 6 46. 1 Timothy 6.16. 1
John 4.12. But how does this agree with his Notion on Dan. 7.9. That the
Ancient of Days whom Daniel saw, was the Father? page 7.

He gives a lame Definition of a Person, for which he quotes Goldman, which is
this, A Person is an individed Substance, of a rational nature; but it wants
the following words, Subsisting by it self, to complete the Definition; and
thus the human nature of Christ is not a Person, because not subsisting by it
self, but by the person of the son, as he is the eternal and essential Word.

XI. P. 81. That God is a Spirit, Ioh. 4 24. Hence men would infer, as though (to
speak with reverence) God was a mere nothing, because our Savior says to the
Woman of Samaria, God is a Spirit. It seems John Wats, and others, would gather
from hence, That God was not a Person, but only a Breath or Air, every where
present a like.

P. 82. Yet in Contradiction to his former Assertion, That Gods Personal being
is no where else but in Heaven, he says, God does respect all places alike,
and does invisibly attend every one in every time, and every place (when and
wheresoever, with a gracious acceptance) this evangelical, not legal Worship is
performed by him in spirit and truth.

Page 124. He most ignorantly and wickedly perverts the sound words of Dr
Tillotson, late Archbishop of Canterbury, in one of his Sermons on that Text,
Ioh. 1. The Word was made Flesh, page 19. Though the Word was really God, yet
not God the Father. Again, page 30. The Word was God, yet not God the Father:
On these sound words, W. D. says, Note, Then the Word which is God, and not
the Father, and the Father which is God, and not the Word, make two distinct
Gods personally, according to the Bp. of Canterbury.

Page 122, 123. He grossly perverteh the sound words of Bishop Usher, to
justify his Blasphemies. And in like manner he perverts the second Article of
the Church of England, and other Protestant Authors.

That these Quotations above given are faithfully recited, Attested by George
Keith, Clerk. John Talbot, Clerk, Evan Evans, Rector of Philadelphia.

Philadelphia, the 26 th of March, 1703.
BY the foregoing Quotations these following Anti-scriptural and Blasphemous
Assertions of William Davis are evident.

First, From Quotation 2, 6, 12. The three Persons are three distinct and
separate individed Essences, and so three Gods, as really as Peter, James and
John are really three men; contrary not only to all sound Reason, but to many
clear Proofs of Scripture.

Secondly, From Quotation 6 and 9. These three Gods being of One nature and
kind, every one of them from Eternity had a Soul and Body, seeing, as he
affirms, Quest. 1, 4, 5. the Son had a Body from Eternity, an outward, visible
and tangible Body, contrary both to Reason and Scripture; for if the Son is
compounded of Soul and Body, so must the Father and the holy Ghost, seeing (as
he affirms) they all three are of one nature and kind.

Thirdly, And seeing the outward, visible and tangible Body of the Son, which
he had from Eternity, was a circumscribed Body, of no greater bigness or
quantity than the Body of an ordinary Man, such as the Man Christ Jesus was, so
the Body of the Father and the Body of the holy Ghost are circumscribed,
visible and tangible Bodies, of no greater bigness or quantity, having hands,
fingers, eyes, ears, feet, toes, of the like ordinary bigness; see Quotation 4

That not one of these three Gods is every where present; and by his wicked and
blasphemous Consequence, if every thing where God is, be God, then Heaven must
be God, for he confesses God is in Heaven. But whether he is only in all the
heavens, or only some part of the heavens, he has not expressly told; see
Quotation 3.

Fourthly, That God the Fathers substance has parts, which can be separated
from him; for he compares the generation of the Son to the generation of a
Child, that consists of the substance of both Father and Mother, to wit, being
real parts of them; so Christ God-Man consists of real parts of the Fathers
Substance, and of the Virgin Mary.

5 thly, That Christ suffered, as God, as well as Man, in both Natures; see
Quotation 7, 8

6 thly, That these three Gods are one Objectively, being one Object of
Worship; and thus he would excuse his Blasphemy and Idolatry; and the like
excuse the Heathen might give, who worship many thousand Gods together, as one
Object of Worship, as witness their manner of Prayer to them altogether, Dij
Deque omnies, i. e. O all ye godds and goddesses; see Quota. 9.

7 thly, That the Body and Soul of the Son, which he had from all Eternity,
locally came down from heaven, having the bigness of the body of an ordinary
Man, and came into the Virgins Womb, [Which is as great a contradiction to
Scripture and Reason as Transubstantiation] see Quota. 9.

8 thly, That he denies God to be a Spirit in the proper sense of all rational
men and true Christians, as if the notion of Gods being a Spirit, were, that
God is a mere nothing, or but only a breath or air; see Quota. 12, 13*

That Christ, as both God and Man, has but one Nature and subsistence, it
being as impossible to distinguish the two natures in Christ, as to divide
them; see Quota. 2.

George Keith, Clerk. Evan Evans, Rector of Philadelphia.


A Public Advertisement to all Christian People into whose hands this may come.
AT Philadelphia in the Province of Pennsilvania, the tenth day of March, 1702.
George Keith a Presbyter of the Church of England, having fully and evidently
detected the chiefest of the abovementioned monstrous and blasphemous
Principles of W. Davis, at the Meeting House of the People commonly called, The
Keithian Quakers (their free consent being had thereto, in the said Town of
Philadelphia) in a public Dispute between him and William Davis, mutually
agreed on betwixt them, as to time and place, which continued two hours, or
more, in the fore-noon, and three hours at least in the afternoon, several
hundreds of persons belonging to the Town and Country (many of them of good
Quality of the Church of England, and others) being present, where, by
agreement, each of the Disputants had half an hour to speak, without
interruption, and which was duly observed on both sides; it being also agreed
by W. Davis, that G. Keith should be the Agressor, and bring his Charge and
Proofs against W. Davis out of his abovesaid Book of vile Heresies and
Blasphemies; and that W. D. by agreement, in the first place, was to be the
Defendant. And according to the said agreement G. K. began to give his Charge
and Proofs of vile Heresies and Blasphemies contained in the abovesaid Book of
W. D. for the first half hour. To none of which did W. Davis give any direct
and close Reply, either in his first half hour, or any of the following half
hours which he spent, whereof many judicious persons were witness. But instead
of defending the Notions and Doctrines of his Book, he generally turned
Aggressor against G K. accusing him of several passages contained in his Book,
called, Truth Advanced, etc. (writ by G. K. when under the profession of a
Quaker, as being erroneous, about the Person of Christ and the Resurrection of
the Body: To all which G. K. did so Reply, that he sufficiently cleared himself
from the false Aspertions and Perversions that W Davis had put upon some
passages in the said Book, as likewise his false aspertions and pervertions
upon the words of diverse worthy Divines of the Church of England, and other
Protestant Authors, whereby to defend his Blasphemies, alleging, That if he
was in an error for holding three Gods, etc. he was led into it by some of the
Sons of the Church of England.

And notwithstanding the two Moderators chosen by agreement, did press the said
W. Davis to answer the points charged and proved, as also did some others
present, of good judgment and quality, of the Church of England, yet they could
not prevail with him to speak or hold to the points charged; and he so wearied
all judicious and intelligent persons there present, with his Tautologies,
Triflings and most impertinent Repetitions and dreadful Blasphemies, that not
only the Justice of Peace, whom G. K. had desired to be present to keep the
Peace, but several other worthy persons said openly in the Meeting, They would
no more be present to be Witnesses to such irregular proceedings, as well as
horrid Blasphemies of the said William Davis, and his palpable
self-contradictions, one time professing to retract his Notion of three Gods,
and his uncharitableness toward all that differed from him about that and
other things; and another time telling us, he could justify them all by Reason
and Scripture, and accordingly did endeavor to justify them.

In the conclusion, the Justice of Peace, who was the Moderator for G. K. in
the afternoon, and chosen by him and diverse other persons of the Church of
England, whom G. K. had desired to be present as Witnesses, did openly refuse
to come to another Meeting the next day, reckoning it would be lost time,
unless W. Davis could be brought to a regular way of answering to things
charged by G. K. and proved; but this W. D. could by no means or persuasions be
brought unto. Whereupon G. K. did openly declare, that he was resolved to have
no other Meeting with Davis, especially seeing the Justice of Peace refused to
come another Meeting, and G. K. knew not where to find any other Justice or
Magistrate that would be willing to be present, and unless some that were in
Authority, were present, G. K. thought it not safe to come, lest any thing
should have happened that his Adversaries might have represented to be a Riot
or Breach of the Peace.

But notwithstanding the declared purpose of both the Justice of Peace, and
other Friends of G. K. as well as his own, not to be present at any other such
Meeting with W. D. yet the said W. D. the next morning, being the 11 th of
March, sends a new Challenge to him, to meet him that morning to discourse with
him about some other heads, viz. that of Infant Baptism and the Sabbath; but G
K. had not agreed with him to dispute about those Heads, until an end had been
fairly and regularly put to the first head, viz. the vile Heresies and
Blasphemies contained in W^ D 's Book, and which not being done, nor like to be
done, had there been another day spent in that dispute; and though they had not
agreed to two days, yet they agreed the Dispute should not last above two days;
so the failure was altogether on W D 's part; and indeed in any point of
argument, W D was so ignorant, that by W. Davis's illogical and sophistical way
of reasoning against each Person of the holy Trinity having an individed
Essence, and consequently that the Three were but One Person, as they were but
one Essence, W. D. having given only the Genus of the Definition of a Person,
without giving also the specifical Difference, by which W. D. sophistically as
well as ignorantly did infer, That the three Persons in the Trinity were three
Gods; as also, he argued, That if there were two Natures in Christ, there would
be two Persons. But said G K. by W. D 's false Logic, he would prove W. Davis
to be an Ass, as thus,

An Ass is an Annimal,

And W. Davis is an Annimal,

Therefore W. D. is an Ass.

But so ignorant was W. D. that he retorted the like Argument on G. K. to prove
G. K. to be a Horse. But how? only by W. D 's false Logic, which though it
tied W. D. to hold, yet it no way tied G. K. being only Argumentum ad hominem,
according to that Maxim in Logic, Cui convenit ad hominem, convenit definitum,
i. e. That to which the Definition agrees, to that the defined thing does
agree.

Upon G^ K 's refusal to dispute with W. D. the following day, for good Reasons
above given, the said W. Davis goes that morning to Edward Shippen, a Quaker,
being Mayor of the Town of Philadelphia, for the time present, and obtains of
him, by his order, a Constable, with his Constables staff, to stand by and
protect the said W. D. that none should oppose him in his Discourse, during all
the time he should speak; the said Mayors pretense being, that he sent the
Constable to keep the Peace, supposing G. K. would be there to dispute with W.
D. in the open street or ground before the Meeting House abovementioned, that
was kept shut; and according to the Quaker-Mayor, Edw. Shippen's order, the
Constable stood by with his Constables staff, to protect and countenance the
said W. D. while he vented some of his chief Blasphemies contained in his Book,
and faithfully collected in the foregoing Sheet, and that openly in the
Street, or on the ground adjacent, before the concourse of a rude and ignorant
Mob, some of them being W. D 's Crew, such as Alex. Badcock, Abel Noble, and
some others. And among other dreadful Blasphemies that the said W. D. did again
utter openly in the street, before that concourse of People, he did most
wickedly and wretchedly dispute against the Omnipresence of God, saying, If God
be in every thing, then every thing is God, and so there shall be as many Gods
as things; and Grass and Vegetables, as well as Beasts, shall be God: This is
Keith 's God (said he)

Now, let all Christian People, who shall hear or read this public
Advertisement, seriously consider and judge, what a heinous Offense it is to
Almighty God, and what great scandal to all sober and religious Persons, who do
believe that God Almighty is, that his sacred Name should be so blasphemed
openly, and the Quaker-Government so far from discountenancing it, that the
said W. D. was publicly countenanced and protected by the Mayors order, who
thus, for three hours together, openly in the street, or ground adjacent, did
belch out his horrid Blasphemies against Almighty God, and other vile Speeches
against some Principles and Practices of the Church of England, as the Baptism
of Infants, and the Religious Observation of the Lords Day.

And so punctually did the Constable, being a Quaker also, fulfill the Mayors
Orders, that when a Church of England Man, a Freeman of the Town of
Philadelphia, of good repute amongst his Neighbors, formerly a
Keithian-Quaker, did but soberly oppose, by a few words, to the Blasphemy of W.
D. which he heard him belch forth, the Constable, at the desire of W. D. and
some of his Crew, laid hold on him, and carried him away as his Prisoner.

Qu. Whether the Mayors pretended ignorance in the case be any tolerable
excuse, seeing G. K. did make no address to him, nor any for him, to send any
Constable to keep the Peace? But again, had G. K. been so indiscreet and rash,
(which he was not) to have sent to the Mayor for to have a Constable sent to
keep the Peace, would it not have been very blame worthy and scandalous in the
Mayor to have granted such a Request, to have some of the greatest Truths of
all true Religion, whether natural or revealed, so prostituted and exposed, in
the open street, in the face of the Son at noon day, as to be expressly denied,
exposed and villified by that wretched Blasphemer William Davis, as he
evidently did before many Witnesses, and to the truth of which four Persons of
good Credit, who heard him, have given their Oaths before a Justice of Peace.
But was this supposed Ignorance of the Mayors an invinsible Ignorance? nay, he
could easily have informed himself that G. K. was not to be there; and he could
very easily have enjoined the Constable, if he did not see G. K. to acquaint
him that he was not there.

But if it be said, that the Mayor did at last come himself and discharge W. D.
We say, that was after the said VV. D. had vomited out to the full all his
Blasphmies against God Almighty, together with many other falsehoods and
fictions for about the space of three hours, yea, and the Mayor passed by the
said VV. D. while he was like a Mountebank on a Stage in the open street,
belching out his fulsom and loathson Assertions, and did not in the least
discharge him, but went in to feast at a wedding hard by the place, and was,
with difficulty, persuaded by a Gentleman of the Church of England, and some
others present at the said Feast, to go and discharge the said W. D. from the
place.

The public Countenance given by the Authority of the Mayor of Philadelphia,
to such open and public Wickedness, deserves a public Censure, and calls for
great Humiliation before God, lest he be provoked by this great sin, as by
other great sins both in Town and Country of this Province of Pennsilvania,
under Quaker-Government, to pour down his heavy Judgments upon the Inhabitants
thereof, which God Almighty, in his great mercy, avert and prevent, for Christ's
sake, Amen.

George Keith, Evan Evans.


FINIS.

