Agreeable Admonitions for Old and Young. OR, AGED PIETY Honored, AND, EARLY
PIETY Quickened. In a Brief DISCOURSE, Delivered, April 25. 1703.

Ab Eo Tempore Censemur, Ex quo in Christo Renascimur. Hieronym. Epitaph. in
Nepotian. Boston, Printed by T. Green, Sold by Benjamin Eliot, 1703.

Agreeable Admonitions FOR OLD and YOUNG.
Ephesians. I. 12. We, -- Who FIRST hoped in Christ.
IT is a memorable passage in Eusebtus, One of the Ancients; The Greatest
Philosophers among the Gentiles, tho they talked much about the Immortality of
the Soul, and the Felicity of the Future State, yet by their Lives they made it
appear, that they did not Believe their own Talk, they really looked on it as a
Trifling Report; But, Says he, among us Christians, the very Boys and Girls,
being assisted by the Power of our Blessed Savior, make it apparent, not only
by their Words, but also by their Lives, that they have a powerful Belief of
their having Immortal Souls, and of their coming to Eternal Blessedness in the
World to come. Thus we find, even the children in the Primitive Churches,
commended by one of the Renowned Fathers. May the Lord so Bless thy Children in
the midst of thee, O NEW ENGLAND, that boy may deserve such a Commendation!

It is a most agreeable, and a most profitable Thing, for the Ministers of the
Gospel, whose Love to the Lord Jesus Christ obliges them to Feed His Lambs, to
take every Occasion, for the pressing of Early Piety. Methinks I see a fair
Occasion for it, in the Text, which from The Gospel of the Ephesians, now falls
into our Hands. Our Apostle mentioning the Great Things done by the Grace of
God, for His Chosen People, he proceeds, more particularly, to mention the
Subjects, upon whom the Triumphs of Grace are multiplied. These are first, the
Elect of God among the Jews; and then, the Elect among the Gentiles. The Former
are designed in the words now before us; And, Behold a singular Privilege of
the Jewish Converts. It is proposed as a singular Privilege and Advantage to
be, The First, who Hoped in Christ Or to Go before others in Christianity. For
this then be the Doctrine, that we shall insist upon.

It is a Glorious Privilege and advantage to Go before others in Early
Christianity.

Singular is the Comfort of those Believers, who get the start of others, in
Early Believing on the Lord Jesus Christ.

Let us receive this Truth with the Love of it, in the Ensuing Propositions.

I. They who are Older than others in Christianity, are in some regards to be
preferred before other Christians. They that First have Believed on the Lord
Jesus Christ, should in some regards be first Esteemed among the People of the
Lord Jesus Christ. There is a Seniority in Christianity, as well as in other
Points, which is to be accounted Sacred among all Christians. It is required,
Romans 13. 7. Render to all their Dues, Honor to whom Honor. Now there is a
special Honor due to Elder Christians, on the score of their being so. The
Fifth Commandment requires us, to treat All men, with Respects agreeable to the
Place and Worth, which God has given them. It is Enjoined, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Honor
all men. And we must especially Honor Old Men; And we must Honor Old Saints
yet more especially. All Superiority is to be Dutifully acknowledged.
Superiority in Age, calls for very particular Acknowledgments. It is an Edict
of Heaven, Lev. 19. 32. Thou Shall rise up before the Hoary Head, and Honor
the Face of the Old Man, and Fear thy God. Now the Age of men's Christianity,
may justly call for a peculiar Consideration, in the esteem of all other
Christians. An Hoary Head found in the may of Righteousness; and most of all,
if it had entered that way, long before its growing Hoary; it is a most Honorable
sight. We may see some, that Knew God, and Served Christ, and Forsook Sin, and
Walked Religiously, long before us; Yea, perhaps they were Newborn before we
were Born at all. How much, with what Reverence, with what Affection, ought we
to prefer those Old Christians above our selves? The Apostle Paul, could not
speak of such as were Converted before him, without some Confession, that they
were to be Preferred before him; Says he, Romans 16. 8. They are of Note, --
they were in Christ before me. Aged Christians must be Honored with special
Civilities. It becomes Younger Christians to look on Aged Christians, as their
Fathers; and speak of them, and speak to them, with a Filial Veneration. When
we see Elder Christians, we may suppose, These are they that have done more for
God, and Christ; that have more mortified the Sin that easily besets us all;
that have more Experience in the Right ways of the Lord; that are more Able to
encounter Temptations; that are better Soldiers in the Wars of the Lord: that
are more acquainted with Heaven, and more prepared for Heaven; than we that
came long after them into the Vineyard of the LORD. No small Regards are due on
such Accounts.

II. They in whom the Christianity of any Society, has its Beginning, have a
Pre-eminence in some sort, above the rest of the Christians in the Society. The
First Believers, of any (...), are Believers upon whom God has put a Dignity
above the rest. When Christianity comes into any Family, or Town, or Land,
there are some who First embrace it, before others. Now the First Christians of
any Society, are most eminently above others, favored of the Lord. We read, 1
Cor. 16. 15. I beseech you, Brethren (ye know she House of Stephanas [which
seems to have been the Jailer, Act 16. 27.] that it is the First Fruits of
(...),) that ye submit your selves unto such. The First Fruits are in some
sort, the Best-fruits. In the First-fruit, there is a special Excellency; And
that which makes them especially Excellent, is the Encouragement which they
give of more Fruits to follow. The First Converts of any Family, or People, or
Nation, have a special Remark of the Divine Favor upon them. The Firstborn
have a claim to an Excellency above the rest. Hence that passage, in the
Blessing of Reuben Genesis 49. 3. My First born, the Excellency of Dignity. To be
the Firstborn of God in any Society, is to have yet a more Extraordinary
Excellency of Dignity. God, in the Effectual Calling of them that are First
called unto Him, in any Society, proclames His Distinguishing (...) unto these
in His Eternal (...). And the Lord often makes a Distinguishing Use of the
first Called, for the Awakening, the Assistence, the Direction of these that
are afterward to be made partakers of Effectual Calling? In such First our
Lord Jesus Christ, (as the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 1. 16.) shows forth, what may
be for an example to them that should hereafter Believe on Him, to Ever lasting
Life. In the Primitive Churches, they that were First Called, were by the
Apostles often Constituted the Pastors, of the Flocks that followed them; And
our Lord Jesus Christ more often makes them the Pattern of them that are to
follow. It may be partly for this cause, that the History of the Bible singles
out these and those Elders obtaining a Good Report for our Entertainment and
Instruction: It singles out these and those, when there is nothing said of many
Thousands that may have been equal to them, for the Grace of God. Why so?
Because usually these were the First that shone with any Eminency in that
Grace; and being the First, God will have them to shine brighter in His
History, than any of the rest. Yea, more than so; By those that are First
Converted in any Family, or People or Nation, God, as it were, takes Hold of
the Kindred, and gives Assurance, for the Conversion of more in His Time. The
Jews who First Received the Lord Jesus Christ, Encourage us to expect a (...)
Harvest of Jews, when the whole Jewish People and Nation shall Turn unto the
Lord. It is thus argued, Romans 11. 16. If the First-fruit be Holy, the Lump is
also Holy. And perhaps, there is no People or Nation, that has had any Quantity
of Christians in it, but notwithstanding any horrible Apostasy and Calamity,
and Confusion intervening, yet God will have a Reserve of more Christians, to
be Gathered unto Him, from that People and Nation, in the Latter Days, when
People shall gather together, and Kingdoms to serve the Lord.

III. They that Betimes come to Christianity, by an Early Repentance, in the
First Years of their Lives, have glorious Advantages, above those who Delay
Repentance.

There is a being First in Believing on the Lord Jesus Christ, by a more Early
Christianity, than what is common in the Christian world. It is, alas, too
common, for persons to Delay the Action of giving themselves up unto the Lord
Jesus Christ by Faith, until some considerable Number of Years have rolled over
them. They let their Youth much of it, roll away, before they become serious
Christians. But there are some, who are more Early in their Christianity; They
make more Haste in Believing on the Lord Jesus Christ. They are First even
before others, in making sure of their Salvation. They do not spend their
Youth, no, nor it may be, all their Childhood, in Vanity. They do betimes
Consecrate themselves unto the service of the Lord. Now, of these, it is to be
asserted, That Early Repentance, gives a very glorious Advantage to them that
have it.

But, What Advantage have they that are First, or more Early in Believing on
the Lord Jesus Christ, above those that make it more Late, or do more lag and
flag in that important matter? Why, Much every way.

First, Early Piety and Repentance, is more Acceptable than Delayed Repentance.
The more Early we are in our Obedience to God, the more Conformable and
Agreeable we are to the Commandment of God; For the Commandment of God enjoins
Early Obedience, yea, it enjoins Present Obedience. The motto upon the Command
is, To Day. We read 2 John 4. I rejoiced greatly, that I found of thy Children
walking in the Truth, as we have received a Commandment from the Father. Truly,
is the Commandment of the Father, even unto you that are Children, that you
should Walk according to the Directions of His Holy Truth. And if it be
Acceptable unto Good men, who will thereat Rejoice greatly, to see you doing
so, how much more Acceptable will it be, to the GOD of all Goodness? The
Commandment of God is, Let the Wicked for sake his way, and let him turn unto
the Lord. The Commandment of God is, Work out your own Salvation. And, This His
Commandment, That we Believe on the Name of His Son Jesus Christ. Young People
as well as Old, are concerned in the Commandment. And it is very particularly
directed unto Young People, when it is said, Eccl. 12 1. Remember now thy
Creator in the Days of thy Youth. Now, the more Conformable we are in our
Obedience, to the Commandment of God, the more Acceptable is our Obedience. If
it could be said, Act. 17. 30. God now commands all men every where to Repent,
then it is plain, He now commands Young men to Repent, yea, and Now to Repent. It
is therefore highly pleasing to the most High God, that Young Men should not
put off Repentance. The Debt of Obedience, that we owe unto God, the sooner we
pay it, the more pleasing will be the payment. God has no where said. Let
Young people To (...) turn unto me. No, but He says, Turn ye NOW every one
from his evil way. It is Acceptable unto Him, then to see them do so! The God
of Heaven has indeed most expressly declared His most gracious and grateful
Acceptance of Early Piety. What a Charming word is That; Prove. ^. 17. I love
them that love me, They that seek me Early shall find me. Our Lord Jesus Christ
had one Disciple, whom He peculiarly owned, as His Beloved Disciple; And this
was, it seems, the Youngest of all His Disciples. Oh! The Transcendent Love,
which the Lord Jesus Christ has for the more Early Seekers of Him! And, Behold,
what manner of Love, the Father bestows on them, who betimes acknowledge Him as
their Father! All Returning Sinners are welcome to the Lord; but He makes none
so welcome, as those that are most Early in the Return. There is no melody more
delightful in the Ears of Heaven, than the Prayers of Young People, Beseeching
and Besieging of Heaven. The sooner we list our selves under the Banner of the
Lord Jesus Christ, the Kinder will be the Notice He will take of us, the Richer
the Reward He will give to us. We say, (...), dat qui cito dat, A Grant made
with Dispatch, is a Double Grant. This we may say, Early Piety is Double Piety.
They are the Young Samuels, and the Young Timothies, that are the Favorites of
the Lord. How can it be so Acceptable unto God, for the Children of men, to
offer their Flower unto the Devil, and their Bran unto their Maker and their
Savior? No; it is more, far more Acceptable, to shake off the Yoke of the Devil,
and cease to be Children of Belial, even while we are yet Children, and be as
Early as we can, in putting our selves under the Yoke of our Heavenly Lord. The
Earlier we begin to be for God, the more will He do for us; Yea, the more in
that very thing He does for us. There is no such Token under Heaven, of one
very dear to Heaven, as Early Piety; Or, for one betimes to have much of Heaven
in him.

Secondly; Early Piety and Repentance, is more Honorable than Delayed
Repentance. Is not a Child of God, more Honorable than a Child of Satan? A
Servant of the Lord Jesus Christ, more Honorable than a Vassal of the Devil?
An Heir of an Heavenly Crown, more Honorable, than an Heir of Death, and a
Firebrand of Hell? We may say, Psa, 149. 9. This Honor have all the Saints.
Well, but the sooner we come to this Honor, the more Honorable are we. By
Early Piety we do betimes come to the best Honor in the world. Is it not an
Honor to be the Excellent in the Earth, and, more Excellent than ones
Neighbor? It Is affirmed, Psalm. 16. 3. The Saints are the Excellent in the
Earth; and Prove. 12. 26. The Just is more Excellent than his Neighbor. Then
Early Piety is a very Honorable Thing; for it will render us, more excellent,
even than the excellent. We Excel even the Excellent themselves, when we become
Saints, and become Just, sooner than the rest of the Saints and of the Just.
Certainly, it is more Honorable to be Conversing with God, in the Noble
exercises of Piety, than to be Debasing and Debauching our selves, in the
Beastly ways of Wickedness. If an Angel be more Honorable than a Beast, it
must be so! Sinful Man, Thou art a Beast, until Repentance do recover thee. It
is Honorable to be Reasonable. Folly is a Dishonor. It Is a Shame, to play the
Fool. Religion is the most Reasonable thing that ever was. The sooner we become
Religious, the sooner we come to our Wits, and come to act as Reasonable men.
We are truly advised, Psalm. 111. 10. The Fear of the Lord is the Beginning of
Wisdom, a Good Understanding have all they who do those things that are in it.
Is it not more Honorable to do the part of a Wise man, and act with the
Highest Reason, that it can be, to do nothing but Play the Fool? Sinner, so
long as thou deferrest thy Repentance; thou art so long a Fool; Yea, Madness is
thine Heart. Young People sometimes make it an Objection against Early Piety;
They shall be Despised, and perhaps Derided for it. But, Behold, Ye Despisers,
and Wonder at your own unspeakable Infatuation; Reason is Despised by Folly;
Wisdom is Derided by Madness, when you Mock at Early Piety. Be advised of This,
and then, Mock on, if you Resolve to Perish.

Thirdly; Early Piety and Repentance, is more comfortable than Delayed
Repentance. What are the ways of Piety, but ways of Pleasancy: We read, Prove.
3. 17. Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. Well
then, the sooner thou come into those ways, the more of Pleasure and of
Comfort, will thy Life be sweetened withal. The more Early thou art in thy
Piety, (...) sooner shall thou See thy Name written in Heaven, to which no
Delight on Earth is comparable; the sooner shall thou Hear the very Great and
Precious Promise of God Ravishing of thee with their continual Melody; the
sooner shall thou Taste that the Lord is Gracious in the Entertainments of a
Fellow-ship with Him; and the sooner shall thou Feel the Divine Consolations of
the Holy Spirit, which are not Small, reviving of thee. By Dela^ing of
Repentance, men put themselves under grievous and woeful Disadvantages. It Is
therefore a more Advantageous and Comfortable thing to Repent Betimes; Yea, My
Child, As soon as ever thou can.

There are especially Two very astonishing Mischiefs of a Delayed Repentance;
and it is a most comfortable Thing, to be by Early Repentance rescued from
those Mischiefs.

First; A Delayed Repentance will be a Difficult Repentance. We read, Jer. 13.
23. Can the Moor change his Skin, or the Leopard his Spotts? Then may ye also
do Good, that are accustomed to do Evil. A Delay to Repeat of Evil-doing,
produces Customs to do Evil. How hard is it, forto be brought off an Evil
Custom? When our Corrupt Nature, is become a Second Nature, how uneasy is the
Conquest over it. The most Early Piety, is the most Easy Piety. The less
Inveterate the Maladies of our Souls are, the more easily performed is the Cure
of them. Early Piety prevents the Inveteracy of our Maladies. It Is true, All
things are alike Easy to that Omnipotent Arm which Heals all our Diseases; but
the Patient must undergo the more Trouble, to be Healed, the longer he has been
under his Diseases. The Old Man within us, will be subdued with the less of
Trouble and Anguish unto us, if we set upon subduing of it, before we grow Old
our selves. The Devil will be Dispossessed, with the less of Tearing Agony,
where he has less Prescription to (...) for his Possession. The Weeds of Hell
in our Hearts, the sooner they are Plucked up, the less Rooted they are, and so
the more easily plucked up. Soul, Thou art but Hardening, and Confirming thy
self in Sin while thou do not Repent of thy Sin. Happy the Soul that gets rid
of an hard Heart, wile it is most Easy to get rid of it. The Spirit of the Lord
Jesus Christ, for the most part works more Easily upon the Hearts; that are by
an Early Repentance brought home unto Him; so Easily, that indeed often it is
not Sensibly. He as it were steals His Grace into their Hearts; They don't know
the Time, of their being first United to the Lord Jesus Christ; It is done by
so Soft, so Sweet so Gradual Methods! They find, they are in the Lord Jesus
Christ, but they don't know, how they First came to be so!

Secondly; A Delayed Repentance will be a Dubious Repentance. It is an awful
Hint; Prove. 27. 1. Boast not thy self of To morrow, for thou know not what a
Day may bring forth. Early Piety puts it of Doubt, that our Souls are safe, and
we may thereupon Rejoice in the Hope of the Glory of God. But while we put off
the care of our Immortal Souls, we run the dread fullest, and the desperatest
Hazards, that can be run (...) by Mortal men; even the Hazards of losing our
Souls forever. We promise our selves, that Hereafter we shall make our Peace
with God; but God has given us no promise of any Hereafter. Let any man show
me any one word in all the Bible, where God has engaged unto any man, A space
to Repent; and I will venture to say, Procrastinate. But in the mean Time, what
an horrible Venture do thou run, O Foolhardy Creature? Early Repentance, is
the only way, to live our of Extreme and Hourly Danger, to be cast into Eternal
Perdition. There are many who Die in Youth: It was of Old said, The Young Men
are Dead. And as an Early Death, so a Sudden Death is the portion of not a few:
It may be said of them, b^ a Moment they go down to the Grave. Nothing but
Early Piety can give us any Security, of our ever getting into Good Terms with
Heaven. If we do it not Betimes, it is very uncertain whether we shall ever do
it at all. It Is uncertain, O Young People, whether you shall outlive the Days
of Youth. Or, if you do, it is uncertain, whether you shall not have out lived
the Days of Grace, and whether God, who (...) will and to do, of His own Good
pleasure, will Please then to Work in you that Grace, which you have (...)
Refused. Oh! The Blindness of those Young People, who do not see the Comforts
of Early Piety!

But let us proceed unto the

APPLICATION.
I. May Aged Christians Challenge a special Honor from other Christians? Let
all Aged Christians be careful to deserve the Honor that they Challenge. May
you that are the First Christian be First-rate Christians. Fathers, You must go
before Others in Exemplary Christianity, if you would be set Above other
Christians. An Old Christian is a very Venerable Thing. The Heraldry of
Christianity, would look upon that, as a special mark of Honor in a Scutcheon;
Act. 21. 16. An Old Disciple. But by gross failings, he may too much make
himself a Contemptible Thing. You that have been longer in the school of the
Lord JESUS CHRIST than others have been, Oh! YOU should be more Holy, more
Devout, more Watchful, more Fruitful, and more Heavenly, than others are.
'Twill be your Disgrace, and what can be said for your Excuse? If you that came
the First into the School of Christianity, should yet continue in the Lowest
Form of the School. A Vain a Trifling, a Foolish Carriage in an Old Christian,
it is, How disagreeable? Even when you come to be Twice Children as we say, yet
it is pity that you should be of a Childish Behavior.

I am to Entreat Old Men at Fathers. Wherefore, My Fathers, and all you that
were in the Lord Jesus Christ before me; I Entreat you, To Examine your selves,
what Progress you have made in Christianity: Examine, whether you have now any
more clear Knowledge of Him that is from the Beginning, than you had at the
Beginning: Examine, whether you are any Readier for Death, than you were when
your Death was further off? I Entreat you, to procure unto your selves; that
Praise, Thy Last works are more than the First; and grow more full of Christ,
and Heaven, than you were at the First. You have one Foot in the Grave,: I
beseech you, Sirs, where should the other be? And I Entreat you, to take the
Apostolical Admonition, Tit. 2. 2. That the Aged Men be Sober, Grave,
Temperate, Sound in Faith, in Charity, in Patience. I Entreat you, Do not
Exemplify an Observation of (...) That while the Spirit of God, working in
Young Ones, many times does give out early Discoveries of His Grace, there are
Elder persons, who only carry their Gray Hairs as a badge of their Ingratitude
unto God.

II. Are the First Christians in a Society to be reckoned in the First Rank of
Christians? Let this animate some in very Ungodly Families to become Godly
Christians. It may be, some of you, My Hearers, belong to Families that have
not one Regenerate Christian in them. Will You then be the First? Oh, what a
Consolation would you find it in the issue, if you might be they, that shall
First bring the Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, into the Families whereto you
belong? It is probable, that when that Heavenly Leaven is once gotten in, it
will spread further, and sieze upon more; but you will be the MorningStars
among those Children of Light. We read of Abraham; Romans 4. 16. He is the Father
of us all. Why because he was in some respects one of the First, that led the
way in leaving all at the Call of God, in the Faith of His. Messiah. Thus, all
that God will Effectually Call unto Himself out of thy Family, will (...) thee,
their Father, if thou art the First of the Family, that answers His Heavenly
Call.

III. Is it an Advantage for us, to Repent in our most Early Years? Those of us
have sad cause to Mourn, that have Delayed Repentance until our Later Years. My
Neighbors; If the Love of God, had inflamed your Hearts never so soon, yet you
would have cause to Confess and Complain with old Austin, Lord, it was too
Late, when l first began to love thee! How much more may you now complain of
your selves, That you made it so very Late, before your doing any thing to
purpose, about the Great Errand which you came into the world upon! It was
mentioned by one that was Newborn, as a matter of Humiliation, 1 Cor. 15. 8. I
was one Born out of due Time. Here the Abortives are they that come Tob late!
Oh, Let your Humiliation appear, in your shaking off all further Delays, and
your doing Immediately the Good Things that God requires of you. Immediately
abandon all the Paths of the Destroyer; Immediately submit unto the
Regenerating Influences of the Holy Spirit, that are offered you; Immediately
become seriously Religious. Though it be Late, Blessed be God, it is not yet
altogether Too Late. It may be, the Devil, who once told you, It Is too soon,
does now tell you, It Is too late. Though you did once Presume, do not now
Despair. Indeed, it will shortly, very shortly be Too Late. This I say, The
Time is but short, ere you will hear the Oath of Heaven, That Time will be no
more. But Yet it is not so; As Yet, even, After (...) long a Time, God says,
To Day if you will hear His Voice. 'Twas a Remarkable Occurrence, whereof we
read, Joh. 5. 6. Jesus knew that he had now been a long Time Ill, and says
unto him, Will thou be made whole? Even so, Though you have been a long Time
very miserably out of Order, yet the Lord Jesus Christ is willing to be your
Healer, and your Savior. Oh! But since you have let your Disorders go on such
a long Time without seeking to Him, let it be Enough, [Alas, it is Too much!]
And say now, Lord, I am at last willing to be made whole, and I am astonished,
that after such a long Time, thou art willing to make me so!

IV. Is Early Repentance the most Acceptable, Honorable, Comfortable
Repentance? Be persuaded, Be overcome unto it, O you that are yet capable of
that (...). Dear part of our Flock Will you be among the First, that Return
unto their Allegiance and Obedience unto the Eternal King of Heaven? That which
is with all possible Fervency to be pressed upon you, is; That you may be the
David's, able to say, Lord, Thou art me Trust from my Youth! That you may be the
Obadiahs, able to say, I fear the Lord from my Youth! That you may be the
Josiah; who while yet Young, do seek the Lord; and the Timothies, even from
Childhood, by the Holy Scripture made wise unto Salvation. Briefly, an Early
Application to Piety and Repentance is demanded of you; And it is demanded,
that you Betimes make the wise Choice, that Solomon wisely made in his Youth:
Oh, Choose the Wisdom of Religion, and leave the Folly of Wickedness. Young
People, may there be a Lovely Emulation among you, who shall be First, in
appearing to own the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and His Holy Truths and Ways! It was
an Expostulation Repeated upon the Elders of Judah, 2 Samuel 19. 11, 12. Why are
ye the last, for (...) bring back the King? Let me thus Expostulate with you, O
Young People; Will you be the Last, that will submit unto the Eternal King? Oh
Be not so! Be not so! Lest you Perish among the First, whom the Wrath of that
Eternal King shall fall upon. Methinks, you should be displeased at your
selves, if you be not the First, in the Congregation, that shall submit unto
the Heavenly Scepter of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Surely, It cannot be too Soon for an^ of you, as Young as you are, to become
Serious Christians, and with a Renewal of your Baptismal Covenant, give your
selves up unto the Lord, saying, O my God, Thou shall be my Father, my Savior,
my Leader! What? Can it be too soon for you to be Deliverd from the Anger of
God, and the Danger of Hell, and the Oppressions, of the Devil? Can it be Too
soon for you to be Absolved from the Guilt of all your Sins, and be Clothed
with the spotless Righteousness of Jesus Christ, and be Filled with the
gracious Influences of the Holy Spirit? Or, Can it be Too soon for you, to be
made Hens of Life, and meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light?
Inconsiderate Youth! How can thou dare, how can thou bear, to say so? Be
astonished at this Advice! The King of Heaven is wooing of thy Young Soul, to
become United, and Married, unto Himself: He propounds, Will thou be mine, and
shall I make thee Happy? Oh, It cannot be Too soon for thee to Consent unto the
proposals of that Glorious Lord; or, to Reply, Lord, Make me Thine, and I am
Happy!

Or, Can it be Too soon for thee to Prize the Lord Jesus Christ? He is always
Precious. Can it be Too soon for thee to Love God? God is always Lovely. Can it
be too soon for thee to Hate Sin? Sin is always Hateful. Can it be Too soon for
thee to look after the welfare of thy own Soul? Thy Soul is always in Peril,
always upon the Brink of an horrible Perdition.

If none of all these Thoughts are Lively Enough, or if none of them will
Enliven thy Early Religion, Think, Think on thy own Mortality. It is not too
Soon for you to Die: Oh, why should it be too Soon for you to begin a New Life,
and Preparation for Death. If you Die before this be done, it had been Good for
you, that you had never been Born. If this be seasonably done, the sooner you
Die, the sooner you enter into Joy. How many Young People have already Died
before you? Some of them have been able from their Deathbeds to say, or to
write unto their Friends, That they had been so seasonably brought unto
Repentance and Conversion; they now found themselves prepared for Death, and
were able to Die willingly, and cheerfully. Oh! Happy Youths! Oh! Happiness to
be admired and envied! But O Young People, how woeful, how dreadful must your
Condition be, if a Dying Hour should quickly surprise any of you, in your
Unregeneracy? And, O ye Unregenerates, Who of you can be sure, that you shall
not before the next week be out, fall under such a dismal surprise? Then, to
have your Eyes with a Dim Cloud, and your Hands with a Damp Sweat, upon them,
your Breath failing, your Throat rattling, your Friends in a bitter Agony
weeping about you; and now to feel your Immortal Souls irresistibly dragged
away, before God the Judge of all, to receive an Eternal Judgment from Him.
What, Oh! What! Will you then think of all that Lewdness and Madness, that you
have used in Wicked Company, and all the courses of Wickedness, wherein you
have departed from God, and forgotten the Admonitions and (...) that have been
laid upon you to serve Him. What will you think of your walking in your Ungodly
ways, O Vain Youths, when God shall for these things bring you into Judgment?
Oh! These things will be found Bitterness at the latter End! They that have so
Profanely and Foolishly scoffed at Religion, will then wish, Oh that I bad more
practiced the Religion which I derided! And they that have Railed at the
Faithful Ministers of God will find that they want the Prayers and the Counsels
of those Ministers.

Consider this, O all you Young People that Forget God, last ye be torn to
pieces by the Deadly strokes of His Indignation, and there be none to deliver
you!

But, that I may not be as one who beats the A^^, I must pitch upon two or
three points of Early Christianity, unto which my dear Young People, must
suffer an Exhortation. And, behold, I find them, even very Comprehensive ones,
provided in the very Verse that has affored our Text unto us.

That me should be to the Praise of His Glory who first Hoped in Christ.

Accordingly;

First; An Early Hope in the Lord Jesus Christ; Oh, My Young People, Endeavor
it, Endeavor it. There is a Great Salvation set before you; a noble, a worthy
Object for your Hope. And let the Lord Jesus Christ, that Savior who is a
Great One, be the bottom of your Hope to come at it. Might such an Hope as this
be raised in the Souls of my Young People, even the Hope of coming to Life by
the Lord Jesus Christ, what an Enlivening, what a Purifying, what a Comfortable
effect would it have upon them! Oh! That you would by Faith repair to the Lord
Jesus Christ, with Satisfaction, that He is both Able and Willing to bring you,
to all the Blessedness contained in the Promises of God; and then by Hope,
Entertain an Heart-satisfying Expectation of that Blessedness. Rejoice, O my
Young People, Rejoice in the Hope of the Glory of God; but place all your Hope
on the Lord Jesus Christ; among whose Charming Titles this is one; [1. Tim, 1.
1.] JESUS CHRIST, our Hope. While you are without Christ, I tell you as Paul
told his Ephesians, you have no Hope. All your Hope of Good, must be built on
the Lord Jesus Christ; You are Foolish Builders on the Sand, if it be not so.
But coming to the Lord Jesus Christ, Hope then, Oh! Hope in Him, for all manner
of Good. We read, Col 1. 27. of, Christian us the Hope of Glory. There is no
mercy of God, but the Lord Jesus Christ must be in you, the Hope of that mercy;
and without the Lord Jesus Christ, you can have no Hope, that He who made you
will have mercy on you.

May you be revived first, with an Hope, that you May come unto the Lord Jesus
Christ. By no means Despair of it! This I am sure of; The Gracious Lord Jesus
Christ Inviteth you; to Come to Him, and Hope in Him. The Invitation is
Indefinite, unto; whosoever will. And we have it in our Commission to assure
the Young People, who are willing to come under the Yoke of the Lord Jesus
Christ in their Youth, They may Hope for the Salvation of God. O Sinner, Do
thou Question, whether the Lord Jesus Christ will receive thee, if thou come
unto Him? Oh! There is no Question of it. It is a most (...) word of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the worst Sinner among us all may lay hold on that word; Joh.
6. 17. (...) that comith unto me, I will in (...). Let the Light of so much
Hope as this, break in through some Crevis, into thy Returning Soul; If I do
Return, and I may hope that it may be, Sovereign Grace will help me to Return,
unto God in my Lord Jesus Christ, He that came to seek and save, that which is
lost, will take pity on me.

But then, if you do come unto the Lord Jesus Christ, let your Hope then
proceed unto a Confidence, That He will do for you most wonderful Things, and
Save you unto the uttermost. Oh! Hope in the Lord Redeemer, for with Him, there
is Mercy and Plenteous Redemption! Shall I a little state your Hope for you?

Let the Godhead of the Lord Jesus Christ, be the main Basis of your Hope. And
now, Let Heaven hear our Young People, Saying, and hoping.

Since my Lord Jesus Christ is God, the Merit of His Obedience is Infinite. I
may Hope, that the Obedience of my Lord Jesus Christ, will be a sufficient
Righteousness for me therein to appear before God, because it is the
Righteousness of God: And since His Blood, is the Blood of the Son of God, I
Hope to be Cleansed from all Sin by that Blood. Since my Lord Jesus Christ is
God, His Power is Infinite, Uncontrollable, Irresistible. Oh! I know He can do
every thing. I Hope that He will Enlighten me, because He is the Only Wise God.
I Hope, that He will Sarctify me, because He is the Holy, Holy, Holy Lord of
Hosts. I hope that He will bestow Everlasting Life upon me, and prevent all
that would obstruct it, because He is the Everlasting Jab, the God that Lives
for ever and ever.

But then, Let not the Manhood of the Lord Jesus Christ, assumed into a
Personal Union with His Godhead, be Excluded from a share in the Basis of your
hope. It Is the Anchor of your Souls. May your Hope thus argue upon it.

I hope that He who humbles Himself to behold the things in Heaven, will have
regard unto me, a poor Worm upon Earth; because the Son of God is become the
Son of Man. I hope that I shall one day be Lodged in Heaven with God; because
there is a Man who lies in the Bosom of God forever. I hope I shall come to
Endless Glory in the End; because there is a Man, who sets on the Throne of
Glory, and will have His Kindred, for to be at last, with Him, where He is, to
Behold His Glory.

Pass on then, O Young People, to fix your hope, on the Offices, which the Lord
Jesus Christ Executes on the behalf of His Chosen People. 'T will be Melody in
the Ears of Heaven, to hear you saying, and singing, and hoping;

I hope, that my Sins are forever Expiated; because I have such a (...), as my
Lord Jesus Christ. Because I have such a Prophet, as my Lord Jesus Christ, I
hope, that I shall not be turned aside by a Deceived heart; but be kept from
every false way, and be led in the way Everlasting. Because I have such a King
as my Lord Jesus Christ, I hope, that being delivered from the hands of my
Enemies, I shall serve the Lord in holiness and righteousness; and that the
Good Work begun in me, shall be finished unto the Day of the Lord.

And, finally, Let the Conditions through which the Lord Jesus Christ has passed
for us, furnish my Young People, with ravishing matter for their hope.

Shall we hear your Hope uttering these Triumphant Songs!

My Lord Jesus Christ has been my Surety, to God; I hope He has paid all my
Debts to the Justice of God. My Lord Jesus Christ has undergone Pain for me; I
hope for Pleasures at the Right and of God for ever more. My Lord Jesus Christ
has undergone Shame for me; I hope for a Crown that fades not away. My Lord
Jesus Christ was Condemned at the Bar of Mortal Man; I hope to be Acquitted at
the Bar of the Immortal God. My Lord Jesus Christ, was Buffeted by Devils; I
hope to be Rescued from the devouring Jaws of Devils. My Lord Jesus Christ
Encountered with Death it self; I hope, that my Death will be my Gain. My Lord
Jesus Christ Rose from His Grave; I hope for a joyful Resurrection from the
Grave. My Lord Jesus Christ, went up to Heaven; I hope, I shall get up to
Heaven after my Lord. My Lord Jesus Christ Ever lives to make Intercession for
me; I hope, to be Saved by Him, and brought unto Everlasting Life.

O Young People; God will take pleasure in you, if you thus Fear Him, and Hope
in His Mercy.

Secondly; An Early Dedication to the Praise of the Infinite Glory of God; Oh,
My Young People, Resolve upon it. I have read, Rev. 14. 6. of, An Angel having
the Everlasting Gospel to Preach, and saying with a loud Voice, Fear God, and
give Glory to Him. It Is that Angelical Demand, with which I now come unto you, O
Darling part of my Flock; Let the Glorious God, and the Glory of God, from this
Time, have Eternal Praises from you.

Let there be a little set before you, some Idoea, of the Noblest, and the
Sweetest Point, that ever you were treated upon; A Point, which were indeed a
Boundless Ocean, if it were, as it might be prosecuted!

The Great GOD, is a most Glorious God. He is, The God of Glory; the King of
Glory. God the Father, is the Father of Glory. God the Son, is the Lord of
Glory. God the Spirit, is the Spirit of Glory. His Excellencies are infinite.
It is His Glory, to be JEHOVAH, of Himself, and for Himself alone; Eternally
and Necessarily Self-existent, Independent, All-sufficient, Unchangeable; the
First Cause and the Last End of all things. He is Glorious in Holiness, in
Faithfulness, in Power, in Wisdom, in Goodness. There can be no Addition to
His Glory; Who can Add unto that which is Infinite? God was in Himself as
Glorious, before He made the world, as after His making of it. And if the world
were filled with Blasphemies against God, He would not yet be less Glorious
than He is.

But the Glorious God is infinitely satisfied, in the Manifestations, the
Operations, and the Exhibitions of His Glory. The First Being is admirably,
Energetick. God from all Eternity, Beholding of Himself, there was Begotten an
Image of Himself. This is the Son of God, the Brightness of His Glory, the
Express Image of His Person. Infinite is the Satisfaction of God, from all
Eternity, in beholding of His Glory, as it is Expressed in His Only Begotten
Son; whose Triumph it is, I was set up from Everlasting, I was brought forth
before the Mountains were settled; Then was I daily His Delight! And why did
God, so satisfied from all ETERNITY, proceed unto the Works of Creation, and
Providence, even unto all the Works of Time? This is, that He may take the
satisfaction of Beholding His own Glory, as it is Expressed in all His Works.
If the Works of God had no other Spectator, but the God who has wrought them
all; This, This were enough; This were infinitely more, than for all the Works
to take Notice of themselves, or of one another.

Nevertheless, It Is a particular Satisfaction, unto the Glorious God, that
Rational Beings do particularly observe the Manifestations of His Glory. There
are Intellectual Beings, formed by the Great God, that forms All Things.
There is a World of Spirits; Angels and Men, Things that have Reasonable
Spirits in them, are made by that God, who is the Father of Spirits. That
Spiritual World is a Million of Times more Considerable, than the Corporeal
World. These Intellectual Beings are capable of Observing and Regarding and
Admiring the Glory of God. God says, I formed them for my self, to show forth
my Praise. Thus Good is our God!

Now God will have us to Glorify Him, in Declaring the Praises of His Glory,
falling under our Observation. And in these two ways, are we to Declare the
Praise of the Glorious God. First, We must our selves Acknowledge the Glory of
God; and be sensible of those Glorious Things in God, that shall draw us, to
Fear Him, and Love Him, and Seek Him, and Serve Him; and make His Will the only
Rule of our Life, and count His Good Will to be better than Life. And then, We
must Invite and Engage Others, to join with us, in those Acknowledgments of
God; So that from what we are, or have, or do, Honorable Thoughts of God shall
be Raised in the minds of Others, and Others shall devote themselves unto the
Lord.

This it is, To Glorify God. This is all the Revenue, that God Expects, of all
that He does for us. Yea, It Is that for which He brings us to all the Glory of
Heaven at the Last! And all those whom He brings to Heaven, He does first
inspire with a Disposition, to make Choice of this above all things, That they
may be thus unto the Praise of His Glory.

Well then, My Young People; When will you become thus Disposed. Oh! When shall
(...) be? All Heaven is writing to Hear this Language from you. [And, O my God!
My God! That it might be NOW obtained from them!] Utter it, O Solicited Souls.
Utter it before the Lord, from the very bottom of your Souls.

O Glorious God, I am not able to bear the Thoughts of Living, or of Being,
upon any lower Design than This; That the Glorious God may have the Praises of
His Glory from me. What is my Errand into the world, but that I may Glorify the
God, who made me, and all the world! I was not Born only to Eat, and Drink, and
Play, and Sleep, and by some Labor, to purchase Conveniences for all of these
No; Nothing will please me, O my God, but This; That thy Glory may have Praises
from me; and that I may Glorify God, and my Lord Jesus Christ, in Conforming to
the Rules and Hopes of His Holy Religion Lord, I would not only Speak any
Praises, but I would also Live thy Praises. To bear Testimonies unto thy Glory,
shall be the very Business of my Life. I will make it my main Business, to
Testify any Believe, I have That God is a Good Portion; and, That nothing is
too hard for the Lord; And, That the Lord is of purer Eyes than to look upon
Iniquity; And, That the Lord is Good unto the Soul that seeks Him; And, That my
Lord Jesus Christ is Precious, and Lovely, and Worthy of all my Services. I
will abhor all Sin, because it is not for the Praise of the Glorious God. I
Consecrate, all my Powers, all my Members, all my Interest: unto thee, O my
God! Oh! That thou may have Glory from them all. Oh! Spirit of Grace, Now do
thou take Possession of me, Fill me, Act me, Use me, and Fetch out of me, the
Praises of the Glory of my God throughout Eternal Ages.

Are my Young People come to this Language? Blessed Youths! They have upon them
the infallible Marks of their growing meet for the Ever lasting Blessedness of
that World, where the Glorious God shall be All in All unto them. Children; I
shall shortly meet you there, --

CONVERSION EXEMPLIFIED.
AND now, to Life Raised by the Heavenly Call,
Henceforth, Vain Idols, I Renounce you all.
Vile Flesh, Thy raging Lust, and sordid Ease,
My winged Soul now shall not serve and please.
False World, Thy Laws shall be no longer mine,
Nor to thy Ways my Newborn Soul incline.
Satan, Thou will, I know, my Tempter be;
But thy Temptation shall not Govern me.
Foolish live been; O Lord, I blush, I grieve;
And gladly would my Woeful Folly leave.
Fain would I Turn to God; but cannot alone:
Help, Sovereign Grace, or it will never be done!
To the Great GOD of Heaven I repair,
And Helped by Heaven, thus to Him declare.
Great GOD, Since to be Mine Thou willing art,
Oh! Be Thou mine! Replies my Conquered Heart.
To Glorify Thee, Glorious Lord, I take,
For That alone, which can me Happy make.
O FATHER, of all Things Creator Great,
Will thou all Happiness for me Create?
Eternal SON of God, will thou me Save,
That I the Hopes may of Gods Children have?
Eternal SPIRIT of God, Poor me will thou
With Spiritual Blessings of all sorts Endow?
Lord, Ravished at thy wondrous Grace, I do
These Gracious Offers now Conform unto.
O All-sufficient ONE, Will thou supply
My Wants from Stores of rich Immensity?
Shall Boundless Wisdom for my Good Contrive?
And Boundless Power, the Fruits of Goodness Give?
Shall Spotless Holiness on me Imprint,
An Holy Temper, with thine Image in it?
Lord, Thy Perfections all I do adore,
And to a Perfect Love my mind would soar.
A State of Bliss according to thy Word
Thou will unto thy Chosen Ones afford.
A State of Blissful Rest and Joy, wherein
Raised from the Dead, they shall be freed from Sin.
There Bathed in Rivers of Eternal Joy,
No Sorrows more shall them at all annoy.
GOD shall be All in All; Brought nigh to God,
In Him they shall forever make Abode.
They shall See God; The Beatifie Sign
And their own God shall take in them Delight.
My Soul, Make now thy Choice, O say; Is This
What thou do Choose for thy Chief Blessedness?
Things of this Present Time I now Refuse;
My Blessed GOD; Thee, Thee, and This I Choose.
May the sweet JESUS me to Glory bring,
And be my Glorious Prophet, Priest, and King.
Does the Almighty SON of God, to those
That Will, an Union with Himself propose?
My Lord, I will! The Will thou did bestow:
To Thee, Oh, Let me be United so.
The full Obedience which my Sure^ty paid
To God, may That my Righteousness be made.
A Wretched Sinner would appear in That,
Righteous before the dreadful JudgmenSeat.
Show me thy Way, O Lord, Left that I should
Fall by those Mockers that will me delude.
To thy Pure Scriptures way, I will adhere,
And find the Rule of my whole Conduct there.
All the Rebellion of my Heart Subdue;
And for thy work, O Lord, my Strength Renew.
From thy vast Fullness let my Faith derive
Strength to do all things, and to Thee to Live.
May thy Good SPIRIT me Possess, and Fill
With Light and Zeal, to Learn and Do thy Will.
With His Kind Flames may He upon me Sieze,
And keep me always on my Bended Knees.
May all I am and have, be used for Him
Whose is my All, for He did me Redeem.
To Thee, Good SPIRIT, I lift up my Cries,
That thou will fall upon the Sacrifice.
May thy Bright ANGELS, be my Guardians then;
For Thee, they will Guard and Guide the Sons of Men.
By Thee assisted, LORD, Thus I Consent
Unto thy Everlasting COVENANT.
FINIS.

