SOUL-SAVING Gospel Truths.

Delivered in several SERMONS, Wherein is showed:

I. The Unreasonableness of those Excuses which Men make for their Delaying to
come to the Lord Jesus Christ for Salvation.

II. That for Men to Despair of the Forgiveness of their Sins because they have
been Great, is a great Evil.

III. That every Man in the World is going into Eternity.

By INCREASE MATHER.

Phil. 3. 1. To write the same things to you, to me indeed is not grievous, but
for you it is safe. 2 Pet. 1. 14, 15. Knowing that shortly I must put off this
my Tabernacle -- I will endeavor that you may be able after my Decease, to
have these things always in remembrance. Sold by Eleazer Phillips. 1703

TO That Congregation in Boston New England, To whom I have for many Years been
Preaching the Gospel of CHRIST.
IT is but a very little Time that I have now to be in the World: on which
account I have the greater reason to make what ha^t I can, to finish the work
appointed for me on the Earth; and to Labor (by the help of Christ) to bring
forth that Fruit which shall remain after I am gone. I have considered that
Discourses on Doctrinal Subjects, may be of Use (if the Lord see meet to give
his Blessing to attend them) for the Edification of believers. Nor have I been
altogether negligent in Endeavors (according to the measure of Grace received)
to serve the Generation whereof I am, in that way; having therefore Published
my Meditations respecting the future Conversion of the Jewish-Nation. The
Subject of Bap^^sm: The Order of the Gospel Professed and Practiced in these
Churches: The Ministry of Holy Angels; And concerning the Person, Office, and
Glory of Christ. I have also prepared for the Press several Discourses
concerning the New-Jerusalem State of the Church; and concerning the First
Resurrection, which I shall leave with those that shall survive me, to dispose
of as they shall see cause. But I have observed, That Plain, Practical-Sermons,
the design whereof is to promote Conversion and Holiness, do the greatest Good.
Therefore have I several times Dedicated Books of that nature (and for the same
reason I Bequeath what is emitted herewith) to You who are My Flock, and ^early
Beloved. Two and Forty Years are this Summer expiring, since I began my
Ministry in Boston. I thank the Lord, (and I bless You) for the great Love
which You and Your Fathers have manifested to me and mine. I have often been
tempted to remove from you by more solicitations than one or two. And if I had
done so, perhaps I might have advantaged my self in Outward respects: But when
I have considered Your singular Affection toward me, I could not find in my
Heart to do it. May I be instrumental of Good to Your and to Your Childrens
Souls, not only while^t I am Living, but after I am Dead, and meet many of You
(...) the right hand of Christ, when He shall appear in His Glory, how great
will our Rejoicing be in that Day. I am wasting continually with decays of Age:
And wonder that I have held out so long, considering my sedentary Life, and
fifty Years constant hard Studyings, Watchings, Cares, Labors. But it is a
comfort that I have well nigh finished my Course. A great man was used to say,
that when once a man was past Sixty, he should be willing to D^. I am through the
Patience and Goodness of God now past (that which they call the great
Climacterick) the Sixty Third Year of my Age. Thrice have I been in my Younger
Years brought to the Gates of Death by Sickness: But Your Predecessors, and
some of your selves, have by your Prayers to God kept me alive. Your Love I
acknowledge and thank you for. But now that I am stricken in Years, I cannot
desire you to Pray, that I may continue longer with you. And I will confess to
you, that CHRIST has showed me that which makes me long every day to be where
He is. But therefore let your Prayer for me be that whilst I am in the World I
may be serviceable, and that I may ^ipen for Heaven apace. So do I commend you
to God, and to the Word of His Grace, which is able to build you up, and to
give you an Inheritance among all them which are Sanctified. I am desirous to
approve my self unto Death,

Your Faithful and Loving Teacher, Increase Mather.
July 14, 1703.
ADVERTISEMENT.
These Books are to be Sold by Benjamin Eliot, under the West End of the
Exchange in Boston. Viz.

THe Christians Exercise by Satan's Temptations: Or an essay to discover the
methods which this Adversary u^eth to tempt the Children of God; and to direct
them how to escape the mischief thereof.

The Fountain opened: Or the great Gospel-Priviledge of having Christ Exhibited
to sinful men. Wherein is also proved that there shall be a National Calling of
the Jews.

The Peril of the Times displayed. Or the danger of men's taking up with a Form
of Godliness, but denying the Power of it. By the Reverend Mr. Samuel Willard.

ALL Excuses for not Believing on Christ are Unreasonable.
Luke XIV. 18. And they All with one Consent, began to make Excuse.


THE Lord Jesus Christ was on the Sabbath Day invited to eat Bread in the House
of an eminent Phar^^ee. Being there he did (as he always used to do) set
himself to do good unto those with whom he had his Conversation. In the first
place he healed a man that was ^ick of the Dropsy; and then he gave wholesome
Counsel unto those that were about him, which te^ded to promote the health and
salvation of their Souls. He Exhorted them to Humility, and also to Charity and
Liberality; and that they should extend their Charity not to Rich men only,
that could do as much for them again; but unto such as were Poor and could
never make them any recompense: and he did assure them that if they did so
(from a right, principle, and to a right end,) they should be recompensed at
the Resurrection of the Just. Upon this one present uttered a saying very
frequent among the Jewish Rabbis, namely, That they are Blessed who shall eat
Bread in the Kingdom of God. They are blessed that shall have Communion with
God, and with his Saints in the Resurrection world. Upon this man's thus saying,
the Lord Jesus Christ took occasion to speak a Parable concerning the Great
Supper. By which he did intimate that notwithstanding they pretended an
affection to the Kingdom of God, nevertheless the wo^ld had a greater interest
in their affections than that Kingdom. For he showed that many who were invited
to the Great Supper, refused to come, and made Excuses for their so doing. The
first had one Excuse, the second another, and the third another. Nevertheless,
in this they all agreed to Excuse their not coming. When they were invited with
one consent they made Excuse. Their Excuses were specious and plausible, and
yet unreasonable.

Now for the opening of this Parable, By the Great Supper, Christ and (...)*
Benefits are intended: which are fitly called a Great Supper, no^ only in
respect of the Mult^tude of persons invited thereto, but in respect of the
Greatness, the Excellen^^ of the Matter of the Fea^t* Christ and Eternal Life:
and in respect of the Continuance thereof. We read Esther 1. 4. that A^asuerus
the Emperor of Persia, made a Feast for his Nobles and Princes, which continued
for the space of an Hundred and Fourscore Days. But this Great Supper has
infinite Multitudes invited to it; Thousands yea Millions have been called to
it. And the Feast will continue not for an hundred and fourscore Days, nor an
hundred and fourscore Years, but through out the never ending Ages of Eternity.
Therefore it may well be called a Great Supper. And as for the Person that did
make this Feast, and so call unto it, we are to understand God Himself:
Therefore in the Parable, Mat. 22. 2. it is said That a certain King did it,
viz. the God and King of Heaven, the King Eternal. And as for the Servants that
are said to (...) sent to call unto this Great Sup^er, the Ministers of the
Lord Jesus Christ are thereby meant. As for the Persons invited to this Great
Supper, both Jews and Gentiles are intended, and not only the great ones but
the meaner fort among them. Therefore it is said, Go-into the Streets of the
City, and call them in, and it is said, Go into the Highways and compel them
to come in: By which the calling of the Gentiles might be signified. The Jews
had the first offer of the Gospel made to them. Christ was Preached unto them
before unto any other in the world; but few of them would accept of him, few of
them did believe, but with unreasonable Excuses did put off their coming to him.

DOCTRINE.

That when men are in the Gospel invited to come to Christ for Salvation, they
are apt to delay and put it off with Unreasonable Excuses.

Two things are before us to be showed.

1. What those Excuses are, and the Unreasonableness of them, whereby men put
off their coming to Christ?

2. Whence is it that men are apt to make Excuses and Objections against
Believing on the Lord Jesus Christ?

Question 1. What are those Excuses which men commonly make, and the
Unreasonableness of them?

Answer 1. Men are are ap^ to pretend that their coming to Christ will be
prejudicial to their worldly and carnal Interests. Thus here, three are
mentioned as Excusing themselves: Two of them their excuse was, it would be
prejudicial to their worldly profit, the other because it would be prejudicial
to his carnal sensual delights. Men are apt to think, that if they come to
Christ they shall suffer as to their Outward estate. It may be they shall be
Poor then. And indeed though the Lord Jesus Christ does not require that all his
Disciples should actually part with whatever in the world they enjoy,
nevertheless he requires that they be willing to do it when he shall put them
upon it. Luke 14. 32 He that will not forsake all that he has cannot be my
Disciple. A man must be willing to forsake all the Comforts that he has in the
world, when ever Christ calls him to it, or he cannot be his Disciple. Yet
nevertheless, this Excuse is very Unreasonable: For if a man should lose all
that he has in the world and gain Christ instead of it, he would be no loser,
but an infinite gainer. Ephesians. 3. 8. The Apostle there speaks of the Unsearchable
Riches of Christ. If a man looses the world and gains Christ, he has
unsearchable Riches instead of that which he had in the world. And Mat 13. 45.
we read of one that did sell all that he had that he might obtain the Pearl of
great price. Christ is the Pearl of great price. Though a a man should part with
all that he has in the world, if he gain that ^earl he is no loser, but a great
gainer. No man loses any thing for Christ, but Christ will make it up to him
in this world; if not in temporals, then in spirituals which is far better.
Mark. 10. 30. Who ever shall lose House or Land (said Christ) for my sake, and
the Gospels, he shall receive an Hundred fold in this present life. He shall
have more Grace given to him if he loses the world, and a little of that is
more valuable than a great deal of the world. And he shall have more of inward
heavenly Joy in his own soul. As the Christian Hebrews when their goods were
taken away from them on Christ's account, took that affliction Joyfully. And
much more will the Lord recompense them in the world to come. Therefore the
Lord says, he shall have an hundred fold in this world, and Eternal Life in the
world to come. Now that Eternal Life is of great worth and value, infinitely
more than any thing of this world. Mat. 19. 21. Says Christ to one there,
Follow thou me, sell all that thou have and give to the poor, and follow me and
thou shall have treasure in Heaven. How great is that Treasure? how vast are
those Riches? Ephesians. 1. 18. That you may understand the Riches of the Glory of
the Inheritance. Riches of glory, a rich and glorious Inheritance. This men
should have, if they came to Christ; and therefore it is very unreasonable in
them to object the profit of the world as their Excuse for their not coming to
the Lord Jesus Christ.

Again, Others are apt to Excuse themselves by thinking they shall be deprived
of their earthly Delights. That they shall never see pleasant Day more; that if
they become serious Christians, then they must bid a farewell to all Pleasure in
the world. But this is an Unreasonable Objection. For those pleasures which
Christ calls his Disciples to renounce for ever, they are sinful ones, and last
but for a season. Heb. 11. 25. The pleasures of Sin are but for a season. Yea
and but for a very short season too. Eccl. 7. 6. They are like the crackling of
Thorns. If Thorns be set on fire they make a crackling, but they are presently
out. And such are the pleasures of Sin: And then they end in dismal sorrow.
Prove. 14. 13. The end of that mirth is ^eaviness. The pleasures of sin, the end
of them will be heaviness. And the more delight any take therein the greater
will their sorrow and misery be in another World. Rev. 18. 7. How much she has
glorified her self and lived deliciously, so much torment and sorrow give her.
The more persons have indulged themselves in the ways of sin, the greater
torment shall be given to them in the world to come. Whereas if they hearken to
Christ and come to him, they shall have better pleasures. Prove. 3. 17. All the
ways of wisdom are pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. They are
pleasant, and in them are far greater pleasures than ever any did enjoy in the
ways of sin, Psalm. 36. 8. Thou will make them to drink of the rivers of thy
pleasures. Rivers of pleasures are to be enjoyed by those that come to Christ.
And they are pleasures that shall last for ever and ever, Psalm. 16. 11. At thy
right hand there are pleasures for evermore. Now then for men to refuse coming
to Christ because they think they must never enjoy their pleasures any more,
whereas those pleasures are but for a season; and if they did come to Christ,
they should enjoy better and greater and eternal Pleasures, for them on that
account to Excuse themselves is most unreasonable.

But,

2. There are some who are so Unreasonable as to Object, that they don't know
whether Christ dyed for them or no, and then if they did come to him they
should not partale of the Salvation purchased by him.

But to show you the Unreasonableness of this Excuse.

1. There, is merit enough in the Blood of Christ to save all the men in the
world. 1 John 2. 2. He is a propitiation for our sins, and not for our sins
only, but for the sins of the whole World. If all the men in the world should
believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, there needs no more to be done that God
should become propitious to them, than that which Jesus Christ has already
done. His Blood is infinitely Meritorious; and it most needs be so, because of
his being not Man only but (...) also. 1 John 1. 7. The Blood (...) Jesus
Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin. Inas-much as the Blood of Jesus
Christ is the Blood of the Eternal Son of God, it cleanses (...) all sin.
There is an infinite value and efficacy in it. There is a super-abundant merit
in the Blood of Christ. As the repenting Prodigal said, Luke 15. 17. There is
Bread enough in my Fathers House and to spare. Even so, there is Merit enough
in the Death of Christ and to spare. As for all those thousands of Millions
that perish to Eternity, I will say to you, there is not one of them all that
does perish for want of a sufficiency of Merit in the Blood of Christ to save
them, but because they do not come to him and believe on him. Therefore,

2. In the Gospel Christ and Salvation by him is offered unto all men. The
offer of the Gospel is as Free and ^^iversal as possibly can be. Mark 16. 15.
Go and Preach the Gospel to every Creature. Every man where the Gospel comes,
has Christ and Salvation by him tendered unto him. Rev. 22. 17. Come whosoever
will. What can be more Free or Universal than that invitation of the Gospel,
Come whosoever will? And if they come they shall have Life? Heb. 5. 9. He is
the author of eternal Salvation to all them that obey him. Let never so many
obey him, he will be the author of Eternal Salvation to them. And there is not
a man in the world, but a Minister of Christ may say to that Man, Do you
believe on the Name of Jesus Christ and you shall never perish, but shall have
Eternal Life, Joh. 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only
begotten Son, that whosoever does believe on him should not perish, but should
have everlasting Life. In this there is a difference between fallen Man and
fallen Angels. It may not be said unto the fallen Angels, if you believe you
shall be saved by Christ, if you will trust to him for Salvation you shall be
saved by him. When Evil Spirits in possessed persons have entered into
discourses with men, as oftentimes it has been so, no man may say to one of
them, If you will trust to Christ for Salvation, you may be saved. But now this
may be said to Men, to every one without exception. So large, so universal is
the offer of the Gospel that the Children of men are made partakers of. If a
Prince should lay down a Price for the Redemption of a company of Slaves,
declaring that whosoever will consent to be his Subjects, the price is laid
down for them, how unreasonable would it be for any one of them to say, I don't
know it was intended for me in particular: when the Prince their Redeemer said
it was intended for all that would consent to be his faithful Subjects. So does
the Lord Jesus Christ the Prince of Life say in the Gospel, I said down a Price
to redeem the Slaves of Hell, and whosoever will sincerely consent to be my
Subject, my faithful Servant, it is for him.

3. The way and the only way for a man to know whether Christ dyed for him in
particular, is to believe on his Name. If any man, though a Reprobate should say
Christ has not dyed for me, that man would sin in so saying; for then he would
intrude himself into that which is a Divine secret. Much more would an Elect
Vessel, be guilty of sin, if he should say Christ has not dyed for me. D^^t.
29. 29. Secret things belong to the Lord, and Revealed things belong to us.
Whether Christ has dyed for such a man in particular is a secret thing, known
unto the Lord only, until by the fruits of it it does appear. But that such a
man ought to Believe on the Name of Jesus Christ: that he ought to come to
Christ, and submit to him is revealed. Then let him do what is revealed, and he
may be sure Christ has dyed for him. Yea as sure of it, as if he were now in
Heaven Gal. 2. 20. Says the Apostle, The life that I now live, is by the Faith
on the Son of God, who gave himself for me. If a man has Faith in the Son of
God, then he may know that Christ gave himself for him in particular. This then
is a very Unreasonable Excuse for not coming to him.

3. There are others that to Excuse themselves pretend they cannot Believe. (As
one here in this Parable said, I cannot come.) Pretending they have not power
to believe: Does not Christ himself say, Joh. ^6. 44. None can come to me
except the Father draw him? And what would the Ministers of Christ have us do
things impossible for us to do?

But to show the Unreasonableness of this Objection.

1. It Is man's own fault that he cannot come. They have made themselves unable
to believe. How then will that Impotency Excuse them? It is true, that the
Children of men are become impotent, miserable Creatures. Romans 5. 6. They are
without strength. But they have made themselves to be without strength. They
have sinned away that power which once they had. As Sampson when he did hearken
to Delilab, his strength departed from him, and he became weak. So Adam and we
in him, hearkening to Satan, our Strength is departed from us, and we are
become weak. Adam had power enough to do whatever God required of him: There
was nothing that God enjoined on him, but he had power sufficient to do it.
Eccles. 7. 29. God made man upright but they sought out many inventions. So God
gave to man in his first-state sufficiency of Power to obey whatsoever he
should enjoy^ on him. But they have sinned away that power, and made themselves
unable to do what once they could have done. If a Servant should make himself
sick, and neglect doing his work that his Master has set him about, and then
pretend that he was sick, would that be a sufficient Excuse? When it might be
said, You did wilfully make your self sick and weak. That would be no rational
Excuse for him.

But,

2. Sinners would not believe if they could do it. They would not come to
Christ if they had power to do it. Mat. 22. 2. It Is said, They would not come.
It is not said, They could not come: Nay, but they would not come. If sinners
would speak out and declare the whole truth, they must say, We neither can nor
will come to the Lord Jesus Christ. Their Cannot is a most wilful Cannot. They
had rather perish than go to Christ for Salvation. It is a dreadful word to be
spoken, nevertheless it is a true one, That there is such opposition and enmity
in the hearts of men against the holy Lord Jesus Christ, that they had rather
be damned for ever than that Christ should save them. Therefore did Christ say
to the Jews, Joh. 5. 40. Ye will not come unto me that you might have Life.
They were told plainly and often enough, that if they did not come unto Christ
they should dye in their sins. They were told often enough, that if they did
not come to Christ for Eternal Life, they should be sent down to the Torments
of Hell world without end. Yet for all this they would not come to him that
they might have Life. That Unbelief which is the Damning sin of men that live
under the Gospel, it is a wilful Unbelief. Joh. 3. 19. This is the Condemnation
that Light is come into the world and men have loved Darkness rather than
Light. That is the Damning sin under the Gospel, men love darkness. And when
light is come to them, they shut their eyes and don't care for the light. It is
plain that sinners will not come to Christ; that they have no mind to believe,
in that they will not do what they can do. They will not do what they have
power to do, in order to the obtaining of Faith. God in his Ward has given men
directions what to do that so they may obtain Precious Faith in the Name of
Christ, and such things (...) they can do if they would, but they will not, and
therefore do they perish. Man. 23. 37. I would have gathered you under my wings
(says Christ) but ye would not.

3. God does command no man in the world to believe by his own strength.
Therefore this Objection this Excuse is unreasonable. When the Lord commanded
Moses, Exodus 14. 1^. saying Last up thy hand, take the Rod into ^hine hand,
lift it up over the Sea, and divide it. How unreasonable would it have been for
Moses to have said, I divide the Sea! It is impossible, and therefore for him
to have neglected to take the Rod into his hand and lift it up? So it is when
God commands sinners to believe, and in order thereunto that they should do
such and such things, and yet they will not do, it. I say the Lord requires no
man to believe by his own power, nevertheless, there are three things that God
commands every man to attend where the Gospel comes, and yet there are many
that will not obey him.

1. God requires that they should not refuse and despise the Outward calls of
his Word. Heb. 12. 25. Take ^eed that ye refuse not him that speaks from
Heaven. Yet they do and will refuse. Psalm. 81* 11, My people would not hearken
to me, they would none of me. They would not, they would not, (says God) no^
they would not when the Lord called to them. So Prove. 1. 22. How long ye
Scorn^^s will you delight in Scorning? Cannot men choose whether they will
delight in scorning or no* I called and ye refused, says the Wisdom of God:
You set at naught my Counsels and despised my Reproofs. God does expect and
require from men that they should neither in word n^r deed say, We will not do
what thou command, and yet sinners will do thus, Jer. 2. 31. They said, We
are Lords, we will come no more unto thee. No, we will not come to thee. They
said so Practically however though not Verbally. Yet one time when the Prophet
told them what God required of them, Jer. 44. 16. they said, As for the Word
which thou have spoken to us in the Name of the Lord we will not hearken to it.
So it is with sinners when invited to come to Christ, they will not hearken to
that word: And therefore to pretend Inability to come is a vain Excuse.

2. God requires of sinners that they should not resist the Inward strivings of
his holy Spirit. As that they should not refuse nor reject the Outward calls of
his Word, so that they should not resist the Inward strivings of his Spirit:
and yet this they do, and this they will do though they are Damned for it when
they have done. 1 These. 5. 19. Quench not the Spirit says God. Ayo, but sinners
when the Spirit of God has beg^n to kindle a holy fire in their hearts, they
quench it, they put it out. Thus it was with the sinners of the old world, Genesis
6. 3. My Spirit shall not always strive with Man. The Spirit of God had been
striving with them. Righteous Noah Preached many powerful Sermons unto them:
that Preacher of Righteousness would sometimes startle and amaze their
Consciences, but they rejected they resisted the Holy Spirit striving in that
Ministry. So it was with the rebellious Children of Israel, Isa. 63. 10. They
rebelled and vexed his Holy Spirit, therefore he became their Enemy. And so it
was with their Children a long time after them, Act. 7. 51. You staff-neck^d
and Uncircumcised in Heart and Ears, you do always resist the Holy Ghost
Sinners resist the Holy Ghost when he strives with them, and uses arguments to
persuade them to come to Christ. Therefore their pre^^n^ions that they cannot
believe are vain, since they resist the motions of his Spirit.

3. God requires one thing more, and that which they have power to do if they
will, He requires that they should be earnest and diligent in the use of means
for the obtaining of Faith. Joh. 6. 27. Labor for the Meat that endures to
Eternal Life. And if we must labor for that, we must labor for Faith without
which that is never to be obtained. Luke 13. 24. Strive to enter in at the
strait Gate. The gate of Faith is a strait gate, but very few enter in at it:
Well, God requires men to strive that they may enter in at the strait gate. And
that they should do such things as have a tendency to cause them to believe.
There are such things, and sinners can practice them if they will.

As now,

Meditation and serious Consideration has a^ tendency to cause men to come to
Christ* If they would meditate on their undone condition without Christ: If
they would consider (...) the state, the miserable condition they are in, and
the way they are walking in, what it is, and whether it will bring them at the
last; it may be Serious Thoughts of that nature would end in their Conversion
and Salvation. This they ought to do, Hag. 1. 5. Thus says the Lord of Hosts
consider your ways. The Lord God of Hosts says from Heaven to every sinner,
Consider thy ways, what thou ha^t done, whether thou art going, where this way
will bring thee ere long. And God requires men to consider of Death and
Judgment to come. Deuteronomy. 32. 29. Oh that they were wise that they would consider
their latter and. This God requires of sinners, that they should sit down and
consider of their latter end: Consider that Death is coming on them: Consider
that after Death comes an Eternal Judgment. God requires sinners that they
should think seriously of that Eternity to which they are going: That Eternity
is before them in another world where they must quickly be. Eccl. 11. 8.
Remember the days of darkness for they are many. Remember Eternity, consider
of Eternity, and where you must be when you go out of this world. This God
requires of men. And that they should Meditate on the Lord Jesus Christ: that
they should think of his being a suitable Savior for them: that they should
Meditate on the Glory of the Lord Jesus Christ, and how he is altogether
lovely. If they would do ^o, it may be their Souls would be enamoured with him;
it may be they would be persuaded to part with all for his sake, if they would
but Meditate on Jesus Christ and on his Glory. But now Sinners will not do
this, although they can do it if they will. For that Cogitative faculty, that
power of thinking that God has given to men makes them capable to think of
Christ, of Eternity, and of another World, as well as of the vain things of
this world. That power which God has given them enables them to do it if they
would. But they will not. They suffer other kind of thoughts to lodge in their
souls, Jer. 4. 14. Wash thine heart from wickedness O Jerusalem that thou
may^st be saved: how long shall vain thoughts lodge within thee: how long shall
it be? Sinners suffer vain thoughts to lodge within them, but they will not
suffer holy thoughts to lodge within them, they will not suffer thoughts of
Christ and Eternity to lodge within them. Then shall they complain they are not
able to believe, when they will not do the things that have a tendency to make
them believe?

Once more,

God requires that men should Pray to him for Faith. For Faith is the gift of
God, Ephesians. 2. 8. We are saved by Grace through Faith, and that not of our selves
it is the Gift of God. That Faith that men have if a true Faith, it is the gift
of God to them. Faith is of the Operation of God. Then God requires and expects
from men that they should pray to him for this gift; that they should go alone
and Cry as for their lives and souls to God to give them Faith. They say they
cannot come to Christ except God draw them, then you ought to Pray to God that
he would draw you. Cant. 1. 3. Draw me and I shall run after (...). So ought
sinners to pray to God that he would draw them to Christ. He will be enquired
of by the House of Israel to do this thing for them. 'Twas said to the Woman of
Samaria, If thou ^adst asked he would have given thee living water. So God
expects of sinners to ask Faith in Christ. We have instances of those that
prayed for Faith, Mark. 9. 24. Lord help my Unbelief. So the Lord would have
sinners come before him and complain of their Unbelief, and to Cry to God to
help them against their Unbelief. The Apostles prayed for more Faith, Luke 17.
5. Lord increase our Faith say they. So sinners should go to God and should
Pray to him, Lord give us Faith, and help us to lay hold on Christ. ^ow our
hearts to accept of him, as in the Gospel he is offered unto us. But this they
will not do: Or if they do, it is in a formal careless manner, they are not in
good earne^t in Crying to God for Faith. Tell me if you can, where there is one
Unbeliever in the world that does day and night Cry to God to help him to
believe, that does Cry to God to give him saving Faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ. I am persuaded there is not one such Unbeliever in the World. Therefore
how vain is it for an Unbeliever to say I cannot Believe, when he can pray to
God for this Grace, but will not.

4. Another Excuse which some make it that they are Unworthy that Christ should
accept of them, and therefore they will stay till they are better qualified and
then offer themselves to Christ. Being so unworthy as they are, they think they
may Excuse themselves for the present.

But this is though a seemingly humble, a really proud Excuse. The meaning is
that sinners would: have ^ome works of their own to commend them to the Lords
acceptance, something of t^eir own that should deserve that Christ should
receive them. Whenas we must come to Christ like poor Beggars that have nothing
in the world to recommend us to him, but only Sin and Guilt and Misery, that so
Christ may deliver us from it. Nor will he refuse to accept of such if indeed
they come unto him. As we read concerning David, 1 Samuel 22. 2. That if any ^ere
in distress and in debt they came to David, and he became a Captain over them.
So sinners that are infinitely in debt and distressed if they come to the Lord
Jesus Christ he will be to them the Captain of their Salvation. Therefore he
does invite Poor as well as Rich, them* that have nothing to offer to him, yet
that they should come to him. Isa. 55. 1. Come without Money and without Price.
Such as are so poor as that they have neither Money nor Moneys worth, the Lord
says to them Come, come, come. And thus in this Parable, we see that Christ
invites the most worthless ones to come to the great Supper, Luke 14. 21. Go
into the Lanes and Streets of the City, and bring in the Poor, the Maimed, and
the Halt, and the Blind* 23. ver. Go into the Highways, to the Hedges and
compel them to come in. Chri^ts Salvation is altogether free, Rev. 22. 17.
Whosoever will let him come and take freely of the Waters of Life. Christ will
not Sell his Blood, and he will not Sell his Salvation, but he gives it freely.
And as for such as have a real sense of their own Unwo^thiness, they are not
the less welcome to Christ on that account, but rather the more acceptable to
him. As we see in the Centurion Mat. 8. 8. I am not worthy that thou should
come under my Roof. The Lord did highly accept of this man that had a deep
sense of his own Unworthiness. So the woman of Canaan, Christ did intimate to
her that she (...) a Dog, and not (...) of the Childrens Bread, Mat. 15. 26. It
is not meet to cast the Childrens Bread to Dogs: Truth Lord (says she) but
Dogs may eat of the crumbs that fall from their Masters Table. Do thou say I
am a Dog, true Lord I confess I am so, but may I not have a crumb
notwithstanding that? There is no way to have any thing of real worth, but by
coming to the Lord Jesus Christ for it. We must be beholden to him for it (...)
Rev. 3. 17, 18. Thou art Poor, Wr^^ched, Naked, I counsel thee to (...) Gold of
me that thou may be (...). If we would have Spiritual* Riche^, if we would
have ^old, we must go unto Christ for it all.

5. Despairing sinners are apt to Excus^ themselves from coming to Christ's
because of the greatness of their sins. Because they have been grievous sinners
they are afraid to come.

But this is the most unreasonable Excuse that possibly can be. It is just as
if a man should say, I am very sick, and therefore am afraid to go to the
Physician. The more sinful any have been, the more concerned are they to go to
Christ. Yea, to make ha^t unto him, Mat. 9. 12, 13 The Sick need a Physician: I
came to call Sinners, says Christ. They that have Sin-sick-souls they need a
Christ, and are concerned to make ha^t to Him who is the great Physician of
Souls, that they may be Healed. And the Lord Jesus Christ is so wonderfully,
Gracious, is that He does invite the greatest of Sinners. Not only such as have
been guilty of lesser Evils, but the most wicked in the world where the Gospel
comes, Christ invites them, to come to him, believe on him, and trust in him
for Salvation, Isa. 46. ^2. Hearken to me you that are stouhearted, and that
are far from Righteousness. So in the Parable, Mat. 22. 10. Good and Bad were
invited. Not only the Good but the Bad. There are some sinners compared with
others, may have the name of Good given to them. Such as have been Civil and
Moral in their Conversation they are good, compared with such as have been
scand^lou^ly wicked. But the Bad, the most vile profligate sinners are invited
to come to Him for Salvation. Nor did the Lord Jesus Christ ever refuse any
that came to Him, on the account of their having been gui^ty of great sins. No,
the Publicans were received by Him, though they had been notorious Sinners. In
Luke 7. ^7 we read of a woman that had been a sinner, an abominable sinner, yet
when she did wash the Feet of Christ with her tears, notwithstanding her great
sins, He did graciously accept of her, and her sins which were many were
forgiven. So then Christ does not refuse any on that account. Nay as for the
worst of sinners, He declares that He came into the World to save such, 1 Timothy
1. 15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus
Christ came to save the chief of Sinners. Then He will not refuse such as they
are, if they do indeed come unto Him and believe on Him. Only He expects that
they should be willing to be delivered from the dominion of sin, as well as
from the damnation of it. Mat. 1. 21 He saves is people from their sins And
there is one consideration that may answer this and all other Excuses that can
be made against believing, it is this, The God of Heaven does command men to
believe, 1 John 3 23 This is His commandment that ye believe in the Name of His
Son Jesus Christ. Would it not be a very strange thing to hear a man say, May I
dare to do what the Great GOD commands me to do? For a man to say, shall I not
presume if I do that which God positively requires me to do? And yet so it is
when any one does say, shall I not presume if I go to Christ for Salvation, or
may I dare to believe?

Quest. 2. Whence is it then that Sinners are so apt to Excuse and Delay their
coming to Christ?

For Answer,

1. It is from that Ignorance which is in them. There is a double ignorance
which does keep men from closing with the Lord Jesus Christ. First, They are
ignorant of themselves, they know not how sinful they are. They are not
sensible of that exceeding Guiltiness that is upon on them. Especially if they
have been kept from gross scandalous Sins, they are apt to think all is well
with them, and that they have no such need of a Savior as indeed they have.
Thus it was with Paul before his Conversion, Romans 7. 9 I was alive without the
Law, but the Commandment came, Sin revived and I dyed. He thought himself
alive, that he was in the way unto Eternal Life. Before his Conversion he lived
very blamele^ly, he was a Pharisee and a strict one too. But when the
Commandment, when the Law was set home on his Conscience in the power and
spiritual Nature of it, then he saw himself a thousand times more guilty and
sinful than once he apprehended. Then I Dyed, (says he) he saw himself a Dead
and and a Damned Creature, and was e'ne ready to dye away with the terrible
sight of his sins. And Sinners are ignorant of their Misery, Rev. ^. 17. Thou
know not that thou art Miserable. A man that is very sick if he does not
know it, he will not go to the Physician. So it is with sinners, Mat. 9. 12.
The whole have no need of a Physician. The Pharisees thought themselves to be
whole, and righteous enough without a Christ, and therefore they came not to
him, Joh. 9. 41. You say we see, therefore your Sin remains They were under
Spiritual blindness and other miseries, which they needed a Christ to save them
from, but they knew it not; therefore their sin did remain.

Again,

Secondly, Sinners are ignorant of Christ, therefore they come not to him, Joh.
1, 10, 11. He was in the world and the world knew him not; He came to his own
and they received him not. They knew him not, and therefore received him not.
If a man should have a Jewel offered to him of never so great value, if he is
ignorant of its worth, he will not much regard the offer. So here, Christ is
the most precious Jewel that ever was offered to any man, He is better than
Rubies: But sinners don't know the worth of a Christ, if they did they would
not reject him, but count it the greatest happiness might they have an interest
in him. Psalm. 9. 10 They that know thy Name will put their trust in thee. They
that know the worth of a Christ will believe on him. It was therefore said to
the woman of Samaria, Joh. 4. 10 If thou had known the gift of God, thou
would have asked. But as long as sinners do not know Christ, it is not to be
wondered at if they do not come to him for Salvation. The man that was born
blind but had his eyes opened, when 'twas said to him, Joh. 9. 35. Do thou
believe on the Son of God? Replied, Who is He that I may believe on him? If men
do not know who and what manner of one Christ is, they will not believe on him.
Sinners are ignorant of the Righteousness of Christ, and therefore do not
desire to be made partakers of it. Romans 10. 3 Being ignorant of Gods
Righteousness they did not submit to it. And they are ignorant of the Glory of
the Lord Jesus Christ. Although they have the Scriptures which set forth the
Glory of Christ, for all that they remain ignorant of it. Act. 13. 27 They knew
him not, nor the voice of the Prophet* that were read to them every Sabbath
Day. The Jews in their Meeting Houses had the Scripture read and expounded to
them every Sabbath Day. Those Scriptures declared the Glory of Christ, yet they
knew him not. If men were really apprehensive of the Glory of the Lord Jesus
Christ, they would not reject him, 1 Cor. 2. 8 If they had known Him they would
not have Crucified the Lord of Glory.

2. The Reason why sinners do not come to Christ when invited, It is because
they love him not. No man will choose to be a Scholar to a Master that he
hates. Sinners are so far from loving the Lord Jesus Christ, as that they do
indeed hate him. Joh. 3. 20 He that hates the light does not come to the light.
Christ is that light which sinners hate, therefore they do not nor will come
unto him. It is a sad word to be spoken, but alas a true one, That men by
Nature are haters of God, and therefore will not believe on him who is the Son
of God. This reason Christ gives why the Jews did not believe on him, Joh. 5.
42. You will not come unto me that ye may have life: You have not the love of
God in you. They hated God and therefore would not come unto the Lord Jesus
Christ. He that hates God the Father, hates the Lord Jesus Christ who is the
Son of God also, and must needs do so because he is so like unto his Father.
Joh* 15. 24. They have hated me and my Father, says Christ. He that hates the
one will hate the other. He that hates Christ will hate God even the Father,
and he that hates God the Father will hate Jesus Christ too. Wherefore Christ
speaking concerning those Jews the^ were invited to come to him, but did not,
nor would they come, says Their Soul loathed me, Zech. 11. 8. Because Christ
is holy therefore the unholy hearts of men do not love him. As the Evil Spirit
once said in a po^^e^^ed Man, What have we to do with thee thou holy one of
God? M^^. 1. 24. So it is with sinners, Christ is the Holy one of God, and
therefore they don't desire to have to do with him. He is too holy for them.
They would willingly have a Christ that should save them from Hell and yet
allow them to live in their sins: such a Christ would please them. But Christ
is He who is Holy, and will not allow men to continue sinning against God.
Hence they hate him, Joh 7. 7. The world hates me (says Christ) because I
testify of it that the works of it are evil:

3. Sinners Excuse and Delay their coming to Christ because their hearts (...)
set upon those things which are inconsistent with Believing and Accepting him
according to the terms of the Gospel. Three things the Gospel requires men to
part withal* but their Hearts are set on them and they will not let them go.

1. There is their own Righteousness, men must be willing to renounce that.
Mat. 16. 24. If a man will be my Disciple he must deny himself. He must deny
his Natural self and his Righteous self, which is the hardest piece of
self-denial in the world. They that think it is not so, do not know what it is
to deny Righteous self. Adam was to have been saved by a Righteousness of his
own, and all his Children desire to be saved in the same way. Isa. 57. 10 Thou
have found the life in thy hands. That's what men exceedingly desire, they would
have life by their own hands; they would obtain Eternal Life by some Works or
Righteousness of their own. Sinners are loath to go a begging to Christ, to be
beholden to another for life and for salvation their proud hearts cannot comply
with that. They would rather with some works of their own purchase Salvation. A
Learned Papist (but a Prou ^one) said, If God would give him Heaven Gratis he
would not accept of it on those terms. He would do something that should
deserve it first. To be saved by ones own Righteousness and by the
Righteousness of Christ are inconsistent, they stand in direct opposition the
one to the other. Men doat on their own Righteousness, they Idolize that,
therefore will not come to Christ for his, Romans 10. 3. Going about to establish
their own Righteousness they submitted not to the Righteousness of God. That
then keeps them from coming to the Lord Jesus Christ, and closing with him as
offered in the Gospel.

^. The Hearts of men are exceedingly set on the World: therefore it is that
they refuse the invitations of the Gospel. Thus Mat. 22. 5 when they were
invited to the great Supper, one went to his Farm, and another to his
Merchandise, and made light of that invitation. Wherefore is it that men make
light of the Gospel offer? It is because the Farm or Merchandise has their
hearts. If they could have Christ and the world too, it would please them. If
they were sure of gaining the world by coming to Christ, they would say as a
famous Pagan once did, (...) me a good rich Bishopric and I will turn
Christian. But Christ promises nothing of that Nature, but the contrary, and
says, If any will come to him and be his Disciples, they must look for
Poverty, Crosses and Afflictions in the world. And that if they do any service
for him, or suffer for his sake, they must look for their Recompense not in
this, but in another World. Now when they heir of this, they fly off from
CHRIST, and don't care to come to him on such terms as these are. One made a
very fair profession, Lord (says he^to Christ) I will follow thee whither
soever thou (...), Mat. 8* 19. Says Christ to him, The Son of Man ha^ not
where to lay his head. If thou will follow me, it may be thou shall not have an
House to put thine head in, but must be a poor man all thy days. Then you hear
no more of him. Another came to Christ praying an Answer to the greatest Case
of Conscience that could be propounded, Namely, What he must do to obtain
Eternal Life? Christ to try the man, bid him sell all that he had, and give to
the Poor, and tells him he should have Treasures in Heaven. But it is said, Mat.
19. 22 He went away sorrowful for he had great Possessions. Those possessions
kept him from closing with Christ on the terms of the Gospel. If men are
resolved to have the World whatever comes on it, they will not come to Christ.
If a man is resolved that he will have worldly Honors, it is impossible he
should be a Believer on Christ, Joh. 5. 44. How can you Believe that receive
Honor one from another? So if men be resolved to have the Riches and Pleasures
of the Earth, then they will not come to Christ; No, they remain in a state of
Enmity against Him, Jam. 4. 4. Do ye not know that the Friendship of the world
is Enmity against God, and that if a man be a Friend of the world, he will be
an (...) of God. So then he remains an Enemy of Christ.

3. The Hearts of men are set upon their sins. They love Sin, they take
pleasure in Unrighteousness: There are sinners that take delight in nothing so
much as in sinning against the blessed God. Prove. 4. 16 They cannot sleep except
they cause some to fall. They are set upon sinning, and causing others to sin.
Now Christ says, if they come to Him they must be willing to part with all
their sins. He says away with your sins forever, if you come to me for
Salvation. Ezekiel 18. 31 Cast away your Transgressions, why will you die? So does
Christ say, Part with your sins, or else you will die, Mat. 5. 29. Pluck out
thy right Eye, Cut off thy right Hand if it does offend thee. The sins of men
are as dear to them as life or limbs, or what is most dear. Many a man that has
a pleasurable lust he is accustomed to and he had as liev have his Right Eye
plucked out as to be divorced from that Lust. A vile Drunkard was per^waded to
leave his Drunkenness for fear of losing his eyes, he replied, I had rather
part with my Eyes than not be Drunk sometimes. Thus are sinners in love and in
league with their sins, and therefore they will not come to Christ to be
delivered from them.

4. Satan does all that possibly he can (...) keep men from coming to the Lord
Jesus Christ. He hates Christ with an implacable hatred. The Serpent hates the
seed of the Woman more than any thing in the world. He knows that Christ has
wounded him to death, having destroyed his Kingdom, and bruised his Head, and
therefore he hates Him, 1 John 3 8 For this purpose wa^ the Son of God
manifested to destroy the works o^ the Devil. Sin and Death are the works of
the Devil. Christ has delivered from Sin and from Death those tha^ believe on
Him: Therefore does the Devil hate Him. Men shall never hear of Christ if he
can hinder it. 1 These. 2. 18 I would have come unto you, and if he had you may
be sure he would have Preached Christ, but Sa^an ^indred. A people shall never
have a Minister that will Preach Christ unto them, if Satan can hinder it. And
he does hinder it sometimes by evil suggestions of his own. He put it into the
heart of Juda^ to betray Christ. So he puts it into the hearts of sinners to
take up Prejudices against believing on Christ. And sometimes he does it by
wicked Instruments. When Paul Preached the Gospel to Sergius the Deputy, Elimas
sought to turn him from the Faith, Act. 13. 10 said the Apostle, Thou Child of
the Devil, will you not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord. It was
from the Devil. And the truth is, the Devil had rather men should do any thing
in the world, than they should believe in Jesus Christ. It is true, he would
not have men to Pray, to observe the Sabbath, to reform their Evil ways, yet
he had rather they should do all this, than go to Christ. It is a thing known
that the Devil has in Humane shape appeared to men, and (to serve a Cursed
design) given them good Counsel. In this Land a Demon appeared to an Indian,
and advised him to leave off Dr^nkenness, to Pray to God, hear Sermons, and
observe the Sabbath Day: The Indian did so, and continued to do thus for
several Years. At last the Demon advised him to kill himself, and told him he
should rise again within three days. The miserable wretch did kill himself,
and so was ruined Body and Soul. But it was observed that this Demon said not
one word of Christ to him* never exhorted him to believe in the Name of Jesus
Christ. The Devil knows that the Salvation of men depends on this thing above
all others; that if they believe in Christ they shall have Eternal Life. But he
knows also that though they Hear, Pray, and keep the Sabbath, if they do not
believe on Christ they never will be saved. Therefore above all things, Satan
sets himself to hinder men from believing on, and coming to Christ for Life and
Salvation.

USE I. For INSTRUCTION.
We may here be Instructed co^ce^^ing the doleful misery of those that live
under the Gospel, and yet remain in a Faithless and Christless Estate.

Their misery appears in that,

1. They shall be deprived of all Good. They shall not taste of the great
Supper. Luke 14. 24. None of those that were ^idden shall taste of my Supper.
No not one of them. They shall be Excluded the Heavenly and the Eternal
Banquet, and shall never eat Bread in the Kingdom of God: How miserable must
such needs be? And what miserable anguish will take hold on those poor
Creatures, when they shall see others in Heaven, and think with themselves, We
might have been there too if it had not been for our own fault and folly! We
were invited to the same joy^s, but we did not accept of it. Luke 13. 28. There
shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth, when you shall see Abraham Isaac and
Jacob in the Kingdom of God, and you your selves thrust out. Oh! what anguish
will they be in when they shall see those that heard the same Sermons that they
did, in Heaven; with what regret will they think of it, because they might have
had Everlasting Life as well as those, but they would not. They that go on to
refuse Christ, refuse Everlasting Life, and resolve forever to be deprived of
it. The Apostle told the Jews that if they did put away the Word of Life from
them, they did judge themselves unw^^thy of Everlasting Life. They did thereby
pass a sentence upon themselves, and declare that they deserved to be deprived
of Everlasting Life. There is no life but by comeing to Christ. Never any one
sinner since the world began did obtain Eternal Life but by Christ, and by
believing on him. Joh. 14. 6. None can come to the Father but by me, I am the
Way the Truth and the Life. He is the only true way to Eternal Life. They then
that neglect this offer of Salvation by Christ, shall be deprived of Life
Eternal. Are they not then miserable? If men are in danger to lose a bodily
life, they think themselves miserable: But what is that to this? What is a
Temporal to an Eternal Life? What is the life of the Body, to the life of the
Soul? If a man gain the whole world and lose his own soul, what is he profited?
Now they that persist in their Unbelief will lose their immortal Souls. The
precious life of an immortal Soul will be lost by keeping at a distance from
CHRIST.

2. The misery of such appears in that positive Evil which will befall them.
What that is the Evangelist does in one word declare, Mar. 16. 16 He that
Believes not shall be Damned. Sinners little think what that is. There are some
horrid Creatures so wicked as to wish themselves Damned in their mad rage. Poor
wretches, no Tongue of man can express, nor Heart of man con^eive the misery of
the Damned state. The most terrible pains and punishment that can be thought
of, are in Scripture used only as Metaphors to describe it. Unbelievers Rev.
21. 8. shall have their part in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone. To
be burnt to Death is painful if with Brimstone that makes it more painful But
all this is but a mere shadow, compared with what will be found really true.
The misery of the Damned is unspeakably beyond all this. As a poor wretch you
have sometimes been put in mind of, when the wrath of God was scalding his
Conscience, looking on the Fire with a ghastly Countenance, said to those that
were near him, Do you see that Fire burning there? To lie burning in that fire
is but a Metaphor to what I feel in my Soul. And then the Eternity of it, is
that which makes it dreadful indeed One may wonder that sinners that hear such
things, should be able to ^^ntinue in a Christless Estate one Day to an end:
That such sinners as live under the Gospel should be able to sleep one Night in
a Christless Estate. But Solomon tells the reason, Eccl. 9. ^. Madness is in
their Hearts while they live, and after that they go to the dead Yea, truly
they live a mad merry Life, and after that they go to the Dead, nay to the
Damned. And can there be a greater madness than this? When the Eternal God
offers men Heaven on this one only condition, that they submit to his Son Jesus
Christ, according to the blessed terms of the Gospel, they refuse Him, and lose
Heaven, and go down to the torments of Hell fire. Oh what madness is this!

3. Of all Damned ones they that have neglected the offers of Christ in the
Gospel will be the most Damned. Therefore it is said, Heb. 2. 3. How shall we
escape if we neglect so great Salvation? How shall we escape the ^oarest Wrath
of God, if we neglect the great Salvation? It had been better for such men if
they never had heard of a Christ, 2 Pet. 2. 21. It had been better for them
that they had not known the Way of Righteousness, than after they have known it
to turn away from the Holy Commandment. They had better have been of those
Indians that never had Christ Preached to them. Woe to such Unbelievers: Woe, woe
unto them. It will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha at the Day of
Judgment than for them. It were better to Dye in Sodom than in New England. It
were better to go to Hell out of Sodom than out of Boston where Christ is
Preached, and men refuse (...) receive Him. There is no Sin provokes God like
(...) of Unbelief, the most provoking of all sins. Heb. 3. 18. Against whom did
He Swear in His Wrath, but against them that Believe not. Unbelief is a
despising of Christ, who is most dear to God. I tell you truly, that all the
Men on Earth and all the Angels in Heaven are not so dear to God as JESUS
CHRIST is. They then that have Christ offered to them, and for all that
continue in Unbelief, do most highly provoke God, and will be most miserable.
But some will say, We are no Infidels, we are all Believers: what then means
your telling us, if we don't believe on Christ we are miserable. I beseech you
for the Lords sake, and for your own Souls sake be not d^^eived. Mat. 7. 21.
Christ says, Not every one that says to me Lord, Lord; not every one that
says he is a Christian, and that Christ is his Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. There are many that shall say, Have we not Prophe^^ed in thy
Name? Yes says Christ, you did: But I never knew you. They then that have only
a form of Godliness without the power of it, they that take up with Externals
in Religion are no true believers ^n Christ. There are those that with hear
Sermons every Lords day, and it may be on other occasions too, but do little of
what they hear. Be ye doers of the Word of God, and not hearers only deceiving
your own Souls. There are some that Pray every day in their Families, and it
may be in their Closets, (I wish all that hear me did so) yet may they miss of
Heaven and Eternal Life by Jesus Christ for want of true Faith in his Name.
Christ says, Mat. 5. 20. Except your Righteousness exceed the Righteousness of
the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. The Pharisees were noted for their Dev^tion and outside Religion, they
would Pray very often, and Fast often, and some of them were men of great
Morality. Nay but says Christ, if your Righteousness does not exceed theirs,
you shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Godliness in the power of it is
another thing than most men think of. If a man has Godliness in the Power of
it, then he is all for Christ and Holiness. If he be a true Believer, then
there is nothing in the world so dear to him as Jesus Christ is, 1 Pet. 2. 7.
To you that believe He is precious. Nothing so precious as a precious CHRIST to
a Believer. If a man has Godliness in the power of it, then he is wonderfully
mortified as to worldly concerns, 1 John 5. 4. He that believes has overcome
the World. This is our Victory even our Faith. He that is a true Believer though
Carnal Affections do remain in him, they do not reign in him. Gal 5. 24. They
that are Christ's have Crucified the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts. If a
man be in Christ he is a new Creature. I should think my self the happiest Man
in the World, were I sore that this were true concerning all that Hear me (...)
day. But if they that have only a Form of Godliness are without Christ, most
certainly they that live in open scandalous Sins never had an interest in Him.
For a saving Faith is always attended with good Works, Jam. 2. 14. What does
it profit a man to say he has Faith, if he has not Works? Can Faith save him?
True Faith and Repentance go together, Zech. 10. 12 They shall look on me whom
they have pierced and mourn. If a man has with an eye of Faith looked on Christ
he cannot but mourn for sin, and turn from sin. Therefore they that live in sin
do but deceive themselves, if they pretend to be Believers on Christ. Can a
profane Swearer be a Believer? Can a Drunkard be a Believer? Can a Lascivious
Wanton Young man be a Believer on Christ? It is impossible, if they continue to
be such. Christ will never own them at the last day, He will say, as in Luke
13. ^7. Depart from me all you that work Iniquity. They that are workers of
Iniquity, that indulge themselves in sin, Christ will say to every Soul of
them, Depart from me.

USE II. For EXHORTATION.
Let not any one Soul here delay or put off his coming to Christ on any
pretense whatsoever. Remember that Christ has invited every one. There is not
one that hears me this day but Christ has invited him to the great Supper. All
and every one in particular as truly as if the Lord from Heaven called him by
Name, as he did Saul, saying Saul, Saul, why do thou persecute me? So Christ
has as really invited thee to come to Him as if He had called to thee by Name,
and said, Why do^t thou not come to me? How often has it been so? Mat. 23. 37.
How often would I have gathered you under my wings as an Hen does her Chickens?
So how often has Christ offered Life and Salvation to you? And then how
inexcusable will you be at the Last Day? Men have their Excuses now, but there
is a day at hand when they will not have one word to say, why they did not come to
Christ for the Pardon of their sins, and the Salvation of their souls. They
will be then like the man that was found without a wedding garment, Mat. 22.
12. How came thou hither not having a Weddinggarment? And it is said, he was
speechless. So Sirs, you will be speechless at the last day. You will not have
one word to Excuse your selves then, for your not coming to Christ when he did
so earnestly and so often invite you. Then your destruction must needs be of
your selves. You will be guilty of your own Blood. Now you slight what you
hear: but you will not do so in the day when Christ will say as David to the
A^n^lekite, 2 Samuel 1. 16. Thy Blood shall be upon thy own head. There is not
one of you that shall dye in his^ins, but the blood of his Soul shall be on his
own head. I call Heaven and Earth to record against you this Day. Men and
Angels shall bear me witness at the Last Day. that I have Preached Christ to
you, and Salvation by him. But Oh that you would be persuaded to come to him
without any further delays. Your past neglects of Christ, and of the great
Salvation may suffice you. Let not any one say, I Will stay until I am sick and
like to dye, and then I Will believe and give my self to Christ. Have you not
heard of a poor Man that did so, and when he lay on his Deathbed a Minister
said to him, There is no way left for you to obtain Salvation but by going to
Christ. Oh said he when I was well and in ^ealth^l would not go to Christ, now
I am sick and dying I cannot go. Oh remember the avenger of Blood is behind
you. How did the Manslayer make ha^t to the City of Refuge when pur^u^d? Poor
Creature, do thou not know it, the avenger of Blood is pursuing of thee, and
will slay thy Soul if thou do not make have to the City of Refuge. Therefore
Delay no longer, considering that Now is the accepted Time, now is the Day of
Salvation.

TO DESPAIR Of the Forgiveness of SIN, Is a GREAT EVIL.
GENESIS IV. 13. And Cain said unto the Lord, My Punishment is greater than I can
bear.


IN the former part of this Chapter we have the History of the two first Mon
that ever were Born into the World, viz. Can and Abel. Abel the Younger Brother
was a very pious Man One that ^eared God, and that trusted in him for Eternal
Life, through the promised Savior: Which he testified by the Sacrifice he
offered to the Lord; and at last he died a Martyr. (...) who was the first man
that ever was born, made himself to be the Firstborn of the Devil. He
Sacrificed without Faith, and was angry at God because He did not accept him.
He regarded not the (...) which the Lord gave him, but envied and at last
murdered his Brother because his Brothers works were righteous. So that well
might the Apostle say, 1 John 3. 12. That Cain was of he wicked one. And when an
heavy Doom was passed on him, he reverthel^ss did persevere in his Sin. He was
far from r^penting or praying for the Pardon of his great iniquity; but went
from one sin to another, and fell yet further into the Condemnation of the
Devil* As we see in the words before us to ^e insisted on Which some take to be
words of Complaint and Murmuring against God, saying that his Punishment was
greater than he deserved. But others take the words to be words of Despair. The
(...) word Nasa translated to Bear, signifies also to Forgive. And according to
the Seventy Greek interpreters they run thus, My Fault is greater than it can
be forgiven to me. My Sin (says he) is so great that God Himself cannot never
forgive it. And in so saying he did exceedingly sin. One of the Ancients
observes, that Cain in saying that his Iniquity was greater than could be
forgiven, was guilty of a greater sin than when he murdered his own Brother. It
was surely an heinous ^^n in him.

Wherefore the DOCTRINE before us, is, That for Men to Despair of Forgiveness
because their Iniquities have been Great, is a great Evil.

For the clearing of the Truth before us.

First, Something may be mentioned for the Demonstration of it.

Secondly, We shall enquire whether such as belong to God may not fall into the
sin of Despair?

For the Demonstration of the Doctrine now to be insisted on.

1. It is evident in that in Despair there is a Blasphemous Reflection on the
Glorious Name of God. It is a disowning and a denying of his Glorio^s
Attributes. It is a denying of his Omnipotency. God can do every thing; the
doing whereof does argue or require power. And in the forgiveness of sin power
is required. Therefore when Moses prayed for the Children of Israel that their
sin might be forgiven them, he said, Numb. 14. 17. Let the Power of my Lard be
great. q. d. The greatness of thy power is ^hewn in forgiving great Sins. But
Despair makes the Omnipotent God to be no better than Impotent sinful Men. To
forgive sin is an act of Omnipotent Goodness. Despair robs God of this Glory.
Men are apt to judge of God by themselves. Because they are not able to forgive
very great wrongs, they are apt to think that God cannot do so neither: but this
the Lord reproves, Isa. 55. 8, 9. My ways are not as your ways, but as the
Heavens are higher than the Earth so are my ways higher than your ways. I Will
forgive great injuries to my Name, sa^e^ the Lord, though you cannot do the like:
you may not judge of me by your selves, who cannot forgive such offenses: But my
ways are above yours. Thus to speak concerning God, thus to deny his
Omnipotent Power, is to speak against him, it is to blaspheme his Name, Psalm.
78. 19. They spoke against God saying, can God prepare a Table? So when any
say, Can God forgive so great a Sinner? Can God pardon so great Sins as mine
are? This is to speak against Him. Again, Despair is directly against the Grace
and Mercy of God. In which Attributes his Divine Glory does most eminently
shine forth. When God proclaimed his Name before Moses, Exodus 34. 6, 7 He said,
I am the Lord, Gracious and Merciful, L^^g-suffering, abundant in Goodness and
Truth, keeping Mercy for Thousands, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin.
Some have observed that in the Proclamation of Gods Name, there are no less
than thirteen Attributes mention^d which relate to his Mercy, and only one to
his Justice. God counts that especially as his Glory, Epe^. 1. 12. That we may
be to the Praise of his Glory. His Grace his Mercy is his Glory. Now by De^pair
men leave to God but a little of this Glory. They limit the Mercy of God. To
limit God is a great Evil. Psalm* 78. 41. They limited the Holy One of Israel.
To limit his Power or his Mercy is a great Evil. Yet so do they that Despair.
They set bounds to the infinite Mercy of God. They say there is but a little
Mercy in God: Only Mercy enough to pardon lesser sins, but not the greatest.
Men thereby say there is more of Evil in a finite Creature, than there is of
Goodness in the Infinite God: than which blasphemy nothing more untrue can be
spoken. Romans 5. 20. Where Sin abounds Grace much more abound. But Despair
says, Si^ does abound more than the Grace of God. Yea and in this sin, there
is a blasphemous reflection on the Truth of God as well as on his Power and
Mercy, as if there were no. Truth in those gracious Promises which God has
made unto repenting believing Sinners. God in his Word has said that the
greatest sinners in the world, if they will truly repent and turn to him shall
be forgiven, Isa. 1. 18. Wash you make you clean, cease to do evil, learn to do
well, though your sins be as Scarlet they shall become white as Snow, then red
like Crimson, they shall be a Wool. God says that the horride^^ bloodiest
Sinners in the world shall have a full forgiveness of all their sins if they
turn to him. But Despair says, that is not true. God in his Word says, they
that have been guilty of many sins as well as great ones, if they do truly
repent and turn to God in Jesus Christ, shall have their many sins forgiven to
them. Isa. 55. 7. Let the Wicked forsake his war, and the Unrighteous man his
thoughts, and return to the Lord, he will have mercy, to our God and he will
abundantly pardon. He will multiply to pardon. They that have been guilty of
many sins shall find there are more Pardons with God to bestow on them, than
they have committed sins. And they that have committed the same sins many Times
over, yet God, says in his Word, if they will repent and believe on Jesus
Christ they shall be forgiven. A Drunkard that has been Drunk an hundred times
and more. An Unclean person that has been guilty many a time, if he repents God
will forgive him. Jer. 3. 1. Though thou ^^st played the Harl^t with many Lovers,
yet Return. Yea, and He has promised that they who have been guilty of grievous
(...), that have returned to those (...) which for a time they had forsaken,
upon true Repentance after all shall be Pardoned Jer. 3. 12. Return ye
Backsliding Children, and I will not cause my anger to fall upon you. Now
Despair says, there is no truth in these Promises. It is then a great Evil.

2. In Despair there is a great reflection on Jesus Christ the Son of God and
Savior of the World. It says Jesus Christ is but a little Savior, whereas He
is a Savior, and a Great one, Isa. 63. 1. He is mighty to save. Despair says
of Christ that He is a Physician that can cure only lesser diseases and not the
greatest Whereas he is able to cure the most Diseased Soul in the world. As no
Bodily Disease could stand before his power, Mat. 4. 23. He healed all manner
of Sicknesses, and all manner of Diseases. That was to signify that he Heals
all manner of Soul Diseases: And that he has obtained Forgiveness for all
manner of Sins that men are guilty of. We find in the Gospel, some diseased
Twelve, others Eighteen, others Thirty Eight Years, yet Christ did heal them;
thereby declaring, that Souls which have been a long time under the Guilt of
sin may through him hope for Forgiveness. And that the most Chronical, the most
laveterate Soul-diseases may be and shall be healed by him. But Despair says
otherwise. Heb. 7. 25. He is able to save to the uttermost. No, says Despair
but he is not. Though a Sinner has destroyed himself to the uttermost; though he
has damned his own Soul a Million times over, yet Christ is able to save him.
Despair then is a reflection on the Merit of the Death and Blood of Christ, as
though that Blood could make atonement for lesser offenses, but not for great
ones: Whereas the Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, cleanses from
all sin, 1 John 1. 7. Let the sins be never so many, never so great, that Blood
cleanses from them all. There is more of Merit in the Blood of the Lord Jesus
Christ, than there has been of Demerit in the greatest Sin that ever was
committed in the world. Adams sin was in some respects the greatest that ever
was, for that has brought ruin on thousands of millions of Immortal Souls, yet
the Merit of the Death of Christ, has exceeded the Demerit of that great
Offense Romans 5* 17. If by one Death came, how much more shall they that receive
abundance of Grace, and the gift of Righteousness reign in Life, by Jesus
Christ. Much more says the Apostle. The Disobedience of Adam destroyed Souls,
much more does the Obedience of Christ save the Souls that believe on him. God
has been pleased more, and honored more by the Death of Christ, than he has
been displeased and dishonored by all the sins of all the Men in the world.
But Despair denies this. And it reflects on the Veracity of Christ, as though
(...) promised more than he either would or could perform. Christ says,
whoever comes to him He will accept of them and save them, Joh* 6. 37. Him that
comes to me I will in no wise cast out. But the Despairing* sinner says,
though I should go to Christ he would (...) me out. So then it is a great Evil.

4. Despair proce^d* from Evil Caus^s. That*s another thing that ^ets forth the
Evil of it.

1. It proceeds from Satan. It Is (...) that makes men Despair. Presumption and
Despair both proceed from the Devil. First he Tempts sinners to commit very
great sins, and when they have done so, then he tells them their sin is greater
than can be forgiven. Thus in Cain, the Wicked one persuaded him to murder his
Brother, and when he had done so, he told him that now his Sin was so great, as
that it was Unpardonable. Who is it that says to sinners, their sins are
greater than can be forgiven? God does not say so. And Ungodly sinners though
they are wont to tempt one another to Presumptuous sins, yet they don't use to
tempt one another to Despair. It remains then that it is Satan which tempts
persons to Desperation. So he tells sinners it is too soon to Repent, and when
they have delayed their Repentance for a long time, then if they begin to have
a serious thought of turning to God, he says now it is too late. First that it
was too soon, and then that it is too late. This he does that so he may
discourage from Returning to God, and from Praying for Pardoning mercy.

2. Despair proceeds from groundless and sinful Fears. Especially there are
three things which Despairing Sinners are afraid of, without any just ground.

1. Lest the Day of Grace is past with them. But why should any say so, or
think so? Says the Lord, Isa. 40, 27. Why say thou O Jacob? Why speak
thou O Israel, my judgment is passed over from my God? Why should any one say
the Day of Grace is past? God will look on me no more! Whereas there is not any
one here this day, that can say that his Revealed Day of Grace is gone and
passed away. As for the Secret Inward Day of Grace that continues so long as
the Holy Spirit strives with the Soul. Such fears as these not amounting to
Despair oftentimes are attended with the strivings of the Holy Spirit of God.
Hence the Apostle speaks of the Spirit of Bondage to Fear, Romans 8. 15. Poor
sinful Creatures are in great Bondage, because they are full of Fear. God
sanctifies such Fears to his Elect, in order to their Conversion. As for the
Revealed Day of Grace, that continues so long as men enjoy the Outward means of
Grace, and have the Gospel Preached to them, which is the Gospel of the Grace
of God. Isa. 65. 2. I have stretched out my hand all the day long. There is no
man that lives under the Gospel, but God offers to him the Pardon of his Sins,
and the Salvation of his Soul, if he will indeed believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ. And unto such the Revealed Day of Grace continues so long as the Day of
Life Indeed after Life is ended, the Day of Grace is at an end. No more
Sermons, no more tenders of Mercy, no more calls to Repentance after that.
Therefore Desperation must needs be in such miserable Souls as dye in their
sins, Isa. 38. 18. They that go down to the Pit cannot hope for thy Truth. But
while Life lasts there is hope, Eccl. 9. 4 To him that is joined to the living
there is hope. Hope that he may obtain the forgiveness of Sin, and the Eternal
salvation of his Soul.

2. Despairing Sinners are afraid that God from all Eternity has Reprobated
them to Damnation. But who is this that darkens Counsel by words without
Knowledge? Who told thee that thou art a Reprobate? God never told thee so. It
must needs be Satan then, and will you believe him? Learned Bezn wrote a
Judicious Treatise, concerning Divine Reprobation. It so happened that a man
who read that Book (...) himself a Reprobate, fell into Despair, and de^^royed
himself. And thereupon Popish writers, and some others have taken occasion to
blaspheme the Doctrine of Reprobation, as if it tended to drive men to Despair.
But there is no cause for that Predestination is a Divine secret, known to no
Man or Angel, to none but God alone. Therefore for men to conclude that they
are Reprobated is an high offense to God, Romans 11. 34 Who has known the mind
of the Lord, or who has been his Counselor? Who was by him when he wrote the
Book of Life, to see whose Names were enrolled there, and whose left out? As
God said to Job, Job, 38. 17 Have the gates of Death been opened to thee, or
have thou seen the doors of the shadow of Death? So has the Book of Death been
opened to thee, that thou should know who are appointed to Wrath, and not
unto Salvation? No, it has not For any man to say that another is a Reprobate
would be a great sin. But for him to say that he himself is so, would be a
greater sin. A man may know his Election by giving diligence to make his
Calling sure. If he know that he is Effectually Called, he may be assured of
his Election. But no man can know his Reprobation, except in one case which is
rare, viz. if he has committed the Unpardonable Sin.

Therefore,

3. Another groundless Fear which is the cause of Despair in some, is that they
have been guilty of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, which shall never be
forgiven neither in this world, nor in that which is to come. But that is a
groundless Fear in any one that has any fear about it. There are many that are
perplexed left they have been guilty of the Sin against the Holy Ghost, of whom
it is certain that they never did, nor never shall commit that sin. Many pious
Souls especially when in the Pangs of the New Birth, are thus Tempted. Young
Converts are frequently disturbed with fears of that nature. But the reason of
it is they are ignorant of the nature of that Sin. The sin against the Holy
Ghost is a knowing and melicio^s blaspheming the operations of the Holy Spirit
of God. Whoever has been guilty of that sin, has maliciously blasphemed that
which in his Conscience he did believe was the work of Gods Spirit. There is
cause to conclude that the Phari^ees were some of them guilty of that sin. When
the Lord Jesus Christ did by the power (...) ^he Holy Spirit of God cast out
Devils, the Pharisees blasphemously said He did it by the Devil. They knew in
their Consciences, they were fully convinced of it, that* what Christ did was
by the Holy Spirit, yet they most maliciously said, it was by the Devil. On
that occasion Christ said, that the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost should
never be forgiven, Mat. 12. 32. But consider the Characters of those that have
been guilty of the Unpardonable Sin, and then say whether (...) have been
guilty of it or no.

One Character of such a person is, that he has an implacable Hatred of the
Holy Lord Jesus Christ. Heb. ^. 6. They cannot be renewed by Repentance, for
they have Crucified the Son of God afresh. They that have committed the
Unpardonable sin, if it were possible for them to do it, they would Crucify the
Son of God again. They contemn the Doctrine of Salvation by the Blood of
Christ. They trample under foot the Son of God, and count the Blood of the
Covenant an unholy thing. Heb. 10. 29.

Again, Such as have been guilty of this sin are bitter Persecutors of those
that have the image of God appearing in them. It has been thought by Divines,
that Saul was guilty of the great Transgression. Now he had a most bitter
hatred of those that did in a peculiar manner belong to God. 1 Samuel 22. 17.
Slay the Priests of the Lord. They are the Lords Priests therefore Slay them.
He therein showed his spite against God, who had preferred David above him. So
it is with those that commit the Unpardonable sin. They cannot come at God, and
therefore will show all the spite they can against his Faithful Servants.

Two things I may venture to say,

1. They that are afraid lest they have committed the Sin against the Holy
Ghost, it is certain they never did commit it. If they had they would never be
troubled on that acount: For it would be matter of pleasure to them; as it is
with the Devil: All manner of sin is pleasant to him. The Devil is not troubled
that he has been guilty of any one sin. So they that have committed the Sin
against the Holy Ghost are not sorry for what they have done. And I may venture
to say,

2. That there is not one here in this Assembly that has been guilty of that
Sin. For if you had, you would not be here attending on the Word of God. They
that commit that sin do as, Heb. 10. 25 Forsake the assembly of the Saints.
They then that do attend the Assemblies of Gods People, that prize his
Ordinances, that hear the Word of his Gospel with delight, have not been left
to that sin. So then that is a groundless Fear.

4. Despair has Evil Effects. As it proceeds from Evil Causes, so it produces
Evil Effects. There are sad Consequen^es of it.

1. It does cause Men to be like Satan: Fallen Men to be like the fallen
Angels. The Devil is the most Despairing Spirit that ever was (...) He knows
that he shall be Damned at the great Day. There is a Scripture which the Devil
and all his Angels cannot hear, nor read, nor think or without horror and
trembling, namely that which is expressive of the Sentence which the son of God
will pass on all the Reprobate would at the Last day, Mat. 25. 41 Christ will
then say, (...) into Everlasting Fire, Prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
The Devil and all his Angels know most certainly, that they must endure Ever
lasting Fire after the great Day (...). There was a company of Devils that fell
a roaring when Christ came near them, and said, Mat. 8. 29 Art thou come to
(...) before the time? They know that there is a time when they shall be in
horrible Torment, much greater than they are in at this day. The fallen Angels
are reserved in Everlasting Chains of Darkness for the Judgment of the great
Day. They know that they shall never get out of those Chains, which the great
God has bound them in. They never had an offer of Grace, and they know they
never shall. They forever Despair of it. So then Despair is from the Spirit of
darkness, and makes men resemble him.

2. It is the cause of very much Sin. It makes men guilty of sins of Omission.
Hence they neglect Duty. They neglect Prayer and will do so if they Despair. If
they Despair they will not go to Christ for Salvation. No man will attempt to
do that which he believes is ^t^erly in vain to endeavor. No man will be
diligent in pursuing after Salvation when he utterly Despairs of obtaining it.
And it causes men to be guilty of other great Sins, Jer. 2. 25. Thou say
there is no Hope. What then follows? We have loved Strangers and after them we
will go. When sinners say, there is no Hope, then they give themselves over to
their Lusts, and say, after my Sins I will go. There is no hope of the Pardon
of them, therefore I will sin more and more. We have an instance of it in Saul,
he Despaired, And what did he do? He goes to the Witch of Endor, and at last
murders himself. And did not Despairing Judas do the like?

Thus have we seen the Doctrine proved. Before we proceed to the Application of
it, something may be spoken in Answer to this Enquiry, viz.

Whether may those that are not as Cain was Reprobates, but the Elect of God
fall into the Sin of D^^^air?

Take the Answer in Three Conclusions.

CONCLUSION I.
Not only Elect Vessels, but true Believers may for a time be overcome with
this Evil. What are men, yea the best of men, if God withdraw from them, and
leave them to the power of Satan's Temptations? There have been very Holy Men
and Women who have had their pangs of Despair. For such may be of melancholy
tempers, and thence apt without any just ground, to phan^y dismal things
concerning themselves. There was an eminent Minister in London, (Mr. Nalton)
who in some fits of melancholy would say, If an Angel should come from Heaven
and tell him that he had Grace, he could not believe him. An Aged and Faithful
Minister here in New England, being overcome with melancholy, did many Years
ago utter such words as these to me, O it is a sad thing when a man knows that
he must be Damned. I have your Father more than any man in the world: He came
to see me, and would have Prayed with me, but I would not permit him to do it
lest he should take Gods Name in vain by Praying for a (...) Thus a Natural
Disease is through the malice of Satan the cause of this Spiritual Malady. And
then it is often removed by the use of natural means. The Physician may do more
than the Divine (...) for relief in this case. Moreover, Good men may be in a
Despairing condition through a mistaken Judgment Some very pious Souls have
been troubled with horrid Blash^emous Thoughts concerning God, and Christ, and
the Holy Scriptures; and Satan has from thence taken occasion to fill them with
(...) Thoughts too. They have fal^ly imagined that no one that belongs to God
could be troubled with such thoughts: Whereas the greatest Saints on Earth may
be vexed with them. What more blasphemous imagination can there be than that a
Man should worship the Devil? Nevertheless, the Devil did suggest that to the
Holy mind of Christ in whom there never was any sin. Such blasphemous thoughts
if they are not at all entertained, but rejected with abhorrency, are the
Devils sin, and not the sins, only the great affliction of the man that is
perplexed with them. When Joseph's Steward put his Silver Cup into Benjamins
Sack, there was no guilt on Benjamin who never consented to the Theft. No more
are they guilty of sin whose minds are perplexed with blasphemous injections
from Satan, as long as they give no consent to them. It is not the ravished
party, but the party whose will consented to the rape that is guilty. They that
Cry out to Heaven for help against such Tempta^ions ought not to be
discouraged, or to have the least Despairing thought on that account.

CONCLUSION II.
For the most part when Gods Children fall into the Sin of Despair, they are
graciously revived and comforted before they go out of the world. The holy
Penman of the Seventy Seventh Psalm had his dark hours. Ver. 3 He remembered God
and was troubled. When he remembered the Power of God, and the Justice of God he
was troubled, as thinking these were against him. When he remembered the Mercy
of God he was troubled, left that would not favor him. He said, Will he be
favorable no more? Is his mercy clean gone forever? Ver. 7, 8. Thus
disconsolate was he But he recovered out of those dismal sorrows, ver. 10. I
said this is my Infirmity. There have been very eminent Saints who having
fallen into the pit of Despair, have not dyed there. The holy Martyr Mr. Robert
Glover, a little before his death was much sunk in his spirit. But when he came
to behold the Stake where he must dye, he was e'ne ravished with joy, saying,
He is come, He is come, the Comforter is come to my soul. That Martyrs Brother
Mr. John Glover, had been in a sad Despairing condition a long time, fearing
(without cause) that he had committed the Unpardonable sin. But some Years
before his death the Lord restored Comforts to him, and he lived a most
Cele^tial life, more like an Angel than like an Earthly Man, spending the most
of his Time in Communion with God. There was in Oxford a Learned and Holy
Minister (Mr. Peacock) who thought himself a Reprobate, and that Prayer for him
would in vain. But he dyed tri^mpha^tly with such words as these in his mouth,
I am sure the Lord has provided for me a Kingdom, the Joy that I feel it
incredible. I am a thousand times happy. That Eminently Religious Gentlewoman,
Mrs. Katherine Brettergh had a fit of Despair, in which she would with tears
trickling down her Cheeks, cry out that she was a woeful forsaken Woman, having
a roaring Wilderness of woe within her, wishing she had never been Born, or that
she had been any other Creature, rather than such an one. But this Agony of
that Eminent Saint, who had been a great blessing to many, ended in Joy
unspeakable and full of Glory. For she dyed with such words as these; And now
blessed Lord! Thy comfortable Presence is come: Yea Lord, thou have had respect
to thy Handmaid, and (...) come with fullness of Joy, and abundance of
Consolations. O bl^ssed be thy Name my Lord and my God. O the Joy^^! The Joys!
The Jo^es (...) ^ee^ (...) my Soul! The^ be wonderful! They be wonderful! They
be wonderful! Thus dyed that precious Saint after the terrible Conflict was
over. I omit to say any thing of those pious Gentlewomen, Mrs. Ho^ywood, and
Mrs. Drake, the Narrative of whose doleful Despairs, and after that joyful
Deliverances, have been long since published to the world. Nevertheless* One
Example more I shall mention which his of later Date. Mr. Charles L^ngfo^d was
in grievous Horror and Despair for some Years. But God wonderfully brought him
out of his distresses, and that in Answer to the Prayers of his Wife, who was a
praying holy Woman. This man happened to over hear her at her secret Devotions,
where she expressed her self after this manner, Oh my Father, my Father what
(...) thou do for my Husband. Destroy me if thou will, but I pray thee spare my
Husband. He has been speaking and acting in thy Cause, so that if he should
perish dishonor will come to the Name. Therefore I pray thee save him, and do
to me what thou will. At the very Moment when he heard his Godly Wife thus
praying the Evil Spirit departed from him, and all his Temptations vanished
from that very Day, which was April 16. in the Year 1669. He therefore
Published a Book giving an account of his Gracious Deliverance, which Book is
Entitled, Gods wonderful Mercy in the Mount of woeful Extromity.

CONCLUSION III.
It is possible that a Godly man may dye under a Cloud. We must not judge of
men by their last hours, but by the former course of their lives. As some
Ungodly Hypocrites go smoothly out of the world: There are no ^ands in their
Death. Psalm 73. 4. They have a deluding Confidence of their own good estate,
Prove. 30. 12. Rev. 2. 17. They may live so and dye so, and never be sensible of
their woeful mistake, until it be too late to help it, Jer. 2. 37. Our Learned
Cartwright observes that many a Sinner has gone to Hell with a Lord have mercy
in his mouth: So have they with an ungrounded persuasion of their finding
mercy. From thence it is that some Ungodly persons are not afraid of death,
pretending to an assurance of Heaven. So on the other hand, Gracious Souls may
live and dye under great Fears what will become of them after death. A great
Casuist speaks after this manner, The common Opinion (says he) is, that if a
man Die quietly and go away like a Lamb, then he goes straight to Heaven, but if
the violence of the Disease cause frantic behaviors, then men use to say
there is a Judgment of God, serving either to discover an Hypocrite, or to
plague a Wicked man. But the truth is otherwise. For indeed a man may dye like
a Lamb, and yet go to Hell. And one that dies in exceeding Torments and strange
behavior of the Body, may go to Heaven. Thus speaks our famous Mr. Perkins.
And how often has it been seen that men of the greatest Holiness have gone out
of the world though with inward tranquillity of Soul, yet not with Ee^tasies of
joy. That Heavenly Saint, Mr. Paul Bain^s when dying had not any transports of
Joy. Yea, it is possible that men of great Pi^ty may die by Cabentures, or other
Diseases causing distractions, and then if they utter Despairful speeches, it
is not to be wondered at. Now then concerning the present case, I say with that
Eminent Divine Mr. Bolton, that for my part, I would not much alter my Censure
of a man's spiritual estate whom I have thoroughly known before for the manner of
his death Hear (says he) that great Doctor, (he intends Mr. Greenham) in the
Art of rightly comforting afflicted Consciences, who (...), ^ut what if you
should ^ay in this discomfort? For my part (as I look for no great things in my
Death) I would not thinks more hardly of you, neither (...) wis^ any to judge
otherwise of Gods Child in that state of Death. We are not to distrust Gods
Mercy in death, be we never so uncomfortable, if so be it has been before (...)
in our (...) and Sanctification. Thus speaks Holy Mr. Gree^ham.

We proceed now to the APPLICATION of the Doctrine, only by way of Exhortation.

I. Let every one say to his Soul as David did to his, Psalm. 43. 11. O my Soul
hope thou in God. There are those in this Assembly, that are in Distresses, the
Lord knows how many are perplexed in their Souls, and full of fears and doubts,
well but Despair not however: But rather go to God and say to him, as his
People of old did, Jer. 14. 8. O thou that a^t the Hope of Israel, and the
Savior thereof in the time of Trouble, leave me not. Go and Cry to God, and
yet Hope in him. Hope is a Grace exceeding necessary for a Christian, as an
Helmet is for a Soldier. Ephesians. 6. 17. Put on the Helmet of Salvation. What is
that? Hope in God and the Lord Jesus Christ, that is the Helmet of Salvation;
it is the Headpiece. If a man be wounded in the head, it is dangerous. If a
Christian lets his Hope go, his Head lies open to the Wicked one, to the fiery
Darts of the Wicked one. And those fiery Darts are evil Thoughts concerning
God. The Devil puts it into a Christians heart that God will never have mercy
on him, that God has Reprobated him. Now his Head piece is gone if he gives way
to these Temptations. Hope is as necessary as an Anchor to a Vessel. Heb. 6.
18, 19. Who are fled for Refuge to the Hope set before us, which Hope is the
Anchor of the Soul, sure and steadfast. What comes of a Vessel if it has no
Anchor when a Storm rises? It is broken to pieces. So the poor Souls that let
their Hope go, bring themselves to confusion.

Therefore,

Meditate much on those things that are a sure ground of Consolation. A great
relief against all Despairing thoughts is, in the consideration of the
infiniteness of the Mercy of God. He is rich in Mercy. How great is his
Goodness? No man can say how great his Goodness is. No man can say how far his
Mercy may extend. And meditate on the infinite Merit of the Death of Christ. A
man may safely venture his Soul on that bottom. The greatest sinner may safely
say, If there is not Merit enough in the Blood of Christ to save me, let my
Soul perish for ever. Well then, think much and often on the infinite Merit of
that precious Blood. And remember also, that God takes pleasure in them that
Hope in his Mercy, Psalm. 147. 11. They that Pray to God, and Hope in his Mercy,
and Confess their Sins and Hope in his Mercy, and Turn, from Sin to God and
Hope in his Mercy, God takes pleasure in them. For then the more Glory will
come to his Name the greater their Sins have been. Says David, Psalm. 25. 11.
For thy Name sake Pardon mine ^niquity for it is great. The greater the
Iniquity of any poor Creature has been, the greater Glory will come to God by
the Pardon of it. Therefore God takes pleasure in it, when very great Sinners
return to him and hope in his mercy. Remember also, that others that have
sinned as much as you, have found pardoning mercy with God. There is not any
one here this day, but as great a sinner as he, has been Pardoned. What a
bloody Sinner was Manassch? And yet when he humbled himself greatly, the Lord
had mercy on him. What think you of the Jews that embrewed their hands in the
Blood of Christ? They were far greater Sinners than Cain, who murdered his
Brother Ahel. And yet many of those very men that Crucified the Son of God, had
their Sins forgiven for the sake of that Blood that was shed by them. Let not
any say, Oh but I have continued a long time in Sin, and therefore I Despair of
Forgiveness. Say not so^ For some have been called and brought home to Christ,
and have had their Sins forgiven them after Gray-hairs have been upon them.
Mat. 20. 6. We read of one called at the Eleventh Hour. It may be thou art come
to the Eleventh Hour. Old Age has overtaken thee in thy sins; Well, but for all
that God will be merciful to thee and forgive thy sins, if now thou will
Believe on the Name of His Son Jesus Christ. Although it be indeed very rare,
that men who have lived under the Gospel all their days, should be Converted
in their Old Age, yet some such instances have been. One in this Land a wicked
Drunkard, and one that had been guilty of other Impieties till Fifty Years Old:
Then God took hold of his Heart and made him a remarkable Convert. Ar^tius a
Learned Foreign Divine te^^ifies on his own knowledge, That there was a
Merchant in Strasboro^gh that had been as wicked a man as possibly could be, a
vile Adulterer, Swearer, Drunkard, and continued in his Sins till Old Age came
upon him, and then his Conscience being awakened he fell into Despair for some
time, and would Cry out that his sins were so great that GOD could not Forgive
them; And in the heig^ht of Despair would many times call upon the Devil to
fetch him away. Says this Divine, much Prayer was made for him by many
Ministers of God, and other Praying Christians, and God did at last near prayer
for him, that he was not only recovered out of his Despairing agonies, but was
full of Joy, lived a Godly life for several Years and dyed comfortably. Since
then there have been such instances in the world, let no one Despair of finding
Mercy with God, if they turn to him in JESUS CHRIST.

II. There is a Good Despair which I am to Exhort you unto, namely, Despair of
finding Mercy if you continue Impenitent. Godly sorrow works Repentance to
Salvation. But without Repentance Despair of Salvation. Christ said, Except you
Repent you perish. One thing in Repe^^^nce is to Pray and Cry to God for Mercy.
As it was said to Simon Magus, Repent and Pray, if it be possible to Sins may
be forgiven thee. But without repenting and praying and seeking to God, Despair
of ever finding forgiveness. Turning from Sin is another thing in Repentance,
Prove. 28 13 He that confesses and forsake (...) find mercy. Thou must Despair
of finding mercy if thou will not forsake thy sins, as well as confess them.
And yet all the Repentance in the world cannot make atonement for sin. If thou
should weep Seas of Tears, that would not make amends for the wrong done to
God by thy Sins. If thou should give ten thousand Rivers of Oil, Yea, the
Fruit of thy Body for the Sin of thy Soul, all will not do. Only Christ can do
that. Only the Obedience and the Righteousness of Christ can make satisfaction
for Sin. Therefore Despair of obtaining the forgiveness of thy sins without a
Christ. They that are without Christ are without Hope. And without the
Righteousness of Christ there is nothing but Despair that sinners may promise
to themselves. Oh! Then look to Him above all things. It was well spoken by an
Eminent Minister on his Deathbed, When I look on the best Works that ever I
did, the best Sermon that ever I Preached, or the best Prayer that ever I made,
I fall into Despair: But when I look upon Christ, and consider his
Righteousness, I have Hope and Comfort, my Soul lives then. Oh then let that be
our chief care to be found in Him; And in that way let every Soul Hope in the
Mercy of God: And look to Him who says to us all, Isa. 45. 22. Look unto me all
ye ends of the Earth and be saved.

Every Man in the WORLD, Is going into ETERNITY
MAT. XXV. 46. And these shall go away into Everlasting Punishment, but the
Righteous into Life Eternal.


THE Disciples came to Christ privately, as He sat on Mount Ol vet, praying His
Resolution of three Enquiries, concerning which they were solicitous. This the
Evangelist takes notice of in the third Verse of the precedeing Chapter.

1. When should the Temple be destroyed? That Christ had given them occasion to
make enquiry about: For in his last Sermon that he Preached in Jerusalem, he
plainly told them that their House, meaning the Temple, should be left utterly
Desolate: And when the Disciples showed him the wonderful Stones in that
Edifice, admiring the greatness of them, the Lord said, Not one of these Stones
shall be left on another. Now they enqui^ed when this thing should be? We have
the Answer to that Enquiry from the Third to the Twenty-fourth Verse, in the
preceding Chapter.

2. They enquire concerning the Signs of his coming, viz. His Providential
coming to take vengeance on the Jenish Nation? The Answer to that is from the
Twenty-fourth Verse of the former to the Thirty-first of this Chapter.

3. They enquire when shall be the End of the World? That end of the world
which shall be at the Universal Judgment? ^o that enquiry Christ answers from
the Thirty-first Verse of this Chapter to the end of it. In which we have an
illustrious. Description of the Great Day of Judgment; alleding to the Supreme
Court of Judicature among the Jews, from which there was no appeal The
Sanbedrim which was at first instituted by Divine direction, did consist of
Seventy Judges, besides Moses who was the chief. These Judges sat in the form
of a Semicircle. The Praesident sat in the middle; next on his right hand was
the Vice President, whom the Jews (...), Ah Beth Din, The Father of the House
of Judgment. This gives light to those words which (...) has written concerning
the Day of Judgment, where he says that Thrones, that is Seats of Judicature
were pitched down. And he speaks of the Ancient of Days. This also helps to
understand that Scripture. Mat. 26. 64. where Christ says, That they should
see the Son of Man standing at the Right hand of Power; Alluding to that
Supreme Court of Judicature among the Jews. He that was in Power and Dignity
next to the Praesident, sat at his right hand. And there were two Clerks in
that Court; one of them did stand at the right hand of the Judge, and he did
write down the Votes for Absolution: The other stood at his left hand, and
wrote down the Votes for Condemnation. Thus did God order it to be, that there
might be a lively Representation of the Day of Judgment; when all m^n must
appear before the Son of God, and either be Absolved or Condemned by him. This
Day of Judgment is set forth from three particulars.

1. A Separation: There will be a Separation made between the Righteous and the
Wicked. The Righteous are noted by the Sheep on the right hand; the Wicked by
the Goats on the left hand.

2. A Sentence that then shall be passed on all the Men in the world, or that
ever shall be. As for the Righteous it will be said to them, Come ye Blessed
(...) the Kingdom prepared for you: As for the Wicked it shall be said to them,
Go ye Cursed into Everlasting Fire.

3. There is here noted the Execution of that Sentence. That is in the Verse
before us. And although the Sentence shall be passed first on the Righteous,
nevertheless the Execution will be first on the Wicked. These shall go away
into Everlasting Punishment: It will certainly affect the Righteous
inexpressibly, and cause them to admire the Grace of God, and to praise his
Name to Eternity, when they shall see such terrible Execution done to all the
Wicked in the world, and themselves not only to be delivered from that
Punishment, but to have Life, and Life Eternal too given to them.

The words afford us this Doctrine, Viz.

That every Man in the World is going into Eternity.

There are three Propositions before us.

PROPOSITION I.
That is said to be Eternal which is of Everlasting duration. Sometimes
Eternity is taken in a more strict sense, namely for that which has neither the
beginning nor ending of Days. Eternity is an infinite standing Now, that
admits of no succession; and thus only the First Being is Eternal, and has
therefore that Name of I AM given to him* Exodus 3. 14. God said to Moses, that
he should say to Pharaoh I AM has sent me. All things whether past or to come
are present with him. He only is without beginning of Days. Psalm. 90. 2^ from
Everlasting to Eve^lasting thou art God. And in this sense Eternity is an
incommunicable property of the Divine Nature. God is the Eternal; and is
thereby distinguished from all false gods* and from all Creatures* whatsoever.
Isa. 57. 16. He is the High and Lo^ty One that inhabits Eternity. But in
Scripture Eternity is many times taken for the same with Perpetnity. That is
said to be Et^^nal which is Perpetual: So there are Creatures that continue to
Eternity: Though there is no Creature but has a beginning, yet there are
Creatures that shall never have an ending. Thus the Punishment of sinners,
their Misery in another world is said to be Eternal Mar. 3. 29. They shall have
Eternal Damnation. And the Happiness of the Righteous is said to be Eternal: As
in the Text before us, They shall go into Life Eternal. When therefore it is
said that every Man is going into Eternity, the meaning is, that every Man is
going into an Unchangeable Estate, an estate that shall be forever
Unchangeable; and is going to a place where he must be forever and ever,
through out the Ages of Eternity.

PROPOSITION II.
That every Man in the world is going out of this into another World. Men must
not b^ in this world always As Christ said to his Disciples, Mat. 26. 11. Me
you have not always. Even so, Men are not to be in the world always; no, nor
long neither. Hence David said, 1 Chronicles. 29. 15. Our Days on Earth are as a
shadow, and there is (...) abiding. No abiding here on the Earth. Zech. 1. 5.
Your Fathers where are they? And the Prophets, do they live for ever? The
Prophets live in Heaven for ever, but neither they nor any else shall live on
the Earth forever. Death will put an end to Time and then comes Eternity. That
is what every man is hastening unto, Psalm. 89. 48. What man is be that lives,
and shall not see Death? There is not such a man in the world; not a living man
but he shall see death. This world is like a Stage, where men appear for a
while, and then go off to make way for another to succeed them, Eccl. 1. 4. One
Generation goes away and another comes. Or, it is like a passing Room, through
which we go, but do not set down to rest in. So as to this world, here is not
our rest, here is not the place for us to abide in; but in another room of the
Universe, and not on this Earth. Men are departing hence: Simeon speaks of his
Departure; and Paul says, The time of his Departure was at hand. Every man is
going to the Grave, as to his Body, Ec^l. 9. 10. There is no work in the Grave
whither thou go. Every man is going, and whither is he going? He is going
into the Grave. And although men as to their Bodies shall not be always there,
nevertheless, there they must be for a long time; especially such as dyed in
the first Ages of the world, Eccl^punc; 12. 5. The Grave is said to be a long
home. Man goes to his long home; and that is the House which is appointed (...)
all Living. But when they go to the Grave as to their Bodies, they do not go
thither as to their Souls. When the Body is returned to the Dust as it was, the
Spirit will return into the hands of God, to be disposed of by him, either to
Happiness or Misery. Men go when they Dye, as to their Souls into that World
which the Scripture sometimes denotes by the Name of Hades, which signifies the
unseen World. Righteous men go unto that world where Christ now is. 2 Cor. 5.
8. Being absent from the Body, we are present with the Lord. Therefore did Paul
desire to depart that he might be with Christ. As for Wicked men they go into
that world where the Devil is: Their Souls do so at the time of Death. They go
into the world where there is nothing but fire and torment, This we learn from
the Parable of Dives, and Lazarus, Luke 16. 23. The Rich man dyed and being in
Hell, he said; I am tormented in this Flame. And although this be a Parable,
Parables are taken from things that have a real Existence; and it is most
certain that they who are in that world are in a miserable condition, though not
so miserable as they shall be after the day of Judgment.

PROPOSITION III.
That World that men go into after they are out of this world, it is an Eternal
World. That is mentioned in the Scripture as the difference between this
present visible world, and that which is invisible, 2 Cor. 4. 18. The things
which are seen are Temporal, but the things which are not seen are Eternal. So
this world which our mortal Eyes see, it is a a Temporal world; but as to the
unseen world it is an Eternal world. This Earthly world and all things in it,
are of a perishing nature, and shall be dissolved, 2 Pet. 3. 10, 11. The Earth
and the works that are therein shall be burnt up, all these things shall be
dissolved. But the other world is not dissolved but abides to Eternity: When
men are there, they are fixed down world without end. Therefore in the Parable,
in Luk, 16. when Dives said to Abraham, Send Lazarus that he might dip his
finger in water and cool my Tongue, the answer was, There is a great Gulf fixed
between us, that they that would pass cannot. Eternity is a great Gulf, and
when men are got into the other world, they have shot the Gulf, they are staked
down for Eternity.

It will appear that men are going into an Eternal world if we consider,

1. There are some that are going in the way to Heaven, in that way that will
certainly bring them to Heaven. For there are some in the world that are
Regenerated, that have experienced a new and heavenly Birth. Joh. 3. 7. You
must be Born again, Born from above as the word there is. Now a heavenly Birth
does incline men to walk in that way that brings to Heaven. Grace, true Grace
is a spark of the heavenly World; it is Heaven in the beginning of it. Grace is
called Glory in the Scriptures, for that it is Glory in the beginning of it,
and it ends there. If God has given Grace to a man, it is an infallible sign
that he is bound for Heaven; if he has true, saving, sanctifying. Grace wrought
in his Soul by the Spirit of God. Ephesians. 1. 13, 14. We are Sealed with the
Spirit of Promise which is the earnest of our Inheritance. Heaven that is the
Inheritance* promised to us, if the Spirit of God has sealed us: If he has
made impressions of the Divine Image upon us, in respect of a work of
Sanctifying Grace, that is the Sealing of the Spirit, which is an earnest, a
sure sign that such a Soul is bound for heaven. There are some in the world
that have true Faith in Jesus Christ, a Faith that works by Love, a Faith that
causes them to be Obedient unto All the Commands of God. Now this Faith leads
to Heaven, 1 Pet. 1. 9. Receiving the end of your Faith the Salvation of your
Soul. If a man then have true Faith wrought in him, that Faith will end in the
Salvation of his Soul in Heaven to Eternity. If a man has Faith, then the
Righteousness of Christ is his. Romans 3* 22 The Righteousness of God is upon all
that Believe. If a man does truly Believe, the Righteousness of Christ, which
is the Righteousness of God is upon him; then he has a perfect Righteousness.
If he has the Righteousness of Christ to show, he has a Righteousness that will
justify him before the Throne of God: it is impossible for him to be shut out
of Heaven. Some then are going in that way that leads to Heaven. Now Heaven it
is an Eternal world. It Is called an Eternal House. 2 Cor. 5. 1 If our Earthly
Tabernacle were dissolved, we have an House Eternal in the Heavens. It is
called an Eternal Inheritance, Heb. 9. 15. And the Heavenly Jerusalem is said
to lie four square, Rev 21. 16. importing the Immutability of the Heavenly
state, that it is an Unchangeable Estate. And therefore Heaven is said to be a
City that has Foundations, Heb. 11. 10. It Is not like the Tents of Old that had
no Foundations, but might be pulled up and removed. It has Foundations whose
Maker and Builder is GOD, says the Apostle. The greatest Cities in the world,
the most famous that ever were of Men's building, have been destroyed. But this
is a City, a Building that shall never be destroyed; because of the Glorious
Architect of it: the Builder of it is the Eternal God himself. And the
Inhabitants of Heaven they are all of them immortal ones. God, Christ, Angels,
the Souls of Men, yea and the Bodies of the Saints of God, shall be
immortalized before their translation unto Heaven. At the Resurrection their
Bodies are made immortal, neither can they dye any more, Luke 20. 36. Then this
Mortal shall put on Immortality, and this Corruptible shall put on
Incorruption. And the Blessedness of Heaven is an Eternal Blessedness: It is
Eternal Life. It is in Scripture expressed by that of an Everlasting Kingdom. ^
Pet. 1. 11. The Everlasting Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. And it is called
an Incorruptible Crown, that fades not away. 1 Pet. 5. 4. It is not like the
Glory of this worl^ that fades; but the Heavenly Glory, it is a Crown that fades
not away When once a man is got safe into the Heavenly Country, he shall never
be removed from thence any more. Rev. 3. 12. He shall go out no more, says
Christ. In this respect the Heavenly Paradise does infinitely excel the Earthly
one. Adam was turned out of that, but the Believer shall never be turned out of
this. It Is therefore called an Everlasting Habitation, Luke 16. 9. That they
may receive you into Everlasting Habitations.

2. There are some, and alas the greatest part of the Children of men, that are
going in the way to Hell. This is true of all Profane ones, Drunkards,
Swearers, Children that are Disobedient unto their Parents, Unclean persons,
Thieves, Liars, and all such, they are going in that way that leads to Hell. As
it is said concerning the Harlot, Prove. 7. ult. Her House is in the way to
Hell, going down to the Chambers of Death. And all that are only Forma^^^ts in
Religion, that have only the Form of Godliness, but are strangers to the Power
of it; though they may themselves think they are in the the way to Heaven: and
others may think so of them too; yet it is not so, they are not in the way that
brings to Heaven. Mat. 5. 20. Except your Righteousness exceed the
Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. The Jews were wont to say of the Scribes and Pharisees, That
if there were but two men in the world that should go to Heaven, a Pharisee
would be one and a Scribe the other. And yet we see what Christ the Son of God
has said, if men have not a better, a greater Righteousness than they, they
shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. So neither are Civil Moral
men in the way to Heaven; those that are only Civil Moral men, that never
experienced a work of regenerating Grace on their souls, they are not in the
way to Heaven. Joh. 3. 3. Except a man be born again be cannot see the Kingdom
of God. Thus then there are many in the way to Hell. Now (...) is an Eternal
world. Those Souls that are gone thither are in a dismal Eternity. Eccl. 11. 8.
The days of Darkness are many: The days of that Darkness are innumerable
many. The Souls that are fallen into that Pit can never be redeemed. As in
Psalm. 49. 8. The Redemption of the Soul cease for ever: 19. ver. They shall
never see light. They are in a Dungeon that they must never come out of.
Therefore Jude says, 13. ver. For them is reserved the blackness of Darkness
for ever. Hell is an Everlasting Prison. They that are in that Prison must
never come out again. Mat. 5. 25, 26. Lest he cast thee into Prison, whence
thou shall not come out till thou have paid the utmost Farthing. That is to
say, Never, to Eternity. It was a sad word which a very wicked man uttered when
dying and just going out of the world: Now (said he) my poor Soul is a going to
pay all its Debts; Ay, but those Debts can Never, Never, Never be Paid. Yet the
miserable Soul must not come out of that woeful Prison, until the utmost
Farthing is paid. The fire that is in Hell is an Eternal fire; therefore Hell
is sometimes called by the name of Tophet in Scripture, Isa. 30. ult. Tophet is
prepared of old, the pile of it is fire and much ^ood, and the breath of the
Lord like a stream of Brimstone does kindle it. To open that Scripture: Tophet
was in a valley between Jerusalem and Mount Olivet, and in that Valley it was
that the Angel from Heaven smote the Camp of the Assyrian; in respect of which
Providence it is said, Who can stand before a Consuming Fire? Who can dwell with
Everlasting Burning? The Idolatrous Jews were wont to burn their Children to
death, to the Idol Moloch in Tophet. In that Valley there was a great Idol of
Brass, made in the form of a Man, they put their Children in it, and then put
fire under it, and burnt the poor wretches to death. They called that Valley,
The Valley of the Son of Hinn^m, that is the Valley of Roaring: The poor
miserable Children when the fire scorched them to death, would ^hri^k and roar
most lamentably. Josiah in an holy Zeal defiled that place by casting dead
Bones there, and the Garbage of the City, and that so no Annoyance might be
made by it, there was a fire kept continually: So did it become a Type of Hell
where the fire never goes out.

3. Every man in the World is in one of these two ways that have been
mentioned. Either in the way that leads to an Eternal Heaven, or else in the
way that leads to an Everlasting Hell. For there are but those two ways to be
thought of which concern immortal Souls, and every man on the face of the Earth
is going in one of them. Mat. 7. 13, 14. Narrow is the way that leads to Life,
broad is the way that leads to Destruct on. Every man is either in the Narrow
way, or in the Broad way. The way to Heaven is the Narrow way, the way to Hell
is the Broad way. As there are, so there always have been ever since there were
any number of men in the world, two sorts of men. The old distinction is that,
Genesis 3. 15. The Seed of the Serpent, and, The Seed of the Woman. This
distinction divides the whole World, 1 John 3. 10. There are the Children of
God, and the Children of the Devil. Now as for the Children of God they are
going to Heaven; but the Children of the Devil are going to Hell. So then if
every man in the world is in one of these two ways, either in the way to
Heaven, or in the way to Hell; and if that Heaven is Eternal, and Hell is
Eternal, this Doctrine must needs be true, That every Man in the World are
going into Eternity.

USE I.
How great is their Error that think there is no Eternal Beings? It is
wonderful that men that have reasonable Souls in them should be so
unreasonable. But there have been such; I wish there were none such in
New England, that would persuade themselves that there is neither God nor
Devil, nor any other World besides this: But how foolish are they that think
so, Psalm. 14. 1. The Fool ^ath said in his heart there is no God. Yea Fools
indeed they are that say so, or think so. If there be no God, how can there be
such a World as this that we see? The invisible things of God, his Eternal
Power and Godhead are clearly manifested by the Creation of the world. If a
man comes to a place where he finds many Houses, and some of them stately
Buildings, suppose no man to be seen there, yet he concludes some men have been
there to build such Houses, for they could not make themselves. So when men
look on the world and see what Creatures there are, what mighty and glorious
Creatures some of them are, as the Sun in the Firmament, and fixed Stars
innumerable, and (as Astronomers conjecture) greater than the Sun it self; they
cannot but conclude surely then there is an Eternal God to be the Creator of
these things: They then are most unreasonable, and their Error worse than
Diabolical that doubt of this. Others believe that there is an Eternal God, an
Eternal Power, but they don't believe that there are Immortal Creatures, they
don't believe that there are Invisible Beings, that there are Angels belonging
to another world. So the Sadducees of old, Act. 2^. 8. They said there was no
Angels. But God does sometimes by wonderful Providence make men to see it in
respect of their effects and operations. The Providence of God makes men see
that there are Evil Angels, since persons Possessed are miserably tormented by
them Therefore there is an Heaven and an Hell. Some are so (...) as to believe
they have no immortal Souls, that their Souls dies with their Bodies as the
souls of Bruits do: But if the Soul be not immortal how comes it to pass that
they can think and judge of Eternal Objects, that men's Souls are able to think
on God. Angels, Eternity? Certainly if their Souls were not immortal, they
could not reason about Spiritual beings. The Souls of Bruit Creatures are not
capable of such thoughts as these are: The reflection of Conscience does prove
the immortality of the Soul: in that a Guilty Conscience is a Worm that never
dies. A Sinner thinks with horror of his sin committed many Years ago, that was
never pardoned, as Joseph's Brethren, Genesis 42. 21. They said one to another, we
are ver^^^ guilty concerning our Brother That sin was committed Twenty Years
before. So sins committed an Hundred, yea a Thousand Years ago, Conscience will
remember them, and l^^h the Soul of the sinner because of them: Such a
remembrance of things past argues the soul to be immortal. We see that Old men
will remember things done Forty, Fifty Years ago, much better than things which
were done but a few Weeks ago: A clear evidence of the immortality of the Soul.
And why should not men think that their souls are Immortal, when there are
things in Nature that show it? There are some Lights that will burn for for
many Ages. It is reported that the Ancient Romans would artificially resolve
Gold into a liquid substance, which would continue burning for many Ages. And
that there was a Lamp found burning in the Tomb of Constantius Clorus, (Father
of the great Constantine) buried in Yorkshire in England, (then known by the
name of Britain only) which had been blazing for above a Thousand Years. And
have not the Stars of Light been shining in the Fi^m^ment for near upon Six
Thousand Years? It is also related that in the Tomb of Tullya the Daughter of
Cicere, there was a Lamp found burning Fifteen Hundred and Forty Years after it
was first lighted. And if so, shall it seem incredible that the Spirit of a Man
which is the Candle of the Lord, shall endure forever? But alas, many do not
lay to heart these solemn Truths, they do not consider of them as they ought to
do. Therefore Solomon speaks as in Eccl. 3. 21 Who knows the spirit of a Beast
that goes downward, and the spirit of a Man that goes upward? Who considers it
as they should do? It Is true (says the wise Man) the spirit of a Beast goes
downward, his spirit his sensitive soul dies with him: but it is not so with a
Man, when he dies his soul goes upward into the hands of God. But who knows
this? There are very few in the world that consider this us they ought to do:
but men live as if they had only sensitive and not immortal Souls in them Luke
12. 19. Soul, (says that miserable wretch) Eat, Drink and be Merry. One of the
Ancients says of that rich Fool that if he had the soul of a Swine in him, he
could not have spoken more like a Bruit, Soul eat and drink Men live as if they
thought they should live here to Eternity, Psalm 49. 11. Their inward thought is
that their houses shall continue for ever. Men live as if that were their
inward thought that they should live for ever in this world. For what are their
thoughts concerned about, but only temporal things? Christ says, Mat. 6. 25.
Take no thought for the Body what ye shall eat and drink. But the most of men
take no thought abo^^ any thing else, but things of that nature. They (...) no
thought about their Souls, or about another Life, about Eternity and the other
World into which they are going apace every day. How few among Christians, but
what are practical Sadduces, practical Atheists? How few are there that
remember and practice the advice that Christ gives to his Disciples, Mat. 6.
33. Seek first the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness. How few are there who
make Religion their business? A sign they don't believe an Eternity. It is most
certain that if men had a firm belief of their going into Eternity, they would
make Religion their business, that they would mind, that in the first place,
that above all other things.

USE II. For EXHORTATION.
O let every Soul here this Day make sure of going into a Blessed Eternity.
Consider 1. This is the One thing needful. We should often think of those
words of Christ, Luke 10. ult. Thou art cumbred about many things, but One
thing is needful. And what is that? It Is to make sure of a Blessed Eternity; to
make sure that when once we are out of this, we shall be in a better world.
Their Folly is beyond expression great, who that so they may enjoy the vanities
of the world, and the pleasures of sin for a season, will venture the loss of
Eternal Happiness, and plunge their immortal Souls into Everlasting Misery. The
blessed Martyr Hooper, when one tempted him to renounce the Truth, because Life
is sweet, and Death is bitter, answered wisely, But Life Eternal is more sweet,
and Death Eternal is more bitter. Another Martyr, the inquisitor saying to him,
that his Life was in his own hands, well replied, Then it were in an ill
keeping. But Christ's School has taught me to save it by losing it, and not by
the gaining of a few Days or Years, to lose Eternity. Those holy Martyrs were
(and all good men are) sensible, that to make sure of a blessed Eternity, is
the One thing needful above all other things. As for the many things that
people are cumbring themselves about, and carking for, they are not needful.
About what are men encumbring themselves? It Is how they may get great Estates,
and live high in the world, and leave great Portions to their Children. Oh, My
Friends, that is not needful: You shall not, nor shall your Children after you,
enjoy them long. All these things are but for a moment. It is more needful that
you think what will become of your own Souls, and your Childrens Souls to
Eternity, and that it may go well with them forever in another World.

Consider 2. That we shall all of us be very shortly in Eternity. It is not
only true, that we are all going into Eternity, but that we shall be quickly
there: For the great Day of Judgment will be here e're long. But suppose that
to be far off, which it is not; yet we shall be in Eternity e're long. Death
opens the door into Eternity. Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed for men once to Dye,
and after that the Judgment. As soon as the Body is dead then will be the
Judgment, as to the Soul of a man. There is no man that goes out of this world,
but as soon as ever his immortal soul is out of his body, he knows certainly
where he must be throughout Everlasting Ages, whether he shall be in Heaven or
in Hell to all Eternity. Now this will be e're long. Life here is but for a
moment. Jam. 4. 14. What is your Life? It is even a vapor, that appears for
a little time and vanishes. Lifetime is but for a little while, and then comes
Eternity: So that every man will quickly be in Eternity. Old men will quickly
be in Eternity: And so will Young men too. They know not but that they may dye
suddenly. How many instances have we seen that either by Drowning or by
Sickness, or by other Providence, Young men as well as others have been
carried into Eternity. There are few here this Day but have known many
instances of it. Well then, will you not prepare for a blessed Eternity? Vain
Ungodly Creatures are apt to say, a Short life and a (...) one: Truly for the
most part, they that live a merry life, live but a short one. They spend their
days in Mirth, and in a moment they go down to the Grave. The Fool in the
Gospel said, Eat, Drink and be Merry, thou have Goods for many Years: but it
was said unto him, This Night thy Soul shall be required of thee. So it is with
many that lot upon a long Life, they are upon (...) very brink of Eternity.
Every day men draw nearer to Eternity than they were the day before. Every one
in this Assembly is one week nearer unto Eternity than they was the last Lords
Day. Then are we not concerned to prepare, and to make sure of a blessed
Eternity?

Quest. But what shall we do to make sure of a Blessed Eternity?

Answ. 1. Let our chief care be about those things that will go with us into
the Eternal World. An Interest in Christ will do so: If the Soul is by Faith
United to Christ, that Union will never be dissolved through out the days of
Eternity. All other Relations will cease, they will come to an end. The
Relation between Father and Children, Master and Servant, Husband and Wife,
they will soon come to an end. Aye, but if a man is Related to Christ, that
Relation abides forever. Therefore Christ says, Hos. 2. 19. I will betroth
thee to me forever. Oh make sure that your Souls be Married to Jesus Christ the
Son of God, and that Relation will abide World without end. Again, Grace in the
Soul that will last to Eternity. Saving Grace is the Seed of God which is
incorruptible, that lives and abides for ever. The Grace of Love is so: Love to
God, and Christ, and to his People, 1 Cor. 13. 18. Charity never fails. If a
man has a true sincere Love to Christ in his heart, that Love will go with him
to Heaven; and though it be but as a Spark here, it will there be a Flame that
will never go out. And sincere Obedience unto the Commands of God, will stand a
man in-stead for Eternity. Therefore fear God and keep his Commandments. Deuteronomy.
5. 29, 3^* Oh that there were such an hea^ in them that they would fear me, and
keep all my Commandments always, that it may go well with them fore^er. 1 John
2. 17. The world and the lusts of it pass away, but he that does the Will of
God ^bides forever. That is to say, he is happy for-ever. When he dies he goes
into an happy Eternity. So Good Works proc^eding from Faith and Love, they will
pass with you to the other World; they will follow you. Blessed are the dead
which dye in the Lord: their works follow them, Rev. 14. 13. They lay up a good
Foundation for the time to come, yea, a good Foundation for Eternity. Let us do
all the Good we can do, we are sure of a reward, and it will be an Eternal
reward.

2. Redeem the Time. If we would enter into a Blessed Eternity, we should
redeem the Time. Eternity does depend on improving that moment of Time, we have
here in this world allowed to us. O don't mis^en^ your precious Time, that you
be not made to repent of it to Eternity. Don't spend time in Sinning. We ought
not to spend any part of our time in sinning against God; we have done too much
of that already: the time past may suffice. Neither spend too much time in
Recreations. Some time spent in Recreation is lawful, but too much time spent
therein will be uncomfortable in another World, and it may be on a Deathbed
it will cause sad Reflections. Our Famous Prince Henry lying on his Deathbed, a
Noble Man coming to him with whom he had spent much time in Recreations, He
said, In vain do I now wish for those Hours again that you and I have spent in
vain sports. Be sure to spend a suitable portion of time in Religious
Exercises, in Prayer, and in Reading the Holy Scriptures. They that have the
greatest Employments are not exempted. God required of the Kings of Israel,
that they should with their own hands write out some part of the Scripture. The
Emperor Theodosius with his own hand wrote out the New Te^^ament. Some Learned
Men who have spent their Time industriously and profitably, yet when they came
to Die, have bewailed it as a great Evil they had been guilty of, in that they
had spent no more time in Prayer, and Reading the Scripture. Never did any man
when he came to Die say, I have spent too much in Prayer, and Reading the
Scriptures; but many have done the contrary. Then be careful to improve Time
well, because when it is past there is no recovery of it. An Eminent Divine
speaks of one the occasion of whose Conversion was, he heard a poor dying
Creature speak these words, Can you call Time again? If you cannot, I am undone
to Eternity. O then improve Time unto Soul-saving ends and purposes.

3. Meditate on Eternity. Think sadly on Eternity. Oh! Eternity! Eternity!
Eternity! O be pe^swaded to go alone and think of Eternity. It may be God will
bless serious Consideration on it, to the Conversion and Salvation of your
Souls. Mr. Flavel speaks of a Person of Quality that had misspent some of her
time in playing at Cards, and one Night coming home late, she found her Servant
Reading in a good Book, to whom the Gentlewoman said, Ah! Poor Melancholy
Creature, always Reading! But not long after, she fell into a bitter weeping,
nor could she sleep at all that Night: The Servant enquired what might be the
cause of her weeping, O (said she) I cast my Eye on that Book you were reading,
and there I saw that word ETERNITY, and that has broke my heart, I have an
immortal Soul within me, but where must that Soul of mine be to Eternity? O
then be persuaded to Meditate on Eternity. Oh, go alone and think with thy
self, Within a little while I must be either in Heaven, where there are
Pleasures for ever more, and after I have been in the Joys of Heaven as many
Million of Ages as there have been Minutes since the world began, my Happiness
shall be no nearer the end, than it was the First Moment of my happy Arrival
there. Or, within a little while I must be in Hell, where the Worm dies not,
and the Fire is not quenched, and after I have been in that place of Torment
more Millions of Ages than there are Sands on the Seashore, I shall be no
nearer the end of my Misery than the First Day I went to Hell. Oh that you
would think of this. Suppose (says our Famous, Mr. Perkins, and he speaks
weightily) all this Earth was a vast heap of Sand, and God should send a
Sparrow to fetch away one Sand, once in a Thousand Years, when


