FALSE NEWS FROM GATH REJECTED. (...) REASONS of the People called QVAKERS For
(...) ^^^^ning to Answer JOHN TALBOT's Proposal (at the song of (...) to their
last Yearly Meeting at Burlington.
JOHN TALBOT.
WE have seen a printed sheet Subscribed FRANCIS BVGG. filled with bitter
Invectives and false Charges against us who are in derision called QVAKERS;
insinuating things to be our Principles which we Abhor and Detest: in the close
of which (...) and stylist him Honest Francis which to those that know him
(which we suppose thou do not seems altogether Ironical. However in Courtesy
and with the like reason he may possibly Salute thee with the same Language.
Here thou Undertakist his Task, viz: To prove all the Charges against us
contained in that sheet, or rather more (if we desire it), at this our
Yearly Meeting. How far this will recommend thee to be a man of Peace or
Knowledge, thus rudely and rastly to Attack us, without any just Provocation on
our part, time may Determine. However* we hereby let thee know that we shall
not consent to have our Meetings (which are appointed for Better Purposes) to
be Disturbed or Interrupted. For* since it has pleased the Legislative
Authority of England to show that Tenderness (...) Conscientious Dissenters as
(...) indulge them, in the Free exercise of their Consciences in Religious
matters (without Disturbance* tho to the great Grief of men of thy temper) we
claim and expect our share of the benefit of it as well as any other Protestant
Dissenters.

And whatever Grace and Favor is extended to us by our Sovereign we shall not
willingly part with for the Humor of any Subject* tho much more considerable
than thy (...). Upon the whole; we do expect* that in a way Proper and
Reasonable* thou should perform what thou have Undertaken* or else acknowledge
the Injury done us. This we conceive ought to be done in Print since the Charge
against us (...) already: And to be sure has Reached further than any Verbal
Account of a Dispute is (...) to do, which often ends in Noise and Tumults and
leaves the Auditory the impartial which s^^do^ happens under great
Incertainties if not plapable mistake^; and cannot repair the injured
Reputations of those that are Recriminated tho (...) innocent. Therefore the
Press we take to be the only Proper method, to end such Controversies as have
arisen from thence with which if thou compliest thou may expect by the
Assistance of God) an Answer from some of us, or some other of our Communion.

Burlington 18. 7. mo: 1704. Signed in behalf of the People called Quakers By
Us. EDWARD SHIPPEN. GEORGE MARY'S ANTHONY MORRIS. JOHN RODMAN. THOMAS STORY.
CALEB PUSEY. SAMUEL (...) (...) OWEN NICHOLAS WA^NE



