FREE GRACE, Maintained and Improved.

OR, The GENERAL OFFER OF THE GOSPEL, Managed with Considerations of the GREAT
THINGS done by Special Grace, IN THE ELECTION and REDEMPTION and VOCATION Of
those who Embrace that OFFER. AND The Illustrious DOCTRINES of Divine
PREDESTINATION and Humane IMPOTENCY, Rescued from the Abuses, which they too
frequently meet withal; And rendered (as they are) highly Useful to the Designs
of Practical Piety.

In Two brief Discourses; Published at the Desire of Some, who have been
greatly Apprehensive of Growing Occasions for such Treatises.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green. 1706.

FREE GRACE at Work For them that are Chosen to GLORY.
Joh VI. 37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me.


THE ESSAY which I am going upon, is, To Rescue some Glorious Truths of GOD and
of GRACE, from the Abuse, which I See they commonly meet withal. Truths, I am
sure, they are, which the Service of our Holy Religion mightily requires us to
Explain and Propound in such a manner, as that they may be Serviceable. O
Eternal Spirit of Truth, Who Leadest thy Servants into all Truth, Assist and
Prosper my Undertaking*

The Illustrious Doctrine of Predestination, Some that Profess the Belief of
it, very Sinfully Pervert it, as if it were a Doctrine Calculated either for
the Security, or the Discouragement, of them who should be brought unto
Repentance; to make Sinful Men, either Presumptuous or Desperate, Whereupon the
Doctrine is decried by the Sons of Pride and Profaneness, as if it were an
Useless, yea, and an Hurtful Doctrine, and as if it were best of all never at
all to meddle with it.

A Glorious Doctrine of Christianity, has been Crucified between Two Thieves:
It must be Delivered from the Sword; the dear Truth must be Delivered from the
Power of the Dog: A Crown of Glory must be set upon the Head thereof.

Indeed the Doctrine of Predestination has its Mysteries, its Abstruse
Difficulties, and Soaring Sublimities. But, for men to pretend therefore, that
it should be Silenced and Smothered and Shut out of Sermons, is for them to be,
as the Professors of Leyden justly Expressed it, Praepostere Cauti, more Nice
than Wise, more Cautious than they need to be; and there is usually, A Snake in
the Grass, when such a Doctrine of Godliness is much hissed at. We find, the
Doctrine of Predestination Proposed by our LORD, and His Apostles, with a very
frequent Inculcation; We find, that it has a wondrous Tendency to the
Edification of the Faithful in their most Holy Faith, and the Ignorance of it
mutilates the Praise of God, and cherishes the Vice of man, in very
considerable Instances. Briefly, It Is no little part of the Gospel; and we do
not fully Preach the Gospel, Declaring the whole Counsel of God, if there be
nothing of this Declared.

This is a thing to be set before you, in the most advantageous Terms that I
can meet withal. And where can any be met withal comparable to those in the
Seventeenth among those Famous Articles of the Church of England, which are
Subscribed by all the Allowed Clergy of the Nation!

PREDESTINATION to Life, is the Everlasting Purpose of God, whereby before the
Foundations of the World were laid, He has constantly Decreed by His Counsel,
secret to us, to deliver from Curse and Damnation, those whom He has Chosen in
Christ Jesus out of Mankind, and to bring them by Christ to Everlasting
Salvation, as Vessels made to Honor.

It Proceeds.

As the Godly Confideration of PREDESTINATION and our Election in Christ, is
full of Sweet, Pleasant and Unspeakable Comfort to Godly Persons, and such as
feel in themseves the workings of the Spirit of Christ, -- as well because it
does Establish and Confirm their Faith of Eternal Salvation, to be Enjoyed
through Christ, as because it does frequently kindle their Love toward God; so
for curious and carnal Persons lacking the Spirit of Christ, to have
continually before their Eyes, the Sentence of Gods Predestination, is a most
dangerous Down fall.

The Doctrine so Plainly Asserted by the Church of England, is every Day so
Unaccountably Decried, and Reproached, by many from whom One could not with any
Reason have Expected it, many, who boast themselves the Sons of the Church;
that it is high Time for us, to do what we may, to Magnify it and make it
Honorable.

Our Lord-Redeemer is now Preaching of the Doctrine. He had a very sorrowful
Sight before Him; the Unbelief, the General and the Horrible Unbelief of the
People to whom He had been Exhibited. That our Lord might Comfort Himself under
the Unsuccessfulness of His Ministry, and that He might preserve others from
the Temptation and Stumbling Block therein Laid before them, He Propounds, the
Decree of God in His Eternal Predestination.

What else can we have, in any measure to allay the Discomposure of our Minds,
when we see the Gospel hitherto so little Crowned with Success in the World!
All that the Father gives to me, says our Lord, shall come to me.

It Is plainly Asserted, That every one, who is given to the Lord Jesus Christ by
God the Father, shall at one Time or other by Faith come unto Him. It Is plainly
Asserted, That these Persons are given to the Lord Jesus Christ, before they do
by Faith come unto Him. Hence it follows, That the giving of any to the Lord
Jesus Christ by God the Father, is not His Bringing them to Believe on Him. If
it be Before their Believing, we shall soon find it to be, as other of the
Divine Oracles have told us, From all Eternity.

This then is the DOCTRINE to be insisted on.

There are Some, whom God the Father, has from all Eternity given unto our
Lord-Redeemer, to be brought by Him unto Eternal Blessedness; and all that are
so Given unto our Lord, shall in Time come unto Him.

Do not imagine, That I am going to Entertain you with Unprofitable
Speculations. No; Your Entertainment shall be a Great Mystery of Godliness; I
shall use my best contrivance, that every Stroke of it may be most sensibly
Subservient unto the Designs of Godliness.

I. Shall we prove, That there are Some, whom God has from all Eternity Chosen,
to be brought unto Eternal Blessedness? They who Dispute this, do Err, not
knowing the Scripture, nor the Nature of God. Indeed, the Christian Fathers did
not so often and so clearly Express themselves about our Eternal Election,
before the Pelagian Heresy made much Disturbance, as Austin and Others did
afterward. But the Word of God is very Positive; [Rom. 8.29.] That there are
Some, Whom God did Foreknow, and whom He did Foreknow, He also did
Predestinate, to be conformed unto the Image of His Son. And, [2 Thessalonians. 2.13.]
That there are Some, Whom God has from the Beginning Chosen to Salvation. And,
[1 Pet. 1.2.] That there are Some, Elect according to the Fore knowledge of God
the Father. Do we not read, [Rev. 13.8.] Of, Names Written in the Book of Life
of the Slain Lamb, from the Foundation of the World? In the Word of God, we
find a Remarkable Distinction, [1 Thessalonians. 5.9.] Between Some Appointed unto
Wrath, and Others Appointed to obtain Salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ. The
Import of these passages, will soon be perceived, if you will but lay together
a few Incontestable Conclusions.

There is an Eternal Blessedness; or, a Rest which remains for the People of
God, yea, a State wherein God shall become All in All unto His People. No body
doubts of this.

There are Some who do arrive to Eternal Blessedness; And they are but Some;
Some there are who fall short of Entering into Rest. No body doubts of this.

The Eternal Blessedness is the gift of God; None ever come to Eternal
Blessedness, but such as are by the Blessed GOD Himself brought unto it. No
body doubts of this.

God from all Eternity does infallibly Fore know whom He will bring unto
Eternal Blessedness. It cannot be said of any Person in the Eternal Blessedness,
That God once did not infallibly Fore know whether this Person should ever come
unto it. Can any body doubt of this?

Once more; The Eternal Certainty of the Eternal Blessedness to be granted unto
these and those Persons, cannot arise from the Persons themselves, who are not
yet in Being; It can arise from nothing but God Himself Determining of it; from
nothing but the Determination of God.

The Sum of the Argument is this.

If it be Certainly and Exactly Fore known by God from all Eternity, Who shall
be brought by Him to Eternal Blessedness, then it is Decreed by God; there is
in the Will of God a Determination of it. But there is a most Certain Fore
knowledge of God, (unto whom all His Works are known from the Beginning,) even
from all Eternity, Assuring Him, who shall be brought by Him to Eternal
Blessedness. God forbid, We should so derogate from His Infinite Majesty, as if
He did not from all Eternity most certainly Know what shall come to pass in
Time: Lord, Thy Understanding is Infinite! Therefore, it remains, That there
are Some Chosen by a Decree of God, from all Eternity, to Eternal Blessedness.

Upon this Argument, our Twiss openly challenged the whole Nation of Jesuits
and Arminians; he truly says of it, It is, Nullo humano acumine Solubile; It
is unanswerable.

But now, My Hearers, Let us make a Pause. This admirable Truth shall not go
out of our Hands, until we feel it make a most Heart-melting Impression on our
Hearts.

. We will Enquire, first; Whether they whom God has from all Eternity Chosen to
Eternal Blessedness, may come to Know that they are so Chosen to it, while they
are yet but in the way loading to it?

Yes; They may. They may Know it, by their being in the way leading to it; For
it is, The Way Everlasting. There are some, whose Privilege is that, 1 Thessalonians.
1.4. Knowing your Election of God.

But how shall we attain to this Privilege?

O Child of God; Say not in thy Heart, who shall ascend into Heaven, to see
whether I have my Name Written in Heaven? Who shall bring down to me the Book
of Life, to see whether I am Enrolled in that Book or no? The Proof of all this
matter is Nigh unto thee; It Is in thy own Heart, in thy own Life; There it may
be met withal. Oh! Give a Great Attention!

You have not forgotten the Exhortation, that so speaks unto you; 2 Pet. 1.10.
Give Diligence to make your Calling and Election Sure. If you are Sure, That
you are Effectually Called, you may be Sure, That you are Eternally Chosen of
God. The matter may at this Moment be brought unto a wondrous Issue. The Call
of our Great Savior is at this Moment made from Heaven unto every one of us;
Look unto me, and be Saved; come unto me, that I may make you Wise, and
Righteous and Holy and Happy. May the Spirit of Grace now fall upon us; may our
Conquered Souls comply with the Call, and Reply to it; Lord, I Look! Lord, I
come! Lord; Thou have made me willing to take thee for my Savior, my Leader,
my Ruler for ever more! From this Moment, O Regenerated Souls, you may take for
granted your Election of God; you may take it for granted; My God will now give
me to see the Good of His Chosen, and rejoice with the gladness of His Nation,
and Glory with His Inheritance.

We read, Act. 13.48. As many as were ordained unto Eternal Life believed.
Examine then; Do I Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ? Is my whole Reliance upon
Him, as my Sacrifice and my Advocate, for my Peace with God? Am I heartily
Resigned unto Him, for Him to Guide me by Counsil, and bring me to Glory? If it
be so, then be of Good Comfort; Thou art most certainly Ordained unto Eternal
Life.

We read, Ephesians. 1.4. He has Chosen us, that we should be Holy. Examine then; Am
I Holy? Do I follow nothing so much as Holiness? Do I Lament nothing so much as
my want of Holiness? Do I Sincerely Dedicate my self unto God? Would I fain be
entirely Possessed by God, and have my All employed in Serving of Him? If it be
so, then be of Good Comfort; God who knows who are His, has Chosen thee for one
of His.

Go on, and bring the Matter to this Touchstone. We read; 1 John 4.19. We Love
Him, because He first Loved us. Even so; We choose God, because He first chose
us. Bring it under an impartial Examination. Do you make Choice of GOD? There
is a Twofold Satisfaction Proffered unto you; A Satisfaction in Creatures, and,
A Satisfaction in God. You have once Chosen a Satisfaction in Creatures. Do you
Bewayl, Disclaim, Revoke that Choice? Do you now Choose over again? It Is
Religion, (Perhaps in the very Etymology of the Word) so to do. Is the Language
of your Souls now that? Lam. 3.24. The Lord is my Portion, says my Soul;
therefore I will hope in Him? And, Psalm. 119.57. Thou art my Portion, O Lord; I
have said, that I would keep thy Words. Do you Choose rather to have the
knowledge of GOD, and the Image, of GOD, and the Favor of GOD, than to have
all the Good Things of a Flattering World? Is this the Choice and the Voice of
your Minds; Lord, There is nothing that I desire in comparison of thee! Then,
Rejoice, O Chosen Soul, Rejoice with Joy unspeakable and full of Glory; God has
Chosen thee to Joy unspeakable and full of Glory.

. We will, next, Enquire; With what Acknowledgments ought they to Glorify God,
who thus know themselves to be Chosen of Him?

Truly, With Acknowledgments and Admirations of Sovereign Grace; The Grace that
shines forth in our Election with a most astonishing Sovereignty! Here, Here,
are Thanksgivings of the most Elevated Strain in Christianity. They are, Words
to lift up the Horn! they Sound High in our Devotions. A Thankful Christian
does Raise His Thanksgivings to the Rarest and Highest Notes imaginable, when
he comes hereabouts. It Is a Melody peculiarly acceptable to Heaven; It Is the very
Beginning of Heaven!

First. Will you not Admire, O Chosen of God, Admire the Absolute Sovereignty
of God in His Choosing of you! Vast is the Difference which the Choice of God
puts between One Man and Another. But what is the cause of His putting such a
Difference? It Is even so, Lord, Merely because it pleases thee. Thus we are
advised; Romans 9.16, 18. It is not of him that Wills, nor of him that Runs,
but of God that shows Mercy: He has Mercy on whom He well. Why has our God
Elected One, and Rejected Another? It Is that First Cause of all things, that is
the Sole Cause of this; namely, The Will of the Glorious One. The Royal
Prerogative of God is wonderfully Exerted in this matter; and He will give none
Account of the matter. Is the Foresight of our Faith and Obedience, the Cause
why God has Chosen us? Then say, We first choose God before He chooses us! Not
at all. It was a Text often quoted by Austin, to confute this Fancy; Joh.
15.16. Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen you. We are chosen TO Faith and
Obedience; not chosen FOR our Foreseen Faith and Obedience. They are the
Effects of our Election; they cannot be the Causes of it. Our Gods Foresight of
our Faith and Obedience, presupposes His purpose to bestow Faith and Obedience
upon us; For these are always the Gifts of God. Now this very purpose is our
Election it self; And hence, the Foresight of those Gifts cannot be the cause
of our Election. What says our Apostle? Romans 9.11. The Purpose of God,
according to Election, it is not of Works. Our Election is indeed Absolute. No
Decree of God is Conditional, tho God may decree a Condition. It were
derogatory to the Perfection of God, for His Decree, to depend on any
Condition; though the Things Decreed, may in the Execution thereof, do so. The
Decree of Election is not, That if we will Believe we shall be Saved, but it
is, That we shall be Saved, and that in order to it we shall believe. So
Absolute our Election. And how Gratuitous! Altogether Free. The Great God is
Blessed for ever in and of Himself. He has no Need of Us. He was under no
Necessity to Choose any of us unto Eternal Blessedness. If He would choose any,
He was under no Necessity to pitch upon Such or Such, Make thy Reflection, O
Chosen Vessel. Oh! why am I a Chosen Vessel of Mercy, and not a Vessel of
Wrath! Why would God set His Love upon me, rather than upon another! Lord, Thou
Love, Because thou Love! Be Satisfied, O my Soul, Be Satisfied, in the
uncontroleable, the unaccountable Will of God, as the only Cause of His Choosing
me for His own.

Secondly; Will you not Admire, O Chosen of God, Admire the Eternity from which
He has Chosen you, the Eternity to which he has Chosen you.

Look Backwards. When was it that our God first made His Choice of us? We read,
Ephesians. 1.4. He has chosen us before the Foundation of the World. Then, it was
before the very First Dawn of Time; For, Time is but the Duration of the World.
And thus, we are told, That God has a Gracious Purpose concerning us, before
the World began. A Ridiculous Absurdity it is, to imagine, That a Man is not
Elected, until God has waited all the Time of a Man's Life, to see whether he
will Persevere in a Course of Well-doing, or no. Far from it! Before the
Mountains were settled, while God had not yet made the Earth, nor the Highest
part of the Dust of the World, Even then were we Chosen of God. How does the
Ancient of Days comfort us! Jer. 31.3. I have Loved thee with an Everlasting
Love. Think, O most undeserving Object of Love: When did the Lord Begin to
Think of bestowing His Love and His Life upon me! Truly, His Thoughts of Love
to me never did Begin: but they have been from Everlasting; and Ever of Old;
Though I am one of the poorest and vilest, and most Worthless Things in the
World, yet my God has been Thinking upon me, and had His Kind purposes
concerning me, infinitely before the Foundation of the World.

Look Forwards. Will the Lord Repent of His Choice? Never; Never. It Is
unaltarable. We read, 1 Samuel 15.29. He is not a man, that he should Repent. The
Choice made of us, it is an Act of Him, whose Name is, I am that I am; and, The
God who changes not. There is nothing wanting in His Wisdom, or His Power; What
can there be to Dispose Him to a Change? He abides firm to His Intentions. The
purpose of the Lord shall Stand, and, I will do all my pleasure, says the
Lord. We have such Tidings from Heaven to fortify us; Romans 8.39. Nothing shall
be able to Separate us from the Love of God. If Elected, then how Established?
The Earth may be Removed, Mountains may be overturned, the Pillars of Heaven
may tremble; but our Hope of Heaven is laid on a Foundation that cannot be
Shaken! Think, O Son of well-founded Hope: The God who is Resolved, That He
will surely do me Good, will never alter His Resolution. I am a poor, feeble,
fickle creature; and I should soon Cast off God, if I were left unto my self;
But He has purposed that He will not Cast off me; and therefore He will not
Leave me unto my self. I shall be kept by the mighty power of God, through Faith
unto Salvation.

II. We must proceed now to Observe; That there is an Eternal Covenant of
Redemption, wherein God the Father Gave His Chosen People, unto our
Lord-Redeemer, for Him to bring us unto Eternal Blessedness. The Chosen of God,
are such as the Father has Given unto our Lord Jesus Christ. We read, Ephesians. 1.4.
He has Chosen us in Him. Our LORD Himself is the First Chosen, and the Head of
all the Chosen; and all the Chosen are committed into His Glorious Hands.

Let us take in the Evangelical Idea of the Matter.

First; In the Eternal Election of God, it is Decreed, That Such and Such, [The
Persons are Determined, and the Number of those Persons is with God!] They are
to be Heirs of God, and Joint-Heirs with His Messiah, in the Eternal
Blessedness. But the Decree also Permitted these Heirs of Life, to Fall into
wretched circumstances, that should render it Necessary for the Messiah to take
upon Him, the Character of a REDEEMER for them. Wherefore, in the Eternal
Election of God, the Son of God was Ordained the Redeemer of His Chosen, and
Appointed to do all that was to be done in the Redemption that must bring us,
to the Eternal Blessedness. But now, the Son of God, was wholly Free, about His
own coming into the Decree of a Redeemer; He most Freely came into it; It was
with his Free, and Fair and Full consent; It was without any Compulsion that He
undertook the Redemption of Man. Hence it is, that the Transaction between God
the Father, and out Lord-Redeemer, in the Decree for the Redemption of Man, is
most fitly represented in the Form of a Covenant; which we call, The Covenant
of Redemption. With an Eye to this wonderful Transaction, we find that passage
in our Lively Oracles; Psalm. 89.3. I have made a Covenant with my chosen, I
have Sworn unto David my Servant.

It is very Surprising to find, in the Writings of the ancient Jews themselves,
a confession of this Mystery. A Book of theirs, called Pesikta, recites this,
as a Dialogue between the Almighty and the Messiah.

GOD, beginning to make a Covenant with the Messiah, Spoke thus to Him.

They whose Sins are unknown to thee, would impose a Yoke of Iron upon thee, by
which they will make thee, like to a Young Heifer, almost Blind with Labor,
and they will destroy thee; Because of their Iniquity, thy Tongue shall cleave
unto the Roof of thy Mouth. Art thou willing to suffer all this?

The Messiah answered;

It may be, these Pains and Afflictions, shall endure but for a Short time.

GOD.] I am Resolved, thou shall Suffer it for a whole Week of Years; But if
thou will not Consent unto it, I will not Impose these Sufferings upon thee.

MESSIAH.] I willingly Submit to it, on Condition that no Israelite Perish, but
that they shall all be Saved; those that are born after my Time, and those that
are already Dead, since Adam.

O ye Modern Jews, that cannot bear to hear of a Suffering Messiah, what can
you say to this Quotation?

To go on; In this Covenant of Redemption, the Great GOD commits the care of
His Chosen, unto the Charge of our Lord-Redeemer. It Is because of this Covenant,
that our Lord could say; Joh. 17.2. Thou have given Him Power over all Flesh,
that He should give Eternal Life unto as many as thou have given Him. God the
Father then propounded unto the Son; There are such and such, whom I Choose, to
be brought unto a Glorious and Intimate Communion with thee, in thy
Blessedness. I put these my Chosen into thy Hands, for thee to Redeem them out
of all the Wretchedness, from whence they must be Raised, before they can come
to that Blessedness. Do Thou, O Mine Elect, in whom my Soul delights, Do Thou
undertake the Work of a Redeemer, for these my Chosen; I will do all that
belongs to Me, for thy Encouragement in this Excellent Undertaking. [See, Psalm.
40.8. and, Isa. 42.1, 4. and, Isa. 49.6, 8. and, Isa. 53.10, 12. and, Tit. 1.2,
3. and, Heb. 12.2. The Joy set before Him.]

Our Lord-Redeemer then Accepted the Charge thus Committed unto Him. He took
the very Names of those, for whom He would become an Atonement and an Advocate.
He Promised unto His Eternal Father, That He would not only become a Man, but
also be Born of a Woman, and be Made under the Law, and Appear in the Form of a
Servant, and become Obedient unto the Death of the Cross, and thoroughly
discharge the part of a Surety for His Chosen, and Save them unto the
uttermost. [See, Heb. 10.5, 7. and, Joh. 14.31.]

Hence it is, That the Chosen of God, even while they are yet in their Sins,
are called, Joh. 10.16. The Sheep of the Lord Jesus Christ. Yea, He vouchsafes
to call them; Heb. 2.13. The Children which God has given me.

Finally. There is a Special Intent in the Heart of God, and of our Lord
Redeemer, that they who are Chosen by God, and Given to the Lord-Redeemer,
shall have a Distinguished and Peculiar Share in His Redemption. Our
Lord-Redeemer has Engaged, and Obeyed, and Suffered, with a Distinguishing and
a Peculiar Eye, to those whom the Father has Given unto Him. The Virtue and
Success, of our Lords Engagement in the Work of Redemption, depends not merely
upon the Uncertainties, of what Respect the Free Will of Man, may happen in
Time to show unto it. For so, it might happen, That no man at all should ever
be the better for that Redemption: which must by no means be imagined! Our
Lord, in the work of Redemption, has bought Faith for Some; He has bought this
Favor for some, That they shall by Faith be brought actually to Enjoy the
Benefits of His Redemption. Oh! Let none of the Faithful be so Ungrateful, as
to say, My Faith is a Grace, which the Blood of my Redeemer never bought for
me! If this Grace be Bought for any; the Grace, to Receive, and by Receiving to
Enjoy, the Redemption of the Lord Jesus Christ; Then it must be Bought for a
Special Number, who are known unto the Lord. Surely, The Great God never so
fully Intended the Redemption of our Lord Jesus Christ, for those, who He from
Eternity Fore-knew, would never come to partake in the Advantage of it, as for
those whom, He Gave to the Lord-Redeemer. Never say, Sirs, Never say, That
Peter was no more beholden to his Lord-Redeemer, than Judas!

Well; But, my Hearers, Let us again make a Pause. We have before us a Truth,
with which we are Singularly Illuminated: You shall see, what Incomparable
Good, what Honey of the Rock, will presently be Dropping from it.

. We will Enquire, first; Whether a Man may come to know, that he is from all
Eternity in the Covenant of Redemption given by God the Father to our
Lord-Redeemer?

Yes; He may. And you that are now before the Lord, may immediately come to
know, That God has Given you unto the Lord Jesus Christ. You may know it by
this Unquestionable Symptom. Do you give your selves unto the Lord JESUS
CHRIST? One whom the Father had given to our Lord, came to know it, by his
being Able to Say; 2 Timothy 1.12. I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded
that He is able to keep that which I have Committed unto Him. I will Say; Do
you know, that you have so Believed the Lord JESUS CHRIST, as to Commit your
selves unto Him? The Lord-Redeemer says, My Son, Give me thy Heart. Is this now
your Answer to the Lord-Redeemer? Lord, I would fain Give thee my Heart! Oh!
Give me the Grace to give thee my Heart, and my All! Distressed Soul; Do thou
Give up thy self unto the Conduct of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, as thy Shepherd,
thy Great Shepherd, and thy Good Shepherd, wishing to be led by Him in the
Paths of Righteousness? Do thou Give up thy self unto Him, with that
Supplication, that Expectation; Lord, I am thine; Save me! It is then beyond
all Question, That God from all Eternity has Given thee to thy Lord-Redeemer:
Thy Name is in the List of those, for whom He did become a Lord-Redeemer.

Or, We will so express it. If a Man come into the Covenant of Grace, he may be
sure, that he is in the Covenant of Redemption. There is a Covenant of Grace,
wherein the Great GOD offers to be Our God. All the Sure Mercies of our Lovely
JESUS are offered unto us, in this Everlasting Covenant. Have you Really and
Heartily come into this Covenant? Have you Embraced God the Father, as your
Father; God the Son, as your Savior; God the Spirit, as your Leader? And have
you Resolved, That you will with His Help Live to Him, and Walk with Him, to
the End of your Lives? Is this your wish: O Great God, be thou my God; O my
God, make me thy Servant according to thy Covenant. We read, Ezekiel. 16.8. I
Entered into Covenant with thee, says the Lord God, and thou becamest Mine.
This I will say; The Covenant of Redemption did first make us the Lords, if in
the Covenant of Grace we are become the Lords.

. But we will next Enquire; Whether there be no Special Duties, wherein they
that know themselves Given to the Lord-Redeemer in the Covenant of Redemption,
should be thereby drawn to Glorify God?

Many Duties, many Duties, become now incumbent on you, O you whom the Lord has
thus wonderfully comforted.

Methinks* The first of them should be, To Wonder at the Goodness of God unto
us, and even unto us who are Sinners of the Gentiles, that we are admitted into
the Knowledge of the most Glorious Transaction that ever was. We have an
Admission to an Acquaintance, with that Secret and Glorious Transaction, The
Covenant of Redemption. We have Learnt the very Words, as I may say, of the
Consultation that Passed between God the Father and the Son, at the
Council Table of Heaven, when there was none else present, but that Principal
Secretary of State, the Holy Spirit of God, who has Revealed it. The Fifty
Third Chapter of Isaiah, has a Copy of them. Oh! Wondrous Condescension of Him,
who Humbles Himself to behold the things that are done in Heaven, to tell us,
pitiful Worms upon the Earth, what He Himself did in Heaven from all Eternity!
Will any Protestant call that, A Fiction, which is indeed the very Marrow and
Substance of the Glorious Gospel of the Blessed God; the very Fountain of all
our Eternal Blessedness! O Sinful Ingratitude, unto Him, that has even Lifted
us up to Heaven, by communicating unto us, these Deep things of the Spirit of
God!

But then, there Ensues another point of Practice for us, which is indeed the
Sum of all Practical Christianity: It Is that; Heb. 12.2. Looking unto JESUS.
Whither shall we now Look for every thing, but unto Him, unto whom the Father
has Given us, that He may Give all unto us; that is to say, Our Lord JESUS
CHRIST. This, This must be the continual Sentiment of our Minds; If ever I come
to Eternal Blessedness, it is my Lord-Redeemer that must bring me to it; Why
has God the Father given me to the Lord-Redeemer? It Is because my Lord-Redeemer
is to do all for me. Unto thee then, O Lord-Redeemer, I Look for all.

III. What remains is; That all that are from Eternity Chosen by God, and given
to the Lord-Redeemer, shall in due Time come unto Him.

This is a Link in the Golden Chain of Salvation; Romans 8.30. Whom He did
Predestinate, them He also called. It is a Chain that shall never be broken: It
lies not at the Arbitrary Determination of a Sinners Free Will, whether it
shall be broken or no. God will so move by His Powerful Grace upon the Will, of
such as are Chosen for Himself, and Given to His Christ, that it shall not be
broken. Though we do not know the Way of the Spirit, in this illustrious part of
the Divine Providence over the World, nor After what manner, the God who forms
the Spirit of Man within him, does Effectually move His People by His
Verticordious Influences, and yet not Extinguish or Overwhelm the Free Will of
the Rational Creature: Yet this we know, The Determination of this point, Who
Will, and, Who Will not, be brought unto the Faith of Gods Elect, is not left
unto such a Contingency, as what the Free Will of a Fallen and Corrupt Man,
only addressed with a Moral Swasion, shall please to do concerning it. The God
of all Grace, will with his own Peculiar Influences, infallibly bring about the
Effectual Vocation, of all those whom He has Chosen for Himself, and Given to
His Christ; and, what though the Manner of His Working upon the Minds of His
People, be not fully to be Comprehended? It is no little part of the Homage,
which we owe unto the Glorious GOD, Humbly to admire and adore His Conduct, and
acknowledge it Incomprehensible!

But in this Wilderness I find Giants to be Encountered with.

There is a very Numerous party of men, in the World, who hold no Grace
necessary to bring a Sinner into a State of Salvation, but only that which they
call Moral Grace, or, Moral Swasion; and which amounts to no more than a
Rational Proposal of our Duty, To turn from Sin to God in Christ, with
Reasonable Considerations, to Excite men unto the doing of this their Duty.
They Deny, any purpose of Mercy in God, for any, but what may be obliged by a
Foresight of the Good Use, which a Sinner may make of his own Free Will. They
Deny, all Gracious Qualities, created in the Heart, or Will of a Repenting
Sinner by the Spirit of God, and reject the Notion of Infused Habits. They
Deny, all such Sanctifying Operations of the Almighty Spirit, on the Will of a
Sinner, as will or can Certainly incline it to act, or incline it any more to
act, than not to act. All that they will allow Grace to do, is to Propose unto
the Will, and leave the Will Indifferent, and leave it wholly unto the
Determination of the Free Will in the Sinner, whether the Proposal shall have
any Effect or no. It Is no Special Grace, which they allow; there is in it, no
more done by the Spirit of Faith, for them that are Saved, than for them that
are Damned. In the mean time, they ascribe such a Vast Power unto the Will of
Sinful Man, that they Expressly assert, The Will of man cannot be determined
unto its Acts by any Irresistible motion, [Ne ab ipso Deo quidem!] no, not from
the Great God Himself. They maintain, That when all the Works of Grace in order
to the Conversion of a Sinner are past upon the Will, it still remains in the
Free Power of the Will, to Convert, or not Convert it self. The Lord shall not
have His Will* the Predestination of GOD, and the Undertaking of CHRIST, and
the Application of the SPIRIT; shall all come to nothing, if the Will of Sinful
Man, will please to Resist it all; The Great GOD can do nothing to overcome the
Resistance! Thus is there an Idol Set up, which has more People, and Nations,
and Languages, falling down before it, than there did before that in the Plain
of Dura of old. What if the Disposition of a carnal Mind, so generally, to
Dethrone the Grace of God; and Set up the Will of Man in the Throne of God,
should be found, but a Refined Idolatry after all?

It is of Great Consequence to the Interests of our Holy Religion, that we
should set before you the Dangerous Tendency of these Opinions.

And, first, Can it be any other than a thing full of Danger unto the Souls of
Men, to be so Insensible of the Wounds which Original Sin has given unto all
the Faculties of our Souls, and particularly unto our Wills? While men say, [as
the Successors of the ancient Enemies of Grace, do expressly say, and therein
indeed wax worse and worse than the Old Pelagians,] That no immediate Operation
of the Spirit upon the Mind or Will, is needful for any one, that he may
believe: they proclaim, that they have little Sense of any Corruption in the
Will of Sinful Man. If the Will of a Sinner, needs nothing but the Setting of
an Object before it, wherein is it more Corrupt or Feeble, than the Will of an
Angel? Certainly, very Defective is that Repentance, in which the Corruption of
the Will, is no more Considered!

These men say, That the Preaching of the Gospel is granted mostly unto those
whose Virtues deserve it; and all other Grace is granted still unto the worthy
Hearers of the Gospel. Any good Act which a man did of himself, on the account
whereof Grace is vouchsafed, was counted Merit, in the Sense of the Primitive
Church, who branded all pretenses to it, with an Anathematizing Detestation.
According to these men, all Grace is given according to Merit. Wretched
Inconsistency! Sirs, If it be of Merit, it is no more of Grace? According to
them, The Great God can from all Eternity Choose none, but those, who He
foresees, that by the Good Use of their Free Will they will Merit the Election
of Grace. Yea, All the Promises in the Covenant of Grace also, are Suspended on
a Condition, of something to be performed by the Power of our Free Will,
assisted by no Grace at all but only a Persuasion, or Proposal, which does
nothing to Enable it. And how destructive will such a Proud conceit of our own
Merit be, unto that Humility, which is the peculiar Spirit and Glory of
Christianity!

He that only Advises another to do a thing, does not the Thing himself, but
Expects it from Another. So then, the Sinner does, according to these Opinions,
Convert himself, and Quicken himself! O Converts, Be not so Unthankful, as to
say concerning your own Conversion, It Is owing to my self! I am no more beholden
to the Grace of God, than they that are yet in their Sins! It Is to be feared,
You are yet Unholy, if so Unthankful. The True Strain of Christianity, was long
ago dictated unto us; Not unto us, O Lord, Not unto us; But unto thy Name give
all the Glory! The Church in its Childhood was trained up in this way; Now we
are Old, Let us not, Let us never depart from it.

Inded, for a man to be in a mere Indifferency, whether to Believe on a
Glorious Christ, or not, is to be in a Wicked posture. If the uttermost that
the Grace of God has to do, for the Will of the Sinner, is to make it and leave
it Indifferent in this Grand point, -- Oh! do not so Reproach the Grace,
whereof all Heaven is filled with Eternal Adorations!

What? Shall the Image of God in the Will of man, want no Reparation? Man, Thy
Will must be the Chief Receptacle of that Lovely Image. But at present, it is
Desperately Wicked. Why should men render a work of Regeneration so needless?
It Is, The One thing that is Needful. Doubtless, the Doctrine of Regeneration
comes to be so much Neglected, and then more than so, Denied, and at length
more than so, Derided, from the prevailing of these Horrible Opinions in our
Days.

These Opinions lead men to take up with a very common work upon their Souls;
with such a Conversion as may be accomplished merely by the Rational proposals
of the Gospel. Alas, if men look after no more, their Souls are in wonderful
Hazard. Sirs. As you love your Souls, beware of such Hazardous and Venomous
Errors! These men slander us, when they say, we do not Preach Morality. But we
also Preach, That you must not be satisfied with mere Morality. We say, By
Supernatural Grace, the Tree must first be made Good, or else there will be no
Good Fruits upon it.

Shall the Children of God say, That God had no more Thoughts of Love to them
from Eternity, than to those that are under His Everlasting Hatred? That Christ
purchased no more for them, than for those that are gone to the Place of
Dragons? That the Spirit has done no more, to bring them unto Holiness and
Happiness, than for those that wallow for ever in their Filthiness? Oh! do not
so go to stifle your Love to God! The Transcendent Love, which you owe to God!
Nor take such a way to render your selves Lovers of your selves more than
Lovers of God! Abhor those Opinions which will put by your Praises to God, for
the Greatest of His Mercies; the Praises wherewith God is to be most of all
Glorified for Eternal Ages! Tell us, O ye Adversaries of Grace, and of
Christian Gratitude; According to you, what has God done more for Simon Peter,
than for Simon Magus? What more for John than for Judas? What more for Paul the
Apostle, than for Alexander the Coppersmith?

What will become of our Faith in God, about those concerns, wherein the Wills
of men, are concerned? If men are the Masters of their own Wills? If God may
not Determine the Wills of men, without Destroying the Nature, the Freedom, of
them? Why should we thus render it unnecessary, yea, unreasonable, to Pray for
our selves, or others. What? Shall we not Ask of the God of all Grace, that He
would Convert us? That He would Incline our Wills to the Things that are Holy,
and Just, and Good? That He would Effectually bring Home to Himself, all those
that are about us? If it be in our own power, why do we put it into our Prayer?
If it be not God, who does this for us, by His Grace, but we do it for our
selves, why do we go to God for it? Whenever these people Pray, That their own,
or other wills may be Subdued unto that which is Right, their Prayers
contradict their Principles. Let none of our Hearers Entertain Principles, that
have such a Tendency, to confound their Prayers.

They are Principles which Rob the Great God of the Glory which is for ever due
unto Him. We Thunderstrike them, we Annihilate them, if we do but insist on
that Holy Demand; give unto the Lord the Glory due unto His Name. What will
become of the Divine Praescience? If, as they say, All turns upon the Free Will
of man, and no Act of God can Ascertain what is to be done by the will of man,
without Abolishing the very Nature of it, how can the Eternal God Certainly
Foreknow from all Eternity, those things which are of the greatest consequence!
and which are left unto the Determination of our Will? To know that as Certain,
which God has not made Certain, is not to Know, but to Err. Where is the Divine
Faithfulness? If there be no Certainty, That the things foretold in the Word of
God shall be Fulfilled? What Certainty can there be of their Fulfillment, if it
be Uncertain what the Will of man may do? It Is Uncertain, if it be not
Determined by God. What an Eclipse is there brought on the Mercy of God, if
there be no Certain Object fixed for the Mercy? If it be a Mercy only unto
Virtues, and not unto Persons? If it be a Mercy, that has not Ensured the
Salvation of any one man upon Earth? They tell us, That we straiten the Mercy
of God; though we show a vast Number of Subjects upon which it infallibly
operates. The Universal Mercy which they talk of, has not Secured the Salvation
of any one person in the World. And it is a Mercy, which cannot express it
self, but where it finds a Merit or a Motive in the Creature. A Mercy without
Grace! O Mercy! How art thou Disgraced!

What an Abridgment is there come upon the Dominion of God, if the Will of man
cannot be Ruled by him? Why should we so rise up against the Government of God,
as to maintain, that our Will must not be Touched, but be such an Exempted, and
Self-Governing thing, that a Touch from God must violate it? Yea, What a
Limitation do we go to put upon Omnipotency?

By these Principles the Redemption of a Glorious CHRIST, has unsufferable
Indignities cast upon it. Upon them, No Regenerate person may say, My Lord
Jesus Christ has purchased for me, that Faith, that Repentance, that Holiness,
which are the greatest Blessings that ever Heaven bestowed upon me! Christian,
Thy Soul upon due Delibration, cannot but abhor the Thoughts of this; That when
Spiritual Blessings have Enriched thee, there should nothing be ascribed unto
the Purchase of the Lord JESUS CHRIST on that occasion? That such Spiritual
Blessings, must be no more than mere Contingencies! Yea, if it must be, as
these would have it, The Blood of the Lord JESUS CHRIST has not certainly
purchased the Salvation, of any one Person in the World. Though the Blood of the
Lord have been offered up, yet, it seems, there is no certainty, that any One
Person shall ever have any Saving Advantage by it. The Uncertain Will of Man
alone, must have the Honor to Determine it.

What an Affront is given by these Principles, to the Holy SPIRIT? They allow
Him to do nothing for us, but only to dispense unto us a Common Light, such as
is enjoyed even by the Children of Darkness; And that Light so ineffectual,
that the Will is not Effectually Inclined by it. No more for Him to do but
this! Oh! Do not so Disparage the Holy Spirit, unto whom our Obligations are
Infinite!

But there is no End. The mischiefs, cannot be Numbered. There is no Enumeration
of all the Evils, in these Crooked Principles. Yet I must make an End; and I do
it, with telling you, That one great Reason, why you are now warned with so
much Vehemence against these Principles, is, The Strong Temptation which they
lay before you, to Neglect the Great Salvation, and persist in the course of
Sin, which will bring upon you a terrible Destruction from God. If Conversion
be in your own Power, you will think, that you may take your own Time for it;
and that you may go on in a course of Sin, till you may see your own Time to
break it off. If no Darkness, and no Hardness can be contracted, but what your
own Will may shake off at pleasure, and there be no Hazard of a Peradventure,
whether God may give you Repentance, What Encouragement will this give unto
Sinful Men, to go on still in their Trespasses, till they see themselves likely
to breathe no longer among their Fellow-Sinners in the World?

I apprehended if High Time, that my Country, should be called upon, to watch
against the Growth of these Tares, or I had not now so much insisted on it. We
will go on to clear our Proposition.

. Let it be asked, First; Why shall all that are Chosen by God, and given to
Christ, come unto Him?

Why? Because the Honor of God and of Christ, make it requisite, that it
should be so; and there is nothing to hinder, or to render why it should not be
so. Should they that are Chosen of God, miss of Eternal Blessedness, the
Counsels of God would be defeated. Should they that are Given to Christ, miss
of Eternal Blessedness, the Fidelity or Ability of Christ would be blemished.
The glorious LORD will never come under such Imputations. But if men do not
Come unto the Lord, they cannot but miss of Eternal Blessedness, It Is a Faithful
Saying, and worthy to be trembled at; Joh. 3.36. He that Believes not the Son,
shall not see Life, but the Wrath of God abides on him.

Let it be, Next, asked; How shall they that are Chosen by God, and Given to
Christ, come unto Him?

How? Their Coming to the Lord, is by Believing on Him. Our Lord says as much
as this comes to; Joh. 6.35. He that comes to me, is he that Believes on me.
They that are Chosen of God, and Given to Christ, shall come unto the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, as unto their Priest, their Prophet, their King; They shall come
unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST, with Petition to Him, and with Dependence on Him,
for His Precious Benefits; They shall come unto Him, with such Dispositions;
Lord, I Repair to thee, Lord, I Rely on thee, for Grace, for Glory, for Every
Good Thing. I Resolve to Obey thee, and Look for that Eternal Salvation,
whereof thou art the Author, to as many as Obey thee!

It Is what will come to pass, most Assuredly, most Undoubtedly.

. But now there is a DEHORTATION to be managed against an Error and a Folly,
frequently committed among us. It is a Folly, which we daily see Raging among
us; it Stabs the Souls of Multitudes. Multitudes accuse the Predestination of
God, as the cause of their Impenitent Unbelief; Or at Least, from this
Predestination they go to Excuse themselves in their Impenitency. They Argue, [
Argue, did I say? I should rather say, They Cavil:] at his rate;

I don't know, Whether I am Chosen of God, or no. None but the Elect shall be
Saved. If I am not Elect, unto what purpose is it for me to seek to be Saved?
If I am Elect, what need I trouble my self? I cannot miss of being Saved. I
don't know, whether I am Given to Christ, or no. It may be, the Death of Christ
was never Designed for me. How can I plead the Death of Christ, when, it may
be, I am none of those for whom it was Designed. If I perish, how can I help
it? It is but what the Lord has Ordered.

These are the Idle Words, for which men will be greatly Condemned in the Day
of Judgment; the Idle Ratiociations, which have a Tendency to make men Idle, in
their Preparations for the Day of Judgment.

It would be a Vast Benefit unto the Souls of Multitudes, to destroy these Idle
Ratiocinations, these perverse Imaginations. I will therefore send in among
them certain Maxims of Piety, which, I hope, will do some good Execution upon
them.

I. It would be a very Great Sin, in the Greatest Sinner among us all, to
conclude himself a Reprobate.
We read, Deuteronomy. 29.29. The Secret things belong unto the Lord, but those things
which are Revealed, belong unto us. Reprobation is One of the Secret Things;
You have no Direction to meddle with it. It is not Revealed, who is, and who is
not, a Reprobate. But I am sure, it is Revealed, That every One of us ought to
come unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST, with as much Alacrity, as if we were already
Assured, that the Father has Given us unto Him. A man may, by the
Sanctification of the Spirit, and the Belief of the Truth, know himself to
belong unto the Election of Grace. But a man cannot ordinarily by his
Unsanctified Life, know himself to be a Reprobate. Should a Man be never so
Wicked, it would be a further Wickedness in him, to define himself a Rebrobate.
No; Let the Chief of Sinners among us, be Quickened in Seeking and Pressing
after Conversion to God, from this Consideration. Sinner, Thou do not know,
but that there are Thoughts of Mercy, yet in the Heart of the Blessed GOD
concerning thee. Many, Many of the Elect of God, have been left unto all the
horrid Abominations, that have made thy Soul so Desolate. But they have after
all been brought unto the Faith of Gods Elect, and been Called and Justified
and Sanctified, and fetched away to Eternal Blessedness. Who can tell? No man
alive can tell, but Thou, O Black Sinner, O worst in all the Black Tribe of
Sinners, Thou may be One of These.

The Charms that I would lay upon my Tempted Neighbors are these; I Pray you,
I Charge you, Let not One of you all Pronounce himself a Reprobate. But let
every One of you fly away to God in the Lord Jesus Christ; Accept His Mercy;
Resolve His Service; Do it as cheerfully as if it were from Heaven Revealed
unto you; Thy Name, O man, Thy very Name is Written in Heaven. Oh! Let none be
Deaf, while we Charm never so Truly!

II. Men do not urge the Decree of God, so Injudiciously, so Impertinently, so
Irreverently, in any Inferior Matters, as they often do in the Matters of
their Salvation.
Ungodly People plead This, for their leaving Undone what every man must Do to
be Saved; They don't know what may be the Decree of God about their Salvation.
Sinner, The Lord will not hold thee Guiltless, if thou go on thus to Sin
against the Third Commandment. Will any man in his Wits proceed after this
fashion: I don't know, whether God has Decreed my Life, therefore I will do
nothing to preserve my Life. If men see a Rational, and probable way to get
Money, they Run into that way, without ever making this Demur; We don't know,
whether the Decree of God will allow us to prosper, or no. I have read of an
Eminent Physician; That he had heard of a Gentleman who often made this frothy
Apology for his notorious carelessness about his Everlasting Interests; If I am
Elected, I shall be Saved; If I am not Elected, no care of mine will signify
any thing to Save me; why should I employ my care any further about it? The
Gentleman at length became his Patient, in a Sickness that came upon him; when
the Physician saw cause to put him off after this manner: Sir, If it be
Decreed, that you shall Recover your Health, you shall do so; but if it be not
so Decreed, no Counsils, or Methods of mine will recover you; why should I
trouble my self any further about you? This brought the Patient unto a Sense of
his former Error; A Double, and therefore, an Happy cure, was wrought upon him!

You may rest Satisfied; There is no such Decree as This; That the Elect shall
be Saved, whether they Work about their own Salvation, or no: Or, That the
Elect may continue Unconverted, and Unconcerned about Eternal Blessedness, and
yet get Safe unto it, at the Last. I say, There never was any such Decree of
the Glorious GOD. No; The Decree of the End, always includes a Decree of the
Means. Though they are not Propositions, but Persons, that are the Object of the
Divine Election; The Decree is not merely, That if men do come unto the Lord
Jesus Christ, they shall come unto Eternal Blessedness; but it is Decreed, That
such and such among the Children of men shall come unto Eternal Blessedness,
and therefore they shall come unto the Lord Jesus Christ. Yet these always go
together; Man, If there be a Decree, that thou shall Enter into Life, it is
also Decreed, that thou shall part with Sin, and close with Christ, and walk
with God, and be in an Holy Agony, lest thou fall short of Entering into Life.

Act Reasonably, O Children of Men; Show your selves Men. The most common
Wisdom of a Reasonable Creature, cries unto the foolish Disputers of this World;
Prove. 1.22. How long ye simple ones, will ye love simplicity?

III. If any Man continue in his Unreasonable Rebellion against God, his true
Reason for it, is not what he Pretends, if his Pretense for it, be the
Predestination of God.
When a Sinner does an ill Thing, his Reason for it is, not because he thinks,
That God has Decreed, he shall be left unto such a Thing. He has no Reason to
think so. Nor can he dream of Gratifying the Holy God, by doing what He has
Forbidden, because He has yet Intended that it shall be done. The True Reason
why a man does Evil, is that; Psalm. 52.3. Thou Love Evil more than Good. But,
Sinner, why do thou not Return to God? Thy Reason is not, Because the Lord
has Decreed, He will not have Mercy on thee, nor abundantly Pardon thee. Thy
True Reason is, Because the Ways of Sin, are so Pleasant unto thee, thou art
loathe to leave them. Why do thou not Believe on Christ? Thy Reason is not,
Because the Lord never so Loved thee, as to have Decreed His Christ for thee.
Thy Reason is, Because thy Heart is full of Prejudice against a Precious
Christ, and thou art loathe to have Such an One Rule over thee. Do not go to
make Predestination an Apology for thy Impiety. The fittest words, that I can
use to batter it, are those; Neh. 6.8. There are no such things as thou say,
but thou feigne^^ them out of thine own Heart. Thy True Reason for all thy
Impiety, is not in such things as thou say; It is in the Criminal
Inclination of thy own Impious Heart unto it. But, what a Miserable Apology
will this be, O Sinner, what a Miserable Apology in the Day of the Lords
pleading with thee?

IV. A Reprovation by God, Enforces no man to be a Sinner: A Damnation
overtakes no man; but because he is a Sinner.
What though there are some, whom the Election of God has passed by? Indeed there
can be no Election except some are passed by. We must grant a Decree of God,
according whereunto He leaves men unto the Sinfulness of their own Hearts and
Lives, out of which He is under no Obligation to Recover them, and then
inflicts upon them the Woes, the Deaths, which are the due Wages of their
Sinfulness. But they that are thus Passed by, and Left out, from the Election
of God, have no Force thereby put upon them, to Sin against Him. It is true;
They shall Sin; but it is because they will Sin; their Sin is always voluntary;
they act Freely whenever they Sin. It seems, men will Quarrel with God, until
they can Reconcile the Divine Praescience with Humane Liberty. But, vain man,
Thy Heart is now Haughty, and thou do Exercise thy self in things too High
for thee! The Matter of Fact is most certain. It Is most Certain, That the
All-wise God, who knows all things, does most perfectly know, who will be a
Sinner. It Is most Certain, That the Sinner does of his own Accord become so;
God infuses not any Sinfulness into him. How can this be? We all see, That so
it is. It may be, it would puzzle Angels to tell, How it is! Poor Potsherds of
the Earth, Why will you not Allow your Maker certainly to Foreknow, what Evil
you will do, and what Good He will bring out of this Evil, without your making
Him the Blameable Cause of all your Evil?

When a Reprobate comes to be Damned at the last, it is not Because he was a
Reprobate. No, he is Damned, only Because he Sinned; and Because he Sinned
willingly, he Sinned heartily, he Sinned with Delight; Because he Loved Death,
and he Chose Damnation. Sinner; Do not keep the Chains of Death upon thy Soul,
by insisting on the Tremendous Reprobation of God. Thou shall not be Lost, if
thou do not Love thy Chains. When thou stand before the Judgment Seat of
the Lord JESUS CHRIST, thou shall not be able to say, Lord, I would have come
unto thee, but thy Decree fettered me, and forced me to neglect thy Great
Salvation. The Glorious JUDGE will cause the Sinner to hear that Thunder of His
Wrath; Hos. 13.9. Thou have destroyed thy self. That the Sinner may be Saved
from then being so Thunderstruck, we must now so call upon him; Oh! Do thy
self no Harm, and the Decree of God will do thee none!

V. Salvation by the Blood of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, is tendered unto every one
of us all; and time of us will miss of Salvation by that Blood, but such as
wilfully Refuse it.
How Limited soever the Efficacy of our Lords Blood may be, in the Secret
Purpose of God; This we are sure of; There is in the Blood of our Lord
Redeemer, such a Sufficiency, as to Cleanse every one of us all from all our
Sin, if we come unto it. This we are sure of; We are Every one of us all,
Invited; and Commanded, and Obliged, to Take the Blood of our Lord-Redeemer,
and plead it, for our Deliverance from our Sin. Instead of all Evil-surmising,
whom the Blood of our Lord may be for, and whom not, it is the Duty of Every
one presently and Thankfully to Accept of it. The Invitation unto Every one of
us all is This; Thou art a Sinner; A Sinner wants a Sacrifice; The Sacrifice
provided for thee, is that of a Crucified JESUS. Come, and cast the Load of thy
Soul, and place the Hope of thy Soul, on that Sacrifice; and plead it with God,
That thou may for the sake thereof be Saved from all thy Sins. It may very
truly be said, Nothing shall hinder thy Salvation by the Blood of the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, O Sinner, but thy wilful Refusing of it. Whenever thou do
become really Willing to be Sprinkled with the Blood of the Lumb, and thereby
to have all the Enmity between God and thy Soul, taken away, it shall be Done;
there shall be Nothing to hinder it. We have a Commission to represent the
Blood of the Lord JESUS CHRIST, under that most agreeable Figure; Zech. 13.1. A
Fountain Opened. Come, O perishng Souls, come every one of you, unto that
Fountain; It Is in the Gospel Opened for you: It Is proclaimed in the Gospel, that
you shall be Welcome unto it. Let every one of you fall down before the
Lord-Redeemer, and sincerely say, O Glorious Lord; The Benefits of thy precious
Blood, I know, thou have offered them unto me. I do therefore at thy offer, and
by the Help of thy Spirit, humbly receive thy Blood. Let the Efficacy of it
upon me, be not only to Save me from thy Wrath, but also to Cleanse me from all
Filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, and to cure all the Maladies of my Soul, I pray
thee, I pray thee! Do thus; The Consequence will be, Salvation, Salvation World
without End.

Your Way to the City of Refuge, I hope, is a little cleared by these
Meditations.

FREE GRACE Exhibited In the Gracious Offer of the GOSPEL.
Joh. VI. 37. Him that Comes to Me I will in no Wise cast out.


AND is this Thy Voice, O our Lord REDEEMER? It is verily so. And the sweetest
voice that ever was heard among the Sinful Children of Men. Why do not we Lift
up our Voice, and weep; and with a weeping Faith give that Echo to it; Lord, I
come unto thee: I will in no wise cast off thy Favor!

That short and sweet Sentence, which we are now taking from the Gracious Lips
of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, has been Employed by His Almighty Spirit, for the
Conversion of many Thousands. There are Holy Myriads, who have upon a
Quickening from this very Word, come unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and found Him
as Good as His Word. There are Bright Constellations of Saints in the Heavenly
World, who were, by this very Call brought Home unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and
at last into that World. Oh! that this Faithful Saying may find the same worthy
Acceptance with you, My Hearers, which it has had with Multitudes that have
gone before you!

Our Glorious Lord-REDEEMER, having first comforted Himself under the sad
sight, which He had in the general, and criminal and obstinate Unbelief of His
Hearers; first comforted Himself with the Assurance which He had, That all His
Chosen should come unto Him: He proceeds unto the comforting of His Chosen, who
do Come unto Him; Comforting of them with an Assurance, That He will make them
welcome.

Shall I observe, That the First Thing before us, is, The Duty of a Sinner? I
hope, you take this for granted. Certainly, a Duty of greater Importance, a
Duty of better Consequence, was never set before a Sinner. To come unto the
Lord Jesus Christ. This is the Duty, which must be done, by every Sinner that
will be Saved; the Duty, which the Eternal Happiness or Misery of us all does
most of all turn upon.

But we will then Observe; That the Next Thing is, A Promise to the Sinner who
does this Duty. The Expression is Negative. I will in no wise cast him out. In
the Original, the Negative is Doubled; q. d. I will not cast him out; No, will
I not. But the Intention is positive. Yea, there is more in the Intention than
can be clothed with any Expression. Our LORD will not Cast us cut. Lord, What
will thou then do unto us! Why, He will do all that needs to be done, that we
may be brought unto Everlasting Happiness; He will do beyond all that we can
Ask or Think; He will Save us unto the uttermost.

The Doctrine of God our Savior which now calls for our Attention, is This.

Our Great SAVIOR, will not Reject any Sinner that comes unto Him; No, though
the Sin of that Sinner be never so great; But He will bestow His Great
Salvation, upon all who diligently Seek Him. My Hearers, What, what is the
Turning point, of our Everlasting Blessedness? Hearken Diligently; For I am
going to tell you.

I. All that would be Saved, must Come unto the Great SAVIOR; Yea, all that
shall be Saved, will do so.

This will presently be determined, by but knowing, What it is to come unto the
Lord Jesus Christ. Who can Interpret it so well, as our LORD Himself? His
interpretation, which is infinitely to be Relied upon, was, That a Coming to
Him, is a Belief in Him. As it was said, He that comes to God must believe; so
we may say, To Believe, is to Come unto our Lord. Is it indeed so? Then see
what will come of it: We are told by Truth it self, Mark 16.16. He that
Believes shall be Saved; but he that Believes not, shall he Damned.

We have all the Reason imaginable to proceed upon this Action. We will briefly
Describe the Action, of, Coming unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST. And we will Beseech
the God of all Grace, to Dispose and Assist us all, unto the Doing of this
Action, while we are Hearing of it. O Spirit of Grace, come down upon us, with
thy Gracious Influences!

The Phrase, To Come unto the Lord Jesus Christ, we are sensible, it is
Metaphorical; We are sensible, that FAITH is the thing meant in the Metaphor:
The most Precious Grace that a Sinner can be inspired withal!

The Action of a True FAITH, has more than one Resemblance, in the Oracles of
God. It is Resembled unto the Action of the Eye, and called, A Looking to the
Lord; unto the Action of the Ear, and called, An Hearing, that the Soul may
Live; unto the Action of the Mouth, and called, A Feeding on the Lord; And unto
the Action of the Hand, for which it is called, A Receiving of Him. Consider, O
Soul, consider what Action of the Soul, can answer to every one of these Terms;
Fall into such a Full Action; and Lift up thy Cry unto thy Savior; O Glorious
Lord; I Desire to See thy Beauties; I desire to Hear thy Counsils; I desire to
Feed and Feast on thine Excellencies; And I desire to Take all thy Benefits!

But now, the Foot also must afford an Action, by which a Saving FAITH shall be
set forth unto us. It Is a Coming to the Lord JESUS CHRIST. And many Motions of
the Soul are contained in it. Yea, Awake my whole Soul, and All that is within
me, to do this Noble Action!

To Come unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST, is, with a Lively FAITH to ADDRESS Him, as
the CHRIST of God, and for such Blessings as are to be Desired and Expected
from the CHRIST of God. More Particularly,

First; The Address with which our Faith must Come unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST,
is to Acknowledge Him as the CHRIST of God. We do not come aright unto the Lord
JESUS CHRIST if we do not come with that Acknowledgment; Joh. 6.69. We believe
and are sure, That thou art the Christ, the Son of the Living God. When we come
to the Lord JESUS CHRIST, it is necessary, that we have some Knowledge of His
Admirable Person; yea, that we Admire Him as a Person Altogether Lovely. In
coming to the Lord JESUS CHRIST, we must Behold Him, as God and Man in One
Person; we must Behold Him as the Only Mediator between God and Man; we must
Behold Him, and make that Confession of Him, Joh. 4.42. This is indeed the
CHRIST, the Savior of the World* And that Confession; Act. 4.12. There is no
other Name given among men, whereby we must be Saved: And that Confession; Heb.
5.9. He becomes the Author of Eternal Salvation, unto all them that Obey Him.
We do not come unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST, if we do not Confess Him to be, The
Son of God Assuming our Nature, and with a Commission from God becoming our
Savior: An Offering and a Sacrifice to God for us, and now our Advocate in the
Heavens, and Sitting at the Right Hand of God as the Governor of the World.

The Language of our Souls, in coming to our Lord JESUS CHRIST, must be of this
Tenor.

O Glorious JESUS; Thou art the CHRIST, the Son of the Living GOD. Thou art the
Priest, whose Blood cleanses from all Sin. Thou art the Prophet, who do Make
us Wise unto Salvation. Thou art the King, who do make us Victorious over
the Powers of Darkness. Thou art the Wonder of the Heavens, and Worthy to be
the Desire of all Nations upon Earth. Oh! There is None to be Compared with
thee! There is no Blessedness comparable to that of an interest in thee.

Secondly. The Address with which our Faith must come unto the Lord JESUS
CHRIST, is to Desire and Expect from Him, such Blessings, as the CHRIST of God
bestows upon His People.

We cannot come unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST, Except we see our selves Fallen
from God; Fallen and Plunged into horrible Circumstances: Except we see our
selves utterly unable to Recover our selves out of our Sinful and Woeful
Circumstances. In our coming unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST, we must have that
Anguish on our Minds; Romans 7.24. O Wretched One that I am? Such, even such must
be our Soliloquies; These must be our Thoughts, and our Griefs before the Lord.

I have Sinned, I have Sinned! And by Sin I am now become, how very Miserable!
I am Deprived of the Favor of GOD, and of the Knowledge of GOD, and of the
Image of GOD. O Dreadful Miseries! I am Exposed unto the Dominion of Lust, and
unto the Tyranny of Satan, and unto an Everlasting Banishment from God, into
Outer Darkness, among the forlorn Vessels of Wrath. O Fearful Miseries! O
wretched One that I am! who shall Deliver me!

Our Lord JESUS CHRIST is our Deliverer. Our Design in coming to our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, must be, to obtain Deliverance.

What? May we be so Selfish, as to aim at our own Salvation in coming to our
Lord Jesus Christ? Yes; It Is a Laudable Selfishness. A Salvation* that rescues a
Sinner from his Enmity to GOD; A Salvation, that restores a Sinner to the
Enjoyment of GOD; A Salvation* whereby GOD shall have Revenues of Eternal Glory
from the Sinner: Oh, be not Afraid of Seeking such a Salvation: It will be no
Faulty Self-seeking, you may be Satisfied.

But then, What are the Blessings to be sought from our Savior, in His Great
Salvation?

When we come unto our Lord JESUS CHRIST, He puts this Demand unto us; Matt.
1^.32. What will ye that I shall do unto you? We must render a fit Answer to
this Demand. Our Answer must be; to this Purpose.

Glorious REDEEMER; I come unto thee for Atonement. Oh! Let me stand before God
in thy Spotless and Perfect Righteousness! Oh! Let thy Intercession Save me to
the Uttermost!

Our Answer must be more than so; It must have this in it.

Lord, I come unto thee for Instruction. Oh! Guide me in the Way of Peace! Oh!
cause me to know the Things of my Everlasting Peace!

And there must be yet more in our Answer* It must go thus far.

Lord, I come unto thee for Government. Oh! Conquer my Rebellious Heart, and
Incline me to Love and Keep thy Laws; Oh! make me a Conqueror over all my
Spiritual Adversaries!

These and such as these Blessings, are we to Propound, in our coming unto our
Lord.

That our Address in our coming may not miscarry, there are Two Qualifications
of it, that are to be Endeavored.

First. We may not Separate the Blessings of our Savior, for which we come
unto Him. God has Joined them; God will not own the Man that Parts them. We
must be for a whole CHRIST, and for Every Article of the Salvation which a
CHRIST has to confer upon us. We must be for a CHRIST, that will give us
Repentance as well as Remission of Sins; and for being Sanctified as well as
Justified. We read, Col. 1.19. In Him there does all Fullness dwell. And we must
come for All, if we would not be put off with None. A Genuine Faith has many
Errands upon which it comes to the Lord JESUS CHRIST. It is not a Genuine
Faith, which does Neglect any of them, Despise any of them. It is not enough,
to come unto the Lord JESUS CHRIST, only that we may be brought into His
Righteousness* we must also Ponder on all the Maladies of our Souls, and
Specify them All, and Mention them All, and Long for the Relief of them All;
very Particularly. Lord, my Mind is Ignorant; Oh, Do thou Enlighten it. My
Heart is Depraved; Oh, Do thou Rectify it. I have a Slothful Soul; Oh, Do thou
make me Lively. I have a Barren Soul; Oh, Do thou make me Fruitful. I have a
Soul inordinately set upon the World; Oh! Do thou make me Heavenly. It is
Proud; Extinguish, and Nullify the Pride in my Soul. There is great Impurity in
my Soul; Do thou Purify me, and make me Meet for the Inheritance of the Saints
in Light. God will hear this Cry of the Humble!

And then, Secondly; When we come to our Savior for His Blessings, we are both
to Desire them, and to Expect them. Our Faith must carry us to a CHRIST for
Salvation, on the Two Wings, of Prayer, and of Hope. In our coming to the Lord
JESUS CHRIST, there must be a Petition to Him for Salvation; such a Petition as
that; Psalm. 116.4. I beseech thee, O Lord, to deliver my Soul. And there must
be a Dependence on Him for Salvation; such a Dependence as that; Psalm. 25.2. O
my God, I Trust in thee. First, We are to Beg of our Lord Jesus Christ, That He
would undertake for us, and Guide us by Counsil and Bring us to Glory; And
then, we are to Trust in Him, that He will do so. First we are to Commit our
selves unto our Lord; Saying, Lord, I am Thine, Save me, Lead me, Rule me! And
then we are to Compose our selves, with some Degree of Confidence or Affiance,
in the Lord; Saying, Return to thy Rest, O my Soul, for the Lord will deal
bountifully with me!

You now Apprehend, What it is, To come unto the Lord Jesus Christ. Souls,
When, when will you come Experimentially to Apprehend, what it is! Know, for
your Excitation;

II. There is a Great SALVATION to be bestowed upon all who thus Come unto the
Savior.

Our Lord JESUS CHRIST Will in no wise cast out those that come unto Him. He
will then Take them under His Conduct: But, Oh! Blessed Conduct! Oh! Thrice and
Four times Blessed they that are under such a Conduct! O Lord, How Great is thy
Goodness, which thou have Laid up for them, who put their Trust in thee!
Believer, Thy Great SAVIOR has those Things to Do for thee, which will cause
thee to Sing; [Psal. 126.3.] The Lord has done Great Things for me, whereof I
am Glad!

What will our Savior do for them that Come unto Him? The Answer in short is,
He will do all that for which they Come unto Him?

SALVATION is That, SALVATION is the End of our Faith. We are told; Act. 16.31.
Believe on the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and thou shall be SAVED. But all that is
Comprehended in that Salvation, it is inexpressible, it is inconceivable!
Imagine, if you can, all that is comprehended in that Incomprehensible
Catalogue of Blessings; 1 Cor. 1.30. Wisdom, Righteousness, Holiness, and
Redemption. Believer, These are all Thine, from the first moment of thy
Believing.

Yet we will make a feeble Essay, to tell something of what our Great SAVIOR,
will do for them, whom He will not Cast out, but will Take in under the Shadow
of His Wings.

O Comers to the Lord; ADOPTION will be one point of your Salvation. We read;
Joh. 1.12. As many as Received Him, to them He gave power to become the Sons of
God. This, This is the Engagement of our Lord JESUS CHRIST; Him that comes
unto me, I will in no wise Leave in the sad and black Family of Satan; I will
make him a Child of God; an Heir of God. I will give him a Title to a matchless
Inheritance; He shall be a Joint-Heir with me; He shall Inherit all things. My
Father shall be His Father, and Bless Him wonderfully!

Another point of your Salvation shall be your JUSTIFICATION. We read, Romans
3.22. The Righteousness of God, is by the Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and
upon all them that Believe. This is the Engagement of our Lord JESUS CHRIST;
Him that Comes unto me, I will in no wise Leave under the Wrath of God. God
shall be Reconciled unto him. Though God has been Angry with him, the Anger shall
be turned away. All Sin shall be Forgiven him. He shall stand in the Favor of
God; be highly Favored of the Lord. He shall have a claim to all the
Blessedness of the Righteous. I will put my Righteousness upon him; A Robe
outshining the Splendour of the brightest Angels in Heaven!

Another point of your Salvation shall be your SANCTIFICATION. We read, Act.
26.18. We are Sanctified by Faith. There is the Engagement of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST: Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise Leave under the Power of
Sin. I will make him a Temple of God, and Sin shall not have Dominion over him.
I will knock off the Chains of Hell from his Mind; and Enlarge his Heart so
that he shall Run the way of my Commandments. I will give him a New Heart, a
Soft Heart, a Clean Heart; and I will incline his Heart unto all the Things
that are Holy, and Just, and Good.

This is not All. Your Salvation must have a Consummation, in Heavenly Glory;
in the Riches of the Glory of the Inheritance reserved for the Saints in
another World. We read, Joh. 6.47. Verily, Verily, I say unto you, He that
Believes on me, has Everlasting Life. Thus does our Lord JESUS CHRIST Engage
Himself; Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise cast out, into the Outer
Darkness, where the Ungodly shall be for ever Exiled from God. No; At the close
of his Earthly Pilgrimage I will take his Immortal Spirit into an Heavenly
Paradise, where it shall be Clothed with Garments of Light. At the Last Day, I
will Restore his Body to his Spirit, no longer subject unto Corruption; and I
will take him into the Holy City, where he shall be Filled with all the Fullness
of God for ever and ever.

And are they such Things as these, that our Savior will do for them that Come
unto Him? Verily, They are. Oh! Great Salvation! Oh! Savior, Oh! Savior;
Before whom the greatest that ever was, must vanish as a Shadow! Why do we not
All immediately Come unto Him!

It may be, our extreme Sinfulness and Wickedness, and Filthiness, and
Unworthiness is our Discouragement. Indeed, we all have cause humbly to Declare
with him; Luke 7.7. Lord, I do not think my self worthy to come unto thee.
Nevertheless we have before us a mavelous Consolation.

III. Our Great SAVIOR will not Reject any Sinner, that Comes unto Him; no,
though the Sin of that Sinner be never so Great. He has given His Word; Be he
who, or what he will, I will in no wise cast him out. Sinner, Let not thy
Sinfulness discourage thee, from Coming to thy Savior!

I will first, Argue thus. Did our Lord Jesus Christ ever cast out any of
those, that came unto Him, in the Days of His Flesh, for any of His Favors!
No, He Received All, He Relieved All; Yea, it was cast as a Reproach upon Him;
Luke 15.2. He receives Sinners. What was this, but a most obliging Intimation,
That our Lord Jesus Christ will still give a Kind Entertainment unto All that
come unto Him? Come unto thy SAVIOR, O Soul, so Blind as to see nothing of the
Things which are Invisible; O Soul, so Lame as to be unable to take a step in
the Way of Holiness; O Soul, Grievously Vexed with Devils, which throw thee
into the Fire of Passion, and into the Water of Company, and make thee Cut and
Wound thy self among the Monuments of the Dead. Come unto thy Great Savior: He
will do as Illustrious Things for thee, as any that were done in His Miracles
of old.

I will go on, and Argue thus. How is it possible, How is it possible, for such
infinite Grace as fills the Heart of the Lord Jesus Christ, ever to Reject the
Sinner that comes unto Him? There came unto the Lord a Great Sinner, who made a
Trial of Him; and upon the Trial he Published this Report unto all the World;
[1 Timothy 1.14.] The Grace of our Lord, Oh! it is Exceeding Abundant! A Man that
has but a Little Grace, yet if there be, Any thing of CHRIST, in him, he will
cast out None that come unto him for Help; he will treat all that come unto
him, with Compassion, with Benignity; he will Help them all, and Serve them
all, and rejoice to do them all the Good that ever he can, All this Grace is
but a very Little Picture, and Scarce That; of what is in our Lord Jesus
Christ. It is unto His, not so much as a Drop unto the Ocean. It was of old
said; Joel 2.13. Turn unto the Lord your God, for He is Gracious and Merciful
and of Great Kindness. And we will now say, Come unto the Lord your Savior, in
whom it is that God becomes your God, for He is a Gracious and a Merciful
Savior; None can utter the Greatness of His Kindness!

I will not yet cease to Argue; But Oh, Hear, what I have yet to speak, on the
behalf of our dearest Savior; I will ascribe a Peerless and Endless Goodness
unto Him. Certainly He that never did Reject any Sinner that came unto Him,
never will Reject any Sinner that comes unto Him. Now this, this may be
asserted concerning our Savior. The Worst Sinners in the World have come to
Him; Did He ever cast out any of them? No, in no wise; not One of them all. We
read of such as were Emphatically, Sinners, among them who came unto our Lord
Jesus Christ: And what became of them? What, but this, Their sins, which were
many, were Forgiven them. Yea, The very Murderers of our Lord Jesus Christ
Himself; the Wretches that with Wicked Hands Crucified Him and Murdered Him:
The Sin of those Monsters, was the Greatest Sin, that ever was Committed under
the Cope of Heaven; The Earth trembled, the Rocks rent; the Sun turned black;
the whole Frame of Nature was in a Convulsion at it. It may not without Horror
be thought upon. And yet! Some of these very Murderers, Repented, and Repairing
unto the Lord Jesus Christ, obtained the Remission of all their Sin. There were
horrid Sinners among the Corinthians; [1 Cor. 6.9, 10.] Fornicators, Idolaters,
Adulterers, Effeminate, Sodomites, Thieves, Coveteous, Drunkards, Revilers,
Extortioners. What a Black List is here! Can the Bottom of Hell show a blacker!
Ah! Holy JESUS! would thou not cast out such as these, when they came unto
thee? No; Read on. Such were some of you; BUT, Ye are Washed; BUT ye are
Sanctified; BUT ye are Justified, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God. Oh! Grace! Grace! that cannot be Paralleled! Now, we were
long ago thus called upon; O Give Thanks to the God of Heaven, For His Mercy
Endures for ever. The Mercy of our Savior, which of old Received the Greatest
Sinners that came unto Him, still Endures, ever Endures; come to Him, O Sinner,
Thou shall find the Like Mercy in Him, that was found in the former Ages.

My Quiver is not yet Empty; The Arguments are not all spent; There is another
of them now to be set before you. The Invitation of the Lord Jesus Christ unto
Sinners to Come unto Him, is, An Universal Invitation. What is the Gospel, but,
An Invitation unto Sinners to Come unto their Savior? Now, the Commission runs
large enough; Mark 16.15. Go into all the World, and Preach the Gospel to every
Creature. -- There is no Creature among the Children of men, but, though never
such a Sinful Creature, the most Sinful, and Forlorn Creature in the World,
there is this Gospel to be Preached unto him; Sinner, Believe in the Great
Savior, and thou shall be Saved. The CALL of our Lord Jesus Christ, How
Universally it Extends! Look unto me and be ye Saved, ALL ye Ends of the Earth:
And, Ho, EVERY ONE come to the Sure Mercies: And, Come unto me ALL ye that
Labor and are heavy Laden: And, WHOSOEVER WILL, Let him come. The greatest
Sinner upon Earth may lay hold on such an Invitation. Sinner, Why should
thou Exclude thy self? The Glorious LORD has not Excluded thee: Thy Name is not
Excepted in the Invitation? What will this Arguing prove? This; If Invited, to
Come, then surely, not Rejected when thou shall come.

Nor is there yet an End of our Arguments. I will not Reason with unprofitable
Talk, nor, I hope, with Speeches that will do no Good. Let no man be such a
Prodigy of Impiety and Ingratitude, as to Abound in Sin the more, on the
pretense that Grace may Abound. But have you not heard of such an amazing
thing, as that? Romans 5.20. Where Sin abounded, Grace did much more Abound. The
Greater the Sinner that comes unto the Lord Jesus Christ, the more will the
Lord and His Grace, be Glorified in the Salvation of such a Sinner. When a
Great Sinner comes to be Saved, our Lord has a mavelous opportunity, to
accomplish the Great Intent upon which any Sinner is ever Saved. The Glory, the
radiant Glory of the Lord, will be displayed in such a Salvation, more than on
any other Occasion whatsoever. It must be a Great Salvation indeed* that shall
help such a Sinner! It is pleaded; Ps. 25.11. For thy Names sake, O Lord,
Pardon mine Iniquity; for it is Great. A Great Sinner may make this plea; Lord,
It will be seen, that thy Name is Great, if so Great a Sinner as I, may be
Saved from all my Iniquity! Men and Angels will upon the Salvation of such a
Sinner conspire in Everlasting Doxologies to the Glorious LORD. Oh! the Glory
of that Grace, that would give a Glorious CHRIST for such a Sinner! Oh! the
Glory of that Blood, that would wash away all the Guilt of such a Sinner! Oh!
the Glory of that Spirit, who could bring to Rights, all that was amiss in the
Soul of such a Sinner! The prospect of such a Glory accruing to the Lord, will
be an Argument, for the Salvation of the Greatest Sinner, that shall come unto
Him to be Saved. And, Sinner, I am sure, thou may make this an Argument for
thee, in thy Supplications to the Lord: Lord! Where can thy Glorious Grace find
a fitter Object for its Precious and Eternal Triumphs, than in so great a
Sinner!

I know not how to dismiss this Lovely Theme. -- And yet I will now add no more
than this upon it. There cannot be Greater Sinners on Earth, than some were,
who are now in Heaven, and Stand there, not only without Guilt, but also
without Fault, before the Throme of God. Sinner, Be thy Sins never so horrible,
never so horribly Enormous; there are some now in Heaven, that once were Guilty
of the very same Sins. A Bloody Robber had this from our Savior, Thou shall be
with me in Paradise. And she that was Rahab the Harlot is there too! There are
some in Paradise, who were once, The Chief of Sinners. Paul was caught up
thither; Paul is now gone to stay there; And yet this Paul could say, I was a
Blasphemer, and a Persecutor, and the Chief of Sinners. Oh! could we overhear
the Fraises, that are the Melody of the Heavenly World! One who died among us,
after fifty years rolled away in Wickedness, out of which he was Effectually
Recovered a few Weeks before he dyed; when his Friends thought him gone, and in
a manner Dead, he Revived so far, as to Surprise them, with these Expressions;
O my Friends, Heaven rings all over at this! They Wonder at this; A Great and
an Old Sinner coming to Heaven! O the Riches of Grace! O Glorify Free Grace for
ever more! And so he died quite away. Were Heaven Open to us, we should
overhear Strange Acclamations! One that had been a very Oven of Unchastity,
Crying out; Oh! Praises to that Savior, that has rescued me from the Fiery
Furnace, and Purified me, Sanctified me, brought me to the Inheritance of the
Saints in Light! Another that had been many a Time, as Drunk as a Beast, Crying
out; Oh! Praises to that Savior, that has fetched me from among the Bruits,
and first infused the Holy Principles of Angels into me, and now placed me with
His Angels, with the Princes of His People! Another that had Sworn many a
Profane Oath, and Spoke many a Lying Word, Crying out; Oh! Praises to that
Savior, who has kept out of Hell, a Tongue that had been Set on Fire of Hell;
that will employ one, who once belched out the Language of Friends, to Sing
Hallelujahs with His Holy Ones! Many, many more such strange Sights there are
to be seen in Heaven. Say, O Encouraged Sinner, say, Why 'may not I make One of
them!

And now, Upon the Astonishing Encouragement, and, The Hope set before us, what
shall we do? I had almost said, What can we do? But come to an agreeable
Resolution?

Rosolve, O Perishing Souls, Resolve immediately, To come unto a Glorious
CHRIST for His Great Salvation. Yea, though you see your selves to be very Great
Sinners, and even the Chief of Sinners, yet come unto Him, who came into the
World, that He might Save Sinners, and even Such Sinners, from all their Sins.

It is a Thing that must Immediately be Resolved upon. There is indeed no Room
left for any Deliberation before you come unto a Resolution.

HE that Commands you to come unto Him; Oh! who is HE? I am to tell you; HE is
the Son of God; HE is the King of Glory; HE is the Lord of Angels! It is HE, to
whom all the Creatures in Heaven and Earth yield Obedience. Lord, All are thy
Servants! Art thou Unresolved, O Sinner, Whether thou shall yield Obedience to
the Commandment of such a LORD? Instead of thy Saying, May I Dare to come unto
Him? I will Say, How do thou dare to do any other than come unto Him?

It has always been beyond all Dispute, with all that are not with Madness in
their Hearts going down unto the Dead; That, Psalm. 73.28. It is Good for me to
Draw near unto God. Certainly, It will be Good for you to come unto a Great
SAVIOR. But are you Unresolved, Whether you should come into a Friendship and
a Fellowship with the Blessed GOD? Unresolved, Whether you should become the
Sons and the Daughters of the Almighty? Unresolved, Whether you should Accept a
claim to all the very Great and Precious Promises of the New Covenant? Oh! how
can you continue so? It Is to continue Unresolved, Whether you had not best ly
under the Fearful Curse of God, and have the Dreadful Wrath of God abiding on
you? But is this possible? Can you continue Unresolved, Whether you shall Choose
your Portion with Unbelievers, and Weep and Wail in the Outer Darkness of an
Eternal Banishment from the Blissful Mansions of the Righteous? Whether you
shall Choose to do the part of Devils, and have a part with Devils, and be held
in the Chains of Endless Darkness laid upon you? O unaccountable Indifferency!
O inexcusable Stupidity!

Briefly; The Doom will pass upon you, from the Mouth of the Lord JESUS CHRIST,
either, Come ye Blessed; or, Go, ye Cursed: This Doom will pass, according to
your Coming to, or Keeping from, the Glorious LORD. Oh! No longer then continue
Unresolved; But, as we read; Joh. 11.28, 29. She called Mary her Sister
secretly, Saying, The Master calls for thee: As Soon as she heard that, she
arose quickly, and came unto Him. I do here Openly declare unto you, The
Savior calls you; Oh! That Now, As Soon as you hear that, you would arise
quickly, and come unto Him!

I will bring the Matter to an Issue. Try, Try, Whether you cannot with a
Quickened Soul, Address your Great SAVIOR. O Great Sinners, Greatest, Vilest,
Saddest of Sinners, Make the Trial. Take with you Words. You shall have Words
put into your Mouths; Words which your most Gracious LORD has Himself Prepared
for you; Words which if you do with your Hearts bring before the Lord, He will
receive you graciously.

Unto your Great SAVIOR, Let your First Address be in those Words; Psalm. 4.1.
Hear me when I call, and be thou the God of my Righteousness.

Let your Next Address be in those Words; Psalm. 25.4. Show me thy ways, O Lord,
Teach me thy Paths.

Let your Third Address be in those Words; Psalm. 119.133. Order my steps in thy
Word, and let not any Iniquity have Dominion over me.

It is for these Intents and Purposes, that you are to come unto your Savior.
And, Believe Him; He will cast out none that so come unto Him!

I may not Conclude the Discourse, without Some Endeavors to deliver the Minds
of my Hearers, from some Difficulties, which I find often Encumbring of them.

One thing that Supplies much Objection to them that are Invited by a Great
SAVIOR, to come unto Him, is This;

I cannot come. I am not Able to Believe. It Is not in me to do it of my self. I
cannot do it, until the Lord please to Enable me!

That this Objection may not hold any People in their Impenitency, there are
these things to be said upon it.

First. The Impotency of a Sinner to do it, must not be used as any Apology,
for his Not coming to a Savior. Where is the Seat of this Impotency? It Is in
the Will; It Is in a Depraved Will. It Is Willful, and therefore it is very Sinful.
When a Sinner says, I cannot come to the Savior, and own Him for my Savior;
the plain Truth is, He will not come. So it is charged upon Unbelievers; Joh.
5.40. Ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life. I Pray, What Excuse is
it, for any other Crime, to Say, My Will stands that way! The most Vicious
People in the World, have an Excuse for their not Reforming of their Vices, if
the want of a Will to do it, may go for one. As little will this Excuse our
Neglect of the Great Salvation; to plead, I have no Will to Look after it! When
the Exhortations are made unto the Sinner, to Come unto a Savior, and receive
the Unsearcheable Riches of Christ, Why does he not Come? What is the Reason?
Sinner, the Reason! Speak out plainly; Say, I will not come unto the Lord: My
Mind is no way disposed, my Heart is very much Averse, unto it! Oh! Scandalous
Excuse for the worst Wickedness imaginable! To Say, I am Wicked, because I am
not willing to be otherwise!

I may Venture to Assert This; That never any man in the World, could Say, I am
willing to come unto my Savior, but He does not make me Able to come. The
Sinner does Really Begin to Believe on a Glorious CHRIST, if once he do
Sincerely Desire to do it, or Desire that God would Enable Him to do it. Faith
is actually Begun, in the Soul, that is made Sincerely Willing to Believe. One
Sincerely Willing to come unto the Savior, had rather be gratified in this
Point, than in any Worldly Interest; He Prefers a Glorious CHRIST, above all
the Things of this World; He Neglects no Means, he Omits no Cries, that he may
obtain the Grace to Lay Hold on Him, and on Eternal Life in Him. Unbeliever,
Thou art not, Willing to be any other than what thou art. And, This, This, will
be thy Condemnation.

Secondly. This Impotency must be confessd and Bewailed in our Coming to our
Savior; and our Sensible Confession of it, is a notable step of our Coming
unto Him. It is not likely, that the Spirit of Grace will Enable us to Come
unto our Savior, till we feel and own that we are Unable to Come. When we
become Sensible that we are Unable, and become Desirous to be Enabled, then we
are indeed Beginning to come. When the Grace to Believe on a Glorious CHRIST,
is to be wrought in a Soul, the God of all Grace, will have the Glory of
working it. See, O Sinner, That thou art Justly Damned, if thou do not come
to thy Savior. See this; and Say it before the Lord. But at the same time also
humbly say; Lord, I shall not come to my Savior, if thy Sovereign Grace do not
help me to come! It Is true, Such a Corruption there is upon the Will of
Unregenerate Man, that he will not come unto a Glorious CHRIST, but indeed have
a greater Enmity to this, than to any one thing in all Religion; till there be
an Efficacious and Supernatural Operation of God upon the Will, not only to lay
Moral Suasions before it, but also to infuse a New Frame into it, and
Effectually Incline it unto the Faith whereto it is an Enemy. So far is the
Sinner, from an Ability to change his own Will, and bring it unto the Faith of
a Glorious CHRIST, that whatever he does from his own mere Natural Ability,
cannot oblige the God of Heaven, to make a Saving Change upon it. Let us keep
to that famous Tenth Article of the Church of England. The Condition of man is
such, after the Fall, that he cannot turn, nor prepare himself by his own
Natural Strength, to Faith and Calling upon God. Wherefore we have no power to
do Good Works pleasant and acceptable to God, without the Grace of God
preventing us, that we may have a Good Will, and working with us, when we have
that Good Will.

But then, how is this Good Confession to be prosecuted? Not now to Ly down
like a Stag in a Net, with despair ever to escape the Fury of the Lord. No; but
from thy Sinful Grave, O Sinner, send up thy Sighs unto the Lord. Though Lying in
the Belly of Hell, yet give a Look toward the Holy Temple. Make that
Acknowledgment; Joh. 6.44. No man can come, except the Father Draw him. But
then beg it of the Father; Oh! Draw me, Draw me to my Savior! Acknowledge
that; Ephesians. 2.8. Faith, is not of your selves, it is the Gift of God. But, then,
beg it of God; Oh! Give me, Give me, a true Faith in my Savior! Acknowledge
that; Phil 2.13. It is God, who works in you, both to Will and to Do, of His
Good pleasure But then, beg it of God; Oh! Work in me the Will, and help me to
do this thing, to Come unto my Savior.

After this praeface unto it, Now come! Now see whether thou can not, with a
New Life infused into thee from Heaven, say, Lord! I come unto thee!

Another thing, that causes much Confusion, to them that are invited by a Great
SAVIOR, to Come unto Him, is This.

Does it not Look like Double Dealing? What Reality can there be, in the Lords
bidding all men to come unto Him, when He knows He will not help them all to do
it. If the Lord has not Really purposed, that He will Enable any but His Elect
Effectually to come unto Him, what Sincerity can there be in His calling them
to come?

Sinner, Let none of these Cavils retard thy Coming to thy Savior. It Is a mere
piece of Confusion to insist upon them. It Is Enough, That He calls Thee to
Come, and He will not cost thee out, if thou Come. Do but Come, and thou shall
find He has been most Sincere in His Call unto thee.

It Is true; The Lord knows, that Reprobates will not Come unto Him; And, He
knows, that He will not give them a Will to Come. Yet He Delude no man, when He
says to all men, Him that comes unto (...) I will in no wise cast out. Where is
the Reprobate, who can say, That the Lord has dealt falsely with him? It must
be a man, who knows himself to be a Reprobate. This no man Living does. O man,
As it is thy Duty to come unto thy Savior, so it is thy Duty to reckon it
probable, that thou art one whom the Lord intends to bring unto thy Savior. To
doom thy self a Reprobate, would be a Criminal Impiety: Oh! Do it not!

Had the Call to come unto a Savior, been directed unto the Elect, exclusive
of the Reprobate, or been any other than unto All the Children of man in
general, the Ends of the Call had utterly been defeated. On the one side; No
man would have Obeyed the Call; For no man can know himself to be one of the
Elect, until he has Obeyed the Call. Every Individual man, would have been at a
Loss; whether he might have come unto the Savior, or no. On the other side;
The Reprobate now Enjoy many Privileges, many Advantages by the Call. It
Restrains them from very much Disorder: It proves an Instrument that furnishes
them with many Ornaments. And, It prevents their passing away their Time, in
such a doleful Desperation, as would otherwise make very Devils of them.

Reprobation is not the Immediate Cause, why the Reprobate will not Come unto
the Savior. No; Their own Sinful, Corrupt, Wicked Nature is the Cause. If God
should Lay Chains upon a Sinner, against his Will, and then Bid him to Come
unto a Savior, this indeed would look like a Mockery. But the Cause why a
Sinner does not Come unto a Savior, is not because God will not Enable him;
It Is because he has Disabled himself; he has cast himself into the Snares of
Death, and keeps the Chains of Hell upon his own Soul.

The Grace of God that should Restore the Depraved (...) the Sinner, and
Quicken him to come unto a (...) Conveyed in the Means of Grace. The (...)
sight those means, and use them not. God makes a Tender of His Grace. They will
not so much as Accept the Tender; They will not so much as Request His Help to
Accept it; They will not, -- they never Do, what they can, toward the
Renovation of their Will; that which, though God has not bound Himself by
promise, to Renew them, upon their doing of it, yet their doing of it, would
render it most highly probable, that He would with Saving Influences look upon
them. Such is the Antipathy of the Sinner, to Believing on a Glorious CHRIST,
that if he had more strength, he would still Do just as he does. And where lies
the Impropriety of it, if the Great GOD, will many ways Glorify Himself, by
calling upon such a Sinner, to come unto a Savior? Where Lies the
Dissimulation, (as it is Blasphemed,) if the Great GOD now declare in the
Hearing of such a Sinner, That for men to Come unto a Savior, is a thing that
will be Approved by Him?

In fine; The Elect and the Reprobate they Live together in this World. The
Call of the Gospel must come to Both together. It Is for the same Reason, that
when the Corn and the Stones in the same Field, Ly together, the Rain must fall
upon Both together. God will see that the Call stall be Efficacious to the
Elect; and there shall be enough to leave the Reprobate Inexcusable.

Wherefore, O Sinner, Talk no more exceeding vainly, nor let any more of this
Cavilling proceed out of thy mouth. Try, Strive, Beg, that thou may Come unto
thy Savior; Come to Him, as well as thou can. It may be, that He will help
thee to Come. Then thy Labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.

FINIS.

