An ESSAY Tending to Promote the Kingdom Of Our LORD Jesus Christ, As it was
Delivered in a SERMON Preached before His Excellency the GOVERNOR, the
Honorable COUNCIL, and Representatives of the Province of the
Massachusetts Bay in N. England, On May 28. 1707. Which was the Anniversary Day
for Election of Her Majesty's Council, for that Province.

By Samuel Belcher, Pastor of a Church in Newbury.

Matt. 6 33 But Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness: --
Boston in N. E. Printed by B. Green. 1707.

To His EXCELLENCY, JOSEPH DUDLEY Esquire. Captain General and GOVERNOR in Chief,
of the Provinces of the Massachusetts Bay, and New Hampshire in New England.
May it please Your Excellency,
I Have not the Vanity to think any thing of Mine worthy the Public View; But
since it is Your EXCELLENCIES Pleasure, That this Discourse of the KINGDOM of
CHRIST, be made Public; I humbly Pray, it may find Shelter under the Shadow of
Your Excellencies Favor and Protection.

I am Your EXCELLENCIES most Humble Servant, Samuel Belcher.

A SERMON Preached on the Election Day May 28th. 1707.
Matthew VI. 10. Thy Kingdom Come.
IT is very Obvious that the Words now read are the second Petition, in that
which is commonly called, The Lords Prayer, delivered by our Lord, near the
middle of that Divine Sermon He Preached in the Mount; delivered as a most
Excellent Formulary, Pattern, and Platform of Prayer, unto which, all our
Prayers are to be conformed, as to Matter and Manner, as appears by the Words
of our Lord, in the Prologue to this Prayer, v. 9. After this Manner therefore
Pray ye, i. e. consonant, and agreeable here-unto: Nor know I any
inconvenience, if the very Words be used, as the case may require.

In this Prayer may be considered. (1.) The Preface, in which God is described,

1. In Relation to us, [ Our Father,] an Endearing Relation, Inviting and
Encouraging all his Children to make their Addresses to Him, with Confidence;
That he bears like affections, and incomparably greater, than any Earthly
Parents can do to their Children: And with Assurance, that they shall be heard,
in all Things they call upon Him for, which are according to his Will, in the
Name of His Son.

2. God is here farther described in Relation to his own Severeign Majesty, [
Which art in Heaven,] admonishing us to keep our Distance when we come before
Him; not to be rash with our Mouth, or let our heart be hasty to utter any
thing before God; for God is in Heaven, and we are upon Earth.

(2.) As to the Matter, and Order of these Petitions, we are directed, That the
things which regard the Glory of God, have the Deference and Preference, to
those of our own Necessities. Hence we first Pray, for the Sanctification of
the Name of God, and the Establishing of the Kingdom of his Son, etc. before
other things.

[ Thy Kingdom come.]

By Kingdom I understand, not that Natural and Essential Kingdom, which the Son
has in common with his Father, as he is King of Nations: But that Mediatorial,
and Dispensator) Kingdom, which he has received by Donation, and D^putation
from his Father, as King of Saints. The Administration of which Kingdom is
committed to the Son, till the consummation of all things; When he shall have
delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, as fully completed, and
accomplished; all the Elect gathered; all Enemies subdued; When God shall be
all in all, and the Son shall Reign together with the Father* throughout the
interminable Revolutions of Eternity, 1 Cor. 15.24.

1. This Kingdom is Spiritual; Not exercised over men's natural Lives, or
Estates: Our Lord when upon the Earth, would not inter-meddle with dividing
Inheritances, Luke 12, 13, 14. His Kingdom is not of this World; it is over the
Hearts and Consciences of men; Casting down strong holds, silencing carnal
reasonings, bringing over the affections, and bringing the Thoughts to the
obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. Awakning and Terrifying the Consciences of
Hypocrites: but speaking Peace to the hearts of his People.

2. Eternal; It is a Kingdom which shall never be destroyed, nor left to other
People: Dan. 2.44. A Kingdom which cannot be moved, Heb. 12.28. Other Kingdoms
may be shaken to their foundations; and their Kings be shaken out of their
Thrones. But unto the Son, he says, Thy Throne, O God is for ever and ever,
Heb. 1.8. But this must be understood as to the Substance of it, for, as to the
present form and manner of Administration, as it is now dispensed by Officers,
and Ordinances; it is limited to the Time of the End, when the Son shall
deliver it up to God, in like manner as he received it from God: But as to the
Substance, He shall be Head of his Church for ever; an everlasting Father, and
of his Kingdom there shall be no End, Luke 1.33.

The coming of this Kingdom is,

1. Internal; it is within us, Luke 17.21. Comes not with Observation, as
earthly Monarchies do, whose Original, Foundations, Constitutions, Growth,
Declensions, Translations, lie open to the Observation, and Discourses of
Learned Men. But this is the Rule of Gods Spirit in the hearts of his People,
consisting in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy; the Growth and Multiplication of
these blessings, from the gracious Presence of Christ.

2. External; In the powerful Administration of Gospel Ordinances; gathering
Multitudes of Subjects under the Government of Christ: a visible, and glorious
appearance thereof, accompanied with abundance of Peace and Prosperity,
according to the Promises, Psalm. 72.7. In his days shall the righteous
flourish; and abundance of Peace, so long as the Moon endures. Isa. 2.2, 3, 4.
And it shall come to pass, in the last days, That the Mountain of the Lords
house shall be Established in the Top of the Mountains, etc. and many other
Scriptures.

The Doctrinal Observation which I shall take up from these words, may be to
this purpose: That it ought to be the great Concern of a Religious People of
all Orders, faithfully to Endeavor in their several Capacities, the promoting
of the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ.

In order to the Illustration of this Truth, let it be Enquired, When it may be
said, That the Kingdom of CHRIST makes Advances amongst a Religious People?



Take the answer under the following Heads.

1. When the Name of God is duly Sanctified by them, and amongst them. It is
easy to observe, that in this Head, I have regard to the order of the
Petitions; Hallowed be thy Name: Thy Kingdom Come. When a Professing People do
give unto God the Glory due to his Name, then may it be said, that the Kingdom
of God is come unto them, Psalm. 29, 1, 2. And this they may d^ by their Faith,
Works, and Worship: When they are sound in the faith of the Gospel. He that
would build high, had need to see that the Foundation Stones be deeply and
truly laid. Faith in God is a Foundation-stone; He that comes to God, must
believe that He is. Now when a People do believe in God, and do believe in
Jesus, the Christ of God, the Lords Christ, the Kingdom of God is come amongst
them; when they acknowledge no God but He who is the God and Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ; When they do embrace, profess and contend for the faith once
delivered to the Saints; and what they do believe in their heart, they are
ready when orderly called to it, to make confession thereof with their mouth
unto Salvation. Again, When their faith blossoms forth to Love, and Love
fructifies unto good Works; when Faith works by Love, and Love to God does
excite and constrain such a people to keep the Commandments of God.

2. When a Professing People do Worship God according to his own Mind, as to
the Matter, Means, and Manner of Worship. When the Mind of Christ, and not man's
Mistake, is made the Rule of Worship: But in vain do they worship m^, teaching
for doctrines the commandments of men, Mat. 15.9. When God is worshipped as it
is Written, namely with Scripture Worship; When the Statutes of Christ, not of
Omri are kept. When Gods Altar is set upon its right Basis, and they who
Minister at the Altar, do see that all things be done according to the Pattern.
When a People do Worship God after the due Order, not in an External, August
and Pompous Way of Worship only, but in Spirit and in Truth, with reverence and
godly fear, agreeable to the simplicity of the Primitive and Purest Times.

3. When Gods Sabbaths are Religiously Observed. Many have truly Remarked, That
Religion flourishes or decays, lives or dies, as Gods Sabbaths are Sanctified
or Profaned; let this vein be cut, and the vitals of Religion will soon drop
forth. If the Lord's Day be thrown up, and laid in common with the other days of
the Week, Good men may justly fear, it will not be long, before God will remove
his Kingdom from such an unthankful people. But if a People shall turn away
their foot from polluting Gods Sabbath, from doing their pleasure on his Holy
Day, and shall call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the Lord, etc. They may
expect much of the Presence of Christ amongst them, Isa. 58.13.

4. Another promising symptom of the Prosperous State of the Kingdom of Christ,
is, When Conversions are frequent, and multitudes are born to Christ, numerous
as the drops of dew from the womb of the morning, Psalm. 110.3. When the Kingdom
of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force: When the doors of
Gods House stand open continually, and many enter in* When the Church has
frequent occasion to say, Who has begotten me these? Isa. 49.21. Who are these
that flee as a Cloud, as doves to their windows. When the Blessing of God,
rests upon a Religious People, Behold! a Troop comes; when one shall say, I am
the Lords, and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and another
shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and Surname himself by the name of
Israel.

5. When Converted Ones do grow and thrive, and make increase with the increase
of God, 2 Pet. 3.18. When Professors bring forth much fruit, and abound in the
work of the Lord; when they walk worthy of God, who has called them to his
Kingdom and Glory; when they bring forth Fruit unto, and in old age, and the
longer they live, the more grace they have, the more holy, humble,
heavenly-minded; and as natural bodies move swifter near their Center: so
gracious Souls, the nearer Heaven, the more haste they make thither.

6. When a People are acted with a holy zeal for God, and against Sin; zealous
for the Doctrine, Discipline, Order, and Government of Christ: Acting from the
same Spirit, as of old, Phineas and Elijah, who cannot bear them which are
evil, who having Tried them who say they are Apostles and are not, have found
them Liars* Whose Zeal is kindled with a Coal from Gods Altar, and governed by
knowledge, to the ends of Gods Glory, the promoting Truth, Righteousness and
Peace, acceptable to God, and approved of men.

7. When Families are Seminaries of Piety and Virtue. As Religion began, so is
it maintained and preserved in Families. Now when Heads of Families do exercise
their Authority, in Commanding their Children and Household after them, That
they may keep the way of the Lord: Religion will be kept alive. Well-governed
Families resemble little Churches, and afford matter for greater. When our Sons
and our Daughters are pruned and polisht in their youth, by good government in
the Family; they may be suitably prepared, the one to be planted in Christ's
Garden, the other to be laid in the Building of his House.

8. When Civil Rulers are keepers of both the Tables: Do rule with God, and for
God, and remembering their Character [ I have said ye are gods] do Exert their
Divine Virtues and Accomplishments; to the Weal of their People, cherishing
those that are good, and like the most High, being kind to the Unthankful; and
a people thus favored and blessed do strengthen the hands and hearts of their
Rulers, and do cheerfully render them the double, treble honor of Countenance,
Maintenance and Obedience.

9. When Gospel Churches are Candlesticks of Gold, not only gilt. When the
Lights in the Candlesticks, are burning and shining Lights, and they who bear
the Vessels of the Lord are all holy; when the Angels of the Churches do
sustain that Character, not in Name and Title only, but in regard of holiness,
agility and indefatigableness in the Service of their Lord. When the Churches
Stars are not falling Stars, nor wandering Stars, but fixed, casting forth their
borrowed Light, to the loosning the bands of Tempestuous Orion, delivering
Sin-bound Souls from the cords of their iniquities, and reviving drooping
Spirits, with sweet Influences, as the Pleiades. When the work of Christ
prospers in their hands, and the Kingdom of Christ rises up to Elated degrees
under their Administrations; moving the glad Spectators to cry, Grace! Grace!
to it.

10. When the practice of Second-Table Duties, Enters into the Character of a
Professing People, and becomes a considerable part of it. We know that general
Rule, Phil. 4.8. Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are
lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, think on these things; bring them
down into practice. Without these, the loudest Profession is but as sounding
brass, or a tinkling cymbal. It is a reproach to Religion when the Professors
of it, soar aloft in their discourses, but by and by descend again, and
sordidly creep after their lusts; But they who shall abide in Gods Tabernacle,
are men of other principles; they are Children that will not lie; a just
weight, and a just Ephah is their delight: but false balances, and the scant
measure, that is abominable, is an abomination to them, as to the Lord; they do
in holy wise disdain to enrich themselves by little Arts; we read their
character, Psalm. 15.

11. When a Professing People do faithfully endeavor to preserve the Unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace. Do stand fast in one Spirit with one mind,
striving together for the faith of the Gospel. When they do not denominate
themselves from this or the other party, but from Christ, and can be content
that others should be Christ's as well as they; we know the Apostles
Exhortation, Follow peace and holiness, etc. There is not like to be much
holiness, where there is but little peace; Peace is the Tranquillity of Order;
if Peace be broken, Order will be cripled, and we may invert the words of the
Apostle to his Colossians, grieving and beholding your want of Order; when
contentions grow warm, love will grow cool. Jerusalem is builded as a City that
is compact together.

12. And Lastly; When a people are contented under their pr^sent circumstances;
and can quietly leave the Government of the World to him, whose Kingdom rules
over all; (as Luther once to Melancthon) and without murmuring; yea with
thankfulness receive what Divine Providence carves out to them, and are not
forward to meddle with those who are given to Change.

These are some of the happy Symptoms which do betoken, the flourishing State
of the Kingdom of Christ.

This Truth may be farther argued,

1. From that Gospel Precept, Matt. 6.33. But seek ye first the Kingdom of God.
Our Lord Jesus Christ is KING of his Church: Isa. 33.22. The Lord is our King:
He was born a King, Matt. 2.2. Where is he that is born King of the Jews. He
was a King before he was born, by the appointment and decree of God: Yet have I
set my King upon my holy hill of Zion; I will declare the decree, Psalm. 2.6, 7.
But he shall not be a King without a Kingdom; whatever some have vainly, and
curiously enough thought possible: His Father has given him large Territories;
the Uttermost parts of the Earth for his Possession. And this in virtue of that
blessed compact which passed between the Father and the Son, when the Terms of
Man's Redemption, were agreed upon, in the Council of God: That the Son of God
making his Soul an offering for Sin, he shall not die in vain; He shall see a
numerous Seed, Sprinkle many Nations. God will divide him a Portion with the
Great, Isa. 52.13, 15.53.10, 11.

2. But what advantage will it be to any particular man, that Christ has a
Kingdom in the World, if he have no share in it? If there be nothing of it in
his heart, he may behold something of it with his Eyes, but never Taste of the
power, or plenty of it; so that we may argue from the necessity which lies upon
men to concern themselves in this matter in order to their best good, it is the
One needful.

3. It is the best thing: The Apostle tells us, It is good to be zealously
affected always in a good thing. Now the Kingdom of Christ is the best thing
in the World: Christ is the best King, higher then the Kings of the Earth;
Fairer than the Children of men, anointed with the oil of gladness above his
fellows. His Subjects are the best Subjects, and most honorable; He makes them
all Kings: His Laws the best Laws; His Law a Royal Law, a perfect Law of
Liberty: The privileges of his Kingdom the best privileges; and the best thing
that we can do, is to lay hold of this Kingdom, to prosecute the interest of
it, with vigorous affections, both in our selves and others.

I might Reason farther, from the common places of Honor, Interest and
Conscience. But I shall proceed to the APPLICATION.

USE I. We may hence learn, what cause we have to bless God, that there is such
a gracious Appearance of the Kingdom of Christ, yet amongst us in this Land.
Our Fathers when they transported themselves and Families over the great Ocean
into this Wilderness, they designed the Interest of the Kingdom of Christ in
that Undertaking. They left not their Native Country, a Land which was dear to
them, out of any disaffection to Monarchy, or dislike of the Civil Government.
They came not hither, for the sake of Dominion, the great Idol of the World;
they came not to Erect an Independent State here: They came not to Enrich
themseves by Trade, or to Enlarge their Borders, that they might live in a
large place. They propounded to themselves higher and more noble Ends; their
Design it was to Exalt our Lord Jesus Christ in his Kingly Office, to lay the
Foundations of his Kingdom in the Remote Parts of the Earth, where Satan had so
long usurped quiet Possession; that this part of the Earth might be leavened
with the savor of the Gospel, as well as her other Sisters; that they and
their Children might serve God in the Wilderness. God owned them, maintained
their Cause, they had much of the Presence of Christ, who showed them much of
the Goings out, and Comings in of his House, the Laws, and Ordinances thereof;
they were edifyed, walking in the fear of the Lord, and comfort of the Holy
Ghost, were multiplied, their Fame went forth, they were Renowned for Religion:
And having Served their Generation, according to the Will of God, they are
fallen asleep. Now we their Posterity of one and another Generation are Risen
up in their places, and although as to too many of them, it may be said, they
are not like unto their Fathers, and it may be, that the best do but imitate
them, as Children follow their Parents; Non aequis Passibus, at too great a
distance; and notwithstanding there are some Surviving, who saw the former
Glory, and who may find cause to say, That the Glory of this Generation is not
like the Glory of the first; yet let us pray that God will make it so, and let
us bless God, for what of Glory yet dwells in our Land.

I hope it may without offense be said, That New England may yet at least Vie,
with any of the Queens foreign Plantations, for pure Religion, and the power of
Godliness. Our GOVERNOR and COUNSELORS this day, let it be spoken with due
thanks to GOD, and our gracious QUEEN, are all chosen from amongst our selves,
though not all by our selves; Men of Jethro's character, and who desire to Fear
God and Eschew evil. Our GOVERNOR a Person born, and brought up amongst us,
who naturally cares for the Weal of his Native Country; Excellently qualifyed,
for Understanding the Times, and who knows, whether sent, and continued amongst
us, for such a Time as this? Through whose happy Conduct, we who live on the
Frontiers, and in the Exposed Plantations, do enjoy a measure of quietness,
beyond our fears, and above our hopes, which we do accept always, and in all
places, with all humble Thankfulness. Our MINISTRY, a Godly, Learned, Painful,
Condescending Ministry. And as to the Body of our People, They are to be
accounted Orthodox Christians, and sound in the Faith.

There is a great deal of Religion in this great Town; as there is a great deal
of Vanity, so there is a great deal of the Power of Godliness: The Town fares
the better for it. The like may be said of some other great Towns in this
Province; and lesser Towns too, in which God is Solemnly Worshipped every
Sabbath day. There is in this Country, many a poor Cottage, whose Outside
resembles the Tents of Kedar, whose Riches and Ornaments are within, Gospel
Worshippers; who constantly Serve God Day and Night, These are our Walls and
bulwarks; The chariots of our Israel, and the Horsemen thereof: and shall we
not bless God for this Glory?

I proceed to another USE, and let it be a Word of EXHORTATION: To stir up all
of Us, in our several Stations, and Capacities to promote the Interest of
CHRIST's Kingdom in Our Selves and Othe^s.

And perhaps it may not be indecent for me to say, That all Orders here
present, are to look upon it as the Work of their Generation. And if I should
think to attempt any thing more particularly, His Excellency, and this Assembly
have been Addressed so often, and to so good purpose, from this Place, and on
this Occasion, that there will be the less reason for me to say,

That your EXCELLENCY, having prepared and Settled a Throne for the Lord Jesus
in your own Heart, and having resigned up your Self to the Conduct of his
Spirit, and taken up with that part of his Kingdom, which comes not by
Observation, but is Righteousness, Peace, and Joy, in the Holy Ghost: You are
on this account, as many other, the rather Obliged, and Enabled, to Observe,
and Procure, The coming of the Kingdom of our Lord JESUS CHRIST in this Land,
in greater Power, and Glory; in so doing, you do approve your Self an Eminent,
and Illustrious part of His Kingdom, and will bring upon you, The blessings of
Heaven above, the blessings of the Deep that lies under; the blessings of the
Earth, and fullness thereof; That the blessings of your EXCELLENCY, may prevail
above the blessings of your Progenitors, from the good will of Him who dwelt in
the Bush.

And those HONORABLE Persons who are, or may be called to Assist in
Government, They will readily concur to any thing, to every thing, which may
conduce to the building up the Kingdom of Christ amongst us.

You have before you, the Examples of Holy, and Honorable Persons, whose Names
are preserved in Sacred Writ, who were famous in their Generations, on the
account of Christ's Kingdom. Moses was King in Jesurun, he was faithful in all
his House as a Servant, to a Tack, and to a Pin. David was Uneasy whilst the
Ark abode in the Fields of the Wood, was restless in his thoughts till he had
prepared a Resting place for it. I might instance in Nehemiah, Mordecai, who
sought the Wealth of their People, who were the Lords People, and His Kingdom.

And now as to those VENERABLE Persons of the Sacred Order: You know your
Character so well, and the care of Churches lies so near your Hearts, that you
will all agree to that Wise Master builder; We Preach not Our Selves, but
Christ Jesus the Lord, and Our Selves the Churches Servants, for JESUS sake.

There is another Order here present, Namely, Those good GENTLEMEN who
Represent the Body of this People: It is Evident by that great Trust this
People have reposed in you, That they do Presume and Expect, That in the choice
now before you, you will have a special regard to Such, who in the Judgment of
Charity, have Subjected themselves to the Rule of Christ's Kingdom.

And there is not the meanest Person in this Assembly, but who may, by his
devout Prayers, and pious Life, give a lift to this cause.

Let it be considered, That CHRIST's Kingdom shall come in great Power and
Glory. The Kingdoms of this World, shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and
of his Christ, Rev. 11.15. God will bring home his ancient People: The Lord
said, I will bring again from Bashan, I will bring my people again from the
dephts of the sea, Psalm. 68.22. He is able to do it: and the gifts and calling
of God are without Repentance. All Impediments must be removed; Euphrates must
be dried up, let the Streams swell never so high: The Ottoman Monarchy, if not
otherwise disposed of, will sink under the weight of its own bulk. Every Limb,
and Toe of Nebuchadnezzars Image, shall be broken in pieces, by the Stone cut
out of the Mountain without hands: The Idolatrous Worship of the Gentiles,
shall be abolished: Our Lord Jesus Christ, will in these last days, shake all
Kingdoms, and Nations, till He have shaken out all that Antichristian Mortar,
with which they were cemented in their first constitution, and until He has
formed them to the Interest of His Kingdom. And Tottering Rome shall at length
fall, and great will be the fall thereof; not a Stone left upon a Stone: The
man of Sin must be Totally destroyed, Head and Members, Root and Branches.

The Expectations of Gods People are raised up to look after, and wait for the
Accomplishment of these things; Multitudes of Prayers are hastening of them. It
is a happy Omen, That the Time to favor Sion, yea the set Time is come; When
the Lords Remembrancers give him no Rest, till he make Jerusalem a Praise in
the Earth; when his Servants take pleasure in the Stones of Sion, and favor
the Dust thereof. Then let us prepare to meet the Lord; let us sit loose from
all these things which shall be dissolved; let us see that we be furnished with
Vessel Oil, that our Lamps be Trimmed, and burning, that we be not ashamed
before Him, at his coming. Let us keep our selves upon our Watch-towers, and
let us gird up the Loins of our Mind, be Sober, and hope to the End, for the
Grace that is to be brought, at the Revelation of Jesus Christ: Yet a little
while, and He that shall come, will come, and will not tarry; and perhaps
before many Slumbring, Sleepy Virgins are aware: Let us then Look for Him.

And let this Great Assembly Unanimously join in that Holy Comprecation; AMEN,
Even so, Come, Lord Jesus.

THE END.
Concio ad Magistratum, OR, An Assize SERMON Preached Before the HONORABLE Her
Majesty's Superior COURT of Judicature, Court of Assize, and General Goal
Delivery, at Ipswich in New England, the 21 st. of May, 1702.

From those Words,

Ecclesiastes VIII.11. Because Sentence against an Evil work is not executed
speedily: therefore the heart of the Sons of men is fully set in them to do
Evil. By Samuel Belcher, Pastor of a Church at Newbury.

BOSTON in New England: Printed by Bartholomew Green. 1707.

TO PAUL DUDLEY Esqr. Her Majesty's Attorney General in New England.
SIR,
THE following SERMON has now Lien in Silence for several years, and might I
have had my own choice, it should have Remained so always: But your great
Importunity has prevailed on me to Publish it, (such as it is;) and the Office
and Station you now bear in your own Country, which Obliges and Engages you
more immediately to Prosecute Offenders, and to see that Sentence be Speedily
Executed against them, will sufficiently Justify the Dedication to your Self.
Now that the GOD of Blessing would Bless and make you a Blessing in and to your
Generation, as those of your truly Honorable and Worthy Family, have been, and
are, (and GOD Grant may long continue,) and your Self much more abundantly, is,
and shall be the Sincere Desire and Prayer of,

SIR, Your Affectionate Humble Servant, SAMUEL BELCHER.

An Assize SERMON, Preached at Ipswich, May, 21 st. 1702.
Ecclesiastes VIII.11. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily: therefore the heart of the Sons of men is fully set in them to do
Evil.
WISDOM is commended in this Chapter, for its Usefulness to Men, in several
Cases.

1. In that it does direct them how to deport themselves, toward Kings and
Rulers; so as to keep them in their Obedience, grounded on the Oath of God,
which they have solemnly taken, Namely, The Oath of Allegiance, which Subjects
Swear to their Prince; I counsel thee to keep the Kings Commandment, and that
in regard of the Oath of God, v. 2. And that they may avoid those dangers, and
precipices which foolish men, through their folly and indiscretion do cast
themselves into: Be not hasty to go out of his sight: stand not in an Evil
thing: for he does whatsoever pleases him. Whosoever keeps the Commandment
shall feel no evil thing,: v. 3, 5.

2. Wisdom furnishes men with Expedients in their Preparations, for the
prevention of those Unhappy Accidents and evil Occurrents, which do frequently
happen in this changeable World, and are many, unforeseen, intricate, and not
otherwise to be avoided: v. 6, 7, 8.

3. It teaches how to make a right Judgment of the Prosperity, and Impunity of
wicked men; That notwithstanding their present Immunity from punishment, and
prosperous Successes; they shall not always escape: but are in due Time Snared
and Taken in the Work of their own hands.

[ Because Sentence against an Evil Work is not speedily Executed.] Sentence
against every Evil Work is passed in Foro Coeli, in the Court of Heaven; it is
the Execution that is suspended.

GOD has determined in his Eternal Counsel to punish Sin; and the act is no
sooner committed, but the Sinner becomes obnoxious; Guilt commences against
him, and the Man is Self-condemned; Condemned in the Court of Conscience; if
Conscience be awake to do its Office, and though the Punishment be deferred,
Conscience keeps him in safe Custody.

[ Therefore the Heart of the Sons of men,] That is, (says a Learned Man)
Illorum qui sunt nutriti in carnalitate, et sunt filij hominum, non D^i: Of
them who are nourished in Sensuality; and are the Sons of Men, not of God.

[ Is fully set in them to do Evil,] i. e. Composed hardened and determined, to
turn all to an Increase of Wickedness.

In these Words are touched, 1. Go^s Patience toward Evil doers. 2. Their
perverse use of Gods Patience to a Licentiousness in Sin.


Obser. I. That the Righteous God for Holy Ends is sometimes pleased to suffer
Evil doers, for a time to go Unpunished.

Obser. II. Such is the Perverseness of Evil doers, that they abuse the
Patience of God, to a Liberty, and boldness in Sin.

GOD is pleased oftentimes to Exercise long patience toward Sinners; they have
a Day of Grace, and they have a day of Patien^^: The day of Grace may be ended
and past, and yet Patience may interpose, and obtain a reprieve for the Sinner
a little longer: Justice has En^ai^^ punishment to Sin, and though it be
Impossible to cut off the Entail; whilst Evil men persist in their Wickedness,
yet Patience oft-times s^spends the punishment.

The Long-suffering of God waited on the Old World, all the time the Ark was
preparing, Namely One hundred and twenty years, 1 Pet. 3.20. Genesis 6.3. which
must not be understood of the Term of Man's Life ^ut off in so little time, to
so short a scantling; but of Gods Patience toward the Old World, which he
would exten^ no farther. God had determined to bring Evil upon Ahab and his
house; yet the evil determined was deferred all his days upon his Humiliation, 1
King. 21.29. Because he humbled himself before me; I will not bring the Evil in
his days, but in his Sons days will I bring the evil upon his House. The
doomed Amorites were respited from destruction, four Generations through the
Patience of God. Forty years Patience passed between Jerusalem threatened, and
Jerusalem destroyed: All the cumberers of the ground are not presently cut
down, Luke 7.8. Some Reasons why all Sinners are not presently punished.

Reas. 1. God forbears to punish speedily, that men may have a space to Reform,
and grow better. I gave her space to repent, Rev. 2.21. Differt paenam dum
Expectat poenitentiam: So Hierom: He deferreth the punishment, while he
Expects Repentance. Punishment is not the primary intention of the Supreme
Lawgiver: The Law of God (as other Laws) binds to Obedience; Punishment is
superadded in a Secondary way, to reduce men to their Duty: Hence God warns,
and waits before He strikes. We read of the Riches of Gods forbearance, Rom
2.4. It is the forbearance of God which makes Him rich in Souls, the Salvation
of Thousands of Souls is owing to the forbearance and long-suffering of God. It
is the Patience of the good Shepherd that seeks, finds, and brings home the
wandering Sheep; when impatience would easily neglect, and despise a single
Sheep. The patient Father Receives, Clothes, Feasts the Prodigal Son, and makes
Apology for him too, to his discontented Brother. Had Manasseh been cut off in
the full carreer of his Sin, we should not have heard of his Repentance,
Restoration, and Reformation.

2. God sometimes spares wicked men, that they may be Improved as Instruments
to punish others. He lets loose the Nations, and suffers them to break in upon
one another, that they may afflict, vex and punish one another. God made a Rod
of the Assyrian to scourge the Hypocrisy of his own People, Isa. 10.5. O
Assyrian the rod of mine anger. The great Invader of the Peace and quiet of
Europe, as justly deserves to be called, Flagellum Dei, as ever Totilas did, as
if raised up on purpose to disquiet the Nations. When God has done his Work by
such Instruments, He will do his Work upon them; He will punish them: When the
Lord has performed his whole work upon Mount Sion, etc. I will punish the
fruit of the stout heart of the King of Assyria, v. 12. Thus Caesar, after all
his Slaughters and bloodshed, it came at last to his own turn, he was
ignominiously slain in the Senate House, by some of his pretended friends.

3. Wicked men may in some sense be Spared, yet not Exempted from Punishment.
Wickedness carries its punishment along with it: Guilt lashes the Conscience
with invisible Strokes; a guilty Conscience is its own Tormentor; no fury like
it. Hence Wicked men are likened to the troubled Sea, when it cannot rest, Isa.
57.20. When Paul a Prisoner reasoned of Judgment to come, Felix, though a
Judge, trembled; the Lion within was awakened, and began to roar. After Nero
had Murdered his Mother, he was ever haunted and tormented with her Ghost: Sin
not repented of lies gnawing, and feeding as a Vulture on the Entrails. Now we
see the Out-ward Splendour and Grandieur of Wicked men, but we see not the
inward inquietude, and anxiety of their Minds; we see the Silk Stocking, but
not the Ulcerated Leg under it.

4. The time wicked men are Spared, is not so long as we think for. We reckon
time by short and scanty measures, and a little time seems long to us: Gods
forbearance of Sinners, though for many years, is nothing compared with his
duration; A thousand years are but as one day, 2 Pet. 3.8. Now what is man's
Life? It is eve^ a Vapor that appears for a little time, Jam. 4.14. David
says, Behold thou have made my days, as an hand-breadth; and mine age is as
nothing before thee, Psalm. 39.5. So then, there is no wrong done in whatever
part of man's short Life, his Sin unrepented of, finds him out. The Malefactor
is not acquitted because the Execution is deferred unto the Evening.

5. The proper Time for the Punishment of Wicked men, is not yet come. That is
another reason why they are forborne: To every thing there is a season. They are
not yet ripe for destruction, they have not yet filled up the measure of their
Sin: The iniquity of the Amorites was not full in Abraham's time, Genesis 15.16.
Some fill up their measure sooner than others, and so bring upon themselves
swift destruction. They who live under plenty of means, under the light, and
influences of Gospel Ordinances, their Sins are sooner ripe for Punishment.
Others have not the like advantages, and they are the longer borne with: The
times of Ignorance God wincked at, Act. 17.30. Or wicked men may be spared for
a time, that their Punishment may be the more remarkable; they shall be made
Examples: God sees their day is coming in which his Justice will ride
triumphant, in their destruction. Now is the End come upon thee, and I will
send mine anger upon thee, and will judge thee according to thy ways, Ezekiel. 7.3.

Lastly; Why may it not be to give a check to the Eagerness, and Hastiness of
men to pursue and satisfy their own Revenges, under the plausible presence of
Justice, and to teach us Clemency and forbearance? The Patience and
Long-suffering of God, may be of great use to our Imitation, that we be not too
forward to prosecute Injuries and Offenses.

I come to the APPLICATION.

USE. I. What has been said may be Improved to Vindicate the Justice of
Providence, in the Government of the World, from the Imputations of men, who
either cannot see far off, or do pass a judgment too soon, before Providence
has done its work. It has very much Exercised the thoughts of Inquisitive men
among the Heathen, when they observed Wickedness Prosperous, but Virtue
Oppressed; and has caused them to speak very doubtfully, if not altogether
deny, the Being of Divine Providence. Pompey fights for Glory and is
Victorious; but when he turns his Arms to preserve his Countries Liberty, he
falls a Victim before the Ambition of his Corrival. And it is not so much to be
admired, because they wanted Divine Revelation. But others there have been, who
have been furnished with more Excellent Instructions, than Nature can teach,
who yet for a time could not satisfy themselves on this head. I was Envious at
the foolish (said that good man) when I saw the Prosperity of the Wicked, Psalm.
73.3. Holy Jeremiah craves leave to debate this matter, Let me talk with thee
of thy Judgments, Jer. 12.1. The Book of Esther is an Excellent Scheme of
Providence working to the Deliverance of the Church from that Destruction She
was devoted to, by her Enemies. A Chain, whose links consisted of various
matter, some of Gold, others of baser Metal, as One well observes. Now he that
shall break this Chain, and consider only some parts by themselves, shall never
be able to connect and reconcile them to the Grand design of Providence. While
the House is in building (perhaps it is the same Learned man's similitude) the
Materials lie here and there in heaps, in a disorderly and uncomely manner, but
when the House is finished, a beautiful fabric presents it self to our Eye: we
often judge before the time, and so make false Judgments. But indeed a finite
Understanding is not a competent Judge of those things that are disposed by
Infinite Wisdom. The Wheels of Providence are too intricrate, high and
dreadful, for our weak sight to trace, and measure their motions, Ezekiel. 1.16,
18.

USE. II. The impunity of Evil doers in this Life, may confirm our Faith in the
Doctrine of the last and general Judgment; They do not Escape, but are reserved
unto the Judgment of the Great Day. God has made a Righteous Law, by which He
has declared His Sovereign Pleasure, to punish the Transgressors with Death,
Romans 6. ^3. But He sometimes suspends the Execution to another day: Manet alta
mente repostum. God is in honor obliged to Punish Sin which is so directly
contrary to his Being, and Life; but it is with His Wisdom to direct, and
determine the time when, and if not in this World, we may assuredly conclude,
it shall be in another, Eccl. 3.16, 17. and Chap. 11. v. 9. Nor want we
Instances in Courts of humane Judicature, where sometimes the Trial of
Criminals is waved in an Inferior; and left to the Wisdom, and Authority of a
Superior Court. If there be not a future Judgment, many absurdities would
follow, which man's Reason recoyls from; then the best of men would be in a
worse condition, than the basest of men. If in this Life only we have hope in
Christ, we are of all men most miserable, 1 Cor. 15.19.

USE. III. To detect and correct the Wretched perverseness of man's Nature, in
abuseing the Patience of God; as if Sinners were Spared to commit greater
Abominations: Jer. 7.10. Let favor be showed to the Wicked, yet will he not
learn Righteousness; therefore the heart of the Sons of men is fully set to do
Evil: Their hearts are full to do Evil, so some read, Full of Evil Thoughts,
Evil Desires, Purposes, Resolutions; so full, that there is no room for the
fear of Gods Judgments, no room for the Consideration of the foolishness of
Wickedness, or their own dang^^ to restrain them, but they rush on without
counsel, against counsel, as the Horse into the battle; or rather the Wild Ass
loose in the Wilderness;, that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure, and happy
will it be for such, if there be a Month in which they may be found, and
caught, though it be among the thorns, as Manasseh was: they think not of the
Jugment to come, or if they do, they have set the day so far off, and removed
it at such a distance from them; that as the Stars, it does but twinkle in
their thoughts, and makes no powerful Impressions upon their Heart, or Life.

USE. IV. Of EXHORTATION.

To stir up men wisely to Improve the days of Gods Patience, and to account
his Long-suffering Salvation; to prepare to meet the Lord by sound Humiliation,
and a timely Reformation of their Evil Life. The Sentence is past, it is meet
Sinners should be Alarmed, but if they will adventure to go on still in their
Trespasses, the Execution will follow, there will be none to interpose: And if
it bear fruit, well: and if not, then after that thou shall cut it down, Luke
13.9.

And here let it be considered, that sometimes the Sentence is speedily
Executed, Justice is a Swift Witness against Evil doers: Mal. 3.5. They are
soon cut down like the grass, Psalm. 37.2. (...) was David's Observation long
since, I have seen the Wicked in great Power, and Spreading himself like a
green-bay tree; yet be passed away, (...) was not, yea I sought him, but he
could not be found.

Nadab and Abihu, are Instances of present Punishment, Lev. 1.2. in whom God
was pleased to show not only Judgment, but Present Judgment: Salvian. But if
the Punishment be deferred, it will be the heavier when it falls: Jerusalem came
down wonderfully, because he Remembered not her last End.

USE. V.

The last USE may be to Exhort and Excite us to Imitate the Goodness,
Gentleness and Forbearance of GOD, toward one another, forbearing one another,
^ol. 3.13. It is no little argument of the degeneracy of humane Nature; Man's
eagerness and hastiness in Prosecution of Injuries. We call that Justice, which
might too often more truly be named Revenge.

Theodosius was too hasty, in the Execution of the men of Thessalonica. Hasty
Executions are oftener repented than recalled. It is known who that Prince was
that could not call from his (...) that great Minister of (...) when he (...)
of him, he had too hast^^y sent (...).

Pure Religion and Undefiled is this, To Imitate the Divine Perfections. Be ye
therefore Merciful, as your Father also is Merciful. He that makes GOD his
President, though he is not like to hit the Mark, yet surely it will be to his
honor that he aimed at it, and presses toward it.

FINIS.

