THE DANGER OF Speedy Degeneracy, Held forth in A SERMON Preached at the
Lecture in Boston the 5th. of July, 1705.

By Solomon Stoddard Pastor of the Church at Northampton.

Boston: Printed by B. Green, for Benj. Eliot, at his Shop under the West End
of the Townhouse. 1705.

THE Danger Of SPEEDY Degeneracy,
JUDGES II. 11. v. And the Children of Israel did Evil in the Sight of the
LORD, and Served Baalim.


THAT Generation of the Braelites that Entered into the Land of Canaan, carried
themselves commendably; and though they had Infirmities, yet they walked before
God in much Integrity: But Joshua lived but Seventeen Years after their
Entrance into Canaan, and within a while the rest of that Generation were
carried to their Graves: After them arose a Generation of another Spirit; the
consequence whereof we have in this Verse.

Here are, 1. the Criminals. 2. The Crime.

1. The Criminals, or persons that were guilty: the Children of Israel: Had it
been the Canaanites, or Moahites, or Ammonites, it had not been so strange; but
they were the Children of Israel, the Posterity of Abraham, and Isaac and
Jacob; the People that God had made glorious discoveries of himself unto, the
people that had been instructed in the Will of God. Again, they were the
Children of Israel, not a few of the Israelites, not one or two Towns, not
Ramah, or Bethlehem, or Hebron, not one of the Tribes, but it was a general
Defection.

2. The Crime: 1. In general: they did Evil in the sight of the Lord, they
sinned under the eye and observation of God; it may be some of them might do it
in a more secret way, 2 King. 17. 9. The Children of Israel did secretly those
things that were not right; but they did it in the sight of God. Again, they
did evil in the sight of the Lord; that is, they did that which was evil in his
sight: it may be in their own eyes, it might seem good, they thought there was
no hurt in it; but it was evil in the sight of the Lord: Again, they did evil
in the sight of the Lord; they carried so as to provoke God to anger there was
always sin and infirmity among them; but now they were so bad, that God was
provoked by their carriages; he condemns them as a people of a corrupt
carriage. 2. In particular, they served Baalim. Baal signifies Lord, Baalim
Lords; there were many of them, as Baal Peor, Baal Berith, Baal Zebub: by Baal
you may understand the Sun, it was worshipped by diverse Nations, under diverse
forms and representations, and Israel imitated them.

DOCTRINE.
The Covenant People of God do sometimes grow very corrupt in a little time.
When the former Generation were dead that came into the Land of Canaan, they
did evil in the sight of the Lord: People are wont to be very inconsistent in
goodness; as they are subject to many other changes, so to changes in Religion;
Piety is not natural to a people, and so they do not hold it long; sometimes
when a people are grown corrupt, they hold that a great while; but when they
are holy, it is not long before they lose their holiness; it is otherwise with
particular persons that are once holy, such men will continue to be holy all
the days of their lives, but if a people be an holy people, many times they
lose it quickly; it is easy to go down hill: people are apt to grow degenerate;
one would have thought, considering the piety of those that went into Canaan,
the Divine Constitution of their Church, the great manifestations of the glory
of God to that Nation, that they would have held their Religion from Generation
to Generation, but it was otherwise.

QUESTION.
How does this come to pass?

ANSWER.
The principal occasion is, that Godly men Dye, and there rises up an
Unconverted Generation in their room: many other things may meet together to
help forward this Degeneracy; there be many temptations that fall in to promote
this corruption, as the example of Neighboring Nations, the temptation of
Wealth, the evil Opinions that are broached by particular persons; but the main
reason of the degeneracy is that Good men dye, and go to Heaven one after
another, and there rises up another Generation that are Unconverted, and they
corrupt themselves; they are born in Sin, and continue in their natural
condition; they profess holiness, but are not holy, and so the Land is
corrupted; Judge. 2. 10. There arose another Generation that knew not the Lord.

This occasions Degeneracy these ways.

1. Hence they want Grace to restrain them in a Day of Temptation. In length of
time there will arise considerable temptations, but if a people be gracious, it
is hopeful, that they will withstand those temptations: Gracious men will not
live in evil ways: 1 John 2. 9. He cannot sin, because he is born of God: they
have a principle of faith, and do believe the dangerousness of evil ways, and
will be afraid: Job 31. 23. Destruction from God was a terror to me; and they
hate sinful ways, and cannot endure them, they are like green wood that will
not take the fire so readily as others: but if a temptation comes, carnal men
have not grace to restrain them, they have natural consciences, and a care of
their reputation, but they want the principal thing to restrain them; it may be
they will be commanded to do that which is sinful, and they have not grace to
withstand the command: Hos. 5. 11. Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment,
because he willingly walked after the commandment, i.e. of Jereboam, Mic. 6.
16. The statutes of Omri are kept, and all the works of the house of Ahab. It
may be there will arise some false Teachers, and many carnal men will fall in
with their delusions, 2 Timothy 3. 6. Of this sort are they that creep into
houses, and lead captive silly women, laden with sins, led away with diverse
lusts. If persons don't fear God, they are liable to greatest iniquities in a
day of temptation; Genesis 20. 11. The fear of God is not in this place, and they
will slay me for my wives sake.

2. There will be many bad Examples. Where there be many holy men, they will be
giving good examples to others, they will walk in fear, carry humbly, and
glorify God; Acts 24. 16. Herein do I exercise my self to have a conscience
void of offense, toward God and toward man. Where there be plenty of Holy men
in a Land, there will be many good examples; men will be provoking one another
to an holy emulation: but where there be few good men, there will be a scarcity
of good examples; many men will give bad examples, and others will be ready to
follow them; especially the younger sort of people; men are apt to follow the
multitude: when they see others sin, they are taught to sin; the pride of
others draws out their Pride, and the covetousness of others draws out their
coveteousness, as the fire in the coals draws out the fire that is in the wood:
bad examples make men think, that there is no great danger in sin: bad examples
make men think, sinful practices to be honorable, hence in time sins grow
natural.

3. They will indulge their Children in Evil. Godly men may be too indulgent to
their Children; but more generally Godly men will be careful in the Education
of their Children, Genesis 18. 19. Abraham will command his Children and his
Household after him, and they shall keep the ways of the Lord. David was very
careful to principle Solomon, Prove. 4. 3, 4. So was Bathsheba, Prove. 31. 2, 3,
4. They are solicitous for Gods Glory, and the Salvation of their Children, and
will be creful in Educating of them; but if the Generation be carnal, they will
be negligent in Educating them; they would have them be good husbands, and
follow their business diligently; and they cannot abide that they should do any
thing that should occasion them to be fined; but there be abundance of
miscarriages that they do not much regard; they don't much mind it, if they be
rude and misbehaved, if they run abroad in the night time, and be absent from
Family Prayers, if they be vain and proud, and don't sanctify the Sabbath
carefully; and if they do indulge their Children in evil, they will grow very
bad: Children will be very corrupt, if not well governed; Eccles. 11. 10.
Childhood and Youth are vanity; Prove. 29. 15. A Child left to himself, brings
his mother to shame.

4. Godly men that are among them will be tainted. When a Country abounds with
Godly men, they will stir up one another graces, they will quicken and confirm
one another, and strive to excel: but when they are generally a carnal people,
it will be a wonder, if they do not taint those that be good; sweet liquor put
into a corrupt vessel will be tainted; so Good men in a corrupt Town or
Country. It is true, that when wicked men carry very filthily, that does by an
Antiparistasis stir up the graces of Godly men; Psalm. 119. 126, 127. They have
made void thy Law, therefore I love thy Commandments above gold. But when men
are carnal, and carry on a profession of Religion, their miscarriages do
mightily taint Godly men, the air of the Country is infectious, and sound men
may be infected thereby; Joseph learned to Swear in Egypt; Barnabas was carried
away with the dissimulation; Gal. 2. 13. Some of the good King of Judah did not
take away the High Places.

5. They will grow very blind. When God converts men, he gives them light and
understanding; Acts 26. 18. They are turned from darkness to light: And
Spiritual Light received in Conversion, strengthens the reason of men, and
makes the law of nature more legible; but when a people are a carnal people,
they will grow as blind as moles: they don't know the mercy, and wisdom, and
holiness of God, and so are not sensible how such carriages do reflect upon
him: they think there is weighty reason for some carriages that are indeed
sinful; their affections do darken their minds, they don't judge that pride
that is pride, nor that to be intemperance that is intemperance: besides, such
men will not study the mind of God, nor pray for light as Godly, men do, and so
they grow blind; Isa. 5. 20 They call light darkness, and darkness light:
Conscience in some cases gives them a liberty to sin, and in some cases it
urges them to sin.

6. They will not much regard the warnings of the Word, or the Judgments of God.
When God gives warning in his Word, Godly men are wont to fear; Isa. 66. 2.
They tremble at the Word of God: So did Hezekiah; Jer. 26. 18, 19. So did
Josiah: and when Judgments come upon the Land, they are greatly affected with
the anger of God. But when a people are a carnal people, they don't much mind
warnings; many times they make a derision of the warnings of the Word; Isa. 5.
19. They say let him make speed and hasten his work that we may see it, let the
counsel of the Holy One of Israel draw nigh and come, that we may know it.
Godly men would lament upon such an occasion; Judge. 2. 4. When the Angel spoke
these words to the Children of Israel, they lift up their voice and wept. But
carnal people don't believe warnings, Jer. 5. 12. They have belied the Lord,
and said it is not he, neither shall evil come upon us, neither shall we see
sword or famine. Or they think if Judgments do come it will be a good while
first; Ezekiel. 12. 27. They say the vision that he sees is for many days to
come, and he prophesies of the things that are far off: Amos 6. 3. They put
far away the evil day. Yea, if Judgments do come, many times they are like
Pharaoh, they don't lay them to heart, unless they be very heavy, and if they
be very heavy, yet they soon forget them, and the promises that they made,
Psalm. 78. 37. They were not steadfast in his Covenant.

7. They will grow weary of Religious Duties. Godly men love Religious Duties,
Psalm. 26. 8. I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where
thine honor dwells: they find a great deal of Comfort in drawing nigh to
God, Psalm. 84. 10. One day in thy Courts is better then a thousand else where.
Psalm. 87. 7. All my springs are in thee: Religious Duties suit the new
principle that God has put into them: but carnal men grow weary of such
Services: in some pangs they may delight therein, Isa. 58. 2. They ask of me
the Ordinances of justice, and take delight in approaching to God. But
generally they grow weary after a while; for their hearts are set upon other
things, and so duties are a burden to them, Amos 8. 5. When will the new Moon
be gone, that we may sell corn, and the Sabbath that we may set forth wheat.
They don't meet with God in Religious Duties, and so they are empty things to
them: they don't relish them, hence they are weary of them, and if they must
attend them, they had rather do it in such a way as has a pretty deal of
Ceremony in it, then in a more Spiritual way.

8. Many of their Leading men will be Carnal men. The People must take up with
such men as they have. And they will have some carnal Men for Magistrates, and
they will help forward the corruption very much: they will give bad examples,
they will have respect to persons; they will be very dull in the matter of
Reformation: Neh. 3. 5. Their Nobles put not their necks to the work of the
Lord. So some of the Ministers will be carnal men: and though generally they
Preach sound Doctrine, yet they have not experience of the ways of God: and
they want zeal in the cause of God. They don't rightly understand the work of
Regeneration, and are very dead and flat in their Ministry. As the Scribes
were; it is said Christ Jesus taught with authority and not as the Scribes,
Matthew. 7. ult. And they make others to Stumble at the Law, Mal. 2. 8. So other
leading men in the Church and in the Town will be carnal men. Some that are
aged, and of good understanding, and good Estates, and have a great sway in
Public affairs are but carnal men; and that helps forward the corruption of a
People: they will not do what they might to promote the building of Gods House, or
to reform the place: if they would join with the Minister, they might do great
Service, but they have not a Spirit to do it: they clog and hinder a great deal
of good work which would go forward, if they did heartily assist therein.

USE I. Is of EXAMINATION.
Whether we have not corrupted our selves? They were a very holy People that
came into this Land, whatever mistakes they were under, in any particulars,
their hearts were engaged to do the Will of God: and walked before him in great
integrity; and it lies upon us to consider whether we have not corrupted our
selves: it is but a little while since the Land was planted, the first
Generation have not been long removed: The Question is, Whether we do carry as
they did? We have been more advantaged by our Education than many of them were;
and still continue to make a great Profession: but the Providence of God look
dark upon us, and are a Testimony that we are departed out of the way.

Consider 1.
Men do not favor of a Gracious Spirit. Men are wont to discourse much about
their Callings; so the Merchant, the Seaman, the Husbandman: if men made it
their work to Serve God, it is strange they should be so silent about it: Men
that are going a Journey or Voyage, are wont to be discoursing about it: if men
were traveling to Heaven, it is much they should not seem to mind it: Men are
wont to favor of such dispositions as are in their hearts, Psalm. 30. 31. The
mouth of the Righteous speaks of righteousness, and his tongue talks of
judgment: the law of God is in his heart. But many people don't favor of a
gracious spirit; they favor of worldliness, pride, envy and frowardness: but
there is no edification in their discourses; they pray favourly, but they talk
unfavourly; there is scarce any Religion to be discerned in them, but only in
religious duties; seldom talk any thing of Religion, except it be about some
matter of contention, or to run down some other men; they don't quicken one
another by their discourses.

2. Duties of Religion are much neglected. Holiness teaches men to be much in
them; Psalm. 122. 1. I was glad when they said to me, let us go up to the house
of the Lord: Psalm. 27. 4. One thing have I desired, and that will I seek after,
to dwell all the days of my life in the house of the Lord. But there is a
considerable neglect of duties of Religion: the Scripture is not duly read in
many Families; if they do Pray, that is all: many men make little use of their
Bibles: God required the King to read in the law all the days of his life,
Deuteronomy. 17. 18, 19. And many people don't love days of Fasting: they are
contented to go to Lectures, where after the Service they can visit their
Friends, and be kindly entertained; but they are backward to have Communion
with other Churches in this duty of Fasting; or to attend the same at home, but
only when they are required by Authority; and seldom do any thing privately
this way: it was otherwise with David, Psalm. 35. 13. I humbled my soul with
Fasting.

3. The Sabbath is not duly Sanctified. Where Religion thrives, men will be
careful to Sanctify the Sabbath according to their light: and God lays great
weight on the Sanctification of the Sabbath, Jer. 17. 24, 25. But here is not
due care about it: besides, other miscarriages that are more particular: Men do
take a mighty liberty in their Discourses on that day; this is a spreading
disease in the Land: between the Exercises they will talk of any thing, they
will Discourse of their Corn and Hay, and the prizes of Commodities, of almost
any thing that they discourse of on Working days: they are mute about what
they hear, and run into impertinent discourses. It were a fault in Boys, but
Men and Women are guilty, yea such as pretend high to Religion are greatly
culpable in this thing. This is expressly contrary to the Command of God, Isa.
58. 13. If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from duing thy pleasure
upon my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the boly of the Lord
honorable, and shall honor him, not doing thy own ways, nor finding thy own
pleasure, nor speaking thy own words. And this liberty that men take does show,
that their hearts are not under the awe of Gods command; that men are not
Spiritual, that the Sabbath is not loved. Men would count themselves imprisoned
to be restrained from Worldly idle talk upon the Sabbath. The Country is also
very faulty in not Sanctifying days of THANKSGIVING according to Gods
appointment: Days of Thanksgiving are holy days as well as days of Fasting:
They are expressly called Sabbaths, Lev. 23. 39. And there is a prohibition of
Servile work therein, verse 35. But some People allow themselves to do Servile
Work; and in many places there is but one Meeting, (if it be excusable in some
Towns, yet it is not in others) thereby young People have opportunity to meet
together, and spend some part of the day rudely: Days of Thanksgiving are kept
in some Towns like Lecture days, and not like Sabbaths.

4. Abundance of Men are not Moral Men: there be many gross immoralities in the
Land, as Swearing, Drunkenness, Fornication; these things are indeed punished
when they do appear: but a great deal never comes to light: but besides these
grosser iniquities, there be many other Moral evils that do abound: and many
that make high pretensions to Religion are guilty of them: many of our
Professors are not through Moral men: they will talk rudely, they are not
punctual to their Word, they do not honestly pay their Debts, they do not
attend Family order, they are not faithful in their dealings, they will venture
to speak beyond the bounds of Truth, they are not fair dealing men: if the fear
of God did prevail in the hearts of men, they would be of a more becoming
Conversation: flourishing Grace would make men more exact in their Walk. The
Gospel teaches men to carry holily: Tit. 2. 11, 12. The Grace of God teaches us
to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and
godly in this present world.

5. Times of Public Solemnity are times of Voluptuousness. When Saul was
Proclaimed King, Samuel sent the people every one to his house: 1 Samuel 10. 25.
When Solemnities are over, men should return to their occasions: but it is much
otherwise here. When the Training is over, men go to the Taverns, sit tippling
till an unseasonable time in the night, those Exercises end in Revelling. So at
Court times, especially in Country Towns, there is a great deal of riot; there
is more tippling at those times, than in a month before. Commencement times are
times of Riot: So on Lecture Days, many people go from the House of God to the
Tavern; Lecture-Days are Market-Days for Innkeepers, they are designed for
good, but have been an occasion of much evil: this shows that men are of a
corrupt spirit, they imitate those Idolaters; they offered burnt-offerings and
brought peace offerings, and the people did eat and drink, and rose up to play,
Exodus 32. 6.

USE II.
See the reason why God brings Judgments on a People, that a few years before
were famous for Religion. Men are ready to wonder at it, they say, there has
been a great deal of Religion in the Country, one would think God should favor
that People; but the case is altered with them, they have corrupted themselves,
and God will change his Dispensations to them: Judge. 2. 13, 14. This is the
Covenant of God, that Holiness shall be rewarded, and Sin shall be punished:
God takes vengeance on them, because they are departed from the ways of their
Fathers; iniquity will bring misery, Sin is a root that bears gall and
wormwood.

1. He will do it, though they be the Children of very Worthy men. God has a
great deal of mercy in store for such, while they keep his Covenant; Psalm. 103.
17. The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting unto them that
fear him, and his righteousness unto Childrens Children, unto such as keep his
Covenant, and do his testimonies: but if such men live wickedly, God will
execute vengeance on them: if they be not heirs to their Parents Piety, they
shall not be heirs to their Parents Felicity. God has a greater regard to his
own glory than men's Parentage; Josiahs holiness will not make Jehoiakim happy:
Jer. 22. 15 -- 19.

2. Though they carry on a pretty deal of the form of Religion. When they have
corrupted themselves, yet they are devout in their way; and have their Prayers,
and Fasts, and Sacrifices; but these things shall not secure them from the
Wrath of God: such Services will not make up the breach between God and his
people. God takes more notice of their sins than of their sacrifices; Jer. 6.
20. Wherefore comes there to me incense from Sheba, and the sweet cane from a
far Country, your offerings are not acceptable, nor your sacrifices sweet unto
me.

3. Though they cry to him for pity. They are wont in their affliction to make
their moans to God, and to complain to him under their sorrows, and entreat his
pity. But God knows how to harden his heart against a rebellious people; they
encourage themselves that God is merciful, but as merciful as he is, he will
not indulge them in their iniquities: Zech 7. 13. It came to pass as I cried to
them and they would not hear, so they cried and I would not hear, says the
Lord of Hosts.

USE III. Of WARNING.
That you do not grow more corrupt. We are running down hill and our natures
lead us to degeneracy, and we are now grown so bad that temptations to
degeneracy do abound in the Land; Men have bad examples before them; they
harden one another, Men will be counted ridiculous if they do not in some
measure comply: We are like a man in a Consumption, in danger to grow worse and
worse. Like a tree in a withering condition, in danger to dye: There is need of
much care.

Consider,

1. If you do go on to corrupt your selves, you will frustrate the design of
planting the Land. The design of our Fathers in Planting this Country, was that
their Posterity might fear and serve the Lord, They would not have left England
merely for their own quietness: but they were afraid that their Children would
be corrupted there. But what advantage will the Planting of this Land be, if we
should grow a corrupt People here? as good have been bad in Old England as in
New: what great matter is it, if we be delivered from Superstition, if we carry
in other respects wickedly: The Planters of the Country might even repent that
ever they came over into this Land: the design will be very much lost; they
might say as Joshua says, Josh. 7. 7. Would God we had been content and dwelt
on the other side Jordan.

2. Corrupt carriages will of themselves bring much misery on you. If the
Country grows very corrupt, that will make us miserable, though we had no
punishment: if we grow a wicked People, men will be abusing one another in
their Estates, by fraud, by oppression, by theft, by corrupt judgment: Isa. 5.
7. He looked for judgment but behold oppression, for righteousness but behold a
cry: Men will be reproaching one another, blasting one another Names, they
will reproach their Magistrates, and reproach their Ministers, and make their
lives burdensome, Children will be disobedient to Parents, grow riotous, and
drunkards, and bring themselves to misery: Men's Daughters and Wives too will
become Harlots; which is a great misery: Amos 7. 17. Wickedness will make a
People miserable.

3. God will surely judge you, if you corrupt your selves. You may not expect
that God will spare you: Josh. 24. 19. God is an holy God: and a jealous God,
he will not pardon your iniquities, nor your sins: If there were no cloud in
the sky, yet it would not be long before there be a Storm. God will never grow
into love with sin: He will never grow regardless of his honor, he will never
repent of his Covenant, he will never grow weary of punishing a Rebellious
People: it is a vain thing for People to promise themselves Prosperity in a way
of Rebellion. Sin will prove a moth to their Estates, and poison to their
Bodies; if men harden themselves they will not prosper, Job 9. 4. Walls of
brass will not be sufficient to defend a Rebellious People.

4. No man knows when you will be recovered, if you should grow more corrupt.
Sometimes in the beginning of a distemper it is easily cured, but when it is
grown inveterate it rejects all means. It is hard to recover us now, we find
abundance of obstacles in the way, and some are discouraged; but if degeneracy
should prevail more, the case will be more desperate; it is easy to grow worse
and worse, but hard to grow better. When men are habituated to do evil, it is
an hard lesson to learn to do well: Jer. 13. 23. How can you that are
accustomed to do evil learn to do well? When much means are used in vain God
speaks of a People as incurable: Jer. 13. 27. O Jerusalem, will thou not be
made clean, when shall it once be?

5. You will be reproached in the World. It was a great undertaking to Plant
this Land; and the World will take notice how you carry your selves, if you do
corrupt your selves, you will grow ignominious; you will be a contemptible
People: Holiness makes a People to be honored, but wickedness makes them to be
despised; you will become a scorn to others, they will say, as Lam. 2. 15. Is
this the City that men call the perfection of beauty? And when God brings
Judgments on you, they will give that reason of it, because you have forsaken
the God of your Fathers, Deuteronomy. 29. 24, 25. What means the heat of this great
anger: and men shall say, because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord
God of their Fathers.

6. Multitudes of you will perish. When holiness flourishes in a Land, a great
many will go to Heaven, besides the Prosperity that they shall enjoy here, God
will bestow heavenly Glory upon many of them: but if a People grow corrupt, it
is a sign there be few of them Godly, we may conclude that the Ordinances have
not much efficacy among them; they may pretend high and promise themselves a
part in Heaven, but few of them will obtain it: Multitudes when they dye will
go to Hell; when Parents dye, and Husbands dye, and Wives dye, and Children
dye, they will generally go to Hell; after all miseries here they will have
Eternal misery: Math. 8. 12. The Children of the Kingdom shall go into outer
darkness, there shall be wailing and gnashing of teeth. It is not so always;
but it was a corrupt time when Christ was on the earth, and then the Children
of the Kingdom are cast into outer darkness.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Benj. Eliot, at his Shop under the West End of
the TownHouse. Viz.
GOds frown in the Death of Useful men: Showed in a Sermon Preached at the
Funeral of Col. John Pynchon Esquire.

The Way for a People to live long in the Land that God has given them: A
Sermon Preached before His Excellency the Governor, at the Election of
Counselors, May 26. 1703.

The Sufficiency of one Good Sign to prove a man to be in a State of Life.
Cleared up, and Applied in a Sermon Preached at Boston, May 30. 1703.

These three Preached by the Reverend Mr. Solomon Stoddard, Pastor of the
Church at Northampton.

Spiritual Desertions Discovered and Remedied: Being the Substance of diverse
Sermons Preached for the help of Dark Souls laboring under Divine Withdrawings.

The Fountain Opened: Or the Great Gospel Privilege of having Christ Exhibited
to Sinful men: Wherein also is proved, that there shall be a National Calling
of the Jews from Zechary 13. 1.

Morality not to be relied on for Life: Or a brief Discourse discovering the
one thing wanting, which leaves the Legalist short of Life Eternal.

The Christians Exercise by Satan's Temptations: Or an Essay to discover the
Methods which this Adversary uses to tempt the Children of God; and to direct
them how to escape the mischief thereof: Being the Substance of several Sermons
Preached on that Subject. From 1 Chronicles. 21. 1.

These four by the Reverend Mr. Samuel Willard, Teacher of a Church in Boston.

There is now in the PRESS, and will speedily be Published, A faithful Man
Described and Rewarded. Some Observable and Serviceable Passages in the LIFE
and Death of Mr. Michael Wigglesworth, late Pastor of Maldon: Who Rested from
his Labors on the Lord's Day, June 10. 1705. In the Seventy Fourth Year of his
Age. And MEMORIALS of PIETY, left behind him among his written EXPERIENCES.
With a Funeral-Sermon Preached (for him) at Maldon; June 24. 1705.

Together with an Epistle Dedicated to the Church and Congregation at Maldon,
in New England. By the Reverend Mr. Increase Mather, Teacher of a Church in
Boston.

There is also ready for the Press, and may shortly be Published, A Sermon
Preached before His Excellency the Governor, the Honored Council and
Representatives of the Province of the Massachusetts Bay in New England, at the
Election of Her Majesty's Council there, on May 30th. 1705. By the Reverend Mr.
Joseph Easterbrooks, Preacher of the Gospel at Concord in New England.


