THE Government and Improvement OF MIRTH According To the LAWS of Christianity.
In Three SERMONS.

I. Of Civil and Natural Mirth II. Of Carnal and Vicious Mirth III. Of
Spiritual and Holy Joy.
Essayed from James. V. 13. Is any among you Afflicted? let him Pray. Is any
Merry? let him Sing Psalms.

More especially designed for the Use, and Recommended to the Serious Perusal
of Young People, and in Particular the Young Gentlemen of Boston.

By Benj. Colman.

Boston in New England: Printed by B Green, for Samuel Phillips at the Brick
Shop. 1707.

TO THE READER.
THE Reason of my Publishing the following Discourses, is because I apprehend
the Subject to be of great Importance, and a Treatise on it wanting among us.
For among things of common and daily Abuse, no one scarce has escaped with less
express Censure, and Labors for the Correcting it, than abused Mirth ^as. It
is always like to be in fashion in the World, and every single Person in every
age of it is sometime or other making Solomon's Experiment, Eccl. 2.1. I said
in my heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with Mirth, therefore enjoy Pleasure,
(...) it Endangers the World while it flatters and seems to adorn it: As in the
days that were before the Flood, they did eat, they drank, they Married, --
until the day that Noah entered into the Ark; and the Flood came and destroyed
them all.

It may be there never was more Mirth, nor under less Regulation, than in this
Age, and among too many in this Place. A great deal of Pleasantry there is in
the Town, and very graceful and charming it is so far as it is Innocent and
Wise. Our Wit like our Air is clear and Keen, and in very Many it is exalted by
a Polite Education meeting with good Natural Parts: it is pity that Sin should
mix with it, to render it Nauseous and Destructive, and make it end in Shame
and Sorrow.

Youth is more especially the Age of Levity and Laughter, and needs Correction;
Rejoice, O Young man in thy Youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of
thy Youth, and walk in the way of thine Heart, and in the fight of thine Eyes;
but know thou that for all these things God will bring thee into Judgment. To
Young People therefore it is that I principally Write; and possibly may do it
with Advantage as well as Decency, my own Youth and natural Cheerfulness not
savouring to them of Moroseness, that common Prejudice of sensual Youth against
their wise Reprovers.

And indeed I am far from Inveighing against Sober Mirth: On the contrary, I
justify, applaud and recommend it; Only let your Conversation be as becomes
the Gospel; let it be pure and grave, serious and devout, all which it may be
and yet free and cheerful; there is no necessity of being Immodest or Profane,
Idle and Impertinent, in order to be Merry. Yet for want of a Religious care
and Watch over themselves, people slip insensibly into these Excesses; and some
set themselves to abuse and pervert their Wit, and the Bounty of God to them,
to Filthiness, and foolish Talking, and Jesting, which are not convenient, nor
should be once named among us, as becomes Saints; But rather giving of Thanks.

A more mean and sickly thing this is in Elder People, as well as more vile and
horrid! their Example Abominable and Pernicious, and Portentous to themselves
that they are of that Number, St. James 5.5. Ye have lived in pleasure on the
Earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter.

But because there is another Extreme, and too many Good People run into it, I
would turn my Address to them, and Say: That by no means must they seem to
place any thing of Religion in being Dull and heavy, sad and disconsolate, sour
and morose. Not only does Religion Allow but it Obliges unto cheerfulness with
Sobriety: It gives the most reason for it, and is served by it: None have that
License, and in none is it so Decent and Comely as in them that are Good. Mirth
was not made for the Profane and Ungodly, Especially Spiritual Joy is the
peculiar Duty and Privilege of Saints: They are under Bonds to exhibit the
Pleasures and Satisfactions of Religion, if it be possible to convince the
Ungodly how Superior they are to all those of Sense which this World has to
boast of. If men are for Mirth, This is worthy to be called so and aspired
after! A Joy that is Solid, Pure, Perfective, Purmanent! Stronger than all
Afflictions, and abiding in Death! A light in those shades, and a Triumph 'ore
those Terrors!

To do my Duty therefore to One and Other, I have in the following Pages
endeavored to show the Decency and Obligation of Natural and Civil Mirth, and
then the foul Abuses of it to Vice and Carnality; and finally I have considered
(as I was able within so short a compass) the Pleasures that are proper to
Religion.

But the last being a Subject so Noble, I blush at my own Presumption in
Attempting it; nor should I but for the Lameness which the Omitting this would
have left on the others: Also when I consider how Rich and Copious a Theme it
is, I blush again at the Poverty of my Essay on it. Moreover, I durst not trust
my own Expressions on so Heavenly and Spiritual a Head, and therefore have laid
it in Scripture Language. The Holy Ghost can best describe his own Gifts and
Work, and speak of the Joys whereof He is the alone Author: and where should we
expect this but in His Inspired Word? On such a Head which is strictly Divine,
and purely Heavenly, that Discourse is sure to be most exact and pertinent,
which is taken out of the Bible, and composed in Scripture Phrase.

It is more than two years since I Preached these Sermons in the Course of my
Ministry, (but the Last now appears altered in Method, and abbreviated as to
that particular, Duty and Ordinance named in the Text, scil. The Singing of
Psalms; that Argument having been designedly Written on very lately by my
Reverend Brother Mr. Wadsworth.) And as I then though it the Subject Useful and
Seasonable, so I have since grown in that Opinion; and therefore I now humbly
offer 'em to the Public, asking the Readers (...) and Prayers, and beseeching
Almighty GOD to bless what is Written to him, and to make it Serviceable also
unto his Own Glory; and that not only in the Reforming the Lesser Slips and
Grosser Excesses of Common Mirth among us, but also in giving us all a true
understanding and Taste of the Divine Joys of Religion.

B. Colman.
Boston N. E. January 3d. 1706, 7.
Of MIRTH, Civil, Spiritual, Carnal.
Or Natural, Religious, Vicious.

Essayed from, James V. 13. Is any among you Afflicted? let him Pray. IS ANY
MERRY? let him Sing Psalms.


THERE are the Special Seasons of the Particular Duties of the Christian Life,
and every thing is beautiful in its Season; most acceptable then to God,
Profitable to us, and Fair in the eyes of the World. A Time there is to every
Purpose, -- A Time to Weep, and a Time to Laugh; a Time to Mourn, and a Time to
Dance. It is therefore a great point of Christian Skill and Wisdom, obediently
to Time our Duties, as God in his various Providence directs and commands us.

We are very prone to Err in every State, and in all our Frames. The Devil is
ready to suit his Temptations, and the Corruption within us shows it self
variously, but with equal impetuous Lustings, as our Condition and Temper in
this changing World do alter. It particularly lusts against the Duty of the
present Day, and like an expert Enemy tries to make its advantage of all that
occurs, and to divert us from making ours. On the contrary, where the Grace of
God is lively and vigorous, it influences to those particular Duties which are
peculiarly proper and incumbent under present Providence, and the Blessed
Spirit of God leads the Happy Souls in whom he dwells, to an instant and
zealous application of themselves thereunto.

Agreeably, in the Text a special Precept and Direction is given for our good
Conduct in two very different States of Life, and Frames of Spirit. If we are
Afflicted and Sorrowful, we are bid to Pray; if our Condition be Prosperous,
and accordingly our Spirits Cheerful, we are bid to Sing Psalms. The first Rule
is suited to all our Melancholy Hours under every Grief of mind occasioned by
the Which is the true sense of the Greek, (...); which though it expresses, only
the Cause, scil. the Evil suffered, yet must needs be interpreted of the
Effect, scil. the Souls sorrow: Opposed therefore to Mirth and Cheerfulness.
suffering of Evil: In the other, the Occasion of Mirth is supposed, in
opposition to the state of Affliction before named.

Is any Merry? (...), Is any one of a good, easy, pleasant mind? of good
cheer, (as it is rendered, Act. 27.36. as the late foundring Mariners and
Soldiers of Paul's Company, when their fears and distress were over, their
Souls calm again after the Storm, nay, transported with an assurance of their
Lives.) The sense is plainly this; Does God in his Providence call any one to
rejoice? And God allowing or requiring it, is any one joyful? scil. under the
smiles of Providence, in the Benefits and Favors of God vouchsafed to him. In
this Case the Duty directed to is,

Let him Sing Psalms: which is one part of Divine Worship, and Medium both of
Prayer and Praise, but the principal aim of the Ordinance is Praise, to which
at least the sense must be determined here; Prayer having been distinctly
directed to before in the Case of Sorrow. This is a Spiritual, Devout and Holy
Exercise for a Christians Mirth, which else does expire in Froth and Sin.
Singing as well as Laughter is a natural expression of Mirth, both among Saints
and Sinners. Psalm. 126.2, 3. Then was our Mouth filled with Laughter, and our
Tongue with Singing; -- The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we are
glad.

Let him Sing Psalms, scil. Those Psalms of Praise which are provided for us by
God in his Word; which are so worthy of his inspiring, and therefore meet for
him to receive; which do so fully answer to all the Variety of Mercies that we
at any time rejoice in, and are so powerful to raise in us the utmost sense of
them, and the highest Gratitude. For I am not for the freaks of some men's
Fancies, who love rather to compose Hymns for themselves, (and very silly dull
ones too sometimes to my knowledge;) and bring them into the Public Worship
instead of David's: as though one should prefer puddle Water to the pure and
crystal River of the Water of Life, proceeding from the Throne on high; for
such after all is the produce of our muddy Brain, be we never so illuminated,
sanctified, and not inspired, compared to the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost;
who has in Infinite Bounty and Mercy provided for us this store of pure and
raised Devotion, in copious and lofty strains that well become the mouths of
Angels; out of which we ought to bring our Offerings to God, because to him we
ought to offer our Best, which sure must be His own. If we think otherwise, how
insufferable is our vain conceit of our own low and paltry Inventions? and if
we are not so opinionated of our own Composure, Conscience will modestly blush
and give place.

Suffer me to offer one or two Lessons, which the Text suggests. It admonishes
us in the first place, That there is no Time nor Circumstance of Life wherein
we may not be Honoring God, advancing in Religion and in Communion with God.
Our Christian Life neither ever need, nor ought to meet with any Interruption.
Afflictions call us to Prayer, Prosperity ministers matter for Praise: the
Apostles care is that the Exercise of Grace be the same under all the Changes
of Providence: He knew well our Danger in either Extreme, of Sorrow or Joy: He
considers our Infirmity and Pravity, how prone we are under Affliction to
murmur or despond instead of praying, and how apt under the smiles of God to
forget God and kick against him, instead of giving him Praise: This he warns
and cautions us against, giving us a Law how to behave our selves in either
Case, so as may turn to Gods Glory and our own good account. The Rules are
worthy of such a Master, as they were the practice of an equal Apostle, who
said of himself, I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound; every
where and in all things I am instructed, both to be full and to be hungry, both
to abound and to suffer need. So would the Holy Ghost instruct us also, how to
serve God and preserve Fellowship with him, how to carry on the proper work of
our Lives, and maintain a blessed Intercourse with Heaven, whether we are Merry
or Sad.

Indeed, every inordinacy of our affections will interrupt it. Worldly Sorrow
and Sensual Mirth have one and the same effect: they are necessarily the
Intermission of a close walk with God, and conspire in working Death: they
offend the Holy Spirit, and provoke him to withdraw from us. Immoderate Sorrows
break the vigor of the engaged Spirit, enfeeble and sink it: Intemperate
Pleasures sensualize it, and it becomes light and frothy: But if our affections
be well limited and directed, they do excellently subserve unto the Exercise of
Grace. We may be sorrowful and yet serious, resigned and thankful; and we may
be cheerful and yet grave, devout and heavenly. It is utterly an Error to
think, that a mournful Spirit does only or best suit Exercises of Devotion: You
need not of necessity always get the frame of your Spirit altered before you
draw nigh to God, only improve the present frame to Serve him withal; for if it
be not irregular and inordinate in it self, there are Religious Acts or
Services peculiarly adapted to it.

Many people if they are sad and pensive, are apt to think, this is a serious
frame, and proper to help me in Retirement or in public Worship; but if in a
cheerful vein, they go abroad to be merry: Whereas they might be as laudably
and as profitably now in their Closets or in the Church as before, and it may
be rather the more so, because a cheerful spirit will go about Religious
Duties, as well as Worldly Works, with the more life, delight and zeal.

Let every man therefore in that circumstance of Life wherein he is, Walk with
God. Let no State or Frame prove your temptation; but as these alter, remember
that the same work is to be carried on notwithstanding, only in a different
manner. So that our business is to enquire, and satisfy our selves from the
Word of God, what the duty of the present Circumstance or Frame is: Am I now
Sorrowful? Yet let me not be duller and less active in Religion than before.
Or, Am I in a pleasant Humor? Let me not be less serious, less thoughtful of
my Spiritual and Eternal State. Praise may now preserve, continue and increase
that Communion with God, which before was carried on by Humiliations and
Prayers.

A Second Instructive and Useful Lesson suggested in the Text is this: That
every Ornament, Gift and Accomplishment of our Souls is a Talent lent us by
God, to be improved in his Service, and returned to him again in way of tribute
and acknowledgment. Two Instances there are before us, which I am apt to think
are seldom considered as the Gifts of God, improveable to his Glory, and to be
accounted for another day: these are, A Cheerful Spirit, and a Musical Ear and
Voice.

First, A Cheerful Spirit, or Pleasantness of Temper and Disposition, is a
precious gift of God, a happy and lovely thing, and to be used to his Glory.
Such a Christian must especially recommend Religion in his Life, as a seal to
that Truth, Her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her Paths are Peace.
He must beware of Vanity and Froth, and sensual Excesses, to which his Temper
will easily betray him. His care ought to be that his Wisdom remains with him
in his Pleasantry; and that he never give himself all the loose which his heart
may crave, for fear it should run quite away with him. He is inexcusable if he
be not often delighting himself in God, and if he make not his Duty minister
unto him Spiritual Joy, when Worldly things serve to his Sensitive. God did not
give the Man this sweet. Temper to Serve the Devil with it, and make the ways
of Irreligion look Gay; but to adorn his own Holy Doctrine, to show how
pleasant the Road to Heaven, and how bright the Serenity, how profound the
Peace, of his Servants Soul may be.

Secondly, Another considerable Ornament and Beauty in any Person is, A Musical
Ear and Voice; Art and Skill in Singing, and a Genius to relish the Lusty Airs
and Strains of Poetry. These also are of great Use unto Devotion, and when
devoutly used they are truly Great and Charming. God designed 'em for the
Celebration of his own Perfections and Works, though to be sure the Devil has
scarce ever had so much Honor and Homage from any thing. He uses to attempt
the fairest and worthiest part of God's Workmanship, and therefore has labored
so to engross these; as knowing their Power and Force to serve that Interest
they take in with.

The First POEM we know of was a Divine One, Inspired in Heavenly Numbers by
the Holy Ghost; and so the First Singing we read of was to celebrate the
Triumph of the God of Israel in the Overthrow of Pharaoh: (When had they
altogether held their Peace the Neighboring Rocks and Woods would have cried
out, and the Dumb Fish of the Sea after their Fright would have found a Tongue.)
We know also of another Song of Moses to be Sung on a more Illustrious
Occasion: So that the First and Last of Poetry is sacred to God: the Song of
Moses begins it, and the Song of Moses and the Lamb ends it in the Holy
Scripture; and the Argument of each much the same.

David's Skill is known both in Composing and Playing on Instruments, and in
his Psalms and by his Harp Poetry and Music were both Sanctified and Perfected.

But since his day how have they been debased and debauched to the leudest as
well as the meanest Subjects? The Triumphs of silthy Vice have been waited on
and adorned, by a Servile and Scandalous Prostitution of these lovely Gifts;
and Sin has been so set off (like a Fiend transformed into an Angel of Light)
that Multitudes have been taken by its dress, and charmed into Hell. Very just
is the High Resentment of the Abused Nation of late, at this impious
Profanation of Powers that should be devoted to God; and Praised even in the
Churches in Solemn manner should the Heroes be, who first Mr. Collier, against
the Stage.
Encountered this growing Prodigy of Sin, and dared to take that long despised
part and place of the King of Israel, Sir Rich Blackmore 's Eliza. His
Paraphrase on the Book of Joh. and Songs of Moses, Deborah, David, etc.
to Dance before the Lord, and the returning Ark.

Our Text is an address to every cheerful heart, and skilful Ear or Hand, to
let God have the Voice he gave and which he claims, to tune our Harps to the
Songs of Zion; and not to move a finger, nor lose a Breath in Satan's Service.
What is so fair in you do not blemish ever, by trespassing on the Rules of
Decency and Virtue. Consecrate your Skill and Muse to God: keep your self pure.
Pray and aspire after David's steady fervent Inclination to the worthiest Matter
and Subject of raised Praise, and Summon all your Powers to the Mighty Work:
Psalm. 57.7, 8. My heart is fixed O God, my heart is fixed, I will Sing and give
Praise: Awake up my Glory! Awake Psaltery and Harp! etc.

There is eno' in God for our Everlasting Wonders and Delights; Eno' Beauty and
Perfection shining forth in his Works for all the Copious Tho'ts of Men and
Angels too to dwell on for ever. The Lord Redeemer claims the Service of your
Mind and Tongue: To Him the Song of Songs is Inscribed, and he Merits Ours.
Sing now to your Well-beloved, -- Sing of his Deity and Eternal Generation, the
ineffable Felicities of the Godhead, and His who was set up from Everlasting,
the Fathers Daily Delight, and Rejoicing always before him (Prove. 8.30.31.)
Sing of his Pleasure and Gracious Delights with the Sons of Men: his Life in
our low World and all the Glories of it; His God-like Holiness, and Divine
Works of Power and Mercy: Sing of his wondrous Love and Victorious Passion; how
he Triumphed Gloriously, dying to Rise and Reign for evermore; to take all
Power in Heaven, and dispense all Heavenly Gifts to Men. These are the
Christians proper Theme, the Life of Jesus whom he Worships; Psalm. 142, 2, 3.
Let Israel rejoice in Him that made him, let the Children of Zion be joyful in
their King; let them Praise his Name in the dance, etc.

But I will detain you no longer from what the Title Promises: Mirth. A common
thing in the World, and seldom seen under a good Regulation; Its Use to
Religion (it may be) scarcely imagined or rarely considered, but the abuse of
it gross and notorious every where.

Is any Merry? The Apostle Writes to professed Worshippers of Christ, real or
at least visible Saints; he supposes Mirth among them, and in that he does not
censure and condemn it, he plainly allows, approves and countenances it; much
more does he so by supposing and intimating, that it may consist with a devout
heart, prepare it for some Exercises of Worship, and promote our Fellowship
with God in them. Indeed he does not deny that Mirth may and generally does
degenerate into Sin: it is ordinarily the froth and noxious blast of a corrupt
heart. Therefore holy Job always feared for his Sons, as their times of
Feasting came about, lest there shoud have been Sinful Excesses in their Merry
Meetings: He sent and sanctified them, and offered Burnt-offerings according to
the number of them all.

It is with Mirth as it is with Sorrow: there is a proper, decent, Natural
Sorrow on many Occasions, and there is a Sorrow which is Worldly and Deadly,
and there is a Spiritual Mourning, a Godly Sorrow. In like manner, there is a
Civil Mirth which is lawful and decent on proper occasions, and there is a
Merriment that is Vicious, Fleshly, Hellish, and there is a Joy which is Holy
and Heavenly. It highly concerns us to know these if we would converse in this
Evil World as becomes the Gospel, so as neither to dishonor it by an Idle
Austerity, nor by Licentious Excesses, nor live Strangers to its Divine
Pleasure. I will therefore Essay to show these three things.

1. That there is a Civil and Natural Mirth, decent and lawful in a Christian,
and occasionally a Duty.

2. That there is a Carnal and Vicious Merriment, to be condemned and avoided.

3. That there is a Spiritual and Religious Joy proper to a Saint; his rich
Privilege, and his Duty to aspire after.

I. There is a Civil and Natural Mirth decent and lawful in a Christian, and
occasionally a Duty. Mirth is good in it self, only it must be used Lawfully:
it is then profitable and serves to many Wise ends, and is countenanced by
Religion. The Reason, Manner and Measure of it must be Innocent. No injury must
be done by it to God or our Neighbor; it must transgress no Rule of Sobriety,
Holiness or Charity; nor unfit us for any Duty we owe either to God or Man.
Such Regulations must be observed, that it shall neither un-man us, nor
trespass on our Christian Character; and then I am bold to affirm not only the
Lawfulness, but the Loveliness and Obligation of Civil Mirth.

It were sufficient to say, that we have the express allowance of 1 These 5.16.
Eccl. 5 10.9.8, 9. Genesis ^^.6. Job. ^.21.
Scripture for it; and to be sure God does not indulge us in any thing evil or
indecent. I commended Mirth, says Solomon, meaning a Sober Satisfaction in the
distributions of Providence, enjoying the comforts God allows to us: and what
he commends the Apostle positively commands, Rejoice Evermore. There is a
Complectional Joy which we must make allowance for, some being naturally of a
more gay and bright Spirit than others; and it is a Super-added Gift of God, to
the man to whom God has given riches and wealth, and has given him Power to
eat thereof, and to take his Portion, and to rejoice in his Labor. God often
Fills the Perfect man's Mouth with Laughing, and his Lips with Rejoicing, on the
account of present and worldly blessings: God has made me to Laugh, said Sarah,
so that all that bear will laugh with me. A most acceptable License, and highly
ornamental of the Christian Life: O^ thy way, eat thy bread with Joy, and drink
thy Wine with a Merry heart, for God accepts thee herein; Let thy Garments be
always white, and let thy head lack no Ointment; Live joyfully with the Wife
whom thou Love, etc.

Many Reasons might be given in Justification of Moderate Mirth;

As,

1. Were this indecent in all Circumstances, Nature had not put this Faculty
and Disposition into us, and made it so beautiful in us. God has so formed and
framed us, and it is his Work; and it is most plain that he has graced and
enobled is Creature in it. For the Countenance of Man is much the more
beautiful and graceful for its Smiles: A glad Countenance transforms a man, and
makes quite another Person; the Eye has new Life, and the Mein is Superior and
Angelick: Whereas when his heart is sad and his Spirits low, his Face confesses
his Original, and his Fall; that like other Creatures he is of the Dust, and is
tending thither again. Sorrow of heart shows the Spirit to be broken, but a
Merry heart makes a bright Countenance, Prove. 15.13. Then Man appears Without
like his First Self; Grave and yet full of Life and delight; so he must needs
be though it to have been in his State of Integrity and Dominion: he Surveyed
himself and all about him with unknown Content and Pleasure; no Cloud hung over
his Brow, nor Frown wrinkled it; he walked Erect, without a dejected look, and
as there was nothing light in his Air and Gate, so there was nothing dull and
heavy: he had that Life and Majesty in his face that awed all the Creatures,
and commanded fear and obedience from them. God made Man in his Perfection, and
at the top of his proper Felicity; from which he is sunk by Sin, partly because
of the Grief that comes of it, whereby we now so often look abject, low and
mean; strangly other than what could have possibly agreed to a State of
Rectitude and Felicity; for that must needs be accompanyd with a perfect
Internal Delectation of Soul, shining forth constantly in all Looks and Words,
and in the whole behavior. And if this must be supposed of Man in his first
Estate, then so far as cheerfulness can be without Sin, we may conclude it is
Comely and Ornamental in our present State, according to the design of our
Nature, and the will of Him that created us.

2. If Mirth might not be decent and lawful, our Blessed Savior would not have
ever countenanced it, nor would the Joys of Heaven have been set off by it. It
is plain that our Savior did give Countenance to it, by his Presence at the
Marriage in Cana of Galilee. This was the House of Rejoicing, and Jesus goes
thither as well as to the House of Mourning: and as he Wept with the Sisters of
Lazarus whom he found in Tears, so no question he here partook in the
Bridegrooms Joy. The Guests were indeed Select and Heavenly; The Mother of
Jesus was there, and both Jesus was called and his Disciples; yet it is not to
be doubted but there was Sober Mirth among them, as there was plenty of Wine;
Wine that makes glad men's hearts, and ministers to their Mirth; and lest there
should be any want of it, as there had like to have been, he supplied 'em by
his Divine Power. Hereby he sanctified the Solemnity and the Joy of it. As also
elsewhere he intimates, that Sorrow were improper and indecent at such a time
and place: Can the Children of the Bride-chamber Mourn, while the Bridegroom
is with 'em?

Moreover, The Joy of Heaven is represented to us by Virtuous Mirth. Let us
make merry and be glad, said the Father of the Prodigal, who in the Parable is
our Gracious Heavenly Father in Jesus Christ. We are the Prodigals, who so
often spend our first years in Riots and Excess, madly hunting after all manner
of sensual Joy, wandering from God, and forgetful of him; but upon our
Repentance there is Joy in Heaven among the Holy Angels, which the Holy Ghost
thus represents to us -- They began to be merry. In Heaven we are told there is
the Fullness of Joy and Rivers of Pleasures: it is called also the Marriage
Supper of the Lamb, and the united Acclamation of the Elect Guests begins thus,
Let us be glad and rejoice. -- So then Mirth may be decent and good, since it
is a shadow of Heaven.

3. Sober Mirth is a duty so far as it is a due acknowledgment of Gods Bounties
to us, which do bespeak and challenge it. His Mercies call us to Mirth, we deny
them if we be always of a heavy heart and sad face; we in effect say, that we
receive nothing from God to make us cheerful and thankful: we don't render to
him according to his benefits, but act as if only afflictions were measured out
to us, and we were Chastened every morning. This were an ungrateful
Forgetfulness or Undervaluing of the Favors of God, who in giving Fruitful
Seasons, designs to fill men's hearts with food and gladness. A glad Spirit
should be the least fruit of that Divine Bounty which feeds our Bodies.
Therefore when Moses had given to Israel the Law of Offering the First Fruits
of their Land to God, he adds, -- Thus thou shall worship before the Lord thy
God, and thou shall rejoice in every good thing which the Lord thy God has
given unto thee, and unto thine House. The nature of a Benefit leads us into
the reason of Such a Precept: For shall we receive Good at the hand of God, and
not be pleased in it? Are Health, Peace, Plenty, Children, Friends, and the
affluence of Worldly Enjoyments of little or no price with us? Are they not his
rich Beneficence, his Fatherly Provision, his Royal Munificence? How do we
acknowledge this if we do not rejoice in it? Do we need none of these things,
or do we merit 'em and more at Gods hand? but if freely given without our
desert, and very valuable Mercies in themselves, self-love as well as gratitude
binds us to rejoice in 'em. In short,

There is the same reason why we should rejoice under the smiles of Providence,
as there is for mourning under its frowns. If when God bereaves us of Mercies
he calls us to grief, then when he multiplies 'em, he calls us to Joy. Both
have a voice, and ought to be heark'ned to.

4. And lastly, The apparent Ends of Mirth are very good, therefore in it self,
and if virtuously regulated, it cannot be evil. Mirth is obviously good to many
excellent purposes; of great use, service and benefit to us in many respects.
As,

First, To refresh and recruit tired nature in its work. We are in a state of
frailty: a little labor wearies the Body and Mind too; the labor of the Mind
is a weariness to the Flesh, and the toils of the Body soon tire the Mind. We
daily need some respite and diversion, without which we dull our Powers; a
little intermission sharpens 'em again. It spoils the Bow to keep it always
bent, and the Viol if always strained up. Mirth is some loose or relaxation to
the laboring Mind or Body, it lifts up the hands that hand down in weariness,
and strengthens the feeble knees that could stand no longer to work: it renews
our strength, and we resume our labors again with vigor. It Is designed by
nature to cheer and revive us through all the toils and troubles of life; and
therefore equally a benefit with the other Rests which Nature has provided for
the same end. It Is in our present Pilgrimage and Travel of Life refreshing as
the Angels provision for Elijah in his sore travel. Prove. 15.15. All the days
of the afflicted are evil, but he that is of a merry heart has a continual
feast.

Secondly, Moderate Mirth is of great use to preserve Health. It is both food
and medicine; it nourishes a healthful Body, sustains and restores the
languishing. Prove. 17.22. A merry heart does good like a Medicine, but a broken
spirit dries the bones. It minds me how the Prophet joins these two things,
Your heart shall rejoice, and your bones shall flourish as on herb: There is a
natural Influence and Causality in the one unto the other. Cordials serve to
cheer and keep up the spirits from sinking; but Nature is the best Physician,
it knows what will work most kindly and efficaciously for its own sustentation;
and things unnatural and violent should be the last Remedies. Now we all owe
this Duty to our selves, to look after our own life and health; and therefore
so far as Mirth may be a necessary and kind Means of that, so far we are
obliged to it by the Sixth Commandment.

Thirdly, Another good Use of Mirth is to cherish laudable Friendship, and to
increase Love among Christians. Charity is the greatest Grace, the Apostle
gives it the pre-eminence; and this must needs derive a Goodness on whatsoever
shall be subservient and instrumental to the advancing such a Blessing in the
World. Now it has been found a Means of Endearment and Love, for Relations,
Acquaintance, Friends and Brethren in Christ to be free and pleasant at each
others Houses. This was the Use of Genesis 31.27.43 34. Job 1.4. Luke 15.32. Acts
2 46.
Feasts from the first Ages of the World; and so the happy Family of Job
cherished that mutual delight in each other, for which they were so Exemplary:
and so the First Christians did eat their Meat with Gladness and singleness of
heart.

Religious Friendship, and the pleasure of Saints in one another, is the very
Image and Joy of Heaven: There Holy Spirits unite, and their pleasure is, as
their mutual Love, for ever; both in their Fullness. One end of Life and Society
is to increase in Love, and Mirth is both the fruit of Love as well as a means
of it: For while we love, we shall rejoice together; and feel the Psalmists
words, How good, and how pleasant is it, for Brethren to dwell together in
Unity!

Fourthly and Lastly, Another End and Use of Virtuous Mirth is That we may
attend holy duties of Worship, in Private or Public, with the more
cheerfulness, and to promote Spiritual Joy. So in the Text, Mirth helps to the
Singing Psalms, and making melody in our hearts to God. A cheerful spirit
sanctified, finds its best pleasure in holy duties. David's Mr. Mortons, Spirit
of Man Sanctified and Preserved p. 31.
Sanguine Temper being under the Regulation of Grace, lead him to his Psalmody.
It not only fits a man to work the better in his Shop, to be a more pleasant
Neighbor, and a greater comfort to his Family; but it makes him more
serviceable to Gods Glory, and acceptable in his sight. God Loves a cheerful
Servant, (as we our selves also do) to see men love their Duty, and make
Meditation, Prayer and Praise their delight, being never so much pleased, as
when engaged in such Exercises. He likes not to see us go pining or dull about
our Work, as if it were our Penance, and a hard Service. It gives a Luster to
Religion to go unto Gods House with the Voice of Joy and Praise: When it is
Pleasant to our Souls, then is God indeed honored by us. Now regular Mirth
promotes this; the Habit of Cheerfulness does not accompany us just to the
doors of the Church, or of our Closets, and there take leave of us; No, it goes
with us to our Knees; quickens, enli'vens and makes fervent: the Soul
reflecting on its own delightful frame, says to it self, Thus will I bless him
while I Live, I will lift up my hands in his Name.

As a sad heart goes heavily about business, so a lightsome mind is vigorous:
and as Worldly Sorrow works Spiritual Death, and carnal Mirth does the same, so
temperate Mirth promotes our living Spiritually. Let the Spirit be clouded
through bodily Indispositions, and the Spiritual Life often seems to languish:
Good People in that case have sometimes sadly but groundlessly complained of
the decays of Grace; they are Lifeless and cannot go to their knees with half
that pleasure and desire they lately did. But it has been the Physicians work,
more than the Divines, to administer toward the Persons restoration unto his
Sensible Communion with God; which has not been really Interrupted as it has
seemed to be; for let his bodily Distemper be removed, and his delight in God,
and in other things too, returns: Which is a Demonstration that Cheerfulness
does greatly subserve unto a holy and religious Joy. In short, Melancholy
People commonly make drooping Christians, to the disadvantage of Religion.

These are the Excellent Ends of Sober Mirth; it recruits nature, preserves
health, and cherishes both Charity and Devotion: wherein as it consults Gods
Glory, and our Neighbors Interest, so also our own present benefit and future
Reward. And that which is of so excellent Use to us in our Christian Life must
needs be decent and a duty: As these Ends are Great and Noble in themselves, so
must that be which is a Mean of them.

USE. Having thus argued the lawfulness and use of sober Mirth, I will only say
this upon it, That it reproves the defect and want of it among many good
Christians. The use of it both unto Life and Godliness being manifest, one
would have though it that such a Duty would be readily embraced; yet it is rather
fled from by some few, either through the power of Melancholy, or a wrong notion
taken up of Holiness. The last is injurious to God, dishonorable to Grace, a
scandal to Religion, and mischievous to Mankind. It Is a gross Opinion to think
the Gravity, Sobriety, Moderation and Mortification to the World, which agrees
to the Christians Character, cannot consist with Occasional Mirth, or with
Habitual Cheerfulness: Neither the Saints of old time, nor the Apostles after
them, nor the Lord, the Savior of the Church, has taught us any such sour
Doctrine.

Men wrong Religion by this ill account of it, and must answer for disparaging
the Service of Christ, and giving an ill report of the Land of Promise, as if
there were Monsters and Giants in the way terrible to force through. It is the
Spirit of Joshua and Caleb that does God and Religion honor; they were for
engaging cheerfully, and animated others to do so too; but the dullness and
cowardice of the other Spies had a wretched influence to dispirit the whole
Congregation, who lift up their Voice and wept that night, and were for turning
their backs on Canaan. Just as a melancholy Christian would tempt his
Neighbor to suspect Christianity to be a grievous and morose kind of Life. A
most certain way to obstruct the growth of Christ's Kingdom; for you know the
vain World are stumbled at any thing that looks this way; therefore turn the
bright side to 'em, and let 'em see that you enjoy more pleasure in Serving
God, than they can in serving diverse lusts and pleasures. It Is true, we must
not counterfeit or lie for God, but profane men must be told, that they must
part with their Lusts, and repent of them, and that Repentance is a very bitter
Grief, and that the Mortification of those fleshly pleasures they have
surfeited on in their past ungodly Life is a necessary Labor, wherein they may
expect the painful throws of a violent Death; and if men will go away Sorrowful
from Christ upon such faithfulness, there is no Remedy: Only let the
disheartened Person know too, that this does not infer Christianity to be a Life
only of Penance and Sorrow; No, sensual men need only exchange their Pleasures
for far better, more substantial and enduring than those they part with; such
as become Men, and Heirs of Heaven, in the hopes of which there is a continual
Ravishment.

Such a joyous Life of eminently good men has been the Means of the Conversion
of profane Sinners. Famous is the Story of a Gentleman so Converted in an Inn;
he never before knew that Mirth was separable from Profaness and Intemperance;
the Mirth appeared Wise to him, and the Religion that allowed and governed it
charming. The sad hearted Christian seems to be without hope in the World, and
so his Religion without Motive or Allurement in it, which were an Effectual
Care that it should make no Converts. Let me only ask the pensive drooping
Christian,

Is your Master hard, your Work unreasonable? I Am sure you detest the
Blasphemy, you tremble at it, and will reply, No, my Gracious Lord, thy
Commandments are not Grievous, thy Yoke is Easy. Then I beseech you, let your
Life say so, and Glorify Christ: don't force People to pity you and to say, --
What a Poor Slave goes there! What a Miserable Look has he! What a load of
Grief hangs on his Brow! What a dead Eye and Heart has he! Pray, what Tyrant
does he Serve? and what is the Drudgery he is put to? O Christian, let 'em see
that there is such a thing as your Masters Joy, and that on this side of
Heaven; that Devotion is a good Exercise, that your Meditation on God is sweet,
and that Man may eat Angels Food.

Again, Are your Receipts nothing? have you no Calls to pleasure and the Joyous
Exercises of Praise and Thanksgiving? Is there nothing delightful in all the
good Gifts of God? No? not in the Gospel it self, that Good Tidings of great
Joy to all People! But this is an Evil which I have seen under the Sun, a man
to whom God has given all outward Blessings and Spiritual too in abundance, and
yet the obliged Creature has not had a heart to taste the Good of any of 'em.

To add no more,

Is Heaven before you Inconsiderable? (for I speak to such as are bound
thither) that One Hope of your Calling, in Hope of ETERNAL LIFE, which God who
cannot Lie has promised! Is your Hope poor? the Promises not precious? and
Grace (the Unspeakable Gift) not felt? How do you disparage the Riches of
Mercy, by a heavy lumpish Life! how ill a Return to the Lord, who has done
great things for you, whereof you ought to be glad, which should fill your
Mouth with Laughter, and your Tongue with Singing.

Men taste not the Blessings of their Sabbaths, nor of their Tables: Manna is
raind about us but we want an Angels relish; the Milk and Honey flows but we
have no Appetite: O did we taste and see how Good the Lord is, our Eyes would be
Enlightened; we should rejoice more in Him and in his Benefits! Pray therefore
to God for a Savor and Relish of your Mercies, that you may more love and
delight your selves in Him the Giver.

SERMON II. Of MIRTH Carnal and Vicious.
James V. 13. -- IS ANY MERRY? let him Sing Psalms.


I have spoken of that Civil and Natural Mirth, which is decent in a Christian,
and occasionally a duty.

I now proceed to say,

II. That there is a Carnal and Vicious Merriment, to be condemned, abhorred and
avoided. All such Rejoicing is Evil, and Sorrow is better than such Laughter;
wherefore this Apostle in another place calls upon such Merry fools to be
afflicted and mourn and weep, to turn their Laughter to Mourning, and their Joy
to Heaviness. There is a Laughter, of which the Wise Man could not but say --
It is Madness, Transporting the Mind beyond the bounds of Sobriety and Reason;
and there was a Mirth too in his days of which he said, What does it? It does
no Imaginable good, but much hurt. This Unprofitable and Pernicious Mirth I
shall endeavor to lay before you and describe the several kinds of it.

1. From the Measure. 2. Manner of it. 3. The Timing it. 4. The Object, Cause
or Reason of it. 5. Its ill Effects.

I. The Measure of our Mirth may be Prodigal and Intemperate. There is a Mean
to be kept in all things. No Excess is Innocent. Mirth may be Immoderate in the
degree of it: Excessive loud it sometimes is, and sometimes excessive long. The
first* is too often to be heard in Taverns, when Drink has intoxicated men and
banished Reason and Sobriety. They chant to the sound of the Viol, but their
own Voice most criminal. Inferior Mariners especially do give themselves this
Offensive license: the Noise argues a Tube; hollow Creatures that have nothing
within 'em; no Grace, Wisdom, Consideration or Though It: A Gag is their proper and
due punishment.

Length also is a frequent Excess, and commonly is with the other* increasing
the Guilt and Mischief. Some spend the whole day in a Rant, and continue the
Dinn from Morning to Evening. Thus precious Time is wasted in Madness and Riot:
that Time which should rather be redeemed in Retirement* and deep Reflections
in Silence on their horrid Sins. Men consume their days in vanity, and keep
Conscience stunned till they pass into their Graves; Death cures their Madness,
and at last they are in a State of Silence.

In Short, That Mirth is immoderate, which exceeds the Intention of Nature.
It Is designed to refresh our Spirits in our work, and not to tire 'em and unfit
for it. It is easy to over-doe and get a habit of Lightness: and then the
Headstrong beast, used to liberty, will not endure the rein again; takes the Bitt
in its teeth, and none knows the Compass of its Career. So hard is it to stop
and reclaim a Libertine and Extravagant.

II. There is often a variety of Sin in the Licentious Manner of expressing our
Mirth. It Is sometimes Proud, sometimes Profane, sometimes Wanton and Fleshly.
Pride puts on a very Pleased face when it scorns, derides and insults: Disdain
is fleer'd from the Eye, and Contempt is in the Smile; though indeed Envy and
Spite are underneath the paint; the Look is pleased eno' and Gay, but it is only
Disguize, a forced laugh while a man's galled and mad at the heart. Profane men
Swear alike and Curse, imprecate and blaspheme, whether they are angry or
pleased, in earnest or in jest. A kind of Merriment as Impertinent as it is
Impious: that a Wretch cannot be overjoyed to see a Friend but he must curse
him, and every cup of drink he gets he damns himself he is so pleased, and
blasphemes God the Giver of it. The Wanton man's Mirth is Ridiculous. He lays
aside the Man, and the Gravity of Reason, and acts the part of a frolic Colt:
He roars and frisks and leaps; and lies and throws firebrands in Jest. Finally,
the Fleshly man's Mirth lies in obscene jests and drunken revels. There is a
foolish Jesting, which the Apostle names with Filthiness, and opposes it to the
giving of thanks; he says of it that it is not convenient, which might seem a
mild Censure, but that he presently adds a vehement Inhibition of it, That it
be not once named among us as becomes Saints, Ephesians. 5.3, 4. Frothy Wit is
unsavory and should be insipped. The talk is not Seasoned with Salt, to
minister Grace to the hearers, and is flat and tastless to a chaste and
healthful Soul. But above all kinds of vain Mirth deliver me from the Drunken
Club, who belch out noisy Ribaldry rank of the foul lees within. Nabals Mirth,
and Folly is in it: 1 Samuel 25.36. His heart was very Merry within him, for he
was very drunken. Wine is Mischievous when it inflames Rage, but nothing is so
Nauseous as a Merry Drunkard: A sickly sight that no Satyr can severely eno'
expose: So ridiculous and fulsome that it would provoke one to renounce Mirth
for ever. "Gaudent Pii, garriunt Ebrii, the good man rejoices, the drunkard
drivels. The flesh does thus pollute our Mirth, and the Manner of expressing it
is foul and licentious.

III. Mirth ill Timed may for that Reason be Sinful and Vicious. To every thing
there is a Season, -- a time to weep, and a time to laugh. Therefore that which
is decent and lawful to day, may possibly become indecent and unlawful to
morrow. Times of Affliction are proper for Humiliation and Mourning; Mirth were
indecent under Mournful Providence. Ezekiel. 21.10. Should we then make Mirth?
scil. When the Sword is sharp'ned and furbished for slaughter: i. e. a time of
Public Judgments on a Land is no time for Merriments among them. Sorrows are
forced on 'em: Isai. 24.7, 8. All the Merry-hearted do sigh, the Mirth of
Tabrets cease, the noise of them that rejoice ends, the joy of the Harp
cease, they shall not drink Wine with a Song, etc. God causes to cease from a
Place the Voice of Mirth and the Voice of gladness. Jer. 7.34. Joy is taken
away from the plentiful field, and the wine press is no more to be trod with
shouting. Some are too stout and stubborn to bend before Divine Judgments;
their Jollity is a high Contempt and Provocation of the Holy God; New woes hang
over such, Amos 6.1, 4, 5, 6. Woe to them that are at ease in Zion, -- that
chaunt to the sound of the Viol, -- that drink wine in Bowls, -- and are not
grieved for the Affliction of Joseph. Utter destruction is threatened to such,
Isa. 22.12, 13, 14. In that day did the Lord God of Hosts call to weeping, and
to mourning, and to baldness, and to girding with sackcloth; And behold joy and
gladness, slaying Oxen and hilling sheep, eating flesh and drinking wine: --
And it was revealed in mine ears by the Lord of Hosts, surely this Iniquity
shall not be purged from you, till ye die, says the Lord God of Host.

Moreover, Mirth does no ways agree to a Fast Day. Isai 58.3. In the day of
your Fast ye find pleasure. Nor common Mirth to the holy Sabbath, v. 13, 14. If
thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy
day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the Holy of the Lord and Honorable, and
shall honor him, not -- finding thine own pleasure, etc. Sports and Pastimes
are detestable on the Lord-Day, whoever tolerate and authorize 'em: Work and
Labor is rather sufferable; for to make it a Play-day is worse than not to
make it a Rest. More abominable yet is it to see People on the Merry-pin in the
very Exercises of Worship; which is to affront the Great God to his very Face,
and in his House, which he has commanded us to Reverence, as well as to
Sanctify his Day. Yet we too often see People bring vain and light minds
thither. Some can Play and Laugh, as well as others Sleep, under that Word,
which we should Tremble at, because we must be judged by it. How rude is it as
well as Profane, not to put on Gravity and Respect in Gods awful Presence,
which we do when we come before any Superior on Earth! the God, the Lord our
Maker, whom we should bow down and kneel before, whom we should Serve with
fear, and Rejoice in with Trembling! Only Spiritual joy becomes the Sacred
Place and Season.

Again, The House of Mourning is no place to be Merry at. Christianity requires
us to weep with those that weep. A Corpse and a Grave should minister serious
and devout tho'ts to us, and sober behavior becomes a Funeral.

To conclude, A Graceless State is no condition for much mirth. A hard saying,
and who can bear it? May not an Unregenerate man be allowed to laugh? Is it a
Sin to be merry before we are Converted? I mean no such thing, it is a tender
point and must be warily guarded.

It is easy to observe, that there is too much and Inordinate mirth among
Unregenerate men. All excess of wantonness is to be seen among them, as if they
had taken offense at Sobriety, and abjured all Rules of Restraint: so that
confessedly the fault lies on this side, and here is the danger; Levity being
one fruit of Natural Corruption.

Yet Occasional Mirth in moderation is Innocent in all men: Else Nature it self
must be quarreled with, which has framed and invincibly disposed us for it;
and has made it one distinction of mankind from Inferior Creatures.

Moreover, There is a Quiet and cheerfulness which is necessary to the
preservation of Nature: and without which we never shall in any good measure
discharge the Duties of our Respective Places. Now to be sure we may not
destroy Nature, nor neglect Duty on any such pretense as this, -- I have no
right to be merry.

But yet the Graceless Person, upon a sober consideration of his State, must
needs confess that he has no reason for any more mirth than is necessary to
these Ends. For let him but consider what his State is and what his danger:
that he is in the broad way to Hell, and under the heavy Curse of God; and is
this a condition for him to be merry in? Should we countenance it in a Criminal
under Condemnation? Or like to see a Miserable behave himself sportively as he
is drawn to the Gallows? In like manner, rather should Anguish and Horror seize
the Sinner. Delight is not seemly for a fool. The Earth may well be disquieted
for this, A Fool when he is filled with meat; and bounds upon it like a fed
horse. It Is eno' to draw tears from a sober Beholder, to see the outrageous
Extravagancies of some wild and careless, frolic people in a doleful,
unsanctify'd State. But so much of Unseasonable Mirth.

IV. Mirth ill Placed becomes Sin: it is evil with respect to the Object, Cause,
or Reason of it; and is either altogether idle and impertinent, or malicious
and mischievous, or profane.

1. Idle and Impertinent Mirth is evil, which is squandered away we know not on
what, nor wherefore. No reason can be given of it, no cause assigned: It Is an
unaccountable Blithness and Jollity, common to many, they know not why, but
because they are in a frolic. It Is a Noise without sense and meaning, without
design, and void of Harmony: Eccles. 7.6. As the crackling of thorns under a
pot, so is the laughter of the Fool. It Is below the Reason of a man, who is (or
should be) an Agent by Counsel, and should be able to assign some sufficient
cause for all his actions; know why he laughs, and why he weeps, and not like a
Horse that has no understanding, frisk and leap and bound in a lawless
tho'tless Range. A wise man pities and blushes for such Freaks of others: And
Nature teaches us to think it a calamitous sight, when we have beheld a poor
Natural sit laughing at his Straws. There is a Disease that shows it self in
strange and unreasonable Fitts of laughing and weeping, but altogether as
unhappy and compassionate as some other Maladies: So is Idle Mirth the Disease
of many a vain heart; a symptom of a sickly Soul, which every amusement of the
fancy commands, and tosses about at pleasure.

2. Malicious and Mischievous Mirth is very wicked. It is a sport to a fool to
do mischief, he plays with pointed Arrows and Death. His Mirth is injurious and
cruel.

He is glad at Calamity, it may be; is merry in the sufferings of others, and
says -- Aye, so we would have it. This is equally against Nature and against
Christianity, for both do teach us to weep with them that weep. Job detested
the Barbarity, (Job. 31.29, 30. If I rejoiced at the destruction of him that
hated me, or lift up my self when evil found him: --) and good men have
sufficiently felt it; therefore does the Church complain so bitterly of the
wicked pleasure of her Enemies; they have heard of my trouble, and are glad
that thou have done it; they pass by and clap their hands; and in like manner
does the Psalmist grievously resent it, In mine adversity they rejoiced, yea
the Abjects gathered themselves together, -- Lord let them not rejoice
wrongfully, nor wink with the eye.

Too often people make sport at the defects of others, whether Bodily or
Intellectual: this also is cruel and uncharitable Mirth. It Is abusive and
inhumane to make merry at another Infirmity, and much more his Misery. A very
odd fault, that an Infelicity, and not procured neither by enormous lusts, as
sometimes men are the guilty Authors of their own griefs, should be made such a
matter of laughter! That if a poor Innocent, (as some Nations very humanely
call 'em) a Miserable whom God has deprived of understanding, do but pass along
the Streets, a troop of rude Boys are after him, abusing him, and making
themselves cruel sport; when as they ought rather to weep in pity, and think
with themselves, -- Did not he that made me in the womb make him? --

I might note also that there is the malicious Joy of the Defamer and
Backbiter; the huge satisfaction of the Detractor if he can blast a name which
he spites. Envy also conceives a base Joy, and is highly gratified in another
loss; as the Devils high satisfaction was, to rain a happy world, and to make
another Race of Beings miserable as himself. Finally; Persecutors please
themselves in Blood. The Mourning of Rama, and the shrieks of Smithfield, are
music to some savage hearts. The Guilt of Antichrist, all whose Gayety and
Pomp and Pleasures have been bought with blood, or swam to through it.

I will sum up this Head, of barbarous Mirth, in the sad Instance of Sampson.
His Indiscretion and Sin had delivered him into the hands of the Philistines,
and they had bound him and put out his Eyes; upon which they had a great
Holyday appointed to offer a great Sacrifice unto Dagon their god, and to
rejoice; and when their hearts were merry, they called for their poor Captive
to make 'em sport. 'Twas like the rest of their brutish Religion, and just as
cross to true Goodness, as their stock Dagon was to the true and living God,
the Immense Spirit. In this he was a Type of our Blessed Savior, who going to
his Cross and upon it, was derided and reviled by the rude Mob. The last
Instance this of cruel and malicious Mirth, when it insulted the Meek and
Innocent Lamb of God: O fatal and impious pleasantry of the brutish stupid
Guards, when they dressed the King of Heaven and Earth in scorn of his Kingship,
and bowed the knee to him in Mockery! No doubt, they were wondrous merry at
their insolent and barbarous Game, and the Hall shook with their Hoots and
roaring. This is the Mirth that is malicious and mischievous, unmerciful and
injurious to our Neighbor.

3. There is an ill-plac'd Mirth which is yet more strictly to be called
Profane. Either when Sin or when Goodness is the Object, Reason and Cause of it.

First, Mirth is profane when we make our selves merry with Sin. Sin calls for
Horror and not Laughter, for tears and not sport: yet it is a common thing for
Fools to make a mock of Sin. Prove. 14.9. And that sometimes their own Sins, and
sometimes the Sins of others.

1. It is very profane to make our own Sins the reason or matter of our Mirth;
instead of afflicting our Souls for them. Yet this men are often guilty of
three ways more especially.

1. Profane men please themselves in Projecting Iniquity. They raise to
themselves a Scheme of what they will do, and the Pleasure they shall find in
it, and so their fancies are tickled beforehand with what their Imagination
paints, and their Wishes have realiz'd. Thus Murderous Esau. comforts himself
with the sweet Revenge he purposed, Genesis 27.41. Behold the days of Mourning for
my Father are at hand, then will I slay my Brother Jacob. His heart conceived a
wicked Joy in Imagining this almost worst of Crimes. The Oppressor and Robber
devour all the sweets of Gain beforehand, Prove. 1.11, 13. -- They say, Come,
let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily for the Innocent without Cause,
let us swallow them up alive as the Grave; -- We shall find all precious
Substance, we shall fill our Houses with spoil. A delicious Morsel this, on the
hopes of which the hungry dog will smile and live a great while. The Rich Fool
in the Gospel strangely pleased himself in premeditating a long Life of
Sensuality and Luxury: the gay prospect transported his sunk Soul: St. Luke
12.19. I will say to my Soul, Soul, thou have much Goods laid up for many
years; take thine ease, eat, drink and be merry. And so I might show of the
Lewd Heart too, what Scenes of pleasure it paints to it self, what charming
Images it forms and gazes at, and enjoyes! the Joy of this Sinner is all in
Projection, he fancies things that are not, and promises himself what none can
give. So the Impudent Solicitress whom Solomon speaks of, gave her Temptation,
the gayest Outside that could be, -- She tells of the Tapistry, and Carved
Work, and the Fine Linen of Egypt, wherewith she had decked her Bed; the
Myrrh, the Aloes, and Cinnamon that perfumed it, and all to flatter the Simple
One with a fond Expectation of a Fill and long Solace of Love. This is the Vile
Joy of the Projection of Sin.

2. Profane men find a Superior Joy in the Compassing and Committing Sin. Just
then their hearts are full of Satisfaction, and they greedily seize their Prey:
they Sin in the Heat of blood, while their desires violently carry them to the
forbidden Object; the Sinner is heated and Athirst, drinks eagerly and is
pleased with his draught; the Stolen waters are sweet, his lust inflaming him
as a Fever within, and though the Drought be Unnatural and Mortal, yet its
pleasant to quench it. This is the Cris^^ of their Joy, as it is of their
Distemper, raised to the top of their wicked Desires. So the Intemperate man
looks on the Wine in the Glass, and Praises its Color and its Spirits, and
when he has sufficiently raised his Own, he lifts up the baneful draught to his
Mouth. So do the Unjust snatch and grasp at wicked Gains, and you may see their
delight in their Eagerness after 'em, even though Conscience and Fear check the
bold Robber, and he tremble in the attempt, as it is common to see them. So the
Lustful Amnon rushed with mad desire on his Rape and Incest, had what he so
long pined after, pleased for the moment the cursed act was perpetrating, but
stung with bitter Loathing and Remorse immediately for it.

3. Profane men remember and call to mind their Sins with a wicked pleasure. It
is sweet to 'em in the Review, they act over again in Imagination past Excesses
which they cannot again come at; as some Creatures fetch up the food they eat
and Chew, the Cud; only they are Clean Beasts, and so too good for a comparison
here. How Merry are Impenitent men very often in reciting the vain, the lewd,
the malicious Passages of their Lives? the Injuries they have done to some, the
Contempts to others! glorying in their shame and dishonor, to set the Club a
laughing. What a Prize has this been sometimes though it, and what a Contest and
Vying has there been to carry it? to that degree that many in the World will
belly and defame themselves, and pretend to Impieties which they never had
Opportunity for, for the pleasure and delight of being though it Vile. Others who
have outlived their Sin, but not the Will to it, can only surfeit on the
Remembrance of it; and nothing is more sickly as well as hydeous than the
fulsome sprightly talk of some Aged People, about the Sins of their Youth. They
ha'nt lost the Relish of their long acted follies, and impotently show their
Will and Joy, though to be compassed no more. This is Profane Mirth indeed! and
we may well be struck with Horror at it, that men's Sins should minister it,
when they call for their most bitter Sorrows, or will lead to endless Wailings.

2. It is also a Profane thing to make the Sins of Others our Sport. Which men
too often do under a double Character, either as Friends, or as Enemies.

1. There is a Profane Approving of Another Sin, which is the Guilt of wicked
Friends and Companions. This is Evil, and just cross to the Holy Temper of the
Psalmist, I beheld Transgressors and was grieved. Yet there are such Merry
Clubs, where the Envied and Crowned Hero is he that can tell of most singular
Villainies, and number up most daring Crimes: and well may he be the most
admired (but detested) Monster among them. So (they say) the Devil meets his
devoted Tribe of Malice, to hear who has most Served him, and is likest to him,
and there bestows the Infamy of his Commendation. And these are some of his
most natural and finished Children, the last brand of a Reprobate Mind, and
evidence of Vile Affections, who knowing the Judgment of God, that they that do
such things are worthy of Death, not only do the same, but have Pleasure in
them that do them.

2. There is a Profane Insulting Another Sin, the Malicious Joy of an Enemy. A
man lost to that Christian Charity, which rejoices not in Iniquity, 1 Cor.
13.6. So contrary also to that Express Precept, Prove. 24.17. Rejoice not when
thine Enemy falls, and let not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth. Yet
such there are who have no greater pleasure than to twitt, and cast another
Sin in his teeth; or if they ever hear him commended, then to Object it with a
wretched spite. How contrary this is unto the Merciful Spirit of our Savior,
might be shown from many Passages of His Glorious Life John 8.10, 11. Luk 7.39,
40. etc. John 20.15.21.15.
, as well as from the Tenderness of the Covenant of Grace to the greatest
Sinners upon their Repentance. There are those also that hate Religion and all
that Profess it, and have no greater Joy than to hear of a Professor falling
into any Scandal; it is Sugar to their Cups to make a Sober man Drunk, and they
lay it up as a Memorable Feat, and for a sufficient Triumph all their Life
long; nay and it may be as a doughty, Eternal, Unanswerable Argument against
God and His Worship for Evermore.

This is the first kind of Profane Mirth, to make merry at Sin; whether it be
our own, or other men's Sins.

Secondly, It is equally Profane to make Religion and Goodness the Object of
our Mirth: to Play and droll on things Divine and Sacred. And this is either
Blasphemous or Contemptuous.

1. There are such daring Wretches as can make themselves merry in Blasphemies.
It is dangerous to have one light though it of God, or of his Word: Unbelieving
Sarah laugh't at the Incredible Promise of her Pregnancy, but was severely
rebuked for it. Yet in our days some horrid Creatures dare to do much more
than this comes to; they dare to Ridicule the Doctrines of Revealed Religion,
and the Godhead of Christ our Savior in particular, if not the very Being and
Providence of God. What their Grovling Reason cannot comprehend, or what their
filthy Lusts oppose, they set their paltry Wits to expose. And now all Revealed
Religion must bear their saucy Banter; for so indeed our Modern Deists have
been prodigal of Witticisms at the Expense of Scripture; and no Merrier fools
than these conceited Despisers of the Mysteries of Christianity. So the Wits at
Athens mocked at the Resurrection, and St. Peter's Scoffers at the Promise of the
Second Coming of Christ; and no doubt but he was in a Rapture who once asked a
Christian, what the Galilean was a doing, and received this answer, that he was
preparing a Hell for Scoffers. Such mad fools play with the Thunder, and clap
hands at their Imaginary Judge, as if he were but a Name, and the subject of
some Romance. They do daily what the barbarous Jews did once to him on the
Cross, revile him with a wagging head, art thou he that must save us? But this
sport will not last long; the Judgment Day will effectually stop it.

2. There is a Profane Contempt of Sacred Things, which helps the Scorner to a
great deal of vile Mirth. I know that those whom I now accuse will plead Not
Guilty, and try to excuse themselves from Contempt: they forsooth own a God and
his Providence and his Word, and reverence them all; only indeed they have
flights of Wit which some people are too grave and dull to be pleased with: but
this pretense of Respect will not pass, when Contempt is plainly expressed. As,

1. To promote Mirth some are often making Allusions unto Texts and Phrases of
Sacred Scripture. As if there could be no finished piece of Farce except the
Bible be haled in and burlesqu'd! this passes for the Quintessence of Wit with
some, and it is easily to be observed of them, that let another talk with ten
times the Finess and Quickness without such Allusions, and he may pass for a
sensible man it may be; but let a rude Dunce blunder out a scurrilous P^^n in
Scripture Language, and they burst out and clap hands. Good God! that a
Christian should treat his Bible thus, which a Turk would not his lend Alcoran!
Is it, that nothing is serious and Holy! that the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost
cannot be polluted! that any foul Mouth has license to take the pure words into
it! has God spoken what is Ridiculous, that it should so entertain us with
Laughter! Verily, It Is because the Scripture is so very pure; therefore the
rooted corruption in Mankind lusts so mortally against it, while it bears with
the Alchoran because of the Mixtures of Filthiness in it.

2. The Merry Sinner proceeds on in the next place to scoff at a Serious
Profession. And then the Puritan is dressed up a Merry-Andrew, and a Fools Coat
is patcht together of a thousand lies and calumnies. Or if a Story or two be
got of a Devout Persons Impertinence, then woe be to Sobriety and Godliness! it
and its Votaries shall suffer for the Indiscretion of a weak Brother, and the
Hoot follows at the Nonsense of all that are not as loose as themselves; as if
they would shake down the Churches, as Faith once did the Walls of Jerico by a
shout. But more especially, Woe be to the Churchmember, who must now be
content to be a Knave and a Fool, and like some Martyrs of old, be dressed up
to be worried without pity, nay with all the rude pleasures of a Bear-baiting.
Indeed if the world had not often found it so, we could never have guessed it
possible, that an honest, sober, harmless life should have ever offended any,
or seemed so Ridiculous! that a man should ever be exposed to scorn, because he
seems to reverence and fear his Maker! because he prays to him, and delights
in his Worship! Job 12.4. The Just, Upright man is laughed to scorn.

3. Especially the MINISTRY serves to the profane man's Mirth: When it may be
there is no reason besides the Separation to the Service of the Altar. But the
Servant is not greater than his Lord; for so did they by our disguised Lord
first. We are made a spectacle to Angels and to Men, we are fools for Christ's
sake, weak and despised; said the great Apostle himself. But our Age has
outdone the very Times of Heathenism for Outrages to the Sacred Character and
Order: witness what Mr. Collier has produced the Abuses of the Clergy by the
Stage. A very odd Diversion in Christendom, as he very well says. The highest
Resentment is very just and decent when the Church and its Glorious Head is so
grossly Insulted. Our Order have reason to complain of this Usage, be it only of
the Nicknames put on us, which our Friends too begin to countenance, though they
cannot but know, that whenever they come into play they are Prologues to
something that is Ludicrous. Christ is struck at through his Servants side, and
made the Drunkards Song.

4. And Lastly, Some horribly profane Fools can make Merry at the Judgments of
God. As of late the Wretches, that could act the Tempest as soon as the fearful
Storm was over that had astonished Europe, and produced amazing Ruins there, at
the Recital whereof the Audience Clapped hands: things which the Hair of their
head stood an End at in the Morning, and yet droll'd on in the Evening! A
Desolation which Posterity will remember with awe, and speak of with
Seriousness. It is a daring pitch of Sin, but common in the World, that no
Voice nor Blow of God can lay men's ribald tongues, nor fright 'em into
Soberness. Let the Sea roar, and the fierce Winds cast the Waves up to Heaven,
yet there are profane Mariners that will Drink and Sing on. Let the Murdering
Bullets fly, and bury the hardy Soldier in a Mount of dead Companions, yet
he will jest it may be at their fall and maims, and their wild looks in Death.
Let God speak in yet louder Thunders, and fill the Heavens with Flames, there
are bold Sinners who will not bush their Laughter, nor leave their Cups and
their Games. There Is not an Awful thing happens in the Neighborhood, but it is
twenty to one some Circumstance shall be found to crack a Jest on. But these
Fools-bolts are all shot at Providence, and fasten on the Operation of Gods
hand.

I have thus briefly laid before you some Instances of Profane Mirth, placed
amiss, on Objects that will not bear it. Let it be never named among us, nor
said that God and things Sacred are our Game. For if it be Vile to commit Sin,
it is doubly so to laugh at it when we have done; and if it be Vile to omit to
do good, it is doubly so to revile and scoff at Goodness. But this is the
Fourth Head, Mirth ill placed becomes Sin.

V. And Lastly, Mirth may be known to be Evil and Unlawful, by its evil Fruits
and Effects. As the tree is known by what it bears, the Vine of Sodom by its
sour Grapes. Particularly, That Mirth is evil, which is an hindrance of what is
Good, or which cherishes and provokes to what is evil.

1. Sometimes it indisposes for what is Good, which it should promote by
Exhilerating the Spirits. It begets ill frames, and unfits for duty: the temper
of Spirit is perverse, and will not be bro't to what is good. Thus, Spiteful
Mirth is the death of Charity: The heart that can insult the Miserable is void
of all Pity and Beneficence: it will not so much as say, Be ye warmed, be ye
filled: Again, Profane Mirth is the furthest point from Repentance and
Spiritual Mourning. He that should be Sorrowing and trembling at his own Sins,
is hellishly sporting himself without fear. Nothing that is good can dwell with
this frame. And Frothy vain Mirth is an Enemy to all Devotion. It Is hard to
recover ones self to Sober and Devout thinking, or to find delight in Divine
Contemplations. It suppresses and stifles the Convictions that were upon the
Soul; Conscience is born down, and the Spirit of God driven away by impure
Blasts: So pleasures Choke the Word as well as worldly cares, and Yesterday's
concern for the Soul is forgotten. Finally, It takes away both List and
Confidence for Prayer: too Serious a Duty, and too much a Privilege, for one
that has been all the day in a light Spirit: How can he look God in the face at
night, or compose himself to a holy Reverence!

2. Often it provokes to Evil, and promotes and strengthens Sin in men. It
stupefies and hardens men, and by a tho'tlessness of God, they insensibly grow
fearless. The Jovial Sinner comes in a little time to sit under Sermons with
the same Levity that he reads Plays with; and 'ere he is aware may come to
make a Jest of Heaven and Hell, and all that is Sacred. Profane Mirth runs men
into all Sensualities; it has a pernicious Influence to make men Shameless in
all Immoralities: it hoots Modesty and Fear away. Moreover, It cramps Industry,
and is big with Idleness; it affects such Company as are for the Glass and
Gaming; it would make the Year one long Holiday, and dooms the Sabbath to Sport
and Pastime, as well as the Six days of Labor. Finally, Malicious Mirth
teaches men to backbite, imbitters 'em against their Neighbors, makes 'em hate
'em with Malignity, and Scorn 'em with Virulence. All this Iniquity it foments
in our own Breasts.

Nor is it without an Evil Influence on Others, who behold our vain
Conversation. It gives Scandal to the Sober and Temperate, who desire to Live
Godly; as the Riots of Sodom vexed Lots holy Soul. And it tempts unstaid
graceless Minds to run into the same Excesses: they are for this sort of Life,
for a Merry and Loose one, and easily prevailed on to cast in their Lot here;
if you only beckon you force him, and he Follows as a Fool to the Correction of
the Stocks, till he find his Bane mixed up in these Sweets.

This is the Mirth that is Carnal and Vicious, and as such to be condemned,
avoided and abhorred. And the view we have had of it is very Improveable, and
of excellent USE for our Conduct and Government: That we be Merry and Wise;
that we acquaint our selves with Wisdom, while we yet desire to enjoy that Good
which is for the Sons of men, all the days of their life. It teaches us to
rejoice with trembling, and never to let go that holy Fear which is a Check on
our mad lusts. It warns us what a wild thing Joy is in a Corrupted Heart, and
with what Care it should be looked after. It may be a Cue to us in looking back
on our past life, and searching out what has been amiss and faulty in our past
Conduct. It may remind us how often our Joys have been Intemperate, Fleshly,
Profane, Uncharitable, etc. We may possibly discover Folly or Malignity, where
it would be uncharitable for another to charge it, and where we our selves did
not so much suspect it. And all will have this good use, to preserve us from
future Errors of this nature, and make us Penitent for those that are past.

And here I might observe, what a Strong Poison Sin is, how cursed its
Influence to pervert every graceful Power God has given to man. That ever
Mirth, so harmless and innocent as it is in it self, should become such a wild
and bitter Root, bearing Gall and Wormwood! In it self truly a gay and pleasant
thing, but now a black and threatening Evil; our Wound and our Blemish, our
Grief and our Shame! How distorted from their Native Beauty are those Smiles,
which should have been both Oil and Wine to us, to make our Hearts Glad, and
our Faces Shine. The Devil who is held in Chains of black Despair himself,
envied us Ihis which is forbid to him for over: But who could have Imagined
that it could be turned to so much Sin and Mischief! Such a help to Duty into
so great an hindrance, and the Pleasure of Life into so great a Curse! Sin is a
Blast on all the Works of God, deforms the fairest Angels, and brings most hurt
out of the greatest Good. You may partly conceive from hence, what the Works of
God once were before Sin entered, and how strangely altered and perverted now.
Alas! Men have no Conception of their Original Rectitude, and the Use that
would have been made of every Power in us to the Creators Glory, and our own
Felicity.

But because Sin never comes with that force upon us, as when it puts on a face
of Pleasure, and invites us to be merry, I shall therefore add some Rules and
Motives to help us to withstand it.

1. Let us Accustom our selves daily to meditate on some serious awful Subject
or other. Inconsideration is the Cause of men's Levity and Licentiousness; or
rather it is from the possession which one Triffle or another takes of the
mind; whereby it is Engrossed and swallowed up of vanity. But did we suffer our
tho'ts daily to dwell upon some serious and Holy Subject; did we realize God
present with us, his eyes fastened on us as a severe Observer and Judge; it
would thicken our flowing Blood, and cool our Fever. Did we calmly take a view
pretty often of our Sins as they are linckt to amazing Consequences, even to a
Judgment-day, wherein we must give an account for every Idle word; our own
hearts would as often call upon us in the words of the Apostle James, Be
afflicted, and mourn and weep! let you Laughter be turned into Mourning, and
your Joy into Heaviness. To conclude, Let your Souls and Eternity come often to
mind, and think with your selves, I have an unseen part to look after, of an
Invaluable Price and Everlasting Duration, the Danger of losing it is great,
and the Time of Saving it very short; and am I Idling and Playing with my Soul
in my hand, and it may be but a sand or two more in may Glass to run? O my
Soul, it highly imports one hastening into Eternity to be Serious!

2. As Mr. Baxter advises, Lay a good Foundation for Joy in Repentance, and by
securing an Interest in the Lord Jesus Christ. This will both govern our Mirth
well, and be a License and Warrant to us to rejoice. Let every man prove his
own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself, Gal. 6.4. Stay till your
Souls be safe, and then be as merry as your daily Reviewing your Evidences for
Heaven can Inspire you. What quiet or ease belongs to you till you begin to
return to God, and to seek safety under the Wings of Christ. Then God himself
will take part in your Mirth, as it is represented in the Parable of the
Prodigal Son, after his happy Recovery from his Riots, Luke 15.23, 24. Let us
eat and be merry, for this my Son was dead and is alive again, he was lost and
is found: And they began to be merry.

3. Be constant in Secret Prayer, and therein daily renewing your Repentance.
This will leave a seriousness on the Soul, and keep a man in the fear of God
all the day long. He that in his Retirements has been confessing and bewailing
Indwelling Sin, and all the cursed fruits of it; fervently praying too for the
Spirit of Holiness, the Mortification of every Inordinate Affection, and to
become dead to the world, will find little heart to fall in with mad Merriments
that day. Watchfulness follows serious Prayer; It also begets in the Soul a
Contempt of the wild Freaks, which the carnal heart loves. It makes a man look
upon 'em with a Generous Pity, or a Noble Disdain.

4. Guard against the Sins of Sensuality more especially, and shun Evil
Company. The First are the Fomentors, the Last the Favorers of and Assistants
in Vain Mirth. Sensual Lusts are made up of Levity; they admit of nothing that's
Grave and Solid, no not a single Though It; their Life and Empire depends on the
Exile of this; for Reason is really Sedition and Conspiracy against the Reign
of Sin: if we ought to live to the Flesh, verily Conscience and Reason ought to
die as Irreclaimable Traitors.

Morever, These Sensual Lusts love Company: Men cannot Game, and Drink, and be
lewd and laugh Alone! they provoke and spur on one another by Evil
Communication, which is very Infective, and unspeakably depraves while it is
heark'ned to: As the Eyes of the Basilisk kill, so Attention does here, the
deadly Poison is conveyed in the Sound. Where is Profaness and Licentiousness
taught and propagated, but in these Clubs, which are the Devils Schools, and
some Proficient in his Works sits, as Master, at the Head of the Table. As
therefore you would retain any spark of Seriousness and Modesty, as you would
not that Folly, Play and Vanity should devour all your Tho'ts and Time, O give
no Countenance to Sensual Companions and their Courses. You Will find it
impossible to keep up an Intimacy here, and be Serious too; though it may be
there is many a Soul that is gulled by promising it: He ventures at first into
vain Company with a wrong and false notion of them and their Ways, as not so
guilty neither as some do report 'em to be; or at least he promises for himself
to preserve a Decorum among them, and let 'em see that one may be Jocund and
Innocent: But how vainly is this pretended! he finds their Breath a subtle
Poison, that imperceptibly Sheds it self into all his Veins, and he comes out
from them as very a Rake as the worst.

5. Call often to mind the Afflictions you have gone through, and the Frames you
were in when these were upon you. Then you were serious, and tho'tful for your
Souls and another Life: then you had a sensible Conviction of the Emptiness of
this World, and could find no Pleasure in it.: then your past Merriments were
tastless and nauseous to you, and stung you with Remorse: then you wished you
had those days of Vanity to live over again and Redeem: then you could have
felt Comfort from a sober and temperate, a Spiritual and Heavenly Life past:
then you reproached and cursed your past pleasures of Sin, and said of
Laughter, It is Mad. O judge of vain Mirth now by what your Conscience spoke
upon, the Sickbed: You were then far from lavish Mirth, you promised to be
more temperate in your Joys if ever you recovered, Sobriety then looked Manly
to you, and Godliness was infinitely Amiable and desirable: never forget those
Apprehensions of things, and they will be a continual Check, and a faithful
Directory. Remember, These were your wise and sober Hours, now was your
Judgment Unbiased, and your Sight clear and distinct. It was in his deep
Affliction that the Prodigal came to himself, he was out of his wits before in
his Riotous Life. Lust and a Fever alike make the head giddy and light; when
the Rod of God (which is Medicinal) lays our Fever, our Reason returns.

6. And Lastly, Set the Life of the Blessed JESUS before you, and by it correct
and reprove your Excesses. Did our Holy Savior, whose Steps we ought to tread
in, leave us any Countenance for Intemperate Mirth? Was there the least shadow
of it, the least Inclination to it in his Life? On the contrary, how Austeer
and Mortified was it! In what subjection kept he his Body and Passions! In what
Contempt had he the World and all its Glories! How wide did he keep from it!
His Conversation was Above, his Nights he spent in Prayer, his Days in doing
good! in God-like Acts of Mercy, many as the Miseries of Men; the Needs of
their Bodies, and of their Souls.

Indeed there was nothing Morose and Sour in the Conversation of our Lord: and
I wish we could learn from thence, and always remember it, that Evangelical
Holiness and Mortification do require no such thing of us. He was Courteous,
Obliging, Affable to all that sought unto him; only Severe and Inexorable to
men's Sins. It Is true, we read of his Tears, but never of his Laughing; and his
Style was -- A Man Sorrows: Yet we know also he did not shun Mirth on proper
Occasions, nor censure it in others. I have already observed, how he honored
the Joyful Solemnity in Cana with his Presence; wherein he sufficiently
countenanced Regular Mirth, and indeed sanctified it; for it would be silly to
question whether the Guests were Merry there; there was the Joy of the
Bridegroom, and his Friends rejoiced to hear his Voice; but then again it would
be Audacious to suppose there were any Indecent Irregular Mirth there; No
Backbiting, no Scornful Fleering, no foolish Jesting, no Profaness, no rude
Laughs with their Wine. To conclude, If we ever find our selves in a licentious
Vein, ready to be carried away by flowing Mirth, let us bethink our selves of
our Character and Relation to Christ; Is this as becomes a Christian? did the
Life of Jesus teach me this? should his Professed Follower give himself this
loose? For he has not called us unto Uncleanness, but unto Holiness: therefore
let us who are of the Day be Sober.

Suffer me yet to lay two or three CONSIDERATIONS before you, to deter men from
playing away their Souls.

1. Consider Seriously what a Shadow Sinful Mirth is. What is there of
substance in it after all? What has a man enjoyed at last? It is Contingent,
Mutable, mixed with pain, dashed with sorrow, and very fleeting. As Children
blow up gay Bubbles in the Air, which vanish in a minute. Or as Solomon makes
the Comparison, Eccl. 7.6. As the crackling of Thorns under a Pot, so is the
Laughter of the Fool; this also is Vanity. His Mirth is like that Insignificant
Noise, confused and soon over.

In the gayest part of Life his Mirth is mixed, Sunt quaedam tristes Voluptates,
say Seneca: there are embittered and sour'd Pleasures* but we have a greater
witness than his that there are so: Prove. 14.13. Even in Laughter the heart is
sorrowful, and the End of the Mirth is Heaviness. Some sudden Judgment may put
an untimely Period to it, and long sorrow may succeed it. Or the Sinner may
long outlive the Relish of what he now surfeits on: At the Venerable
Barzillai's Age will he discern between Good and Evil? Will he taste what he
eats? Or be able to hear the Voice of Singing-men, and all their soft Airs?
Deaths hasty Advances would spoil all if he could. Nabals Mirth, and struck
dead to Morrow! And what becomes of the Fools Mirth as he dies! What Profit or
Comfort! It is remembered with shame, and bitter in Reflection: Though Wickedness
was sweet in his Mouth, yet his Meat in his Bowels is turned, it is the Gall of
Asps within him. Truly the Triumphing of the Wicked is short, and his Joy but
for a moment; it flies away as a dream, and is chased as a Vision of the night.

2. Consider Soberly what those Virtues are which Sinful Mirth transgresses and
fights against, and where you will end. It will scandalize you at this Folly,
if you are not lost to all sense of what is Good and Comely, to see what it is,
you declare against, and to what degrees of Impiety it tends. You declare
against Sobriety, Charity, Purity; the Fear, Reverence and Worship of God: And
are you indeed the professed Enemy of these? Do you design to be this
Libertine? Believe it, loose Mirth will soon run you to all this length. It is
an Enchantment, and you cannot break it when you list. It is like Some Mills
that having got the least hold of a man draw in the whole Body. The Disguise of
all Sin is Pleasure, and a Bewitching one it is.

3. Consider, In thy Vain Mirth thou thy self art the Sport of Satan, and the
Pity of Heaven. You gratify and please the Devil, but every Wise and Good and
Happy Creature pities thy madness and distraction. There is a Cruel Sport I
have seen in the World, that goes under the guise of Compassion, and Mercy;
scil. A poor Natural kept in a Rich man's House, whom they daily make themselves
very merry with: I know no Condition of Life more to be deprecated, and yet
truly I know no more just Comparison, whereby to represent the deplorable
Circumstances of the Jovial Sinner; only the Devil who in a sort begs and keeps
him, feeding his Lusts, and provoking him to his follies, does it with a more
malicious pleasure.

4. And Lastly, Consider the sad work which Sinful Mirth makes for Repentance,
or the Sorrow that will come of it for evermore. The man is mad, who thinks the
pleasures of Sin can balance the pain of Repentance; were he sure of the Grace
to repent. He knows not what Remorse is, nor how heavy the Hand of God may lie;
nor how the swallowed Poison will sting and rend 'ere it be cast up. One drop
of Divine Wrath is so fiery, that if you could mix it with an Ocean of Sensual
Mirth, yet it were not sufferable. The disgorging there pleasing Draughts of
Sin is an uneasy thing; but the utter and extreme Griefs that attend
Impenitence are amazing to think of. A sad Change of Note will soon be in this
Case, and an unequal portion of Sorrow for a little empty Mirth! This for a
day, that for ever! this Imperfect for the Moment it lasts, that Insupportable
for Weight as well as for Duration. Our Sensual Pleasures will be soon
forgotten here, or then Memory will add to our Torments, and raise the more
Wailing and Gnashing of Teeth for ever. And very often there is a sad Prologue
to these, and men are bro't to mourn despairingly for their Intemperate Joys
before they go down into Hell: Prove. 5.11, 12. And thou mourn at the last --
and say, How have I hated Instruction, and my heart despised Reproof! And have
not obeyed the Voice of my Teachers, nor inclined mine Ear to them that
Instructed me?

SERMON. III. Of MIRTH, Spiritual and Holy. Being the Substance of a Sermon
Preached on a Day of Public and Solemn Thanksgiving, Nov. 23. 1704. And
Recommended to be Read in Families or in Secret on such Occasions.
St. James V. 13. Is any Merry? let him Sing Psalms.


I Have spoken of that Natural and Civil Mirth, which is decent in a Christian,
and Occasionally a Duty; and also of that Carnal and Vicious Merriment, which
is to be condemned, abhorred and avoided; and now I pass on to say in the Third
and last place,

III. That there is a Spiritual and Religious Joy, proper to a Saint; his rich
Privilege, and his Duty to Aspire after. A Joy which the Carnal heart knows
nothing of, which the World cannot give, nor can it take away. The Good Man's
Privilege and Property: Light is Sown for the Righteous, and Gladness for the
Upright in heart: And the Good Man's Duty, which is often required in the holy
Scripture. Be glad in the Lord, and Rejoice ye Righteous. Rejoice in the Lord
Always. Rejoice Evermore. Let not your hearts be Troubled.

It is a Joy on Spiritual Accounts, Spiritually Felt; and Spiritually
Expressed: the Author, Object, Subject and Means of it are all Spiritual.

For Kind and Degree of Pleasure it is far away Superior to all Sensitive and
Worldly Joys; even those of Harvest and of Victory, which ever were named
among the loudest and most Triumphant Exultations: Isa. 9.3. They Joy before
thee according to the Joy in Harvest, and as men rejoice when they divide the
Spoil. Yet These are below any Comparison with the Gladness put into the
Psalmists heart by the Light of Gods Countenance: Psalm. 4.6, 7. There be many
that say, Who will show us any Good? Lord, Life thou up the Light of thy
Countenance upon us! Thou have put Gladness in my heart, more than in the time
when their Corn and Wine increased.

In Discoursing of this pleasant and Heavenly Enjoyment, I will, 1. Speak of
its blessed Author. 2. The happy Subject of it. 3. The Glorious Object of it.
4. The Subordinate Causes and Means of it. And 5. The Proper and Natural
Expression of it, as directed unto in the Text: Let him Sing Psalms.

I. The Blessed AUTHOR of this Holy and Spiritual Joy is GOD THE HOLY GHOST.
It Is a Divine Delight excited in and imprinted on the Soul by the Holy Spirit.
This agrees to his Style and Office, the Comforter; and hence we read of a
Walking in the Comfort of the Holy Ghost. It Is He breaths and diffuses the
Joys of Holy Souls; it is He Creates in us every heavenly Grace and Pleasure:
Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the Spirit is Love, Joy and Peace. Now where these are
Shed abroad by the Holy Ghost, there must be Pleasure without Allay, and
Brightness without a Mote to shade it. Are the Consolations of God Small? said
Eliphaz to Job. Can they be so, when He is Infinite? His Consolations must be
Vast and Ineffable as Himself, when it pleases him to vouchsafe 'em. As the
Ocean they are Wide and Deep, and there are Seasons for their Swelling Tides:
the Capacious, the Exalted, the Refined Spirit of Man Sanctified cannot fully
Conceive of, and much less speak its own Spiritual Tastes.

This is eminently true of the SEALING from the Holy Spirit of Promise, and his
Bearing Witness with our Spirits: Of which Divinest Privilege it were easy to
Speak Great and Glorious Words, but all below what plain and humble Saints have
felt: Especially what they have sometimes spoken in their Dying Ecstasies has
been truly Mavelous; their Words too narrow to express their Sense, their
Sense too Inward and Vast for the Living to apprehend, but who have also been
Dissolved in Raised Devotions. Unutterable thing, even to the raped Saints
themselves, as the Words of Paradise were to the Descended Apostle! Omnipotent
Delectation! that has so taken away the Sense of Pain in a holy Martyr, that
the very Flames have not been felt! The Ravished Mind, taken up with its own
Fruitions, being not able to attend unto the Tortures that destroyed the Body;
though the Union so strict and Intimate, and the Sympathy on both sides so
tender, yet the Soul has forgot it, being Intent on higher Objects, and
sensible of no Union but to God the Supreme Good! As Calm at the Stake, as
Elijah ascending in his Chariot of Fire: they have Smiled out their Souls, and
blessed their Tortures.

Next unto this, and Subordinate unto it, is the Testimony of CONSCIENCE for
us; of which the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 1.12. Our Rejoicing is this, the
Testimony of our Conscience. Our Rejoicing, -- He speaks not of the vain Joys
of the Ungodly; they are Strangers to this, and Intermeddle not with it: A Joy
peculiar to the Children of God, and which no Graceless heart can have: A
Spiritual Joy, spoken of as the highest, best and chief Joy of Man. Our
Rejoicing, -- That which is Eminently Ours; compared to which nothing else is
meet to be named so; which affords us our proper and fullest Satisfaction and
Delight. This is from the Testimony of Conscience; i. e. That is the Cause,
Ground and Reason of this Joy; what Warrants it, and what Constrains it; being
the Voice of God Himself, whose Substitute and Representative it is, and gives
its Testimony of Infallible Knowledge, with Invincible Integrity, and with
Irresistible Majesty and Authority. So an Eye Witness affirms with Boldness:
Act. 4.20. We cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard: And so
a Judge absolves with Power. Conscience is a Soverain Comforter: It does not
Whysper, but Proclaims a Jubilee; it does not Drop but Pours Oil into the
Wounded Soul: It does not Beg and Entreat, but like a Lord bids, and it is
done; as our Savior said to the Stormy Sea, Peace, be Still; and there was a
great Calm: Its Sentence is Peremptory, and Forces Joy if it be for us; No man
can refuse to credit and reverence his own Conscience; As if the Sun rises it
will be Day, so the Soul is Serene and bright if that applaud us. It was a
strange but happy Saying of Luthers to this purpose, Miser fit qui possit, Ego
non possum; Let him be Miserable who can be so, for my part I cannot: Meaning,
that his Conscience would not Suffer him to think himself so.

No Outward Troubles can take this Joy from us, as indeed the World cannot give
it; but it is the Sure Sanctuary and Impregnable Fortress which the Good man has
to retire unto, when Providence drives him out of his Outworks: Here he has
Safety and Peace, and from hence he can look down boldly and calmly, nay with
pity on the Evils and Enemies which do Besiege and Assault him. So Job did when
Satan had spoiled him of every thing but his Integrity; This he held fast and
immured himself in it, My heart shall not reproach me so long as I Live. And he
could bear it with less Patience that his Friends should endeavor to beat him
out of this his Last Retreat, than if they had joined with the Ravagers of his
Goods. It Is a Noble Though It of Dr. South, who likens Afflictions in such a case
to Frost, when it seises some Generous Wine; it may congeal the Waterish parts
of it, but the Spirit Retreats into it self, and will not freeze. So firm and free
from Impression is the Conscience of a Good Man sometimes, when Calamity
arrests his Name, Family, Body, Estate, etc.

To return from this small Excursion.

II. The happy SUBJECTS of this Holy and Spiritual Joy are only Holy People, in
their holy Frames, and in the actual Exercise of Grace. It is Spiritually felt,
by them that have Tasted that the Lord is gracious. Only the Renewed Mind knows
it: it is the Good of Gods Chosen; the Gladness of his Nation; the Glorying of
his Inheritance. It Is the Illustrious Manifestation of the Empire of Grace:
Romans 14.17. The Kingdom of God is Joy in the Holy Ghost. Never is the Soul of a
Saint more carried forth to God, than when this Joy fills him. His Love,
Reverence, Admiration, Desire, Hope, are in their highest Exaltation. It Is the
top of Devotion; the Soul whom God has Sanctified raised in Meditation,
Self-Examination, Prayer and Praise. A Heavenly Enjoyment truly, and the temper
of the Blessed for ever! The Perfect Spirits in Heaven have this Joy in its
Fullness, and the Prelibations of it are their Peculiar, who are hasting
thither. We read of JESUS his Rejoicing in Spirit, Luke 10.21. And the Blessed
Virgins Magnificat we know of, (Her Joy, like the Favor of Heaven to her,
strictly Singular;) Luke 1.47, 48. And Mary said, my Soul does Magnify the
Lord, and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. I might name another Happy
Mothers holy Joy, but the Instance less Blessed than the Former, scil. the
devout Mother of Samuel: What her Transports were let her Song tell us, at the
Presenting of her Wondrous Son; Her Prayers and Vows which had obtained him
came to Mind, and her Soul was Exalted and over joy'd: 1 Samuel 2.1. And Hannah
Prayed and said, My heart rejoices in the Lord, mine Horn is exalted in the
Lord: etc. David was eminently fitted for, and often favored with this
Heavenly Enjoyment, through his frequent and excelling Devotions; and his Psalms
do abound with the most lofty Flights of it that can be. Of this Noble Order
are they to whom Heaven Vouchsafes its Visits, and its Streams of Light: the
Ungodly can have no such Favor done 'em, for what Communion has Light with
Darkness? This Spiritual Joy might then possibly break into Hell too, and
relieve the Miserable there. But it is indeed the Childrens Bread, not a Crumb
whereof is thrown to the Dogs; They like their Lord before them have Meat to
eat that others know not of: Christ gives 'em to eat of the Hidden Manna, the
peculiar portion of the New Name, which no man knows save he that receives
it. Judas, not Iscariot, could not conceive of this till the Comforter taught
him it: Joh. 14.22, 26. Lord, how is it that thou will manifest thy self unto
us, and not unto the world? This may be called one of those Deep things of God,
which no man knows, but the Spirit of God: -- As it is written, Eye has not
seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things
which God has prepared for them that Love him. 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 11, etc. I
might very properly transcribe the rest of that Inward and Spiritual Discourse:
But God has revealed them unto us by his Spirit; adds the Apostle: For what
man knows the things of a man, save the Spirit of man which is in him? Even
so the things of God knows no man, but the Spirit of God: Now we have
received, not the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit which is of God; that we
might know the things that are freely given to us of God: Which things also we
speak, not in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the Holy Ghost
teaches, comparing spiritual things with spiritual: But the Natural man
receives not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are Foolishness unto
him, neither can be know them, because they are spiritually discerned: But he
that is spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no man: i. e.
of no man who has no higher Principle than that of Nature to discern things by.
The Allusion is plain and pertinent, and needs no Comment. The happy Subjects
of Spiritual Joy are only Gracious Saints, in some of their best Hours.

III. The Glorious OBJECT of this Holy Joy is GOD our Maker, and the LORD JESUS
CHRIST our Savior. GOD is the Delectable Object: Absolutely so in Himself,
possessing every Adorable Excellency; but more especially is he so to us,
considered Relatively as our God and Father in Christ, and Everlasting Portion
through him. The Holy Psalmist calls him his Exceeding Joy, and agreeably
professes and promises Psa. 43.4 9.2.33.21. See Use, Cant ^.4. Isa. 41 16.
, I will be Glad and Rejoice in Thee: Our heart shall rejoice in Him. We are
also commanded to delight our selves in the Lord. Psalm. 37.4. And a like
Direction we have, Psalm. 149.2. Let Israel rejoice in him that made him, let
the Children of Zion be joyful in their King. A most grateful Precept, and
blessed License, and possible only to a Saint; the Holiness and Power, Truth
and Righteousness of God being most terrible to the Wicked to think on.

The PERFECTIONS of the Deity are most Amiable and Pleasant to the
Contemplative Mind. The Goodness and Mercy of God are so, Zech. 9.17. How great
is his Goodness (...) how great is his Beauty! Psalm 31.7. I will be glad and
rejoice in thy Mercy. So is the Divine Power: Psalm. 21.13. Be thou Exalted,
Lord, in thy own Strength, so will we Sing and Praise thy Power. There is a
Divine Pleasure in Contemplating the Holiness of God: The Seraphims feel this,
(those Fires of Heavenly Zeal, and Love and Joy!) and they cry alternately,
Holy, Holy, Holy is the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his Glory: to
whom the joyous Saints on Earth do Echo back, Psalm. 99.5. Exalt ye the Lord
our God, and Worship at his Footstool, for he is Holy.

But especially,

These Divine Attributes are Beautiful in their Union and Harmony; and in the
Meditation of the Infinitely Blissful State resulting thence. Here is Infinite
Majesty, Dominion and Power, Everlastingly possess't by Eternal Goodness,
Wisdom, Holiness and Truth; from whence Ineffable Blessedness must necessarily
arise. And what should be the Joy of every Created Mind, besides this Glorious
and Blessed Being? every one of whose Essential Attributes shine bright to our
Understandings, and ravish 'em in their humble Admirations and Adorations!
Psalm. 96.6, 7, 11. Honor and Majesty are before Him: Strength and Beauty are
in His Sanctuary. Give unto the Lord, O ye Kindreds of the People, Give unto
the Lord Glory and Strength. Let the Heavens rejoice, and let the Earth be
glad; let the Sea rore, and the fullness thereof; let the Field be joyful, etc.
So while the Sun dazzles our weak Eyes, yet it is Pleasant to behold it, and the
Light is Sweet. So are the small Gleams of Divine Light to the holy Mind; My
Meditation of Him shall be sweet, I will be glad in the Lord.

Mediately we rejoice in God, while we do so in the Contemplation of his WORKS
and of his BENEFITS. The Invisible things of Him from the Creation of the
World, are clearly seen, being Understood from the things that are made, even
his Eternal Power and Godhead. And how we should Joy in Him, in the Meditation
of his Glories as they shine forth in the Works of CREATION, we may best learn
from many of the Inspired Psalms The 95, 96, 100, 104, 148, Psalms.
which celebrate the Great Creator in lofty and sublime Expressions comporting
with his own Immensity and Unapprochable Light.

The like holy Joy arises from a Devout Apprehension of Gods Governing
PROVIDENCE, and a religious Trust therein See Psalm 145, 146, 147.
. Hence come Security and Confidence. Psalm. 5.11. Let all those that put their
Trust in Thee rejoice, let them ever shout for Joy, because thou Defendest
them. There may well be Ease and Quiet, Delight and Gladness under Gods
Paternal Care: His Shadow refreshes, and His Wing warms and cherishes whom it
covers: Psalm. 63.7. Because thou have been my Help, therefore in the Shadow of
thy Wings I will Rejoice.

Moreover, The BENEFITS wherewith God daily loadeth us, even our most Common
Mercies under a Spiritual Improvement, do yield us Divine and Holy Joy. They
minister it unto our Humble, Thankful, Devoted Souls, while we consider 'em as
coming from God, utterly undeserved by us, and Improveable to his Glory. So the
Pious Jew rejoiced Spiritually when he offered his First Fruits; the whole Form
of which Solemnity is truly Expressive of the proper Spirit of a
THANKSGIVING-DAY; Namely, How we should rejoice Spiritually in the Common and
Outward Benefits of the Lord our God to us: Deuteronomy. 26. 10, 11. Thou shall set it
before the Lord thy God, and worship before the Lord thy God: And thou shall
rejoice in every good thing, which the Lord thy God has given unto thee, and
unto thy House. So were they to Sacrifice the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and to
declare his Works with Rejoicing. And so ought we to be doing, every one Apart
for his Personal and Family Mercies, and with United Voice for those of a
Public Nature. Holy Joy is Essential unto, and Inseparable from the Spirit of
true Thanksgiving: that is for Mercies received, to express our Joy in 'em, in
Praises for 'em.

But SPIRITUAL BLESSINGS in Heavenly Things in Christ our Lord, are eminently
the Object and Cause of a Religious Joy: they are so where they are duly
apprehended and Resented.

CHRIST is both the Author and Object of the Believers Joy. And most justly,
being the Unspeakable Gift of God to a Miserable World, and the Fountain of all
Mercy and Saving Good to lost Sinners. Consider Him in his Glorious Offices, in
the Illustrious Work of Redemption which he has undertaken and finished, and in
his precious and Inestimable Benefits, contained in the Covenant and Promises
of the Gospel, the Purchase of his Obedience and Death, and we have indeed
Great Joy in him in all Respects! In such a Prophet! We rejoice in his Light.
In such a Merciful High Priest! Romans 5.11. We joy in God through our Lord Jesus
Christ, by whom we have received the Atonement. In such a King and Lawgiver and
Judge! He shall Save us. In such an Advocate! verse 2, 3. By whom also we have
access by Faith into this Grace, and rejoice in Hope of the Glory of God. The
Joy of Faith and Hope, of Prayer and Praise, of every Evangelical Grace and
Duty, (hereafter to be Enumerated) does all Ultimately center in Christ the
Savior. Phil. 3.3. We are the Circumcision, which worship God in the Spirit,
and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh.

Well did the Angel say to the Shepherds, I bring you good Tidings of GREAT
JOY, which shall be to ALL PEOPLE: for unto you is born this day in the City of
David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord. Our Father Abraham rejoiced to see
that Blessed Day; He saw it and was glad. Devout Simeon waited for this
Consolation, and at last had it in the Temple, where he took the Holy Child in
his Arms, and blessed God, and said, Lord, now let thou thy Servant depart
in peace, -- for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation. --

So then, Our Rejoicing may be MORE ABUNDANT IN CHRIST JESUS, to borrow the
Apostle's Words; but that must needs depend upon an Assured Interest in Him,
and a Title to the Blessings of the Covenant of Grace. And the Divinest Joys
flow from this, Namely, from a sense of Gods Eternal Love to us in Christ, that
he has pardoned, accepted and justified us in his Son. This is that
Loving Kindness which is better than life. In this our Savior bids us to
rejoice, scil. That our Names are written in Heaven. The Joy of Christ Himself
is in his Exaltation, Ours in the Great Salvation through Him: Psalm. 21.5, 6. His
Glory is great in thy Salvation; Honor and Majesty thou have laid upon Him:
Thou have made Him most Blessed for ever, -- exceeding Glad with thy
Countenance. If the Hope of Salvation will not give a sinking, perishing Sinner
Joy, what should? It Is his Hearts Desire surely! the one Request of his lips!
all the Blessings of Goodness together! even Life for ever and ever! Rev. 2.17.
I will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new Name written, which no
man knows saveing he that receives it. It was a Custom (they say) anciently
to send a white Stone in token of Absolution, and a black Stone as the sign of
Condemnation, with the Persons Name written upon it, accordingly this New Name
signifyes Gods Pardon and Adoption, the Inexpressible Sweetness of which
Privilege, no man knows but he that is possessed of it.

Finally, The Ground of all this must be the Evidences and Fruits of our
SANCTIFICATION; and the sure perception of the GRACE of God in our hearts:
Which is another Invaluable Gift of God, and Benefit by Christ, that affords us
assurance of Gods Love and Joy in the Holy Ghost. To behold in our selves a
Conformity and Subjection of Soul unto the Redeemers Holiness! that Likeness
wherein we hope to Awake, and rest satisfied for ever! which is the Seeds of
Glory Sown in us, and Light therein! Heaven begun in us! the Earnest and
Foretast of its Perfection, and therefore necessarily of its Joys. Indeed it
cannot be pleasant to think of a Holy God, and to find no Image of his Holiness
on our selves; no love to it, no desire of it, nothing of His Divine Nature:
But on the contrary, the bare apprehension of these Excellencies in us is an
Unspeakable Pleasure; the Holy Soul even dies away through the Excess of it,
saying, -- The Health of my Countenance, and my God!

To finish this Head, The GLORY OF GOD in the Salvations granted to his Church,
and in the Conversion of Sinners, is a special Matter and Object of an Holy
Joy. It Is the Honor of God and of the Lamb that occasions the Joys of Heaven:
Witness in what Triumphing Words they Sing his Works of Mercy and of Judgment:
Alleluia, Salvation, and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lord our God! --
Let us be Glad and Rejoice, and give Honor to Him.

The Church's HOLINESS is the public Honor of Christ: Therefore there is Joy
among the Angels of God over one Sinner that repents; And when Jesus Rejoiced
in Spirit it was on this Account, (as well became the Lover and Savior of
Souls) I thank thee, O Father, Lord of Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid
these things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes: Even
so, Father, for so it seemed Good in thy sight. The Holy Children of God have
no greater Joy than to behold the Grace of God in one another; Especially Holy
Ministers have none higher, than to see this in their People: For what is our
Hope, or Joy, or Crown of Rejoicing? Are not even ye in the Presence of our
Lord Jesus Christ at his Coming? for ye are our Glory and Joy.

So again, The Illustrious SALVATIONS of Gods Church in the Earth, and its
outward Tranquillity and Flourishing, is to the Saviors Honor; and for this
Reason alone Jerusalem must be Preferred above our chief Joy. It is but Piety
to God and to his Interest, a Duty to Christ and to his Members: Isa. 66.10.
Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love her; Rejoice
for Joy with her, all ye that Mourn for her. Thus John 3 29. Phil. 1.18. Rev.
18, 20. 2 Samuel 6.16.
the Bridegrooms Voice fulfilled the Baptist's Joy; and the Apostle's was that
Christ was Preached; and when Babylon falls the Commandment is, Rejoice over
her thou Heaven, etc. So when King David bro't up the Ark of God, which had
sufficiently mortified the Philistines, and triumphed over their Idol Dagon, it
was with Music and with Shouting, and the Kings Sacred Feet too Leapt and
Danced with his Over-joyed heart. But this may suffice to say of the Glorious
Object of Religious Joy.

IV. The MEANS and Subordinate Causes of it are Eminently the GRACES and DUTIES
of Christianity. There is a Divine Pleasure that waits on these in their lively
Exercise, and vigorous Practice. The Anointing we receive is indeed with the
Oil of Gladness. Every Grace of the Holy Spirit is such as agrees to the
blessed Style He has assumed, the Comforter; they refresh and exhilerate the
Soul in whom they rule. And so truly does every Christian Duty we devoutly
perform; I delight to do thy Will, O my God! thy Law is within my heart!

1. As to the GRACES of Christianity, I will Instance in Faith, Hope,
Repentance, Resignation, and the Love of God. These are both the Object, and
Means of a Religious Joy.

Very vast is the Joy of FAITH and HOPE: Even all Joy and Peace in Believing,
to them that abound in Hope through the Power of the Holy Ghost, Romans 15.13. Both
these embrace the Promises afar off, look unto possessing, and already are the
Substance of them. Blessed and Lively Hope! of no less than an Inheritance
Incorruptible, and Undefiled, etc. wherein ye greatly Rejoice, says St. Peter,
1 Pet. 1.4, 8. O Happy Frame of Spirit, that wants nothing of Heaven save the
Actual Possession! that like the Prince who is Apparent Heir to a Crown, has
all the Joys of it beforehand in his Acknowledged Right.

The Produce of REPENTANCE is Holy Joy. It yields a man Internal Peace and
Self-delectation. There Is Comfort and Pleasure in those Tears. It Restores the
Joy of Gods Salvation, Its Aspirations shall not be in vain, Make me to hear
the Voice of Joy and Gladness, that the Bones which thou have broken may
Rejoice. "The End and Consequence of this Sorrow sweetens it. It Is a high
delight to feel that we do indeed Mourn for Sin. This is not to Sorrow as
without Hope, for the blessed Mourners are promised Comfort, Mat. 5.4.

RESIGNATION to the Sovereign Will of God, and a Contented Thankful Acquiescing
in His Dealings, has mighty Comforts attending it. Not barely Indolence and a
profound Quiet, but Satisfaction, Complacency and real Delight is in it. It
almost makes Adversity impossible, and Prosperity fixed and unalterable. It
Glories in Tribulation: It Is then the most Sovereign Cordial that the Art of
man can prescribe: it makes a man's Bed for him in his Sickness; it keeps all
his Bones, not one of them is broken; it lays him down in the arms of Sovereign
Mercy and Wisdom, and to die, is but to Sleep in Jesus.

To name no more, The LOVE of God is Ravishing. Psalm. 5.11. Let them that love
thy Name be joyful in thee. Love is a sweet and delectable Passion: but when
the Object of it is the Infinitely Perfect and Amiable Being, then is the
Affection it self superlatively pleasing. Whom have I in Heaven but thee? and
there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee. The First and Great
Commandment is the first and greatest Pleasure of Man; Thou shall love the Lord
thy God with all thy Heart, and with all thy Soul, etc. And the Second is like
unto it, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. A Love that is refined from
all dress, inspired from Heaven, and directed to it! it is ten thousand
Pleasures in one, as the Beauties of its Object are. How Joyous is the
Conscience of this Love! Witness every Breast that holds this Sacred Fire! How
easily could he bid Adieu to every Sensitive Refreshment, while this is
sensibly burning within! This is the stay of his Life, the strength of his
heart, the life of his Soul, his Ever-living Pleasure.

2. As to the DUTIES of the Christian Life, (though these before-named Graces may
bear that Name also) I will name two only, scil. CHARITY AND WORSHIP: the one a
Joyous Grace in it self, delighting in the Good Will it bears, and the Kindness
it shows to others; the other the Exercise of all Grace in its various Acts of
Devotion.

1. How triumphant a Joy is there in DOING GOOD to others, especially to the
Needy or Afflicted? Never was such sweetness fancied of Revenge, as has been
felt in forgiving Injuries, in overcoming Evil with Good, in Rejoicing with
them that Rejoice, and in Weeping with them that Weep. Particularly, Bounty to
the Poor, is one special Means of, and often rewarded with Spiritual Pleasure.
When Job remembered the Pleasures of his Prosperous Life, these were among the
first of 'em, The Blessing of him that was ready to perish came upon me, and I
caused the Widows heart to Sing for Joy. His pains were eased in the
remembrance of these pious Dispositions and Actions. The Satisfactions of 'em
brighten a man's face in the Streets, as the Joy of the Soul in the Resurrection
will help to glorify the Body. Romans 12.8. He that shows mercy, with
Cheerfulness. The Frame and Face suits the Action: it delights him that does
it. No Miser ever counts over his rusty Moneys with any Pleasure equal or
comparable to what the Liberal Soul feels in Communicating. It Is also the
proper Joy of a Thanksgiving-Day, whereof BOUNTY is always one special Duty,
causing the Poor to rejoice together with us. The Exercise of our Saviors Life
lay in Acts of Mercy to the Miserable, and it agreed well to the Infinite
Delight and Complacency of his Soul in God. And this is the Eternals Rest, even
His Continual and Everlasting Communications to all his Creatures.

2. The other Instance and Means of Spiritual Joy is DIVINE WORSHIP, in all the
Parts and Acts of it, whether Natural or Instituted. These are the great
Employment of the Christian Life, and a very pleasant One. A Holy Heart
receives the Word with Joy, Prayer is his Recreation, Praise his Rapture,
Psalms are his Melody, the Sabbath is his Rest, the Sanctuary his
Banqueting House, the Ordinances his Feast: I was glad when they said to me,
let us go up to the House of the Lord, our feet shall stand within thy Gates, O
Jerusalem! The Devout Heart calls the Sabbath a Delight, and of the Sanctuary
it says, How Amiable are thy Tabernacles, O Lord of Hosts! My Soul longs,
yea even faints for the Courts of the Lord; My heart and my flesh cries out
for the living God. The Reason of all this is the Joys he had tasted in Solemn
Stated Worship: For I had gone with the Multitude, I went with them to the
House of God, with the Voice of Joy and Praise, with a Multitude that kept
Holy Day. O with what Joy do Heavenly Minds lift up their hands in Gods Name,
to receive of the Sweet and Saving Influences of the Holy Spirit! Those
heavenly Gifts and Graces, that Divine Light and Comfort, which are with him to
dispense, and which he does Communicate from on High in the ways which he has
Instituted! Draw me, we will run after thee! we will be glad and rejoice in
thee! They are indeed Strangers to this Spiritual Joy, who have never felt what
I now speak of in Sabbath Exercises. It results from Fellowship and Communion
with God in Sacred Duties; Whom it Converses with, whose Power and Glory it
sees, whose Loving Kindness it tastes, and the Soul is Satisfied as with Marrow
and Fatness, while it is Praising with Joyful Lips Psalm 32.1, ^.43.3,
4.46.4.63.2, 3, 5 and 4.1, 2.122.1.
.

I shall not enlarge here in a distinct account of the Joy of PRAYER, wherein
indeed as every Grace has its Exercise, so at times the Joys of 'em all are
had. And in Reading and Hearing the WORD of God, I shall not attempt to say
what the Psalmist could not express, How sweet are thy Words to my taste! yea
sweeter than Honey to my Mouth! Psalm. 89.15, 16. Blessed is the people that
know the Joyful Sound: they shall walk, O Lord, in the Light of thy
Countenance: In thy Name shall they rejoice all the day, and in thy
Righteousness shall they be Exalted. The Law is Holy, and therefore pleasant to
them that are Sanctified both in the Contemplation of it, and in the the
Practice. The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart. Thy
Testimonies have I taken as an Heritage for ever, they are the Rejoicing of my
heart.

BAPTISM is a Holy and Consolatory Ordinance; Whether we reflect upon our own
Consecration to God, and think, O Lord, truly I am thy Servant, I am thy
Servant, and the Son of thy Handmaid; Thou have loosed my Bonds; Or whether in
the Act of Dedicating our Little Ones to God in Christ. Nature here assists
Grace in its Exercise, and Grace sublimates and exalts the pleasing workings of
Natural Affection. The earning Bowels of a gracious Parent are doubly refreshed
to behold his loved Offspring publicly Accepted, and solemnly Blessed by God!
as much and as formally as Joseph saw his two Sons at the Knees of Jacob! in
whose words also in Effect the Blessing of the Covenant is -- Thy two Sons are
Mine, even as Simeon and Reuben are Mine! For a Parent or Grand-Parent, in the
Aged Patriarch's words, turned into a Prayer, and in his Spirit, to bless their
Posterity; God, before whom my Fathers walked, the God which fed me all my Life
long unto this day; the Angel which Redeemed me from all Evil, bless the Lads,
and let the Name of my Fathers Abraham and Isaac be on them! I say again, To
behold the Blessing of Abraham coming on Ours after us, what more sensible
Pleasure can a holy Parent have? To see your Child declared Heir of a Kingdom,
i. e. a Heavenly! So when the Prophet Nathan bro't that Message unto David from
God, I will set up thy Seed after thee on thy Throne, and I will be his Father,
and he shall be my Son; The over-joyed King went immediately to the Tent where
the Ark was, and Sat before the Lord and said, (what each of us may well do in
all humble Admiration) -- Who am I, O Lord God, and what is my House that Thou
have bro't me hither unto? And this was yet a small thing in thy Sight, O Lord
God! but thou have spoken also of thy Servants House for a great while to come!
And is this the manner of man, O Lord God?

Finally, The Joy of the LORDS-TABLE rises yet higher: it is the Stated and
Solemn Memorial of the Love of Christ and his Purchased Benefits, the happy
Season of raised Devotions and intimate Communion with Him, and of the Renewal
of our Covenant Engagements to Him, which while we are doing with burning Love
and Zeal, with strong Faith and Desire, with deep Repentance and Self-loathing
for our Sins; We have our Pardon Sealed in his Blood, and Assurance of our
Interest in the Mercies of God through Him. It Is a most refreshing thing to
revive often in our Minds the LOVE OF CHRIST, and the FREE GRACE of God, which
(we trust) has chosen us in Him, and instated us in the Dignity, and will bring
us to the Glories of his Redeemed. We have Great Joy in his Love, -- O how
Unspeakable! to think -- I am my Beloveds, and his Desire is toward me! He is
my Savior, I am a part of his Purchase, mine are the Promises, and the Heaven
of Blessedness therein made over! Who Loved me, and gave Himself for me! To
represent him to our selves, either on the Cross, or on his exalted Throne,
equally reaching out the same Arms of Mercy to Embrace returning Sinners! to
realize our selves with Him, where He is, to behold his Glory; Beloved of him,
and Crowned by him, -- what can beget in a devout Soul such Ecstasy and
Ravishment as this? Such was the Seraphick Love and Joy of the holy Spouse, I
sat down under his Shadow with delight, and his fruit was sweet to my taste; He
bro't me to the Banqueting House, and his Banner over me was Love.

Again, It Is a Joyous thing to revive on our Minds the Memory of our
COVENANT-BONDS, which are so connected with the riches of Grace in our Lord
Jesus Christ, that we cannot be struck with the Awe of the one, but the Joy of
the other will break in upon us. Every Renewal of our holy Covenant should send
us home with fresh Content, O my Soul, thou have said unto the Lord, thou art
my Lord. In the same breath we make Profession of our devotedness, and we
humbly claim the glorious Privilege of a Relation to the Great God: O Lord
truly I am thy Servant, I am thy Servant! A Though It that threw the holy Psalmist
into Raptures of Praise, and gave him new Ardors of Devotion: Psalm. 116.17, 18,
19. I will offer to Thee the Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and will call upon the
Name of the Lord. I will pay my Vows unto the Lord, now in the Presence of all
his People: In the Courts of the Lords House, in the midst of thee, O
Jerusalem! Praise ye the Lord.

There are yet behind two more Instances, or Acts of Religious Worship, the
Seasons and the Means of Holy and Spiritual Joy, Namely, PRAISE AND SINGING:
These my Text obliges me to take particular Notice of, teaching us, That our
Joy in the Benefits and Mercies of God unto us, ought to be expressed in
Singing Psalms of Praise unto Him. Is any Merry? let him SING PSALMS. I pass
therefore to the last part of my Discourse, which is,

V. And Lastly, To speak of the Proper and Natural EXPRESSION of Holy Joy, as
directed unto in the Text: LET HIM SING PSALMS. We must needs understand it of
Psalms of Praise and Thanksgiving, and therefore I shall observe. 1. That our
Rejoicing in God, and in his Divine Favors, should show it self in Praises and
Thanksgivings* 2. That the Joyful Christians Praises may and ought particularly
to be expressed in Singing of Psalms. 2 Chronicles. 29.30. They Sang Praises with
Gladness, and they bowed their heads and worshipped.

1. Our Rejoicing in God, and in his Divine Favors, should be shown in PRAISES
AND THANKSGIVINGS to Him. If we distinguish between Praise and Thanksgiving,
Praise is the Celebration of the Divine Perfections shining forth in the Word
and Works of God, Thanksgiving of the Divine Beneficence and Bounties: and so
Praise carries more of Admiration and Veneration, Thanksgiving more of
Acknowledgment: Both are a debt from us, as Creatures, and as Obliged; and unto
God, considered as the most Excellent of all Beings, and as our Benefactor.

Need I say that the Word of God, and the Examples of all the Saints do loudly
call upon us, to abound in these Duties. How often have we that devout Wish
over in one Psalm, O that men would praise the Lord for his Goodness! etc. It
stands as a Call to all Posterity, in the several Generations of men: As it was
from the Beginning a Law to Israel, Deuteronomy. 10.21. He is thy Praise, and He is
thy God, that has done for thee these great things which thine Eyes have seen.
How agreeable this is to a devout heart, let the Book of Psalms bear witness,
wherein we are so often called upon to show forth Gods Praise, to make his
Praise Glorious, to Triumph in his Praise, and to have our Mouth filled
therewithal. A Duty so often repeated, and so fervently, that sometimes the
Psalmist scarce gives himself time to take breath in his zealous Inculcating of
it, as in the 135 Psalm, Praise ye the Lord, praise the Name of the Lord,
praise him O ye Servants of the Lord: Nay he addresses unto all Creatures,
Angels, Men and bruit Creatures too, the Heavenly Bodies, and even things
Inanimate, in their several ways to Unite in Lauding the Creator. For himself
he resolves, My Praise shall be of him in the great Congregation, I will bless
the Lord at all times, his Praise shall be continually in my mouth: O magnify
the Lord with me, and let us exalt his Name together! -- And my Tongue shall
speak of thy Righteousness, and of thy Praise all the day long.

It Is the least Testimony of Gratitude and Esteem that can be expected from us,
who have Souls in our Bodies, and Tongues in our Heads; who have the power of
Speech, and Reason to regulate it; who have a Conscience within us, and a sense
of Benefits. And never are our Minds and Tongues so well employed, as when the
Glories of God do take 'em up: therefore the Inhabitants of Heaven are thus
busied for ever. Praise is the Religion of Happy Creatures, it is the natural
Homage of Infinite Goodness. It Is the best part of Worship: the best Affections
of the Soul are in the best manner that can be carried toward the Best Good.
This is Praise; which like Charity has this to give it Prehenminence, that it
Never fails; but if it imploys our life here, so will it our Eternity; and he
that dies with these in his mouth, changes his place but not his Frame and
Work; only in Heaven they are perfected. And what do we think it is that makes
Praise the Work of Heaven? verily, because it is the Place and State of complete
Eternal Happiness and Joy. Every Glorious Spirit there is full of these, and
out of their abundant delight in God, they pour out Praise unto him. God
communicates unto them with a liberal hand, they drink of the very Fountain of
Goodness to the full, they know no want and indigence, and can know no sorrow;
therefore being always brimful of Content, they unweariedly praise Him in whom
all their springs are. So we, while the Joy of the Divine Benefits fills our
Souls, must imitate the ravished Minds above, and give Blessings and Praises to
Him.

In short, the Reason is as plain for Praise as for Prayer; there ought to be a
sense of Benefits as well as of our Needs, nay much the rather, because the
least selfish of the two, and looks more directly at Gods Glory. But I pass to
Praise more dilated.

2. The Merry Christians Praises may and ought especially to be expressed in
SINGING OF PSALMS: of which there are very many full of rapturous Praises.

I will not enter on any Elaborate proof, that Singing of Psalms is a part of
Divine Worship, Natural and Instituted, Private and Public. I doubt not but
that the Reason of Mankind, even in this our sunk Condition, would teach and
direct to this as well as unto bare Prayer or Praise: for the Tongues of men
are hung for Singing as well as Speaking; and reason tells us that every noble
Power in man ought to be used to the Creators Glory.

To be sure it is appointed in Scripture, is recommended by the noblest
Examples, and has ever been the Practice of the Church, under both Testaments
Exodus 15.1. 1 Chronicles 6 32. Nehem. 12.46, 47. Psalm. 96 1.98.5 Mat. 26 30. Ephesians.
5.18, 19 Heb. 2.12.
. Moreover, God has greatly owned the Ordinance: Holy Souls have tasted as much
of Heaven in it, as in any part of Worship. It sweetly dilates the Soul, and
God often comes unto the opened heart. No part of Worship oftener melts heavenly
minds into Tears, and no wonder we should be raped near to Heaven by it, since
Heaven it self has its Songs. Rev. 5.9. God has also honored this part of
Worship in Miraculous manner; as, at the Dedication of the Temple, 2 Chronicles.
5.13, 14. and when at Midnight St. Paul and Silas Sang Praises in the Prison:
Act. 16.25, 26. Was it their Voices that Shook the Place, and threw open the
Doors, and Loosed every ones Bands? or was it the Brightness of Solomon's
Majesty, the Fulgor of his Robes and Crown, that filled the House of the Lord
with Glory? No: it was the Glory of the Lord Himself, and it broke in among his
Worshippers on that great Solemnity, just as the Trumpeters and the Singers
were as one, to make one Sound to be heard in Praising and Thanking the Lord.
It Is a Religious Exercise more especially Adapted to the Spirit of Praise and
Thanksgiving. This is the Immediate and first End of Singing, the proper Spring
whereof is Admiration and Joy Psalm. 81.1, 2.95.1, 2, 108 1, 2.14^ 2, 3.
. So 'ere the foundation of the Earth was laid, the Morning-Stars Sang
together, and all the Sons of God Shouted for Joy; And as they began they hold
on for ever; PRAISE is the Eternal burden of their Songs, and everlastingly
growing JOYS inspire 'em.

I mean not that Singing does not suit Occasions of Grief, and the Spirit of
Humiliation and Mourning; for there are Penitential Psalms, and Psalms of
Prayer, and of Sorrowful Complaint; and the sad Heart may and should Sing
these, which suits its State and Temper; bemoaning it self, and seeking Grace
and Help of God in this way, as well as in Prayer. Nor is Solomon to be
understood to deny this when he says, As Vinegar upon Nitre, so is he that
Sings Songs to a Heavy Heart: it is as the Song is, and as it is timed and
sung, that instead of soothing Grief will only vex and enrage it.

Nor do I mean to deny the Excellent Use of Reading the Inspired Psalms, but
affirm that this also is wonderfully Adapted to the Spirit of Praise. Could I
speak with the Tongue of Men and Angels whether in Prayer or Preaching, had I
all the Eloquence of the World given me this day, and the holy Zeal and Flame
of a Seraph put within me, yet could I no ways compose for your Edification,
and the raising your Affections toward God, any thing to be Named with those
Psalms of Praise, which have this day been Read in your Hearing. Nor could an
Angel from Heaven do it, save speaking by the Holy Ghost, who inspired these
holy Odes.

How suited is the Book of Psalms to a day of Thanksgiving! From thence we may
best take our Words and Expressions, clothing our Tho'ts in these excelling
Strains of Devotion, to raise in our Selves a like heat and warmth: while we
Muse on these the Fire Kindles.

Yet Singing has its Peculiar Advantages for Edification, if it be not our own
fault. The Apostle therefore speaks of the Instruction and Admonition which
this Ordinance designs us: Col. 3.16. Teaching and Admonishing one another in
Psalms, Hymns and Spiritual Songs.

One Advantage hereunto is the Deliberateness and Leisure of this Mode of
Praise or Prayer. The Mind has time allowed it to Pause on the Sacred Passages:
Every Syllable is distinctly uttered, and drawn out in its proper Note, that
the Mind may fix and fasten and dwell on the holy Though It. And as the Voice
leisurely Ascends, so may the Soul with it toward Heaven.

Another Advantage is, that it strikes so strongly on Sense and Imagination,
and by them has the more forcible Access to our Affections. Our Spirits being
Imbodyed are naturally come at by Impressions on our Senses, and more
particularly by the Eye and Ear. Musical Notes may be fitted to the Matter
Sung, whether it be Grave or Loose; and they may be Address't with Art and
great Power to one or other Passion of our Souls; and accordingly they do
convey into our Minds Ridiculous Idea's or Venerable, which provoke Laughter or
Seriousness, bespeak Reverence or Contempt, move Love or Hatred, Joy or Sorrow:
Hence it is that loose Sonnets have so fatal a power to deprave men, and Satan
uses 'em as natural Means hereunto; while the Holy Spirit works also upon our
Souls in ways adapted to our Frame and Nature, and uses Holy Psalms as
naturally tending to leave Impressions of what is Holy and Good upon us.

Another Advantage of Singing unto our Edification is, the Pleasure and Delight
which generally Mankind take in it: though it must be granted that its Force is
not alike on all. Music has its Charm, in such an Ear as David's more
especially, and so have Psalms where there is his Devotion, It is a good thing
to give Thanks unto the Lord, and to sing Praise to thy Name, O most High! It Is
the Echo of our Earth to Heaven, and a softer kind of Rapture. It has had
wonderful Effects: The sweet Voice of a Psalm has ejected Melancholy, as
David's Harp did the Evil Spirit from the Lord on King Saul: It has sweet'ned a
Prison, and given new Heart to Martyrs at the Stake: It has made the Shades of
Death to flee away, and closed up a Saints Eyes in like Brightness, as the Sun
sets in a fair Evening. Come help me with your Praises, (cried happy Mr.
Janeway on his Deathbed) Yet all too little! Come help me all ye Mighty Angels,
who are so well skilled in the Heavenly Work of Praise! Hallelujah! Hallelujah!
Praise is now my Work, and I shall be engaged in this Sweet Work for ever.
Come, bring me the Bible, and turn to David's Psalms, and let us lift up our
Voices in the Praises of the Most High: I will Sing with you as long as my
Breath does last, and when I have none, I shall do it better.

Nor is this a Sensitive Pleasure merely. The Body subserves the Soul, and is
its Instrument in this State of their Union: yet the Rational part governs, and
he that throws away his Senses and Natural Powers, must his Reason and Religion
too; nor Glorify God in his Spirit no more than in his Body. God reaches the
Soul by the Ear, or else Faith had not come by Hearing.

Nor is it sufficient for men to say, that they could never have any Relish of
the Ordinance, nor find Profit from it: It Is their Carnality that hinders; and
it may be neither have they ever had any real savor of Prayer or Hearing the
Word: It Is too common for People to live under Gospel Ordinances, and not taste
the Goodness, nor feel the Power of 'em. And it is eno' to say, that through
Grace others do relish this Holy Ordinance, and the more Heavenly men are, the
more do they delight it it. Moreover, It is possible for a depraved Heart not
to relish Heaven neither: were he taken thither he would find Singing there,
and if that can disgust him, Heaven can be no Place for him.

To Conclude, It must be granted, that some do Abuse the Ordinance; they Sing
Vainly, Conceitedly, Lightly in the Solemn Worship of God, and it is an offense
to see 'em do so: But is it not as true, and equally a Lamentation, that they
can have wandering Minds, can Sleep, and be wanton in Prayer and Hearing also?
And must we therefore reject, revile and pour contempt on all Instituted
Worship? No: Gods Institutions are no more to be charged with our Sinful Abuses
of 'em, than Affronts and Injuries are to be charged on Him that innocently
suffers 'em.

I have said all this of the Use of SINGING unto the Ends of Holiness, not to
depretiate Prayer and the other Ordinances, but to assert the Place due to
this, and to show that God owns all his Institutions, and chooses which of them
he pleases to work by.

The USE of this Meditation on the Joys of Religion might be easily enlarged
on, in many Particulars. As,

1. To display the free and rich Grace of God unto us Sinners, and to put us on
Adoring Him, who has provided through Christ Jesus this Holy Joy for us; allows
it to us, and requires it of us.

2. To show the high Felicity of Saints, for whom this Light is Sown, this
blessed Enjoyment purchased.

3. To set a just Price on Grace, and raise our Aspirations after the greatest
Measures thereof, that our Joy may be full, which it can be only by our
abounding in Holiness and Devotion.

4. To manifest the Wretchedness of the Ungodly, who are (while such) debarred
this Joy for ever; it being impossible to 'em, and the Means of it their
Torment. Yet disbelieve the Account of it they cannot, having felt the torturing
Gripes of an Accusing Conscience, which alone may satisfy 'em that its
Approbation is exceeding Joyous. Or if they pretend to Joys too in their Evil
Courses, what are they but Precarious, Borrowed, and at the mercy of a thousand
Accidents, proper only to the Body, Partial and Fleeting! whereas Those of
Religion are proper to the Soul, Sure and Full, at the mercy of no Evil or
Enemy, living in Spite of a frowning World, bearing the Heart up under
Affliction, growing like the Palm Tree under Burdens and heavy Pressures, and
Abiding to Death, and after it. So true are our Saviors Words, St. John 14.27.
Not as the World gives, give I unto you. But at last, the Wicked man's Joys
are his Guilt and Woe. Conscience is Asleep. or run from. A Joy without
Warrant, and against Reason; an Extravagance as Criminal as Absurd! The more of
it there is, so much the Worse! the more Sin and Misery!

5. I must needs again lay before Good People their Duty, to Exhibit in their
Lives the Joys of Religion, thereby to make some Acknowledgment to the Great
God of the Riches of his Mercies toward them, and to Honor the Ways of God in
the sight of Others. Why else has God made a Provision of Joy for his Children,
but that they might Serve Him with a Glad Heart, and Serene Face!

Yet Some, whom we must needs account Good People, seem not at all to apprehend
it a Duty to labor after a settled Joy in God, and Others that have it,
apprehend not their Obligation to Exhibit it.

To the First I would say, That they act as if Unknowing in the Nature, Design,
Tendency and proper Effects of Religion: That it is no Christian Modesty and
Humility to put that Divine Pleasure from us which God allows to us: That on
the contrary, Nothing is more Ornamental to Christianity, or does more Honor
to God, than for Good People to be Walking in the Comforts of the Gospel; Nor
scarce any thing more Unseemly in them, Injurious to God, and more palpably a
Temptation of Satan, than some of their Cloudiness and Dejections.

Again, The Mis-behaviour of Others is very gross, who are not Strangers to the
Joys of Religion, but yet have taken up a Melancholy Way, on a Conceit (I
fear) of its Looking Religious, and being Agreeable to Seriousness of Spirit.
Zeal is apt to run Weak Minds into some Unnatural Oddities, by which Religion
is hurt and wounded instead of being Served. Unnatural it is to speak of God as
Our God in the same sad manner as we would Lament after the Blessed Hope in. Is
the Soul indeed delighted? I Am sure it is Ill-favour'dly Expressed, and cross to
Nature the Interpretation must be; As if Frowns and Tears should be made to
signify Pleasure and Content. But, why should not Holy Joy express it self
freely? Why should not the Brightness of the Face, and the Life in the Eye,
speak it? and the Tone of the Voice be Natural; Then was our Mouth filled with
Laughter, and our Tongue with Singing: the Lord has done Great things for us,
whereof we are Glad. --

Let me Argue a little with the Sad Spirited Saint. Is this the Look that the
Servant of a Kind and Good Master, and a Child of God, an Expectant of Glory
should have! Why art thou, being a Kings Son, lean from day to day? Do you not
look for Joy in Heaven? and why should the State of Grace be so unlike to that
of Glory? Why not that Life of Pleasure now begun, which Heaven will perfect
and be, the Fullness of? You hope to Launch 'ere-long into those Rivers that
flow Above for evermore, and why not wish to Swim in those calm and serene
Streams that run into these Deeps!

Is it that you only groan after more Grace? a clearer Sight of it in your
self? and then you should Rejoice! But do you not the mean while overlook the
Grace you have, and forget the Thanks you owe to God for that! Be Just to God,
to own what he has done for your Soul, and from every symptom of his Grace in
you Conceive a holy Pleasure.

Have you Grace? take it for your Portion, and rejoice in it as a sufficient
One. What would you have more, or what can you? With what Flesht Sinner would
you change Condition! for whose Possessions would you give your Hopes! Pity his
Pride and Joy, the Abject Object whereof is a little Dust: or if it glitter in
your Eyes, to dazzle 'em, lift 'em to Heaven, and see how much Higher and
Brighter thy Place is than his, and how much wider the Compass of thy Felicity!
If the mean Sinner survey his mouldring Stores with pleasure in his Eyes, Can
you the Graces of the SPIRIT in your self with less? Are the Diviner Gifts
smaller with you? The Gifts and Calling of God which are without Repentance!
Whose Faces should wear Smiles but Theirs whom Heaven so Endows and Smiles on!

Pine not after Unnecessary Goods, when the Best and Chief GOOD is secured to
thee! Will you for a Feather, when you are Heir to a Crown! or after finer
Array for thy Body, when thy Soul is Adorned and Beautified with the Array of
Angels! or for more Delicacies of Food, when thou have Bread from Heaven to eat
of! Pine not after more Friends or Respect on Earth, when God and Angels esteem
and love thee, and thou art their Care! Nor after Children, when thou thy self
art a Child of God! (Hannah! why weepest thou? and why eatest thou not? and why
is thy heart grieved? Is not an Interest in the Great GOD, a happy Relation to
Him, joyous Communion with Him, better to thee than ten Sons?) Finally; What
anxious Though It about any Event possible in this Life can haunt and fright you?
He that has done the Greater things for thy Immortal Soul, and as to thy
Eternal Concerns, can he deny the Lesser Concerns of Time and of the Body? He
who has given HIS OWN SON for thee and to thee, Shall he not with Him also
freely give thee all things? But I pass,

6. And Lastly, To the more Particular Application of the Subject to the
Present Solemnity.

You see the proper Exercise of the DAY, and the Spirit we must be in before
the Lord our God. There must be Praise, which must proceed from Joy, which must
be Spiritual, and therefore the Worship we perform must be from the Heart; from
an Engaged Spirit, and raised Affections.

1. There must be PRAISES offered to God. And it may not be Improper just to
Intimate, That we have PSALMS of Praise prepared for, and suited unto, every
possible Reason of Joy, and Solemn Thanksgiving.

As,

Do we Praise the God of our HEALTH? We have Forms of Praise ready penned to our
hands, to Sing unto HIM, Who kills and makes alive, who brings down to the
Grave, and brings up. Who makes Sore and Binds up: Who wounds and his
Hands make whole. Who strengthens on the Bed of Languishing, and makes our Bed
in Sickness. Who heals all thy Diseases, and Redeemeth thy Life from
Destruction. See also, Psalm CVII. 17, -- 20.

Or do we Sing unto God in the Joys of HARVEST? We have Psalms adapted: Sing
unto the Lord with Thanksgiving, Sing Praise upon the Harp unto our GOD; Who
Covers the Heaven with Clouds, who prepares Rain for the Earth, who makes
Grass to grow upon the Mountains: Who gives to the Beast his food, and to the
young Ravens which cry: Who fills thee with the finest of the Wheat, -- etc.
See also Psalms LXV. 9, -- 13. CXLIV. 13, 14, 15.

Do we magnify the Power and Love of our Gracious PROTECTOR? We have prepared
Psalms to be Sung aloud unto GOD OUR STRENGTH: -- Praise the Lord O Jerusalem!
Praise thy God O Zion! for He has strengthened the Bars of thy Gates; He has
blessed thy Children within thee; He makes Peace in thy Borders. -- See also
the CXXIV Psalm.

The Songs of VICTORY are Innumerable, to HIM who has Triumphed Gloriously;
Such are the Song of Moses at the Sea, The Lord is my Strength and Song, and he
is become my Salvation: The Song of Renowned Deborah, Praise ye the Lord for
the Avenging of Israel: The Song of Habbakkuk, etc. But especially David's Harp
strikes every Warlike Note; He the Warrior, the Saint, and the Divine Poet
too! GOD is gone up with a Shout, the LORD with the Voice of a Trumpet. Sing
Praises to God, Sing Praises: Sing Praises to our King Sing Praises. See Psalms
XLVI. XLVII. XLVIII.

Once more; Do we bless the Name of God for our Civil Liberties, and for Pious
RULERS? We have again Psalms formed to our hands: TO HIM who led his People
like a Flock by the Hands of Moses and Aaron: -- Who chose David also his
Servant, and took him from the Sheepfolds; from following the Ews great with
young; He bro't him to feed Jacob his People, and Israel his Inheritance: So he
fed them according to the Intregrity of his heart, and guided them by the
skilfulness of his hands. See also, Psalm. LXXII.

Finally, Are we Praising our Gracious and Merciful God for his GOSPEL, and all
Spiritual Blessings in CHRIST JESUS? We have prepared Psalms herefor: To HIM
that chose the Tribe of Judah, the Mount Zion which he Loved; and built his
Sanctuary like high Palaces, like the Earth which he has Established for Ever.
-- He shows his Word unto Jacob, his Statutes and his Judgments unto Israel;
He has not dealt so with any Nation, and as for his Judgments they have not
known them: Praise ye the LORD. See also, Psalm XLVIII. 11, 12, 13, 14. LXXXIX.
1, 15, 16, etc. St. Luke I. 68, 69, etc.

These are some of the Sublime and Holy Psalms, adapted unto our Solemn Feast
Days. Psalm. 81.2, 4. Take a Psalm, and bring hither the Timbrel; the pleasant
Harp with the Psaltery: For this was a Statute for Israel, and a Law of the God
of Jacob.

2. These Praises must be Sung with Hearts full of JOY. The Call of Providence
is to this, and it is more requisite and decent than Garments of Praise or a
joyful Countenance. There should be no sad Heart or Face in the Lords
Assemblies: We remember his Benefits in the midst of all our Sins and Sorrows.
Our work To Day is like that of Heaven, where Prayers are changed into Praises:
the very Felicity of Angels, to Rejoice in the Divine Munificence, to Rejoice
in Praising God! O might we all feel this Heavenly Principle of Joy, enlarging
us in this Good Work of Praise! But remember,

3. Our Joy must be SPIRITUAL, and what is properly Religious. I very much
dread to see the day, when Thanksgivings shall lose of their Solemnity in this
Land. It has been our Crown and Glory that they have not been Debased and
Prostituted among us, as they are too commonly in Other Places, by Play and
Sports, to Drinking and Bonefires, and Noisy Lawless Jollity; nor yet have
dwindled into more Silent and Innocent Illuminations. Certainly it is pleasing
to God, and seemly to Man, that we do at least appear more Spiritual, Grave and
Retired on such Occasions. So Brethren, I beseech and humbly Charge you in the
Lord, that your Joy in Him, his Operations and Favors, be Serious and Inward,
and Holy.

The truth is, Spiritual Joy is as Uneasy and Impossible to a carnal Heart, as
other Duties of Christianity. We easily Rejoice in a Fleshly manner, our Lusts
provoke to it, we can Eat, Drink and be Merry: But to Rejoice Spiritually is to
sour the Pleasures of the Flesh. Corn and Oil and Wine are good things, and the
Flesh to thinks 'em so: But to set our selves to consider and weigh 'em as
coming from God, and our Ill-deserving any of 'em; to Abase our Souls for our
Sins ungratefully committed in Abuse of his Benefits, to Rejoice in paying the
Homage and debt of Praises for them, and to bind our selves to Live Devoted to
God as a meet Thank-Offering; -- this has nothing of Pleasure in it, but is a
sore Penance to the Carnal Mind so much as to think of! Let God take his Gifts
again, ('it is ready to say) if we must Pay so dear for 'em, at the Expense of
our Lusts!

But nevertheless, I must insist on it, that our Joy be Holy: Such as true
Devotion inspires, and the Spirit of God kindles in holy Souls, by his
Fellowship with them in holy Duties: Such as the Spirit of Praise requires, as
the Graces of the Holy SPIRIT do cherish, and as Influences unto all Holiness.
If men do not feel themselves delighted from Love to God, Admiration of his
Mercy, Desires and Serious Purposes (through Grace) of Living to his Glory, and
to Serve him with the more Cheerfulness and Diligence, under the large
Experience of his Benefits, they do but play with and mock their Benefactor.

4. And Lastly, Therefore our present WORSHIP must be from the HEART, from an
Engaged Spirit, and raised Affections. A Joyful Noise alone is not Praise. The
Transports of the Ear are one thing, those of the Heart quite another. The Lord
takes no more pleasure merely in the Voice, than in the Legs of a Man, but in
them that Fear him. It Is a Play of Worship, whether we Sing Psalms of Praise or
Penitence, if no Inward Pleasures Elate us in the one, nor Sorrows depress us
in the other. The very Sport of the Children in the Marketplace, We have piped
to you and ye have not danced! We have mourned to you and ye have not lamented!
The Goodly Sacrifice is the Heart it self; the Substance this, a Lifeless Sound
the other. Without Grace in the Heart, and in Exercise, we make no Melody to
the Lord; as a Nightingale dead or asleep can no more than a Crow. We may pass
for Tubes, making a Sound, but by no means are Worshippers.

I will only offer further, David's Example, and the Apostle's Precept or
Benediction rather; Both teaching us that the Heart must be intently fixed, and
devoutly raised in the Spiritual Duty of Praise.

My HEART is Fixed, O GOD, my Heart is Fixed, I will SING and give PRAISE.
Awake up my Glory! Awake Psaltery and Harp! I my self will awake Early.

Let the PEACE OF GOD rule in your HEARTS, to the which also ye are called in
one Body, and be ye THANKFUL. Let the WORD OF CHRIST dwell in you richly in all
Wisdom, Teaching and Admonishing one another in Psalms and Hymns and Spiritual
Songs, SINGING WITH GRACE IN YOUR HEARTS TO THE LORD. And whatsoever ye do in
Word or Deed, do ALL in the Name of the LORD JESUS, GIVING THANKS TO GOD, AND
THE FATHER BY HIM.

FINIS.

