The Just MAN'S Prerogative. A SERMON Preached Privately, Sept. 27. 1706. On a
Solemn Occasion; or the Consolation of a Sorrowful Family, Mourning over the
Immature DEATH, of a Pious SON, viz Mr. Simeon Stoddard, who was found
Barbarously Murdered, in Chelsea Fields near London, May 14. 1706.

BY S. WILLARD.

II. Sam. 12.23. I shall go to him, but he shall not return to me.

Boston N. E. Printed by B. Green. Sold by Nicholas Boon at his Shop. 1706

The Just Man's Prerogative.
PROVERBS XII. 21. There shall no Evil happen to the Just.


THE Life which the Children of God are called to lead in this World, is a Life
of Faith, and not of sense: for the supporting and strengthening of which Faith,
he has laid in great and exceeding precious Promises, which they are to feed
upon: and if they do not make a comfortable living on them, it is their own
fault. Those Promises have enough in them to fortify us with resolution to
pursue the hardest Duties, and bear down all the Discouragements that thrust in
our way to stop it up, and bring us to a stand; and to give us light and
consolation in the darkest hours of sinking distress. If we could so fix our
Trust on God, and place our firm reliance on his power and veracity, we should
be like Mount Zion that cannot be moved. And indeed there is so much of Paradox
in these Promises, that sense is blundred at them, and carnal reason is run a
ground at the contemplation of them, and Faith only can make true English of
them.

Such a Promise is this now under our Consideration, which not only do the
Unbelieving World make a ridicule of, but the Godly themselves are sometimes at
a loss about it: Hence that puzzle which the Psalmist was involved in, Psalm.
77. begin. and probably there are a great many things in Providence, which a
Believer cannot at present see through, nor is able to reconcile until he comes
into a better light, as our Savior told him, Joh. 13.7. What I do now thou
know not, but thou shall know. Only in the mean while he believes in hope
against hope, and so comes to conquer the Temptation, and recovers his
Tranquillity, as he did after much struggling, by resolving, Psalm. 73.24. Thou
shall guide me by Counsel, and afterward receive me to Glory.

I shall not here tarry to enquire after the diverse readings of these Words by
Interpreters, or the different sense put on them by Expositors, but only take
notice of them so far as is needful for the right stating of the Truth which is
to be remarked from them in regard of the present design: For which two things
may be observed.

1. The Subject here spoken of; the Just. Which Word is to be understood
according to the tenor of the New Covenant; for, in a legal sense that is a
great truth, Eccl. 7.20. There is not a just man upon earth that does good and
sins not. And in that respect, the Promise would be of a nonentity, and
exclude every one of Adams race, from the Consolation of it, and so become
insignificant, and have no manner of encouragement in it. But it grasps in it
all that truly believe, and are accounted Righteous in Gods sight, through the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness to them; and have received an inherent and
inchoate Righteousness, through the Sanctification of the Spirit. And in this
sense it is very frequently to be understood in the word of God; and this is
the man whom God reputes to be a Just Man, and to whom this Promise does belong.

2. The Predicate, or the thing asserted concerning all such; for the Subject
is declared indefinitely, and without limitation, amounts to an Universal: and
that is, that there shall no Evil happen to him. This is a thing very
mysterious, and hardly comprehended by us. The Word, Evil, that is here used,
is used to express both the Evil of Sin, and the Evil of Punishment or Misery:
and some there are that here apply it to the one, some to the other, and some
to both; and probably both may be included in them; for the Words are general,
No Evil shall happen to them, which seems to aim at the kinds of Evil: and if
we understand it in either of there senses, there is difficulty in the
assignation of it to one as well as the other, in regard of the manner in which
this Promise is accomplished: for it is certain that Godly men do here
encounter both with Sin and Sorrow, and if we allow none for Godly but such as
are clear of both, We must condemn the whole Generation of the Just. Nor are
any free from these, till they come to the Spirits of Just Men made Perfect.
And the Word which we render, Happen; in one Conjugation signifies, to Lament,
and in another, to Occur, and some would have it in the first sense, viz. That
he shall not be overwhelmed with any Evil: and that which we render no Evil, in
the Original is all Evil: but every one that is acquainted with the Language
knows, that nothing is more common, than to use this Word, distributively, for
any: and I think that there can be no other, at least no better sense put upon
these Words, than this, viz. That he shall meet with no such Evil in this
World, as shall prevent him, yea that shall not eventually further him to the
obtaining of Eternal Blessedness. And this is the thing that remains to be made
good, in the prosecution of this,

DOCTRINE. That a Godly Person shall meet with no Evil in this Life, but what
shall turn to his great advantage in the issue.
That many general expressions in the Word of God are to be understood with a
limitation, cannot be denied by him that would not impeach it of a
contradiction: and yet the thing it self has a certain and excellent Truth
couched in it; and so it is here, and this may be made good in respect of the
Evil of Sin, but that it is aliene from my present purpose. I shall therefore
confine the following Discourse to the Evil of Affliction.

To make way for the clearing of the Doctrine, a few things may be offered
Introductory.

1. Good and Evil may come under a Physical and a Moral Consideration. In the
former sense, a thing may be said to be Good, when it is suited to the nature
of Man, and adapted to his rational cravings. And in this regard, that which
has such a nature put into it, as may afford to a Man the Support of his Life,
the preservation of his Health, the restoring of him to his Health, the
gratification of his natural Appetites, that is good: and on this account Evil
is whatsoever is contrary to this, and damnifies the Man in either of these:
and this arises from the agreeableness of the nature of the thing with the
nature of Man for whose use it was made; or from its disagreeableness to it in
all these: this therefore that good Man Prayed for, and obtained, 1 Chronicles.
4.10. Oh that thou would bless me indeed, and enlarge my coast, and that
thine hand may be with me, and that thou would keep me from Evil, that it
may not grieve me. In the latter sense, they are considered as they bear a
respect to the Law of God, and are made helpful to us in our Serving of him as
our last end; or on the other hand become hindrances to us in our faithful
Obedience: On this account Sin is called Evil, and Christ Prayed that his
Disciples might be kept from it, Joh. 17.15. That thou will keep them from the
Evil.

2. A thing may be said to be good Physically, and evil Morally; and
contrarily, evil Physically, and good Morally: Thus all the things that are
adapted for the comfort of the man's natural life are good, because they answer
the next end they were made for: But when these are abused to the hurt of his
Soul, they so become evil to him in that regard. Whereas that which in the
former respect is resented as evil, if it is made advantageous to the promoving
of his Spiritual Welfare, is upon that account good to him; and for this we
have such remarks made in the Word of God, Psalm. 69.22. Let their Table become
a snare before them: and that which should have been for their welfare, let it
become a trap. And Eccles. 5.13. There is a sore evil that I have seen under
the Sun, Riches kept for the Owners thereof to their hurt. These things are
good in themselves, yet by man's misimprovement of them, they become to him
eventually evil, and do him the greatest hurt, because they undo his Soul.
Whereas by a wise and gracious improvement of such things as are the most
grievous to men's natural resentments, they become to him salubrious.

3. The Good or Evil of a thing is considerable either absolutely, or as it
bears respect of a Medium to an end. All things come under one of these two
considerations, viz. either as they are an End, or as they are Media. Now a
thing under the consideration of an end, has ever the respect of good upon it;
for good in the object is the motive of a rational Choice; and nothing can be
made an end by a reasonable Creature but under such an apprehension: but it is
not to be denied, but that a man may propose to himself an evil end, under an
appearance of good to his blinded judgment; and that is when he proposes to
himself that, in the attainment whereof he will not make himself happy, but
miserable; and such are the too frequent designs of deluded men, who call evil
good, and good evil. And this is, either when he proposes that to himself as
his last end, which is but a subordinate one; and though in its place it might
be good, yet by thus displacing it, it becomes evil to him; as when a man makes
his present outward accommodation his farthest design; or when he has no
farther reach in what he does, but to bring to pass a wicked purpose. But in
the using of a thing as a Medium, supposing the end to be good, the Medium is
then good; when it is both lawful, and has a tendency in it to promove the
thing sought; and evil when it is either unlawful, or will obstruct the design
for which it is used: as when a man either seeks gain in an evil case, or
uses such means as will hinder and not further his purpose.

4. That which is truly serviceable to advance a man's last end, cannot in a
Theological sense be called evil, but must be confessed to be good. There is a
last end, and there be such as are subordinate. The last end is the Glory of
God, which the reasonable Creature is, or ought to be bound for in all that he
is concerned in; and there are subordinate ends, which men may lawfully pursue
in their right order; a man may lawfully seek his present comfort, and use the
approved means for the obtainment of it, and that which serves him herein is
good in this regard: but if this hinders him in his pursuit of his last end, it
certainly becomes evil to him. But that which whether it helps the former or
no, does yet become in the issue more serviceable to the latter, it ought not
to be called Evil, but Good; and on this score we have the Psalmists
acknowledgment, Psalm. 119.71. It is good for me that I have been afflicted,
that I might learn thy Statutes.

These things being thus Premised, it follows that we proceed to apply this
matter to the truth that lies before us; and to explicate this, Let us observe.

1. That it is the Lot of the Children of God to suffer Affliction in this
Life. This is an experienced truth, and no other than what our Savior has
warned us of, Joh. 16. ult. In this world you shall have tribulation; and the
Apostles taught this every where, Acts 14.22. That we must through much
tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God. And it is here to be remarked, that
as the Life of the Godly is here a life of trouble, so there are no temporary
troubles which mankind are liable to, but the Godly may encounter the like, and
that not only for kind, but all the temporary circumstances of them, insomuch
as there is no room at all here left to distinguish between the one and the
other; this the wise man observes, Eccles. 9.2. No man can know love or hatred
by all that is before him, and there is one event to the good and bad, etc. And
all the difference is, that to the one they come full of the Curse, and are but
the beginning of sorrows; whereas to the others they are exempted from the
Curse, and have a Blessing annexed to them, which is not to be gathered from
the thing it self, but only from the effects, which, what it is, will be anon
considered. But this is known only to themselves, and is to be judged of by the
fruits.

2. That God is the Author of all the Afflictions which these do suffer. Some
there be who suppose, that when it is said that no evil shall happen to these,
it only intends, that nothing shall befall them casually, but every thing shall
be according to the All-wise Counsel of God; which is indeed a truth in it
self; but the Wicked as well as the Godly are herein concerned; and besides as
to second causes there are contingencies in these things. But this is not all
the meaning: and the word not only signifies to Happen, but also to Evene, or
come to pass. And it is very certain that all events are according as they were
fore-appointed, as he confesses, Job 23.14. He performs the thing that is
appointed for me; and God assumes this to himself, and makes that challenge,
Amos 3.6. Is there any Evil in the City, and the Lord has not done it? And
God, in his ordinary Providence, works, by Instruments, and frequently by
rational Agents, and such as are malicious as well as voluntary; nevertheless
they do what he has seen good that it shall be done; those therefore are
called his hand, Psalm. 17.14. And it is our duty to look beyond second causes
in all the troubles that we undergo in this world, or else we shall never make
a right and profitable improvement of them; hence that, Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb,
I opened not my mouth, because thou did it.

3. That God has appointed these to Glory, notwithstanding the Afflictions
which they do at present suffer. To this they were designed in his Eternal
Counsel, and this was secured to them in their Effectual Calling, which is one
of those Gifts of God which are without Repentance. If then God had not in his
purpose resolved to bring them to Glory, he would never have called them, but
left them in their Unregeneracy, so that let their trials be never so many or
great, it is no evidence, as some are ready in their dark hours to suspect,
that he either never Loved them, or that he has forgotten to be gracious. We
are therefore to consider what he has called them to, viz. to Eternal Glory, 1
Pet. 5.10. And this is an undeniable evidence that they can meet with nothing,
though never so severe, that shall obstruct their Salvation, by separating of
them from the love of God, which has entertained them: and of this the Apostle
speaks with the greatest confidence, in, Romans 8.38, 39. I am persuaded that
neither Death nor Life, etc.

4. That God sends these Afflictions to prepare them for, and to bring them to
this Glory. He is an Infinitely Wise Agent, and must have some Worthy design in
all his Works, Psalm. 104.24. In Wisdom have thou made them all. Now if Gods end
in regard of these, be to Glorify himself in advancing of them unto Glory, all
his dispensations to them are in Wisdom accommodated to bring this about. There
is a great deal needful to fit them for the Kingdom, and conduct them safe to
it: and the whole way of God toward them in his Providence is to lead them
thither. This was Christ's business, Heb. 2.10. To bring many Sons to Glory: and
their whole conduct is to accomplish this, Psalm. 73.24. Thou shall guide me by
Counsel, and afterward shall receive me to Glory. And on this account we are
told, Psalm. 25.10. All the paths of the Lord are Mercy and Truth. Now
Afflictions belong to this conduct, and are no little part of it. And if it be
asked, Why does God so Afflict his own? The answer is ready, Isa. 27.9. By this
shall the iniquity of Jacob, be purged, and all the fruit shall be to take away
Sin. And on this account we are told that they never come but when there is
need of them, 1 Pet. 1.6. Ye are, if need be in heaviness, etc. And there is
not one Affliction that a Believer meets with, but has an Eye to this, for God
Afflicts not willingly.

5. As God uses these Media for, so he will certainly overruled them to the
promoving of this design. The Counsel of the Lord shall stand, neither shall
any thing defeat it: with this he comforts his People when the blackest
Providence passed over them, Jer. 29.11. I know mine own thoughts, even
thoughts of good will, and not evil, and to give an expected end. And has he
said it, and shall he not do it? Instruments may intend hurt by what they do,
but he will turn it to good; and every gracious Soul shall find it in the
issue, and may allot upon it as he, Job 22.10. When I am tried, I shall come
forth as Gold. He therefore always Sits by the Furnace, and looks carefully
after it; and by a powerful Influence gives it its kindly operation. The
Apostle could comfort himself in this, 2 Cor. 4.17. Our light Affliction, which
is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of
Glory. And every Affliction belongs to these all things which shall work
together for the Good of Gods called, Romans 8.28. And neither Satan's Malice, nor
wicked Men's rage shall be able to hinder it, but it shall be so in the event,
Eccl. ^.12. I know it shall be well with those that fear God, that fear before
him.

6. There is no Affliction that over-takes a Child of God, but what proceeds
from his Love. We ascribe Love to God, sometimes on the account of his
Beneficence, and this is common to Good and Evil, Math. 5.45. He makes his Sun
to shine on the Evil, and the Good, and causes his rain to fall on the Just
and the Unjust. Sometimes to his Benevolence, or purpose of everlasting good to
them; and this is peculiar to Some, and every true Believer has an interest in
this Love: yea this is it that Governs all the Providence that pass over them.
Is it Love that moves him to afflict them, Heb. 12.6. Whom the Lord Loves he
chasteneth. It is Love that presides in the Affliction it self, as to kind,
degree, and continuance. It is not because God hates them that he Afflicts
them, nor is it because he Loves the Wicked, that they prosper; for, Psalm.
92.7. When all the Workers of iniquity prosper, it is that they may be
destroyed for ever. Now as Love is an affection that contrives and pursues the
best good of the object of it, so it cannot willingly do it any Evil, for it is
contrary to it: and though there may be the Anger of God at his Children
manifested in the Affliction, yet it is the Anger of Love, the Displeasure of a
Father, and not of an Enemy, Psalm. 89.30. etc. I will chasten them, etc. but my
loving kindness I will not take from him.

And if we consider what are the things that he designs and accomplisheth
thereby, we shall be farther assured of it; for, all that he intends by it, in
regard of them, will come under those heads.

1. To Chasten them for their Sin, and reclaim them from it. Sometimes they
fall into Sin, and thereby Provoke him, and it is fit that they should be
humbled for it: and it is meet also that the World should not be Scandalized at
it; and this is one reason of their troubles: they are apt, when fallen into
Sin to ly in it, and too often to go on farther: but God, when possibly they
have been told of it, and solemnly warned about it, but have taken no notice of
this; now sends Affliction on them, and thereby makes them to resent their
follies, and brings them back again, such was his experience, Psalm. 119.67.
Before I was afflicted I went astray; but now have I kept thy Word. And when
the world are Scandalized at their follies, He thus vindicateth his Holiness, 2 Samuel 12.14. Now this must needs be Love, and turn to their best Good; for we
are assured that the contrary is a fearful Note of his hatred; Psalm. 87.21, 22.
-- Israel would none of me, so I gave them up to their own hearts lusts. Heb.
12.8. If ye be without Chastisement, whereof all are partakers, ye are
bastards, and not Sons.

2. To quicken there to Duty, and advance them in Holiness. That this is the
design we are told, Heb. 12.10. He for our Profit, that we might be partakers
of his Holiness. And it is an usual observation, that when the Godly themselves
enjoy much Prosperity, they do grow secure and negligent in their Spiritual
concerns, this was his Confession, Psalm. 30.5. In my Prosperity I said, I shall
never be moved. And now God sends trouble on them, and that rouseth them up,
and makes them to return to their business: and for that reason the Psalmist
acknowledges the goodness of his Affliction, Psalm. 119.71. It was good for me
that I have been Afflicted, that I might learn thy Statutes. And accordingly he
declares the blessedness of all such as are so Afflicted, Psalm. 94.12. Blessed
is the man whom thou correctest, and teach out of thy Law. And it has been
a frequent observation, that such Christians as are most exercised with
Afflictions, have made the greatest progress in the business of their
Generation. Now Holiness here, is the way to Happiness hereafter; and that
cannot be Evil but Good; and many a Child of God is, under him, beholden to his
Affliction for the great progress that he has made in the Work of his
Generation.

3. To Wean them from the World and all the things of it. The things of this
World are accommodated to our senses, and when it smiles upon us, we are too
easily entangled by it; and our hearts are too much set upon it, and the
delights of it steal them away; and we are apt to value our selves upon these
things, which, were we let alone, would greatly impede us in our Christian
race: But God, by Affliction shows us the vanity of these things, and it
becomes as Aloes put on the breast of the Creature, which embitters it to us;
and by this means it takes off our exuberant affections from it, and tells us
that here is not our resting place, and that these things cannot be our
happiness. And this puts us upon using the greatest diligence in Running our
Race, and laying up our Treasure in Heaven: this makes us to shake off our
Sloth, and puts fervor into our hearts, than which what greater kindness can
be done for us here?

4. To Try and Exercise their Graces. In their Conversion they were Sanctified
for his Service; in which Sanctification they were furnished with the whole
body of Sanctifying and Saving Graces, in the exercise whereof they were to
glorify God: And as these Graces were to be Exercised, so they were to be
tried, for the discovery of their truth, and of their strength. God has to
this end provided (...) as may give a through proof of them: and to this are
the Afflictions of the Godly suited and made Serviceable; for which reason they
are frequently called Trials, and that is one thing designed by them, as we are
told, Deuteronomy. 8.16 To humble thee, and prove thee, and to do thee good in thy
latter end. And though they may discover a great deal of our weakness, as
experience tells us, yet they will make manifest our sincerity too; and they
who can maintain their Love of God, and their fidelity to him, and can in truth
say, as the Church, Psalm. 44.17. All this has befallen us, yet we have not
forgotten thee, nor dealt fasely in thy Covenant. Shall have an evidence in
themselves, and give proof to others, that they Love him in Sincerity. Hereby
also they shall bring much Glory to God, and this will afford to them much of
inward Peace, under their sharpest Afflictions.

5. To make them willing to Dye, and desirous to depart, and be with CHRIST.
Whiles we converse with the things that are here below, we are apt to be too
much glowed to these things, and they will make us to hang back, as being does
to leave them: and this makes the aspect of Death to be very ungrateful to us,
and the parting with all our pleasant fruitions which we ever delighted in,
terrible to us. But when God, by embittering these to us, (...) Affliction,
weans us much from them, it also raises up our hearts to Heaven, and makes us
long to be there, both because we thus find by experience that this is not our
resting Place: and upon the Contemplation of the Glories of that Palace, we are
made to wish for the time when this Scuffle shall be over, when Sin and Sorrow
shall be no more, but we shall Swim in Those Joys and Pleasures, that are at
his Right Hand for ever: and this will prompt us to be the more diligent to get
all things in a readiness for our happy departure.

6. To bring them Home to the Kingdom. Death is the King of Terrors, and seems
to be the bitterest of all the Trials, which we are encountered withal: and many
times the circumstances of it intend the bitterness of the Sorrow of it: not
only the thing it self, but the ghastly prospect of a cruel and barbarous
bloody end that ours are brought to, carries horror in the face, and fills
both the Person exposed to it, and all who are concerned with him, with
Agonies, and great consternation. But that Godly Persons may, and often do so
die, is certain: And is there no Evil in this? No, none at all in the sense of
the Text and Doctrine: for this is but the Chariot, which though fiery, yet is
prepared by our Heavenly Father, for us to ride in to the Palace of Glory which
is above, where all our Sorrows shall be ended, and all our Hopes will be
owned, beyond the comprehension of our most enlarged conceptions or
expectations here: and with this could the Apostle comfort himself in the
aspect of all the troubles of this Life, 2 Cor. 5.1. We know that if our
earthly Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God, an House not made
with Hands, eternal in the Heavens.

Now if thus it be with the Children of God in regard of the Afflictions to
which they are exposed, it must needs follow that no Evil shall befall them:
for (...) are secured on this hand they must doubtless be safe. And that this
is so is evident,

1. Because He has Promised it. And his Promise is good Security, because he
is immutably Faithful: And this Unchangeableness of his is offered to
Corroborate his People faith in the darkest hours, Mal. 3.6. I am God, I change
not; therefore ye Sons of Jacob are not consumed. And he has said, Psalm.
34.10. They that fear the Lord shall want for no good thing. And though it is
sometimes Promised conditionally, yet his Word is also past for the performance
of the Condition, 1 Pet. 1.5. Ye are kept by the power of God through faith
unto Salvation. And as the Promise is made to Believing, so the preserving them
in Faith, and not suffering them to fall out of it, is comprehended in the
Promise, and they may rest on it, for he will never leave nor forsake them: and
the Apostle so argues, Phil. 1.6. Being confident, that he who has begun a
good work in you, will perform it unto the day of Christ.

2. He is able to Accomplish it. There is nothing too hard for him to do: not
only his good Will, but his Power too, stand to ratify it. Men who Promise
Sincerely, may yet fail through defect of ability, but he never can: how often
therefore does he put them in mind of his ability, and would have them to
acquiess in it? There is nothing else can offer us any rational
discouragements, and I am sure that this is as unreasonable as any thing else:
for, as he can bring good out of evil, so he can turn that which in its own
nature is Evil, into Good, and bring the greatest real benefit out of it, and
can make Poison it self a Cordial.

3. His Glory is concerned in it. As God designed the manifestation of the
Glory of his Grace in the Salvation of his Chosen, so he proposed the
declaration of other of his Perfections in the way by which he would bring it
about: and one thing herein concerned, is that he would accomplish it through
many Tribulations. And it will be an Eternal Wonder, and commend his Wisdom and
Power, to see a thing so frail as the Believer is here, so often tossed with
Tempests, and beaten upon with the Hurricanes of Affliction, not only kept up
under and through all, and not be foundred; but that every one of them has
contributed to the making of his Eternal Crown the more Massy, as we are
assured that it shall, in the forecited, 2 Cor. 4.17. Haec olim meminisse
juvabit. And when we shall look back from the Pinacles of Glory, and review the
whole passage that we have been led through, and how exactly every thing has
Served to help us forward to the Kingdom; we shall be ashamed of the Prejudices
that here we entertained, and be swallowed up with endless Ecstasies of
Admiration, and Hallelujah's.

USE. I shall wave all other Application which might have been offered, and
confine my self to presenting, by way of Exhortation, a few practical Lessons,
which may be Servicable to the present Occasion, and be helpful, as to us all
in regard of the Afflictions of this present Life, which we ought to Live
always in the expectation of; so in particular to this Family whom God has put
into Mourning, under an awful bereavement, and bitterly circumstanced. Let us
acknowledge the Merciful kindness of God, which has given so much just Matter
of Consolation on one hand, that in respect of the Person gone, there is no
cause to Mourn for him as one that is without hope, having so many just grounds
to conclude that he is gotten safe beyond the troubles of this Miserable World,
and lodged safe in the Arms and Bosom of CHRIST, Which is best of all. But our
business is to endeavor to turn it to our own advantage: And that they who are
nextly concerned in this, may find that there is no Evil happened to them hereby,
but that it may be found to their Everlasting Good: and that we may all of us
experience the like by all the Trials of this Life which may pass over us. And
here,

I. Let not our expectation of Affliction put us into Consternation. It is good
for us always to fear it with a fear of expectation, else when it comes it will
take us on Surprise, and in all likelihood find us unready, which becomes not a
true Christian; for, Prove. 28.14. Happy is the Man that fears always. But we
are apt to be put into Consternation with it, which is more perplexing to us
then the thing it self. Whereas, because it is possible that the thing feared
may never come to pass, it is imprudent to perplex our selves about it before
hand: and it is enough to quiet us into a sedate frame, to Consider that if we
are the Children of God, though it shall come, and come circumstanced as bad as
we imagined, yet it shall do us no real hurt: and if we can but wait, we shall
find such advantage from it, as shall make us to confess that we are
sufficiently recompensed; so he assures them, Heb. 12.11. Afterward it
yields the Peaceable fruits of Righteousness to those that are exercised
thereby. Yea to make sure of this, the Apostle has cast up the account, and
brought in the true reckoning of it, Romans 8.18. I reckon that the Sufferings of
this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the Glory that shall be
revealed in us. And then what an unreasonable thing is it, to put our selves
into a fright about it?

II. Let us rightly Improve this Truth to help us to a suitable demeanure of
our Selves; when we are under the Exercise of Grievous Afflictions. And there
are such Lessons as these we should Learn from it.

1. Let it put us anew upon the Confirming of our Assurance, that we are such
Just Persons. Our clearness in this is apt to be obscured; and the darkness of
Providence too frequently raises Clouds on our Mind about it: and this is very
often the perplexity of a Christian, and he thinks that he could be quiet under
the Affliction, were he but sure of this. Now the best way so to be is to be
often proving of our selves, according to the advice given, 2 Cor. 13.5.
Examine your selves, whether you are in the faith: prove your own selves. This
also will be a good way to keep us from doing any thing that will interpose to
hide this light from us, or will provoke the Holy Spirit to withdraw the
affording us his confirming Testimony. The Promise on which our hope is built,
is not to be doubted of, so that there needs nothing to yield us satisfaction,
and afford us a triumph, but to know that we are the Heirs of this Promise.
There are the things which accompany Salvation, and if we can find them in us
we have now nothing to do, but to Suck out the sweetness therein.

2. Let us Corroborate our Faith on the Promise and humbly Claim it of God. We
are here to Live by Faith, and the whole dependence of our Faith is on the
Promise, if that could fail, we might be miserable; but if that will hold, we
are safe. If God him said that no Evil shall befall us, we may be sure that it
will be so, though sense should bring in a contrary Verdict. Our work therefore
is to keep our Eyes upon this; to consider the Contents of it, and then think
believingly, who has past it; the God who is Unchangable in his Promises, as
well as in his Purposes, Mal. 3.6. The God who is faithful, and will therefore
be as good as his Word, 1 These. 5.24. Faithful is he who has called you, who
will do it. Who cannot repent of what he has said, 1 Samuel 15.29. The Strength
of Israel cannot lie nor repent; for he is not a Man that he should lie, nor a
Son of Man that he should repent. And is able to give Being to his Word, Ephesians.
3.20. To him that is able to do exceeding abundantly more than we ask or think,
etc. And let us remember that his Promises are nothing else but his Purpose
made known for us to rely on. Let us then humbly challenge it of him, and with
our acknowledgment of our own unworthiness, let us put him in mind of it; as
he, Genesis 32.10, 12. I am not worthy of the least of all thy Mercies, etc. And
thou said, I will surely do thee Good, etc. Consider that he expects this of
us, Ezekiel. 30.37. I will be sought to by the house of Israel to do this for
them. And let us believe that it shall be so, and this will quiet our
tumultuous thoughts: What said he, Psalm. 27.13. I had fainted if I had not
believed to see the Salvation of God.

3. Let us turn our Eyes from the Affliction, to contemplate the Glory which
this Affliction shall work for us. If we only pore upon the trouble, and fix
there, we shall readily say as Jacob once did, All these things are against me.
But, though we may and ought to look on the Affliction it self, thereby
suitably to affect our selves, and without it we cannot do our Duty, and God
does not require us to be sottish and stupid: yet we are not to tarry here,
lest our Spirits be leavened with it; but we are to look beyond this, and take
a view of that which is to come. And the Apostle tells us how he was helped to
keep from fainting under the present Affliction, 2 Cor. 4.18. Whiles we look
not at the things that are seen, but the things that are not seen, etc. Let us
look upon the Crown, Lift at it, and see how Weighty it is, and consider the
Eternal duration of it; and then believe that this is it that we are conducted
to, and fitting for by all that we meet, and then draw proper conclusions from
it, and this will raise us above the Temptation.

4. Let us Enquire into the Mind of God concerning us in the Affliction.
Whatsoever causualty there is in our trouble in regard of Second Causes, yet,
as God is the Supreme author and orderer of all the things that come to pass
in time; so it is our Duty humbly to enquire into his design, or what it comes
for: thus did he, Job 10.2. Show me I Pray thee, wherefore thou contendest with
me. So he, 2 Samuel 21. beg. And as God always does it for the Spiritual profit
of his own, so, that we may thus profit by it, we must endeavor to acquaint
our selves with the Meaning of it. Nor is a general persuasion that it is for
our good, because we are his Called, sufficient for us; but we must by it be
excited to our Duty, which that we may we must know it, and that whether for
Correction, or for Trial, and though we may not expect immediate Revelation,
yet there are the Rules given us by God in his Holy Word, by which we may be
directed in this: Only we must Pray to God to help us in it by his Spirit, as
he did, Psalm. 139.22, 24. Search me, O God, and know my Heart; try me and know
my thoughts; and see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the Way
Everlasting.

5. Let us improve it to the declared Ends of it. We are not only told that all
our Afflictions are the Hand of God, but also that he has gracious designs in
them, regarding his own; and that they are to Teach us to profit: And that we
may so profit by them, and find them Good and not Evil to us, we must apply
them to these ends. What these are, we before Observed; and let us Wait on him
for his Grace to Help us herein. Let us then apply them to Mortify our
remaining Corruptions, to Promove our Repentance of all our Follies, to Wean us
from this vain World, and abate our exorbitant Affections to the things here
below; to make us more Circumspect in our whole Course; and so animate our
desires after, and longings for the Heavenly Kingdom; to make us more ready for
the Inheritance, and the more patiently and cheerfully to Wait for our
Approaching Change, Being with Loins girt, Lamps burning, waiting for the
Coming of our Lord: and how happy shall we then be, if when he comes he shall
find us so doing?

6. Let us Corroborate our Love to God by this. We are too apt, under grievous
Calamities, to maintain Prejudies against God in our Hearts, and we find how
far this wrought on the Psalmist, Psalm. 77.7. etc. Will God cast off for ever?
Has he forgotten to be gracious? etc. But this arises from mistake, and
because we put a false gloss on the Providence, else we should not so do. Could
we, as we ought, believe that all this is the product of his Everlasting Love,
and a part of that Allwise Counsel, which has laid out our Way to Glory, and
will by it certainly advance us thereunto, and both can and will make it
subservient to this purpose; It would put more Charitable thoughts into us, and
make us to say as he, Psalm. 119.75. I know, O Lord, that thy Judgments are
right, and that in very faithfulness thou have Afflicted me. And this would
make us to Love the hand which dispenses it to us. And could we so do, how
comfortably would it support us under our greatest distresses?

7. Let us by this Comfort our selves under all the Oppressing Circumstances of
our Trouble. We are too apt to pore more upon the Circumstances than the thing
it self, and thereby to put more of Gall and Wormwood into our own Cup: Whereas
this is indeed an Error, and though it is apt to make impression on our
senses, yet it ought not to impede our Faith and Consolation: for, not only did
infinite Wisdom so order it, but the thing it self does not put any real Obex
to our Faith in the Promise, which we are to Live upon. Let the DEATH of our
Godly Relation be accomplished with the greatest Barbarity imaginable; all the
hurt it did to him was but to help him to Glory, and what is it that we can
desire beyond that? If such be well Lodged, all is well. And as to our selves,
it cannot rationally becloud our hopes, for though the Chariot were of fire,
yet the Conveyance was to the Kingdom, where we hope ere long to arrive: And
with this let us comfort our selves for the present, That though they shall not
return to us, we shall go to them. And if we Love Earth less, and Heaven more,
by every removal of any of ours from hence thither, and this makes us the more
diligently to wait for, and hasten to the Coming and Kingdom of CHRIST, a few
days more and our Sorrows shall be over, our Tears dried up, and our Joys
perfected.

The END.
Considerations, To Prevent Murmuring AND Promote Patience in CHRISTIANS, Under
Afflictive Providence. In a Lecture SERMON Preached September. 19. 1706. In
Boston.

By BENJ. WADSWORTH, Pastor of a Church of CHRIST there.

Job 10.2. I will say unto God, do not condemn me; show me wherefore thou
contendest with me.

Job 23.10. -- When he has tried me, I shall come forth as gold.

Psalm. 94.12. Blessed is the Man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teach him
out of thy law.

Boston N. E. Printed by B. Green. Sold by Nicholas Boon at his Shop. 1706

Preface,
IT IS the Lot of GOD'S Children while in this World, to meet with Troubles more
or less. And through the remaining Naughtiness of their Hearts, they are too
prone to Murmur and Repine under them. Therefore Considerations to Suppress
Murmuring, and Quicken Patience, should never be reckoned unseasonable; and
especially when some sore Trial is actually upon them. And indeed it was a sore
Trial, which Occasioned this SERMON. I had thoughts of another Subject for the
Lecture (as it fell to me in Course) but a few days before the Lecture came; I
was Surpised with the Sorrowful News, of a Barbarous Murder committed upon Mr.
Simeon Stoddard; Merchant, in London: A Person of an unblemished Character, and
of great Note for his Early and Steady Piety: Son to Simeon Stoddard Esqr. in
Boston. A more full account of this Barbarous Murder, may be seen in the Boston
News-Letter, Numb. 127. It Was this Sorrowful News, that turned my thoughts to
the Text before us: Hoping that a Discourse upon it, might be Useful to all
that might hear it, especially to the Mournful Parents, and other Relations,
of the Worthy Person thus awfully Removed. And as this SERMON was Preached,
more particularly for their Sakes; so at the desire of the Honored and
Bereaved Father, it is now Printed. That all who have Heard this SERMON, or may
Read it, may thereby be furthered in a Suitable carriage under Afflictions, is
the Desire and Prayer of the Unworthy Author,

Benj. Wadsworth.

Considerations, TO Prevent MURMURING, AND Promote PATIENCE in CHRISTIANS,
UNDER Afflictive Providence.
LEVITICUS X. 3. -- And Aaron held his Peace.


DIVINE Sovereignty ought to be acknowledged and adored, even in all those
Afflictive Dispensations of Providence, which at any time we meet with.
Quarrelling with God, is unbecoming for any Creatures, especially those who
call themselves his Subjects, Servants, and Children. If God is pleased to lay
his Hand heavy upon us, we ought quietly and patiently to Submit. Our Text
informs us, That holy Aaron did so, under a very sore Affliction. God had
chosen Aaron and his Sons to the Priests Office, and ordered them to be
employed therein. His two Sons Nadab and Abihu, acted contrary to the rules
given by God, in some of their Official Performances. They offered Strange Fire
before the Lord, which he commanded them not, verse 1. It Is thought, that when
they burnt Incense, they did not take Fire from Gods Altar, as they should have
done, but took common Fire for such holy Service. But whatever the particular
error was, God was highly provoked with it, and bore severe Testimony against
it; for the Slew them both immediately. There went out fire from the Lord, and
devoured them, and they dyed before the Lord, verse 2. Some think 'twas
Lightning destroyed them, but whether so or not, yet it is certain; God sent a
Fire which killed them. A couple of Promising Young Men, Young Ministers, in
their Health, Strength and Vigor; were thus Suddenly Smitten, yea killed by
the Immediate Hand of God. Nay some think, that these two Persons had Drank too
much, which occasioned that error for which they died. Because God presently
gives a charge, That neither Aaron nor his Sons should drink Wine, or strong
Drink when they went into the Tabernacle, lest they dye: -- And that they might
put a difference between holy and unholy, and between unclean and clean, verse
8, 9, 10. And if Drunkenness occasioned that error in these Young Men, which
procured their awful and sudden Death; then surely their Death, must needs be
a more Aggravated Affliction to their Pious Father. Verily the Death of two
such Young Men at once, and that in such an awful tremendous manner; must
needs be a very sore trial, a very grievous Affliction to holy Aaron. Well, and
how does Aaron behave himself under this sore trial? What, does he fall a
vexing and fretting, does he murmur and repine against God? No, nothing of such
a carriage, but the quite contrary. Our Text tells us, He held his Peace. That
is, he did not speak one murmuring discontented Word, he did not blame Divine
Providence; but patiently bore God's Hand, meekly and quietly submitted to his
holy Sovereign Pleasure, in this heavy and sore Affliction. And Aaron's
carriage herein, is fit to be Imitated by all Christians, under their sore
trials. Yea Aaron's humble patient carriage herein is upon Divine Record, for
our Imitation. For Whatsoever things were Written aforetime, were Written for
our Learning, Romans 15.4. From the Words therefore, we may Observe this,

DOCT. Namely, That Christians should quietly Submit to the Holy Sovereign Will
of GOD, under all the sore Afflictions they ever meet with.
Two PROPOSITIONS are contained in this DOCTRINE. [I.] That Christians do
sometimes meet with sore Afflictions. [II.] They should quietly Submit to the
Holy Sovereign Will of GOD, under all of them.

PROP. I. Christians do sometimes meet with sore Afflictions. Much need not be
said to prove this Truth, since undeniable experience renders it so evident,
and that in all Ages. The infallible Word of God also informs us; that Many are
the Afflictions of the Righteous, Psalm. 34.19. It Is through much Tribulation, we
must enter into the Kingdom of God, Act. 14.22. Yea and all that will live
Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy 3.12. Christians must
in some measure be Conformed to their Head, the blessed JESUS. He was a Man of
Sorrows, and acquainted with grief. He First Suffered, and then went into his
Glory. He First endured the Cross, despising the shame; and afterward sat
down, on the right hand of the Majesty on high. Christians must Suffer, before
they Reign. But I need say no more at present, to evidence the first
Proposition, viz. That Christians sometimes meet with sore Afflictions: but may
proceed to the,

PROP. II. They should quietly Submit to the Holy Sovereign Will of GOD, under
all of them. They should by no means quarrel with their Maker; nor contend with
the Supreme Sovereign Owner, and Governor of all things. They should not
foolishly tax, those depths of Providence which they cannot fathom. But instead
of this, they should quietly Submit, lie at God's Foot, adore his Sovereignty,
humbly Justify him in all his Proceedings; Patiently bearing whatever trial
he is pleased to exercise them withal.

Here we might Inquire,

Quest. What are those Considerations which should move Christians, thus
quietly to Submit to the Holy Sovereign Will of GOD, under all their sore
Afflictions? For Answer, There are several Considerations, which should move
them hereunto. I shall mention some of them, As,

1. All our Afflictions are brought upon us, by God's Providence. Indeed Sin is
the Meritorious procuring cause, of all Afflictions. Men are brought Low, for
their Iniquity, Psalm. 106.43. Your Sins have withheld good things from you,
Jer. 5.25. Yet God's Providence, is the Supreme Efficient cause of all our
Troubles: Amos 3.6. Is there any evil (that is, Affliction) in the City, and
the Lord has not done it? No, there is none. Isa. 45.7. I form the light, I
create darkness; I make Peace, I create Evil; I the Lord do all these things.
By Darkness and Evil, we are to understand Afflictions; and they are of God's
Creating. They rise not out of the dust, but are sent by him who dwells in
Heaven. If we meet with Sickness, it is of God's sending: He Wounds and Heals as
he pleases. If we are Disappointed in our Undertakings; this also is of God.
It Is of the Lord of Hosts, that People labor in the very fire, and weary
themselves for very Vanity, Hab. 2.13. It Is through God's blast, that men Earn
Wages, to put into Bags with holes. If Death snatches away our dearest
Relations; Death is but God's Messenger in so doing: for our Times are in Gods
Hand, Psalm. 31.15. Yea if the Spite and Malice of Wicked Men and Devils, are
never so plainly Instrumental, in bringing Afflictions upon us; yet we should
look on God's Providence, as the Supreme Governing Efficient cause of those
Afflictions. The Devil could not be a Lying Spirit in the Mouths of Ahab's
Prophets; nor hurt Job in his Person or Estate; nor Sift Peter with hellish
Temptations; nor so much as hurt an herd of Swine, without Divine Permission.
Satan can no more, nor longer, molest us; than God sees meet to permit him.
Though he is a Roaring Lion, yet he is in Chains. So Men can do us no more harm,
than what God is pleased to permit of. Even in the mischiefs which they
wickedly do to us, they are but Instruments of a Spotless Divine Providence.
Though Sabeans and Chaldeans had robbed Job; yet Job says, Chap. 1. v. 21. The
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the Name of the Lord. Judas
and Pilate, the Jews and Gentiles, were all Instrumental in Murdering the Lord
Jesus: With wicked hands they did Crucify and Slay him, Act. 2.23. Yet we are
told, Romans 8.32. God spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all.
It Was God, that brought Death upon his only begotten Son; though wicked men were
wicked Instruments of it. Shimei did wickedly, in reviling David as he did, yet
David says, 2 Samuel 16.10. The Lord has said unto him, curse David. What, did
God bid and command Shimei, thus to curse David? No, He forbad it, Exodus 22.28.
Thou shall not revile the gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy People. But David's
meaning was, God in his Holy, Just and Sovereign Providence, had permitted
Shimei thus wickedly to revile him. David took notice of God's Hand, even in
Man's Wickedness. When wicked men Afflict us, they are but Instruments of a
Spotless Holy Providence therein: they are but a rod in God's Hand, Isa. 10.5.
O Assyrian, the rod of mine Anger, and the Staff in their hand is mine
Indignation. Chap. 42. v. 24. Who gave Jacob for a Spoil, and Israel to the
Robbers? Did not the Lord, he against whom we have Sinned? Yes, it was he indeed.
If the vilest and wickedest of men, do in the most wicked manner that can be,
bring Affliction upon us; yet we ought to see and acknowledge God's Hand, even
in that Affliction. Yea those Afflictions which are counted the most Casual,
and Accidental as to men and means; are as truly the effects of God's Holy Wise
All-governing Providence, as any thing else in the World is. Hence, if a Man is
Cutting Wood, and his Ax flies off and kill's his Neighbor that stands by,
(Deuteronomy. 19.5.) God is said, to deliver his Neighbor into his hand, Exodus 21.13.
Well then, this Principle must be fixed upon our Souls, That all our
Afflictions come from Gods Hand, whosoever or whatsoever are the Means or
Instruments of them. God does what he will, in the Armies of Heaven, and among
the Inhabitants of the Earth: He does according to his pleasure in Heaven,
Earth, Sea, and in all deep places, Psalm. 135.6. It Is impossible we should
quietly Submit to God's Will, under our Afflictions; if we don't take notice of
his Hand in them. David says to God, Psalm. 39.9. I was dumb, and opened not my
Mouth, because thou did it.

Another Consideration is,

2. That God has Supreme Sovereign right and Authority, to do with us what he
will* We are often offended with Man, and that very justly, when they go beyond
their line, and do those things against us which they have no Authority for.
But God has made all things out of nothing; and he preserves them all. All
things are and were created for his pleasure, Rev. 4.11. God has made all
things for himself. And since he has thus made, and does preserve all things;
he must needs be the supreme Lord, the Sovereign ownner of them, Psalm. 24.1.
The earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; the World and they that dwell
therein. Therefore God may dispose of us and of what we have, as he sees meet.
He may do what he will with his own. We may not say to him, What do thou? or,
Why do thou so? God may do as he will, make what distinction he pleases
between persons. He may load one Man with Honor, and another with Contempt;
may make one very Rich, and another as remarkably Poor; He may continue to one
person his desirable Relations, and take the Like from another, in what way and
manner he will. For he gives none account of his matters. Men often meddle with
things, which don't concern them; God never does so. He may do whatsoever he
will, for he is Sovereign Lord and owner of all Creatures. As the clay is in
the Potter's hand, so are we in God's hand, Jer. 18.6. The thing formed, should
not say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Has not the Potter
power over the Clay, of the same lump to make one vessel unto honor, and
another unto dishonor? Romans 9.20, 21. The consideration, of Gods absolute
indisputable Supremacy and Sovereignity, should prevent all Murmurings against
his Providence. O Man, why do thou Murmur at thy Afflictions? did not God
bring them? yea surely he did, whatsoever were the Instruments of them. And
what, will thou find fault with God? Is not he Sovereign owner, and Governor
of all Creatures? May not he do what he will with his own? Then, whist, hold
thy peace, be still and know that he is God.

3. Our Afflictions are far less than our Iniquities deserve. Indeed the Saints
sometimes meet with sore troubles; the Holy Spirit calls them, grievous for the
present, Heb. 12.11. Yet the very best of men deserve far greater troubles,
than any ever met with in this World. All men are Sinners by natures, and more
or less by practice too. There is not a Just man upon Earth, that does good and
sins not, Eccles. 7.20. Now we are told, Romans 6.23. The wages of Sin is
Death. It Is Eternal Death and Misery. Therefore whatsoever trouble we meet
with, short of Eternal Death, short of Everlasting Vengeance, is far less than
our Iniquities deserve. It Is proper therefore to say, as Lam. 3.39. Wherefore
does a living man complain, a man for the punishment of his Sins? What, Living,
and yet complain? That is groundless indeed. For Sin deserves Death, therefore
while Life is continued, he does not suffer so much as his Sin deserves; and so
it is unreasonable for him to find fault. Indeed we may truly say with Jacob,
Genesis 32.10. We are not worthy of the least of all the Mercies bestowed upon us.
Under our greatest loads of misery, we may truly acknowledge with him, Ezra
9.13. God has punished us less than our Iniquities deserve. Under the sorest
trials we ever meet with, we may truly say, as Lam. 3.22. It Is of the Lords
mercy we are not consumed. Instead of Murmuring because our Afflictions are so
great, we should acknowledge it is a mercy, that they are not greater; even so
as utterly to consume and destroy us. If Christians would but seriously
consider such things as these; doubtless 'twould be very useful to prevent and
suppress in them, Murmuring and repining under their sorest Afflictions. O
Christian, why do thou find fault? Has God wronged thee in any thing? Is he
unjust? Has he laid heavier burdens on thee, than thou deservest? If he has
not, thou have no reason to complain of his dealings. And surely he does not
lay upon thee, more than thou deservest. For the Judge of all the Earth will do
right. For He Is righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works, Psalm.
145.17. While thou art out of Hell, thy Misery is not so great as thy Sin.
Wherefore then do thou find fault? shall we Murmur at the receiving of Ten
Stripes, when instead thereof we deserve Ten Thousand? This would be a
groundless Murmuring; and such are all the Murmurings of Men, against
Afflictive Providence. Instead therefore of Murmuring and Repining, we should
Justify God in all the trials he brings upon us, and say as he, Dan. 9.14. The
Lord our God is righteous in all his works which he does, for we obeyed not his
voice, So Mic. 7.9. I will bear the Indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him. Indeed, the consideration of our own sinfulness and
unworthiness, should stifle all Murmurings under trouble.

4. This God who brings on us all our Afflictions, is our God. All sincere
Christians, are in Covenant with God; they have taken God for their God. Our
taking God for our God, implies in it, our Promising and engaging to keep his
Commands. Moses does so interpret the matter, Deuteronomy. 26.17. Thou have avouched
the Lord this day to be thy God, and to walk in his ways, and to keep his
Statutes and Commands, and his Judgments, and to hearken to his Voice. Have we
taken God, to be our Covenant-God? then we have Promised to Obey his
Commandments. Now among other things he Commands us, To cast our burden and
our cares upon him, Psalm. 55.22. 1 Pet. 5.7. And to Commit our Ways to him,
Psalm. 37.5. He requires, that we should heartily Submit our selves, all our
ways and concerns to him, to be guided, governed, disposed of in his holy
Sovereign Providence, as he pleases. He requires, that we should be still and
know that he is God, that we should lie quietly at the Feet of his Sovereignty.
He cammands us, To be Patient in Tribulation, Romans 12.12. When we take God for
our God, we take him for our Portion; therefore whatever he takes from us, if
he does not cast us out of his Covenant-favour (which he never will do) he does
not take away our Portion; and so we have no ground to complain. When we take
him for our God, we engage to trust in his Promises, Obey his Precepts, and
submit to his Providence. When therefore we Murmur and Repine under trouble, We
act quite contrary to our own Covenant-Engagements: We break out Solemn Vows
and Promises. We practically say, We repent of our bargain, or
Covenant-Promises. We practically say, We would not have God to govern the
World; or to be sure, not to govern us and our affairs, since he takes such a
Liberty in dealing with us. We practically say, We know how to govern the World
better than God does; and that we would be at our own dispose and not at his.
Our Murmuring and discontent at Afflictions, is thus directly contrary to God's
Precepts, and our Covenant Engagements. Indeed, when we repine against the
passages of Divine Providence, we Sin greatly. Discontent is a greater Sin,
than many are aware of. It Is highly provoking to God, and often pulls down heavy
Judgments. Rachel was discontent for want of Children, Saying as Genesis 30.1.
Give me Children or else I dye. But indeed, Her having Children killed her: for
she Dyed in Travail with her second Son, Genesis 35.18. The Israelites Murmur for
want of Flesh, God gives them Flesh, but a Mortal Curse and Plague with it,
Numb. 11.33. While the flesh was yet between their Teeth, are it was chewed,
the wrath of God was kindled against the People, and the Lord smote the People
with a very great Plague. Psalm. 106.15. He gave them their request, but sent
Leanness into their Soul. Israel in a Murmuring Discontented fit, Wished they
had dyed in Egypt, or in the Wilderness. God was highly provoked herewith, and
took 'm at their Word, and said, That they should dye in the Wilderness, Numb.
14. chap. Six hundred thousand Persons dyed in the Wilderness, for their
rebellious Murmuring and Discontent. Since Discontent and Murmuring under
Afflictions, is thus contrary to our Solemn Covenant-Ingagements; thus
provoking to God, and dangerous to our selves, surely we should Watch, Pray,
and Strive against it.

5. God has Promised, That all the Afflictions which his Children meet with,
shall be Profitable unto them. God, can bring light out of darkness, and good
out of evil. He can call things that are not, as though they were. He can cause
those things to be for us, which seem to be most against us. The loss of
Joseph, was a great trouble to Jacob; yet 'twas leading to the preservation of
Jacob's Life, and of his Posterity's also. All things are possible with God,
nothing is too hard for him. And this God who can do whatsoever he will, has
declared, Romans 8.28. All things shall work together for good, to those that
Love God, and are called according to his purpose. Why does God Afflict his
Children? Is it because he hates them? Or because he grudges Prosperity to
them? No indeed, he Loves 'm as the Apple of his Eye. He does not Afflict
willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men, Judge. 10.16. His Soul was grieved
for the Misery of Israel. In all their Afflictions he was Afflicted. It Is, if
need be, that he Afflicts the Saints, 1 Pet. 1.6. It Is out of Love to their
Souls, and for their good. Whom the Lord Loves, he chasteneth, and scourges
every Son whom he receives. He Afflicts them, to purge away Iniquity, and take
away Sin, Isa. 27.5. He chastens 'm, That they may not be condemned with the
World, 1 Cor. 11.32. He does it for their profit, to make 'm partakers of his
Holiness, Heb. 12.10. God Loves his Children, even when he severely chastens
them, every whit as well, as he does at any other time. He never sends trouble
on them, but he designs it for good, and will do good to them thereby. He sends
Affliction, as Physic, as Medicine for the good of their Souls: Sometimes as
Sanative or Restorative Physic. He sometimes chastens them, to awaken them out
of their dull, drouzy, secure frames; to humble them for their past Sins; and
to get their hearts more intensely see, upon Spiritual things. He does it, To
Humble them, prove them, and do them good at their latter end, Deuteronomy. 8.16.
Sometimes he sends trouble, as Preventive Physic, to Prevent their Sinning.
Paul's Thorn in the flesh was sent, lest he should be exalted above measure, 2
Cor. 12.7. It Was to prevent his being Proud, and High-rounded. It may be God who
sees the falseness, and naughtiness of our hearts, takes away our Health,
Credit, Estate, Dearest Relatives, or some desirable Enjoyments or other; to
prevent our being Proud of 'm, or Trusting in 'm, or being too much taken with
'm. It may be God sees and knows, that great uninterrupted Prosperity, would be
dangerous, yea ruinous to us: therefore in Love to our Souls, he brings trouble
upon us. Surely then it is most unreasonable, that Christians should Murmur and
find fault with God; even then when he does consult, and is acting for, their
greatest even their eternal welfare. Considerate Persons, don't use to Murmur at
a faithful, skillful, compassionate Physician to Surgeon, when he does the best
he can, for their Health and Welfare. It Is more unreasonable, that Christians
should Murmur against Afflictive Providence, since God is thereby promoting
their Spiritual Welfare, and that in those methods, which infinite Wisdom and
Grace know to be the best. O Let us not push away that hand, which would heal
us; nor Spurn at those bowels, which compassionately yern for our Welfare.
Persons will sometimes suffer great Incisions to be made in their Flesh, yea,
suffer a Limb, a Leg or an Arm to be cut off, when it is needful to preserve
Life. Surely then, we should not grudge to part with what is as dear as a Right
Hand, or Right Eye; when parting with it, is necessary to preserve our Souls.
Compassionate Parents, often take from their Children those things that would
hurt them. God never takes any comfort from his Children, but when he knows
they had better be without it, than have it. He designs their good and
welfare, in every passage of his Providence to them; therefore they should
never Murmur at Adversity.

6. Very eminent Saints, have met with great and sore trials in former times.
God's Church, has been like a Bush on a light fire, though not consumed. Israel
went through the Red Sea, and a Terrible Wilderness; in their passage to
Canaan. The Saints that in all Ages have gone to Heaven, have first met with
sore trials on Earth. Yea some of the most Eminent of them, have met with very
great and remarkable Afflictions. And pray what art thou better than they? Why
should thou Murmur at Afflictions, since God is but leading thee to Heaven,
in the same path wherein his Saints of Old have gone thither? What, must God
cut out a new way to Heaven, for thee? Must thou Swim to Heaven, in a stream of
uninterrupted Prosperity; when the Saints of all former Ages, have been tossed
with Tempests, and passed through much Tribulation to the Kingdom of God? Pray
what reason is there for such a difference? What ground have thou to expect it?
Art thou better than God's eminent Saints of Old? They met with great trials.
The holy Prophets were Reviled, Persecuted, and had all manner of evil spoken
against them falsely for Christ's sake, Mat. 5.11, 12. The holy Apostles of our
Lord Jesus, were made as the Filth of the World, and the Offscouring of all
things; they met with various and heavy trials, 1 Cor. 4. Chap. We have a
Catalogue of Grievous trials, which befell those Precious Saints, of whom the
World was not worthy, Heb. 11. Chap. Especially from the 33. v. to the end.
Do thou labor under sore Bodily Pain or Sickness? So did Hezekiah (Isa.
38.1.) Epaphroditus, (Phil. 2.25, 6, 7.) and Job particularly, (Job 2.7.) Yea
and many other of God's Precious Ones. Have thou lost a fair Estate, and become
very Poor? It Was so with Job: He lost an Estate (I suppose greater than any of
us were ever owners of) and became Poor to a Proverb; As Poor as Job. Have thou
lost a Beloved Wife? Why Abraham buried his Sarah, and Jacob his Rachel, and
Ezekiel the Desire of his Eyes, Genesis 23.19. and ^5.19. Ezekiel. 24.16.18. Have
thou lost a Pious Husband? So did that Widow, Whose Ost Elisha multiplied, 2
King. 4.1. Have thou lost thy Children? Nay, have they been taken away in a
very Awful Manner? This is no more than God's Precious Saints have met with.
Eli's two Sons were Slain by the Enemy, the Uncircumcised Philistines, 1 Samuel
4.17. And his Sons were very Wicked too, (1 Samuel 2.12.) which must needs have
been an aggravation of his trouble. Aaron lost his two Sons, by the immediate
revenging Hand of God, as we have but now heard. Job lost All his Children,
even Seven Sons and Three Daughters, all in one day, and that in an awful
manner too. They were Feasting in the Eldest Son's house, and a Storm threw it
down, and killd 'm all, Job. 1.2.18, 19. David's Affliction in his Children,
seems yet greater. His Son Amnon, had been guilty of an Incestuous Rape; he had
Forced, Ravished his Sister Tamar; Absalom in revenge, Murders Amnon, 2 Samuel
13.14.28, 29. Thus David has one Wicked Son, barbarously Murdered by another.
Surely this must needs be a cutting and bitter Affliction, to David's holy
Heart. Yea afterward, Absalom himself dies in his rebellious Wickedness,
against his Royal Father. Alas, time would fail to mention, even the very great
and remarkable Afflictions, which many of God's precious Saints have met with.
And what are we, that we should think to escape? Surely God deals with us, but
as with his Children of Old, even when he lays his Hand heavy upon us, Heb.
12.7, 8. If ye endure chastening, God deals with you as with Sons; for what
Son is he, whom the Father chasteneth not? But if ye be without chastisement,
whereof all are partakers, then are ye bastards and not Sons. Indeed if we
Murmur at our Afflictions, we Murmur because God deals with us, as he used to
do with his Children; and how unreasonable would this be?

We may now proceed, to add a few particulars by way of

USE.
I. We should not think we are not God's Children, merely because we meet with
sore Afflictions. The Devil is a buisy Temper, a malicious Foe; he does
whatever he can, to disturb and distress the Saints. How often does he tempt
them, to doubt that they are not God's Children, merely because they meet with
Troubles? He Is ready to suggest to them, Surely if God Loved you, he would not
Afflict you thus; if he was your Friend and Father, he would not chastise and
distress you after this Rate. Thus he often tempts the Saints. But we should
not give place, to such vain groundless suggestions as these are. The Devil
himself, that Father of Lies, cannot suggest any thing more contrary to
Scripture than this; Namely, That Gods Afflicting a Person, is a sign that he
does not Love him. For the Scripture says expressly in so many words, Heb.
12.6. Whom the Lord Loves, he chasteneth; and scourges every Son whom he
receives. And our Lord Jesus says, Rev. 3.19. As many as I Love, I rebuke and
chasten. Let us not therefore give way to Satan's Temptations, but with the
Sword of the Spirit (even the Word of God) let us fight against them. Let us
firmly believe, that God may Dearly Love us, and yet Sorely Afflict us at the
same time.

II. We should not think, that the most Afflicted Persons, are allways the most
Wicked. As a Person's meeting with great Adversity, is no certain sign that he
is not a Child of God; So his meeting with greater Afflictions than others, is
no certain sign that he is a greater Sinner than they. God's love or hatred, is
not to be learned merely from the external dispensations of his Providence.
Eccles. 9.2. All things come alike to all: there is one event to the righteous
and to the wicked: to the good, and to the clean and to the unclean; to him
that Sacrifices, and to him that Sacrifices not: as is the Good, so is the
Sinner; and he that Swears, as he that fears an Oath. Job was an Eminently
holy and pious man, God himself says of him, Job. 1.8. There is none like him
in the Earth, a perfect and an upright man, one that fears God and escheweth
evil. And yet this remarkably holy man, met with distinguishing remarkable
Afflictions; scarce any in the World ever met with such trials as his were, all
things considered. The greatest Saints, have sometimes the greatest trials;
While on the other hand, those that are scandalously Wicked, are encompassed
with great Prosperity. The Ungodly do sometimes Prosper in the World, they
Increase in Riches, their Eyes stand out with fatness, they have more than
heart can wish, Psalm. 73.7, 12. Sometimes the Wicked, Live, become Old, yea are
Mighty in Power; they spend their days in wealth, and in a moment go down to
the grave, Job 21.7, 13. If we therefore see or hear, that some remarkable
great Affliction is befaln such or such an one; we must not presently say nor
think, surely he is a greater Sinner than others. If we should thus speak, we
should offend against the Generation of God's Children. We should but argue
like the Ignorant Barbarous Heathen of Malta, when they saw the Viper fasten on
Paul's hand, Act. 28.3, 4. Our Savior would not have us think, That the
greatest Sufferers, are allways the greatest Sinners; as we may plainly see,
Luke 13. begin. Possibly others may meet with greater trials than we; and yet
we be greater Sinners than they. Babylon did flourish, while Jerusalem lay in
Ruinous heaps. Prosperity is often fatning the Wicked for ruin, while Adversity
is ripening the Saints for Glory. Their light Afflictions which are but for a
Moment, shall work for them a far more exceeding, and an eternal weight of
Glory, 2 Cor. 4.17.

III. We should be humble, for our unsuitable carriage under our Afflictions.
Have not all of us, reason to reflect on our selves with shame; Referring to
our behavior under trials? Alas, it is difficult to keep our hearts in any
tolerable good temper, even in any condition. If we are in Prosperity, we are
apt to be Proud, High-Minded, to forget God, to be slothful and sluggish in
duty. If we are in Adversity, we are apt to Fret, Murmur and Repine. We Are
commonly too much like a Bullock unaccustomed to the Yoke, apt to kick and
fling. Alas, how often have we quarreled with the great God! How often have we
faulted the dispensations, of the Sovereign Lord and Governor of all things!
As often as ever we have been discontent and fretfull under Trials, we have
practically said, That we know how to Govern the World, better than God does.
We have practically charged the Great God, with doing amiss. For if he had not
done amiss, why then were we discontented at his proceedings? Men don't use to
be discontent, at what they think is done well. Indeed, Christians are too apt
to indulge discontent in themselves, but they are highly Criminal in so doing.
Our discontent does always carry in it, most shameful charges against the
blessed and Glorious God. Sedition in a State Mutiny in an Army, even rebellion
against the Supreme power; is justly reckoned a great Crime. But our Discontent
and Murmuring, is a sort of Sedition or Mutiny; in casting off Subjection to
Gods Government. And so far as we have been guilty in this matter, it becomes
us to be deeply humbled before God. Great self abasement very well becomes us,
for the stubborness and unruliness of our hearts, under the Discipline of
Heaven.

IV. We should endeavor, to carry our selves aright under Divine Chastisements
for the future. Our repenting of past miscarriages, should be accompanied with
Reformation for time to come. Let us therefore lie quietly at Gods Foot, under
all the blows of his holy Hand. Let us Justify him in all he does, saying as
Eli, 1 Samuel 3.18. It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good. We shall get
no good, by contending with the Allmighty Ruler of the World. If a mad Horse
will Kick and Fling, because he is Fettered, he does but Gall himself the more.
The more we give way to Murmuring under troubles, so much the more we dishonor
God, and hurt our selves. But the more quiet and submissive we are, so much the
more we please God and Profit our selves. Let us then heartily Submit to Divine
Providence, and be willing that God should have his own way. Let us sincerely
resign our selves, and all our affairs to his dispose; being heartily willing,
that he should do with us according to his Wise Sovereign Pleasure. Let us
heartily say as David did, 2 Samuel 15.26. Behold here am I, let him do unto me,
as seems good unto him. And especially under all our Afflictions, let our
main care be, to grow more Holy. Every Affliction is God's Rod, and his Rod has
a Voice; and the Voice is, That we should grow more Holy. He chastens us for
our Profit, that we might be partakers of his Holiness, Heb. 12.10. This in
general, is the Message, the Errand, on which every Affliction comes from God
unto us. If therefore we don't endeavor, to grow more holy by our Afflictions;
then we are shamefully negligent of Gods call. If our Neighbor sends a Servant
on an Erand to us, common Civility does oblige us, to hear what he says, and to
return a suitable answer. But we are more rude and vile, in our carriage to the
Great GOD; if we don't so hear his Voice in Affliction, as to grow more Holy
thereby. But if we do grow more Holy by Afflictions, then we shall have reason
to say with David, (though our trials are never so sharp and severe) as Psalm.
119.67, 71, 75. Before I was Afflicted, I went astray; but now have I kept thy
word: -- It is good for me that I have been Afflicted, that I might learn thy
Statutes: -- I know O Lord that thy Judgments are right, and that thou in
faithfullness have Afflicted me.

FINIS.

