A Discourse Concerning the Maintenance Due to those That Preach the Gospel: In
Which, That QUESTION Whether TITHES Are by the Divine LAW the Ministers Due, Is
Considered, And the Negative Proved.

By I. Mather, D. D.

Neh. 13.10. And I perceived that the Portions of the Levites had not been
given them: for the Levites and the Singers that did the work, were fled every
one to his field.

1 Timothy 5.18. For the Scripture says, Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that
treads out the corn: and the Labourer is worthy of his Reward.

Boston: N. E. Printed by B. Green. 1706.

To the HONORABLE, Samuel Sewall Esqr. John Foster Esqr. Edward Bromfield Esqr.
AND Jeremiah Dummer Esqr.

THAT Apostolical Man Mr. Thomas Gouge, has Written an Excellent Treatise which
bears this Title, The Surest and Safest Way of Thriving, to which Discourse of
his, those Great Men, Dr. Owen, Dr. Manton, Dr. Bates, and Mr. Baxter have each
of them Prefixed a Commendatory Epistle. The Author has these Remarkable Words,
I am (says he) verily Persuaded, that there is seldom any man who gives to the
Poor Proportionably to what God has bestowed on him, but if he does observe the
Passages of God's Providence toward him, he shall find the same doubled and
redoubled upon him in Temporal Blessings. I dare challenge all the World to
give one Instance, (or at least any considerable number of Instances) of any
Merciful Man whose Charity has undone him. But as Living Wells, the more they
are drawn, the more freely they Spring and Flow: so the Substance of Charitable
Men does oftentimes multiply in the very Distribution; even as the Five Loaves
and few Fishes did Multiply in their breaking and Distributing; and the Widows
Oil increased by the Pouring it out. This is the Assertion by that worthy Man
advanced: He confirms both that, and the Title of his Book with some Historical
Passages very observable: Particularly, he takes notice of what Writers have
reported concerning the Christian Emperor Tiberius, who was famous for his
bounty to the Poor. His Wife blamed him for it, Saying, That he wasted his
Treasure that way; To whom he replied, That he should never want Money so long
as in Obedience to Christ's Command he did Supply the necessities of the Poor.
Not long after he had made a Liberal Distribution to the Poor, he unexpectedly
found a great Treasure, and News was also brought him of the Death of one
Narses, a Man of vast Riches, who had given all his Estate to Tiberius. Famous
also is the Pleasant Story of a Charitable Bishop of Millain, who as he was
Traveling with his Servant, over-took some Poor People who begged an Alms of
him: Whereupon he asked his man what Money he had about him, who answered Three
Crowns, he ordered him to give them to the Poor; but the Servant thinking
himself Wiser than his Master, gave them but two of the Crowns: Not long after
some Noble men Meeting the Bishop, and knowing him to be a very Charitable Man,
appointed two hundred Crowns to be paid to the Servant for his Masters use; who
presently acquainted his Master therewith; who replied to him, Thou may now
see, how in Wronging the Poor thou have Wronged me, for if thou had given
them three Crowns as I appointed thee, thou had received three hundred,
whereas now I have but Two hundred. Mr. Gouge also relates concerning Mr.
Thomas Arnold a Citizen and Haberdasher of London, whose Stock at his first
Setting up was not great, but he was a Man of a Liberal Soul; and God did not
suffer him to loose by his Liberality. He was so blessed in his Calling as that
he attained unto an Aldermans Estate, and gave over his Calling in the City,
and retired into the Country, that so being disingaged from all Worldly
encumbrances, he might think much on Heaven, and the great concernments of that
World which is Eternal. Mr. Fleming in his Book of the Fulfilling of the
Scriptures, p. 466. reports concerning Mr. John Stuart who as Provost of Air in
Scotland, that he did excel in Liberality and Charity. Nevertheless, by reason
of the decay of Trade in that Place, he was reduced to some straits, which
occasioned some ungodly Persons to reflect on him for his bountifulness,
Saying, That his Religion had made him Poor, and that like a Fool he had given
too much to others, and now was in straits himself. Borrowing a little Money,
he went over into France, and at Rochel found that Salt and other Commodities
there were exceeding cheap. At his return home he vended his Commodities, by
which he Paid all his Debts, and Twenty Thousand Marks remained to himself.
Thus did he find at the long run that he was no looser by his being bountiful.
Such Examples (with many more such) are sufficient to induce men to abound in
Works of Charity. Nor is there any greater Charity than that in which the Souls
of Men are concerned, which they are in having the Gospel sent to them, and
duly Supported among them.

I have been importuned to Write on that Subject concerning the Maintenance Due
to the Ministers of the GOSPEL. In one respect it is more proper for me to
consider that Question than for some others: For I do not in the least therein
Plead for my self. I have (through the gracious Providence of GOD) an
Honorable Maintenance, and that too by the Voluntary Contribution of those
that attend on my Ministry, nor do I desire more: only I wish that all my
Brethren in the Ministry had as great (and greater) Encouragement for their
Labors as I have. And that the People throughout the Country might obtain Rich
Blessings from the Lord, as the fruit of their Liberality toward them who
Faithfully Labor in the Word and Doctrine.

The Apostle said to his Thessalonians, Touching Brotherly Love, you need not
that I Write unto you, for ye your selves are taught of God to Love one
another. So may I say to you my Honorable Friends, There is no need for me to
Excite you unto Liberality in Works of Charity. I know God has made you
Exemplary in doing Good with the Estates He has blessed you with, and for which
He will Reward you, it may be in this, to be sure in Another World. The
Dissertation which comes herewith, I give to you, as a Testimony of my
Respects. You may either Suppress it, or Publish it, or do what you Please with
it. So Commending you to the Grace of Christ,

I remain, Yours to Serve, Increase Mather.
Boston, October. 26. 1706.
A TESTIMONY Against SACRILEGE.
Having been Importuned to Write on that Subject of the Maintenance due to
those that Preach the GOSPEL, I shall deliver my Thoughts Concerning it, in the
following Conclusions.
CONCLUSION, I. An Honorable Maintenance is due to the Ministers of the Gospel.
FOR, 1. Their Calling is Honorable. It was said of Samuel, He is a Man of
God, He is an Honorable Man, 1 Samuel 9.6. To withhold from them a suitable
Maintenance is to make both their Persons, and their Work Contemptible. The
light of Nature teaches men to reverence those that are set apart for the
especial Service of God. The very Gentiles had a great Veneration for their
Priests. The Poet could say, Quis homo est tanta Confidentia qui Sacerdotem
audeat violare. We find in the Scripture (as well as in other Writings) that
the Heathen had an Honor for such men, and a great regard for their being
Honorably Maintained, Genesis 47.22. Ezra 7.24.

2. The Lord appointed an Honorable Maintenance for His Ministers under the
Old Testament. For besides the Tenths, the first fruits, and other offerings,
Thirteen Cities of Refuge with the Lands belonging to them was theirs. Now
although under the Gospel the matter out of which the Stipend of Ministers is to
be raised, and the manner of Payment is not as under the Law; Nevertheless, we
may from thence argue by way of Analogy; for so does the Apostle, 1 Cor. 9.13.
Do you not know that they which Minister about holy things, live of the things
of the Temple, and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar.

3. In the New Testament the Truth before us is expressly asserted. Especially
in that Ninth Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, where the
Apostle says, The Lord has ordained that they who Preach the Gospel, should
live of the Gospel, v. 14. This he had proved from the Divine Law which
appointed, That they who Minister about Holy things, should live of the things
of the Temple, as was showed. And, from the Law of Nations, v. 7. Who goes a
Warfare at his own charges! Soldiers do not use to go to War without Pay from
the State that employs them. Ministers are engaged in a Warfare, He that has
listed them in His Service will have them Supported therein. The Apostle
moreover proves his Doctrine from the Law of Nature, v. 9. Thou shall not
muzzle the Mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn. To do that is Cruelty
and Unmercifulness, which the light of Nature condemns. Reynold on Psalm. 110.
p. 478.
Now can any man suppose that God will make Laws to provide that bruit Beasts
shall be rewarded for their Labor, and that he will not have the Labor of
those that are His own Officers to be duly acknowledged? But besides this
Chapter in which the Apostle does enlarge on this Subject, there are other
Scriptures in the New Testament, which Command an Honorable Maintenance to be
allowed to the Ministers of the Gospel. What is employed in that Double Honor
which they are worthy of? Not only Reverence, but an Honorable Maintenance is
doubtless thereby intended, 1 Timothy 5.17. And when its required of them that
they should be given to Hospitality, 1 Timothy 3.2. This is necessarily implied:
for without a Liberal Maintenance it is impossible that they should be capable
of much Hospitality.

4. There is in the Scripture an express Rule concerning this matter, showing
not only that the Ministers of the Gospel should be Maintained, but how this
should be done; the Rule is that, Gal. 6.6. Let him that is taught in the Word
communicate to him that teaches in all good things. If not only some but every
one that is taught should communicate to their Teachers, not only in Some, but
in All good things, they would doubtless have a competent Maintenance; for (as
the Bedgick Annotators have well observed) to communicate of All good things,
is to communicate Liberally. Our Great Hooker says, That this way of
Maintenance is safe, and in the times of the Gospel most suitable to the Mind
of God, and that it will be sufficient, and abundantly satisfactory to answer
the end for which it is given, and he knows no Judicious and Pious Divine that
is against it, unless it be such who are taken too much with a Tang of a Popish
and Jewish way of Tything. Thus Mr. Hooker. By these things it is evident that
the Maintenance of Ministers is not Alms (as some would have it) but due Debt:
They receive it not as an act of Charity but of Justice. They have as much
right to it as any Labourer has to his hire. Therefore when Christ sent forth
his Disciples to Preach the Gospel, He said, The Labourer is worthy of his
hire, Luke 10.7. So do they that Labor in the Word and Doctrine well deserve
the Recompense given to them: They Work the Work of the Lord, as the Apostle
said that he and Timothy did. The Scripture calls their Maintenance, not Alms
but Reward, 1 Timothy 5.18. And, Wages, the Apostle tells the Corinthians, that he
took Wages of other Churches, to do them Service, 2 Cor. 11.8. One of the
Ancients observes, that when the Apostle says to the Galatians (who doubtless
were defective in their duty as to that matter) Let him that is taught
communicate to him that teaches; the Greek word is not (...), which signify to
impart, but (...), which imports a kind of Commerce, or Exchange of Spiritual
things for Carnal, And whatever People may imagine, that the Wages which
Ministers receive, is not comparable to what they give, if they are diligent
and faithful in the discharge of the Work incumbent on them, 1 Cor. 9.11. If we
have sown unto you Spiritual things, is it a great thing if we shall reap your
Carnal things.

This Assertion is denied by few that call themselves Christians. Some of the
first Reformers ( Bullinger and others) tell us that the Anabaptists in those
days, said, The Ministers in the Reformed Churches were no true Ministers of
Christ, because they took Wages for Preaching the Gospel. They pretended that
Christ forbad His Disciples to receive any thing for their Labor, because He
said to them, Freely ye have received, freely give, Mat. 10.8. But they
misinterpreted, and abused the Words of our Savior: Christ Himself was
Maintained by His Followers after He entered on His Public Ministry, and so
were the Apostles, Luke 8.3. Phil. 4.10, 15, 16. When therefore the Lord said,
freely give, He does not speak of Preaching the Gospel, but of healing the
Sick, and casting out Devils, raising the Dead, and the like miraculous gifts.
They might not take any reward for these, as the Prophet Elisha would not from
Naaman the Syrian. It was great wickedness in Simon Magus, when he thought to
get Money by the gifts of the Holy Ghost. The dissembling Jesuits will not
receive any Reward for their Sermons, pretending to observe that Precept Freely
give: yet they say, If not a reward but Alms be given to their College, (and
that comes into their Pockets) they will accept of it. Histor. Jesuit cap. 3.
citante Voetio pol. Eccles pr. 1. l. 4. p. 799. l. Turretin. vol. 3. p. 304.
A Learned man relates a pleasant Story of one whose Name was Greg. Roseph, a
Rector of a College, who when 500 Florens were offered to him as a reward for
Sermons he had Preached in the City, replied, he went by that Rule, Freely you
have received, freely give; but if they pleased to give Alms to his College,
they might. And accordingly, every Year, 500. Crowns were brought there, as
Alms for those that would have no Reward. The Relator says, the Jesuit was
like a Lawyer of his acquaintance to whom a Merchant applied himself,
complaining that he had a bad cause, but if the Lawyer would undertake to make
his cause good, he would give him such a Sum of Money. The Lawyer engaged to
plead his cause, but scrupled to take the Money from him, only told him, there
was such a near Relation of his to whom he might give what Money he pleased.

CONCLUSION, II. The Reformed Churches have many of them been faulty in this
Matter.
THE Alienating of Lands devoted to a use Religious, or of other Deodands has
been accounted a great Sin. The Gentiles were afraid to do it. Some barbarous
Heathen would not burn the Temples of Christians which were set apart for the
Worship of God. The taking away of Church Lands, and using them to purposes no
way Religious, has by many been accounted Sacrilege. This was generally done at
the first Reformation in Luther's time. And the Wisdom of Heaven appeared in
making the Avarice and Ambition of great Men, an occasion of Reforming that
Corruption in Doctrine by which the Papacy had defaced and ruined the true
Church of Christ. Many of those Lands by which the wicked Clergy had been
nourished in all manner of Luxury and Idleness, were not only taken from them,
but Fox Acts and Monuments. Vol. 2. p. 501.
Alienated from all Pious Uses, and given to Profane Gentlemen; which made
Calvin say, That they had taken the Purse from Judas, and had given it to the
Devil. Most true it is, that the Authors of many of those Donations to the
Church, were guilty of great Superstition in what they did; vainly imagining to
Merit thereby, and that the Ecclesiastics would Pray their Souls out of
Purgatory. Nevertheless, it may v. Zanch. in quartum praecep. p. 808.
be questioned, Whether that which has been devoted to the Service of God can
without danger be wholly alienated. The Scripture says, It is a snare to the
man that devoureth that which is holy, Prove. 20.25. Many of those who made
Donations of Lands or gifts to the Church, did with grievous Execrations,
imprecate whoever should convert what they had given to any Profane or Private
use. v. Hospinian de Templis. p. 127.
There have been severe decrees of Synods, and Laws of Christian Emperors,
condemning the Alienation of what has been dedicated. Some Judicious Writers
have thought that it was not without Mystery, that the Apostle writing to the
Church of Rome, says, Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? as
if there were a Prophetical Reflection on those that would abhor the Idolatry
of the Romish Church, and yet would themselves be guilty of great Sacrilege,
Romans 2.22. Mr. Mede thinks that this has been the chief Sin of the Reformation.
And he observes that as Adam was turned out of Paradise for his Sacrilege, in
laying his hands on that Tree which was Sacred to God: so many had been turned
out of their Paradises, ( viz. their fair Estates) for the same Sin. But to let
that pass, What Reformed Church can we mention, in which there has not been a
defect as to Encouragement to the Gospel, and a due Supportment of the
Preachers of it? It is true, That among the Reformed in France, their
Discipline requires that v. Eccles. discipl. of France chapter 1. p. 9, 10.
a yearly Pension be allowed to their Pastors, and that the Elders in every
Church shall Enquire, Whether the Wages appointed for the Minister, is duly
Paid to him: And that the Church in whose Service the Minister does finish his
days, shall take care of his Widow and Children. This notwithstanding, the
Synods there have often Admonished the Churches, and threatened them with
censure for their Ingratitude to their Teachers. As for the Church of England,
their dignified Clergymen have a Superfluous Maintenance, and some others who
have only Parsonages, enjoy that which is Competent and Honorable.
Nevertheless, in many great Towns and Cities it is otherwise: Oftentimes some
Gentleman has the Parsonage, and so the Tithes; when the Minister is but a
Vicar with a scanty allowance. In Torrington a great Town in Devonshire, where
I was a Preacher Forty-eight years ago, the Vicaridge was but 40 l. per Annum,
only the Civil State then, by an Augmentation made it to be 140 l. per Annum.
The like was in Barnstaple, and in many other considerable Towns and Cities.
Impropriations, (that is Minshaei dictionar.
when Spiritual Livings are Possessed by Temporal men, for whom they are
Improper) have a long time been complained of by many good men. There Fuller
church Histor. B. 11. p. 137.
are in England of Parish Churches, Nine Thousand two hundred and eighty four,
endowed with Glebe and Tithe: but of these, three Thousand and eight hundred
and forty five, are either appropriated to Bishops, Cathedrals and Colleges; or
Impropriations. There was a Noble and truly Christian design set on foot by
some Gentlemen in London, to redeem those Lands, and that the profits of them
should be for the Support of able Paeachers of the Gospel, as Lecturers; Twelve
Persons were concerned as Feoffees in Trust for the Management of this Affair,
that so a constant Preaching Ministry might be Maintained in Places of greatest
need. Of these Twelve, four were Divines, four Lawyers, four Citizens of
London; Men of great Estates and of Eminent Piety. The four Divines were Dr.
Sibs, Dr. Gouge, Mr. Offspring, and Mr. Davenport, then Minister in
Coleman-Street, London, but afterward in New England. Money from well disposed
Persons came in apace: And it is believed that if a check had not been given to
it, there would in a little time been enough to redeem all those
Impropriations, to the great advantage of the Evangelical Interest. But Satan
was disturbed at it, and stirred up some Eminent Instruments to obstruct the
Progress of it. A Bill was exhibited in the Exchequer-Chamber, by Noy the
Atorney-General against the mentioned Feoffees. In conclusion the Court
condemned their Proceedings as Dangerous to the Church, Pronouncing the Gifts,
Feoffments, contrivances made to the uses aforesaid, to be illegal; and
confiscated the Money obtained for this Pious use, to the Kings use, which was
King Charles I. The worthy Gentlemen who had concerned themselves in this good
Work, were in danger of being proceeded with as Criminals. Our Mr. Davenport
was not a little exercised in his Spirit about it. I find in a Bible of his now
in my Possession, the following Words, Written with his own Hand. Feb. 11.
1632. The business of the Feoffees being to be heard the third time, at the
Exchequer, I Prayed earnestly that God would assist our Counselors in opening
the case, and be pleased to grant that they might get no advantage against any
of us, to Punish us as evil doers; Promising to observe what Answer He gave:
which seeing He has graciously done, and delivered me from the thing I feared,
I Record to these ends. 1. To be more industrious in my Family. 2. To check my
unthankfulness. 3. To awaken my self to more Watchfulness for the time to come
in remembrance of this Mercy, which I beseech the Lord to grant, on whose
Faithfulness in His Covenant, I cast my self, to be made Faithful in my
Covenant. I. Davenport. Thus was that holy Man, and the rest of them brought
into no small perplexity for their being concerned in so Pious a design;
notwithstanding their having the advice and concurrence of emiment Lawyers in
their undertaking: such was the iniquity of those times. If the Reader would
know, who was the chief author of this trouble, Dr. Fuller has informed him
that it was Laud, the unhappy Bishop of London, and at last the Archbishop of
Canterbury. I am the rather induced to believe that Dr. Fuller does not wrong
Laud in his laying the frustration of this noble design at his door. For he had
an abhorrence of a design which tended to encourage Puritan Preachers of the
Gospel, although Conformists: he persecuted Mr. Shepard, afterward of
Cambridge in New England, for his Preaching a Lecture, notwithstanding he was
then a Conformist, not having searched into the Principles of the
Non-conformists, until after that. I have by me a Manuscript of Mr. Shepards
Written with his own hand, in which are these Words, Dec. 16. 1630. I was
inhibited from Preaching in the Diocese of London, by Dr. Laud Bishop of that
Diocese: As soon as I came in the Morning about 8. of the Clock, falling into a
fit of Rage, he asked me what Degree I had taken in the University, I answered,
I was a Master of Arts. He asked of what College: I answered of Emanuel. He
asked how long I had lived in his Diocese. I answered three years, and upwards.
He asked who Maintained me all this while, charging me to deal plainly with
him, adding withal, that he had been more Cheated and Equivocated with, by some
of my Malignant Faction, than ever was man by Jesuit; at the speaking of which
words, he looked as though blood would have gushed out of his Face, and did
shake as if he had been haunted with an Ague fit, to my apprehension, by
reason of his extreme Malice and secret Venom. I desired him to excuse me: he
fell then to threaten me, and withal to bitter railing, calling me all to
naught, saying, You Prating Coxcomb, do you think all the Learning is in your
brain? He Pronounced his sentence thus, I charge you that you neither Preach,
Read, Marry, Bury, or Exercise any Ministerial Function in any part of my
Diocese: for if you do, and I hear of it, I Will be upon your back, and follow
you where ever you go, in any part of this Kingdom, and so everlastingly
disinable you. I besought him not to deal so, in regard of a Poor Town, and
here he stopped me in what I was going on to say: A Poor Town! You have made a
Company of Seditious, Factious Bedlams, and what do you prate to me of a Poor
Town! I prayed him to suffer me to Catechize in the Sabbath days in the
Afternoon. He replied, spare your breath, I Will have no such Fellows Prate in my
Diocese. Get you gone, and now make your complaints to whom you will. So away I
went; and blessed be God, that I may go to Him. Thus Mr. Shepard. Let the
Reader Pardon this short Digression. I have mentioned these things to show that
even in England it self, which is said to excel other Reformed Churches in a
Liberal Maintenance of the Ministry* there has not been that Encouragement to
the Gospel, which ought to be. There are many Parishes in England, in which
there is no Preaching, because there is not a Competent Maintenance for a
Minister: See Mr. Stockton's Life, p. 193. And if I should speak of the
Non-Conformists there at this day, very few of their Ministers have (although
some have) an honorable Reward of their Labors. In Scotland the Tithes belong
either to the King, or are Appropriated to Gentlemen, so that the Ministry
there has but a small Portion out of them. In some parts of Germany, Zepper. de
Legib Mosaic. l. 4. c. 10 p. 365.
especially in Saxony, not only other Seculars, but Military Officers are
Maintained out of their Tithes, for which the pretense has been, That they who
defend the Church, ought in reason to be supported out of the Ecclesiastical
Revenues. Those Ministers who were the great Instruments of the Reformation
there, had but a very small Stipend, not at all proportionable to their Worth,
or to their Work. Luther says, That when he was a Papist, and saw what large
Revenues belonged to Ecclesiastical Persons, he marvelled that the Apostle Paul
insisted so much on the Maintenance due to the Ministers of the Gospel* But
after he was a Protestant, he did not wonder at it: For (says he) I saw that
although Men would be very Liberal to Antichrist, they would hardly give Christ a
Penny. Luther himself, the most eminent among all the Ministers of the
Reformation in Germany, notwithstanding his vast Labors, had but an
inconsiderable Salary. At his Death he thus Expressed himself, I thank God for
that He would have me live a Poor Indigent Person on the Earth. I have neither
House, nor Land, nor Possessions, nor Money. After his Death, his Wife and
three Sons were exposed to great wants, and neglected by those whom he had
particularly and highly obliged, which ingratitude has sometimes been mentioned
to the great dishonor of Protestants: as on the other hand, the Senate in
Zurick are renowned for their Gratitude toward Peter Martyr, in taking care of
his Posterity after his Death. But to proceed, the City of Geneva has been
famous for their Profession of the Reformed Religion; but not for their
Liberality toward the Preachers of the Gospel. When they first cast off
Popery, they disposed of Ecclesiastical Goods into Secular hands, contrary to
Calvin's Advice. That great Man had but a small Reward for all his
Indefatigable Labouts; nor indeed was he willing to have more. It is reported,
That a Gentleman traveling through Geneva, having heard much of Calvin, made
him a visit, supposing because of his Great Fame in the World, he should have
seen a Man with the Grandieur and Equipage of a Prince: but (says he) When I
saw him, Ecce Pannosus Seuex; he saw another John Baptist with a Coat of Camels
hair, and a Leathern girdle. When Calvin was told that People believed that he
was very Rich, and could not but have great Sums of Money by him, he would
smile at it, and say, If I cannot convince them of the contrary by my Life, I
shall certainly convince them by my Will at my Death. In his Will he gave ten
golden Scutes to the School, and as much to Poor Strangers, and the rest to his
only Brother; his whole Estate consisting in his Library, and Household goods,
not mounting to more than three hundred Crowns.

It must also be acknowledged, That in Poland some who passed under the Name of
Waldenses, were faulty in this matter: their Nobles Loc. Commun. cl. 4. c. 2.
p. mihi. 761.
(as P. Martyr reports) did insult over other Churches, pretending that they in
Poland only had true Ministers of the Gospel among them, because their
Ministers took no reward for their Labors. But the Bohemian-brethren
endeavored to excuse this fault by the Poverty of that People.

No People on the Earth have pretended to a greater Reformation in Religion,
than have the Churches in New England: But have not they been faulty in this
matter also? Reverend Mr. Davenport has sometimes said to me* That he had for a
long time doubted that New England was guilty of much Sin in respect of their
Strait-handedness toward the Ministry; and he told me, That he knew my Father
Cotton was of that Mind also, who would sometimes say Pleasantly (as another
has informed me) That there was nothing cheap in New England besides Milk and
Ministers. The first Ministers of the Gospel in this Colony, brought good
Libraries, and considerable Estates with them from England, which is a
sufficient Answer to that Objection, How are the People in New England, blame
worthy for their Strait-handedness toward the Ministers of Christ; whenas they
had such a Liberal Maintenance as to be able to give a Liberal Education to
their Sons? It is true, that some of them have done so. My Father had four Sons
brought up at the College, which if he had not had a Personal Estate of his
own, he could not have done: For he had not more than an 100 l. Per Annum
Salary from his People in Dorchester, which (although it is a larger Stipend than
what most Ministers in New England have, yet) without other supplies, is not
sufficient to support a Numerous Family, after an honorable manner. The like is
to be said concerning the very Learned Mr. Chauncey; He was constrained to
leave Situate because of his Family Straits. When enquired of, how it fared
with him, his answer was in these Words, Ut plurimun deest Panis. What a shame
is it, that so great a Man should be forced so to speak! And after he was
President of the College, the Country was not so grateful to him as ought to
have been. Nor could he have subsisted, if he had not received supplies from
England, out of an Estate which he left there. I have often thought that
Providence has frowned on that Society as an effect of the Lords displeasure
against this Colony, for their ingratitude toward that Eminent Man, who had
deserved highly from the Churches here, on more accounts than one. But those
Ministers who have had their Birth and Education in this Country, have not had
such supplies as their Predecessors were advantaged with: Some of them have
been forced to forsake the House of God, and go into the Field, and spend that
time there, which should have been spent in their Studies: And then their
Congregations must needs be poorly fed on the Lord's Day. If People neglect to
supply the Lamp with Oil, they will (as Origin observes) have but a dim Light.
Tenuitas beneficij parit ignorantem Sacerdotem* is an old Saying and a true
one. See Neh. 13.10, 11. The usual pretense for neglects of this Nature, has
been the Poverty of the Country. But God will not be Mocked with a pretense of
Poverty, Gal. 6.6, 7. For men to defraud God of His due, is the way to be Poor.
We find in the Scripture that he has punished His People with scanty Harvests,
because they did not take care duly to support His Worship among them, Hag.
1.9. It may be feared that it has been, in part, for this Sin, among other
Evils, that we have sometimes been punished with very scanty Harvests. That
famous Jew R. Solomon has this gloss on Numb. 5.10. He that does not duly pay
his Tithes, in the end, his Land shall yield him but a Tithe of what it was
went to yield* And does not the infallible Word of God assure us, That the
withholding more than is meet, tends to Poverty, Prove. 11.24. We have seen
it remarkably verified in the matter now under consideration. There was a Town
in New England blessed with two Ministers both of them of eminent Abilities and
Piety. At a Town-Meeting it was debated what Recompense should be granted to
their Pastor and Teacher for their Labors, in the Word and Doctrine; and it
was Voted not to allow more than Thirty Pounds to each of them, for their
Salary for one year, because the Town, they said, was so Poor, they could not
do more than that did amount unto. And Behold! What followed: The Lord saw it,
and was offended, and that very year after they had passed such a Sacrilegious
Vote, God took from them by destroying their Cattle, as much as was valued at
300 l. They that were so Poor they could not allow a Minister of Christ above
30 l. for a years Labor, could loose 300 l. in one Specie, in one year. On the
other hand, does not the Scripture say, Honor God with thy Substance, so shall
thy barns be filled with Plenty, Prove. 3.9, 10. Particularly, as to what
concerns the Ministers of God, the Lord Himself says, Mal. 3.8, 9, 10, 11. Will
a man rob God? yet ye have robbed me: but ye say, Wherein have we robbed thee?
In Tithes and Offerings. Ye are cursed with a curse: for ye have robbed me,
even this whole Nation. Bring ye all the Tithes into the Storehouse, that
there may be Meat in mine House, and prove me now therewith, says the LORD of
Hosts, if I will not open you the Windows of Heaven, and pour you out a
blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it. And I will rebuke
the devourer for your sakes: And he shall not destroy the fruits of your
ground; neither shall your Vine cast her fruit before the time in the field,
says the LORD of Hosts. The Experience of the Lords People has confirmed the
Truth before us, 2 Chronicles. 31.10. Since the People began to bring the Offerings
into the House of the Lord, We have had enough to Eat, and have left Plenty:
for the Lord has blessed the People, and that which is left, is this great
Store. Did men believe (and if they have a due regard to the Scripture, they
cannot but believe) That Liberality is the way to Plenty; and that the contrary
is the way to Poverty: they would be more openhanded. Moreover, That the
Allegation of the Countries Poverty, is but a pretended reason for the
Ingratitude which many are guilty of, is evident from this Consideration,
Namely, That although Tithes are not due to the Ministers of the Gospel by any
Divine Law, (as we shall under another Conclusion endeavor to Evince)
Nevertheless, That Proportion was never v. Wolphium in Neh. 11. p. 111.
thought to be an oppressive Maintenance, in the Nations where it has obtained;
whenas it is evident that less than one half of the Tenths would in many Towns
with us honorably support the Ministry among them. Are there not some Towns in
New England, in which the Inhabitants spend more at the Tavern, than they do to
uphold the Public Worship of God? That Estate which is consumed to nourish
Pride, Sensuality, Luxury, would be more than sufficient to support the Gospel.
How then can such People have the face to plead Poverty, as an Apology for
their Sacrilege?

CONCLUSION, III. There is something due to GOD out of every Man's Estate, and
the Tenth of his Incomes is the Least that may be supposed.
THat every man ought to consecrate a part of his Estate to pious Uses is
indubitable. Against this also some pretend their Poverty; but are they poorer
than the Widow, that had but two Mites, and yet cast them into the Lords
Treasury? Nor do such consider, that this is the way to have more. For God will
be in no man's debt; That which he has given, the Lord will pay him again. Such
Ventures have a rich Return, Eccl. 11.1, 2. Cast thy bread on the waters, for
thou shall find it after many days: Give a portion to seven, and also to eight.
There are few that will say that nothing is due to God out of their Estates:
but about the Quota pars, or how much they ought to give, there are disputes.
Some have thought that under the Gospel See Mr. Cotton on Cant. 8.11.
a fifth part of a man's yearly income should be devoted to Christ, viz. 200 l.
out of a Thousand, which is a fifth part; a double portion to the Levitical
Tenth, Cant. 8.11. If they whom God has blessed with great Estates should do
thus, they would honor God, and themselves too. The Pious Lord Harrington, did
not only give the Tenth of his Incomes to the Poor, but was other-ways
bountiful in many Charities. Mr. Gouge relates concerning that Religious
Gentlewoman, Mrs. Parthenia Lowman, that in the time of her Widowhood, She
devoted above a fifth part of her yearly Rents to Charitable Uses. Dr. Walker
reports concerning that Right honorable and religious Lady, the late Countess
of Warwick, that She enquired of a Divine, What proportion one is obliged to
consecrate to God out of his Estate? Who answered, That it was difficult, if
not impossible, to fix a rule that should hold universally; for that the
Families and circumstances of Persons must be considered: but that he supposed,
That if She gave a seventh part of her large Incomes, that would be sufficient.
She replied, That was not enough, and that She would not give less than a third
part; which She religiously performed accordingly: That made some People say,
That the Earl of Warwick, in giving his whole Estate to his Wife, (as by his
Will he had done) he left all his Estate to pious Uses. The mentioning of this
Noble example, is a Satyr on those who make a Will so Sacrilegious, as out of a
great Estate not to devote one Penny to pious Uses. What account will such
Persons be able to give to God at the Day of Judgment, who would give Him
nothing, that had given much to them! When we say that the Tenth of a man's
Incomes are due to God, we do not intend thereby, That they are due to the
Ministers of the Gospel; although what is given to them, as such, is given to
God. But so also is what is laid out in purchasing Bibles, and other Good
Books, designing thereby to promote the Interest of Religion in the World: and
that which is expended in building Houses for the Worship of God. And that
which is given to the Lords Poor, Prove. 19.17. He that has pity on the Poor,
lends to the Lord. The like is to be said concerning that which is devoted to
Colleges, or Schools of Learning, in order to the upholding of Religion, which
will be lost without good Literature. Well did Luther say, In Genesis fol. 399.
Si quid Scholasticis confers, Deo ipsi contulisti. Some Religiously disposed
Persons have done great Service for Christ, by Maintaining Poor Scholars in the
Universities, who have proved Eminent Instruments of Glory to God, and good to
His Church. Now that at least, the Tenth of a man's yearly Incomes should be
thus consecrated to the Lord, seems reasonable.

For,

1. The Argument insisted on by the profoundly Learned Mr. Joseph Mede,
deserves consideration. He reasons thus, God deals very favorably with men if
He requires only a Tenth, since that is the least part of our Goods, according
to the first division. For as Ten is the Periodical number of a fixed and
substantial nature; so when we proceed beyond Ten, we begin to make a new
division, as eleven is ten and one, twelve is ten and two, etc. Thus as the
number of seven is the Periodical number of Time, God has been favorable to
men in commanding only a Seventh part of Time, to be perpetually consecrated to
His Service: So in accepting the Tenth of our Incomes. Ten beginning the
greater number, and concluding the smaller, has been esteemed proper for Him
who is the first Cause, and the last end of all things. With a Seventh day He
is acknowledged the Creator, and with a Tenth part, the Possessor of all things.

2. Before the Institution of the Ceremonial or Judicial Law, the Tenth was due
to God. Abraham gave Tithe of all to Melchizedeck, Genesis 14.20. Which the
Apostle takes special notice of four or five Times in one Chapter, viz. Heb. 7.
Whence it has by Learned and Orthodox Divines, been concluded, That this Homage
and Tribute is due to Christ. Reynold, p. 473.
There never was any Type of Christ, as a Priest, but he received Tithes, and
that not in the right of any thing in himself, but merely in the virtue of his
Typical Office; so that originally they pertained to that principal Priest,
whose Priesthood is Eternal. And we find that Jacob, long before the Mosaical
Law, Vowed unto God, saying, Of all that thou give me, I will surely give the
Tenth unto thee, Genesis 28.22. We read not, that the Patriarchs did this by
virtue of any Positive Law: It seems then, that the light of Nature which
taught them to choose the Lord to be their God, directed them to consecrate a
Tenth of their Estate to their God. Among the Jews at this day, many of the
Richer sort usually give away a Tenth part of their Estate to charitable Uses.
Yea, and of old, the Gentiles did so. Hence is that expression of Plautus; Ut
decimam solveret Herculi: Pliny tells us, That the Arabs consecrated the Tenth
unto their god* Decima quaeque veteres dijs suis offerebant, says Festus. Many
other Testimonies concerning this, are cited by Dr. Spencer, de Legib. Hebr. l.
3. c. 10. p. 615. and by that Learned Reformer, John Wolphius, Comment. in Neh.
11. p. 110. V. Etiam Doughraei Analecta Sacra. p. 24, 25.
who does from thence conclude, that the Law of Nature has taught men thus to
practice. I conclude this Argument with Mr. Baxter's words, in his Discourse
concerning what part of our Estate we should devote to pious Uses. I confess
(says he, p. 97.) If we consider how Decimation was used before the Law by
Abraham and Jacob; and how commonly it was used among the Gentiles; and last of
all by the Church of Christ, it will make a considerate man imagine, That as
there is still a Divine direction for One Day in Seven, as a necessary
proportion of Time to be ordinarily consecrated to God, so that there is
something of a Divine Canon, or direction for the Tenth of our Revenues. Thus
Mr. Baxter.

3. A remarkable Blessing has attended the Estates of some who have devoted the
Tenth of their Incomes to pious Uses. Mr. Mede (before mentioned) when he was
by a signal Providence chosen a Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge, was so
affected with that Mercy, as that he solemnly Vowed to lay aside every Tenth
Shilling he should receive, and to dedicate it to pious Uses. See his Life, p.
66.
This he did religiously observe: And although his Salary was but small, such a
blessing attended him, as that he not only Lived comfortably and honorably,
but was able at his Death, besides Legacies to his Kindred, to give an 100 l.
to the Poor, and 300 l. to the College, in which he dyed Fellow. Mr. Gataker
speaks of an eminent Merchant and Citizen of London (Mr. John Parker) who at
his first Effectual Calling, among other things, then resolved by him, this was
one, That he would set apart every year a Tenth of his gain for the relief of
the Poor. For three or four years after his doing thus, he did not find that he
thrived in his Estate, yet he was not discouraged thereby, but still gave
Liberally and bountifully. And after some time, God abundantly blessed and
increased his Temporal Estate, that he would often profess, that he found those
Promises to be true; which affirm, That he that Scatters shall increase; and
that whoever Lends to the Lord, shall be repayed. v. Mr. Gouge of Good Works p.
50.
Mr. Gouge speaks of one whom he knew, who finding little coming in by his
Trade, resolved upon two things. 1. To be more careful in Sanctifying the Lords
Day. 2. To set apart the Tenth of his Incomes to Charitable Uses. Whereupon in
a few years he gained so much, as that he gave over his Calling, and Lived upon
his Rents. I shall mention one Instance more, and that shall be Mr. William
Whately, one famous in his Time: he declared privately to a Friend of his, that
he laid aside every Tenth Shilling of his Receipts for pious Uses; upon which
he found a wonderful blessing on his Temporal Estate. This Mr. Whately was
Minister at Banbury in Oxfordshire. The Minister is as much bound to devote the
Tenth of his Incomes to pious Uses, as any one of his People. That excellent
Man Mr. Thomas Gouge (who was translated to Heaven without any pain) reports
concerning his Father Dr. Gouge, who was Pastor of the Congregation at
Blackfriars in London, That from him he first heard that men of Estates, ought
to dedicate a Tenth part of their yearly Incomes to pious Uses, and he says,
that his Father did devote a Seventh part of his Incomes.

CONCLUSION, IV. Tithes are not by any Divine Law due to the Ministers of the
Gospel.
THE Learned Seldom in his discourse of the Civil Right of Tithes, has
endeavored to prove this. There has been a War in the Romish Church about this
Question, between the Canonists, and the Scholasticks; the former hotly
Maintaining, that Tithes are due to the Church Iure Divino; the latter, that
they are due only by Ecclesiastical Constitution: so says Bellarmine, and
other of their Learned men. Yet some of their Theologues, agree with the
Canonists: So does Annal. Tom 1. Anno. 57 S. 74.
Baronius. He pretends that Melchisedeck was a Type of the Ministers of the
Gospel; which is not true, he was a Type of Christ only. And that Abraham was a
Type of all Laics; and that therefore as Abraham paid Tithes to Melchizedeck,
so should all Laics to Ministers. It is strange that so Learned a man should
argue so weakly; but it must be imputed to the weakness of his cause. Among
Protestant Writers, Prelates, and Prelatical men plead hard for the Divine
right of Tithes as the Ministers due. Bishop Andrews, and Bishop Carleton, have
said as much for it as any that I have seen. But most of our Reformed Divines
maintain the Negative. So Loc. Commun. cl. 4. c. 13.
P. Martyr, De Redemp. l. 1. c. 16.
Zanchy, Ethic. l 2. c. 10.
Daneus, In Genes. Exercit. 80.
Rivet Ubi Supra p. 824.
Voetius: And to this we adhere. For,

1. The Appropriating of Tithes to the Ministers of the Old Testament was a
Forensic or Judicial Precept, as is rightly affirmed by Mr. Altar Damascen. p.
448.
Calderwood (who passes under the name of Didoclavius.) The Tenth was Gods
due, and he was pleased by a Positive Law to appoint that what should otherwise
have been given to Him, should be bestowed on those His Ministers. There was
also under the Levitical Law a Tenth to be given to the poor every third year.
We may not from thence conclude that under the Gospel it ought to be so. Among
the Jews the first fruits were to be paid to their Ministers, we cannot from
thence argue that the first fruits do by Divine right belong to the Ministers
of the Gospel. The Argument is as strong for one as for the other.

2. Our famous New England Hooker, observes that Gal. 6.6. is a clear Scripture
against the way of Maintenance by Tithes. There is an Acumen in his reasonings.
His Sarreg. pr. 2. p. 31, 32.
words are these. I conclude, 1. That this way of raising Maintenance appointed
in the Gospel, is far differing from that way of Tithing in the Law; nay, to be
tied Precisely to follow the one cannot stand with the other: for this is
raised out of all good things, the Person that is taught has: but the Tithes in
the old Testament, were out of the Seed of the Land, the Fruit of the Trees, or
of the Herd of the Flock, Lev. 27.30, 31, 32. Deuteronomy. 14.22, 23. 2. This
Maintenance is to be paid by all that are taught. But the Levites were to
receive the first Tenth, and to Pay the Tenth of the Tenth to the Priest, Neh.
10.38. So that if the Patrons of Tithing look at the command given to the Jew
as a Moral Law, they must conform themselves precisely to the Prescript Form
thereof. Ergo the Ministers must have a Tenth of a Tenth, and from them happily
who were never taught by them. As the Levites who taught in the particular
Synagogues, paid to the Priests who administered at Jerusalem. And hence it
follows that the way of Tithing in the Old Testament was not a Natural or Moral
Law. For no Law appointed in the Gospel is inconsistent with any Natural or
Moral Law of God, which this is. Thus Mr. Hooker.

3. Neither the Apostles nor yet the Primitive Doctors in the Church in the
next Ages to them, did ever teach that the Tenth is due to the Ministers of the
Gospel. Which if it had been a Moral Precept they would certainly have done,
and reproved the Churches for their not practicing accordingly. Although in the
Primitive Times the Deacons did (as some Writers affirm: Zanchy. p. 407.)
receive the Tenth for pious Uses, they did not appropriate them to their
Teachers. It is evident from the Apologies of Justin Martyr, and of Tertullian,
and by v. Epist. 9. and 10.
Cyprian's Epistles, that the Churches in those days had a Public Treasury,
which did arise out of the Voluntary Contributions of Christians, out of which
their Pastors were Maintained; and much was given to other Charitable Uses,
which the Deacons disposed of, but always with the Advice and Direction of
their Pastors. Also, some Christians whom God had blessed with great Estates,
did bequeath large Legacies to the Church: And Lands too, which yielded a
considerable Revenue to some Churches, but were taken from them by Persecuting
Emperors. Above all Churches, that in Rome was made rich, not only by Money,
but by Lands devoted thereunto. Thus it was Anno. 225. Some say sooner. Of
these things De Templis p. 216, 217.
Hospinian, and many others have Written. At this day Christians who Live in
the Turks Dominions are compelled to give the Fourth of all their Incomes to
the Sultan. The Roman Emperors had the Tenth. v. Alex. ab Alexand. dier.
genial. lib. 4. c. 10.
Nor were Tithes settled on Ecclesiastics before Constantine the Great: And
then there was quickly a very unhappy effect of it. For the Tenth like the
Tenth wave overwhelmed the Church with Superstition and Profanity, occasioned
by the Grandeur, Ambition, and Luxury of the Clergy. Some Writers affirm, that
when Constantine by an Edict gave the Tenth to Ecclesiastics, a voice was
heard in the Air, saying, Hodie venenum seminatum est in Ecclesiam. This gave
ground to that complaint, Religion brought forth Riches, and the Daughter
devoured the Mother. The Emperor Charles the Great, ordered that the Tithes
should be distributed into four Portions; of which the Bishop was to have the
first, other Clergy men or Scholasticks the second, the Poor the third part,
and the fourth was assigned for the building and repairing Temples or Schools.
v. Stuckij Antiq. Convival. l. 1. p. 49.
The Tenth in most Places will afford not only a sufficient, but a superfluous
Maintenance. On which account those Ministers who plead for it all expose
themselves to censure. The Renowned Dr. Owen says Exposition. Heb. 7. p. 127.
That to imagine the Law of Maintenance is taken away, is the greatest folly,
and against express Scripture; but he asserts, That there is a change as to the
way of Maintenance under the Gospel, and pleads for Voluntary Contribution;
judging that to be the most honorable, alleging, That Princes have been
Maintained in that way. No man doubts, but that in the Primitive Times, v.
Stuckium ubi Supra.
when there was no Christian Magistrates, the Preachers of the Gospel were
Supported in that way. Tertullian Apol. c. 39.
says, Nemo compellitur sed sponte confert. And if Christians were now so
Liberally disposed as they ought to be, that way would be most Eligible. But
men are not so forward to build the Church as the Lords People of Old were to
build the Tabernacle, whose Liberality in Freewill Offerings was restrained by
a Proclamation, Exodus 36.5, 6. And there was a Time when Christians were so
Profuse in their Donations to the Church, as that the Emperors were forced to
give a stop thereunto. But in these days there is no need of a Statute of
Mortmain, to prevent such things. Some indeed who excel in the Grace of
Liberality, do not only according to, but beyond their ability; when others of
great Estates, (as Mountains which have Gold in them are commonly barren) do
very little, it may be nothing at all. In too many Places in New England, a
great part of those who are taught, would communicate nothing to him that
Teaches them, were they not by the Civil Law compelled unto it. And in some
Plantations, they have no Gospel among them, nor are ever like to have, if from
their Hearers, the Preachers be Supported in no other way than that of
Voluntary Contribution. They would find Luther's saying true, Duriter profecto
et misere viverent Evangelij Ministri, si ex libera populi Contributione essent
sustentandi. It is a doleful thing, that there should be Towns in New England,
able to Support the Preaching of the Gospel, and yet not one man found therein
willing to give Entertainment to a Minister of Christ. Mr. Norton (that great
Light, first of Ipswich, and afterward of Boston) says, Respons. ad Apollon
p. 145.
Praestat Ministros vivere ex certis et Statis stipendijs quam ex mera
Voluntaria Contributione: It is better that Ministers should be Maintained by
Stated Stipends, than by mere Voluntary Contribution. He produces weighty
Reasons for the confirmation of this Thesis, and so did Zanchy In 4 Praecept.
p. mihi. 810.
before him, whose Arguments Mr. Norton has improved. In Holland their
Ministers are Maintained out of a Public Treasury, which the Political
Magistrate takes care of. The first Reforming Ministers in that Province, and
in Zeland desired that it might be so; in which Voetius Eccle (...) 1. l. 4. p.
804, and 823.
says, they had Calvin's Advice. Doubtless, if in our Country Towns all Public
Charges were put into one common Treasury, and the Ministry Supported out of
it, (as in one Town of late I hear it is so) that would be less invidious, and
tend to Silence the clamours of ill affected Persons, who grumble at making a
distinct Rate for the Minister. Where there are Christian Magistrates, it is
certainly incumbent on them to see that the Gospel is duly encouraged, and the
Faithful Preachers of it honorably Maintained. I shall therefore conclude with
the last General Synod, of the Elders and Messengers of the Churches throughout
this Colony, who met at Boston, in the year 1679. Whose words are these. It is
incumbent on the Magistrate to take care these Officers have due Encouragement,
and Maintenance afforded to them. It is high Injustice and Oppression, yea a
Sin which Cries in the Lord's Ears for judgment, when Wages is withheld from
Faithful, and Diligent Laborers, Iam. 5.4. And if it be so as to those that
Labor about Carnal things, much more as to those that Labor Day and Night
about the Spiritual and Eternal Welfare of Souls, 1 Cor. 9.11, 13, 14. And the
Scripture is express that not only Members of Churches, but all that are Taught
in the Word, are bound to Communicate to him that Teaches, and that in all
good things, Gal. 6.6. Luke 10.7. 1 Timothy 5.17, 18. If therefore People are
unwilling to do what Justice and Reason calls for, the Magistrate is to see
them do their duty in this matter. Wherefore Magistrates, and that in
Scriptures referring to the Days of the New Testament, are said to be the
Churches Nursing Fathers, Isa. 49.23. For that it concerns them to take care
that the Churches be fed with the Bread and Water of Life. The Magistrate is to
be the Keeper of both Tables; which as a Magistrate he cannot be, if he do not
Promote the Interest of Religion, by all those Means which are of the Lord's
appointment. And we find in Scripture, That when the Lord's Ministers have been
forced to neglect the House of God, and go every one into the Field, (as too
much of that has been among us) because the People did not allow them that
Maintenance which was necessary; the Magistrate did look upon himself as
concerned to effect a Reformation, Neh. 13.10, 11.

FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 15. line 1. dele That.

Page 51. line ult read Survey.

Advertisement.
THERE are Prepared for the Press, several SERMONS, being Meditations on DEATH:
Wherein is showed,

I. That true Believers on CHRIST are often afraid of DEATH, but that they have
no just Cause to be so.

II. That Good Men as well as others may be taken out of the World by a Sudden
DEATH.

III. That not Earth but Heaven is the Christians home.

By the Author of this Discourse.


