A Faithful Man, Described and Rewarded. SOME Observable and Serviceable
Passages in the LIFE and DEATH OF Mr. Michael Wigglesworth. Late Pastor of
MALDON; Who Rested from his Labors, on the Lord's Day, June 10 th. 1705. In the
Seventy Fourth year of his Age. AND MEMORIALS of PIETY, Left behind him among
his Written EXPERIENCES. With a Funeral Sermon Preached (for him) at Maldon;
June 24. 1705.

By Cotton Mather.

Factitium Vobis Sermonem in Omni forma Sanctitatis Dei Servus Exhibuit.

Bern. in obit. Humb. Boston: Printed by B. Green, for Benj. Eliot, at his Shop
under the West End of the Townhouse. 1705.

TO THE Church and Congregation AT MALDON in New England.
THERE is often found a truth in that which has been by many observed, viz.
That the Names of those who lived much in Heaven whilst they were on Earth,
Live on Earth after they are in Heaven. We see an Instance of it in your
Faithful Teacher, Mr. Wigglesworth, who now, is not, for God has taken him. As
it was said of righteous Abel, being dead he yet speaks; so dos your deceased
Pastor Speak to you, as by his Divine Poems, which are (I suppose) in many of
your Houses, so by the SERMONS which he Preached to you, which will doubtless
Live in some of your Hearts as long as you your selves shall Live: and by that
Holy Example which he set before you. For as the Apostle said to his
Thessalonians, You are Witnesses how holily, and justly, and unblameably he
behaved himself among you: And in the Memorials of his Piety here put into your
hands, his Example will still be Living among you.

The Providence of God was in several things Remarkable toward him, e. g. In
his being favored with a Learned Education, after his Father had designed
otherwise concerning him, (as it also was with Mr. Wigglesworth's Tutor, our
famous Mitchel, who proved a great blessing to all the Churches in
New England:) And in his being restored to such a measure of Health, as to be
able to Preach for many years twice every Lord's Day, after he had been for a
long time in a Languishing condition. And although in some of the Reformed
Churches, they do not permit a Minister of the Gospel to practice as a
Physician, left he should thereby be too much diverted from his Sacred
Employments, one of these Callings being ordinarily as much as one man can
duly attend; nevertheless the Lord enabled him to manage both with good
Success: So that in being bereaved of him you have lost an able Physician both
for Soul and Body. Nor are the People in Maldon the only Persons who have
sustained a loss by his Death.

He was moreover in his young years a blessing as a Tutor in the College. It
was an honor to Corderius, that the great Calvin had been his Scholar, and to
Mr. Parkhurst, that the Learned Juel had been under his Instruction and
Tuition, who afterward took great delight to behold the Sparkling of that
Diamond, which himself had first pointed, as one Expresses it. Thus some who
were once the My Brother Eleazer Mather, Mr. John Eliot, Mr. Shubael Dummer,
and Mr. Samuel Torrey, etc.
Pupils of this worthy man have proved Eminent in these Churches. It will not
at all add greatness or respect to his Name for Me to say, That I was his
Scholar at my first Admission into the College, above three and fifty years
since; but I have on that account reason to honor his Memory.

The Town of Maldon in England (from which yours receives its Name) was famous
for the great Men who sometimes dwelt there; it having been the place where
some of the British Kings had their Residence. The Lord grant that your Maldon
may be famous for the good Men that shall be in it. And it will be so, if the
Lord help you to follow the Doctrine, and Example of your late Pastor, as he
followed Christ. It is the duty of Churches not to forget, but to Remember
those that have spoken to them the Word of God, whose Faith they are to follow,
considering the End of their Conversation. This will be the way for you to
obtain from the Lord JESUS CHRIST (whose gift it is) another Pastor after his
own heart, who shall Feed you with knowledge and Understanding. To His Grace
and Guidance I commend you, and rest,

Yours in the LORD; Increase Mather.
Boston, July, 11th. 1705.
A Faithful Man Described and Rewarded. A SERMON Preached at MALDON, on June
24. 1705. Occasioned by the Departure of that Faithful and Aged Servant of GOD;
Mr. Michael Wigglesworth.
REV. II. 10 Be thou Faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life.


IT IS the Voice of our Glorious Commander uttered from Heaven unto us. Every
Follower of the Lord JESUS CHRIST upon Earth is concerned in the Voice. It Is
Extensive like the Voice of the Last Trumpet; And it is pity but it should be
as Powerful.

A Church at SMYRNA was one of the Seven, to which our Enthroned Lord, most
graciously directed Seven Epistles. They that look for a Prophetical
Interpretation of the Seven Epistles, as answering to Seven Periods in the Line
of Time from our Lords Ascent unto His Advent, may help themselves through their
Hard Task as well as they can. The Historical Interpretation suffices the more
Judicious Interpreters. Our Lord, going to bid His Beloved John write the
Things which were to be hereafter, bids him first of all to write the Things
which then were. Our Lord would, [And how agreeable the method!] first Instruct
and Reprove and Reform His People; and then communicate unto them His Divine
and Secret Purposes. The Apostle, that had been a Preacher to the Churches in
the Lydian Asia, now does the part of a Writer to them.

One of them was at Smyrna. Ecclesiastical Story tells us, That an horrid Storm
of Persecution befell the Church at Smyrna, soon after our Lord had sent unto
them the Praemonitions of it; A Storm, which was not assuaged until the
Martyrdom of that brave old man, their Pastor Polycarp. A Letter of that Church
yet in our hands, does relate, How cruelly the Martyrs of Smyrna were
tormented, and after all their Torments they were thrown unto Wild Beasts to be
devoured. And we find, that these Cruelties were pushed on, by the Envies and
Slanders of the Jews, as well as by the Savage Fierceness of the Gentiles.

Our Lord Foretold, unto the Christian Smyrnians, the coming of these Trials
upon them. That He might Fortify them for their Trials, Behold, an
Encouragement! The most Glorious, the most Mavelous, the most Engaging
Encouragement, that ever was offered unto the Children of men. Generals do
Encourage their Soldiers, with the Best they can do for them; Riches, if they
Live; Honors, whether they Live, or Die. But we belong to the Armies of* Him,
whose Name is, King of Kings, and, Lord of Lords. No King or Lord, could ever
Encourage with such Assurances as ours gives to us. We are animated now, to
Overcome all Discouragements in the conflict of Christianity. A CROWN OF LIFE!
Methinks, it should be enough to overcome us, and make us Overcome all our
Difficulties.

We have before us, a DOCTRINE, to Encourage us; a DOCTRINE, which may not only
Encourage us, but even Astonish us.

Our Lord JESUS CHRIST, will with a Glorious Crown of Life most Gloriously
Reward them, who Faithfully adhere unto Him and His Interests, as long as they
Live.

There are two very Noble Subjects now to be discoursed on; Subjects that call
for our most Serious Meditations, our most Rapturous Contemplations. The One
is; What our Lord Jesus Christ Requires of us. the Other is, What our Lord
Jesus Christ Reserves for us.

I. That which our Lord Jesus Christ has Required of us; It Is, That we be
Faithful unto Him, and unto His Interests, and this, as long as we Live in this
World.

Now, First; Faith in the Lord JESUS CHRIST, is presupposed in them that Walk
in the Name of the Lord JESUS CHRIST. It is to be presupposed, That we Believe
in the Lord Jesus Christ, and Rely on Him, for Wisdom, and Righteousness, and
Holiness, and Redemption. Our Lord Jesus Christ commands this; Joh. 20.27. Be
not Faithless, but Believing. It Is for this cause, that the People of God, are
so often styled, The Faithful, in the Scriptures of God. The Spirit of God has
wrought in them, the Faith to Receive the Lord JESUS CHRIST, and His Great
Salvation, as tendered in the Gospel. But Then, there is a Faithfulness to the
Lord JESUS CHRIST, which must attend and assert our Faith in Him. This
Faithfulness, is not so much Faith, as Obedience. It Is not our Trust in Him;
It Is our Trustiness to Him. It Is what the Word of God calls, Good Fidelity.
Allegiance to the Lord Jesus Christ, and Perseverance in our Allegiance, is
called for, in this call; Be thou Faithful unto Death.

First. He that would be an Happy Christian, must be a Faithful Christian.

But then; Who is the Faithful Christian? We will Describe him; God grant, we
may answer the Description; God grant, the Description and the Character may be
our own. It very much belonged unto ONE, that lately Shone among us.

A Faithful Christian is One, who has the Heart of a Christian, as well as the
Name of a Christian. He is not merely, Dealbatus nomine Christiani, as Austin
Expresses it; Superficially Whitened with the Name of a Christian. Of such an
one, [and, The Father of the Faithful:] We read, Neh. 9.8. Thou foundest his
Heart Faithful before thee. Faithfulness is opposed unto Falsehood. Every
Christian does profess himself to be, A Lover of the Lord Jesus Christ; and, A
Servant of the Lord Jesus Christ. A Faithful Christian, is one that is not
False in his Profession. He Loves the Lord Jesus Christ; and it is, In
Sinceriy. He Serves the Lord Jesus Christ; and it is, With a Perfect Heart and
a Willing Mind. They that are Faithful to the Lord Jesus Christ, can say, as
Genesis 42.11. Thy Servants are True men. A Faithful Christian is one who is
truly, what he Seems to be.

And hence, it must be a Stroke in the Pourtraiture of a Faithful Christian,
That he does Practice, what he does Profess. He will not Say one thing, and Do
another, in the matters of Religion. He is none of those, whom our Lord sets
that black mark upon, They Say and they Do not. We read, 1 Samuel 2.35. I will
raise me up a Faithful Priest, and he shall Do according to that which is in
mine Heart, and in my Mind. The Faithful Christian is one to whom our Lord may
say, Well Done, Good and Faithful Servant. And he is one to whom all may say,
Thou do Faithfully whatever thou do. The Difference between a Talker, and
a Doer; the Difference between Talking Well, and Well-Doing: This is the
Difference between the Formal Christian, and the Faithful Christian.

We will carry on the Lovely Representation. A Faithful Christian, is a
Christian Mindful of the Obligations, which are laid upon him, to Glorify the
Lord Jesus Christ. There is no Christian, but what is under many Bonds and Vows
to Glorify the Lord. The Faithful Christian is one, who does not Forget the
Vows of God that are upon him. The Study, and the Language of the Faithful
Christian is that, Psalm. 116.14. I will pay my Vows unto the Lord. A Christian
has Entered into Covenant with God. A Faithful Christian is a Covenant-Keeping
one; he is one who may say, Lord, I have not forgotten thee, nor have I dealt
falsely in thy Covenant. Having been Washed in the Baptism of the Lord, the
Faithful Christian resolves; Let me now never Defile my self with Sin, from
which I have been Purified; Let me now always cleave to that God, the Father,
the Son, and the Spirit, unto whom I have been Dedicated; Let me now carry on
the Wars of the Lord, under the Banners, to which I have been Listed. Having
been Sitting at the Table of the Lord, the Faithful Christian resolves, I am
now under an Oath to observe the Law of my Lord Jesus Christ: I have taken the
Sacrament upon it, that the Commandment of my Lord Jesus Christ shall always
give Awe and Law unto me: I have Sworn the Death of my Sin, that my Soul may
Live, O my Soul, How can thou do so great a Wickedness, as to Sin against God?

Moreover; A Faithful Christian, is a Christian careful to make a due
Improvement of the Talents, which the Lord Jesus Christ has committed unto him.

A Faithful Servant is one who sticks to the Business which his Master has
given him to do: Even such is the Faithful Christian: And the Lord Jesus
Christ, is He, of whom the Faithful Christian says, He is my MASTER; To Him I
still remember my self accountable. There is no Christian, but what is be
trusted with Talents, by and for the Lord. Our OPPORTUNITIES to Render, or
Procure, ACKNOWLEDGMENTS unto our Lord JESUS CHRIST; These are our TALENTS. A
Faithful Christian, is very Sollicitous, that he may know and use his precious
Opportunities, and that the Lord may have Service from him in them all. Hence,
of him that made a Good use of his Talents, we read, Matthew. 25.21. He is a
faithful Servant. The Soul of a Faithful Christian is mightily concerned upon
it. He often thinks; What Good may I do? What are my Capacities to do Good! How
shall I do the Good whereof God has made be capable? Which way shall I be
Serviceable? Do but Inform him, how he may be Serviceable, you need say no
more: He will thank you for the Information: He will thankfully and cheerfully
set himself to do all the Good that ever he can.

It follows; A Faithful Christian, is a Christian that Labors to acquit
himself well in the several Relations, wherein the Lord Jesus Christ has placed
him. The Place wherein God sets a man, is greatly to be considered, by one that
would be found A Faithful Man. Are we in Public Relations? We read of a
Preacher; Jer. 23.28. Let him speak my word Faithfully. We read of a Ruler;
Neh. 7.2. He was a Faithful Man, and feared God above many. Are we in Private
Relations? We read of Children; Tit. 1.6. They must be Faithful Children. We
read of Servants; Tit. 2.10. They must show all Good Faithfulness. Accordingly;
A Faithful Christian, however he may stand Related, he considers with himself,
What may my Lord Jesus Christ Expect of me in this Relation? And he endeavors
to conform himself unto the Expectations of the Lord.

Finally; A Faithful Christian, is a Christian that will own the Truths, and
Ways, and Cause of the Lord Jesus Christ, whatever may be the Trouble or
Hazard of doing so. What is a Faithful Christian, but a Faithful Witness for
the Lord Jesus Christ? The Truths of the Lord Jesus Christ; a Faithful
Christian will never Deny any of them. The Ways of the Lord Jesus Christ; a
Faithful Christian will never Desert any of them. Our Lord Jesus Christ has a
Church and People in the World; a Faithful Christian will stick to that People,
and never betray them, never forsake them. Whatever Interest of the Lord Jesus
Christ calls for the Testimony of a Christian, a Faithful Christian will
openly, zealously, courageously appear, to bear his Testimony. We read, Hos.
11.12. Judah was Faithful with the Saints. What is the meaning of that? There
were Faithful Ministers of God, who could not conform to the Superstitions
Established by Jeroboam. These, with other Saints of their Conscientious
Principle, were kindly entertained by Judah: Judah stood by those
Non-conformists of Israel. This was to be Faithful with the Saints.

Thus are we to be Faithful. But, How Long must we be so?

Secondly. A Faithful Christian must maintain his Faithfulness as long as he
Lives: He must never suffer his Faithfulness to fail.

Faithfulness unto Death, implies, That we must be Faithful unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, until the very End of our Lives. As the Faithful man said, Psalm.
119.112. I have inclined my heart, to perform thy Statutes always, even unto
the End; Thus, We must be Faithful unto the Lord, and the Statutes of the Lord,
Always, even unto the End. A Christian is the perpetual Servant of the Lord
Jesus Christ; He has his Ear bored for Him: He must be Faithful unto his Lord,
until he Dies. It was proposed; Psalm. 146.2. While I Live will I praise the
Lord; I will sing praises unto my God while I have any Being. Even so; While we
Live, we must be Faithful unto the Lord, and Serve Him Faithfully while we have
any Being. How Resolute was he? Job 27.3, 4. All the while my Breath is in me,
and the Spirit of God is in my Nostrils; my Lips shall not speak wickedness,
nor my Tongue utter Deceit. Thus, While our Breath is in us, and the Spirit
which God gives us is in our Nostrils, there must be with us, nothing but
Faithfulness; we must never deal Deceitfully with the Lord. Our Song must be
that; We will Serve our Lord in Holiness and Righteousness and Faithfulness
before Him, all the Days of our Life. I do not know, but that the famous
Polycarp, [the Angel of the Church in Smyrna,] might have in his mind, this
very word, Be thou Faithful unto Death, when he so answered those that pressed
him to Renounce Jesus Christ: I have Served my JESUS, till I am now Fourscore
and six years old; and I have always found Him a good Master; I will not now
Renounce him: He shall be my Master as long as I Live!

Yea; Faithfulness unto Death, implies, That we must be Faithful unto our Lord
Jesus Christ, although it be with the very Loss of our Lives. Our Faithfulness
to the Lord Jesus Christ, may cost us very dear: It may cost us all the
comforts of our Lives; It may cost us our very Lives. But we must venture the
loss of all; and lose our very Lives rather than lose our Faithfulness. Thus
those Faithful ones; Rev. 12.11. They loved not their Lives unto the Death;
They were willing to part with their Lives, before the Term to which they might
have lived by the course of Nature. The Work we have to do for our Lord Jesus
Christ, must be Dearer to us, than our very Lives. If our Lord Jesus Christ
call us to part with our very Lives upon His Account we must be Ready to do it.
As that Faithful man Expressed himself; Act. 20.24. I count not my Life dear
unto my self, so that I may finish my course with Joy: Thus we should say; I
shall not count my Life dear unto my self, if I may but Faithfully Discharge
and Finish the Work, whereto my Lord Jesus Christ has called me. Death it self,
in all the Terrors of it, must never Terrify us, from our Faithfulness to our
Lord Jesus Christ. The Faithful said of old; Psalm. 44.18, 19. Our Heart is not
turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way; Though thou have sore
broken us in the place of Dragons, and covered us with the shadow of Death. So
should we be able to say; Though all the Dragons in the Valley of the shadow of
Death, may seek to Sting me to Death, yet I will never Decline taking any Step
that my Lord Jesus Christ shall call me to.

Now this Faithfulness, and Constancy unto Death, it is Demanded by our Lord
Jesus Christ. It is Demanded, That we be steadfast and Immovable, always
abounding in the work of the Lord. It is Demanded, That by patient continuance
in well-doing, we seek for Eternal Life. Chrysostom observes on Luke 22.28. The
Lord Promises the Kingdom, not unto those that Followed Him only, but unto
those that Continued with Him. The Demand is infinitely Reasonable. Our Lord
JESUS CHRIST was Faithful unto Death in His Appearing for us; And shall not we
be Faithful unto Death in our Adhering to Him? Ibi tu, Christian, fige Cursus
tui profectusque metam, ubi Christus posuit Suam, as one of the Ancients well
Expressed it. Our Lord gave not over, till He was the Finisher of our Faith;
our Faithfulness to Him, it must not be Finished, until we come, as He did,
unto the Grave, Obedient unto Death. A man may Do much and Bear much for the
Lord Jesus Christ; But if he be not Faithful unto Death, it is all thrown away:
Gal. 3.4. So many Things in Vain! It is a Rule in the Civil Law; Factum non
dicitur, quod non perseverat; That is not Done, which does not Hold* God will
not accept a Maimed Sacrifice: a Curtailed Sacrifice. A Faithfulness which is
not unto Death, is a Maimed Sacrifice. The Race is Run to no purpose, if it be
not Run to the very Goal. Our Goal is our Death. Indeed, it can be no Real
Faithfulness, that is not a Lasting Faithfulness. A Fainting Piety is but a
Feigned Piety. The Heathen could say, He never was a True Friend, that ever
ceases to be a Friend. He never was a Faithful Friend unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, who is not a Constant Friend; Who does not Love Him at all Times, unto
the End of Time, and beyond all Time.

And now, if we are thus Faithful unto the Lord Jesus Christ, what will be the
consequence? Verily, There will be a Recompense. And it is no Fault in a
Christian, to have Respect unto the Recompense. Let us now Enquire after it.

II. That which our Lord Jesus Christ has Reserved for us; It Is, A Crown of Life
in the World to come.

Oh! the Blessedness of the Faithful Christian! He is Disgraced, Reproached,
Vilified, for his Faithfulness: The Lord Jesus Christ has a Crown to bestow
upon him. He Shortens, he Resigns his Life, to please the Lord Jesus Christ.
Life, Life, shall be his Portion.

We will proceed, Step after Step, unto the Consolation.

First. The Faithful Christian shall at last be Delivered from all the Grievous
and Heavy Things, which he may suffer for his Faithfulness. All our Sufferings
in and for our Faithfulness. come under the Name of Death. The Faithful
Christian shall be brought into a State, wherein he shall see no more Death. He
shall Enter into Life; and that Life will be a State, wherein he shall see an
End of all the Adversity which his Faithfulness was once Encumbred withal. We
read, Rev. 21.4. God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes, and there shall
be no more Death. We shall come into a State, wherein we shall meet with no
Temptation to abate of our Faithfulness. There will be no Flesh crying unto us,
Master, Spare thy self. There will be no Devil shooting at us his Fiery Darts
to discourage us. There will be no Messenger of Satan to buffet us. As we read,
Psalm. 31.20, 21 Thou shall hide them from the Pride of man; from the strife of
Tongues; Blessed be the Lord, for He has showed me His mavelous Kindness in
a strong City. -- The Lord preserves the Faithful. Hold out, O Faithful
Christian; Thou will shortly be in that Strong City of God, where thy
Faithfulness will meet with nothing to Damp it, either from any Lust within, or
from any Strife without. Yet a little while, and thou shall see an End of all
that was uneasy to thee: Faithful Servant, Thou shall Enter into a Joy that
shall never have an End!

Secondly. The Faithful Christian shall find his Faithfulness lead him unto a
Blessedness, which is called Life; which will be an Excellent, yea, an Eternal
Life. It Is most certain, That our Faithfulness to the Lord Jesus Christ will End
in Endless Blessedness. Wherein will consist that Blessedness? In the Old
Testament, we have it after that manner Expressed: Psalm. 17.15. I shall behold
thy Face in Righteousness; when I awake, I shall be satisfied with thy
likeness. In the New Testament, we have it Expressed after that manner; 1 John
3.2. We know, that when He shall appear, we shall be like Him, for we shall see
Him as He is. That incomparable, that incomprehensible Blessedness, which is
intended for the Faithful Christian, will be in the Vision of God, and of Jesus
Christ; and in the Image of that Glorious Lord imparted unto him; and in a most
intimate Communion with the glorious Lord; and in unutterable Satisfactions
produced by the Spirit of Glory for ever possessing of him. This Blessedness is
called, LIFE; and in that Name very precious things are intimated. A Faithful
man may have his Death hastened by his Faithfulness. No; His Life is not lost.
Non homo moritur, sed peccatum hominis: There Dies nothing of him, except that
which is his very Death. His Faithfulness only brings him to a Blessedness,
which is the Truest Life. The Separate Soul of a Faithful man puts on the
Garments of Light; and flies away to a Paradise, and there waits in Rest and
Peace, and Hope for the Resurrection of the Dead. [Rev. 14.13.] There shall at
length arrive, [But, Oh Lord, How Long!] a Resurrection of the Dead; The
Faithful man shall then receive his Body again. His Body shall be an
Incorruptible, Agile, Splendid Mansion for him. He shall in that Body, live as
a Citizen of the Heavenly City, till the very Heavens be no more. When a
Faithful man Dies, it is to Live better than he did before. The Blessedness will
be Life; Because it will be Desirable. It was said, What man is he, who
desires Life? Indeed, what man is he, who desires it not? There are few
things, but what we part withal, to prolong our Life. Men are naturally and
generally loath to Die. Nature is never willing to Die. The cry is, Life is Good!
The Blessedness intended for us, may well be Styled Life: Because indeed it is,
[the Jews do well apply the Text unto this:] Psalm. 63.3. Better than Life. And
the Blessedness will be Life; Because it will be Durable. It Will Endure; It Will
be Everlasting. A Living Thing may Die; But Life never can Die. We shall see
Life, and never see any thing but Life. Our Blessedness will be Life; Because
it will be, 1 Pet. 5.10. An Eternal Glory.

Thirdly. The Faithful Christian shall after all his Faithfulness, be Rewarded
and Advanced, even as with the Crown of an Illustrious Conqueror. The Reward of
the Faithful Christian will be, A CROWN: 2 Timothy 4.8. A Crown of Righteousness.
It is to tell us, That a very high Advancement shall be the Reward of the
Faithful Christian. There is no higher Advancement propounded among the
Ambitious Children of men, than that of coming to a Crown. The Faithful
Christian may meet with much Reproach, and much Contempt in the World. If any
man will be Faithful to the Lord Jesus Christ, and His Churches, that man shall
hear the Defaming of many. They that are Grievous Revolters from the Lord Jesus
Christ, will walk with Slanders against the Faithful Champions of the Lord. As
it was complained; When I wept and chastened my Soul with Fasting, that was to
my Reproach. Even so, If the Faithful Servants of God are after the most Holy
manner, only Praying, and Fasting before the Lord, on the behalf of His
Churches, Men that are full of Satan, will invent something of Reproach against
them, it may be, on that very occasion. Be patient, O Faithful ones. God
intends an inconceivable Advancement for you. You shall come to that
Advancement; Rev. 5.10. To be Kings and Priests for God, and Reign, over the
earth. Highly Advanced shall the Faithful be, when they shall Sit on Throne in
the Heavenly places with the Lord Jesus Christ, and they shall have power given
them over the Nations of the Earth, to Rule them. Highly Advanced shall they
be, when they shall Shine as the Brightness of the firmament, and as the Stars,
and be employed in Turning many to Righteousness. Highly Advanced shall they
be, when they shall be companions of Angels, and be Raised out of the Dust, and
be set with those Princes and Nobles; and they shall indeed be the Angels, the
Rulers and the Teachers of the Saved Nations. Oh! How highly Advanced, when all
their Faithful Endeavors and Achievements, will be Proclaimed with Honor in
the City of God. The Streets of that Great City, shall doubtless have the
Instances of our Faithfulness published in them; and those things will be done
to us, which must be done to the Men, whom the King of Heaven delights to
Honor.

Why so! Because the Faithful Christian shall then be considered as a
Conqueror. A Crown of old, was a prize after a Combat; the Reward of a
Combat. We read, 1 Cor. 9.24, 25. of them who Run, and Strive; They do it to
obtain a corruptible Crown, but we an Incorruptible. This, This will be one
thing in the Reward of a Faithful Christian. When he comes to lay hold on
Eternal Life, it shall be openly acknowledged: This Man has got the Victory!
Unto many a Combat was this Man called in his Time; He Combated with the
Flesh, and the World, and the Devil; He Combated with unknown Vexations and
Confusions: But he has been Victorious over all* O ye Saints, O ye Angels,
Glorify, Glorify that Grace that made him so! The Faithful unto Death, are all
of them, Overcomers. They meet with many things divert them, and debauch them,
from the work whereto the Lord Jesus Christ has called them. They Overcome all
obstructions; They Overcome the tempters, and hold fast their Integrity. This
will be acknowledged with most glorious Praises, when the Crown of Life shall
be put upon their Heads. We shall then be Crowned in our Triumphs among them
that are, Conquerors and more than Conquerors, through him that has loved us.
It Will not be with a Crown of Laurel, or a Garland that will Fade and Die. No;
It Will be with a Crown of Life. Our Honor among the blessed Conquerors will be
a living and a lasting Honor; It shall not be said of us, Being in honor they
abide not. No; 1. Pet. 5.4. Ye shall receive a Crown of Glory, that fades not
away. But from whom?

Lastly. The Crown of Life, which is to be the Reward of our Faithfulness, will
be the Gift of our Lord JESUS CHRIST unto us.

Our Crown comes to us as a Gift. There is no Desert in our Faithfulness. We
cannot by our Faithfulness ever Deserve a Crown. We never earned a Crumb and
much less can we earn a Crown. After all our Faithfulness and our Fruitfulness,
we must confess, Lord, we have been unprofitable Servants. We read, Romans 8.18.
I reckon, that the Sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be
compared with the glory that shall be Revealed. And upon a due Reckoning we
shall find, that there is no proportion between our Faithfulness, under all our
Sufferings in this present time, and the Glory in the Crown of Life that shall
be conferred. Though Death be the Wages of our Sinfulness; Yet Eternal Life is
not the Wages of our Faithfulnss: No; It Is the Gift of God. One of the Best men
that ever New England saw; [Our famous Hooker] Lying on his Deathbed, unto one
that said unto him, Sir, You are going to Receive the Reward of all your
Faithful Services, made this fit Reply, Brother, I am going to Receive Mercy!
It Is Mercy that gives the Crown unto the Faithful; The Crown of Justice is a
Crown of Mercy too.

Well; But this Gift comes from our Lord JESUS CHRIST. Indeed, no Person in the
Godhead is excluded from the Glory, of giving us our Crown of Glory. If every
good Gift come from God; surely, this Gift, the Crown of Life, must come from
Him. Yet our Lord JESUS CHRIST is very particularly concerned, in giving the
Crown unto the Faithful Christian. It Is the Prince of Life, who gives the Crown
of Life. It Is He that says, Rev. 3.21. To him that overcomes, I will grant to
sit with me in my Throne.

Our Lord JESUS CHRIST has by His Death purchased for us the Crown of Life.
It Is a Crown of a vast value. All the Crowns of all the Monarchs under Heaven,
are but vile Caps and Rags, when compared with the Crown of Life. But our Lord
JESUS CHRIST has paid a Price for the Crown; Yea, though it be worth more than
Heaven and Earth, we may say, that our Lord Jesus Christ has paid for the
Crown, as much as it is worth. His own precious Blood, is what He has paid for
it. He bore a Cross, that we might have a Crown; He wore a Crown of Thorns,
that we might wear a Crown of Life.

And our Lord JESUS CHRIST, as Mediator, has all Dominion in His Hands. He is
the Disposer of the Crown. The Crown of Life is at His Dispose. He may cause
whom He please, to Inherit the Throne of Glory. Our Lord JESUS CHRIST, has all
power in Heaven and Earth given unto Him, and so this Power of giving the Crown
of Life; and bringing to Heaven those that follow Him, God has given Him power
over all Flesh, that He should give Eternal Life, where He shall please to give
it.

Christians, We must all cast all our Crowns at the Feet of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST. It is HE that sets our Crowns on our Heads. If we have the Crown of
Life, it is from Him. And so, if we are Crowned with Health, or with Wealth, or
with Wit, or with any Grandeur, or with any Virtue; Thine, O Lord, is the
Glory, and all comes of Thee!

Let us now make our Inferences.

APPLICATION.
I. Are Faithful Ones predestined unto a Crown of Life? Then we owe a Good
Esteem unto Faithful Ones. Whenever we see any person Faithful unto the Lord
Jesus Christ, we may say with our selves; That Person is an Heir of a Crown!
The Lord Jesus Christ will one day bestow a Crown of Life upon that Person. To
load such a Person with Injuries must needs be displeasing to the Lord, whose
he is, and whom he Serves with Faithfulness. All that Love the Lord Jesus
Christ, ought also to Love them that Serve Him Faithfully. Those persons whom
the Lord Jesus Christ will Crown, certainly we ought also to Love. Our Lord
Jesus Christ says, Psalm. 101.6. Mine Eyes shall be on the Faithful of the Land.
The people of the Lord Jesus Christ should say so too. And when they that are
Faithful unto Death, are by Death taken away from the Land, it becomes us to
look after them with mournful and weeping Eyes; as we do this Day after our
WIGGLESWORTH: it becomes us to Lament after them, and say; The Faithful, The
Faithful; the Chariots of our Land, and the Horsemen thereof!

II. Shall they that are Faithful to Death, receive a Crown of Life? Then the
Faithful have no cause to be afraid of Death. An Eminent person Condemned to
Die, began his Letter to his Friend upon it so; Condemnatus sum ad vitam; A
Sentence of Life is passed upon me! A Martyr coming to the Stake, there kneeled
down, and cried out, Welcome, Everlasting Life! Oh! Let us Learn, to Welcome
Death, when Gods Time for our Death arrives, under that Notion; An Inlet into
Everlasting Life. A Faithful man could say, Phil. 1.21. To me, to Die is Gain.
What? Loath to Gain! Will you be afraid of Receiving a Crown of Life? It Is not a
Grave, but a Crown, that is before you. The Grave whereof you have such an
Horror, will be but, Sepultura Laborum, vitiorum, et Lacrymarum; the Grave of
your Pains, your Sins, your Tears. To Bury these, it is to Live; it is Life in
the sweetest Relish of it. Faithful Christian; Thou have mastered every thing
else. It remains now, that thy Aversion to Death, be likewise mastered. Oh! be
not uneasy at the Approach of Death. As the Faithful man said, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8. I
have kept the Faith; Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness. Thus, when they feel Death approaching, with what an Ecstasy of
Gladness may the Faithful think; I have according to my poor measure Faithfully
Served my Lord JESUS CHRIST. Remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee, how I have
walked before thee, with some Sincerity and Fidelity. And now, I am going into
that World, where my Lord JESUS CHRIST, will give me to see, that I have no
cause to Repent of Adhering to Him. O Ye Chosen, and Called and Faithful; You
have no way, to come at your Crown, but by Death. So the Last Words of our
WIGGLESWORTH were; We must Die, we must Die, that we may Enter into Rest.

III. It Is plain, We shall be no Losers by our Faithfulness to our Lord JESUS
CHRIST. Let us then make it the great Prayer and Care of our Lives, That we may
he Faithful unto Death. We read, Prove. 28.20. A Faithful man shall abound with
Blessings. In the Abundance of Blessings, that will Reward us, can we not see,
Abundance of Motives, to be very Faithful! Surely, In a Crown of Everlasting
Life, there is an Abundance of Blessings. Dreadful, Dreadful must be the Death,
of them that are not Faithful to the Interests of the Lord Jesus Christ. If a
Crown of Life shall be given unto the Faithful, What shall be given unto thee,
or what shall be done unto thee, O Soul that art False unto the Lord? What? but
a Death inflicted by the Sharp Arrows of the Almighty; a Damnation worse than
Lying amidst Coals of Juniper? Not a Crown of Life, but Chains of Everlasting
Darkness! Terrible, very Terrible, will be the punishment of Deserters. How
Terribly it Thunders! Heb. 1O.38. If any man draw back, my Soul shall have no
pleasure in him. No pleasure! The meaning is, That the Soul of the Lord will be
infinitely Displeased at him. The Crown of the Faithful, will be Life; The Doom
of the Fearful, will be in the Lake of the Wrath of God. Oh! Be Fearful of
incurring such a Doom!

It was bowayled; Psalm. 12.1. The Faithful fail from among the Children of men!
Let it be desired by us; Lord, Let not me fail of being found among thy
Faithful Children. Wherefore; Be Prayerful, O Christian, That thou may be
Faithful. We read, 1 Cor. 7.25. Of, One that has obtained mercy of the Lord, to
be Faithful. It Is a Mercy, to be asked of the Lord!

And then; To Supplication join Meditation.

Often think; What are the Privileges, What the Capacities, wherewith my Lord
JESUS CHRIST has Entrusted me! We read, 1 Cor. 4.2. It is required in Stewards,
that a man be found Faithful. Remember we, that we are bur Stewards of all that
we have; And then be full of anxious Thoughts, How to acquit our selves with
Faithfulness in our Stewardship.

Again; Often think; What special Interest of my Lord JESUS CHRIST now calls
for a special Witness from me. We read, Prove. 14.5. about, A Faithful Witness.
The Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ, sometimes is most opposed in one Article,
sometimes in another. Our Faithfulness must be manifest, in our bearing Witness
to the Kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ in that Article, where unadvised men
are most busy at undermining it. There, There, Let us fall in, though we may
never so much Expose our selves by doing so.

The Crown of Life, will make amends for all.

Finally. Let us Tread in the Steps of them that have been Faithful.

It was of old said; Prove. 20.6. A Faithful man who can find? Some Faithful Men
have been found. We have Lately Lost such an One; Such an One was our
WIGGLESWORTH, Who has an good Report of all men. One who so Faithfully
demeaned himself, that (as Jerome directed of old,) De illo male Loqui nemo
Potuit Sine mendacio. Because, it may contribute unto the finding of more Such,
I shall give you some short Account of his Faithfulness; and Proclaim his
Goodness: but, as it is most Reasonable, my Account shall be given with the most
accurate and unspotted Faithfulness.

I may truly affirm concerning him, That Faithfulness, Faithfulness, was the
very thing that remarkably Characterized him, Distinguished him.

He was descended of Eminently Religious Parents, who were great Sufferers for
that which was then, The Cause of God, and of New England. While he was yet a
Youth, he was marvellously concerned, That he might have an Heart filled with
the Spirit of God. This concernment upon his mind appeared especially in his
Watchful Endeavors to have Spiritual Sins, chased out of his cleansed Heart.
PRIDE, the Sin of Young men, yea, of all men; PRIDE, the Sin which few men Try
or Trouble themselves about; this Devout Youth, was full of Holy and Watchful
Trouble about it: And he then wrote a very Savoury Discourse, Entitled,
Considerations against Pride. And another Entitled, Considerations against
Delighting more in the Creature than in God. This was to mortify in himself the
Sins rarely minded by the most of men.

Having had a Pious and a Learned Education, the first Public Station wherein
I find him, was that of a Fellow, and a Tutor, in Harvard-Colledge. With a rare
Faithfulness did he adorn the Station! He used all the means imaginable, to
make his Pupils not only good Scholars, but also good Christians; and instill
into them those things, which might render them rich Blessings unto the
Churches of God. Unto his Watchful and Painful Essays, to keep them close unto
their Academical Exercises, he added, Serious Admonitions unto them about their
Interior State, and (as I find in his Reserved Papers) he Employed his Prayers
and Tears to God for them, and had such a flaming zeal, to make them worthy
men, that, upon Reflection, he was afraid, Lest his cares for their Good, and
his affection to them, should so drink up his very Spirit, as to steal away his
Heart from God.

From Cambridge, the Star made his Remove, till he comes to dispense his Sweet
Influences, upon thee, O Maldon: And he was thy Faithful One, for about a
Jubilee of years together.

It was not long after his coming to Maldon, that a Sickly Constitution so
prevailed upon him as to confine him, from his Public Work, for some whole
Sevens of years. His Faithfulness continued, when his Ministry was thus
interrupted. The Kindness of his Tender Flock unto him, was answered in his
Kind concern to have them Served by other Hands. He took a Short Voyage unto
another Country, for the Recovery of his Health; which though he Recovered not,
yet at his Return, I find him comforting himself, with inserting of this
Passage, in his Reserved Papers.

Peradventure the Lord removed me for a Season, that He might set a better
Watchman over this His Flock, and a more Painful Labourer in His Vineyard. This
was one thing that I aimed at in Removing (to help the Peoples Modesty in the
Case,) and I believe the Lord aimed at it, in removing me for a Season.

His Faithfulness now appeared, in his Edifying Discourses, to those that came
anear him; A Thing wherein he was very Careful and Fruitful; much bewayling the
want of a Profitable and Religious Conversation, in so many that Profess
Religion. And that he might yet more Faithfully set himself to Do Good, when he
could not Preach, he Wrote several Composures, wherein he proposed the
Edification of such Readers, as are for Truth's dressed up in a Plain Meeter.
These Composures have had their Acceptance and Advantage among that sort of
Readers; and one of them, The Day of Doom, which has been often Reprinted in
both Englands, may perhaps find our Children, till the Day it self arrive.

It pleased God, when the Distresses of the Church in Maldon, did extremely
call for it, wondrously to Restore His Faithful Servant. He that had been for
near Twenty years almost Buried Alive, comes abroad again; and for as many
years more, must in a Public Usefulness, receive the Answer and Harvest of the
Thousands of Supplications, with which the God of his Health, had been
addressed by him and for him.

How Faithfully did he now, Deliver the whole Counsel of God!

How Faithfully did he Rebuke Sin, both in his Ministry and in his Discipline!

How Faithful was he to the Work of God in the Churches of New England, and
Grieved at every thing that he thought had any Tendency to incommode that
glorious Work?

But how Patient, how Living, how Charitable, to such as in Lesser matters
differed from him! Of this Faithfulness, you are all of you Witnesses!

How Faithful was he in the Education of his Family! A very Abraham, for his
Commands unto his Family, to Keep the Way of the Lord; A very David, for his
Charges unto them, to Know the God of their Father, and Serve Him!

His long Weakness, and Illness, made him an Able Physician. He Studied
Physic; and was a Faithful Physician for the Body as well as the Soul. God
made him a Successful Physician, and a Beloved one.

For such things, his Flock Loved him. Your Love, showed it self, when a
Dangerous Fit of Sickness was upon him, above Seven years ago. You came
together with Agony; you Prayed, and Fasted and Wept before the Lord, with
Public Supplications for his Life. God heard you; God Loves to hear such
Prayers. God Spared him yet unto you, Another Life. For Seven years more, you
had him among you.

As he was Faithful to the Death, so he was Lively to the Death. He earnestly
Desired, That he might hold out, Useful unto the Last. God granted him his
Desire; A Desire seldom denied unto them that are so Importunate in it. It was
a surprise unto us, to see a Little Feeble Shadow of a Man, beyond Seventy,
Preaching usually Twice or Thrice in a Week; Visiting and Comforting the
Afflicted; Encouraging the Private Meetings; Catechizing the Children of the
Flock; and managing the Government of the Church: and attending the Sick, not
only as a Pastor, but as a Physician too; and this not only in his own Town,
but also in all those of the Vicinity. Thus he did, unto the last; and he was
but one Lord's Day taken off, before his Last.

But in the Last Week of his Life, how full of Resignation! how full of
Satisfaction;

Sirs, His Instruction must Live with you, though he be Dead. Yea, and his
Example too; his Holy Example; the Example of his Holiness and his Faithfulness.

From his Exemplary Life, I will single out one thing, to be peculiarly
inculcated. That one thing is, His Early Religion. Oh! That the Young Ones of
the Flock, would but follow their Aged Pastor, in this amiable and admirable
Excellency! His Early Religion. I have known it a Temptation, buzzed by Satan
into the minds of Children; That if they feared God, and sought Christ, and
zealously made sure of Heaven betimes, they should not Live Long upon Earth. If
it were so! -- Certainly, Heaven is better than Earth. But it is a Foolish
Temptation. Our Wigglesworth was a Godly Child; and he held on Living to God
and Christ, until the Seventy Fourth Year of his Age. When he then lay a Dying,
Some spoke to him, about his having Secured, his Interest in the Favor of
Heaven, and his Assurance of that Interest. He replied, [methoughts, like my
Polycarp:] I bless God, I began that work betimes; And e're I was Twenty years
old, I had made thorough work of it. Ever since then, I have been pressing
after the Power of Godliness, the Power of Godliness! For more than Fifty,
years together, I have been Laboring to uphold a Life of Communion with God;
and I thank the Lord, I now find the Comfort of it! Words, that contain in
them, An History of a Life, more valuable than I have seen a Volumn in Folio.

Follow your Pastor, as he followed our Savior. Then, all you that have been
brought nearer to God, by his Faithful Ministry, will one Day meet him in the
City of God. Oh! Joyful Meeting! When he shall say, Blessed be God, That ever I
spoke to those Persons! And you shall say, Blessed be God, that ever I heard
the Voice of that Man! --

All that I will add, is this; May our Ascended and Glorious Lord bestow such
another Gift, upon His dear People here!

Mors, Separavit a Nobis, Dulcem Amicum, Prudentem Consiliarium, Fotem
Auxiliarium.

Bern. de Humberto. An Appendix. Containing a few MEMORIALS of PIETY;
Faithfully Extracted from the Reserved Papers of Mr. Michael Wigglesworth.
THE Survivers have often received incomparable Benefits, from the Reserved
Papers of Good Men; which they have Written only for the Help of their own
Memories and Affections, and without the least Imagination, that they would
ever get from under that Character of Reserved Papers.

It Is now found, that such had our Wigglesworth. Indeed they generally contain
his humble, but severe, Animadversions upon himself, and such as argue a great
Flight of Holiness in him from his Youth; and they contain many other Personal
Matters, in which the Public is no way concerned. Nevertheless, in perusing
such of them, as fell into my Hands, I thought I should Hide a Talent, if I did
not Extract from thence, a few Passages, which may have a Special Tendency to
serve the Designs of Piety abroad in the World. They are such as these.

1. [While he was a Tutor at the College.]
I. I find my Heart prone, to take Secret Pleasure, in thinking, How much I do
for the Good of others? But, Lord, How Little of it is done for Thee? I fear,
there is much of Doting upon the Creature, in my pursuit of the Good of others.
I cannot Seek the Glory of God therein, but am carried most with Pity to Man;
Else the Lord would hardly cross me in my Endeavors.

II. Oh! Let me not unthankfully, and wickedly make the Gifts of God,
Subservient unto my Vain Glory!

III. It is very hard for me, to set my Heart upon God Himself, and not rest in
the Creature; (or else to be restless and disconsolate:) although I see, God is
willing to have me come into His presence, and to satisfy my Soul in sweet
Communion with Himself; and infinitely mere willing, than I am, that any of
those I Love most, should be near me, and that I could be communicating the
greatest Good unto them; which certainly is one of the main things I desire
upon Earth.

IV. Some comfort God gave me in Himself; finding my Love to Man, not Rewarded
with like Love again. He helped me to Rejoice in the Testimony of a Good
Conscience, and Looking unto Him, not unto Man, for the Reward of my Labors.

V. I thought, if God would not Save me at Last, yet there was something that
pleased me in this; That my Lord should still have Glory. Hereupon I Reflected,
Saying, And whence have thou any such Endearedness of Affection to the Glory of
Christ? Can thou Desire His Glory, without some Love to Him? Can thou Love
Him, Except He Loved thee first? Then has God indeed Loved thee with an
Everlasting Love. This some what Revived me.

VI. It pleased God in some measure to scatter my Doubts, when I considered;
How clearly did God once and again draw me to His Son, for all Good, when I
could find none in my self? Then making with me a Covenant, Ordered in all
things and sure. This remains, though I cannot find such sensible Qualifications
in my self; which I desire, bitterly to bewail it before God that I cannot. Yet,
whilst I Live, I will not Let Him Go. Moreover, I appeal to God Himself, the
Searcher of Hearts, to see whether there be, or have been, no prizing of God
above other things. What else means, my Restlessness after Sin committed, until
I have made my Peace with God? Or, if that be from Fear of Punishment, rather
than Love, to thy self, Lord, yet what means that Substantial Soul-Contentment
I have found in thy self, when Creatures have failed; and which I never found
any where but in thy self? What is it but that gives me Support, when Creatures
frown? When I cannot Receive what I desire from thee? Is it not, that I have
all in thee? and that thou art mine, who art better than all? Away, Thou
Unbelief! Away, ye Soul-sinking Discouragements!

VII. I see a Need of a whole CHRIST; and I Desire Him. Oh, Help my want of
Desire. I Need Him, and therefore, Lord, according to thy Free and Gracious
Offer and Command, I Desire to Take Him; As a Prophet, to Reveal His Fathers
Glory to me; that God may be most Glorious in my Eyes; I can see no Glory in
thee, Lord, Except thy only-begotton Son Reveal thee. I desire Him, as my only
Priest, and Propitiation. I have Daily Sins, and therefore, I want Him for my
Daily Atonement; that my Sins may not Separate between me and my God, and
Provoke Him, and His Spirit, whose Visitations preserve my Spirit, to Depart
from me; That Is my Death which I am afraid of! And that I may be accepted for
His Sake, who in and of my self, deserve only Condemnation. I desire Him, to be
my King; that He may subdue all the Enmity of my Heart against Him; that I may
no longer loath Him without a cause; nor Love other things above Him; that He
may subdue my unconquerable Corruptions, which I despair in and of my self to
subdue; and which Eat out actual Love to God, and the Relish of His Ways.

Lord, Let it be to thy poor Creature, according to thy Word. Let Christ be
mine; Let me be His alone. I come to thee, to make me every day more willing
that it should be so.

VIII. I cannot see my Studies and Pains, performed for God, and Accepted by
God, because I have so much Love to my Studies, and so Little to God Himself.
Yet, Blessed be His Name, that lets me not be at Rest, in the Bosom of the
Creature, but Exercises me with often Fears of Losing Himself. When God Hides
His Face, I am Troubled, however other things fare. Father, Deliver me from
that Evil man, My Self!

IX. I cannot prevail against that Cursed Frame; To think the Time long that I
spend in Reading the Word of God. Outgoings of Heart after my Studies again get
head. My Heart even blesses God, when He lets me meet with Crosses in
Creatures; For then is the Creator most Sweet and Desirable. My Spirit within
me Desires Him, and is afraid of Losing Him, by Losing my Desires to Him.

X. Oh! Kindle in me a glorious Esteem of the glorious Savior. When I hear,
the Father gives a Welcome Entertainment unto Him in Heaven, Let not me slight
Him upon Earth.

XI. Lord, Art not thou as ready to give me of thy Spirit, as I am, to give, if
I could, my Spirit unto all my Pupils? Lord, Save me; Thou art my Tutor, and my
Father!

I desire to aggravate my Sin, and fly only to the Blood of Jesus. The more
dead-hearted I am, the more Rich is that Grace of thine, Father, which will
notwithstanding Accept me in thy Son.

XII. I hope, the Lord has in some measure answered my long Desires, in
granting me at length, a Spirit of Fear lest I should, lose Christ, and care
that I might have daily communion with Him, and rest my Soul in his Bosom, and
and make Him my Life.

XIII. Outward wants, at least the Fears of them, Disquiet me, or would do so.
But I dare not let them make Impression, nor be Earnest with God for the supply
of them, lest my Desires thereof should exceed my Desires of Sanctifying Grace.

XIV. I am unworthy to lift up mine Eyes unto Heaven, because proud, and vain,
and forgetful of God. Yet, verily, thou art my Father. Thou give me ground of
Encouragement, because I find a daily Restlessness under Sin committed, without
Renewed Repentance; my Soul is Breathing after God: Emptiness on all things
else; God clears up to me His calling of me; and causes me to come to His
Son, and close with Him on Gospel-Terms.

XV. It is a Death, to think of being left by Gods Spirit in His Ordinances,
and left to set light by them.

XVI. Yesterday, I was in a Doubt, Whether I should go to Watertown-Lecture, or
not; because of multiplicity of Business. I went nevertheless. And this Day,
through Gods Assistance I have done as much as I used to do in two Days.

XVII. The Lord lets in some comfort into me, in that, though I be sinful and
impotent unto any thing that is Good, yet He has made Christ Righteousness and
Strength, to me, and Accepts me through Him. Which was evidenced to me, by my
longings and reachings of Heart after the Lord, not finding Satisfaction any
where else. And in my desiring and promoting the Glory of God, that He may be
advanced by my self and many others. How can I Love the Lord, or His Glory,
except He have Loved me? And if He have so done, He will ever do the same.

XVIII. Gods Visiting Hand has now plucked away from us, Four Brethren of our
Church in a few Days. The Lord was pleased to set in, and break my Heart, and
show me, that I am the man, who Sin unto Death the precious Servants of God,
and drive God from the place and society where I Live, and I pull down Wrath.
Yea, I have sinned unto Death, the Lord JESUS! This most affected me, That I
have Crucified the Lord of Glory! And as if that had not been enough, I am
daily grieving and wounding of Him afresh.

XIX. I was afraid, lest my Soul never rested in Christ, and found satisfaction
in Christ alone. The Lord helped me over these Fears; In that, I daily war and
wrestle against an Heart that is Resting any where but in Christ. And my
wanderings make for my further Establishment, and closer cleaving to Christ: God
sends vexation in the Creature, and makes me seek and find more abundant
sweetness in Him. So I concluded, Christ was mine; and all Spiritual Blessings
in Him.

XX. The Lord affects my Heart with some shame, that I should so Dishonor my
Fathers House, as to feed upon Husks, when He has Bread Enough for me: That I
should promise my self any Paradise under the Sun, when as I have
experimentally found all to be vanity and vexation of Spirit; That I should
mind or desire the love of the Creature, more than take contentment in the love
of Christ, who loves me better than any Creature can do, and who is more able
to do for me, what I stand in need of, than any, yea, than all besides.

XXI. My God, and His Service, is all that I have to Delight my self in, in
this World.

XXII. God sends me in some support. For, First; I have desired and delighted
in (not Heaven, or any Created Excellencies, but) God Himself, who is my Hearts
contentment. Secondly. I do not desire Holiness for Heaven, but for the Love I
bear to God and Christ, and out of my Desire to please Him. And I should desire
it, if there were neither Hell nor Heaven, and I desire universal Holiness. And
it is my very Happiness to do God some Service before I die. That Is all I have
to comfort me against my Sorrows. And that is one end, why I desire communion
with God; that I may be like Him. Such a Christ pleases me best, as will make
me Holy.

XXIII. My Morning-Desires on the Sabbath were, That I might do nothing for my
self, to set forth my self; but all for God; and that I might mind God, and not
Man, in all the Duties thereof.

XXIV. Methinks, These Sabbaths are blessed Seasons, wherein poor wandering
Harlots, may return to their Husband again. Oh! the boundless and inexhaustible
Fountain of Mercy, that is with God and Christ, to Entertain again such as I
am! Behold, I come unto thee; Thou art the Lord my God! Though vain Thoughts, and
Pride, are rife and prevail in me, and what I would do, Lord, I cannot, yet I
bless thee, that I have Time and Heart, to mourn for what I do amiss.

XXV. I find, that the clearest Arguments that can be, cannot persuade my Heart
to believe the Being of a GOD, if God do not let the Beams of His Glory shine
into it.

XXVI. I have sometimes thought, that in one Quarter of an Hours Sense of Gods
Favor (though in a Weak measure,) I found more Joy and Inward Pleasure than Ever
I found in my Twenty years course, by any Worldly Contentments.

XXVII. What if I have a False and Deceitful Heart; bent to Apostatize from
God? Shall I therefore utterly turn away from Him? No. God forbid. I will seek
unto Him, to give me Truth in my Inward Parts. I have an Heart overpowered
with Sin. My Corruptions are too hard for me. And this is the Grief of my
Heart, that I cannot be Sufficiently Humbled for them. This is my Burden of
Burdens. And, whither should I go, but unto Christ, to ease me? The Bruised
Reed He will not break, and the Smoking Flax He will not quench. He has bid me
Hope in His Word, and Wait on Him. He has reached out His Hand to me, and by
that Hand I will hold, and never let Him go, never give Him Rest until He make
me see His Salvation. If I perish, Let me perish waiting on Him!

XXVIII. I have found such vile and blasphemous Injections of Satan into my
mind, and such carnal Conceptions, and bodily Apprehensions of God, even in my
Drawings near unto Him, and I had no power to Resist them, they were so sudden;
that they did even make my Flesh to Tremble, and drive me almost to desperate
Thoughts sometimes, that these could never be cured so long as Lived in this
World, and made me fear lest I should Live long here, to be ever and anon
Stared in the face, by such horrible abominations. I sought God earnestly for
help against these; and found some help. Could I ask in Faith without Wavering,
there is Redeeming Mercy with God, and He will Redeem such as hope in Him.

XXIX. It pleased God to draw near unto my Soul, when I saw the Administration
of BAPTISM; bidding me look back to my Baptism, and see the Lord JESUS there
setting His Seal upon me, and making a Covenant with me, to become Mine, if,
when I came to years of Understanding, I would own His Covenant, and be willing
to accept of that Grace which He had Sealed unto me. My Soul answered, Lord!
That Grace, and that Son of God, I desire to Embrace! Why, God is willing on
His part, yea, stands with both His Arms open to Receive thee; This administered
a great deal of comfort to my Heart, and Strengthening to my Feeble Faith.

XXX. The Life of Godliness, and Power thereof, is apt to be worn out of my
Heart and Actions, and that suddenly. But in Repenting and Turning unto God, in
seeing my own Vileness, and Fleeing to God for Help, there I find Support. And
it is a sweet and blessed thing, to have the Bosom of a Reconciled God and
Father in Christ Jesus, to repose my Soul in, after I have wearied my self with
the pursuit of Vanity.

XXXI. One was speaking in Commendation, of seasonable Laughter and Merriment,
as that which may be a means to Recreate ones tired Spirits, and prolong ones
Life. But, alas, my Heart is so naught, that should I give it Liberty there, I
have cause to fear, lest I should take pleasure, for it self, without Reference
to Health, and so to the Glory of God, and then it would be Sin unto me. And
let me rather Live a Melancholy Life all my days, than by Merriment run into a
course of provoking my God.

XXXII. I could not go through my Study, with Delight and Comfort. God would here
it may be show me, how far even my Studies fall short of giving my Heart true
Content. And Oh! that this might make me prize the Lord more, in whom alone my
Soul finds Support; in whom are all my Springs. Return, Return, Blessed Father,
with the manifestations of thy self, and communications of thy Heavenly Grace
to my Soul.

XXXIII. I Bless God, for giving me a Mouth, to speak any thing of Himself, to
my Companion: Lord, make me to abound in Every Good Work! [After this.] A
Friend came over to us: and we discoursed on this Question If Christ be mine,
and all Fullness in Him, and God willing to give it, and I seek it, Why find I
not Grace in my Need? It was answered. First; It is to make a man Examine, and
be sure he has a Christ, and so a Right to it. Secondly. If he be sure, then to
make him Live by Faith, and not Sense; to make him a poor Nothing. Thirdly, It Is
to Exercise Patience and all Grace. Lastly. It Is to break his Will, and make him
Meek.

XXXIV. I was full of fears and sad thoughts. But for my Re-encouragement, God
Let in these Evidences. First. My Love to His People above others; among them,
my greatest Love, to the most Godly. Secondly. My unfeigned Desires, and some
small Endeavors also, to bring the Souls of others into Hatred of Sin, and
into Love with God.

XXXV. This was the Stumbling Block I always fell at, (while yet
unregenerate;) the great thing, that barred me from coming to Christ, and
closing with Him; the Ruin and undoing of my Soul: That I thought, I was not
humbled enough, to Receive Christ. I durst not close with Him in a Promise, but
still put from me, so great Salvation; hoping to get a greater measure of
Humiliation; and so of Fitness for Him. So by the Strength of Sin in me, I was
still brought back again, into full Slavery and Bondage. And what Impressions,
Affections, Resolutions God wrought in me, this Sabbath Day, all were Eaten
our, and quite lost, in a manner before the next: So that I was as far off from
Christ, and a broken Heart, at the years End, as at the Beginning.

June 20. 1652. [When he was about one or two and twenty years old, he entered
this passage.]
In our Presidents Exposition, I found sweet Encouragement in regard of my
Bodily Weakness; occasionally fetched from that: Isa. 40.30, 31. It may be thou
art Sickly. Why, the Lord is thy Physician, who heals thee. HE CAN MAKE THEE
STRONG IN THY AGE, THOUGH THOU BE WEAKLY IN THY YOUTH.

2. [After he was invited unto Maldon, and then was taken off by Long Sickness.]
I. I Have been musing upon this point, That GOD is. Besides what Arguments I
read in others, these are presented unto me.

1. If there were No God, men's Hearts would not be so full of Enmity against
God as they are.

2. Once I was Blind, but now I See; once Dead, but now Alive; once loving Sin,
and hating Holiness. Who made this Change? Not, Self. For to me, Believing was
impossible. Not Men. For why are not others Converted, that are less Hardened
in Sin; or why was not I Converted sooner, while it was easier! Not, Satan. He
is not such a Fool, to destroy his own Kingdom. Therefore, it was GOD.
Therefore God is.

3. My Prayers have been answered from time to time. Therefore there is a GOD,
who has heard me. If there were no God, how should my Prayers have been heard?
Whoever doubts of his Being, let me never doubt of it, who have Seen him, and
Felt him; not only Heard of him.

II. These are the Principles, which the Lord has been teaching me by his
Afflicting Dispensations this Winter.

1. To Rejoice in Acting according to the Rule, whatever the Event be, Good or
Evil. Mind my Work, which is Duty; and let God alone with the Event, which is
His Work.

2. Not to Rejoice much in any Creature. Thou know not, whether it shall
comfort thee, or Torment thee.

3. Not to be Troubled with Evil before it come. Sufficient is the Trouble of
the Day, when it is come.

4. To be humbly Thankful for Life, and Health, and Liberty to Serve God
heretofore; though I should Enjoy them no longer.

5. To Fight against Melancholy, and unbelieving Thoughts: Not by Debating with
them, (for so they are too hard for me:) but by Sleighting them, and not
Attending to them.

III. I am afraid, Lest I desire Health more than Holiness: (though I desire that
also, that I might have Opportunity for further Exercise of Holiness:) But what
Good will my Life or Health, do me, Good Lord, if I Live not to thy Praise and
Honor?

IV. Christ, Parum doleo quia Te non diligo multum:
Quodque Parum doleo, causa Doloris Erit.
V. Lord's Day. I have been almost discouraged, finding my Heart so carnal, and
my Conversation so Fruitless, on the Weekdays, when as my Soul has been so
Earnest with God, for more Grace, upon the Lords-Dayes. But God be thanked; I
have obtained a Little Strength this Last Week, to honor God with my Lips, and
Speak of Him, and for Him. This Encourages me, to seek Him the more Earnestly
this Day. Lord, Help me to Seek thee, and Serve thee with my whole Heart. And,
Oh, Quicken me, and others by me!

VI. I Earnestly Desire* Deliverance from my Long continued and increasing
Weakness. Because I am thereby detained from the Liberties of Gods House and
Ordinances. And, because it is a sore Hindrance to my Personal Communion with
God, and Holy Walking. I cannot take that pains with my carnal Heart, that its
Necessities requires. I cannot make a fervent Prayer, but my Strength fails,
before I have half unburthened my Heart, or spread my case before the Lord. I
cannot think a few serious Thoughts, Except now and then a short Ejaculation,
which does not so Effectually take off the Heart from things Below, and carry
it into Heaven, as Set and Solemn Maditation was wont to do.

VII. Ira premit, Peccata gravant, afflicto frangit;
Omnia Sub caelo me quoque destituunt.
Aeger, Inops, Orbus, curarum pondere fessus,
Corpore Languescens, Deficiens Animo.
Obruor adversis; Succedunt imbribus imbres,
Meque Simul feriunt, Venturs et unda minax.
My Sins and Wants still pain my Heart.
My Hope in Christ, relieves my Smart.
VIII. Lord,

I have Learned by long Experience, that the best of means can do me no Good
without thee.

I Believe, that JEHOVAH, the Creator of the Ends of the Earth, can do all
Things. Nothing is too hard for thee. Therefore, thou can cure me yet, that
have been so long Incurable.

Thou art All-Gracious. Therefore I believe, there is Goodness enough in thee,
to move thee to do such a Great Work, for a most unworthy Sinner; Enough in
JESUS CHRIST, though no Goodness in me, to move thee.

I own my utter unworthiness and Vileness; and therefore I Justify thee, if
thou never do it for me.

I therefore beg humble Submission to thy Sovereign and Holy will in the Event;
That I may not Repine, or be Discontented, though things go cross to my Desire.
Help me to put my month in the Dust, and say, Not my will, but the Lords will
be done!

Nevertheless, if for thine own Names Sake it may please thee to grant me my
Suit; Man's Extremity is Gods Opportunity, and makes for the Advancement of Gods
Power and Grace. Oh! Therefore be Seen in the Mount!

3. [Being with a mavelous Display of Power and Answer of Prayer, brought
forth again to his Public Services, They were so many, that he had very Little
Opportunity, to Write much more, in his Private Memorials. Nor indeed, had he
now so much Occasion; because he had his former Experiences to Live upon. We
will Transcribe only Three Passages.]
I. AT the Lords-Table, after some Serious Preparation of my Heart for that
Ordinance, I found much of Christ's presence enabling me* to Desire and heartily
to close with whole CHRIST, in all His Offices, for my Savior, who there
offered to bestow His Broken Body upon me, and His Blood poured out, for the
taking away of my Sins. I knew, God was Real, in giving His dear Son; And
Christ Real in bestowing Himself upon me; And I was Really willing to accept of
Him upon Gods Terms; For I was Really Sensible of my absolute Need of Him, and
Perishing condition without Him. I came not thither for Bodily Refreshment, but
Spiritual; Not only to Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the Sin of the
World, but to Converse with Christ, and feed upon the Flesh and Blood of the
Son of God, whose Flesh is Meat indeed, and His Blood Drink indeed; that I
might Live by Him Spiritually and Eternally, and might have Life in more
abundance; a Life of Comfort, an increase of Grace, and Spiritual Strength. I
did therefore Believe, and I do still Believe, ( Lord, Help me to believe more
strongly and steadfastly*) That JESUS CHRIST is mine, with all His Benefits, as
surely as the Bread that I eat, and the Wine that I drink; and that He will
nourish my Soul to Eternal Life. Amen. Bless the Lord, O my Soul, and forget
not all His Benefits.

II. DEATH Expected and Welcomed.
WElcome, Sweet REST, by me so long Desired,
Who have with Sins and Griefs, so long been tired.
And Welcome, DEATH, my Fathers Messenger,
Of my Felicity the Hastener.
Welcome, Good ANGELS, who for me Distressed,
Are come to Guard me to Eternal Rest.
Welcome, O CHRIST, who have my Soul Redeemed.
Whose Favor I have more than Life Esteemed.
Oh! Do not now my Sinful Soul forsake,
But to thy self thy Servant Gathering take.
Into thine Hands I recommend my Spirit,
Trusting though Thee, Eternal Life to inherit
III. A Farewell to the World.
NOW* Farewell WORLD, in which is not my Treasure;
I have in thee Enjoyed but little pleasure.
And now I Leave thee, for a Better Place,
Where Lasting Pleasures are before CHRIST's Face.
Farewell, Ye Sons of Men, who do not Savor
The Things of God; Who Little Prize his Favor
Farewell, I say, with your Fools Paradise,
Until the King of Terrors you Surprise,
And bring you Trembling to CHRIST Judgment Seat,
To give Account of your Transgressions Great.
Farewell, New England, which have Long Enjoyed
The Day of Grace, but have most vainly toy'd,
And trifled with the Gospels Glorious Light;
Thou may Expect a dark Egyptian Night.
Farewell, Young Brood and Rising Generation,
Wanton and Proud, Ripe for Gods Indignation;
Which neither you, nor others can prevent,
Except in Truth you Speedily Repent.
Farewell, Sweet Saints of God, Christ's Little Number:
Beware, left you, through Sloth Securely Slumber.
Stand to your Spiritual Arms, and keep your Watch.
Let not your Enemy you napping catch.
Take up your Cross, prepare for Tribulation,
Through which does ly the way unto Salvation.
Love JESUS CHRIST, with all Sincerity
Eschew Will Worship and Idolatry.
(...) again, until we all appear
Before our Lord, a Well done, there to hear
Farewell, Ye Faithful Servants of the Lord,
Painful Dispensers of His Holy Word;
From whose Communion and Society
I once was kept through long Infirmity;
This of my Sorrows was an Aggravation;
But, Christ be Thanked, through whose Mediation,
I have at Length obtained Liberty
To dwell with Soul-delighting Company,
Where many of our Friends are gone before,
And you shall follow with a many more.
Mean while, stand fast, the Truth of God Maintain,
Suffer for Christ, and Great shall be your Gain.
Farewell, my Natural Friends and dear Relations,
Who have my Trials seen and great Temptations;
You have no Cause to make for me great Moan,
My Death to you is Little Loss or none.
But unto me it is no Little Gain;
For Death at once frees me from all my Pain.
Make Christ your greatest Friend, who never dies;
All other Friends are lading Vanities.
Make Him your Light, your Life, your End, your All*
Prepare for Death, be Ready for his call.
Farewell, Vile Body Subject to Decay,
Which art with Lingering Sickness worn away.
I have by thee much Pain and Smart Endured;
Great Grief of Mind thou have to me Procured;
Great Grief of Mind, by being Impotent,
And to Christ's Work an awkward Instrument.
Thou shall not henceforth be a clog to me,
Nor shall my Soul a Burden be to thee.
Rest in thy Grave, until the Resurrection,
Then shall thou be Revived in Perfection
Endowed with Wonderful Agilitie,
Clothed with Strength, and Immortality;
With Shining Brightness, gloriously arrayed,
Like to Christ's glorious Body, glorious made.
Thus Christ shall thee again to me Restore,
Ever to Live with Him, and Part no more.
Mean while my Soul shall Enter into Peace,
Where Fears and Tears, where Sin and Smart shall cease.
4. These Memorials of Piety, thus fetched from the Manuscripts of the Faithful
WIGGLESWORTH, to serve the Interest of Piety in the Country, ought to be
accompanied with some EPITAPH upon him. One that had been gratified with his,
Meat out of the Eater, and Day of Doom, supplied us with a brief One, of this
Importance.
The Excellent WIGGLESWORTH, Remembered by some Good Tokens.
HIS Pen did once Meat from the Eater fetch;
And now he is gone beyond the Eaters reach.
His Body, once so Thin, was next None;
From Thence, he is to Unbodied Spirits flown.
Once his rare skill did all Diseases heal;
And he does nothing now uneasy feel.
He to his Paradise is Joyful come;
And waits with Joy to see his Day of Doom.
FINIS.

