THE Knowledge of GOD, Securing from Flattery, AND Strengthening to the most
Noble Exploits. Delivered in a SERMON, Preached to the Honorable Artillery
Company in Boston, On the Day of their Election of OFFICERS, June 4 th. 1705.

By Mr. Thomas Bridge, Pastor of the First Church in Boston.

BOSTON: Printed by B. Green, for Samuel Phillips at the Brick Shop. 1705.

THE Knowledge of GOD, Securing from Flattery, AND Strengthening to the most
Noble EXPLOITS.
Daniel XI. 32. And such as do wickedly against the Covenant, shall he corrupt
by flatteries: but the People that do know their God, shall be strong, and do
exploits.


I Am sensible of many disadvantages I am under for such Service as this; but
it being providentially cast upon me, I shall improve this opportunity to
express my concern for those who have called me to this Service, with freedom
and plainness. I know that Persons of Military Disposition, are for engaging in
the most Noble, and honorable achievements; but I must let them know that
such may be corrupted by Flattery, to serve the worst of interests; those who
are best furnished with Arms, and skill to use them, if corrupted by Flattery,
will engage with the vilest of men to promote their wicked designs: It is the
knowledge of God that will secure from the guile, fraud, deceit, and flattery
of designing men; and fortify the mind to the most noble exploits. It is
obvious in our context, that one man by Flattery did prevail to overthrow the
Religion, and liberty of the only professing People of God that day on the
earth; but those that know their God, (and continued steadfast in his Covenant)
stopped the carreer of the enemy, and by noble exploits prevailed to recover
both; an account of which we have in the books of the Maccabees.

In the 20. verse of this Chapter, it is foretold that after the Death of
Antiochus the great, there should stand up in his estate a raiser of Taxes,
viz. his Son Seleucus Philopater, who calling Money his best friend, stuck at
nothing though never so wicked if thereby he might fill his Coffers; amongst
other methods he sent Heliodorus to rob the Temple at Jerusalem; but his best
friend could not secure him from the Vengeance of Heaven, being in a little
time (as some write) poisoned by that very Heliodorus, whom he had used as a
tool to serve his interests.

After his decease his brother Antiochus Epiphanes, did by flattery obtain the
Kingdom out of the hands of Demetrius his brothers Son; and is styled, v. 21. a
vile person; by some called Epimanes, a mad man.

This Antiochus finding the methods of guile, flattery, and deceit so
successful, endeavored by the like artifices, to add Egypt to his Territories,
and in time of peace he entered into their Provinces, and obtained a vast
treasure, which he distributed among his confidents to secure them to himself,
and then made further attempts by open force, as expressed, v. 24, 25.

At length meeting with disappointments, he returns to his own Land; and vents
his malice against the Jews the Covenant People of God; being encouraged in his
malicious designs by Jason, and others who were Apostates, and betrayers of
their brethren, and the true Worship of God; these (it seems by that
expression, v. 31. Arms shall stand on his part) were ready to assist him by
force of Arms, to join with him to prosecute his intentions when he should give
them opportunity.

In the Words of our Text, (1.) We have an account of the method he took to
obtain his end with least hazard, and that was his old, approved way of
Flattery; viz. coloring over his wicked designs by specious pretenses; and
proposing to them many advantages, if they would join with him.

(2.) We have the character of those on whom he practiced this his method, viz.
Such as dealt wickedly against the Covenant; profane, debauched professors,
like those described, Psalm. 50.17.18, 19. Such as hated Instruction, and cast
the words of God behind them; when they saw a thief consented with him, and
were partaker with Adulterers, who gave their mouth to evil, and their tongue
framed deceit, they sat and spoke against their brother, they slandered their
own mothers son.

(3.) The success he had herein, such wicked ones (who appeared to be the Many,
v. 34.) did he corrupt by flattery: it seems that some leading men, (such as
Jason before mentioned) had a great influence to gain over many to their party.

(4.) But then we have in our Text the character of another sort of persons
among the Jews, whom he could neither gain by flattery, nor overcome by force;
viz. such as knew their God; who being the opposites to those that dealt
wickedly against the Covenant, we may thus describe; they were such, who having
the knowledge of God as their God in Covenant, chose him for their portion,
trusted in him for their defense, and cleaved to him with full purpose of
heart, notwithstanding the distresses they were exposed unto, for being
steadfast in his Covenant.

(5.) Of these it is said, they should be strong, and do exploits; h. e. should
be so far from yielding to the Flattery of the Enemy, that being strong in the
Lord, and in the power of his might, should withstand the fury of the Enemy, in
the most hazardous seasons, and at length prevail to do great Service for God,
in purging his Temple which had been defiled; and recovering (in a great
measure) the liberties, and privileges they had been deprived of. An account
of these exploits we have in the books of the Maccabees.

The Doctrine to be insisted on from the Words, is, The True Knowledge of God
will secure from Flattery, and influence to most noble exploits, while profane
Professors are corrupted to serve the worst of interests.

It is agreed by Expositors that this Antiochus was a Type of Antichrist, and
the latter part of the Chapter does manifest it; now we know from 2 These. 2.9,
10. That his coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, signs, and
lying wonders: and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that
perish: because they received not the love of the Truth that they might be
Saved: And for this cause God shall send them strong Delusions that they should
believe a Lie: that they all might be Damned, who believed not the truth, but
had pleasure in unrighteoasness.

Antichrist has obtained his vast Empire by Deceit, Guile, Hypocrisy, and
Dissimulation; and has in several Ages, Corrupted by Flatteries multitudes of
profane Professors, who have believed his Lies; and joined with him, and his
supporters in perpretating the greatest Barbarities, and Cruelties under
pretenses of Religion; thinking they did God service when they killed his
Children.

During this Reign of Antichrist, those who knew their God have either
Overcome, by the blood of the Lamb, and the word of their Testimony, not loving
their lives to the death, Rev. 12.11. Or, when many have fallen by the Sword,
and by Flame, by Captivity, and by Spoil many days, they have been h^lpen with
a little help; Dan. 11.33, 34. i. e. They have been strong and done Exploits,
to the stopping of the fury of the Enemy, yea often to their Overthrow, and
Confusion.

And the time is coming ( hasten it, O my God) when the Command shall be given,
Rev. 18.6. Reward her as she rewarded you, and double to her double according
to her works, in the Cup she has filled, fill to her double; Then, O Then!
shall we more fully understand the expression in our Text, They that know their
God, shall be strong, and do Exploits.

The Doctrine may be Cleared, and Proved by the following Propositions.

PROP. I. That the malice of wicked men, is in especial manner set against the
Holy Covenant of God. It is said of Antiochus, ver. 28. his heart shall be
against the Holy Covenant; and ver. 30. he shall have Indignation against the
Holy Covenant; which Expressions import Malice propense, at last breaking forth
with rage and fury. With this rage of Antiochus, we may compare, Rev. 11.17.
where it is said of the Antichristian interest, (as under the influence of the
Dragon) that he was wroth with the woman, and went to make war with the remnant
of her Seed, which keep the Commandments of God, and have the Testimony of
Jesus Christ.

The Holy Covenant mentioned in our Text, and Context comprehends,

1. All the Holy Ordinances, and Institutions of Divine worship which God
required of his Saints who had made Covenant with him by Sacrifice, Psalm. 50.5.
This is evident from ver. 31. And they shall pollute the Sanctuary of strength,
and shall take away the daily Sacrifice: And the reason of their malice is
intimated in the last clause of the verse; And they shall place the abomination
that makes desolate: That is, they polluted the Temple, and took away the
daily Sacrifice; that they might advance their own Idolatrous Worship in the
room thereof.

So under the New Testament administration, the malice of the Antichristian
interest is against those that keep the Commandments of God, and have the
Testimony of Jesus Christ; on account of their adhering to his holy
Institutions according to the Scripture of Truth; that so they may advance
their own Superstition and Idolatry.

2. The persons of those that are steadfast in the Holy Covenant, comprehending
withal, their Liberties, Privileges, Estates, and whatever else is dear to
them in this world, as far as they come within their reach. Ver. 33. They shall
fall by the Sword, and by Flame, by Captivity, and by Spoil many days. So as
to Antichrist, Rev. 13.7. he shall make war with the Saints, and overcome them.
And, ver. 17. shall cause that no man might buy or sell, save he that has the
Mark, or the Name of the Beast, or the Number of his Name. These both are
comprehended, in Dan. 7.25. And he shall speak great words against the most
high, and shall wear out the Saints of the most high, and think to change
Times, and Laws; and they shall be given into his hand, until a Time, and
Times, and the dividing of Time: that is, Twelve Hundred and Sixty Years.

PROP. II. That wicked men, in order to accomplish their designs against the
Worship, and People of God, usually make use of Guile, Fraud, Deceit, and
Flattery.

For the proving of this Proposition, I shall offer the following reasons to
Consideration.

1. Satan who has in all ages had his influence on all the designs of wicked
men, against the Worship and People of God, puts them on the use of this
method, Rev. 12.9. The great Dragon, the old Serpent called the Devil and
Satan, which deceives the whole world. He is a Murderer from the beginning;
he is a Liar, and the Father of it, he obtained his first Victory over mankind
by Guile: 2 Cor. 11.3. He beguiled Eve, flattering her with hopes of bettering
her condition, Genesis 3.4, 5. And the Serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not
surely dye; for God does know that in the day ye eat thereof, then your Eyes
shall be opened, and ye shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil. And we know
from 2 These. 2.9, 10. That Antichrists coming is after the working of Satan,
with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness, Rev. 13.13, 14. He does great wonders etc. and deceives them
that dwell on the earth.

2. As Flattery is an old, approved, and successful method, so it is apt to
produce the desired effects, especially on the unwary multitude: We read of
some Romans 16.18. Who by good words, and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the
simple, who as Solomon observed, Believe every word, Prove. 14.15.

The aptness of Flattery thus to gain on the hearts of men, appears, (1.) In
that there is in Flattery a show of Love, friendship, and good will, which is
very engaging and obliging. Thus Absalom, 2 Samuel 15.2, 3, 4, 5, 6. By his
kissing of the People, and pretending to do them Justice stole the hearts of
the people from his Father David, to serve his own abmitious designs. (2.)
This method takes persons from their Watch, their guard, and lulls them into a
security: Where can we sleep more secure, than in the embraces of those, that
promise to nourish, cherish, and protect us? (3.) This method has least of
hazard to those that use it; Antiochus found it a great deal easier to obtain
the Kingdom by flatteries, than by Swords and Spears: when it is known that men
design mischief, those that see their danger, are awakened to oppose force,
with force: and though it is often that the weakest go by the Walls, yet there is
a hazard; but good words, fair speeches, titles of honor, and now and then a
small gift to encourage hopes, when the designs are accomplished, these are a
cheap Barter, when houses, lands, thrones, crowns and scepters are in view. Men
of ill designs, have guilty Consciences, and faint, cowardly hearts, till
Flattery has given the major part; then they threaten and are full of rage,
and fury. It was much easier for Joab to kill Abner and Amasa under pretense of
Friendship, than by an open defiance.

PROP. III. Loose carnal professors, are usually an easy prey to Flatterers, 2 Samuel 15.13. It was told David the hearts of the men of Israel are after
Absalom; It seems, he had stolen the hearts of Counselors, and Captains, with
the multitude from David. We find, Neh. 6. That many of the Nobles, Prophets,
and Prophetesses were corrupted by Tobiah, and Sanballet, to obstruct that
great man in the Service of his God. So it appears by our Text, Context, and
the books of Maccabees, that many of all ranks of men were thus corrupted by
Flatteries.

That profane Professors are an easy prey to Flatterers, may appear by the
following Reasons.

1. They taking up Religion on trust, without a personal, experimental
knowledge of the sweetness, pleasure, Soul satisfying delight it affords, find
the duties of Religion Burdensome; and say, What a Weariness is it? Therefore
are ready to hearken to proposals of riches, pleasures, and honors, as
suitable to their inclinations, and desires. It is said of those that perish by
the Antichristian delusions, that they received not the love of the truth, 2
These. 2.10. But had pleasure in Unrighteousness; no wonder if such are ready to
comply with the Mother of harlots, and Abominations of the earth; especially
seeing her Merchants are the great men of the earth, and her Merchandise is of
Gold, Silver, precious Stones, etc. Rev. 18.12.

2. Sin being still predominant in them, (only under some restraint by their
profession) they on the proffers made by Flatterers, overcome the impediment,
and run with more violence to all manner of excess, and riot, and their last
State is worse than the first; as those who have been long kept in, from the
gratifying their sensual appetites; when once the bridle is taken away, they
are as the swift Dromedary traversing her way in the wilderness, and hate to be
controuled.

3. The Holy One in a way of Justice (for the contempt of his Grace,) does give
them up to their own hearts lusts. 2 These. 2.11. For this cause (not receiving
the love of the Truth) God shall send them strong delusions that they should
believe a lie; So becomes a prey to every liar, deceiver, or flatterer. O what
multitudes are there caught in the toils, nets, gins, snares of subtle
flatterers that lie in wait to deceive: Rev. 17.8. They that dwell on the earth
shall wonder (whose names were not written in the book of Life from the
foundation of the World) when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and
yet is.

PROP. IV. Profane professors corrupted by Flatteries are used as tools to
carry on the most wicked designs: What wickedness will they stick at, whose
consciences are debauched, under the conduct of those that Flatter them? v. 31.
Arms shall stand on his part; viz an Army of those who dealt wickedly against
the Covenant, whom he corrupted by Flatteries, and then it follows, the
Sanctuary is polluted, the daily Sacrifice taken away, the abomination, that
makes d^^^late set up; and many of the best of men fall by the Sword, and by
Flame, and by Captivity, and by Spoil. O thus has Antichrist prevailed, by
indulging of sensual lusts; whole Nations have been debauched, and then fit
tools to carry on designs to overthrow the Protestant Religion, and bring in
Popery, and Slavery.

The Reasons are obvious.

1. Satan by their compliance has an advantage over them to press them forward
to further ungodliness; Conscience is awakened, and they are terrifyed;
destruction from God is a terror to them, as knowing they have broken their
Covenant, and so are liable to the Judgments Written; they know they have
forfeited their Reputation with those they have deserted; and now are pressed
on to a desperate rage, to reject all motions to return: and to say as Jer.
2.25. There is no hope, we have loved Strangers, and after them we will go.

2. Those who Flattered them have advantage also against them, (which they know
how to improve,) to egg them on to do the worst of their Drudgery; now they let
them know more of their minds. We may conceive them thus speaking to them; Did
you not promise to be true to our interest? Did you not accept such a Gift? And
did you not protest to such and such, that you would be ready on all occasions,
to do us service? And do you now decline? If you do, we will take from you all
that we gave; we expect satisfaction for the wrong you have done us, and you
must now expect nothing but wrath, we will lay you open to all the mischiefs
you can conceive. In short, we must have none that halt between two; you have
given cause to mistrust you, if you would gain your Credit with us, and have
all the good things we tendered, there is no way but one, and that is by doing
one piece of service whereby we may know, you are true Men; Come, take an Oath
against such a man; whereby we may get such a part of his interest; betray such
an one into our hands; or take up Arms, and fight against your Prince, and
Countrymen. And, O to what a dreadful pass are they then brought! Do they not
then say? Our hope is perished from the Lord; our Brethren hate us; and if
these forsake us we shall be Vagabonds in the Earth, and every one that meets
us will kill us; therefore we will do -- what? -- Sir, what you will.

PROP. V. The Knowledge of God Fortifieth against Flattery, and disposes,
fitteth and enableth to do the most Noble Exploits.

This Proposition must be considered with a limitation: It is said, ver. 35.
and some of them of understanding, (that is, some who know their God,) shall
fall, to try them, and to purge, and to make them white. It pleases the Holy
One, sometimes to suffer his own Children to Yield, Comply, and Fall by the
influence of Guile, Deceit, Dissimulation and Flattery. Peter, and those Jews
who were with him dissembled, they walked not uprightly; and Barnabas was led
away with the Dissimulation.

We must therefore consider, that Flatterers in the managing their designs,
have different methods, and measures; so there are diverse degrees of
Corruption, or influences of this Flattery. If some are no further under the
influence of Flattery than to hold their Peace, to be silent; ^ot to oppose the
designs of the Crafty, this is it may be all they desire, or expect from them;
at least for the present; they have other tools to fit to do the drudgery. But
how often is it that Good men are so far Corrupted, they do not appear in the
proper time, and season to prevent, till at last it is beyond their power to
help, and possibly are the first that suffer when the designs are fit for
Execution. It is frequently remarked, that Honest, Upright, Well-meaning men,
who abhor the designs of Tyrants, and Oppressors; yet by inadvertence, silence,
sloth, and timerousness give the greatest advantage to Flatterers to accomplish
their Devices. Yet notwithstanding, we shall Evidence that the Knowledge of God
does preserve from the influence of Flattery, and fit for most Noble Exploits.
In order to prove it shall answer the following Questions.

Quest. I. What Knowledge of God secures from Flattery?

Quest. II. How does it secure from Flattery?

Quest. III. How does it influence to do Exploits?

Quest. I. What Knowledge of God secures from Flattery?

Answ. Genesis That there is a Knowledge of God which will not secure, is Evident,
for those who were Corrupted were, (as to their profession) in Covenant with
God; had the same means of instruction that others had; we may say of them as
the Apostle Paul of the Jews, Romans 2.20. They had the form of Knowledge, and
the truth of the Law; but they received not the truth in Love; but held it in
Unrighteousness; but of the others we may say as the Apostle of the Ephesians,
Ye have not so Learned Christ; but have heard him, and been taught by him as
the truth is in Jesus, Ephesians 4.20, 21. They hold the Mystery of the Faith in a
pure Conscience.

This Knowledge may be Explained by the following Particulars.

1. It is such a Knowledge of God as their God in Covenant; it implies their
seeking all happiness in and from him: They say as, Psalm. 73.25. I have none in
Heaven but thee, and there is none upon Earth that I desire besides thee. He
has made with me an Everlasting Covenant ordered in all things, and sure, this
is all my Salvation, and all my Desire, 2 Samuel 23.5. This is Life Eternal to
know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent, Joh. 17.3.
And we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an Understanding
that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his
Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and Eternal Life. They that thus Know
God will keep themselves from Idols. They will not forsake the Fountain of
Living Waters, for broken Cisterns that can hold no Water.

2. It implys an Experimential knowledge of God, or a Communion, and fellowship
with him in his holy Ordinances, and Appointments; they have tasted that the
Lord is gracious, which has satisfied their Souls, as with marrow, and
fatness; which causes them to say, How amiable are thy Tabernacles O Lord of
Hosts! my soul longs, yea even faints for the courts of the Lord: my heart
and my flesh cries out for the Living God: A day in thy courts is better than
a thousand; I had rather be a door keeper in the house of my God than to dwell
in the tents of wickedness, Psalm. 84.1.2, 10. They that thus know their God,
will cleave to him with purpose of heart.

3. It implies a knowledge of God as the Supreme Lord, and Lawgiver, who has
the right to dispose of them; they say, H^ is our Lord, and we will Worship
him! Psalm. 45.11. The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is
our King, Isa. 33.22. O Lord our God, other Lords besides thee have had
dominion over us: but by the will we make mention of thy name! They that thus
know their God, will be ready to say to any that would seduce them from their
Obedience, Depart from me ye evil doers, I will keep the commandments of my
God, Psalm. 119.115.

4 It implies the knowledge of him as Supreme Ruler and Governor, whose
Kingdom rules over all: He is the Most high who lives for ever whose dominion
is an everlasting dominion, and his Kingdom is from generation to generation:
And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing: and he does
according to his Will in the army of heaven, and among the inhabitants of the
earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him: What do thou? Dan. 4.34,
35. He does whatsoever he pleases in the heaven, and in earth, in the seas,
and all deep places, Psalm. 135.6. This encourages them to refer themselves,
and all their circumstances unto him; saying, Here we are, let the Lord do what
seems him good. Those who thus know their God, will be ready to answer those
who would seduce them; Our God whom we serve, is able to deliver us from the
burning fiery Furnace, and he will deliver us; but if not we will not serve thy
gods, nor worship thy golden image, which thou have set up, Dan. 2.18. They
commit the keeping of their Souls to him, in well doing as into the hands of a
faithful creator, 1 Pet. 4.19.

Quest. II. How does this knowledge of God secure from being corrupted by
Flattery?

Answ. Genesis In the Holy Scriptures God has declared, and manifested the Glory
of His Nature, and Attributes, and he has therein showed to us the nature,
state, condition, and properties of Man: the more then we see and know of God
according to the Scriptures, the more cause shall we find to fix our Trust, and
dependence on him; and the more we see, and know of Man (in Scripture light,)
the more cause shall we find to withdraw our dependence from him. We shall see
the highest reason to trust in the Lord for ever, for in the Lord Jehovah is
Everlasting strength, he will keep them in perfect peace whose mind is stayed
on him, Isa. 26.3, 4. But as to Man, we shall say to our Souls, Trust not in
Princes, nor the son of Man in whom there is no help; his breath goes forth,
he returns to his Earth; in that very day his thoughts perish, Psalm. 146.3.4.
We shall cease from Man whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is he to
be accounted of?

More Particularly.

1. The Glorious God whose name is, I AM, he only does necessarily Exist: He
has his being of himself, from Everlasting, to Everlasting he is God; with him
is no variableness nor shadow of turning, Jam. 1.17. But vain Man wherein is he
to be accounted of! Every man walks in a vain show; verily every man at his
best estate is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39.5, 6. Oh! therefore it is better to
trust in the Lord, than to put confidence in Man. It is better to trust in the
Lord, than to put confidence in Princes, Psalm. 118.8, 9. Surely men of low
degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie; to be laid in the the
balance they are altogether lighter than vanity; wherefore O my Soul, wait thou
only upon God, He only is my Rock, and my Salvation, he is my Defense, I shall
not be moved, Psalm. 62.7, 9.

2. The Lord our God is Glorious in Holiness, of Purer Eyes than to behold
Evil, and cannot look on Iniquity, Hab. 1.13. Sin is that abominable thing he
hates; He is a God of truth, and without iniquity, just and right is he: Deuteronomy.
32.4. He is that God who cannnot lie; Tit. 1.2. He is a God keeping Covenant,
and remembering his Mercy for ever. But wherein is man to be accounted of? He
is altogether become filthy, there is none righteous, no, not one, Romans 3.10.
His heart is deceitful above all things and desperately wicked, Jer. 17.9. A
source, a fountain of Evil; the imagination of the thoughts of his heart is
only evil continually, from his youth up, Genesis 6.5. and 8.21.

Let Man be considered in his Carriage toward God, and we find innumerable
instances of those who forsake their own mercies, and embrace lying vanities.
God complains that they draw near with their Lips, but their Hearts are far
from him; they compass him about with lies, and deceit, Hos. 11.12. Thus Psalm.
78.36. they flatter him with their mouth, and they lie unto him with their
tongues. And will he that Flatters God with Vows, and Promises of Reformation
when he means not so, be true to Us? Will he that forsakes the Covenant of his
God, be true to his promises to Man? But they that know the Name of God will
put their trust in him, for he forsakes not them that seek him, Psalm. 9.10. He
is my Rock, there is no Unrighteousness in him, Psalm. 92.15.

Let man be considered with respect to his own Interest, and do we not find
that he often Condemns himself in the things he allows? He sees, and approves
the things which are more excellent, and yet follows that which is hurtful, and
pernicious; some of his Lusts as unsatiable as the Daughters of the Horseleach,
Crying, Give, Give, and grudge if they are not satisfied: Others of them,
profuse and lavish; sometimes he seems sorry for his Evils, and promises
amendment, and in a little time he turns like the Dog to his vomit, and the Sow
that was washed, to the wallowing in the mire; sometimes he vows to God, of the
best will I give thee, but when he comes to perform, he offers the halt, the
lame, the blind, though he has a Male in his flock. And will he that is so
uncertain, unconstant, and false to Himself, be true to Us? Shall we suffer our
selves to be flattered, and imposed on by such as these?

Let man be considered in his carriage toward his Neighbors; his character is
given, Psalm. 12.1, 2. The faithful fail from among the Children of men, they
speak vanity every one with his Neighbor; with flattering lips, and a double
heart do they speak.

Look into Families, and we often see the Son at variance against his Father,
the Daughter against her Mother, and the Daughter in Law against her Mother in
Law; a man's foes are those of his own Household, Mat. 10.36.

Look into Religious Societies, and we there often see some with good words,
and fair Speeches deceiving the hearts of the simple; Wolves in Sheeps
clothing, the Ministers of Satan, transformed into the Ministers of
Righteousness; do we not often see Dissentions, Divisions, Schisms, Swellings,
Tumults, Persons biting and devouring one another;

Look into Civil Societies, and how often are Kingdoms obtained by Flatteries?
How often are whole Nations Flattered out of their Liberties and Privileges by
fair Promises? And how often is it that designing men plot, and contrive to
overthrow those who are set over them?

Look into Nations, and how often is it that Kings meet and speak lies at one
Table? Dan. 11.27. After leagues made with one another they work deceitfully,
Dan. 11.23. Now an Eververlasting Peace proclaimed, and in a little time a
bloody War breaks out.

Besides all this, how full is the Holy Scripture of Warnings, and Cautions
against relying, depending on men, Mat. 10.17. Beware of men. Jer. 9.4, 5, 6.
Take ye heed every one of his Neighbor; and trust you not in any Brother; for
every Brother will utterly supplant; and every Neighbor will walk with
slanders. And they will deceive every one his Neighbor, and will not speak
truth; they have taught their tongue to speak lies, and weary themselves to
commit iniquity: thine habitation is in the midst of deceit.

Now who is there that reads the Character given of men in the Scripture; and
observes how this is manifest to their view, and in their own experiences, but
will look well to his steps, and take heed, and beware of men. But he who Knows
from the Scripture, and his Experience, that God will never leave, nor forsake
those that put their trust in him; with what boldness, and confidence, will
they rely on his Word, and trust in him for ever?

2. The Knowledge of God secures from the influences of Flattery, by furnishing
with Answers to the Arguments Flatterers commonly use to gain over to their
side.

1. Do they proffer Riches? An Answer is ready; The moth and rust do Corrupt,
and thieves break through and Steal: These things will not ransom us from the
power of the Grave; that we should still live for ever, and not see Corruption:
They will not satisfy Divine Justice; nor purchase an interest in his favor:
we know these things and what is better; for wisdom is better than Rubies, and
all the things that may be desired are not to be compared to it, (Prove 8 11.)
The exceeding great, and precious promises of the everlasting Covenant are
better to us than thousands of Gold and Silver.

2. Do they proffer Honors; an answer is ready: God himself has determined
the way to honor. He has said, They that honor me. I will honor, and they
that despise me shall be lightly esteemed; God puts away the wicked of the
earth like dross; he pours contempt upon them though advanced to the highest
dignities; as Antiochus is called Dan. 11.21. A vile person: whereas God lifts
his poor from the dust, his needy from the dunghill, and makes them kings and
priests unto God; though poor, and despised in the world, yet rich in faith,
and heirs of a Kingdom* an inheritance uncorruptible, undefiled, and that
fades not away which is reserved in heaven for them.

3. Do they proffer Pleasures; an answer is ready; The pleasures of sin are
mixed, they are but for a season; we have proved them, for we sometimes were
foolish, and disobedient, serving diverse lusts and pleasures; and we found them
gall, and bitterness: though wickedness be sweet in the mouth, though it be
pleasant to a depraved appetite, it is as the gall of the Asps within, (Job
19.12, 14.) But since we have tasted that the Lord is Gracious, our Souls are
satisfied as with marrow, and fatness; we have found his Word, and eaten it,
and it is sweeter than honey from the honey comb; besides we have a prospect of
everlasting Joys; and of being for ever with the Lord; in whose Presence is
fullness of Joy, and at his Right hand are pleasures for evermore; (Psalm.
16.11.) Though I must first lie down, in the Dust, and sleep in the Grave: As for
me, I shall behold his face in righteousness, when I awake I shall be satisfied
with his likeness; (Psalm. 17.15.)

Quest. III. How does this Knowledge of God strengthen and influence, to do
Exploits; or most noble Achievements?

Answ. Genesis The Knowledge of God frees men from those base, low, mean designs
they were pursuing in their state of blindness and error; and elevates the
Soul to the most noble Designs that humane Nature is capable of, viz. that
whether they live, they live to God, whether they die they die to him, that
living or dying they may be the Lords, Romans 14.7 8. A Soul thus Enabled will
scorn what is wicked, base, and unworthy; and will study to please him who has
called him to be a Soldier; will say, Let us subdue our own Spirits, mortify
our Members which are upon the Earth, yea Crucify the old Man with his
affections, and lusts. Let us overcome the World, and and live as Crucified to
it; Let us put on the whole Armor of God, and prepare to wrestle with
Principalities and Powers; that being strong in the Lord, and the power of his
might, we may overcome, and receive the Crown of Life.

Particularly;

1. The knowledge of God influenceth to the most Noble Exploits, by regulating
their Choice of the Cause in which they engage: those who have the true
knowledge of God say, with one consent, as 2 Cor. 13.8. We can do nothing
against the Truth, but for the Truth.

(1.) The cause they will choose, is, the cause wherein the Glory, and Honor
of God is concerned; that they may in his Name lift up their banners, Psalm.
20.5. A Banner to be displayed because of the truth. Psalm. 60.40. Under which
they may Pray, Let God arise, his Enemies be scattered, and they that hate him
flee before him, Psalm. 68.1. Or as the Psalmist, Psalm. 74.22. Arise, plead
thine own cause, remember how the foolish man reproacheth thee daily. And what
Courage does it give to the mind when a person is satisfied he is engaged in
Gods Cause? The wicked flee when no man pursues: but the righteous are bold as
a Lion, Prove. 28.1.

(2.) The Cause in which those who know their God will Engage in, is such as
wherein being injured by Men, they may appeal to God, as the Holy Righteous
Judge of the whole World, who will do right: As Psalm. 17.1, 2. Hear the right O
Lord! Let my sentence come forth from thy presence: let thine Eyes behold the
things that are equal. If I have done this; if there be iniquity in my hands;
if I have rewarded evil to him that was at peace with me, let the Enemy
persecute my Soul, and take it; yea, let him tread down my Life upon the Earth,
and lay mine Honor in the Dust, Psalm. 7.4, 5. Judge me O Lord, according to my
Righteousness, and according to my Integrity that is in me, ver. 8. They will
appeal to Heaven as Jephtah, Judge. 11.27. I have not sinned against thee, but
thou do me wrong to War against me; the Lord the Judge, be Judge this day
between the Children of Israel, and the Children of Ammon. And this also
greatly strengthens, and invigorates the Mind; Enabling them to say, Our help
is in the Name of the Lord; in the Lord do I put my trust; and will not be
afraid, what man can do unto me, Psalm. 56.11.

2. The Knowledge of God strengthens, and influenceth to the most Noble
Exploits, in that those who know their God will labor to be satisfied in their
being called by him to such Service; as David enquired of the Lord saying,
Shall I go up to the Philistines? will thou deliver them into mine hand? We
read sometimes of the chosen men of Israel; It is said of the Soldiers of the
Lamb, that they that are with him are called and chosen, and faithful, Rev.
17.14. Every one is not fitted to be a Sou^dier, nor called to it; it must
needs daunt the courage, and enfeeble the Spirit of a Man to doubt about his
Call, when he should be engaged in Action; He will then say, How can I expect
the divine Assistance, and and protection if I am out of my place? Will God
cover my head in the day of battle? Will he give his Angels charge concerning
me to preserve my Life, though thousands fall on my right hand, and ten
thousand on my left, if I run before I am sent? surely no; he will say, What
do thou here? at it was said to Elijah, 1 King. 19.13. Indeed in some cases
the matter is plain and obvious; and every one is called to be a Soldier; but
ordinarily chosen men, men Trained up for such Service are those that will do
Exploits: Men that are satisfied their cause is good, and their call clear,
will be Lion like men, 2 Samuel 23.20. Men of undaunted courage, By their God
will they run through a Troop, and leap over a wall, Psalm. 18.29.

3. True Knowledge of God influenceth to do Exploits, in that such as know
their God will Offer themselves willingly to his Service. It was a Law in
Israel, Deuteronomy. 20.5. to 9. That those who were fearful, or faint hearted should
return, and not go to battle: So also those who had such Worldly affairs and
business as might render them indisposed, or listless; as having lately Married
a Wife: this Law shows that they are most fit for Service, most like to do
Exploits, who are most free, and willing. In the Song of Deborah and Barak,
Judge. 5.2.9. It is taken notice of as that which did facilitate the Victory,
The People willingly offered themselves; and the Governors of Israel offerred
themselves willingly among the People: Those whom love to God, to his cause,
and interest; love to Justice; love to their Country constrains; these are
men to do Exploits; men that are constrained by others against their
inclinations, and wills, are often (when it comes to Service) but the Shadow
of men, men that have no heart; as it was said of Ephraim, Hos. 7.11. He was
like a silly dove without an heart, ready to yield the cause without stricking
a stroke: But when the Princes, or, (as it may be read) the Voluntary of the
People are gathered to the People of the God of Abraham, Psalm. 47.9. When God
makes them willing, and their Spirit stirs them up, then may we expect to hear
of Noble Exploits.

4. The more they have of the Knowledge of God the more fixed will their Trust
and Dependence be; Psalm. 9.10. They that know thy Name, will put their trust in
thee; for thou forsakest not them that seek thee. They that know their God will
say, Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses; but we will remember the Name
of the Lord, our God, and in the Name of our God we will set up our Banners,
Psalm. 20.5, 7. And what Exploits will they not do who by Faith trust in the
Name of the Lord? All things are possible to him that Believes; This, this is
that will cause to wax valiant in Fight, out of Weakness will make Strong; it
will subdue Kingdoms, and turn to Flight the Armies of the Aliens, Heb. 11.33,
34 This, will make One Chase a Thousand, and Two to put Ten Thousand to Flight,
Deuteronomy. 32.30. O what a Noble Exploit was that of Jonathan, and his
Armor-bearer? 1 Samuel 14.1. It was Faith influenced to that Exploit, ver. 6.
Come let us go over to the Garrison of these Uncircumcised, it may be the Lord
will work for us; for there is no restraint to the Lord to save by many, or by
few. Few indeed, for those Two were the occasion of the Overthrow of all the
Army of the Philistines; and who can tell, how many Thousands it consisted of?
Sure the Army was very great; for when they trembled, the Earth did quake* for
it was a very great Trembling, ver. 15. There is nothing has been done in the
world equal to what has been done by Faith: The time would fail, to tell of
Gideon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephta, of David also, and Samuel,
who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, Heb. 11.32.

5. The more Knowledge of God as their God in Covenant, the less of anxious
solicitude about the Event. They cast their Care on God, who cares for them;
are careful for nothing: God has said concerning the Righteous, It shall be
well with him; and they know it shall be well with them that fear God, which
fear before him, Eccl. 8.12. All things work together for good to them that
love God, Romans 8.28. It does greatly dispirit, and unfit for Action, when the
mind is doubtfully divided, with a concern about the Event; but when a person
can say, Here I am, let him do what seems him good, he goes on with Courage.
The Lord is their Rock, Fortress, and high Tower. To him they commit their
Families, and Interests; their Times are in his Hand; and they know, till their
hour is come, none shall hurt them; they commit the keeping of their Souls to
him in well doing, as into the Hands of a Faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4.19. They
look on Death as a Conquered Enemy; and in the midst of Swords, and Spears, and
Guns can say, O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? Those
that can look beyond Death to an Inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that
fades not away; to a Crown, an Eternal weight of Glory; These, these are the
men prepared, fit to do Exploits; will say, Through God we shall do Valiantly;
for he it is that shall tread down out Enemies, Psalm. 60.12.

6. The Knowledge of God influenceth to do Exploits, in that it furnishes with
Answers against whatever may arise to discourage them. Those who would do
Exploits meet with many Objections; Possibly they hear the Enemies insulting
and saying, Let not thy God in whom thou trustest deceive thee, saying,
Jerusalem shall not be given into the hands of the King of Assyria, Isa. 37.10.
The answer is ready; Of a truth they have cast the gods of the Nations into the
Fire: for they were no gods, but the works of men's hands, Wood and Stone,
therefore they have destroyed them, Isa. 37.19. But our God is in the Heavens,
the living, and true God, the everlasting King. The Enemies sometimes insult
and boast in their Numbers; their Courage, Wisdom, Conduct, and Riches: But the
answer is ready, It is all (...) with the Lord to save by many, or by few;
there is no Wisdom nor Counsel against the Lord, he catches the wise in their
own Craftiness; they are ensnared in the works of their own hands. Do they
boast of their Strength and Wisdom, as Isa. 10.13. By the strength of my hand
have I done it, and by my wisdom, for I am prudent; and I have removed the
bounds of the People, and have robbed their treasures, and I have put down the
inhabitants as a valiant man, and my hand has found as a Nest the Riches of
the people; and as one gathers Eggs that are left, have I gathered all the
Earth, and there was none that moved the wing, or opened the mouth, or peeped.
Suppose the French Monarch should thus insult: The answer is ready; Shall the
Axe boast it self against him that heweth therewith? Or shall the Saw magnify
it self against him that shakes it, as if the Rod should shake it self against
him that lifts it up; or as if the Staff should lift up it self, as if it
were no wood. Therefore shall the Lord, the Lord of Hosts send among his Fat
ones leanness, and under his Glory he shall kindle a burning of Fire; and the
light of Israel shall be for a Fire, and his Holy One for a Flame: and it shall
burn and devour his Thorns, and Briars in one day; and shall consume the Glory
of his Forest, and of his fruitful Field, both Soul, and Body, and they shall
be as when a Standard bears faints, Isa. 10.18. They, they that Know their
God, and have thus in readiness to answer the insults of the Enemy, are fit to
do Exploits. And I hope when God has performed his whole Work, by the Rod of
his Anger; this Prophecy will be fulfilled again, on the Blasphemous, Proud,
and Haughty Monarch of France.

We come now to Apply the DOCTRINE. And hence we Infer:

I. Are Profane Professors easily Corrupted by Flattery, then how little are
such to be relied on? A subtle Flatterer, whose words are smoother than Butter,
and softer than Oil, may gain over thousands to his side; especially when he
has opportunity and advantage to propose and promise Riches, Honors and the
Delights of the Children of men, what dependence can there be on those who
profess to know God, but in works deny him, being abominable, and to every good
work Reprobate. They are liable on every Temptation to desert the Cause of God,
and to run over to the Camp of Antichrist: As the Apostle John (1 John 2.19.)
says of some, They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had
been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us: but they went out, that
they might be made manifest that they were not all of us. Persons are apt to
boast of their Numbers, but in our computation we should reckon those that are
True men; Persons that are of a double Heart, and double Tongues, Persons that
do wickedly against the Covenant (wherein they have lain themselves under
highest engagements to God,) will prove Deserters, when there is a prospect of
more advantage by joining with the Enemy: It is in this case as it was in the
Camp of Gideon, Judge. 7.3. there were but ten thousand left, of thirty two
thousand. So in the case to which our Text refers, there were but very Few that
remained Faithful. It is said, Dan. 11.34. They shall be helped with a little
help: which refers to Mattathias, and his Sons, and what they did; the many,
the multitude, were Corrupted by Flatteries; therefore it is no wonder to see
persons who are Profane Swearers, Sabbath Breakers, Contemners of the
Ordinances of God, Drunkards, Unclean persons, the Ambitious, and Covetous
complying with those who propose the full gratification of their Lusts.

II. The Second USE is by way of Caution, and that more Generally, and
Particularly.

I. Caution. Let all take heed, and beware of Flattery; and that;

1. Take heed of Self-flattery; we read, Prove. 28.26. He that trusts his own
Heart is a Fool. And of some who were evidently wicked, (for their
transgressions declared there was no fear of God before their Eyes;) yet they
flattered themselves in their own Eyes; they pleased themselves with ungrounded
hopes that their state and condition was good; tho they went on in a course of
Sin; it refers to profane Professors, such as heard the Word but did it not. I
know the Text refers to being flattered by others; yet this Caution is suitable
to our Subject, for he that has the clearest view of the unsearchable depth of
deceit, and wickedness of his own Heart; who maintains a jealousy over his own
Spirit; will be most cautious lest he be imposed on by others; those who after
frequent Self-Examination, comparing themselves with the Scriptures of truth,
have good hopes through Grace that their Hearts are upright with God, will be
Praying that they may not be led into Temptation; that integrity, and
uprightness may preserve them; and with the upright God will show himself
upright, Psalm. 18.25. Let this then be our care, that there be Truth in the
inward parts, that in the hidden part God has made us to know wisdom, Psalm.
51.6.

2. Let us take heed we are not corrupted by Others. It is the advice of
Solomon, Prove. 20.19. Meddle not with him that flattereth with his lips; as
also, Chap. 26.25. When he speaks fair, believe him not, for there are seven
abominations in his heart. This might be improved to Caution against those who
would through subtilty Corrupt our minds from the simplicity of the Gospel, 2
Cor. 11.3. There are multitudes of deceivers this day in the World who would
corrupt the Doctrines of the Gospel; and who would mingle their own Inventions
with the pure Institutions of CHRIST; many Cautions are given in the holy
Scriptures against this sort of men; and we had need to beware; a Little
yielding in such matters makes way for further corruption: But our Caution
respects such flattery as tends to corrupt, deprave, and at length to gain over
to serve a Wicked Interest, either in Church or State: The Religion, and
Privileges of the Jews were overthrown by those who deserted the Covenant of
God, and clave to Antiochus by Flatteries. We had need to beware, if we
consider the evil of the present day; Iniquity abounds, and the love of many
waxes cold. Is there not cause to Pray, as Psalm. 12.1, 2. Help Lord! for the
Godly man cease, for the faithful fail from among the Children of men: They
speak vanity every one with his Neighbor with flattering lips, and a double
heart do they speak, or as it expressed, Mic. 7.2. The good man is perished out
of the earth, v. 5, 6, 7. Trust ye not in a friend, put ye not confidence in a
guide, etc. O what sad reason is there to renew the old complaints, Job 6.15.
My brethren have dealt deceitfully as a brook, and as the stream of brooks they
pass away: Or that Psalm. 55.12, 13. It was not an enemy that reproached me, but
it was thou a man, mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance; we took sweet
counsel together, and walked unto the house of God in company. If we look unto
particular persons, how many Tears may we see; how many sighs, groans, and sad
complaints may we hear? Such and such pretended friendship, promised relief,
support, and comfort, till they got me into their snares, nets, and gins, and
then they made a prey of me; and now are grown rich by the spoils they got from
me. If we look into the World, and consider the exorbitant power, and greatness
of France; what Kingdoms, Provinces, and Principalities have been added to his
dominions; and enquire, whence all this Glory? must it not be answered, he has
obtained them, and maintained them by Flattery; how many has he corrupted
thereby? Many of the great, and mighty in the Courts of his Neighbors who have
been of more Service then his Arms. In particular, could he have rooted out so
many hundred thousands of his own Protestant Subjects; had he not first
Flattered them with Oaths, Covenants, and Promises whereby their Religion, and
Liberty (as they thought) were secured to them, and so were lulled asleep
neglecting the use of means for their preservation? till they have seen their
Temples polluted, and destroyed; many thousands driven to the remote parts of
the earth; many hundreds of thousands dragooned into a compliance with Popish
Idolatry; vast multitudes destroyed; and their Children trained up in Popery.

If we consider, what our Indian Neighbors (under the influence of Popish
Priests have done to us;) Did they not Flatter us with Promises, of a continual
Peace; a Peace to continue as long as Sun and Moon endure, and then before many
Changes of the Moon treacherously, and barbarously fall on our Neighbors,
killing many, and carrying others into a miserable Captivity; and there
alluring, and flattering many over to their Superstition and Idolatry: and who
knows what tools some such may be of mischief, if God do not mercifully
prevent? Surely upon the whole, we have reason to take heed we be not flattered.

The Second, and more Particular Branch of the Caution respects those who are
disposed to Military Exercises, who by skill in the Art of War, propose a being
fitted for service, that when they are called to it, they may not be at a loss
how to use their Weapons, but may employ them to the best advantage. To press
this Caution, I shall offer to their Consideration; That persons of mischievous
designs look on them as the most likely to oppose, and withstand their
proceedings: Or on the other hand, (if they can gain them) to serve their
turns. Now (as before we observed,) Flattery is the method they commonly use,
as having less hazard than to provoke them to meet them, with their Swords
drawn; if by Flattery they can keep their Swords in their Scabbards, when they
should be in their Hands; or if they can by Flattery, (and a Gift to blind
their Eyes) persuade them to use their weapons to serve their turns; they have
conquered them. How many Leaders, and Commanders in Fleets, and Armies have
thus been Corrupted to a Neutrality; or gained to serve the Enemy? Besides
Flatterers are Politic; consider with whom they have to do; they know those
who are disposed to learn the Military Art, are commonly men of great spirits,
who aim high; and therefore they propose Honors, and Preferments to them; thus
suiting the bait to their inclinations, often prevail upon them; therefore they
had need to keep a strict Guard over their own spirits.

The Third USE is, by way of Exhortation, and Advice in especial to the
GENTLEMEN in ARMS.

Much Honored Gentlemen,

IT has pleased the Glorious GOD to favor you with his Holy Ordinances; You
have had the means of Instruction; and I hope there are many of you who having
the Saving Knowledge of God in Christ Jesus as your God in Covenant; have
Devoted your selves to his Service; to Serve his Will in your Generation; and
that though you would do injury to none; Yet if it pleases the Holy One, the
Lord of Hosts to call you to jeopard your Lives in the High Places of the
Field; You would be among those who Offer your selves willingly, to serve the
interest of God, and your Country against Unjust invaders. The Advice then I
would give is, that you would increase more, and more in the Knowledge of God;
that being strong in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might, you may be
prepared, and ready for Service, that you may be strong, and do Exploits.

The Consideration of the state of things in Europe, calls upon us both to be
Expert for War, and to be Ready for Service: You all know that our Nation, is
Engaged in a Just War against a Proud, Haughty, Blasphemer, Persecutor, and
Distuurber of the Common Peace: And though we have cause to be very Thankful for
the Victories obtained by the Confederates, and our Nation in particular; Yet
who can tell when the Sword will be put into the Scabbard; and what Service we
may be called unto?

And the state of things in this Land also calls for being always ready; You
all know the hazard our Outward Plantations are continually in, of being
assaulted by our Treacherous, and Bloody Enemies: We must indeed acknowledge
the Favor of God in granting such Conduct to His Excellency our GOVERNOR,
that has prevented unspeakable Mischief; and done much Good; Yet how many are
still in Danger? Even as much as Flocks of Sheep are of Ravening Wolves;
therefore should every one be ready. Besides, you know how much this Town in
particular is Exposed to the Attacques of the Enemy by Sea. The last Alarm
shows, that if an Enemy have the advantage of Wind and Tide, how soon they may
be upon us; therefore we should be always ready.

But inasmuch, it is the Knowledge of GOD, that influence (...) readiness to do
the most Noble Exploits; we shall Conclude with some Advice with respect
thereto.

Much Honored;

Would you be ready to do Exploits?

First; Study CHRIST and him Crucified; and let the Knowledge of him Engage you
to mortify your Members that are upon the Earth, to Crucify the Old man, with
its affections, and lusts: The Scripture says, He that is slow to anger, is
better than the mighty; and he that rules his spirit, than he that takes a
city, Prove. 16.3, 21. Oh! Learn of him, he is Meek, and Lowly; such Graces will
preserve you from misapplying your skill; from giving unjust provocation to
others; and yet will Engage you to follow him whithersoever he goes; and to do
what service he requires of you.

Secondly; Study CHRIST, and him Exalted. He is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords; Angels, Authorities, and Powers are made subject to him; He Reigns till
all his Enemies become his Footstool; He is given to be a Leader, and Commander
to his People, Isa. 55.4. Therefore let Israel rejoice in him that made them,
and the Children of Zion be joyful in their King, Psalm. 149.2. Therefore be
looking to JESUS, the Author and Finisher of our Faith; whose Grace is
sufficient for you, who will fit you for the service to which he calls you;
and remember he that is the Faithful and True Witness has encouraged all his
with that Gracious Promise; Be thou Faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a
Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10.

Thirdly; Study the Scripture Prophecies. Tho there are Depths therein we
cannot find out; must leave to the Holy One who has reserved the times, and
seasons in his own Power; Yet as far is he has Revealed, we should Read, and
Pray that we may so understand the times, as to know what we ought to do. It
seems as if the time to Execute the Judgments written on Antichrist were at
hand; the time when the Kings of the Earth shall hate the Whole, and burn her
Flesh as it were with fire; when the Lamb shall Overcome; and they that are
with him are Called, and Chosen, and Faithful* Rev. 17.14. Who knows what the
present Commotions may issue in? I would hope that if the Year of Recompenses
for the Controversy of Zion be not come, it is near at hand, when the Command
shall be given, Reward her as she has rewarded you. Therefore you that know
your GOD, encourage your selves (...) that you may be strong and (...) Exploits

F^^^^hly; Study much of the Glory of the ^uture State. You all know, (...)
King of Terrors must be ^^^^untred by every individual: It is the Knowledge of
God in Christ as our God, that will enable us to triumph over that King of
Terrors; and how fit are they to do Exploits, to whom Death is a Conquered
Enemy? When we have a view of Christ who was dead, but is alive; and has said,
Because I live, you shall live also: When we view him as on his Throne, saying,
To him that Overcomes, I will give to set down with me on my Throne; and that
the Crown he has to give, is an Eternal weight of Glory; this will influence to
Contemn all the Flatteries of this world; and strengthen us to do Exploits.

THE END.

